We present a case of a cerebellar liponeurocytoma which initially presented in a 61-year-old healthy female. The patient was admitted to the neurosurgical ward in March of 2010. At that time, the patient was admitted to the ER with a month long of general weakness and deterioration. On the day of admission, she complained of dizziness and urge incontinence. The patient’s physical examination was noticeable for a slight 4+5/5 right hand weakness and general weakness in her lower limbs as well as narrow-based walking. The patient underwent an initial CT scan and MRI which demonstrated obstructive hydrocephalus and a lesion involving the fourth ventricle. The patient underwent surgery through a suboccipital midline craniotomy in March 2010. The intraoperative pathology suggested a differential diagnosis between lymphoma, a glioma, and a round blue cell tumor, with a small residual left due to proximity to brainstem. The patient was discharged and did not appear in a timely fashion to her oncology follow-up. On follow-up imaging, a small residual part of the tumor was noticed that was not seen on the immediate postoperative MRI . The patient’s pathology report read “cerebellar liponeurocytoma with atypical morphological features.” Of notice, the patient’s first follow-up in the oncology clinic was in September the same year. Due to tumor growth, the patient underwent intensity-modulated radiation therapy to the residual tumor adjacent to the brainstem for a total of 54Gy with a KPS of 90 in May 2012.
The patient was followed up with serial MRI imaging being performed every 6 months. Due to new leg pain presented during follow-up, the patient underwent an FDG-PET in October 2017 scan to evaluate tumor metastases which demonstrated tumor spread to the cervical spinal canal. This prompted a total spine MRI [ and ] which revealed diffuse spinal cord involvement throughout the spinal cord from the cervical region to the cauda equina. The patient eventually underwent an open biopsy at the level of L5 was performed in January 2018 which demonstrated the exact same pathology seen in the previous surgery (without any pathological features suggestive of a malignant transformation). After reviewing the patient’s charts during tumor board meetings, it was decided to treat in conservative fashion and postpone radiation or chemotherapy as she remained symptomatic, however, with a stable tumor burden. The patient’s symptoms were minimal right leg weakness and decreased lower limb reflexes. The patient was stable during follow-up until June 2018 when she started having lower back pain with the right leg pain albeit stable imaging. Due to the deterioration of her leg symptoms, the patient underwent spinal radiation to L1-S2-3 of 30Gy in 10 fractions in July 2018. In October 2019, the patient complained of visual disturbances. Ophthalmologic examination from October 2019 revealed bitemporal hemianopsia and right eye visual deterioration with visual deterioration on follow-up. An MRI scheduled shortly after showed a new lesion in the suprasellar lesion ; however, due to her visual deterioration, the patient underwent radiosurgery in February 2020 to the chiasm of 30 Gy in 10 fractions.
In March 2021, the patient was seen during follow-up with stable disease both in her spine and her brain. Visual deterioration stopped after radiosurgery treatment. At present, the patient is at home with stable disease and no new neurological deterioration.