The patient was a 26-year-old Chinese male with a chief complaint of impaired vision in both eyes for more than a year. An ocular examination revealed that the vision in his right eye was FC/20 cm and left eye was 0.02, intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in both eyes, ptosis of both upper eyelids, lateral eyelashes touched the cornea. Corneas were transparent in both eyes, central corneal thickness was 547 μm in right eye, and left corneal thickness was 540 μm. The central anterior chamber depth of the right eye was 3.25 mm, and the central anterior chamber depth of the left eye was 3.03 mm. The pupils were round, about 3 mm in diameter. The lenses were milky and opaque in both eyes . The thickness of the right eye lens was 3.30 mm and the lens of left eye was 3.32 mm. The fundus of both eyes was not clear due to the occlusion of cloudy lens. The right eye axial length was 22.38 mm, and the left eye was 22.17 mm. No obvious vitreoretinal abnormalities were found on ultrosonography. Family history showed that his parents were consanguineous (first cousions). The patient’s father died in a traffic accident at 40 years old, and his mother, and sister, uncle, cousin, and niece were in good health. The patient denied any family history of genetic diseases. Developmental retardation occurred when he was 8 years old and Achilles tendon elongation was performed due to Achilles tendon contracture. Physical examination on admission revealed the patient had a spare figure, weighed 40 kg and was 150 cm tall . Vital signs testing demonstrated his temperature was 36.7 °C, pulse was 98 b/min, respiratory rate 19/min, and the blood pressure was 108/65 mmHg. Heart and lung auscultation found no obvious abnormalities. A complete blood cell count, thyroid hormone levels, hepatic function, and renal function were evaluated, and no abnormalities were found. Figure depicts the patient with the symptoms of short stature, slightly built, gray hair, bird-like face appearance, skin depigmentation, skin drying and atrophy, scleroderma-like skin changes, beak-like nose, and teeth abnormalities.
According to the ocular symptoms and systemic signs, including low body weight, a short stature, a bird-like face, atrophic and scleroderma-like skin, and juvenile cataracts, the clinical diagnosis of Werner’s syndrome was made. Next-generation sequencing identified a homozygous WRN mutation in this patient. Five bases (c.3460_3461 insTTGTG) were inserted between the 3460 and 3461 nucleotides of WRN gene in this patient, resulting in a frame shift mutation of amino acids (p. Y 1157 Cfs * 7) . After searching the literature, this mutation has not been reported, and does not belong to the polymorphic site, incidence is very low in the population and not reported in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD professional). The WRN mutation was the likely pathogenic variant. So the definitive Werner’s syndrome diagnosis was established. Besides, the same heterozygous WRN mutation was identified in his mother, his father’s brother, and sister. The pedigree chart has been constructed in Fig. .
The patient underwent phacoemulsification combined with intraocular lens implantation in both eyes. The right eye was implanted with a + 23.0 diopter intraocular lens and the left eye was implanted with a + 24.0 diopter intraocular lens. Post-operative appearance showed the clear IOL in place . The post-operative best-corrected visual acuity was 0.6 in both eyes. No vitreoretinal abnormalities were observed in both eyes.