The proband in this study is a 4-month-old female infant. She was born after a full-term uneventful pregnancy and did not suffer a significant perinatal history. Physical examination after birth revealed a birth weight of 3015 g, a head circumference of 34 cm, and a body length of 47 cm. She had no systemic anomalies and no remarkable family history.
She was referred to our Eye Clinic because of an enlarged and cloudy right eye. Ophthalmologic examination (including B-scan and slit lamp examination) showed the following manifestations before surgery: right eye buphthalmos with long axial length (22.04 mm), macrocornea with diffuse corneal oedema and opacity (14.50 mm*14.50 mm), left eye microphthalmia (short axial length: 16.23 mm) and microcornea with diffuse corneal oedema and opacity (7.50 mm*6.50 mm) . The IOP was 23.78 mmHg and 17.30 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Additionally, an inferiorly decentred excavation within the superficial optic disc tissue was revealed by the B-scan in the right eye . A 360° trabeculotomy was immediately performed on the right eye. She did not return for routine follow-up. Six months after the trabeculotomy, corneal staphyloma and corneal fistula with iris plugging of the perforated ulcer were detected according to the telephone follow-up. Ophthalmectomy was performed for the right eye at the local hospital.
Informed consent was obtained from the parents of the proband according to the protocol approved by West China Hospital Sichuan University. Whole exome sequencing has been performed on the proband’s genomic DNA sample. S220 Focused-ultrasonicator (Covaris, Massachusetts, USA) was used to shear Genomic DNA (1-3μg) into an average size of 150-bp. The preparation of standard Illumina libraries was conducted by DNA Sample Prep Reagent Set (MyGenostics, Beijing, China).
To acquire the DNA library, genomic DNA (1–3 μg) and the probes were mixed and then PCR amplification was performed. A DNBSEQ-T7RS sequencer for paired reads of 150 bp (average sequencing depth: 1485.68; target area coverage: 10X: 99.93 20X: 99.87) was used for next-generation sequencing. Variants in genes responsible for glaucoma, microphthalmia and macrophthalmia were selected and analysed through multiple bioinformatic analytic steps. Variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) smaller than 0.01 (based on the 1000 genome, ESP6500, dbSNP, EXAC) and sequencing quality with a coverage of more than 5 were included. Additionally, synonymous variants without a splice site change and benign variants predicted by online tools (SIFT, PolyPhen-2, MutationTaster, GERP++ and REVEL) were excluded.
Only one truncation in exon 4 (c.640_656dup (p. Gly220Profs*95)) of PITX3 was identified . No pathogenic variants were identified in other genes. Sanger sequencing validation, including amplification, sequencing, and target sequence analysis, was performed following a previously described method . Additionally, segregation analysis was conducted, and her healthy parents did not carry the same variant.