A 21-year-old Caucasian man was transferred to the Clinic for an evaluation of a complex perirectal abscess. The patient had experienced rectal pain with defecation for a month prior to presentation, and was initially treated conservatively for presumed hemorrhoidal disease. His symptoms progressed so that passing flatus alone caused him significant discomfort. He then developed worsening constipation. A rectal examination was notable and revealed marked tenderness and induration. Imaging and a proctoscopic examination under anesthesia were performed at an outside hospital before admission to our clinic, and a complex perirectal fluid was collected but could not be adequately drained. The patient then developed increasing difficulty urinating and a four-day history of obstipation, prompting transfer.
The patient's past medical history was notable for the occurrence of a papillary thyroid carcinoma with cervical lymph node metastases that was diagnosed one year before and treated with a total thyroidectomy and post-operative radioiodine therapy. He had a recent lymph node recurrence prompting a modified radical neck dissection at an outside hospital one week before transfer to our clinic. He had no history of prior abdominal or pelvic surgeries. The only medication he was taking was levothyroxine. He was single, and denied tobacco, alcohol, or drug use. He also denied any rectal instrumentation or anal intercourse. His family history was notable for a paternal uncle with Crohn's disease, and a paternal grandmother with a history of resected thyroid cancer. A review of the patient's systems was positive for a 10 kg weight loss in the past month, anorexia, a decrease in stool caliber, fatigue, and painful urination, in addition to the presenting complaints. He denied having a fever, but did complain of night sweats.
A physical examination revealed a tall, thin man in no acute distress. His maximum body temperature was 37°C, with a blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg and a heart rate of 88 beats per minute, with normal respiration and oxygen saturation. His abdomen was soft, with normal bowel sounds, no distension, and no palpable masses. He had mild tenderness in his right and left lower quadrants as well as his suprapubic region, but no rebound or guarding. A Foley catheter was put into position. A perianal inspection was negative for fistulae, fissures, or external hemorrhoids. A digital rectal examination could not be completed because of significant tenderness.
On the day of admission, laboratory tests showed the patient had mild microcytic anemia (hematocrit of 10.5 g/dL and mean cell volume of 79.7 fL) and hypoalbuminemia (3.3 g/dL), with the remainder of the complete blood count, electrolyte level and liver biochemistry being within normal limits. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the patient's abdomen and pelvis demonstrated an extensive, loculated fluid collection encircling the distal rectum, with a large amount of surrounding inflammation. Compression of the patient's distal rectal lumen and bladder neck by the perirectal collection was seen, but adequate bladder decompression was obtained using a Foley catheter. Wall thickening of the terminal ileum and a fistulous tract from the distal ileum to the cecum were noted .
A flexible sigmoidoscopy on day two demonstrated an erythematous, edematous rectosigmoid colon with multiple areas of extrinsic compression . Although a colonoscopy was attempted for cecal and ileal inspection and tissue sampling, the patient could not tolerate further advancement of the endoscope. An endorectal ultrasound showed a complex solid and cystic structure surrounding the rectosigmoid area, with mobile fluid, solid debris, and significant surrounding inflammation . The process abutted the sphincteric complex, prostate gland, and bladder. A biopsy of the patient's rectum revealed focal acute inflammation with a poorly formed mucosal granuloma, but no chronic architectural changes. A fine-needle aspirate of the cystic structure produced a yellow, turbid fluid containing many leukocytes and mixed bacterial flora, but no malignant cells.
On day six of his hospitalization, the patient had an exploratory laparoscopy and the terminal ileum and cecum were found to be densely adhered to the pelvic side wall, with an apparent fistulous tract further fixing the distal ileum to the cecum. Laparoscopic mobilization of the involved structures was not possible, and conversion to laparotomy with a low midline incision was performed. The ileum and cecum were mobilized to expose a large, perirectal and pelvic lateral sidewall abscess, which was thoroughly debrided. A Meckel's diverticulum with a large perforation at its base was densely adherent to an ileocecal fistula, with surrounding inflammation and fibrosis. Given the inability to repair the defect in the terminal ileum from the fistulous opening, resection of a segment of the terminal ileum and cecum was performed with a side-to-side, functional end anastomosis. The portion of small bowel containing the Meckel's diverticulum was also resected, with a primary anastomosis accomplished. On abdominal exploration, no other obvious abnormalities were seen to support a diagnosis of Crohn's disease or malignancy. Fecal diversion was deemed unnecessary because the perforated Meckel's diverticulum was felt to be the underlying source of the patient's symptoms, and resection and debridement with single intraabdominal drain placement had allowed for decompression. Gross pathologic examination of the surgical specimen confirmed a perforated Meckel's diverticulum with extensive acute inflammation and fibrosis of the adjacent small and large bowels. A histologic examination of the Meckel's diverticulum did not reveal gastric- or pancreatic-type mucosa. There was no histologic evidence to support a diagnosis of Crohn's disease. Specifically, there was no chronic inflammation, crypt architectural distortion or additional granulomas seen in the area surrounding the Meckel's diverticulum, in the ileum or the cecum. In addition, no evidence of malignancy was seen.
Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully. He initially received three days of total parenteral nutrition but was subsequently advanced to a normal diet without difficulty prior to hospital discharge on day 14. He regained normal bowel and bladder function before dismissal. Clinical follow up over the next three years was unremarkable, with no evidence of inflammatory bowel disease or long-term bowel or bladder sequelae.