A 50-year-old Afro-Caribbean woman, with a history of hypertension, reactive arthritis and a previous episode of myopericarditis in 2012, presented to the emergency department with a 4-day history of central chest pain, which was made worse on lying flat and on deep inspiration. The patient had regular medications including 10 mg lisinopril and 10 mg amlodipine per day for hypertension, and 2.5 mg tibolone per day for suppression of perimenopausal symptoms. She did not complain of cough or breathlessness. She had a blood pressure of 116/74 mmHg, a pulse rate of 85 b.p.m., oxygen saturation of 97% on room air and she was afebrile. Examination findings were normal. Laboratory tests showed a normal haemoglobin level, white cell count and platelet count. The patient had a lymphopenia at 0.63 × 109 cells/l (normal 1.5–4.5 × 109 cells/l), her C-reactive protein (CRP) level was elevated at 11 mg/L (normal <5 mg/L) and her high-sensitivity troponin T (hsTnT) was elevated at 77 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L).
An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed poor R-wave progression and small QRS complexes . An echocardiogram showed a trivial anterior pericardial effusion with good biventricular function. A chest radiograph was normal. The patient was admitted under the cardiology team with a presumed diagnosis of myopericarditis based on her symptoms and laboratory results. She was started on colchicine (500 μg twice daily) and ibuprofen (400 mg three times daily) as per conventional therapy for myopericarditis.
The patient continued to complain of chest pain on Day 2. Given that the symptoms had not improved on 1200 mg per day of ibuprofen, 30 mg per day of prednisolone was started as additional therapy with the aim of settling the myopericardial inflammation. By Day 3, the patient’s chest pain had not improved, and so a computed tomography (CT) scan of the patient’s thorax was obtained to exclude possible alternative diagnoses which could explain the patient’s symptoms, or to confirm the diagnosis of unresolving myopericardial inflammation and identify consistent features such as pericardial thickening and calcification. The CT thorax showed a small pericardial effusion and non-specific bronchocentric ground-glass opacities in the left lower zone which was reported as being suspicious for COVID-19 . At this time, the patient had a peak temperature of 37.5°C. An oropharyngeal swab tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
On Day 5, the patient began to experience proximal leg weakness effecting hip flexors and knee extensors, with tenderness over both quadricep muscles and associated lethargy. Oral codeine phosphate (30 mg) was started and administered four times daily for analgesia. On Day 6, a serum creatinine kinase (CK) was measured to diagnose myositis given the ongoing leg weakness, and this was found to be elevated at 6432 U/L (normal value 25–200 U/L). Intravenous 0.9% sodium chloride was initiated to avoid rhabdomyolysis-associated acute renal injury. Repeat hsTnT and CRP were measured at 106 ng/L and 58 mg/L, respectively. On physical examination, the patient had 3/5 power of both quadricep muscles. A rheumatological review was sought and myositis was clinically diagnosed. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of both thighs was suggested. It was advised that the patient continue 30 mg prednisolone daily for the next 7 days. The patient continued to experience progressive weakness and tenderness of both quadricep muscles until day 8, at which point the CK peaked at 32230 U/L. An MRI of both lower limbs confirmed features of diffuse myositis with symmetrical appearances involving the anterior, medial and posterior muscle compartments of the thighs with subcutaneous oedema .
Her autoimmune screen (ANA and ANCA) and hepatitis B, C, and HIV serology were negative. There were no significant changes of either the ECG or echocardiogram when compared with those taken on admission. A cardiac MRI showed normal left and right ventricular function, with possible evidence of myocardial oedema in the basal inferoseptum, in keeping with myocarditis, as well as a 16 mm circumferential pericardial effusion .
On day 12, a CK was measured at 4922 U/L and a CRP at 14 mg/L. The patient’s symptoms of leg pain and weakness improved. On day 13, the patient’s leg and chest pain had resolved. The lower limb weakness was still improving, and the patient was discharged with a 3-month course of 500 μg twice-daily colchicine and 400 mg three times daily ibuprofen, and 7 days of 30 mg once-daily prednisolone. A telephone follow-up was carried out 2 weeks after discharge which confirmed that the patient had remained symptom free. The lower limb weakness normalized within 48 hours of discharge. The patient will have a repeat cardiac MRI 4 weeks after discharge to assess resolution of myocardial oedema and ensure there has been no reduction in cardiac function.