Nearly 4 years ago, a 47-year-old man presented with a 2-month history of cough and sputum. A chest computerized tomography (CT) revealed a pulmonary mass in the right lung, and pleural and bilateral pulmonary carcinomatosis. The biopsy showed that the pulmonary mass was adenocarcinoma. Further confirmed by a PET-CT, the patient was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma with multiple metastases (cTxNxM1, Stage IV), involving the contralateral lung, bone, adrenal gland and lymph node. Molecular testing found the patient was mutation-type of ALK translocation. The patient is asymptomatic and with a stable general condition. The patient was treated with six-course chemotherapy of cisplatin/pemetrexed. PR showed after the first two-course treatment with RECIST1.1 criteria. One year later, the patient showed pulmonary progression and started to receive crizotinib, which achieved stable disease (SD) as the maximum response, accoeding to the RECIST1.1 criteria. After 1 year, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed brain metastases. So the patient initiated whole brain radiotherapy combination with temozolomide (150 mg m−2, 28 days for a cycle), followed by the other chemotherapy with two-course of carboplatin and gemcitabine to consolidate the curative effect and to stability the lung lesions, using SD as the maximum response with RECIST1.1 criteria. Six months later, the patient showed pulmonary progression and initiated the other chemotherapy with four-course of cisplatin/pemetrexed, with SD as the response, according to the RECIST1.1 criteria. Eight months later, the patient, a 51-year-old man, showed clinical progression with the symptoms such as serious chest distress and tachypnea. Ultrasound revealed bilateral bulk pleural effusion. The right diameter of anteroposterior and vertical were respectively 127 and 130 mm, and in the left were 89 and 94 mm. Due to the poor general condition (ECOG PS is three point), ceritinib, buyed from Hong Kong, 750 mg once daily was started. One month later, symptoms like chest distress and tachypnea completely disappeared. Ultrasound showed that pleural effusion significantly reduced . The diameter of anteroposterior and vertical respectively were 98 and 76 mm in the right, and 33 and 71 mm in the left. Two months later, ultrasound revealed small amount of pleural effusion, indicating that bulk pleural effusion was nearly completely disappeared , with II degree of nausea. During the treatment process, selected tumor markers were also significantly reduced, which were summarized in Table . Change curve of tumor marker (CEA and CA125) was presented in Figs. and . Currently, the patient demonstrated a PR, according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST 1.1), and have a very good general status (Karnofsky 80–90%).