An 11-year-old Chinese boy was referred to our hospital with complaints of weight loss greater than 5 kg over six months, accompanied by pallor, fatigue, poor appetite and lower limb twitching at night. He was the first child of healthy parents and was delivered vaginally at full term, with a birth weight of 3.7 kg. Asphyxiation and hypoxia occurred at birth. His developmental milestones were delayed, and he was diagnosed with cerebral palsy, hydrocephalus and strabismus of the left eye. Surgery was performed to resolve tongue tie and slurred speech at age 3. The patient had undergone language rehabilitation treatment for 3 years. There was no family history. Physical examination revealed normotension, cachexia with height 154 cm and weight 25 kg, slow reaction, dysarthria and unsteady gait without nystagmus or hand tremor.
The boy underwent detailed examinations after admittance to our department. Routine blood tests showed severe anemia (hemoglobin 56 g/L). Urine tests showed mild proteinuria; the 24-h urinary protein quantification was 0.61 g (24.4 mg/kg). Renal function tests showed increased blood urea nitrogen (67.8 mmol/L) and creatinine (746.70 μmol/L), and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 7.53 ml/(min•1.73 m2). Blood tests showed significantly elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) (1073.00 pg/ml), hypocalcemia (0.49 mmol/L), hypokalemia (2.99 mmol/L), and metabolic acidosis. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive (1:320), while other autoantibodies were negative. The level of complement 3 was low (0.63 g/L), and the level of complement 4 was normal. The results of liver function, thyroid function, carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, hemoglobin A1c, blood glucose, thyroid ultrasound, abdominal ultrasound and cardiac ultrasound and chest CT were normal. Ophthalmic examination indicated myopia in both eyes and a leopard pattern under the fundus. Hearing was normal in both ears. Renal ultrasound showed two small kidneys. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed dysplasia of the cerebellar vermis and extension of the upper cerebellar feet with an MTS .
DNA was obtained from peripheral blood from the patient and his parents and submitted for trio whole-exome sequencing (trioWES) to Chigene Co., Ltd. Genetic analysis showed novel compound heterozygous mutations in the RPGRIP1L gene [c.1334_c.1335insT (p.L447fs*7) and c.2723G > T (p.G908V)]. His parents were heterozygous carriers and did not present any symptoms. Gene sequencing revealed that the father carried the c.1334_c.1335insT variant, and the mother carried the c.2723G > T variant. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) criteria, the c.1334_c.1335insT variant of the RPGRIP1L gene was classified as a likely pathogenic variant (PVS1 + PM2) because this loss-of-function (LOF) variant could lead to a possible loss of gene function, and the c.2723G > T variant was classified as a variant of uncertain significance (PM2 + PM3 + PP3). Both conservation prediction plots and predicted three-dimensional models predicted that the substitution of amino acids (p.G908V) in the mutated protein would lead to a change in function and eventually result in disease .
The boy was given supportive treatment, including polysaccharide iron complex, calcium, calcium carbonate D3, sodium bicarbonate and human erythropoietin injection. Kidney transplantation was performed 3 months later.