A 60-year-old man presented to our unit in January 2008 with a mesenteric carcinoid tumor compressing the superior mesenteric vein, resulting in recurrent episodes of GI bleeding from mesenteric varices. His relevant medical history began in 2005, when he underwent a work-up at another institution for chronic diarrhea at that time. He complained of up to 15 watery bowel movements a day for the past several years. He underwent an unrevealing esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy, but an abdominal CT scan showed a 4.6 × 2.5 cm mesenteric soft tissue mass encasing the superior mesenteric vein and extending along the mesenteric root to the base of the pancreas . Multiple mesenteric varices were noted on this original CT scan, and several small bowel loops appeared thickened with probable venous congestion. Both 24-hour urine 5-HIAA (14.7 mg, normal 2-6 mg) and chromogranin A levels (76.7 ng/mL, normal < 36.4 ng/mL) were elevated, consistent with a diagnosis of mesenteric carcinoid tumor. His tumor was deemed inoperable after the outside institution's evaluation, and he was referred to a medical oncologist at our hospital. Additional studies then included an EGD with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and a fine needle-aspiration biopsy of the mass. These showed a 3.5 cm mass encasing the SMV, and the biopsy confirmed that he had a chromogranin-positive, synaptophysin-positive, keratin AE1/AE3-positive, NSE-negative well-differentiated carcinoid tumor without evidence of atypia (no mitoses or necrosis, ENETS grade G1). Mesenteric angiography revealed severe stenosis or occlusion of multiple SMA branches such as the ileocolic artery, which was reconstituted distally by jejunoileal collaterals . Staging chest/abdomen/pelvis CT scans showed no evidence of metastatic disease. He was offered participation in a clinical trial but declined, choosing instead to receive standard therapy with octreotide long-acting release (LAR).
His disease remained fairly stable for almost two years on octreotide, with only slight progressive enlargement of his mesenteric mass on interval abdominal CT scans. Starting in August 2007, however, he required multiple hospital admissions for GI bleeding. Colonoscopy was unremarkable, and an EGD showed thickened folds in the second portion of the duodenum. A video-capsule endoscopy revealed diffuse congested mucosa throughout the jejunum, with a few localized erosions. A push enteroscopy was performed, but his duodenal and jejunal varices were not amenable to intervention. By January 2008, he was requiring 2-4 units of red blood cell transfusions a week due to continued GI bleeding; a palliative care consult was obtained and preparations were made to proceed with home hospice. At this point he was referred for a second surgical opinion. Given his otherwise state of good health and his desire for aggressive treatment of his carcinoid tumor, it was determined that we should attempt a palliative resection including partial abdominal evisceration for resection of his mesenteric carcinoid tumor and reconstruction via intestinal autotransplantation.
Laparotomy was performed through a bilateral subcostal incision. The carcinoid tumor was confirmed to involve the root of the small bowel mesentery, extending down to the aorta and vena cava, accompanied by lymphadenopathy of the para-aortic nodes. There was no evidence of hepatic metastasis, but the duodenum and head of the pancreas were involved. The mesentery of the ileum and jejunum was investigated to find suitable vessels for anastomosis. The tumor extended past the confluence of the ileocolic artery with the first jejunal artery branch, therefore requiring that the intestine be autotransplanted in two separate segments. The distal ileocolic artery was deemed suitable to support the cecum and terminal ileum, and the jejunal artery was selected to support a large segment of jejunum and proximal ileum. The Kocher maneuver was performed, followed by a radical lymphadenectomy along the vena cava and aorta. A pre-pyloric division of the stomach was made, and the jejunum was divided just distal to the ligament of Treitz. The common hepatic bile duct was divided distally and the pancreaticoduodenectomy was completed by dividing the neck of the pancreas. At this time, both the ileocecal and ileojejunal segments of bowel were removed and transported to the back table, where they were each flushed with 2 L of UW preservation solution and kept on ice. The resection continued by transecting the superior mesenteric artery, leaving a stump of about 2 cm behind. The portal vein was dissected free and then the superior mesenteric vein was divided 2 cm proximal to its confluence with the splenic vein. The descending colon was stapled off just distal to the splenic flexure. The resected specimen included the mesenteric root, pancreatic head, duodenum and ascending/transverse colon. The ileojejunal segment of intestine was then brought back to the field and was revascularized via the retained superior mesenteric artery stump and the transsected distal superior mesenteric vein. The bowel reperfused well. Next, the infrarenal vena cava and the aorta below the take-off of the inferior mesenteric artery were utilized to complete end-to-side vascular anastomosis for the ileocolic segment of bowel. This bowel segment also reperfused well. GI tract continuity was completed using a pancreaticojejunostomy, gastrojejunostomy and choledochojejunostomy and an end-to-end ileoileostomy to connect the two segments of autotransplanted bowel. The descending colon was left stapled off, and a Bardex cecostomy tube was brought out through the skin to temporarily drain the cecum . The abdomen was irrigated and closed in layers.
Final pathology revealed well-differentiated multifocal carcinoid of the small bowel with metastases to the mesentery (where a 6.5 cm mass was identified) and mesenteric lymph nodes (9 of 18 nodes positive). All resection margins were negative for malignancy. By TNM staging (as defined by ENETS), his tumor was stage IIIB. The patient had a complicated post-operative course. A second-look laparotomy performed on postoperative day 1 revealed all of the bowel to be viable. The patient was brought back to the operating room on postoperative day 4 with plans to connect the cecum and descending colon. At this laparotomy, the ileojejunal segment of bowel looked dusky, albeit not frankly necrotic. The ileocolic segment remained pink and well-perfused. A near-occlusive clot was found at the superior mesenteric artery anastomosis. Fogarty thrombectomy restored good flow to that bowel segment. Continued acidosis and hemodynamic instability required re-exploration the next day, at which point a large thrombus was again palpated in the SMA, and the ileojejunal segment of bowel was found to be nonviable. This segment of transplanted bowel was therefore resected, requiring take-down of the pancreaticojejunostomy, choledochojejunostomy and gastrojejunostomy. Reconstruction could not be performed with the ileocecal segment of bowel in its current location, so this segment was explanted, flushed with ice-cold lactated Ringer solution containing mannitol and then kept on ice. The venotomy and arteriotomy on the vena cava and abdominal aorta were patched with pieces of ileal vein and artery, respectively. The ileocecal segment (including ~70 cm of ileum) was then revascularized via the superior mesenteric artery and vein. The bowel was pink immediately upon reperfusion. A pancreaticoileostomy, gastroileostomy and choledochoileostomy were then performed in the standard fashion. Reconstruction was completed by anastomosing the cecum to the descending colon . Postoperatively, he was started on a heparin drip to prevent further thrombosis and he was successfully extubated the next day.
His subsequent hospital course was remarkable for periodic febrile episodes requiring first IR drain placement into a pelvic fluid collection (which grew Candida albicans) and a final laparotomy for abdominal washout with saline containing amphotericin B and gentamicin. He did have a small leak at his pancreaticoileostomy that was managed conservatively with NPO status and initiation of TPN. He was discharged on TPN on POD 72, tolerating some tube feeds and enteral intake.
Over the ensuing months the patient required several short hospitalizations for central venous line infections related to his TPN, in addition to endocarditis. He was ultimately weaned off parenteral nutrition and his weight has stabilized. He had recovered well enough to undergo an aortic valve replacement in December 2009. Currently, 2.5 years after his carcinoid resection, he is completely independent of parenteral nutrition or tube feeds. He continues to have mild diarrhea, well-controlled with cholestyramine. Surveillance abdominal CT scans reveal no evidence of carcinoid recurrence or metastasis, and his chromogranin A in March 2010 was within normal limits (93 ng/ml, reference < 225 ng/ml).