A-68-year old man visited a hospital with vomiting and hematemesis. The laboratory test showed severe anemia. Therefore, he was referred to our hospital and laboratory tests were performed including the tumor markers. The tests revealed a WBC count of 8,980 cells/ml and Hb level of 9.1 g/dl, and BUN level of 23.6 mg/dl. CEA and CA19-9 levels were 16.23 ng/ml and 37.76 IU/ml, respectively. He underwent an emergency gastroscopy, which revealed Borrman type 3 tumor and oozing of blood . Therefore, biopsy was performed and he was diagnosed with gastric cancer (signet ring cell carcinoma). Afterwards, computed tomography (CT), colonoscopy, and upper gastrointestinal series revealed lymph node enlargement in the perigastric area and no distant metastasis . Under the clinical stage of T3N(+)M0, cStage III, he underwent total gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y reconstruction with D2 lymph node dissection. Although peritoneal lavage cytology was negative and liver metastasis and peritoneal carcinomatosis were not recognized in the operative findings, the tumor was exposed outside the serosa and No3 lymph node, which enlargement was preoperatively detected by CT, invaded the lesser omentum directly . Histopathologic findings were poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma (U, Ant, Type 3, 6 × 4.5 cm, por1 > sig, pT4a, INFc, Ly1b, V0, pPM0 (1.2 cm), pDM0 (12 cm), pN3b (18/44), M0, pStage IIIC). Tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil potassium (S-1) as adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated. However, the tumor marker levels remained high (CEA level, 24.20 ng/ml; CA19-9, 51.04 IU/ml) 3 months after the operation. Enhanced CT was performed and there was no recurrence in any area including the lung, liver, etc. and ascites was not recognized either. Therefore, we decided to follow up in the short period with continued adjuvant chemotherapy. Although the tumor marker level had remained high for a while, apparent recurrence was never detected despite short period CT. Nine months after surgery, he suddenly noted difficulty in hearing, and the deafness in both the ears progressed rapidly with facial paralysis; dizziness, tinnitus, and appetite loss worsened. Hearing test was also performed and audiogram revealed bilateral deafness . Thus, cerebral infraction was suspected, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. MRI showed a neoplastic lesion filling the bilateral internal auditory canal, although the MRI did not show any evidence of cerebral infraction and meningeal hyperplasia, and dissemination was not recognized . Finally, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) test was performed and adenocarcinoma was detected in the CSF using the Papanicolaou stain, and he was diagnosed with meningeal carcinomatosis. Figure describes the progression of his situation including the tumor markers levels. After confirming meningeal carcinomatosis, radiotherapy or chemotherapy was planned. However, his situation deteriorated rapidly and he could receive neither radiotherapy nor chemotherapy because of the rapid deterioration of his performance status. He died approximately two months after the symptom onset.