A 23-year-old woman was referred to the Neuromuscular Clinic at The Ottawa Hospital for assessment of muscle stiffness. A diagnosis of DM1 was made based on the presence of classical clinical features (grip myotonia, ptosis, distal hand, leg, face, and neck weakness, hypotonia and hypersomnolence). Genetic testing revealed 750–850 CTG repeats in DMPK, consistent with DM1. There was no known family history of DM1 at the time of diagnosis, however, her father and sister were subsequently determined to be affected clinically and confirmed with molecular diagnosis. There was no history of cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease, valvular heart disease or arrhythmia. Initial cardiac screening with transthoracic echocardiogram and electrocardiogram were normal. She did not present with obesity, did not smoke, and had no history of diabetes, or dyslipidemia. There is no disease-modifying treatment available for DM1. A timeline is shown in .
The proband subsequently became pregnant at age 23. She developed mild dyspnea in the 7th month of pregnancy. Repeat transthoracic echocardiogram at 38 weeks gestation demonstrated an ejection fraction of 35–40% [normal > 55% ]. She was admitted to the high-risk obstetrical unit at 39 weeks gestation due a non-reassuring fetal heart rate and worsening dyspnea. She had a spontaneous vaginal delivery at 39 + 3 weeks, complicated by postpartum hemorrhage requiring transfusion. Her child was healthy. She was diagnosed with peripartum cardiomyopathy but was otherwise feeling well and discharged home with metoprolol to be followed by cardiology as an outpatient.
Five days postpartum, she developed acute retrosternal chest pain radiating to the jaw and left arm. In the emergency room, electrocardiogram demonstrated inferior lead ST elevation and she was immediately taken to the cardiac catheterization lab. Cardiac catheterization demonstrated multivessel spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) involving the ostial left main artery, first diagonal artery, obtuse marginal branches (M2 and M3 branches) and distal left anterior descending coronary artery . The patient had a cardiac arrest during the procedure, requiring cardiac resuscitation, intubation, and vasopressors for hemodynamic support. She stabilized rapidly and was able to be extubated within 24 h. She was started on guideline directed medical therapy for heart failure including angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, beta-blocker, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist and aspirin for SCAD. Repeat echocardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20% with left ventricular dilatation, and mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed left ventricular dilatation with severe left ventricular dysfunction, thin linear mid-wall delayed gadolinium enhancement in the septum, and focal transmural late gadolinium enhancement at the mid to base left ventricular inferior and inferolateral walls with hypokinesia secondary to SCAD . Ultrasound demonstrated left internal jugular vascular line associated thrombus and she was treated with apixaban for 3 months. She improved rapidly, was ambulant and discharged home 12 days later and remained clinically stable for 5 months.
After several months, the patient discontinued her medications (aspirin, spironolactone, and perindopril), as she was concerned that these medications were causing abdominal pain. She acutely declined and she was readmitted to hospital with nausea, abdominal pain, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea with a diagnosis of heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated worsening cardiac function with severe global hypokinesis of the left ventricle, mild to moderately reduced right ventricular systolic function, severe functional mitral regurgitation, moderate tricuspid regurgitation and pericardial effusion . Given persistent severe low left ventricular ejection fraction, a dual chamber implantable cardioverter defibrillator was implanted for primary prevention. However, she deteriorated rapidly, developed further cardiogenic shock, and had multiple cardiac arrests with pulseless electrical activity. She required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, cardiac support with a miniaturized ventricular assist pump/left ventricular assistive Impella device with anticoagulation, and renal replacement therapy. She had several complications including renal failure and septicemia and developed pneumonia with computerized tomography chest demonstrating confluent consolidation in the upper and lower lung lobes. Computerized tomography abdomen showed severe congestive hepatopathy and bowel ischemia. Unfortunately, she also developed multiple large epidural and subdural hematomas and cerebral edema with worsening neurological function. Care was withdrawn due to poor neurological and cardiac function with multiorgan failure. No autopsy was performed.