A 92-year-old right-handed female with a history of hypertension and basal cell skin cancer presented with a 1-month history of progressively worsening speech difficulties. The patient was brought to clinic by her daughter who first noticed the mild changes in sentence syntax. The patient is a retired schoolteacher who at baseline takes no medication, exercises daily, and lives independently. The progressive speech symptoms prompted medical workup including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and subsequent referral to our institution for neurosurgical evaluation. Symptoms at time of consultation included speech difficulties and intermittent right-hand numbness. Neurological examination was positive for expressive aphasia and otherwise unremarkable.
MRI brain with/without contrast revealed a T1 hypointense, rim-enhancing, and intra-axial mass centered in the left precentral gyrus concerning for a malignant neoplasm involving the eloquent rolandic cortex .
The clinical symptoms and imaging findings were strongly suggestive of intermediate to high grade tumor involving the eloquent motor cortex responsible for speech expression. AC would be offered as a primary treatment option given acceptable surgical risk. The risks associated with surgery in the patient’s age group were considered. However, frailty assessment as measured by the recalibrated RAI-C scoring system deemed her a low-risk surgical candidate.[,] The RAI-C is a 14-question questionnaire assessing 11 variables, including age, sex, several medical comorbidities, and ability to complete activities of daily living (ADL’s). Answers for each question are assigned a score, with a minimum total score of 0 and maximum score of 81. Higher scores are associated with more severe frailty and associated morbidity/mortality. Given her excellent baseline functional status, low frailty score (RAI-C of 30), location of tumor, and risk of tumor-related progression, the patient was offered AC for resection of tumor. The patient and family elected to proceed with the operation after extensive discussion of risks/benefits/alternatives.
A left-sided frontoparietal temporal AC was performed for resection of tumor with the use of the operative microscope and Medtronic Stealth neuronavigation. Awake speech mapping with intraoperative electrophysiology mapping was also performed with assistance from neuropsychology colleagues. Gross-total resection with achieved without any speech arrest. Speech improved intraoperatively on removal of the cystic portion of tumor.
Samples taken during tumor resection were sent to pathology, where microscopic examination of the tissue sections demonstrated a poorly differentiated population of cells with multiforme cytologic features and abundant atypical mitotic figures with vascular proliferation and necrosis, providing a histopathological diagnosis of the WHO Grade IV glioblastoma. depicts the photomicrographs of hematoxylin and eosin stained tissue sections.
Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the neurosurgical ICU for routine monitoring. The patient was neurologically intact with exception of mild expressive aphasia that improved compared to preoperative assessment. The postoperative MRI with and without contrast was negative for acute complications and showed no residual mass . The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course resulting in discharge to acute rehab facility on postoperative day 3. At follow-up, the patient was doing well with continued improvement in aphasia.