A 76-year-old woman reported a history of progressive sensorimotor disturbance in both lower limbs for the past 2 years. Initially, the patient’s condition was misdiagnosed as “lumbar disc herniation” in the local hospital, and she received conservative treatment. However, her symptoms did not improve and became more serious. When referred to our hospital, she complained of inability to walk and bladder and bowel control loss. A neurological examination revealed a diminished sensation below the T7 level. The strength of both lower limb muscles was 1/5. Her neurological status was diagnosed as Nurick Grade 6. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple intradural extramedullary tumors at the T7–T11 level compressing the spinal cord . Computed tomography (CT) scans showed five high-density masses of varying sizes in the spinal canal at the T7–T12 level, and the dural sac was significantly compressed . Three large high-density masses (13.4 mm*8.4 mm, 21.7 mm*13.0 mm, and 14.9 mm*12.5 mm) were observed in the T7–T9 segment, located in the dorsal left rear spinal cord with clear boundaries and ossification signals . The other two high-density masses (8.7 mm*5.3 mm and 11.1 mm*6.73 mm) of different sizes were found in the T10–T12 segment.
The patient underwent tumor resection through T7–T11 laminectomy. The tumors occupied >90% of the transverse diameter of the spinal canal and were entirely ossified. As the vertebral fenestration was too small, it was challenging to remove the tumors. Hence, the bilateral facet joints were removed to enlarge the window. To maintain the stability of the spine, we performed T7–T12 long-segment pedicle screw fixation and posterolateral bone graft fusion simultaneously. Bilateral facetectomy provides advantages over simple laminectomy or laminoplasty in terms of width of the operative corridor and long-term preservation of the spinal alignment. As the dura mater had severely adhered, a fine right-angled hook was used to dissect the neural tissue dorsally away from the neoplasms, which were then resected en bloc, together with parts of the dura mater and arachnoid. After a complete separation of multiple OSMs, the dura mater became normal and it was sutured. The drainage was routinely placed, and the wound was closed layer by layer.
The paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H/E). A histopathological examination revealed a large number of psammoma bodies in the stroma with significant signs of ossification [World Health Organization (WHO) Grade I]. In addition, there were many mature bone tissues around the tumor cells, including trabecular bone, as well as bone marrow with hematopoiesis . Immunohistochemical findings revealed EMA (+), Vim (+), P53 (−), S-100 (+), and Ki67 (approximately 5%) .
Postoperative neurological improvement was significant, and no complications were found. The patient was discharged 2 weeks after surgery. After the 2-year follow-up, she was able to walk without assistance. Her neurological status recovered to Nurick Grade 3. CT scans showed a total resection of the tumors, and there was no recurrence 2 years after surgery .