A 37-year-old man has been undergoing hemodialysis (HD), three times a week, treatment for the past 15 years. He also underwent peritoneal dialysis for five years before HD. The primary etiology of the kidney disease was unknown. He was admitted to the ophthalmology clinics due to the unilateral anterior bulging of the right eye and drooping of the eyelid. This complaint was onset last month and has augmented over time.
The patient was alert and cooperative on the physical examination. The unilateral exophthalmos was observed in the right eye. Both direct and indirect pupillary light reflexes were isochoric. Limited upward and outward gaze was noted in the right eye. Papilledema and swelling of the optic disc were observed in the right eye. No abnormal neurological reflexes were detected. Any mass lesions or lymphadenopathy were not detected elsewhere in his body. Additionally, an arteriovenous fistula was visible on the left forearm. The patient did not report any accompanying symptoms, such as episodes of syncope, seizures, or fecal/urinary incontinence.
The immediate orbital and cranial imaging was performed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and an extraconal mass lesion was detected in the right orbital posterior superolateral position. Mass lesion was exerting pressure on the orbital part of the frontal bone, the right optic nerve, and the superior rectus muscle. The intramedullary lesion measured 36*27*24 mm and exhibited diffuse homogeneous contrast enhancement in MRI. The tumoral lesion appeared slightly hyperintense on T1-weighted images and hypointense on T2-weighted images. The MRI sections are illustrated in Fig. . Afterward, the lesion was evaluated using computed tomography (CT). The CT scans revealed an expansile mass lesion with peripheral linear wall calcification at the right orbital posterolateral level and originating from the sphenoid wing . The mass lesion caused erosion in adjacent bone structures, and was classified as a BT. The laboratory results were as follows: glucose: 92 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen: 56 mg/dL, creatinine: 7.8 mg/dL, sodium: 137 mEq/L, potassium: 4.5 mEq/L, calcium: 9.7 mg/dL, phosphorus: 7.2 mg/dL, albumin: 3.8 g/dL, bilirubin: 0.4 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 1427 IU/L, intact PTH: 4557 pg/mL, serum 25-OH vitamin D: 12 ng/mL, leukocyte: 9200 cell/µL, hemoglobin: 8.2 g/dL, platelet: 390 × 10³/µL. The patient underwent ileus surgery, parathyroidectomy, and leg fracture operation in medical history. However, the patient did not state that certain data about the parathyroidectomy operation however it was performed about 10 years ago. Furthermore, the patient had been complaining of muscle weakness and bone pain for years.
The bone mass lesion was resected via craniotomy due to the compressive effect. During the operation, surgeons observed that the dura mater remained intact in the vicinity of the mass. There were no major complications noted during the postoperative period. Histopathological examination specimens supported the diagnosis of BT, the fibro-osseous lesion contained giant cells accompanied by bone resorption. Light microscopy revealed increased vascularity, fibroblastic proliferation, stroma containing extravasated erythrocytes, and osteoclast-type giant cells .
The patient was evaluated for hyperparathyroidism and parathyroid scintigraphy with Tc-99 m methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) detected three distinct foci consistent with adenomas. The accumulations of Tc-99 m MIBI were sized at 25 × 14 mm inferior to the left thyroid lodge, 18 × 12 mm inferior to the right thyroid lobe, and 12 mm in the anterior mediastinal region, respectively. These findings were further confirmed by CT scan of the neck with contrast. The images of scintigraphy are shown in Fig. .
Parathyroidectomy was recommended because of refractory hyperparathyroidism. However, the patient refused the surgery due to concerns about debility and perioperative risks. Afterward, we retrospectively investigated dialysis inadequacy and reached out to the dialysis unit. Kt/V urea values had mostly been below 1.2 in the past year, and he had not been consistently taking his prescribed medications. Dialysis efficiency was enhanced through necessary adjustments and the average Kt/V urea increased to 1.7 over the next three months. The patient was receiving parenteral calcitriol and sevelamer treatment before the surgery. The patient previously declined oral cinacalcet because of gastrointestinal side-effects so parenteral etelcalcetide was initiated. He tolarated maximum 7.5 mg etelcalcetide, three times a week. Phosphorus levels decreased to target range (< 5.5 mg/dL) with lanthanum carbonate (3*1000 mg daily), calcium carbonate (3*2000 mg daily), and dietary phosphorus restriction. Paricalcitol, administered intravenously at a dose of 10 mcg three times a week, was introduced after phosphorus control. Unfortunately, the follow-up showed a decrease in the PTH level to a minimum of 1428 pg/mL. In the last laboratory assessment, serum calcium level was 10.4 mg/dL, PTH level was 2897 pg/mL and ALP was 1204 IU/L.