A 50-year-old man with a history of heavy smoking visited another hospital due to gross hematuria and weight loss of about 10 kg for 3 months in January 2019. CT showed bilateral hydronephrosis and irregular thickening of the bladder wall . MRI showed a large irregular mass with significant extravesical invasion around the right wall, bladder trigone, and invasion of the prostate and right seminal vesicle . Laboratory data showed acute renal failure (creatinine, 7.01 mg/dL; eGFR, 7.51 mL/min/1.73 m2). Clinical stage T4aN0M0 bladder cancer and acute postrenal failure due to the mass were diagnosed. TURBT for diagnosis and left percutaneous nephrostomy were performed. Histopathology findings showed invasive UC, high-grade, T2. Therefore, the patient was referred to our hospital for cystectomy. Renal failure did not improve sufficiently despite nephrostomy, so we performed robotic radical cystectomy and ileal conduit without neoadjuvant chemotherapy in February 2019. Histological examination showed high-grade NVUC, T4a , and lymph nodes metastases (pathological stage N2). The nested variant represented more than 90% of the tumor. Since renal failure gradually improved after cystectomy (creatinine, 1.39 mg/dL; eGFR, 44.03 mL/min/1.73 m2), he received adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) and carboplatin (area under the concentration–time curve, 4) for 3 cycles. However, para-aortic lymph node metastasis appeared 7 months after cystectomy on CT and FDG PET/CT . He received pembrolizumab (200 mg) as systemic chemotherapy. After 5 cycles of pembrolizumab therapy, the metastatic lesion had decreased in size . After 10 cycles, the lesion remained undetectable . We assessed complete response based on the RECIST version 1.1. During pembrolizumab therapy, he developed herpes zoster on the face (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0, grade 2). He received 18 cycles of pembrolizumab therapy and continues the treatment. No recurrences or metastases have been observed .