A 16-year-old male patient presented with a 5-day history of recurrent fever attacks up to 39.5 °C and with night sweats and arthralgia to the outpatient department (OPD) of the infectious diseases ward of the General Hospital of Vienna. Laboratory examination indicated a moderately increased CRP (1.57 mg/dL) with a normal white blood count, thrombocytopaenia of 105 g/L, a moderately raised total bilirubin of 2.33 mg/dL in addition to moderately increased LDH of 277 U/L. Differential blood count showed monocytosis and atypical lymphocytes. A rapid diagnostic influenza test (Xpert® Flu, Cepheid) was negative for Influenza A and Influenza B, as well as ELISAs for CMV and EBV. An aerobic blood culture was positive for Staphylococcus hominis after 20.4 h. This was not confirmed by other simultaneously drawn blood culture sets and was thus regarded as contamination. Physical examination was normal apart from an enlarged sub-angular lymph node on the right side. The anamnesis revealed that the patient had returned from a trip of 1 ½ months in duration, to Uganda, Papua New Guinea and Singapore, 3 months before the onset of symptoms. During this stay and until 3 weeks after returning home, he took continuous malaria prophylaxis consisting of mefloquine (Lariam®) once per week. He did not report any associated complaints. Eight months before, he had stayed at the Philippines for 10 days.
Thick and thin blood smears were performed and Plasmodium malariae was diagnosed microscopically. A routine therapy with six adult doses of Riamet® (artemether–lumefantrine) was initiated according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and following WHO treatment guidelines. On the first day of treatment body temperature increased to a maximum of 39.8 °C, but the general health status improved subsequently. A thick blood smear on the last day of treatment was negative and the patient was discharged in good condition. A follow-up examination was planned for 1 week after admission to which the patient, however, did not present.
One month later, the patient returned to the outpatient department with reported fever. He had not travelled abroad since the initial malaria diagnosis. A thick blood smear showed a recurrence of parasites with a very low parasitaemia. The patient was retreated with Riamet® and samples from the first and second fever episode were sent for species specific PCR diagnosis . PCR from EDTA blood detected a P. ovale wallikeri mono-infection at both time points. Further analyses were initiated with the aim to identify whether the second attack was a relapse of the same parasite isolate or a prolonged latency of another P. ovale wallikeri parasite obtained during the preceding trips.
Molecular analysis of several gene loci was conducted to evaluate both isolates. Initially, a fragment of the nuclear 18S rRNA gene was analysed to identify Plasmodium spp. (Primers rOVA1WC/rOVA2WC) . The positive isolates were further analysed for discrimination between P. ovale curtisi (rOVA1/rOVA2) and P. ovale wallikeri (rOVA1v/rOVA2v) . To examine if the isolates were identical genotypes the nuclear porbp2 and potra genes were analysed.
Examined sequences of the SSU rRNA, porbp2 [, ] and potra genes revealed homology of the two isolates. The sequences can be accessed in GenBank with the numbers (MG251661—P. ovale wallikeri isolate 17T1554/17T186R. porbp2, MG255222–MG255223—P. ovale wallikeri isolate 17T1554/17T186R SSU rRNA gene, partial sequence).
Accordingly, the patient’s glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) status was tested and showed normal enzyme function so that a 14 days course of primaquine was initiated . During the following 7 months, the patient did not experience further episodes of disease.