A 22-year-old woman presented with intense pain in the shoulders that began 2 weeks after injury during a CrossFit competition, especially on the right side, without edema or reduced range of motion. She started the CrossFit practice routine 2 months before the injury. The patient trained CrossFit three times a week without any other sport activity on the remaining week days. Olympic weightlifting (overhead movement) was described as the last activity before the acute pain started. The initial overhead load was 55 pounds and was part of a “novice” training routine with reported adequate technique. One week prior to the CrossFit competition the patient was oriented to increase the Olympic weightlifting load to 75 pounds as a requirement for competition. Repetitions were set to her own limitation. After the injury, she stopped her exercises and applied ice to the shoulders and upper arms. During the following days, she experienced continuous pain and sought medical attention. Physical examination did not show any reduction of passive and active arcs of movements. Also, Jobe and Bear Hug tests were negative. There was only a mild ligamentous laxity and 10 degrees of elbow hyperextension. Her medical history did not include medications, prior fractures, neoplastic disease or prior surgery on the upper extremities. Also, she did not have history of anabolic or glucocorticoid steroid use. The patient’s height was 1.53 m and weighted 54 Kg, with a BMI of 22.9 and was physically active for more than 3 years. She has never had CrossFit lessons or prior training. Before she started CrossFit practice, the patient used to swim three times a week in college, but did not participate in competitions. The patient had an episode of amenorrhea 3 years ago, considered to be due to weight loss, probably due to intense training and reduced caloric intake. Laboratory tests and densitometry were performed in the same period of the imaging studies and showed normal mineral bone density and Vitamin D insufficiency (serum Vitamin D of 24.8 ng/mL). During the two initial weeks of the patient’s bilateral upper limb pain, she attributed the symptoms to “overtraining” but she sought medical attention when the pain became progressively worse. The patient did not refer any specific diet, nutritional supplementation or reduced caloric intake during the time of the shoulder lesion.
Radiographs of the shoulders were performed 1 week after onset of symptoms.
These were interpreted as normal, showing no evidence of bone lesion, fracture line, arthritis, or periosteal bone formation. However, small and incomplete fracture lines may not be seen on early radiographs. At that time, the patient was presumed to have bilateral impingement syndrome. MRI of the shoulders were performed 2 weeks after the onset of symptoms to exclude other causes of shoulder pain such as rotator cuff injuries, bursitis, bone marrow edema and small fractures The MR images of the right shoulder showed extensive bone marrow edema throughout the right humeral medullary cavity. In addition to marrow edema, there was an incomplete transverse fracture line adjacent to the medial cortex of the surgical neck and mild soft tissue edema . Further, there was an intense edema of the subscapularis muscle, with scattered pattern suggesting overload injury probably related to delayed onset of muscle soreness (DOMS), without tears. On the left side the findings were less prominent, and similarly showed bone marrow edema of the proximal humerus, without a defined fracture line, considered to be the result of joint / bone overload . Additionally, there was a mild edema of the subscapularis muscle, without tears .
The patient was treated nonoperatively with activity modification, without immobilization. She received oral non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs for 5 days and 20 physiotherapy sessions for analgesia, stretching and strengthening of the rotator cuff and deltoid. Also, the patient had vitamin D reposition with 7000 IU twice a week in the first month, with 7000 IU weekly as maintenance. One month later the patient was asymptomatic and 3 months later she resumed CrossFit training against medical advice not to return to sports without follow-up imaging.
Follow-up MRI was done 4 months after the initial studies and showed complete resolution of bone edema and consolidation of the transverse fracture line on the right proximal humeral diaphysis. Also, there was complete resolution of bone marrow edema on the left humerus, and no visible bilateral subscapularis muscle edema or tear . After 6 months of follow-up the patient was asymptomatic.