A 35-year-old Caucasian female had her first pacemaker implanted in 2005 at the age of 18 years due to a complete atrioventricular block. During the primary implantation, a pocket was created in the left sub-clavicular region, and the pulse generator placed under the subcutaneous space above the fascia of the left pectoral muscle (i.e., supra-fascially). In 2006, she had a new ventricular lead implanted due to a primary ventricular lead dysfunction. During the new lead implantation, the primary lead was left in the device pocket. In 2012, she underwent an uneventful pacemaker generator replacement due to battery depletion. In the following years, she was managed on an outpatient basis with an uneventful clinical course, with proper pacemaker function, and no reported pacemaker related issues.
In 2021 she gave birth to a healthy child. This was her first pregnancy. She conceived spontaneously and received routine prenatal care with no documented complications during pregnancy. Labour started spontaneously at term (39 weeks of gestation) with regular uterine contractions. The foetus was in cephalic presentation. She received no antibiotic prophylaxis. Labour progressed normally and resulted in a vaginal birth of an appropriate-for-gestational-age birth weight neonate with an Apgar score of nine at birth and ten at five minutes of life. She was hospitalised for three days after birth. The postpartum period until discharge from the maternity hospital was uneventful, with early initiation of breastfeeding without complications. However, seven weeks postpartum she developed lactational mastitis of the lower outer quadrant of the left breast with local erythema, tenderness, engorgement, and local pain. A conservative and pharmacological treatment strategy with continuation of breastfeeding, cooling of the affected area, and analgesic therapy was advised. However, with the inflamed upper outer breast quadrant and left sub-clavicular region, and with the woman becoming febrile, antibiotic treatment was advised. Since the young breastfeeding mother was reluctant to take empirically selected antistaphylococcal penicillin, amoxicillin / clavulanic acid was prescribed for seven days, according to local guidelines.
Despite antibiotic treatment, an abscess evolved in the upper outer breast quadrant, as determined by clinical examination (showing signs of local edema and erythema, warmth and severe pain) and soft-tissue ultrasound (appearing as an ill-defined mass with central hypoechogenic area and eccentrically thickened walls and displaying internal septation and debris). The abscess was punctured using fine-needle aspiration technique and purulent material sent for microbiological analysis. Staphylococcus aureus, sensitive to methicillin as well as to high doses of amoxicillin / clavulanic acid, was detected. With the isolate available, it was possible to persuade the patient to switch to the most optimal antimicrobial therapy (flucloxacillin for an additional 14 days), after which the signs and symptoms of mastitis gradually resolved. However, four weeks later, a clinically evident pacemaker pocket infection with local erythema, pain, and palpable fluctuation around pulse generator developed. The woman was advised by an interdisciplinary medical team including attending cardiologist, consultant infection disease specialist and cardiovascular surgeon according to current CIED infection treatment guidelines, to undergo a complete pacemaker system extraction strategy, using a well-established transvenous lead extraction (TLE) technique. However, after comprehensive discussion including the young breastfeeding mother, her family and the multidisciplinary team, she did not consent to a potentially risky TLE procedure. Thus, only the pacemaker pulse generator was explanted; three retained pacing leads (two ventricular and one atrial) were positioned in the left sub-pectoral pocket; a new dual chamber pacemaker implanted on the contralateral side and a broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with cefepime continued for six weeks.
In the following months, a chronic skin fistula above the left-sided pocket developed .
Due to the high possibility of a new infection of a fully functional right-sided pacemaker system as a result of chronic left-sided leads infection, the delayed surgical treatment strategy involving TLE was again strongly advised by the same multidisciplinary team. In the light of new clinical circumstances, such as cessation of breastfeeding four months prior and chronic left-sided leads infection potentially leading to potentially fatal right-sided pacemaker system complications, another thorough discussion was performed with the woman and her family. After a detailed review of surgery-related risk, she did consent to the proposed surgical strategy. Therefore, we opted for a now more complex TLE procedure of the three retained left-sided leads while leaving the fully functional and clinically uninfected right-sided pacemaker system intact.
The surgical procedure was performed at the University Clinic for Cardiology, Skopje, Northern Macedonia in 2022, under general anaesthesia with invasive patient monitoring, continuous transesophageal echocardiogram surveillance and with utilization of high-quality fluoroscopy as described elsewhere . Next, an incision was made over the scar from previous surgeries, and the chronic fistula was excised. Subsequently, the abandoned leads’ ends were dissected and a standardized TLE procedure was performed using Liberator® Beacon® Tip locking stylet (Cook Medical), One-Tie® Compression Coil (Cook Medical), and Evolution Shortie RL® and Evolution RL® (Cook Medical) hand-powered bidirectional dilator sheaths through primary implantation venous entry site (i.e., left subclavian vein), as described in detail elsewhere .
Of note, during the procedure, particular care was paid to fully functional leads from the right-sided pacemaker system to preserve them and to avoid any need for additional high-risk surgical procedures. After the surgery, the patient was monitored in the intensive care unit and bedside echocardiography was performed to exclude damage to right-sided heart structures and because of the presence of a pericardial effusion. The young woman was discharged the next day and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was continued for 14 days.
The tips of the extracted electrodes along with the tissue attached to the extracted electrodes were sent for microbiological and histopathological analysis. Histopathological features were typical of sterile vegetation with no microorganisms isolated.
Twelve months after the procedure, the young female patient is clinically stable with no signs of local or systemic infection; with a completely healed left-side skin incision with no signs of residual chronic fistula; a fully functional right-sided pacemaker system; and is managed on an outpatient basis.