In September 2011, a 22-year-old, female, Caucasian patient with obesity (BMI 38,9; height 169 cm, weight 111 kg) first presented to our outpatient clinic with an unclear lesion of the right dorsal distal femur with a surrounding soft tissue mass. Patient history was empty except for intermittent arterial hypertension and having been treated for an inguinal hernia in childhood. The patient recounted that she had presented to her general physician with an onset of knee pain on the right side. She then received conservative treatment for the suspected diagnosis of a burst baker-cyst. In the course of treatment, plain x-rays and MRI imaging of the knee were obtained due to persistent pain.
At first presentation at our outpatient clinic, the patient had a hematoma of the right calf. Due to pyknic habitus, the range of motion was limited and the lesion couldn’t be palpated in the right popliteal fossa. The peripheral perfusion was intact; there were no sensory or motoric deficits. The lateral radiograph of the right distal femur depicted what seemed like a broad-based exostosis with a small tip extending into the popliteal fossa (Figure ). The MRI also depicted what appeared to be an exostosis tip and a surrounding soft tissue mass (Figure a,
b) bordering on the popliteal vessels. Multiple exostoses were excluded by clinical examination.
To exclude a secondary chondrosarcoma or other malignancies the patient was scheduled to undergo an incisional biopsy. Surgery was performed using a lateral approach and a longitudinal incision in the right, distal femur.
Intraoperatively, digital palpation of the soft tissue mass showed an arterial pulsation and profuse bleeding occurred upon palpation. A tourniquet was applied in the proximal thigh to achieve haemostasis and the leakage was sutured by a vascular surgeon.
To verify the intraoperatively suspected diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm, the patient underwent a diagnostic angiography after surgery was concluded. The angiography depicted a polycyclic popliteal aneurysm with smooth margins in the P1 segment. There were no signs of active leakage outside of the aneurysm formation. Muscular branches of the superior femoral artery were in close location to the aneurysm cavity but showed no communication. The diagnosis of aneurysm spurium was confirmed (Figure ).
After consultation with the vascular surgeons, another interventional surgical approach was planned. In a second surgery, the sharp exostosis tip and aneurysm spurium were resected. (Figures –
) The exostosis tip had pierced a 2 mm hole (in diameter) into the popliteal artery that was also sutured during surgery.
Histological examination confirmed a fresh thrombus with parts of necrotic and haemorrhaged adipocytic tissue.
Post-operative follow-up on the hospital ward showed good wound-healing and mobilisation of the patient who was discharged nine days after interventional surgery. After vascular surgery the patient was recommended to take acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg 1-0-0 for 6 months. The postoperative X-ray shows the remaining broad-based exostosis without the sharp tip (Figure ). One year after surgery, the patient is pain free and doesn’t suffer from limitations in terms of joint movement of the persistent broad base of the exostosis.