A 29-year-old female, medically fit, presented to University Dental Clinic complaining of dissatisfaction of her smile due to EGD. Pre-surgical evaluation included Intraoral and extraoral photography and video capture of dynamic smile positions. The patient provided informed consent to publish their case details and any accompanying images. Ethical approval to report the case was not needed per the Qassim University Institution Review Board.
An intraoral scanner camera (Omnicam®) was used for the digital impression of the teeth and the occlusion. The case was diagnosed with EGD from tooth #16–26, due to altered passive eruption and classified as Type1A, except #14 and 13 are type1B, according to Coslet et al.
The planning of the management was performed with the aid of a virtual planning technique in the DSD application , with the purpose of providing a better preoperative understanding of the proposed treatment, before commencement of active care. Then the esthetic crown lengthening guide was designed digitally . The 3D printer (ProJet MJP 3600 Dental 3D systems®) was used to generate the surgical guide .
Local anesthesia was applied by buccal infiltration technique. The 3D guide was utilized for the esthetic crown lengthening, with gingivoplasty incisions at the facial side of teeth #16 to #26 using internal bevel incision and blade 15C , then the collar of soft tissue was removed using a surgical curette . After sounding, flapless osteoectomy was selectively done at the facial bone of teeth #13 and #14 . PeriAcryl (cyanoacrylate adhesive dressing) was applied to control bleeding and enhance the healing .
Postoperative management included oral hygiene instructions, pain medications and 0.2% chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash twice daily. The evaluation of postoperative healing was done at intervals of 2, 4, and 6 weeks. The healing was uneventful (.). The patient was pleased with the outcomes and placed on recall visits of 3, 6, and 12 months. After one year the patient came for a recall visit and the clinical photos were taken .