A 56-year-old male patient (weight: 62 kg, height: 175 cm) who had previously undergone chemotherapy and radiation therapy for hypopharyngeal cancer developed a complete cervical esophageal stricture after undergoing external beam radiotherapy. Airway assessments revealed no limitations in mouth, jaw, or neck movement and a Mallampati score of Ⅱ. The patient underwent a scheduled esophagogastroduodenoscopy in the gastrointestinal suite four months later to dilate the esophagus and facilitate oral feeding despite the presence of a gastrostomy. The gastrointestinal suite was equipped with a pre-use checked anesthesia machine and monitor, an emergency cart, and a defibrillator.
Initially, the attending anesthesiologist administered intravenous ketamine (50 mg), midazolam (2 mg), and fentanyl (50 µg). However, because of difficulties in maintaining the airway, the attending anesthesiologist decided to switch to general anesthesia using an oroendotracheal tube. Anesthesia was maintained using sevoflurane 2.0–3.0 vol% with a mixture of 40% oxygen. Mechanical ventilation was provided at a tidal volume of 500 ml, a rate of 12 breaths/min, and a positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 mmHg. Intraprocedural monitoring included electrocardiography, noninvasive blood pressure, pulse oximetry (SpO2), and end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration (ETCO2). Air insufflation was also used during the procedure. Endoscopy revealed complete stenosis 10 cm from the incisor, with a distal site 35 cm from the gastrostomy site. The esophageal stricture was successfully dilated using the rendezvous technique.
Approximately 45 min into the endoscopy, the patient’s oxygen saturation dropped abruptly from 100% to 85% and the ETCO2 decreased from 30 to 10 mmHg. The patient had a blood pressure of 110/85 mmHg and a heart rate of 105 beats/min in normal sinus rhythm. Subcutaneous emphysema was identified in the right chest wall, while lung examinations yielded normal results. The surgical team was promptly notified and the procedure was halted. Manual administration of 100% oxygen was initiated and a 500-ml bolus of normal saline was administered to maintain preload. The patient’s position was then changed to Trendelenburg. While waiting to undergo computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) after 30 minutes of attempted resuscitation, the patient had a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 95%, heart rate of 80 beats/min, and ETCO2 of 28 mmHg.
CTPA was conducted to rule out a pulmonary embolism while an adequate depth of anesthesia was maintained using midazolam and sevoflurane at a minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration (MAC) of 0.5. CTPA results revealed minimal air bubbles in the pulmonary trunk, forming a tri-radiate offshoot artifact (dynamic Mercedes-Benz sign) attributed to pulsation . Diffuse pneumomediastinum and minimal right pneumothorax were also observed . Mechanical ventilation was continued until postoperative day 2, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 4.