An 18-year-old man whose main complaint was “Finding of chest deformity for 12 years” diagnosed with pectus excavatum was admitted to the Department of Thoracic Surgery of the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University in July 2015. Physical examination revealed a Funnel Index of 2.5 and a Haller Index of 4.6, which meeting criteria for surgical correction. The patient’s chest X-ray is shown in Fig. . Preoperative echocardiography revealed two abnormal transverse shunts (with widths of 1.6 mm and 0.6 mm) in the pulmonary trunk, which were classified as coronary-to-pulmonary arterial shunts Angiography was then suggested, but the patient was unwilling to take further angiography worrying about the potential side effects of this examination.
The patient underwent a modified extrapleural Nuss procedure with a subxiphoid incision . After lysing the adhesion beneath the sternum through the subxiphoid incision, a Nuss introducer was pushed under the sternum cautiously to avoid disturbing the parietal pleura on either side. When the 16-in. Nuss bar was pulled through the retrosternal tract, the patient suffered a sudden ventricular fibrillation (VF). Considering the high possibility of physical cardiac injury given the patient’s response, the Nuss bar was immediately removed, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed. Five minutes after initiation of CPR, sinus rhythm was restored, and the patient’s vital signs became stable. After exclusion of hemothorax, tension pneumothorax and cardiac injury with bilateral thoracoscopes, the Nuss procedure was attempted again. This time, the Nuss bar was successfully pulled through the sternum with the guidance of the introducer, and the patient’s vital signs remained stable. However, shortly after the Nuss bar was rotated, the patient again experienced VF. With the Nuss bar still inside the patient, consistent CPR and 3 rounds of electrical defibrillation failed to cardiovert the patient. Strangely, cardioversion occurred immediately after the Nuss bar was removed. Echocardiography was performed soon after the second successful resuscitation, showing no sign of pericardial tamponade or cardiac injury, but a reduced ejection fraction of 30%. Considering the patient’s serious cardiac insufficiency, the surgery was terminated, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. One week later, the patient was discharged without further complication.