Our patient was a 52-year-old Han man who underwent partial laryngectomy in our department for squamous cell carcinoma of the glottis in September 2011. He came to our department again for recurrence of laryngeal carcinoma and underwent total laryngectomy and cervical lymph node dissection in November 2016. Then, he received radiotherapy at 60 Gy for 1.5 months. There was no obviously abnormal family history. He healed well until April 2018, when a slowly enlarging mass on the left side of the tracheal stoma was noticed. Since then, he had experienced progressively aggravating dyspnea. He came to our out-patient department in October 2018. A physical examination revealed an immobile, well-defined, partially compressible and non-pulsatile mass that measured approximately 4 cm × 4 cm on the left side of the tracheal stoma . The mass extended from the left lateral wall of the stoma and led to tracheostomal stenosis directly. There was no lymph node enlargement in the remainder of his neck. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of his neck revealed a well-circumscribed, non-enhancing, cystic-solid mass measuring 5 cm × 4 cm in the left side of the tracheal stoma . A fine-needle aspiration of the mass yielded approximately 10 ml of yellowish-white fluid that contained a triglyceride level of 26.5 mmol/L, a protein level of 58.0 g/L, a glucose level of 8.5 mmol/L, and a white blood cell count of 1.0 × 109/L, with 96% lymphocytes. The fluid was confirmed to be chyle on the basis of these results. The parastomal mass became smaller after the fine-needle aspiration, but returned to its original size on the following day. The same fluid was aspirated by fine-needle aspiration. Subsequently, he was admitted to our department. An ultrasonography of his neck described a 43 mm × 36 mm mixed echoic mass located between the left lobe of the thyroid gland and the great vessels. Other routine preoperative examinations were normal. According to his medical history, computed tomography, and the results of the fine-needle aspiration, a diagnosis of PSR invading the thoracic duct with intra-mass accumulation of chylous fluid was suspected.
On October 29, 2018, a parastomal mass excision was performed through both cervical and thoracic incision. An intraoperative frozen section showed moderate differentiated squamous cell carcinoma . The upper half of the manubrium sterni and the left sternoclavicular joint were resected to obtain a best exposure of the mass. Surgical dissection revealed that the lower part of the left internal jugular vein and the terminal segment of the thoracic duct were surrounded by the tumor. The thoracic duct was ligated and sutured by the edge of tumor approximately 1 cm and the left internal jugular vein was excised. Then, the mass was meticulously dissected free from surrounding tissues. The incision was closed following placement of one suction drain. Our patient developed chyle fistula after parastomal mass excision. Treatment with closed continuous vacuum drainage (− 400 mmHg) and total parenteral feeding resulted in the closure of the fistula. He has now been off surgery for 15 months and recent follow-ups have not revealed any evidence for tumor recurrence.