A 25 year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with painful, stiff mass which was described to be present for nearly one year but increased in size in the last 3 months and became painful recently. In her history no special feature was recorded. In physical examination, about 3 × 2.5 cm stiff, immobile, painful mass placed posteroinferiorly to the medial malleoli was palpated. The mass seemed to be placed on neurovascular structures of the medial ankle. The anterior-posterior (AP) plain x-ray radiography and computed tomography (CT) revealed a bony prominence 27 × 23 mm (cartilage cap thickness: 7 mm) in size raising from posteromedial of the calcaneus and reported to be an osteochondroma . In the operation, it was observed that the lesion raised from the most inferior and posteromedial side of the calcaneus and grew through the surface pushing the soft tissues more posteromedially. The bony mass was excised totally as possible and pathologic examination suggested that it was an osteochondroma. In physical examination on the 15th day the patient was pain free and no new lesion was detected. One month later, the patient again suffered from pain and a smaller and softer lump with tenderness on the operation field was detected. No lesion could detect in plain x-ray radiography. In order to identify the lesion, CT was performed and an exofitic lesion about 5 × 3 mm in size was detected posteromedially to the calcaneus . As it was a small lesion, antinflammatory drugs were given and elastic bandage with ice was applied for the next 15 days but pain persisted and some growing of the lesion again was detected. In the fifth month, a second CT was performed and increase in the lesion sizes (13 × 8 mm) was detected in multiplanar reconstruction and three-dimensional (3D) imaging . Cartilage cap thickness was 4 mm. The lesion was reported a benign osteochondroma but as the lesion was persisted on growing and pain increased one month later a third CT study and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was performed, and some more increase was reported (18 × 12 mm with cartilage cap thickness: 6 mm) . As the lesion placed in a relatively atypical region and showed recurrence with pain in a shorter time, malignant transformation was considered. The patient was forwarded to a medical center for musculoskeletal tumours and she was reopereted in this center with an initial diagnosis of chondrosarcoma. The bony prominence was totally excised and pathologic examination again revealed a beningn osteochondroma. The last CT examination that was performed one month later the second operation revealed no residual or recurrent lesion . The patient is pain free for 9 months and no new lesion was detected to date.