A 54-year-old male underwent an upper gastro-intestinal endoscopic examination during a medical check-up. Endoscopic examination revealed a gastric submucosal mass near the cardia . An initial endoscopic biopsy contained only non-neoplastic gastric mucosa. Thereafter, the patient was transferred to our hospital for the further evaluation. Abdominal computed tomography showed a relatively well circumscribed mass protruding into the lumen of the stomach near the cardia . As a submucosal tumor, a gastrointestinal stromal tumor or a malignant lymphoma was suspected, and laparoscopic wedge resection was performed as an optimal diagnostic and therapeutic procedure. Macroscopically, the surface of the gastric mucosa was smooth and intact. The cut surface showed 2.7 cm relatively well circumscribed yellowish submucosal mass with dilated blood vessels . Microscopically, the tumor was located within the submucosa and relatively circumscribed, but a fibrous capsule was not present . The tumor was cellular and had scanty stromal components with no fibrous septum identified. The tumor predominantly had an acinar and nested architectural patterns . In acinar, the nuclei of the tumor cells were basally located. The neoplastic cells had a relatively small amount of clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm, and the nuclei were uniform and round to oval with finely dispersed chromatin and indistinct nucleoli . Some tumor cells had a nuclei with a single small nucleolus. The tumor cells in nests had very scanty cytoplasm and the nuclei were overlapped . However, there were no areas composed of large sheets of tumor cells or having an infiltrative growth pattern at the periphery of the tumor. Mitosis was observed in fewer than one cell per 10 high-power field. Neither atypical mitosis nor tumor necrosis was seen. Immunohistochemistry showed strong, diffuse positivity for α1-antitrypsin, chymotrypsin, α1-antichymotrypsin, pan-cytokeratin, and vimentin and weak diffuse positivity for CD56 and DOG1 . Synaptophysin, chromogranin A, TTF-1, c-Kit, S-100 protein, and CD34 were negative . Ki67-positive cells were found at an incidence of fewer than 10 in one high-power field. Based on the acinar histologic features and the immunohistochemical staining, it was diagnosed as pancreatic-type of ACC of the stomach. Thereafter, we carefully re-evaluated histologic sections from the entire resected specimen and radiologic images. However, heterotopic pancreatic tissue was not identified in the resected tissue specimens. There was no specific abnormality in the pancreas or head and neck in the radiographic studies, and the laboratory tests were within normal limits. Because the resection margin was clear and there were no additional lesions visualized via position emission tomography-computed tomography, the patient did not receive any adjuvant therapy and is undergoing regular three-month follow-ups. At the time of submission of this manuscript, the patient has been alive and without evidence of recurrence or metastasis for 33 months after resection.