A 59-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room because of left hemiparesis, left hemifacial palsy, and mild dysarthria.
After 2 wk of hospitalization, the patient's symptoms of dry eyes and mouth started and worsened as time went by.
The patient had no previous medical history.
There was no specific family history.
The patient had a body temperature of 36.1 °C, a heart rate of 54 bpm, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, a blood pressure of 101/61 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air of 97%. His mental status was light drowsy. Clinical neurological examination revealed left hemiparesis, left hemifacial palsy, mild dysarthria, and asomatognosia. Our first clinical consideration was an acute cerebral infarction.
Blood analysis revealed a normal leukocyte count of 7.7 × 109 /L with normal hematocrit and platelet count. Prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time were normal and d-dimers were increased at 2.38 μg/mL. Serum C-reactive protein was within normal range and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 10 mm/h. Blood biochemistries and urine analysis results were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas analysis were also normal. After 2 wk of hospitalization, the patient complained of dry eyes and mouth Thus further studies were performed. Anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies known to be associated with Sjogren's syndrome, were positive and his Schirmer's test showed a possible shortage of tears.
On computed tomography angiography, total obstruction of the right common carotid artery and the M1 portion of the right middle cerebral artery was noted. There was a large acute infarction in the right frontoparietal area on the MR image. Salivary scintigraphy was performed at 2 wk after hospitalization to evaluate functional status of his salivary glands. It demonstrated markedly decreased excretory function of bilateral parotid and submandibular glands, while the uptake ability was relatively preserved. On salivary scintigraphy, an unexpected accumulation of Tc-99m pertechnetate in the right frontoparietal area was also noted . We correlated it with brain magnetic resonance (MR) image. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery phase MR (FLAIR phase MR) image showed diffuse high signal intensity in the same area . Anterior and posterior horns of the right lateral ventricle were obliterated and the midline was slightly shifted to the left side due to right frontoparietal swelling.