A 65-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our department because of OH. He experienced a dry mouth 6 months before consultation. He undertook urinary catheter indwelling owing to urinary retention and noticed constipation 5 months prior to consultation. Four months previously, his primary care physician performed a screening test because he complained of appetite loss and body weight loss of 5 kg. Chest radiographs showed a tumor-like lesion. He was admitted to the Department of Respiratory Medicine in our hospital to evaluate the tumor-like lesion and was diagnosed with extensive disease-small cell lung carcinoma (ED-SCLC) 1 month before consultation. The tumor stage was stage IVA (T1cN2M1b). Following this, he noticed decreased diaphoresis, and suffered from OH. He undertook chemo-radiation therapy (carboplatin, etoposide and thoracic radiotherapy 50 Gy) for ED-SCLC 2 weeks before consultation. However, his daily living activities were restricted due to sustained OH after admission. ECOG PS decreased to 3 points. His medical history included hypertension at 40 years old, diabetes mellitus at 56 years old, and lumbar spinal stenosis at 59 years old. His family history was unremarkable. His medication included magnesium oxide, mosapride, lubiprostone, sennoside, pregabalin, voglibose and mitiglinide.
On consultation, his blood pressure and heart rate in supine position was 124/67 mmHg and 65/min. On standing, his blood pressure was decreased to 69/44 mmHg, and his heart rate was increased to 88/min. Physical examinations were normal. Neurological examination revealed no limb weakness, ataxia, and sensory disturbance. Pupil size and light reflex were normal, and the other cranial nerve examination was also normal. Deep tendon reflexes were in the normal range and plantar responses were flexor. However, he complained of autonomic nervous system impairment; dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation, decreased diaphoresis, and OH.
Laboratory evaluations showed elevated levels of fasting blood glucose (147 mg/dl) and hemoglobin A1c (7.2%). Anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-Ds-DNA antibody, anti-Sm antibody Anti-SS-A/Ro and anti-SS-B/La antibody tests were all negative. The coefficient of variation of RR interval was decreased (0.72%). 24-h urine catecholamine excretion showed normal level of adrenaline (4.5 μg/day; reference range 3.4–26.9) and dopamine (388.9 μg/day; reference range 365.0–961.5), and decreased level of noradrenaline (11.3 μg/day; reference range 48.6–168.4). Serum catecholamine levels also revealed normal levels of adrenaline and dopamine, but decreased levels of noradrenaline (30 pg/ml; reference range 100–450). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed normal cell counts (1 cells/μl), a total protein level of 34 mg/dl, and a glucose level of 94 mg/dl, with a concomitant blood glucose level of 147 mg/dl and a normal IgG index (0.65). Oligoclonal bands were negative. Motor and sensory nerve conduction evaluations showed no abnormalities and both waning and waxing were not shown by the repetitive nerve stimulation test. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed marked colonic distention . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spinal MRI findings were unremarkable. 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy was normal . Paraneoplastic autoantibodies for Hu and SOX1 were positive. Furthermore, an anti-gAchR antibody test (anti-α3 AchR) was positive. Other paraneoplastic autoantibodies including the anti-neuronal nuclear autoantibodies type 2 (Ri), delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor (Tr), glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD65), zinc finger protein 4 (ZIC4), titin, recoverin, paraneoplastic antigen Ma2 (PNMA2), collapsin-response mediator protein 5 (CRMP or CV2), Purkinje cell antibody type 1 (Yo) were all negative. Detection of anti-α3-gAchR and the other PNS autoantibodies was performed by radioimmunoassay methodology and immunoblot analysis, respectively. Based on these results, we diagnosed the patient with autonomic PNS due to SCLC.
We used midodrine (8 mg/day), droxidopa (900 mg/day), pyridostigmine (180 mg/day), and fludrocortisone (0.1 mg/day) to treat the OH, and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 400 mg/kg body weight daily for 5 days because of diabetes mellitus and a catheter-associated urinary tract infection during admission . These treatments improved his autonomic symptoms due to PNS. He was able to walk again without the symptoms of OH, and ECOG PS improved to 1 point. Amelioration of urinary retention meant that the urethral balloon could be removed. Abdominal distention disappeared, confirmed by an abdominal CT after 83 days . The patient was then able to receive the 3 remaining courses of chemotherapy as his ECOG PS improved, and he was discharged 101 days after admission. On day 43 after discharge, his blood pressure in supine and standing positions were 124/83 mmHg and 117/69 mmHg, respectively. Four-course chemotherapy for SCLC achieved a partial response. The autonomic symptoms had not recurred and his ECOG PS remained at 1 point, 10 months after admission.