The patient was a 73-year-old man with a height of 169 cm and weight of 48 kg, who presented to the clinic with a complaint of > 7 mo right inguinal mass.
The patient had undergone radical distal major gastrectomy under general anesthesia 7 years ago and was transferred to the intensive care unit for transitional treatment after the operation. The patient recovered well and was discharged.
The patient had a history of hypertension for > 7 years. He was receiving oral reserpine, and blood pressure (BP) control was stable 2 wk before the operation; when reserpine was discontinued, BP control was fair. The patient had no history of coronary heart disease or diabetes mellitus.
The patient denied any relevant family history of cancer.
On physical examination, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: Body temperature (T), 36.6 ℃; BP, 145/86 mmHg; heart rate (HR), 62 beats per min; respiratory rate (RR), 16 breaths per min. The patient was conscious, cooperated with physical examinations, and was admitted to the ward. He presented with a barrel chest, low-breath sounds in both lungs, and no wheezing was heard. There was no precordial bulging, with a regular heart rhythm, and no extra heart or pericardial friction sounds were heard. A 13 cm × 8 cm × 7 cm mass with a hard texture, and poor mobility was observed in the right inguinal region.
The results of routine preoperative blood tests, biochemistry tests, coagulation function tests, and other laboratory tests were normal.
Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed subpleural inflammation in the lower lobe of the right lung, emphysema, pulmonary bullae, increased translucency in the lower lung fields of both lungs, non-smooth and depressed diaphragms on both sides, a blunt costophrenic angle, and aortic calcification.
Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, normal ECG, and a 72 beats/min ventricular rate. Echocardiography revealed degenerative aortic valve changes combined with mild regurgitation, reduced left ventricular diastolic function, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 65%. Pulmonary function showed a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1): 1.10 L, with a measured value of 43.5% of the expected value, a FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) of 62%, and a lung carbon monoxide diffusion to alveolar ventilation ratio of 0.95 L·min-1·mmHg-1, with a measured value of 77.6% of the expected value. The pulmonary function has been reported to include severe obstructive ventilation dysfunction, mildly reduced total diffusion function, severely increased peripheral airway resistance, abnormal small airway function, and severely increased pulmonary elastic resistance .
ASA grade III, class II cardiac function, metabolic equivalent of 4 metabolic equivalents, clinical frailty scale grade 4, thyromental distance > 6 cm, mouth opening > 3 fingers, and mallampati grade II.