An 11-year-old Caucasian boy was hospitalized after one generalized tonic–clonic seizure lasting about 30 seconds. Two days prior, the patient had a subfebrile temperature of 37.5 °C, stomach pains, and one vomiting episode. The patient had another generalized tonic seizure at the emergency ward and was immediately hospitalized to the intensive care unit (ICU), where the generalized tonic seizures repeated two more times. Intravenous midazolam (5 mg) was used to abort ongoing seizures.
Previous medical history: 5 months ago, the patient’s parents had severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. The patient’s father had a positive virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test and infection symptoms, while the patient’s mother was not tested but did have symptoms as well. The patient himself did not have any infection symptoms and was not tested for SARS-CoV-2 at the time.
The patient was born on time and his early development was normal. The patient was vaccinated according to the national vaccination schedule of Lithuania: by the age of 11 years he was vaccinated with vaccines against tuberculosis, hepatitis B, measles, mumps and rubella, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, poliomyelitis, hemophilus influenza type B, pneumococcal disease, and type B meningococcal disease. The patient had additional vaccination against tick-borne encephalitis. The patient had a varicella infection at the age of 3 years. The patient was observed by a cardiologist for a functional systolic murmur, and heart pathology was not found. The patient had been diagnosed with myopia in both eyes. Both patient’s parents were healthy, and the patient’s grandmother has diabetes mellitus.
On admission, the patient was somnolent and barely communicated, and his weight was 50 kg. The patient’s vital signs were measured: his body temperature was 36.5 °C, he had stable hemodynamic with a pulse rate of 111 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 130/69 mmHg. The patient was breathing spontaneously with a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 71%, and peroral cyanosis was visible. The patient’s consciousness assessment revealed 9 points on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS: eye-opening response 4 points, verbal response 1 point, motor response 4 points). The first neurological examination was performed after the patient was already medicated with midazolam and verbal contact was difficult. During the examination, cranial and bulbar nerves were intact, and no nystagmus was detected. Low, symmetric muscle tone was observed. Deep tendon reflexes were symmetric. No limb paresis was observed. Meningeal symptoms were not present. Blood tests revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis (leukocyte count of 16.87 × 109/l, with a neutrophil count of 9.10 × 109/l), respiratory acidosis with blood pH of 7248, elevated lactate levels (8.1 mmol/l), and elevated blood glucose (6.9 mmol/l). Electrolytes (K, Na, Ca, Cl) and C-reactive protein were within normal ranges. Coagulation assessment and d-dimers were normal. Liver and kidney function blood tests were normal. SARS-CoV-2 PCR was negative; however, immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibodies against the virus were positive (1351.3 AU/ml). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was performed followed by an electroencephalogram (EEG) and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Brain CT scan yielded normal results, EEG showed focal intermittent theta and delta activity in the left frontal region, possibly caused by inflammation. Brain MRI showed brain cortex thickening with hyperintense signals in both hippocampi and another 10 mm hyperintense focus at the base of the right frontal lobe . The next day the patient was somnolent (GCS: 13–14), refused to eat, and barely communicated, answering in one word only. No new focal neurological signs were found. Respiratory rate was 16–20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 92–95%. The seizures did not repeat. In ICU the patient was treated with oxygen 3 l/minute via a mask, intravenous midazolam 5 mg, intravenous dexamethasone 8 mg two times a day, and intravenous 10% mannitol 120 ml two times. After 2 days of treatment in ICU, the patient’s condition stabilized, consciousness and speech normalized, and he was transferred to the children’s neurology ward.
Suspecting encephalitis, appropriate serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests were performed: herpes simplex virus 1/2 DNA, herpes 6 virus DNA, and herpes 8 virus DNA were negative; IgM and IgG antibodies against varicella-zoster, Lyme disease, and tick-borne encephalitis were negative (with a few exceptions of a positive IgG of tick-borne encephalitis after vaccination and IgG against varicella-zoster after varicella infection). CSF testing revealed no pleocytosis, no alterations in immunoglobulin G and M or albumin levels, and no intrathecal IgG synthesis. His glucose concentration was elevated (4.3 mmol/l) in CSF and in the blood (6.2 mmol/l).
Testing serum and CSF for autoimmune encephalitis markers showed positive antibodies against NMDA receptors (by semi-quantitative cell-based indirect fluorescent antibody assay). Positive HHV-7 DNA in the CSF was found. After positive autoimmune encephalitis diagnosis, the treatment with intravenous human immunoglobulin 2 g/kg for 5 days and intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day was started. During the hospitalization, the treatment was continued with intravenous dexamethasone 8 mg two times a day for 5 days overall, oral oxcarbazepine 150 mg three times a day for 7 days, lowering the dose to 75 mg two times a day for 3 days, intravenous acyclovir 500 mg three times a day for 6 days, intravenous human immunoglobulin 2 g/kg administering 20 g a day for 5 days, and intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg for 5 days. No medication was continued after the hospitalization.
The patient was tested for a possible neoplastic source, and ultrasounds of urogenital and digestive systems were without pathology. A control EEG after the treatment was normal and displayed positive disease dynamic. After 3 months, a control brain MRI showed no abnormal signal . Knowing that anti-NMDAR encephalitis is associated with psychiatric symptoms and cognitive changes , the patient was examined by a medical psychologist and no cognitive changes were observed.
Follow-up assessment a year later by a family doctor showed no abnormal physical, mental, or blood examination results. Another brain CT scan was performed 1 year and 8 months later (the patient had an unrelated minor head trauma) and showed no abnormal signal.
Previous medical history: 5 months ago the patient’s parents had SARS-CoV-2 infection, the patient’s father had a positive virus PCR test and infection symptoms, while the patient’s mother was not tested but did have symptoms as well. The patient himself did not have any infection symptoms and was not tested for SARS-CoV-2 at the time.
The patient was born on time and his early development was normal. The patient was vaccinated according to the national vaccination schedule of Lithuania, by age 11 years he was vaccinated with vaccines against tuberculosis, hepatitis B, measles, mumps and rubella, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, poliomyelitis, hemophilus influenza type B, pneumococcal disease, and type B meningococcal disease. The patient had additional vaccination against tick-borne encephalitis. The patient had a varicella infection at the age of 3 years. The patient was observed by a cardiologist for a functional systolic murmur, and heart pathology was not found. The patient had been diagnosed with myopia in both eyes. Both patient’s parents were healthy, and the patient’s grandmother has diabetes mellitus.