The proband , a 44-year-old male, was referred to our department complaining of abnormal enlargement of thoracic aorta detected in medical examination. His medical history was significant for hypertension for 10 years and blood pressure was 200/140 mmHg when admission. There is no history of acute chest and back pain in him. The patient underwent chest and abdominal enhanced computed tomography, revealing a dissection aneurysm measuring 8.5 cm in diameter . Three-dimension reconstruction showed a Stanford B aortic dissection originating immediately distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery, extending to the level of celiac trunk . He thereafter received strict blood pressure control therapy with intravenous sodium nitroprusside, which is converted to oral antihypertensive drugs captopril and betaloc. After the hemodynamic is stable, the patient was evaluated and then treated by endovascular stent-graft placement. The procedure was successful and he was discharged several days later.
Multiple variable-sized cysts in the liver and both kidneys were observed in his CT images suggestive for ADPKD . The patient’s serum creatinine was 79 umol/L (normal range, 44–106 umol/L). His family history was positive for ADPKD in the father and brother (individuals I:2 and II:3, aged 71 and 38 years old respectively), while their serum creatinine level was within normal limit (83 and 59 umol/L, respectively).
To understand the genetic basis of this family, whole exome sequencing was carried out on the proband. Genome DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using standard protocols and subjected to the exome capture procedure with the Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon kit (V5, 50 Mb) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Paired-end sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2500, and the short reads (150 bp) were aligned to the Human Genome (UCSC hg19) by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA). Raw image analyses and base calling were performed using Illumina’s Pipeline v.1.34 with default parameters. The Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) and small insertions and deletions (Indels) were generated with Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) and in parallel with the SAMtools pipeline. The called SNVs and Indels were annotated with ANNOVAR.
The variants were then filtered using standard methods, focusing on rare (minimal allele frequency < 0.01 in all populations from the Exome Sequencing Program and Exome Aggregation Consortium) and pathogenic (predicted deleterious by SIFT or PolyPhen2) variants. Sanger sequencing was performed on DNA samples of the proband and other family members for verification of the detected mutation and segregation analysis.
On average 82 million reads were generated, among which, 99.7% were mapped to the human genome. The mean sequencing depth was 147-fold, and an average of 98.6% sequences was covered by more than 20-fold. With the data analysis and stepwise variants filtering strategy described previously , a heterozygous mutation c.1774C > T (NM_000297.3), p.Arg592Ter in the PKD2 gene was identified. The mutation is predicted to encode a truncated product or result in nonsense-mediated decay of the transcript. Additionally, it was not present in Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes Project, Exome Aggregation Consortium or our in-house dataset.
Further segregation analysis using Sanger sequencing revealed the same mutation in the proband’s affected father and brother (individuals I:2 and II:3), whereas the remaining members of the family (individuals I:1, II:1, II:4, III:1, III:2) were found negative . PKD2 mutation-negative individuals underwent abdominal ultrasound examinations, excluding the existence of multiple cysts of liver and kidneys. All family members, including individuals II:1 and II:4, were subjected to enhanced computed tomography and no aortic lesions were found except the proband, suggesting low penetrance of the PKD2 variant found in this family for aortic dissection.