A 48-year-old Japanese man with CRPS was referred to our institute for the treatment of severe right ankle pain with a visual analog scale (VAS) score of 59 out of 100. About five months earlier, he began to feel severe right ankle pain without any trigger events. Although treatment, including physiotherapy and NSAID administration, was initiated in another clinic, the pain in his ankle progressively worsened and he demonstrated gait disturbance. A physical examination revealed redness, swelling, and remarkable tenderness around his ankle. Severe pain and hyperalgesia also resulted in the disturbance of ankle motion and weight-bearing. Radiographs showed marked regional osteoporotic changes in the distal tibia and fibula at his right ankle compared with his left ankle . Bone scintigraphy with 99 mTc-methylene diphosphonate revealed a marked increase in radioactivity in the bones around his ankle . These clinical findings were consistent with CRPS type I (CRPS I) according to criteria of the International Association for the Study of Pain . His lumbar bone mineral density was 0.904 g/cm2, which is more than 80% of the Japanese young adult mean (YAM). Laboratory tests showed urinary crosslinked N-telopeptides of type I collagen (NTX), a bone resorption marker, to be 37.6 nmol bone collagen equivalent/mmol·Cr (nMBCE/mM·CR) (normal range, 9.3 to 54.3) and an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level of 215 U/L (normal range, 110 to 370). Serum calcium (9.1 mg/dL; normal range 8.4 to 10.4), serum phosphate (2.9 mg/dL; normal range, 2.5 to 4.5), white blood cell count (5600/μL; normal range, 3900 to 9800), and C-reactive protein (< 0.1 mg/dL; normal range, < 0.3) were all at normal levels.
In accordance with the diagnosis of CRPS I accompanied by marked regional osteoporotic changes, oral administration of risedronate at 2.5 mg per day, the same dose used for the treatment of osteoporosis in Japan, was initiated to reduce the high bone turnover and ankle pain (VAS score of 59 out of 100). One month after the start of risedronate treatment, bone pain had fallen from a VAS score of 59 out of 100 to 18 out of 100, and we temporarily discontinued treatment at five months because of successful ankle pain reduction and the presence of epigastric pain. After nine months (four months after the discontinuation of treatment), we resumed bisphosphonate treatment with oral alendronate at 35 mg per week and the ankle pain decreased from a VAS score of 18 out of 100 to 10 out of 100 at 15 months . Bone scintigraphy at 12 months showed a marked reduction in radioactivity to a level comparable to that in the normal, left ankle . In addition, the effect of bisphosphonate on bone pain relief correlated with a reduction in NTX level, from 37.6 to 12.9 at eight months. On the basis of these results, treatment was discontinued at 15 months, and ankle pain relief lasted for 32 months . At the latest examination at 32 months, our patient had almost no pain (VAS score of 9 out of 100) and radiographic findings revealed that the regional osteoporotic change in his ankle had returned to normal, and findings were equivalent to those for his left ankle .
A second 48-year-old Japanese man with CRPS was referred to our institute for treatment of severe right foot pain with a VAS score of 83 out of 100. About nine months earlier, he began to feel severe right foot pain without any trigger events. Although treatment, including physiotherapy and NSAID administration, was initiated in another clinic, the pain and swelling of his right foot progressively worsened, and he demonstrated gait disturbance. A physical examination revealed redness, swelling, and remarkable tenderness of his foot. Severe pain and hyperalgesia also resulted in the disturbance of weight-bearing. Radiographs showed regional osteoporotic changes in the phalanges, metatarsals, and tarsals of his right foot compared with his normal, left foot . Reconstitution computed tomography also exhibited the extensive osteoporotic changes in his foot and ankle . Bone scintigraphy with 99 mTc-methylene diphosphonate revealed a marked increase in radioactivity in the bones of his foot . These clinical findings were consistent with CRPS I according to the criteria described for our first patient. Lumbar bone mineral density was 0.838 g/cm2, which is more than 80% of the YAM. Laboratory tests showed an NTX of 48.6 nMBCE/mM·CR and normal values of ALP (242 U/L), serum calcium (9.6 mg/dL), serum phosphate (3.1 mg/dL), white blood cell count (7100/μL), and C-reactive protein (< 0.1 mg/dL).
In accordance with the diagnosis of CRPS I accompanied by marked regional osteoporotic findings together with the successful treatment of our first patient, weekly oral administration of alendronate at 35 mg per week, the same dose used for the treatment of osteoporosis in Japan, was initiated to reduce the high bone turnover and foot pain (VAS score of 83 out of 100). One month after the start of alendronate treatment, bone pain had fallen from a VAS score of 83 out of 100 to 30 out of 100 and was further reduced to 18 out of 100 at three months and 3 out of 100 at nine months. The treatment was discontinued at 15 months because of successful pain reduction, and the pain relief lasted for 30 months without further alendoronate administration . The bone pain relief correlated with a decrease in NTX values: 12.0 at 15 months and 14.0 at 24 months. Our patient rejected follow-up bone scintigraphy because he experienced no symptoms. At the latest examination at 30 months, he had no pain (VAS score of 0 out of 100) and the radiographic findings revealed marked improvement in regional osteoporotic changes .