The patient was a 72-year-old man. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for alcoholism revealed thoracic esophageal cancer. His medical history included hypertension, nephrectomy for right kidney cancer, mild dementia, cholangitis, alcoholism, and lower limb movement disorder. We diagnosed the patient with esophageal cancer Mt, cT1b, N1, M0, cStage I (Union for International Cancer Control tumor-node-metastasis classification, 8th edition). Thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy, three-field lymph node dissection, and retrosternal gastric tube reconstruction were performed. Esophagogastric end-to-side anastomosis was performed on the left side of the neck using a circular stapler. The insertion hole of the circular stapler was closed using a linear stapler. After the anastomosis, the gastric tube was pulled out from the abdomen to straighten the residual esophagus.
Regular endoscopy performed on the day after surgery revealed that the residual esophagus was twisted 360° and was anastomosed. Since it was possible to pass a 5.8-mm–diameter scope, we followed up the patient without reoperation. Oral intake was initiated on postoperative day (POD) 8, and the patient could gradually be fed orally. The patient was discharged on POD 17, with the possibility of enteral nutrition.
However, oral nutrition gradually became impossible, and the patient was readmitted 3 months postoperatively. Esophagography revealed a spirally twisted esophagus that allowed only a small amount of barium to pass through . Although endoscopy clearly confirmed the presence of torsion just above the anastomosis , a scope with 8.9 mm diameter could pass through the esophagus without resistance. Endoscopic dilation to 15 mm was performed using a balloon; however, the esophagus was only slightly opened, and the stenosis recurred. Computed tomography showed that the anastomotic ring was 4 cm caudal to the top of the sternum and the residual esophagus was dilated . All nutrition was provided enterally, and outpatient rehabilitation was continued. We expected that swallowing rehabilitation would improve oral intake.
However, the patient encountered difficulty in eating for 6 months postoperatively, and we resorted to surgical treatment. We planned to remove the torsion and re-anastomose the esophagus and gastric tube. The left thoracoscopic approach was used in the supine position. Thoracoscopy was performed using an artificial pneumothorax of 8 mmHg and right one-lung ventilation. Ports were placed in the anterior axillary line between the 3rd, 4th, 6th, and 8th intercostal muscles, with 5-mm and 3-mm ports added to the precordium side during surgery . When the left thoracic cavity was confirmed, the left edge of the gastric tube was confirmed behind the sternum . Attention was focused on preserving the right gastroepiploic vessels and gastric tube wall, and an incision was made in the pleura on the dorsal side of the gastric tube to separate it from the pericardium. Subsequently, an incision was made in the ventral pleura of the gastric tube, which was separated from the sternum. During the initial operation, the staples on the lesser curvature side were buried; however, they were found to have adhered to the sternum and were carefully peeled off. A high degree of adhesion was observed around the anastomotic site. Torsion of the esophagus was not clearly identified from within the thoracic cavity due to scarring around the anastomotic site . Finally, the entire circumferences of the gastric tube and residual esophagus were released from the inferior mediastinum to the upper end of the sternum, and the right pleura was preserved .
Subsequently, laparoscopic surgery was performed, and the area around the gastric tube at the thoracoabdominal transition peeled off and continued with the layer from the thoracic cavity . Simultaneously, left cervical surgery was performed to remove the residual esophagus, which was linked to the thoracic cavity. The esophagus was cut off on the oral side of the torsion . The gastric tube was raised to the left neck again through the retrosternal route, and a circular stapler was inserted from the cut part. The twisted part of the esophagus was easily dilated and the body of the circular stapler could pass through. An esophagogastric end-to-side anastomosis was performed on the caudal side of the old anastomosis. The old anastomosis and esophageal torsion were removed, and the insertion hole of the circular stapler was closed using a linear stapler . Finally, the gastric tube was pulled down from the abdominal wound to straighten the residual esophagus, and no torsion was confirmed. The operative time was 6 h 49 min, and the bleeding volume was 240 mL.
Postoperative endoscopy revealed relief of the torsion-induced stenosis . Oral intake was resumed on POD 7. Although postoperative aspiration pneumonia developed, the patient was discharged on POD 38.