A 69-year-old Asian elderly male was admitted to the emergency department of another hospital on June 24, 2022, after suffering from eye pain accompanied by vision loss for one day. His best correct visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200 in both eyes, and his intraocular pressure was 49 mmHg in the right eye and 48 mmHg in the left. After emergency therapy for intraocular pressure lowering, the patient’s symptoms decreased. The patient had no prior ocular history, and his BCVA was 20/20.
The next day, the patient presented to our outpatient clinic, but this time his BCVA was counting fingers in both eyes, and intraocular pressure was 6 mmHg in both eyes. Physical examination revealed mild conjunctival congestion in both eyes, mild corneal edema, shallow anterior chambers, moderate inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber, dilated and fixed pupil, posterior synechiae, lens opacity, and pigmentation on the anterior capsule of the lens. Binocular fundus examination revealed optic disc swelling in both eyes, peripheral retinal serous detachments, and no retinal tears . On optical coherence tomography (OCT) the choroid was swollen and there was a bacillary layer serous retinal detachment in both eyes . In both eyes, late fundus fluorescein angiography showed pin-point hyperfluorescence . The results of laboratory testing for infection and autoimmunity were negative for antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA antibody (ds-DNA), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), syphilis antibody, HIV antibody, hepatitis C antibody, tuberculosis infection cell spot test (T-SPOT), and other tests. Based on the patient’s test findings and the absence of any systemic signs and symptoms, infectious uveitis with VKH was ruled out.
The patient underwent surgical treatment for bladder urothelial carcinoma in May 2020. Due to poor response to chemotherapy(Gemcitabine and Cisplatin), he was treated with a combination of Toripalimab three months later and got a total of 19 rounds of Toripalimab therapy for 18 months until March 2022. Because of a cancer recurrence, the patient underwent a second surgery in March 2022 and was treated with Toripalimab once after surgery. It had been 10 days since Toripalimab therapy when she was admitted.
According to the patient’s history of treatment with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, combined with the patient’s clinical symptoms and signs, the patient was eventually diagnosed with VKHD-like uveitis after continuing to consult relevant literature.
According to the guidelines and consultations with experts from the departments of oncology, immunology, and ophthalmology, it was decided to discontinue the use of Toripalimab and instead give patients a dexamethasone sustained release implant of both eyes, as well as an oral prednisone tablet of 1 mg per kilogram of body weight (60 mg) as the starting dose for 2 weeks, and gradually reduce the dose depending on the situation. After 5 days of treatment, the patient’s vision improved significantly. The right eye BCVA was 20/80, and the left eye BCVA was 20/50. The patient was released from the hospital with binocular exudative retinal detachment . The patient was reexamined after taking a 60-mg prednisone pill orally for two weeks, and the fundus of both eyes was stable. The patient was instructed to limit his oral steroids to 10 mg per week. After three weeks, the patient’s BCVA had improved to 20/25, and the retina in both eyes was flat. At this time, the patient’s oral corticosteroid dose is 30 mg, and the amount can be gradually reduced, with a 5 mg reduction every 10 days. There were no symptoms of active uveitis in both eyes at the time of the last review (January 2023), and the retinas were flat in both eyes.