A 53-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan female presented with high-grade fever, painful oral ulcers, odynophagia and multiple bilateral enlarged cervical lymph nodes for 1 month. She also had a loss of appetite and loss of weight. There was no cough or haemoptysis, past or contact history of tuberculosis, arthralgia, urinary symptoms or altered bowel habits. She denied high-risk sexual behaviour. On examination, apart from bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy she also had a discharging sinus over the submental region and bilateral blepharitis. Dermatological examination revealed multiple erythematous tender papules and plaques with the mamillated appearance and centrally yellowish targetoid lesions symmetrically distributed over the face , upper trunk and upper limbs. The oral ulcers were multiple tender erosions with an erythematous border and a fibrinous base involving lips, tongue and buccal mucosa. She never experienced red eyes. She also had multiple tender subcutaneous nodules over the upper limbs. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. Cardiovascular, respiratory and neurological examinations, including the optic fundus, were normal.
The whole blood count showed mild neutrophil leucocytosis. ESR was 129 mm/1st hour (normal 0–20 mm/1st hour) and CRP was 195 mg/L (normal < 3 mg/L). Liver and renal function tests were normal. She had a positive mantoux test of 19 mm. The chest radiograph was normal. Repeated sputum examinations for Acid Fast Bacilli, Tuberculosis culture and GeneXpert were negative. Human immunodeficiency viral antigen and antibody were not detected. Her fasting blood sugar and HbA1C were normal. Blood culture remained sterile. Aspirate from the suppurative submental lymph node grew Burkholderia pseudomallei (B. pseudomallei). Melioidosis antibody titer was > 10,240.
Histology from skin lesions of the face and left forearm showed a prominent neutrophilic infiltrate in the dermis extending into the subcutaneous fat, which is in favour of Sweet syndrome with panniculitis . Contrast-Enhanced Computerised Tomography (CECT) of the brain, chest, and abdomen revealed matted cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes, non-enhancing hypoechoic lesions in the liver and spleen and a right-sided pleural effusion with underlying consolidation.
The patient was started on intravenous meropenem 2 g daily. She showed rapid clinical improvement with the disappearance of skin lesions with a significant reduction in inflammatory markers. This case clearly demonstrates that, when sweet syndrome occurs in the background of systemic infection, it subsides with treating the infection alone with intravenous antibiotics. Our patient showed clinical resolution without requirements of steroids or other immunosuppressant medications.