A 29-year-old Latina female with a past medical history of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), depression, and anxiety self-referred to a behavioral health center
seeking treatment for severe tramadol use disorder. She had a remote history of
marijuana use, without other recreational drug or alcohol use. She had no history of
any other opioid use, apart from tramadol. At age 24 she first began taking tramadol
50 milligrams (mg) daily as prescribed by her primary care physician for treatment
of back pain but continued use after this pain had resolved. She began crossing the
border into Mexico to purchase tramadol in increasing quantities and slowly
increased her dose to approximately 5000–6000 mg daily, costing her $200 US
dollars monthly.
Complications of her tramadol use included memory impairment, excessive sedation, and
tramadol-induced seizures, occurring about every two weeks. Prior to presentation
for care, she had independently tried numerous times to quit by tapering but was
limited by intolerable withdrawal symptoms, never dropping usage below 4000 mg
daily. At time of presentation, she had not yet participated in any formal
detoxification program. Withdrawal symptoms began two hours after her last use and
included anxiety, restlessness, diaphoresis, and arthralgias. During this time, she
was concomitantly experiencing hopelessness and passive suicidality in the setting
of untreated depression, anxiety, and PTSD from childhood sexual, physical, and
emotional abuse. Her family history was notable for active substance dependence in
multiple members, including a sister who had recently died from a heroin overdose
four months prior to presentation. Her mother had a history of methamphetamine
abuse, and her brother was actively abusing multiple illicit drugs including
fentanyl.
Given tramadol’s combined action as a mu-receptor agonist and SNRI, the
patient was at risk for an atypical opioid withdrawal syndrome. For this reason,
inpatient detoxification with tramadol tapering and buprenorphine induction was
preferred. Ultimately, given limitations of local resources and in consultation with
addiction specialists, a plan was made to coordinate outpatient buprenorphine
induction from the ED. Seven days following initial presentation to the behavioral
health facility the patient was asked to go to the ED but did not and decided to
taper the tramadol dose herself. She went down to 4000 mg of tramadol per day but
started having withdrawal symptoms and went back up to 5000–6000 mg a day.
Three days later she finally showed up for her first ED visit.
At her first outpatient induction attempt, she presented to the ED and was given
sublingual buprenorphine 8 mg with phenobarbital 200 mg added to prevent withdrawal
seizures. She was discharged home on buprenorphine/naloxone 8/2 mg twice a day with
instructions to return the next day for follow-up. On the night of discharge, she
noted significant withdrawal symptoms, reported difficulty with sleep and anxiety,
and ultimately resumed tramadol use. The patient never filled her prescriptions. She
received additional counseling regarding her available treatment options: slowly
tapering use vs medication-assisted treatment.
On one of her trips from Mexico the patient was apprehended for illegal drug
possession, and all her tramadol pills were confiscated. She returned to the ED
eight days later after her initial visit. Before coming to the ED, the patient had
taken buprenorphine/naloxone (8/2) mg. After examination she was given an additional
8 mg buprenorphine. About an hour later she was feeling slightly better but still
having some residual withdrawal symptoms. She was given another 8 mg of
buprenorphine. She felt much better and was discharged after spending slightly less
than four hours in the ED.
She was discharged with a prescription for buprenorphine/naloxone 16/4 mg twice a
day. Venlafaxine, a SNRI, was concomitantly prescribed to forestall possible SNRI
withdrawal symptoms. Ten days post induction, she was still taking prescribed
buprenorphine/naloxone at the same dose and was not having withdrawal symptoms, drug
cravings or using tramadol. She had not yet started taking venlafaxine. Almost a
year out after induction, she reported stable abstinence from tramadol with
buprenorphine/naloxone 16/4 mg twice a day. She had also started treatment for
depression and anxiety with buspirone 10 mg and sertraline 150 mg once daily.