A 16-year-old male patient with Eagle–Barrett syndrome and congenital pectum excavatum was admitted for surgical correction of chest deformity. The preoperative chest X-ray showed a Haller index of 5.8 and an electrocardiogram with sinus rhythm and right bundle branch block. The estimated functional capacity of the patient was greater than 6 metabolic equivalents (METs).
On September 6, 2018, a videothoracoscopy-guided Nuss procedure was performed. It was monitored according to the recommendations of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, and a thoracic epidural catheter was placed at the T4-T5 level for postoperative analgesia without complications. Intravenous anesthesia and placement of a left double-lumen endotracheal tube No. 35 followed.
During the passage of the Nuss bar, the patient presented episodes of ventricular tachycardia with a pulse that subsided when the surgical stimulus was suspended. The passage of the bar was continued, and after turning it to correct the defect and leaving it in position, the patient presented severe bradycardia that improved with atropine. Two minutes after having the bar fully in position and before starting to fix it with the stabilizer, he presented ventricular fibrillation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated with chest compressions in the lower half of the sternum, placing the hands below the Nuss bar. Three external defibrillations were performed at 200 joules with the defibrillator paddles placed in a conventional manner (right infraclavicular area and cardiac apex). Additionally, two 1-mg intravenous boluses of epinephrine were administered 5 min apart.
Ten minutes after arrest, the patient returned to spontaneous circulation. The fibrillation presented was not continuous but came in two episodes, and in between them, we removed the Nuss bar. After the removal of the rod and with the patient in sinus rhythm, a left radial artery and a right internal jugular central venous catheter were channeled, guided by ultrasound, without complications. The patient continued to have hemodynamic instability, so norepinephrine infusion was started at 0.1 µg/kg/min, with an adequate response. The thoracoscope was reintroduced, and the heart was checked for structural lesions.
A transesophageal echocardiography probe was inserted to verify that there were no cardiac lesions and was used as a guide for volume resuscitation. Blood samples were taken to check the metabolic status of the patient and look for other causes that explained his cardiac arrest.
Since the patient presented significant improvement with a decrease in the use of vasopressors and persistence of sinus rhythm, it was decided to pass the Nuss bar again without finding any alteration of the heart rhythm or hemodynamic changes. The procedure was completed without any other complications. Chest X-ray showed a small right pneumothorax without any indication for invasive management.
At the end of the surgery, the neuromuscular blockade was reversed with sugammadex and was confirmed with a train of four test result > 95%. The patient was extubated in the operating room to assess his neurological status. He could move all four limbs, had symmetrical 3-mm pupils with adequate reactivity to light, was alert, and obeyed orders. He was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit, where he was given oxygen through a 50% Venturi mask.
Hours later, in the intensive care unit, a new chest X-ray showed significant bilateral pneumothorax, for which they performed bilateral thoracostomies. A transthoracic echocardiogram did not show structural cardiac damage, but there was dysfunction of the left ventricle with decreased segmental and global contractility and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 45%, without other abnormalities.
During the first postoperative day, the patient persisted with hemodynamic instability that required vasoactive and inotropic support. At approximately 20 h postoperatively, he presented cardiorespiratory arrest with pulseless electrical activity on two occasions for 10 min each. Chest compressions were performed on the lower half of the sternum, and intravenous calcium gluconate, sodium bicarbonate, and epinephrine were administered. The patient continued with hemodynamic instability and the need for vasoactive and inotropic support in increasing doses.
The medical team decided to remove the Nuss bar, which was achieved without complications and with good postoperative evolution. The control echocardiogram the day after the rod was removed showed adequate biventricular function and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 80%. The next day, he underwent successful extubation. After progressive withdrawal of hemodynamic support, he was discharged from the hospital 12 days after surgery. The patient has been evaluated with ambulatory controls without any alterations of note. One year after this complication, he presented good and stable functional and psychological capacity.