A 77-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital because of fever of unknown origin. She had developed general fatigue and a slight fever 2 weeks before admission. Headache and a fever higher than 38°C had developed 3 days before admission, and oral cefditoren pivoxil prescribed at another hospital had been ineffective. She had a 2-year history of polymyalgia rheumatica and chronic gastritis. She had initially been treated with 15 mg/day of prednisolone for the polymyalgia rheumatica. Her dosage of prednisolone was tapered with improvement of her symptoms, and she had been treated with prednisolone (5 mg/day) and famotidine (20 mg/day) for 1 year before admission. She had no other medical or family history and did not smoke or drink alcohol. Physical examination on admission revealed a height of 156 cm, weight of 49 kg, temperature of 40.2°C, heart rate of 120 beats/min, and blood pressure of 116/62 mmHg. No obvious abnormalities of the chest or abdomen were found with the exception of slight right flank pain. Neurological examination also showed normal findings; her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was maximal at 15 (E4V5M6). She was ambulatory; no symptoms suggesting agnosia, agraphia, or any other higher brain dysfunction were observed on admission. In addition, finger perimetry showed no obvious visual field deficits. Laboratory findings showed a high WBC count (20,200/mm3), platelet count (40.4 × 104/mm3), and CRP level (10.02 mg/dl). Chest X-ray, abdominal X-ray, and electrocardiographic findings were normal. Urinalysis revealed pyuria with markedly increased WBCs and gram-negative bacilli, suggesting a urinary tract infection. Intravenous administration of ampicillin (6 g/day) was begun immediately after admission. On day 4, her body temperature remained higher than 38°C despite improvement in the WBC count (18,300/mm3) and CRP level (3.91 mg/dl). On the same day, E. coli was revealed in urine and blood culture specimens taken on admission. Although the E. coli was sensitive to ampicillin, we substituted ceftriaxone (2 g/day) for ampicillin on day 4 based on the results of the antibiotic sensitivity test.
On day 5, her body temperature dropped to 37.5°C. However, she began to drop her spoon frequently during meals and complain of difficulty in donning her shirt. On day 6, she complained of difficulty in seeing. Although she did not exhibit severe palsy or ataxia, she could no longer eat a meal, change her clothes, or walk by herself without nursing care. She was considerably confused, and it was difficult to evaluate her neurological function precisely. Her level of consciousness sharply deteriorated thereafter, and her GCS score dropped to 9 (E2V3M4). Her WBC count and CRP level on day 6 were 15,600/mm3 and 3.63 mg/dl, respectively. Electrolyte, thyroid hormone, and blood glucose levels were normal. Plain brain CT on day 6 showed debris in the right lateral ventricle and a tumor-like lesion in the left posterior lobe . Contrast-enhanced MRI on day 6 revealed a tumor-like lesion in the left posterior lobe with ring-like enhancement on T1-weighted imaging . On diffusion-weighted imaging, this lesion also showed homogenous high intensity, which seemed to be connected with the left lateral ventricle, and obvious debris was present in both lateral ventriculi . Based on these findings, we considered that ventricular rupture of a brain abscess was the most probable cause of her deterioration. The size of the abscess was 1.6 × 1.8 cm. Subsequent abdominal contrast-enhanced CT on day 6 showed a unilocular right renal cyst with heterogeneous and high-density content, suggesting a renal cyst infection . Abdominal ultrasonographic findings were inconclusive for a cyst infection. Contrast-enhanced chest CT showed no remarkable findings. Further laboratory and transthoracic echocardiographic diagnostics excluded potential risk factors for brain abscess, such as human immunodeficiency virus infection, fungal infection, endocarditis, and pulmonary hypertension. We immediately consulted with neurosurgeons and decided to manage the right occipital lesion with intravenous meropenem administration (6 g/day). Her consciousness gradually improved thereafter; her GCS score recovered to 12 (E3V4M5) on day 9. She was slightly confused and showed impaired orientation, but her ability to converse with us had improved. Brain MRI on day 9 revealed no remarkable changes in the size of the abscess. No signs of high intracranial pressure or hydrocephalus were present either clinically or radiographically. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis on day 9 revealed a slight increase in leukocytes (64/mm3), including 23/mm3 (36%) lymphocytes and 41/mm3 (64%) neutrophils with no atypical cells, as well as high total protein (517 mg/dl) and low glucose (21 mg/dl) levels. Microscopy of CSF smear samples with methylene blue staining, India ink capsule staining, and Gram’s staining detected no bacteria or fungi. The CSF culture was sterile. On day 12, her body temperature remained below 37.5°C, but her WBC count (14,900/mm3) and CRP level (4.01 mg/dl) remained high. Additionally, her right flank pain persisted despite antibiotic therapy. MRI on day 12 showed no deterioration of the brain abscess. Based on these findings, we concluded that CT-guided drainage was needed to manage the renal cyst infection. The drainage procedure was performed on day 13, and E. coli from the aspirated pus showed the same sensitivity to antibiotics as did the E. coli from the blood and urine on admission. The patient showed good progress thereafter. The drainage catheter was removed on day 20. Her GCS score recovered to 15 on day 22. On day 30, she showed almost normal activities of daily life, although she still experienced difficulty in seeing. Her WBC count and CRP level normalized, and enhanced brain MRI showed a dramatic decrease in the abscess size . Moreover, abdominal enhanced CT on day 35 showed that the right renal cyst had decreased in size . Formal perimetry was performed by an ophthalmologist on day 35 and showed obvious right inferior quadrantic hemianopsia. Moreover, transesophageal echocardiography using contrast medium on day 35 showed no cryptic abnormalities, including intracardiac right-to-left shunting or small vegetations. Intravenous administration of meropenem was terminated on day 42, and no deterioration was observed even in the absence of oral antibiotics. Following rehabilitation, she was discharged from the hospital on day 60 with right inferior quadrantic hemianopsia as an aftereffect. She has been followed up for 6 months since discharge, and no recurrence of the brain abscess or renal cyst infection has been observed.