A 40-year-old Asian man complained of progressive pain and weakness in his lower extremities. A physical examination showed decreased muscle power (Frankel grade D), increased sensory loss below the T6 dermatome, ankle clonus and abnormal Babinski reflex. He was diagnosed as being seropositive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 6 months ago, and having AIDS-related lymphoma (ARL) in his liver and an intrahepatic bile duct obstruction 2 months ago. A liver biopsy showed B-cell type lymphoma. He received the chemotherapy combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his thoracic and lumbar spine showed a 1.5×2×5cm elongated intraspinal extramedullary mass from T2 to T4. The lesion showed intermediate-to-high signal intensity on T2-weighted image, intermediate-to-low signal intensity on T1-weighted image and heterogeneous enhancement after gadolinium-infusion . A computed tomography (CT) scan showed no definite bony destruction , but abnormal signal intensities and enhancement were found from the T9 to T11 vertebral bodies. Lymphoma was suspected. Emergent radiation therapy was performed at the C7 to T5 field, chemotherapy was administered preoperatively, and surgical decompression and excisional biopsy were performed. The pathologic findings showed that the specimen was compatible with B-UCL with features intermediate between DLBCL and BL . Immunohistochemistry showed the tumor cells were CD20-positive and CD45RO-negative. The patient received chemotherapy and radiation therapy with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) after surgery. Radiation treatment of 200cGy per fraction was performed (3000cGy in 15 fractions). However, his motor power was not improved. A postoperative abdominal CT scan at 5 weeks showed increased lymphoma size in his liver. Moreover, pulmonary thromboembolism and leptomeningeal seeding were detected. A relapsed mass was found from the C5 to T1 area on follow-up MRI. His complete blood cell count was below the lower limit, and his deteriorating condition did not permit additional chemotherapy. He was transferred to hospice care, and he died by massive pulmonary thromboembolism at 13 weeks postoperatively.