A 60-year-old man who had been suffering from depression stabbed himself in the left anterior chest with a kitchen knife with a blade length of 15 cm. He was transported to our hospital by ambulance. On arrival at the emergency department, he was slightly drowsy but could talk. He had a stab wound with a length of approximately 3 cm in the left anterior chest in the third intercostal space . His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 136/79 mmHg; heart rate, 99 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 28 breaths/min; body temperature, 36.6°C. Oxygen saturation was 99% under the oxygen rate of 10 L/min using a high concentration oxygen mask. At the physical examination, his breath sounds were diminished on the left side, but his cardiac murmur was not audible. A focused assessment sonography for trauma revealed fluid in the pericardial sac. He was prepared to undergo thoracotomy in the operating room; however, immediate transportation into the operating room was not allowed due to congestion. In an initial contrast CT , we found pericardial effusion and hemothorax on his left side. His blood pressure dropped gradually by cardiac tamponade. Approximately 190 mL blood was aspirated by pericardiocentesis, however, he suffered cardiopulmonary arrest. He underwent an emergent left anterior thoracotomy and a pericardiotomy with removal of a large amount of the hematoma. A stab wound in the anterior surface of the right ventricle was observed and was primarily repaired with 4-0 Prolene sutures reinforced with Teflon pledgets. The injury was remote from the left anterior descending coronary artery, which appeared uninjured on inspection. Shortly after we undertook resuscitation with an open chest cardiac massage, his spontaneous circulation resumed. Circulation dynamics of the patient then stabilized. On day 22 of his stay in the hospital, he did not have chest discomfort at rest; however, he felt shortness of breath when walking. A cardiac catheterization was carried out to obtain a more accurate shunt fraction, and coronary angiography indicated 90% stenosis in the middle portion of the left anterior descending artery (#7) during right ventricular wall repair. A left ventricle angiogram showed that the pulmonary blood flow/systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) was 1.42. On hospital day 24, a contrast CT showed traumatic ventricular septal perforation measuring 23 mm . Follow-up transthoracic echocardiography indicated a 4.1–5.6 mm septal defect with a left-to-right shunt; however, it also showed normal left ventricular wall motion. We chose conservative therapy on the premise of switching to surgical treatment depending on the severity of the cardiac symptoms. On hospital day 36, he was transferred to another psychiatric hospital. Six months after admission, echocardiography indicated no specific abnormal findings, the VSP was 4.9 mm, and Qp/Qs was 1.17. Our patient had no symptoms of heart failure, and his Qp/Qs was also reduced, so we considered the possibility of recurrence of VSP was not high.