A 29-year-old male was referred to our outpatient department with a 24-month history of a slowly growing, painless mass of the right parotid gland and submandibular region. He also complained of mild discomfort during swallowing. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable with no previous history of surgery. At the time, he was diagnosed as having a vascular malformation of the right parotid-parapharyngeal region and he had been under treatment for one year with sclerotherapy with no evidence of improvement or stabilization of the tumor.
Extraoral physical examination at the time of referral was suggestive of a large, mobile, smooth-surfaced, fibroelastic soft tissue mass, which was palpated in the lower pole of the right parotid gland. The lesion extended subcutaneously along the homolateral submandibular and pharyngeal spaces . On palpation the mass was painless with no evidence of any emanating pulsation. Neurological examination of cranial nerves was normal, and no palpable lymph nodes were present in the neck, supraclavicular or axillary regions.
Upon intraoral examination, there was evidence of the mass bulging to the right oral pharynx with subsequent obliteration of the palatoglossal arch. Deviation of the uvula and soft palate was not evident during opening of the mouth. Covering mucosa of the region was normal in color and texture . The remainder of the head and neck clinical examination was normal.
The patient was initially clinically diagnosed with a vascular malformation (VM) of the parotid, submandibular and parapharyngeal spaces based on computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and neck and a fine needle aspiration biopsy that was indicative of intense hemorrhagic necrosis. At the time, the mass measured approximately 58 × 25 × 47 mm . After unsuccessful treatment with sclerotherapy for one year, a new MRI was performed revealing slow growth of the tumor. MRI was suggestive of an inhomogeneous mass which measured 81 × 34 × 67 mm and extended from the right parotid gland into the right parapharyngeal space. . The signal of the mass was isointense to the circumambient soft tissue in T1W1. Hyperintense signal was demonstrated in T2W1 and T2W1 (Fat suppression) images. There was no sign of infiltration to adjacent soft tissue and no bone erosion was identified on imaging studies. MRI findings were suggestive of a benign parotid gland tumor with involvement of the homolateral submandibular and parapharyngeal spaces.
As mentioned above, clinical history and physical examination were suggestive initially of the diagnosis of VM. Thus, the patient was first treated with a regimen of percutaneous sclerotherapy using ethanol and lauromacrogol for a period of one year without any complications. During this period, no response to sclerotherapy was evident; furthermore the tumor slowly increased in size with no other significant changes in regard to its clinical and radiological consistency.
Since sclerotherapy treatment proved unsuccessful, after discussion and written consent from the patient the decision to surgically remove the tumor was made. The patient was prepared for general anesthesia via nasotracheal intubation. Access to the tumor was feasible through a preauricular incision with a submandibular extension. A skin flap above the parotid fascia and incorporating the platysma muscle was raised with subsequent identification and preservation of the cervicofacial branch of the facial nerve. The tumor appeared to have no obvious infiltration to the surrounding tissues and was excised completely. There was no major intraoperative bleeding. The residual surgical defect was not reconstructed and the wound was closed in layers under suction drainage.
Macroscopically, the tumor was shaped like a dumbbell and contained a single cystic space filled with a yellow-brown sticky fluid.
The patient’s postoperative healing was uneventful. He is on a regular follow up program and six months postoperatively there is no sign of recurrence .
Light microscopy examination of the lesion showed increased cellularity, with spindled and elongated cells intermingled with variable amounts of capillary-sized blood vessels, pseudovascular spaces, and floret-like multinucleated giant cells . At high magnification, the spindle-shaped tumor cells had plump nuclei and pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. No mitoses were identified.
Immunohistochemistry was performed and the mesenchymal markers vimentin, CD31, CD34, CD99 were positive in spindle cells and giant cells. Tumor proliferation antigen marker Ki67 was partly positive (<5% of cells). Muscle-specific actin (MSA), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), smooth muscle actin (SMA), cytokeratin pan (CKP), S100, desmin, CD31, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), myogenin, MyoD1 and F8 were negative . The morphology and immunohistochemical profile were consistent with the diagnosis of GCA.