An 86 year old Caucasian lady presented to the Emergency Department (ED) of a tertiary referral teaching hospital with sudden and persisting loss of vision in her right eye over eight hours. The ED team reported that a hyphaema was present with ‘bleeding through the pupil’. The patient described reduced vision after waking that morning, which progressed during the day. She reported severe pain (6/10) and aching in the right eye, which extended ipsilaterally down to her neck and was associated with dry retching every 30 min. She denied any previous similar episodes.
She was on Warfarin for recurrent pulmonary emboli and had recently been prescribed intravenous Ceftriaxone and subsequent oral Cefaclor for cellulitis of her right leg. Her general health had been complicated by a cerebrovascular accident 30 years earlier following a ventriculoperitoneal shunt revision originally performed for pseudotumour cerebri. She had treated hypothyroidism and hypertension.
Her right visual acuity was light perception and left was 6/9. The right pupil response to light was sluggish, but due to her long-standing Parinaud’s syndrome secondary to the stroke, pupillary assessment was challenging. However, there was no evidence of a relative afferent pupil defect, nor indeed of an indirect relative afferent pupil defect. In the right eye there was a 1.6 mm hyphaema. Her IOP was 55 mmHg, with slight corneal microcystic oedema. There was no evidence of pupillary block and her anterior chamber angles were open at grade 2. There was no evidence of primary uveal melanoma. The left eye was normal, except for a small area of temporal foveal atrophy.
B-scan ultrasound was normal with no evidence of vitreous haemorrhage or mass lesions identified. An iris fluorescein angiogram was contemplated and would have supported a more definitive diagnosis of iris microhaemangioma but was deemed clinically unnecessary at the time. A computed tomography angiogram of the brain, conducted in ED to investigate the patient’s symptoms, with a view to excluding internal carotid artery stenosis, was also normal. Full blood count, liver function tests, blood sugar level and HbA1C were normal. Coagulation studies revealed a supratherapeutic INR of 3.9 and electrolyte analysis revealed elevated serum potassium of 5.9 mEq/L, both of which were deemed iatrogenic secondary to her recent oral antibiotic use.
A 23-gauge needle anterior chamber paracentesis was performed temporally. The intraocular pressure was lowered to 29 mmHg, and statim dilatation was carried out with guttae (G.) Tropicamide 1 %. As the pupillary diameter increased, clot retraction occurred with clearing of the visual axis, immediate improvement in right eye visual acuity to 6/60, and demonstration of the ipsilateral IVTS . At this point, the IVTS in the left eye also became evident. Right fundus examination demonstrated a normal optic nerve head with a cup:disc ratio of 0.2, and with a small area of central foveal atrophy.
The patient was commenced on hourly G. Prednisolone Acetate 1 %, G. Atropine 1 % twice daily, and a combination of Brinzolamide, Timolol, Latanoprost and Brimonidine. With the advice of the Haematologists, she was administered 1 mg of Vitamin K intravenously in order to normalise her INR. With advice from the Nephrologists, 30 g of Resonium was administered orally to reduce her serum potassium.
Her hyphaema resolved completely, and after 48 h her right visual acuity had improved to 6/12. Subsequent scanning laser polarimetry of the retinal nerve fibre layer and automated achromatic perimetry testing were within normal limits.
Given the absence of any significant trauma and lack of systemic associations, the patient’s spontaneous hyphaema was attributed to her IVTs with supratherapeutic INR as a predisposing factor. Her recent oral cephalosporin usage for lower limb cellulitis was implicated as causal for her high INR. It is known that these antibiotics decrease the absorption and alter the metabolism of vitamin K, thus augmenting the effects of Warfarin. Haematology review deemed her risk of further clotting episodes to be too high to stop warfarinisation. Counselling was given to the patient on the association of an increased, and potentially life-threatening INR, and propensity for further IVT bleeding.