A 50-year-old female, previously treated with steroid therapy, presented with symmetric inflammatory polyarthritis persisting for 17 years. The patient initially developed cutaneous nodules in 2003, which were distributed symmetrically across the joints of the hands, ankles, shoulders, and elbows. Over the following 6 mo, stiffness, joint deformities, contractures, and restricted mobility affected multiple joints, including bilateral elbows, wrists, knees, ankles, feet, MCP joints, bilateral PIP joints, and MTP and DIP joints.
The patient had a positive medical history of fever, decreased appetite, cough, breathlessness.
A previous subdiaphragmatic abscess resection and ovarian cyst removal.
No special notes.
Physical examination revealed multiple smooth nodules, ranging in diameter from approximately 5-20 mm, on the dorsal surfaces of the patient's palms, upper arms, MCP joints, MTP joints, and PIP and DIP joints. These nodules exhibited symmetric distribution, firm texture, free mobility, and were non-tender to touch . Furthermore, a large scar connective tissue was observed along the lateral margin of both upper arms . Joint flexion contractures were prominent, particularly affecting the thumb, ring, and little fingers, resulting in a +ACI-main en griffe+ACI- (claw hand) appearance . No signs of Raynaud phenomenon, calcinosis, or palmoplantar thickening were noted.
Biopsy samples were obtained for pathological examination from right arch palmar aponeurosis, left foot articular cartilage and right upper arm scar tissue. The results showed dermal fibrous hyperplasia, elastic fiber disorder, excessive skin coking, irregular thickening of the spinous layer, dermal collagen fiber hyperplasia, synovial fibrous tissue hyperplasia, thickened collagen fibers, and central degeneration and necrosis of cartilage tissue with calcification . Elastica van Gieson staining showed the reduction of elastic fibers in the dermis . In immunohistochemical examination, the spindle cells were positive for vimentin, and α-SMA, but CD68, CD163, CD34, and S100 were negative .
Laboratory tests indicated positive results for both rheumatoid factor (RF) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), while all other routine and immunological tests, including anti-DNA antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), anti-extractable nuclear antigen scl-70, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, anti-Jo-1, anti-SSA, and anti-SSB antibodies, were negative or within normal ranges.
Imaging studies, including X-ray and computed tomography (CT), revealed worsening joint destruction in some PIP, DIP, and MCP joints, as well as bilateral joint space stenosis in MTP, MCP, and IP joints .