An 85-year-old male patient with known history of severe coronary arterial disease presented for planned repair of his enlarging ductus arteriosus pseudoaneurysm. A previous computed tomography (CT) of the thorax (GE Brightspeed 16 slice Multi Detector CT (MDCT)) from December 2010 demonstrated the pseudoaneurysm which measured 3.6 cm × 3.3 cm in diameter. A follow-up CT angiogram of the chest (GE Lightspeed VCT 64 slice MDCT) in February 2016 demonstrated interval enlargement to a diameter of 6.1 cm × 5.5 cm . This included the peripheral thrombosed aspect of the pseudoaneurysm as well as the flowing opacified central portion. The flowing central aspect of the pseudoaneurysm measured 2.3 cm. The diverticulum component had a wide neck (1.6 cm) and created obtuse angles with the thoracic aorta . This diverticular aneurysm was oriented towards the left pulmonary artery, demonstrating that this was indeed a ductus arteriosus pseudoaneurysm. CT angiography (CTA) of the abdomen and pelvis performed concurrently showed severe iliofemoral tortuosity and advanced atherosclerotic calcific burden . A 5.1 cm infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) that was directed towards the origin of the left common iliac artery was also demonstrated .
Endovascular stent graft repair was attempted. The preoperative CTA of the chest suggested that the proximal landing zone of the stent graft would quite likely include the origin of the left subclavian artery. Therefore, a left common carotid to subclavian arterial bypass with interposition ProPaten Graft (Gore, Flagstaff, AZ) was performed to avoid the probable left subclavian artery occlusion.
After the left carotid to left subclavian arterial graft was successfully placed, the right common femoral artery was exposed through a surgical cutdown and the vessel was accessed in a retrograde fashion. This access was to be used for insertion of a 24 French (Fr) introducer sheath used for the introduction of the Medtronic Talent thoracic aortic stent graft system (Minneapolis, MN, USA). Percutaneous access of the left common femoral artery was also obtained for the placement of a 5 Fr flush catheter for the purposes of angiographic control. However, given the previously described advanced common and external iliac tortuosity and severe calcific nature of these vessels combined with the AAA, the 24 Fr introducer sheath could not be successfully navigated distally into the abdominal aorta .
Endovascular coil embolization was performed two days following attempted TEVAR placement. Using right common femoral artery access, a 5 Fr flush catheter (Omni Flush, AngioDynamics, Queensbury, NY) was placed and thoracic angiography was performed. The DAD with its inferior extension of the large pseudoaneurysm component was well visualized . A 4 Fr directional catheter (MeritMedical, South Jordan, Utah) was then introduced into the pseudoaneurysm. Given the wide-neck characteristics of the DAD relative to the thoracic aorta, the junction of the diverticulum and the pseudoaneurysm was used as the “neck” and platform for stable endovascular coil placement. A series of eleven Azur 35 detachable coils (Terumo, Somerset, NJ) were placed in the following order: one 20 mm/50 cm framing coil , two 20 mm/39 cm coils, two 16 mm/32 cm coils, two 13 mm/24 cm, one 12 mm/30 cm, two 10 mm/19 cm and one 8 mm/13 cm. The loop of the initial framing coil slightly protruded into the diverticulum forming a “bridge” across the junction of the diverticulum and pseudoaneurysm. Follow-up thoracic angiography demonstrated no further flow into the pseudoaneurysm of the DAD .
The patient had no immediate complications from the coil embolization. He was taken to the operating room later that night for repair of a right groin hematoma. Ultimately, the patient recovered well and was discharged from the hospital on post-embolization day six. The patient did not return for a recommended three-month-follow-up CTA of the chest. He did, however, present to our facility over a year after the coil embolization, at which point his only concern was a non-healing foot ulcer. He died twenty-one months after the embolization from an acute myocardial infarction with severe underlying coronary artery disease.