A 48 year old gentleman initially presented with chest pain and exertional dyspnoea and was found to have an aberrant right coronary artery (RCA) arising from the left coronary sinus. He underwent an unroofing procedure to re-site the origin of the right coronary artery in the correct sinus. His recovery was uncomplicated with no signs of infection.
Three months post discharge, the patient presented to ophthalmology with an acutely red painful left eye. The patient was admitted for antivirals and steroids for possible herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection, but despite this treatment he had lost his vision in the left eye by July 2021.
In August of 2021, the patient represented with rapidly deteriorating vision in his right eye and was transferred to a tertiary ophthalmology unit. Corneal scrapings demonstrated Aspergillus Fumigatus and Saccharomyces Cerevisiae and a CT thorax abdomen and pelvis confirmed disseminated fungal infection and fungal endophthalmitis. A 74 mm × 76 mm saccular pseudoaneurysm was found arising from the mid anterior ascending aorta, with a wide 24 × 21 mm diameter orifice and no neck. The pseudoaneurysm was in close apposition to the manubrium and proximal sternal body. The features were in keeping with a large fungating mycotic pseudoaneurysm arising from the previous aortic suture line and aspergillus infection was strongly suspected. The patient was commenced on anti-mycotic therapy and transferred to a quaternary aortovascular centre for re-sternotomy and repair of the ascending aortic pseudoaneurysm.
The patient was placed on cardiopulmonary bypass via the right axillary artery and right femoral vein. During cooling a left anterior thoracotomy was performed in the 5th intercostal space and a left ventricular vent sited via the apex of the heart. Once a core temperature of 24 degrees was reached, the circulation was arrested prior to resternotomy. On opening the chest, the aneurysm sac had a fungating appearance and breached. A retrograde cardioplegia cannula was placed through the defect in the ascending aorta and the balloon inflated to occlude the opening. The innominate artery was dissected out and snared allowing antegrade cerebral perfusion (ACP) to be delivered via the arterial cannula in the right axillary artery. The distal ascending aorta was then dissected out and a cross-clamp applied allowing the circulation to be restarted after 30 min of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA). The infected pseudoaneurysm sac was dissected out and the defect in the ascending aorta closed with a pericardial patch. The patient was admitted to ITU for post-operative monitoring where he made an uncomplicated recovery. He was repatriated back to his local hospital for ongoing ophthalmology care.