A month prior to admission to our hospital, a 57-year-old man was admitted to the local hospital with dizziness, obvious memory loss, and rapidly progressive dementia.
A month prior to admission to our hospital, a 57-year-old man was admitted to the local hospital with dizziness, obvious memory loss, and rapidly progressive dementia.
The patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that showed an abnormality in the head of the right caudate nucleus suggesting multiple lacunar infarctions.
Denial the family history of infectious diseases.
The patient was admitted to our department following 1 mo of progressive memory loss accompanied by disturbed consciousness, dementia, depression, and inability to answer questions or complete physical examinations. Based on the reports of the patient’s family and a review of records, the patient’s gait changes, instability, aphasia, forgetfulness, hyperdystonia, and weight loss were all exacerbated since the initial hospital admission. The muscle tone of limbs increased significantly and became hyperactive. Pathological reflex examination revealed positive Babinski and Chaddock signs. There were no other positive neurological signs.
A month prior to admission to our hospital, the patient was examined at the local hospital according to the test results provided by the patient. The results of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed an elevated albumin level of 760 mg/L (nominal range 120-600 mg/L). No definitive diagnosis was made. When his progressive amnesia worsened, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. We conducted basic laboratory tests, including C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, full blood cell count, and electrocardiogram. Microbiological assays were negative, including screening tests for hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus, and neurosyphilis. Immunological tests were also normal .
To further clarify the diagnosis, we performed a second CSF examination. Cytology and biochemical parameters were within normal limits, but glucose and protein levels were slightly elevated . The CSF virus test and bacterial culture were negative, allowing us to rule out central infectious diseases.
To rule out the possibility of a central tumor, an examination of paraneoplastic syndrome was actively carried out. The patient was examined before being readmitted to the hospital. Paraneoplastic syndrome (PNS) is an autoimmune syndrome caused by anti-neuron antibodies. Paraneoplastic syndrome should be considered if the patient shows dementia, extrapyramidal or cerebellar symptoms or other neurological symptoms, subacute onset or rapid progression, positive cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory markers, tumor risk factors or tumor family history. The common antibodies are anti-Hu, anti-CV2, anti-Ri, anti-Ma2, anti-Yo, anti-NMDAR and anti-AMPAR antibodies. Different antibodies can indicate corresponding potential tumors. The most common disease associated with paraneoplastic syndrome is marginal lobular encephalitis, also known as paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis. Usually, the related antibodies are anti-Hu, anti-CV2, anti-Ma2, anti-Ri, and anti-Yo antibodies. The patient was examined for paraneoplastic syndrome to find positive antibodies .
Electroencephalography (EEG) showed generalized periodic sharp wave complexes and slow background activity. These findings were interpreted as nonspecific, moderate, widespread cortical dysfunction, also involving subcortical structures . Brain MRI showed no hemorrhage, infarction, or mass lesions. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) detected increased signal intensity in the cortex of the right frontal-parietal lobe, part of the left frontal-parietal lobe next to the cerebral falx, cingulate gyrus, and bilateral temporal lobes. In addition, there was a high signal in the head of the left caudate nucleus .