A 38-year-old Middle Eastern woman presented with a slowly enlarging abdominal mass of 12 years duration. According to the patient, a surgeon had attempted to resect the mass 12 years earlier, but could not do so due to excessive bleeding from the tumor. She was offered no further treatment.
At presentation, her main complaint was epigastric discomfort. She also gave a history of some mild back pain and occasional abdominal pain. Her appetite was good and she had not lost weight. There was no history of vomiting, change in bowel habits or melena. She had been diagnosed with a peptic ulcer many years ago.
On examination she looked healthy with no clinical jaundice or pallor. Abdominal examination revealed a large upper abdominal mass with thinned overlying skin. It had minimal mobility and was not tender. The rest of the examination was normal. Her hemoglobin level was 10.8 g/dL, with hypochromic microcytic red blood cell indices. Otherwise, all blood tests were normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a 20 cm retroperitoneal mass in the region of the head of the pancreas . It appeared to push and stretch the surrounding structures. There was no evidence of metastases to the liver or lung. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, showing a 2.5 cm ulcer in the second part of the duodenum with a clot at its center. There was no intraluminal mass. A deep biopsy was taken, but was not diagnostic.
Tumor embolization was planned to decrease tumor vascularity before resection. Angiography revealed that the hepatic artery was the main feeding vessel; however, embolization was not possible because the celiac axis was kinked and the catheter could not be advanced into the feeding artery. After preparation she was taken to the operating theater. A midline incision over the previous scar was performed. The tumor was very vascular with large venous tributaries draining into the portal circulation. It lay posterior to the pancreatic head and duodenum, pushing them anteriorly. A pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) was performed with the dissection kept outside the pseudocapsule of the tumor, taking care not to rupture the tumor. The patient tolerated the procedure well and had an uneventful recovery. Histopathological examination revealed a 22 cm tumor arising from the second part of the duodenum. The tumor showed moderate cellularity and mildly atypical spindle cells arranged in fascicles with a low mitotic count (1/50 high power field) and no necrosis . Prominent skeinoid fibers were seen. The tumor was negative for c-kit, SMA and S100 protein, but positive for CD34. Although it was c-kit negative, the features were consistent with the diagnosis of GIST. The tumor was considered of high malignant potential because of its size. Imatinib mesylate (IM) was considered as an adjuvant treatment but the patient could not afford it. She continued to do well, however, and was free of any recurrence the last time she attended the clinic, 34 months after the operation.