A 66-year-old female with a history of poorly controlled type 2 diabetes with associated complications of frequent urinary tract infections presented to our hospital for a routine physical examination. On examination, she complained of repeated urinary tract infections for the past 3 years and asked for a review of the urinary system for abnormalities, prompting an ultrasound to be completed. Ultrasound showed a strong echogenic mass of approximately 1.5 × 1.3 × 1.3 cm in size on the posterior wall of the bladder, with regular morphology and clear borders, and color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) showed the presence of a blood flow signal in the lesion . The patient was admitted to the urology department. Urinalysis after admission revealed white blood cells: 17.48/hp, bacterial count: 39,260/µl, urine occult blood: 2+, and glucose: 2+. The rest of the laboratory tests showed no abnormalities. A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a round nodular mass on the posterior wall of the bladder with clear borders and a maximum diameter of approximately 1.4 cm . MRI suggested a nodular mass with a maximum diameter of approximately 1.3 cm on the posterior wall of the bladder, with clear borders, high signal on T1WI, T2WI-SPAIR and DWI, and a low signal on ADC. The mass was significantly enhanced on MRI-enhanced scans, the inner layer of the bladder wall adjacent to the mass was also enhanced, and the muscular layer of the bladder wall was not enhanced . The patient then underwent cystoscopy, which showed a round mass of approximately 1.3 × 1.2 cm in size, reddish-brown in color, with a pedicle and a copious basal blood supply, on the right side of the posterior bladder wall . Due to concerns about post-biopsy mass bleeding, mass biopsy was not performed. The patient eventually underwent diagnostic ERBT. A SIMAI bipolar plasma system and bipolar loop electrode (SIMAI: SM-8100) were used in the surgery. The cutting and coagulation power were adjusted to 60 and 80 W, respectively. First, we marked and blocked the blood supply to the tumor area by electrocoagulation with an electrode at a distance of 5 mm from the ring of the tumor edge and then incised, inserted, and provoked the mucosal layer and submucosal layer tissues of the bladder wall with the tip of the ring electrode. Then, we incised the muscle layer tissues to the deep muscle layer, peeled the tumor along the plane of the deep muscle layer by pushing flatly, separated the interlaced muscle fiber bundles in this plane, and carefully stopped the bleeding point. The tumor was successfully removed during surgery, and its integrity was preserved. The tumor specimen was round, reddish-brown, solid, with a smooth surface . Postoperative pathological examination suggested that the tumor consisted of epithelioid cells arranged in a nested or glandular pattern, with mild heterogeneity of the nucleus, visible nucleoli, clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm, abundant interstitial vessels, clear tumor boundaries, and tumor infiltration of the lamina propria of the bladder wall . Immunohistochemical staining results were as follows: CK (-), Vimentin (-), GATA3 (-), S100 (-), HMB45 (partial +), Melan-A (partial +), CD31 (vascular +), CD34 (vascular +), PAX8 (-), Ki-67 (5% +). The pathological examination and immunohistochemical results indicated a final diagnosis of the mass as bladder PEComa. Since the tumor did not infiltrate the muscle layer of the bladder wall, the patient did not undergo further surgery and did not receive intravesical chemotherapy. The patient had clear postoperative indwelling catheter drainage without bladder irrigation, and the catheter was successfully removed 5 days after surgery. She underwent cystoscopy 3 months after surgery and CT examination 6 months after surgery, and no tumor recurrence was found.