During a routine chest X-ray examination, a 50-year-old man was diagnosed with an abnormal shadow in the right chest. As there were no signs to suggest the mass was malignant, the patient decided to forego further examination or treatment.
Ten years after the initial discovery, a routine chest X-ray revealed an increase in the size of the previously detected shadow, and the patient was advised a biopsy and tumor removal. However, the patient refused further examination or treatment in the absence of any symptoms. Thirty years after the initial discovery, the patient was hospitalized with symptoms of severe hypoglycemia. Prior to the acute episode necessitating hospitalization, the patient had no history of hypoglycemic symptoms, such as sweating, palpitations, and loss of consciousness. Moreover, there was no history of an increase in weight for the preceding 6 mo. As the patient’s hypoglycemia was resistant to treatment by frequent oral glucose supplementation, he was hospitalized for further management.
The patient had no medical records or family history of hypoglycemia.
The patient was on treatment with azelnidipine for hypertension and rosuvastatin for hyperlipidemia.
Clinical examination revealed no signs, except attenuation of respiratory sounds over the right chest.
Laboratory test results after hospitalization showed a slight increase in C-reactive protein (CRP) levels to 2.11 mg/dL. The anti-insulin antibody test result was negative, and fasting blood glucose was 48 mg/dL, accompanied by a low immunoreactive insulin (IRI) level of < 5.0 µU/mL. Interestingly, there was no change in the levels of insulin-counterregulatory hormones, such as cortisol, growth hormone (GH), and norepinephrine .
Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scanning showed a giant solid tumor (11 cm × 14 cm × 15 cm) in the right lower chest region . A fluorine-18 fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography showed uneven accumulation of the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax 3.1) indicating possible characteristics of a malignancy . Interestingly, the mass showed a propensity for accumulation by octreotide scintigraphy, which was characteristic of a neuroendocrine tumor .
From the biochemical and histological findings, we suspected an NICTH. To confirm this diagnosis, we undertook a core biopsy of the tumor. Immunoblots of serum IGF-II and tumoral tissue IGF-II from tumor biopsies were conducted, and a high-molecular-weight form of IGF-II was identified in both types of samples on Western blotting . Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining for IGF-II in tumoral tissue showed numerous immunopositive tumor cells .