An 8-year-old boy with developmental disabilities, autistic traits, and neurological problems was diagnosed with Coffin–Siris syndrome after genetic testing in February 2021. He was the first child in his family. Pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes, which was treated with a diet. Delivery at term was performed with vacuum extraction. The Apgar score was 9/10, body weight was 3.6 kilograms (P50–P75), and body length was 52 centimeters (P75–P90). He was breastfed for the first 7 months. He had a cow's milk protein allergy, which made him use an adapted milk formula. At 18 months, he started walking without any support, and at 3 years, his walk became more stable. At 4 and 6 months of age, he obtained bladder and bowel control.
He had three surgeries (at 14 months—cryptorchidism, 20 months—strabismus, and 4 years—adenoidectomy). He had febrile convulsions since he was 2 years and 4 months old for which he had taken medication, sodium valproate. EEG measured bitemporal focal changes that were more pronounced on the left side of his slow baseline activity. The development of his language and speech skills was the first cause of parental concern. The delay in this particular domain occurred at the age of 2. This is when they initiated their first referral to the attending physician.
He was examined by an otorhinolaryngologist for problems with speech and for not responding to commands when he was 2 years and 1 month old. Brainstem-evoked response audiometry (BERA) testing had been performed, and there were no pathological findings. He was assessed by a child psychiatrist on suspicion of autism 1 month later and diagnosed with delayed psychomotor development. Both mother and father denied any family history of significant hereditary disorders. He was referred to our Institution for detailed diagnostic exploration when he was 5 years old.
Physical examination showed that stature and head circumference were age-appropriate. Other findings included facial dysmorphia and macrostomia with small, widely spaced teeth, long eyelashes, downslanted palpebral fissures, lower placed hairline with thick and coarse hair, pronounced and descended lower lip, single palmar crease on one hand, and fifth digit distal phalangeal hypoplasia on his feet, as well as a protosystolic heart murmur. According to his parents, diagnostic imaging did not reveal any congenital structural anomalies of the brain or abdomen.
On psychiatric examination, it was noted that the child was well-nourished, active, and curious. A greeting gesture was noted. Eye contact was brief. He immediately approached the toy boxes and spent some time with each of them. Contact with the boy was successfully achieved through playing with toys. He accepted organized play (driving a teddy bear with a toy car). He did not develop any functional speech. Stereotypical movements were not observed. He was clumsy, poorly coordinated, and his sense of spatial orientation was insufficient. It was stated that he participated in organized play, but only briefly. He enjoyed the company of children and tried to interact with them. He particularly enjoyed activities that include motor skills: climbing, jumping, and running. He did not eat with a fork and a knife and did not drink from a glass on his own. He could take off his shoes without any assistance.
A speech therapist examination showed that contact through toys and other objects was achieved with difficulties. Contact through voice and words was not made. He was not turning his head toward the examiner when he was called by his name. Motor skills in total were underdeveloped for his age. Movement of the upper and lower extremities was uncoordinated. His body was often bent forward, which could be attributed to his poor eyesight. Play routines were simple, with very little imagination. He solved the wooden puzzle with animals, letters, and terms without deepening his interaction with the examiner. He played alone and did not show any interest in playing with others. He did not speak. He used two words in the form of syllables with the goal of expressing his needs. Contrary to the psychiatrist's initial assessment, the greeting gesture was confirmed to be absent. He was constantly moving, walking around with toys in his hands, and had difficulty focusing on activities outside of his scope of interest.
His score for general adaptive behavior was 58 on the Vineland II Adaptive Behavior scale. A delay in psychomotor development with significant difficulties in communication (underdeveloped speech and difficulties in comprehension), socialization, and motor skills was noted. The childhood autism rating scale (CARS) was used for psychometric assessment. A score of 29 (borderline value) was noted.
The comprehensive and multidisciplinary team assessment led to the conclusion that his developmental difficulties were significant. There were autistic traits, developmental delay, and neurological problems (seizures). He was formally diagnosed as having ASD by a child psychiatrist with supporting evidence from the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule 2 (ADOS-2). The ADI-R scores were as follows: Total A−21; Total non-verbal B−11; Total C−8; and Total D−5. His total score on Module 1 of ADOS-2 was 22 , which was beyond the cutoff criteria for autism. The detailed family history revealed that there were no developmental, neurological, or psychiatric disorders in the family.
Since the boy presented with ASD, congenital anomalies, and specific features, genetic testing was performed. Karyotype, Fragile X syndrome testing, chromosomal microarray analysis, and urine metabolite screening did not detect any genetic abnormalities. However, the Trio whole-exome sequencing showed a heterozygous de novo variant in the ARID1B gene (NM_001371656.1):c.1638_1647del that was classified as pathogenic (class 5 according to ACMG/AAP criteria). This is a frameshift variant leading to non-sense-mediated decay of mRNA. Heterozygous loss of function variants in this gene are causative of Coffin–Siris syndrome.
The boy had attended several different stimulation treatments during the past few years, including logopedic, psychomotor re-education, and sports activities, which have resulted in improvements in several domains. The comprehension of speech and articulation of syllables have improved. He got better at verbalizing his needs. He has a personal assistant and is attending second-grade school for children with special needs, but is attending math classes under a regular program. Aside from verbalization, his other biggest difficulty is graphomotorics. Verbalization still includes only several words. He is of adequate behavior at home. He still needs support and stimulation with his everyday activities, including dressing up, tying his shoes, eating, and maintaining his personal hygiene.