A 32-year-old shopkeeper presented to our trauma center following a road traffic accident; he was a cyclist, who was hit by a four-wheel drive. According to the patient, immediately after the collision, he fell onto his knees on the road. He was not able to stand up and there was swelling over both knees. He had no head, chest or abdominal injuries. There were no known medical co-morbidities. On examination, swelling, tenderness, crepitus and abnormal mobility were noted in both knees. There was a 2 × 2 cm superficial abrasion over the anterior aspect of the right knee. Skin over the left knee was intact and normal. The patient was unable to do active Straight Leg Raising [SLR] on both sides. Clinical examination revealed no long bone fractures. Distal neuro-vascular examination was normal on both sides. Plain X-rays, including anteroposterior and lateral views of both knee joints, were performed. Routine trauma series X-rays, including chest X-ray, pelvis with both hip joints, and lateral cervical spine X-rays were normal. The case was diagnosed as isolated and simultaneous bilateral Patellar fractures and was placed on posterior long leg splints on both sides. On the right side, there was comminution of the lower pole of the Patella, and on the left side there was comminution of the upper pole . All blood investigations were within normal limits.
Surgery for open reduction and internal fixation on both sides was performed under spinal anaesthesia and tourniquet control. We started on the left side first as the overlying skin was normal. A-15-cm midline vertical incision was made over the left knee, centered over the fracture. The fracture was exposed. Torn medial and lateral patellar retinaculum were noted. Thorough joint lavage was given, to clear the debris and haematoma. The joint was inspected for any associated intra-articular bony or soft tissue involvement and was found to be normal. Despite the upper pole being a small fragment and comminuted, tension band wiring fixation was attempted. The fracture was reduced using AO Weber clamps. Two parallel 1.8-mm K-wires were passed from the proximal fragment to the distal fragment, through the fracture, about 10 mm under the anterior surface. Using 18-gauge stainless steel wires, tension banding was done and compression was achieved at the fracture site. Reduction was confirmed using intra-operative fluoroscopy. K-wires were bent, cut and deeply buried. Retinaculae were repaired. The wound was washed and closed layer by layer over a drain. The right side fracture was exposed and fixed by tension band wiring similarly . Knee compression and long knee braces were applied on both sides and patient was shifted out of theatre.
On the first post-operative day the patient was made to sit in the propped position. Assisted straight leg raising exercises were started. Isometric quadriceps and hamstrings strengthening exercises were taught. On the second day, the drains were removed. The patient was taught to stand with the help of crutches and was made to walk two rounds in the ward. Brace support was continued and was removed only during the physiotherapy sessions. Gradual knee bending exercises were initiated after one week, which included active, active assisted and gravity assisted flexion by sitting at the edge of the couch through 0 - 30 degrees. Similarly, heel slides were also initiated with the patient lying with the supine position. Staples were removed after two weeks and gentle patellar mobility was started. In order to overcome knee stiffness and an extension lag, the patient was encouraged to do open chain quadriceps and hamstrings strengthening exercises. Quadriceps stimulations at highest tolerated current intensity were also carried out to regain strength of the extensor mechanisms. Gradually, 10 degrees of knee bending were increased weekly and brace supports were discontinued at six weeks. The patient was able to bend his knees 90 degrees on both sides by the end of eight weeks. He regained full range of flexion and extension by the end of seventh month and fracture union was evident radiologically on both sides At the end of one year, the patient returned to full activity. However, he complained of occasional pain and hardware prominence in both knees on squatting. For these complaints implant removal was performed at the end of one year .