A 99-year-old African-American female with a medical history of dementia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and a cerebral vascular accident with right-sided weakness who presented to an emergency department (ED) in Long Island, New York, on April 24, 2020, with the chief complaint of the right ankle pain. The patient was accompanied by her granddaughter who reported that the patient had a series of the falls over the past several weeks. She first fell 3 weeks before presentation at which time she complained of the right ankle pain. Due to concerns regarding COVID-19 exposure, especially in light of the patient’s son passing away from complications of the disease, the patient did not seek further medical evaluation. The granddaughter who was also a nurse placed the ankle in a home fashioned posterior slab splint and she proceeded to weight-bear as tolerated.
Two days before presentation, the patient had another fall but again did not seek medical evaluation. On the day of presentation, the granddaughter was concerned regarding the patient’s skin overlying the ankle due to a malodorous wound prompting the evaluation. On examination, the patient had a temperature of 36.7, blood pressure of 111/65, heart rate of 82 beats/min (bpm), respiration rate of 18 bpm, and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. There was a malodorous 20 cm area of necrosis on the anterior aspect of the distal tibia with a 10 cm × 5 cm open wound overlying the lateral malleolus . The wound was explored and distal fibula, tibia, talus, and peroneal tendons were noted. The ankle was tender to palpation about both the medial and lateral ankle with significant bony instability. Sensation and motor strength of the right lower extremity including ankle and foot were unable to be assessed due to the patient’s current mental status. The foot was edematous with overlying blistering. Dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses were not appreciated by palpation, with a +1 dorsalis pedis pulse on Doppler.
Laboratory testing demonstrated an initial white blood cell count of 12.67 K/µL (3.8–10.5 K/µL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 97 mm/h (0–22 mm/h), and C-reactive protein of 36.82 mg/dL (0.00–0.40). Blood cultures had growth in both aerobic and anaerobic bottles with Gram-negative rods (Morganella morganii). COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction testing was negative.
Anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique radiographs taken in the ED showed a bimalleolar ankle fracture with a transverse fracture line about the medial malleolus and an oblique fracture line about the lateral malleolus (, ). Air and gas were noted in the anterior margin of the tibiotalar joint. The patient’s clinical examination was consistent with an open right ankle bimalleolar fracture with presumed osteomyelitis of the right lower extremity and a gangrenous foot. On secondary examination, the patient had no other injuries.
A lengthy discussion was had with the health-care proxy about the patient’s diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment options, especially limb salvage versus amputation. The health-care proxy initially wanted to attempt lower extremity salvage, but after discussion regarding overall success of salvage and associated morbidity versus amputation, the health-care proxy agreed to amputation. The following day, the patient underwent a successful right guillotine amputation by vascular surgery, with plan for a return to the operating room for a formal below-knee amputation (BKA) once her condition stabilized. OR cultures demonstrated a polymicrobial infection with Proteus mirabilis, Klebsiella oxytoca, Enterococcus faecalis, and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. The patient received IV antibiotics for the treatment of sepsis related to her previously infected Grade III A open right ankle bimalleolar fracture and gangrenous foot. The patient’s overall condition improved with no growth on repeat blood cultures and a clean non-bleeding guillotine amputation site. The patient eventually returned to the operating room and underwent a successful formal BKA .