A 33-year-old, previously well Caucasian woman of Mediterranean descent presented to our hospital with asymptomatic left cervical lymphadenopathy for further investigation. There were no associated symptoms of night sweats, weight loss or fever. A subsequent excisional biopsy of a left supraclavicular node demonstrated features consistent with classical nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's lymphoma, with nodular aggregates of small lymphocytes interspersed with CD30+ and CD15+ lacunar variants of Reed-Sternberg cells . A pretreatment staging 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET/CT scan was confounded by prominent physiological brown fat uptake in the neck and thorax, but confirmed 18F-FDG-avid lymphadenopathy in the left lower cervical and left supraclavicular regions with no evidence of disease elsewhere in the body (PET scan-confirmed stage IIA Hodgkin's lymphoma) . Her bone marrow biopsy was negative for bone marrow involvement. She was subsequently treated with two cycles of ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine) chemotherapy followed by involved field radiotherapy (30gy delivered in 17 fractions to the left upper chest and neck).
A posttherapy restaging 18F-FDG PET/CT scan was performed two months following the completion of radiotherapy. The scan demonstrated complete resolution of 18F-FDG-avid lymphadenopathy in the left cervical and supraclavicular regions, but new widespread 18F-FDG-avid bilateral pulmonary hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, raising the possibility of progressive Hodgkin's disease . A mediastinoscopy was performed, and several mediastinal nodes were obtained for histopathological evaluation. These specimens demonstrated non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with numerous multinucleated giant cells, consistent with sarcoidosis . No evidence of malignancy was detected, and staining for infective organisms was negative.
Subsequent investigations, including serum and urinary calcium levels and an ophthalmological review for ocular sarcoidosis, were normal. Her pulmonary function tests demonstrated a mild decrease in gas transfer (62% of predicted value) which was nonspecific and possibly related to prior radiotherapy. Her chest X-ray was normal. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed to evaluate a left anterior hemiblock pattern visualized on her electrocardiogram, which was negative for cardiac sarcoidosis. A nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug regimen was commenced for mild chest discomfort thought to be related to mediastinal lymphadenopathy, with good relief of symptoms. A course of corticosteroids was deemed unnecessary upon a respiratory physician's review, and the proposed management plan was one of close observation.