The patient, a 28-year-old primigravida with a history of 43 d of amenorrhea, presented with bilateral lower abdominal pain and was referred to the emergency department. She reported having undergone IUI 30 d before presentation, owing to primary infertility for 3 years.
The patient had previously undergone ovulation induction and IUI twice. In the second IUI cycle, she underwent ovulation induction with letrozole 5 mg daily during days 5-9 of her menstrual cycle. Transvaginal ultrasound revealed one developed follicle in the right ovary, which was followed by the administration of 10000 IU of human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) and IUI on the subsequent day. The initial serum β-HCG concentration was 130 mIU/mL 19 d after IUI, with a slower increase to 697.3 mIU/mL 26 d after IUI.
The patient had no history of sexually transmitted diseases, endometriosis, or previous gynecologic surgery. Nevertheless, the patient was positive for Ureaplasma urealyticum 3 mo before IUI but had no symptoms of urogenital tract infection. Hysterosalpingography revealed a normal uterus and bilateral patent fallopian tubes.
The patient has a history of hyperthyroidism for 12 years. Through drug treatment, normal thyroid function was observed during IUI treatment.No family history.
The patient’s body temperature was 36.3ºC, heart rate was 78 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 96/63 mmHg. Gynecologic examination in the emergency department revealed tenderness in bilateral adnexa uteri, with stable vital signs. About 5 mL of non-coagulated blood was obtained by puncturing the vaginal vault.
The serum β-HCG level of the patient had elevated to 2817 mIU/mL 30 d after IUI.
Emergency transvaginal ultrasound examination revealed a uterus that was normal in size but without an intrauterine gestational sac, a 43 mm × 19 mm moderate echogenic mass located very close to the right ovary, and a 39 mm × 18 mm fluid dark area behind the uterus . A preliminary diagnosis of suspected ovarian pregnancy rupture (or rupture of corpus luteum) and hematoperitoneum was established. An emergency laparoscopy was planned. Intraoperative examination revealed a hemorrhagic mass surrounded by a blood clot on the surface of the right ovary. The mass was resected and subjected to pathologic examination. Histological examination revealed chorionic villi attached to the ovarian tissue .