A 73-year-old man was referred to cardiology consultation for a 1-month complaint of near-syncope and light-headedness during exercise and at rest, with associated diaphoresis. His cardiac history was remarkable for arterial hypertension treated with ramipril and hydrochlorothiazide and a previous diagnosis of MVP. There was no family history of heart disease or SCD.
Physical examination was unremarkable, and a 24 h Holter monitoring, echocardiogram, and blood tests were requested.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm 77 b.p.m. and one ventricular extrassystole but otherwise unremarkable. Laboratory evaluation revealed creatinine 1.02 mg/dL, sodium 139 mmol/L, potassium 3.85 mmol/L, magnesium 2.1 mg/dL, thyroid-stimulating hormone 1.01 μIU/mL, hs-cTnT 8 ng/L, and NT-proBNP 88 pg/mL.
A 24 h Holter monitoring showed multiple episodes of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT), the longest with 15 s at 220 b.p.m. with associated light-headedness and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
Due to symptomatic VT, the patient was admitted to the Cardiology ward for additional workup.
Echocardiogram showed moderate left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy with preserved LV function and increased peak systolic strain dispersion (PSD; 61 ms). It was most notable for mitral valve disease such as bileaflet billowing with trace mitral regurgitation, annular disjunction (MAD), and systolic curling ( and ).
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) unveiled concurrent tricuspid annular disjunction. Late gadolinium sequences (LGEs) revealed non-ischaemic LV basal inferolateral enhancement ( and ).
There were no coronary artery lesions on angiography.
After discussion in the Heart Team, a cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted for primary prevention of SCD due to AMVD with high-risk features.
The patient was discharged medicated with amiodarone 200 mg, bisoprolol 2.5 mg, edoxaban 60 mg, and ramipril plus hydrochlorothiazide.
Two years after ICD, he suffered an appropriate shock due to VT at 200 b.p.m. Follow-up echocardiogram showed similar findings such as mitral valve regurgitation severity, MAD height, and LV ejection fraction.