The chief complaints were liver enlargement for 4 years, activity loss for 2 years, and cyanosis for more than 1 year.
A female patient aged 13 years and 6 mo was diagnosed with craniopharyngioma 6 years prior and underwent surgical resection without postoperative hormone replacement therapy. She had weakness after the surgery, and multiple laboratory tests revealed hypernatremia and hyperchloremia. The maximum serum sodium level was 176 mmol/L, which was improved by infusion of glucose, and the lowest sodium level was reduced to approximately 155 mmol/L. Four years ago, abdominal distension due to liver enlargement was noted, and B-ultrasound examination suggested fatty liver disease. The patient had severe cyanosis, chest tightness, wheezing, intermittent fever, and progressive exacerbation after mild physical labor for more than 1 year. Oxygen saturation fluctuated around 85% under high-flow oxygen inhalation. Hepatobiliary ultrasonography, liver biopsy, and contrast echocardiography of the right heart revealed cirrhosis and HPS.
The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, or heart disease. She had undergone surgery for craniopharyngioma 6 years ago.
The patient was born to a G1P1 mother at full term. The patient’s parents are alive, healthy, and divorced. The patient does not have siblings.
Under atmospheric inhalation, oxygen saturation (SpO2) mostly fluctuated at around 70%. Cyanosis of the face and lips was noted. The heart rate was 124 beats/min, respiration was 26 breaths/min, blood pressure was 96/46 mmHg, height was 141.5 cm (-2.5 SD), and weight was 41.85 kg (-0.5 SD). The skin sclera did not have obvious yellow staining, and acanthosis nigricans was noted around the neck and axillae. No abnormality was found during cardiopulmonary auscultation, and the abdomen was soft but enlarged with palpable spleen and liver. Examination of the nervous system was negative, double breasts were in stage B1, pubic hair was in stage PH1, and no axillary hair was found.
The patient exhibited hypernatremia (serum sodium level, 167 mmol/L; normal range, 135–145 mmol/L), mild liver function abnormality (alanine aminotransferase level, 67 U/L, normal range, 7–40 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase level, 93 U/L, normal range, 13–40 U/L; γ-glutamyltranspeptidase, 107 U/L, normal range, 7–45 U/L; total bilirubin level, 45.1 μmol/L, normal range, 0.0–21 μmol/L; total biliary acid level, 22.3 μmol/L, normal range, 0.0–10.0 μmol/L; indirect bilirubin level, 33.6 μmol/L, normal range, 3-14 μmol/L; triglyceride level, 2.53 mmol/L, normal range, 0.3–1.7 mmol/L), abnormal renal function (creatinine level, 79 μmol/L; normal range, 15–77 μmol/L), and high blood ammonia level (94 μmol/L; normal range, 10–47 μmol/L). The patient had hypopituitarism and multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies . However, the coagulation function, immune function, and Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus levels were normal. The hepatitis series, including hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, hepatitis D virus, and hepatitis E virus, were normal.
Echocardiography of the right heart revealed a diffuse arteriovenous shunt in the lung (grade III > 100/frame), which was consistent with HPS . Abdominal ultrasonography revealed bile duct dilatation, cirrhosis, and splenomegaly . Biopsy of the liver parenchyma showed loss of lobular structure, formation of regenerated nodules, swelling of the hepatocytes, mild steatosis (20%), fibroseptal bile duct hyperplasia, and fibrous tissue hyperplasia. The diagnostic view showed nodular cirrhosis (considering the origin of NASH) . The liver vasculature of computed tomography angiography revealed cirrhotic hepatosplenomegaly and portal hypertension, spongiform changes in the left portal artery, mild varicose veins in the lower esophagus, and splenic-renal shunt. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography did not show abnormal changes in the pancreatic duct. The pituitary magnetic resonance imaging that included the conventional plain scan and dynamic contrast-enhanced scan showed postoperative changes in craniopharyngioma.