A 13-year-old girl received the diagnosis of ulcerative pancolitis in another hospital in 2015. The first treatment used was oral mesalazine, but intermittent courses of corticosteroids were also required due to disease persistence with mesalazine only. Thereafter, an association therapy with azathioprine (AZA) was started. When the patient came to our attention in 2016, she was 14 and was in a phase of both clinical and histological remission. One year later, the patient started to complain about recurrent intestinal flares, reaching a PUCAI (Pediatric Ulcerative Colitis Activity Index) score >65, which needed intermittent prednisone/budesonide therapy, although a recurrence of symptoms was noted after their suspension. Our patient did not have any other comorbidity and no autoimmune disorder could be detected in her past history. Laboratory testing showed abnormal c-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (41 AU/mL) in a single determination and mild positivity of anti-nuclear antibodies (1:160, fine speckled pattern). She underwent a colonoscopy in March 2017 that showed an active intestinal disease, extended from the hepatic flexure to a proximal descending colon (Mayo 3 phase). Due to poor disease control in June 2017 the patient was started on infliximab (5 mg/kg of body weight) in addition to oral mesalazine and AZA. Four months later she presented megaloblastic anemia, a potential adverse effect with AZA, despite ongoing acid folic therapy at 5 mg/day. AZA was promptly discontinued with rapid resolution of anemia. Since no remission was reached and a PUCAI score of 30–50 persisted, the patient needed to modify infliximab (IFX) therapy in terms of dosage and frequency of infusions. Initially she received IFX every 2–4–8 weeks at the standard dose of 5 mg/kg. Due to absent clinical response, inadequate IFX blood levels and absence of anti-IFX antibodies, the schedule was changed to 10 mg/kg every 8 weeks. After 4 months, the drug was undetectable and anti-drug antibodies were absent, so the frequency of IFX administrations was shortened to 4 weeks, reaching an adequate level of blood IFX without any anti-drug antibodies. After one year on IFX, the girl developed psoriasis-like lesions on the scalp and trunk combined with a papulo-pustular rash on the abdomen and legs. The latter were biopsied, revealing a likely reaction to IFX. This cutaneous picture was treated with topical corticosteroids and recovered. Later on, the patient presented recurrent palpable purpuric lesions on her legs characterized by reddish-purple spots, some covered with a fibrinous film (a). Laboratory tests were performed, showing no anemia and normal white blood cell count; inflammatory markers were normal as well as liver and renal function. The whole autoimmunity panel (p-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, c-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies panel (anti-Sjögren syndrome A and B, Smith antibody and anti-ribonucleoprotein), anti-dsDNA, rheumatoid factor, cryoglobulins, C3c, C4, lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin and anti-beta 2-glycoprotein-I antibodies) was unrevealing. Screening for infections was unremarkable. Urinalysis was negative for proteinuria and hematuria. The only abnormal finding, but without any pathological meaning, was a mild elevation of total serum IgA (4.9 g/L, n.v. 0.6–3.48). Chest X-ray film, renal ultrasound assessment, whole body-magnetic resonance imaging excluded any extra-intestinal disease and/or joint involvement.
An alternative biological therapy was needed: vedolizumab was considered, but was disregarded as off-label in pediatrics. Therefore, in October 2019, a switch to adalimumab was established, starting with a dose of 160 mg subcutaneously (sc) followed by 80 mg sc after 2 weeks (induction) and then continued with 40 mg sc every 2 weeks (maintenance), which led to a definite intestinal remission. Unfortunately, skin lesions seemed to persist: in fact, the patient had relapsing phases of psoriasis on the scalp and relapsing palpable purpuric with hemorrhagic bullous lesions on the legs (b) combined with dysestesia. A biopsy of these latter lesions revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Electromyography was negative for neuropathy. A colonoscopy was performed and showed an endoscopic intestinal remission.
Accordingly, in consideration of the persistent skin lesions, adalimumab was stopped and the anti-interleukin-12/23 monoclonal antibody ustekinumab (recently introduced in dermatology, especially for psoriasis) started at a dosage of 90 mg every 8 weeks. However, no beneficial effects were seen. In fact, after 15 days from ustekinumab introduction, the purpuric rash turned to necrotic-ulcerative lesions (c), and a new punch biopsy was performed, confirming the diagnosis of leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
Prednisone at the dose of 1 mg/kg/day combined with colchicine at the dose of 0.5 mg twice a day were started. After the first three months, colchicine efficacy was lost, and mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg twice a day) and AZA (75 mg/day) were started. Due to poor efficacy, mycophenolate mofetil and AZA were stopped after two weeks. As purpura and ulcerative lesions persisted, the whole autoimmunity panel was repeated but was unremarkable. Therefore, cyclosporin at the dose of 200 mg/day was introduced, finally leading to an overall improvement of the skin picture. The patient is currently well, with non-active scars at her lower limbs (d), and keeps on receiving cyclosporine plus low-dose prednisone (17.5 mg/day). A timeline of the patient’s diagnostic process and treatment is shown in .