A 45-year-old white man was referred to our Endodontic department with intermittent acute pain of spontaneous onset in the left posterior-inferior area; the referring dentist commented that the symptoms started 2 months prior to performing a mesial-occlusal restoration (Class II) in the patient’s mandibular second molar. Tooth 3.7 was negative for the pulp vitality test (cold) and positive for the diagnostic tests (percussion and palpation). Signs of clinical inflammation were absent in the surrounding tissues. A 3.0 mm-diameter circumscribed radiolucent image around his distal root apex was observed on PR (RVG Satelec Sopix, Acteon Group, Marseilles-La Ciotat, France; Fig. ), which confirmed the diagnosis of symptomatic apical periodontitis due to pulp necrosis (according to the American Association of Endodontists, AAE, Consensus Conference Recommended Diagnostic Terminology of 2009). When examining the radicular morphology with the periapical and orthopantomography radiographs , overlapping images of the roots were observed which alerted us to the complex anatomy; the patient was referred for a CBCT (ProMax 3D Max, Planmeca, Helsinki, Finland). The sagittal and coronal axes from the dental imaging software (Romexis Viewer, Planmeca) were placed in parallel and the axial axis perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the tooth 3.7 . A horizontal cross-section (axial view) at the level of the middle third of the roots was performed, which revealed a third root located lingually and four independent canals . In the three-dimensional rendered image and coronal view, the characteristics of the RE could be detected. An independent root located on the lingual side of the tooth between the mesial and distal roots (RE type AC location), with a comparable slightly smaller length and a buccally orientated curvature (type III curvature; Fig. ) was seen. Having identified the root anatomy, the orifice of the RE in the pulp chamber floor was located; for this purpose, a horizontal cross-section (axial view) at the level of the coronal third of the roots was performed under the cementoenamel junction on the vertical cross-section viewed from the front (coronal view) and vertical cross-section viewed laterally (sagittal view; Fig. ). The angle between the mesiolingual (ML) canal, the distal canal and RE was measured (45.68 degrees), as well as the interorifice distance between the RE and the distal canal (3.25mm; Fig. ).
An inferior alveolar nerve block followed by buccal infiltration was performed with 3.6mL of 2% lidocaine/epinephrine 1:80,000. The tooth was isolated under rubber dam (Hygenic Coltene, Ohio, USA) with a number 12a clamp and a number 6 Young metal frame (Hu-Friedy Mfg. Co., LLC, Chicago, USA). Access cavity preparation was created using a round diamond Endo-Access bur and an Endo-Z bur (Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland). Upon visual inspection with an operating microscope (OPMI PROergo, Zeiss, Zaventem, Belgium) and an endodontic explorer (DG-16, Ash Instruments, Dentsply, Gloucester, UK), the orifices of the three canals, MB, ML and distal, were located. Using an ultrasonic tip with a non-cutting tip (Start-X number 1, Dentsply Maillefer) and considering the spatial location of the RE obtained with the CBCT , the orifice to the canal was detected, by eliminating part of the lingual wall at +/− 45 degrees and +/− 3mm from the distal canal . The root canal length was determined using an electronic apex locator (Root ZX II, J. Morita MFG. Corp. Kyoto, Japan) and a pre-curved stainless steel K-File ISO number 10 (Dentsply Maillefer). The ISO 10 file also confirmed patency up to the apical foramen. The preflaring, the glide path and the root canal preparation were performed using nickel-titanium rotating files systems (PathFiles and ProTaper Universal, Dentsply Maillefer). Throughout the procedure, the canals were irrigated with abundant 5.25% sodium hypochlorite solution using a needle 0.30mm in diameter (NaviTip, Ultradent South Jordan, Utah, USA), and for a minimum of 30 minutes after the last file used. The final irrigation was performed with an ultrasonic irrigation system (ProUltra PiezoFlow, Dentsply, Tulsa, USA) for 1 minute for each canal with 10mL of sodium hypochlorite solution and thereafter for 1 minute with 17% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, subsequently leaving the solution passively for 5 minutes. The canals were dried with paper points of 4% conicity (R&S, Paris, France), and an endodontic cement was placed (Pulp Canal Sealer, SybronEndo, Orange, CA, USA). The obturation of the root canals was performed in the same session using Carrier-Based Thermoplasticized technique with a warm layer of alpha-phase gutta-percha (Thermafil, Dentsply Maillefer, Konstanz, Germany) . For adhesive sealing of the pulp chamber, the etch-and-rinse technique was performed with 37% phosphoric acid (Dentaflux, J. RIPOLL S.L.) and dentin adhesive (Adper Scotchbond, 3M ESPE, Minnesota, USA). The obturation was performed using flowable resin composite (Filtek Supreme, 3M ESPE) on the orifice of the canals and a light-curing provisional material was placed (Telio CS Onlay, Ivoclar Vivadent AG Bendererstrasse Schaan, Liechtenstein). The patient was referred to his general dentist for a permanent coronal restoration. After 14 months, postoperative control was performed and revealed negative results on the diagnostic clinical tests (percussion and palpation) and on the radiographic tests with a orthoradial PR (RVG Kodak 5100 Carestream Health, Rochester, NY, USA) performed with the Rinn set (Dentsply Rinn, Elgin, Illinois, USA) and the CBCT (Promax 3D Max, Planmeca; Fig. Additional file ).