A 48-year-old white woman presented to our hospital with enlargement of all groups of peripheral lymph nodes. Lymph nodes formed conglomerates in her left supraclavicular area (up to 6.0 cm in size) with trachea compression and stridor development, and conglomerates in her left femoral-inguinal area (up to 5.0 cm in size) with development of lymphostasis in her left leg. No systemic signs (fever, night sweats, and weight loss) developed. Her medical history was consistent with a 12-year course of SS. At the age of 36, she presented with recurrent polyarthralgia. Serological testing revealed rheumatoid factor at a 1:512 titer (Waaler-Rose test). Subsequently, she developed recurrent parotitis, dry eyes, dry mouth, and recurrent purpura. A contrast X-ray study of her parotid gland indicated parenchymal parotitis. A labial minor salivary gland biopsy showed marked focal lymphocytic sialadenitis with a focus score of 4 (>50 lymphocytes in the 4 mm2 tissue sample). Schirmer's test was positive (<1 mm in 5 minutes). Her anti-Ro/SS-A antibody level was 130 U/ml (normal range <5.0 U/ml). Based on the clinical, serological, and pathological features of SS and the absence of radiographic changes of rheumatoid arthritis, primary SS was diagnosed. Three years before admission, an increase was noted in her left supraclavicular lymph nodes. However, she refused to undergo an examination.
At the time of admission, a complete blood count showed a reduction of her hemoglobin level to 89 g/l. The remaining hemogram parameters were within normal limits. Blood chemistry revealed an increase of total protein to 120 g/l. Her serum lactate dehydrogenase level was normal, and her blood viscosity was 7.9 mPa second (normal range <5.3 mPa second). Antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were absent.
Blood immunochemistry studies revealed a massive M-gradient formed from IgAκ. Her serum monoclonal IgAκ paraprotein level was 72 g/l. Her polyclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) levels were reduced. A urine electrophoresis detected trace proteinuria with serum Aκ paraproteins and monoclonal free κ-type light chains, indicating Bence-Jones (BJ) proteins.
Chest and abdominal computed tomography revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes of her upper mediastinum, lung roots, abdominal cavity, and retroperitoneal space (merging into conglomerates of up to 6.5 cm in size), as well as enlargement of her liver and spleen. A skeletal X-ray revealed no bone destruction. Her myelogram revealed 1.6% plasma cells and 7.6% lymphocytes. Bone marrow histology showed no signs of plasma cell or lymphocyte infiltration.
A diagnostic biopsy of her cervical and inguinal lymph nodes was performed. The imprint cytology of lymph nodes showed plasma cells, some with distinct atypia . The same findings were revealed in the histological results of her neck and inguinal lymph nodes. The microarchitecture of the nodes was destroyed. Only small remnants of B cell follicles were found, while the interfollicular areas were expanded and infiltrated by plasmacytically differentiated cells . These cells were positive for CD138 , MuM1, and CD43 and expressed IgAκ . Several plasma cells were positive for CD79a, and some of the plasma cells co-expressed CD20. The plasmacytic infiltration remained negative for CD56, VS38c, BCL6, BCL2, cyclin-D1, and CD23. Germinal centers (CD10+) were not detectable. The proliferative rate (Ki67) reached almost 10%. Plasma cells were negative for human herpesvirus type 8 (HHV-8) and for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNA (in situ hybridization). Among the plasma cells, single macrophages and epithelioid histiocytes were noted, represented by granuloma-like small structures .
Based on the examination data, generalized lymph node plasmacytoma was diagnosed. Our patient received nine cycles of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone (CHOP) chemotherapy. Restaging showed complete remission. However, immunochemical serum and urine studies revealed a residual M-gradient, which was identified by immunofixation as Aκ, indicating residual disease. Three months after completion of chemotherapy the lymphoma relapsed. A 38.0 °C fever developed with rapid enlargement of all groups of lymph nodes (and the formation of conglomerates of up to 6.0 cm in size) and an increase of IgAκ paraprotein to 37.5 g/l. The paraprotein showed rheumatoid factor activity at a 1:81920 titer. BJκ-type protein and Aκ paraprotein reappeared in her urine. Her femoral lymph node was biopsied, and the histology results were similar to those of the primary biopsy. A histological and cytological examination of bone marrow was unremarkable. She received one course of lomustine, VePesid (etoposide), vinblastine, and dexamethasone (CEVD) chemotherapy, which produced an effect. However, she refused any further treatment.
After 19 months, she again complained of progressive weakness and weight loss. On examination, generalized enlargement of peripheral and visceral (up to 6.0 cm diameter) lymph nodes, her liver, and her spleen were found. Monoclonal IgAκ secretion reached a level of 44.5 g/L, and BJκ-type protein was found in her urine. A myelogram revealed 1.0% plasma cells and 18% lymphocytes. After one course of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, VePesid (etoposide), and prednisolone (CHOEP) chemotherapy, she refused further treatment. No chemotherapy was provided subsequently.
Over the next 16 years, a gradual reduction of her peripheral and visceral lymph nodes to normal size was noted. The lymph node size reduction correlated with a decrease in paraprotein levels to the current undetectable value (the changes in paraprotein levels are shown in Table ). A normal level of immunoglobulins was restored.
The unusual clinical course of the disease has prompted us to exclude the reactive nature of plasma cell infiltration.
We performed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of slices from paraffin blocks to analyze the gene rearrangements of heavy chains and kappa light chains of immunoglobulins. However, we failed to show monoclonal rearrangements of these genes. At the Department of Pathology, Hematopathology Section and Lymph Node Registry, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (Germany), immunohistochemistry of the lymph nodes was repeated, which confirmed the monotypic positivity of the plasma cells for the kappa light chains of immunoglobulins.