An 81-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of gastric SMT that was noted during an annual gastrointestinal examination. He had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and myocardial infraction treated with anticoagulant therapy, percutaneous intervention, and coronary artery bypass graft. His blood examination results were within normal range, but the tumor marker levels were high: carcinoembryonic antigen, 16.8 ng/mL (normal, <5.0 ng/mL) and α-fetoprotein (AFP), 83.5 ng/mL (normal, <10.0 ng/mL). Endoscopic examination of the gastrointestinal tract revealed SMT (approximately 30 mm in diameter) located at the lower gastric body and with erosion on the top of the tumor (A). Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed that the tumor presented as a well-defined hypoechoic mass (22 × 12 mm) arising from the submucosal layer of the stomach (B). Endoscopic biopsy of the erosion site revealed no malignancy. EUS-FNA and boring biopsy were performed. Histopathological evaluation revealed that the tumor had dense proliferation of larger atypical cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that these tumor cells were positive for Caudal-type homeobox-2 (CDX-2) and negative for synaptophysin and chromogranin A. These findings suggested that the SMT originated from a gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 30-mm tumor located in the gastric vestibule and an enlarged lymph node No. 6 (22 mm). Hence, the preoperative diagnosis was gastric carcinoma with lymph node metastasis.
We performed distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection and Roux-en-Y reconstruction after obtaining informed consent from the patient. The resected specimen showed a tumor (35 × 18 mm) located at the lower body of the stomach. Postoperative histopathological examination of the specimen revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with high lymphocyte proliferation in the peripheral tumor. Although the tumor invaded the muscularis propria, the tumor surface was covered with non-malignant epithelial mucosa . Moreover, immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that napsin and AFP were negatively expressed and CDX-2 was diffusely expressed. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded RNA-1 (EBER-1) in situ hybridization confirmed the absence of EBV in gastric tumor cells. Metastasis of the adenocarcinoma was found in 1 (No. 6) of 41 excised lymph nodes. The postoperative pathological stage was IIA (T2N1cM0), according to the Japanese classification of gastric cancer .
The patient was discharged on the postoperative day 19 without any complications. Although he refused adjuvant chemotherapy, no recurrence or metastasis occurred during the follow-up period of 18 months.