We present a case of a 65-year-old Caucasian man with Child-Pugh class A alcoholic cirrhosis diagnosed after a hospitalization due to esophageal variceal bleeding and portal hypertensive gastropathy. Since then, he had been seen in follow-up in a hepatology clinic and was prescribed propranolol 10 mg four times daily and advised to initiate alcohol withdrawal.
In a routine consult, his abdominal ultrasound (US) showed a cirrhotic liver with the presence of a hypoechogenic and heterogeneous nodule in the left lobe measuring approximately 7 cm with lymph nodes on the gastrohepatic omentum, the largest measuring 24 mm. The patient was asymptomatic. His physical examination revealed only hepatomegaly without evidence of ascites. His spleen was not palpable, and his peripheral lymph nodes were not enlarged. Initial laboratory findings showed normal hemoglobin level and leukocyte count, with mild thrombocytopenia (107 × 103/μl; normal range 150–350 × 103/μl). His international normalized ratio was slightly elevated (1.3; normal range 0.8–1.2). His liver function test results revealed small elevations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (37 U/L; normal range 5–34 U/L) and bilirubin (1.56 mg/dl; normal range < 1.2 mg/dl). His albumin levels were slightly decreased (3.3 g/dl; normal range 3.4–4.8 g/dl). Serologic test results for HBV, HCV, and HIV 1 and 2 were negative. The patient’s serum α-fetoprotein (AFP), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within normal range; his lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was normal, and his β2-microglobulin was slightly elevated (3.49 mg/L; normal range 0.97–2.64 mg/L). Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a cirrhotic and enlarged liver with a voluminous nodular lesion in the left lobe measuring 15.6 × 10.9 cm, along with isointense signals in both T1 and T2, showing minimal and heterogeneous enhancement after contrast administration; it also revealed some necrosis in the center of the lesion .
A percutaneous liver biopsy was performed. Histological findings revealed liver tissue infiltrated by DLBCL. The results of immunohistochemical staining were positive for CD45, CD20, Bcl6, and MUM-1 and negative for CD3, CD5, CD23, CD30, and cyclin 1. The proliferation factor measured by Ki67 was > 90% .
The patient was then referred to the hematology department for evaluation and treatment. He remained asymptomatic. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 0, and the finding of his physical examination was unremarkable. His bone marrow biopsy did not reveal lymphoma infiltration. Due to limitations in access to position emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) in our institution, PET/CT could only be performed after treatment initiation (first cycle), showing irregular liver uptake, mainly in the VIII/IV liver segments . A PHL diagnosis was made and classified as Ann Arbor stage IE. He was started on immunochemotherapy with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone), and six treatment cycles were planned.
The patient had several toxicities secondary to treatment. He developed intestinal mucositis (grade 2) after the first cycle and hospitalization due to febrile neutropenia (grade 3) with no identifiable microbiological cause after second and third cycles. Interim PET/CT was not performed. After the fifth cycle, he was hospitalized due to pneumonia requiring mechanical ventilation, and he died despite intensive medical care.