A 29-year-old woman from Xinjiang, China, presented with pitting edema of the lower extremities, without face or eyelid swelling, for a week and was admitted for further evaluation. The patient had no medical history of diabetes, hypertension, autoimmune diseases, infections, drugs, etc. No family history of renal diseases was reported. Her vital signs were normal and her physical examination was unremarkable except for the edema in lower extremities.
At the time of presentation, laboratory tests showed: urinary protein 4+, red blood cells 14.4/high-power field (HPF), white blood cells 13.8/HPF; 24 h urine protein, 3.8 g; serum albumin, 13.5 g/l; serum creatinine, 0.5 mg/dL; hemoglobin, 8.4 g/l; mean corpuscular volume (MCV), 67.3 fl (reference range, 82–100); mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), 17.2 pg (reference range, 27–34); mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), 255 g/L (reference range, 316–354); hematocrit, 0.329 L/L (reference range, 0.35–0.45); reticulocyte count, 0.83% (reference range, 0.5–1.5), serum iron, 6.6 umol/L (reference range, 7–30), while white blood cell counts and platelets were normal. Blood lipids were: cholesterol 8.49 mmol/L, triglyceride 1.77 mmol/L, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 5.72 mmol/L, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 1.38 mmol/L. Serologies, including anti-nuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA, ANCA and anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM), were negative. C3 and C4 levels were normal. Her hepatitis B and C virus and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative.
Light microscopy (LM) examined 14 glomeruli, none of which were globally sclerosed. Glomeruli were without morphologic abnormalities by LM . No tubular injury, as manifested by loss of brush border, blebs, vacuoles and regenerative changes, were observed. No tubulitis, interstitial inflammatory infiltration or fibrosis , and no arteriosclerosis or arteriolar hyalinosis were found. There was no vasculitis or thrombi.
Immunofluorescence (IF) analysis revealed deposits of IgG along the brush border of proximal tubular cells and some segments of TBM and Bowman’s capsule , with equal staining of κ and λ chains. A few segmental granular deposits of IgG were also observed along the GBM. Phospholipase-A2 receptor (PLA2R) staining was negative. Staining for IgG subclasses showed that IgG1 was present in the brush border of proximal tubular cells, TBM and GBM, with a distribution pattern consistent with IgG staining . IgG2, IgG3 and IgG4 were not detected. C3 stained positive along TBMs and Bowman’s capsule, with no obvious reactivity along tubular brush borders . IgA, IgM and C1q staining was negative. Immunohistochemistry for C4d revealed segmentally sparse deposits along GBM and TBM . LRP2 immunofluorescence (using rabbit antibody from Thermofisher, PA5–64182) was positive along the proximal tubular brush border and colocalized with IgG. No LRP2 was found along TBM and GBM . Indirect immunofluorescence using the patient’s serum (at a titer of 1:100) on a normal human kidney section showed positive staining along the proximal tubule brush border, while sera from patients with minimal change disease (MCD) and IgA nephropathy or from healthy subjects showed negative staining . Co-staining showed that the fluorescence from the patient’s serum colocalized with the LRP2 on a normal human kidney section . Detailed methods are provided in the .
Electron microscopy showed small granular electron-dense deposits within the proximal tubule TBMs , and podocyte foot process effacement. No deposits were found in subepithelial areas nor in the Bowman’s capsule .
The patient was treated with predinisolone plus intravenous CTX. The predinisolone was given at 1 mg/kg for 2 months, then was gradually tapered over 7 months. Intravenous CTX was used at a dose of 1 g, monthly for 6 months, then 1 g again 3 months later. Total CTX load was 7 g. Three months after the treatment, the patient achieved a complete remission, with negative proteinuria and a serum albumin level of 35 g/l. The serum creatinine was 0.5 mg/dl. The ABBA titer in serum decreased from 1:100 to 1:10 9 months after the therapy. Her hemoglobin increased to 12.2 g/l after oral iron therapy.