A 69-year old male patient was admitted having gross painless hematuria for the last 2 months with no other comorbidities, apart from benign prostatic hyperplasia treated with a-blockers. Ultrasound of the kidneys, the bladder and the prostate showed an exophytic lesion of the bladder and dilatation of the left pelvicaliceal system. Intravenous urography (IVU) showed a radiolucent filling defect in the bladder and a non functioning left kidney . The next diagnostic step was to perform a cystoscopy, which confirmed the presence of a lesion, occupying the trigone of the bladder and the left ureteral orifice. The patient was subjected to a transurethral resection of the lesion. The histopathological assessment revealed an infiltrative mucinous adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) , colonoscopy and gastroscopy revealed no other primary malignant site. Based on the pathology report, the patient underwent a radical cystoprostatectomy with en block bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy and urinary diversion with a Bricker ileostomy.
The specimen of radical cystoprostatectomy included the urinary bladder with pericystic fatty tissue and the prostate gland. On section, a tumour was identified, measuring in the greatest dimension 3 cm. The tumour was localized in the posterior bladder wall and had an exophytic growth pattern with solid (nodular) appearance. It seemed to invade the wall of the bladder, extending to the proximal urethral margin of the prostate.
The grossly described tumour is a primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder, which invades the wall of the bladder, both lobes of the prostate gland and both seminal vesicles. We did not recognize normal urothelium with intestinal metaplasia. The carcinoma includes glandular configurations, having one cell layer of cuboidal or columnar epithelium with large, dark nuclei, signet-ring cells , nuclear atypia and several mitoses . The reactivity for PAS and PAS-diastase establishes the presence of intracellular and extracellular mucin . The primary nature of adenocarcinoma is confirmed by the immunoreactivity for keratins 7 and 20 .