In a 58-year-old man with a history of arterial hypertension and mild hypercholesterolaemia, an aortic ectasia was detected during an echocardiogram performed to evaluate for hypertension-related preclinical cardiac damage and, due to this finding, echocardiographic follow-up was suggested. Three years later, the patient was admitted for coronary angiography (CA) after the computed tomography (CT) finding of a suspected occlusion of the LM with collateral circulation from RCA to LAD and Cx . The indication for CT consisted of providing a more precise evaluation of the ascending aorta tracts which were not adequately explored by echocardiography. The patient was asymptomatic despite an active lifestyle and the physical examination was unremarkable. Cardiac auscultation revealed that cardiac sounds were rhythmic and no additional sounds (3rd or 4th sound) or bruits were audible; peripheral pulses were palpable, and no vascular bruits were heard as well as no clinical signs of heart failure were observed. Electrocardiogram was normal. Echocardiogram showed left ventricular concentric remodelling with normal systolic function (ejection fraction 65%), dilatation of the ascending aorta (45 mm) and a tricuspid aortic valve with mild aortic regurgitation. Routine laboratory tests were within normal limits.
CA showed LMCA as demonstrated by contrast injection into the left sinus of Valsalva . The left coronary artery was retrogradely supplied from the RCA through Rentrop 3 grade coronary collaterals whose calibre was similar to that of the target left-sided vessels (, Video 1). No obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) was detected. In order to exclude potential myocardial ischaemia, a technetium-tetrofosmin cardiac single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) was performed during maximal exercise-stress testing, which did not show a perfusion defect . During weekly Heart Team meetings, preventative CABG was not deemed to be indicated since the patient was asymptomatic, without evidence of inducible ischaemia. The patient was discharged with targeted medical therapy to prevent atherosclerosis of this single coronary artery. Clinical follow-up with periodic transthoracic echocardiograms was planned; however, with the plan to follow-up earlier in the case of new symptom development. At 9-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and in a stable clinical condition.