A 78-year-old male presented with progressive exertional breathlessness (New York Heart Association Functional Classification 3). He had previously undergone surgical MV repair with a 34 mm Edwards Physio II annuloplasty ring (Edwards Lifesciences, California, USA) for severe MR in 2016 together with tricuspid valve repair. The operation was complicated by bleeding at 48 h and required redo sternotomy. Transoesophageal echocardiography now revealed localized, posteromedial dehiscence of the annuloplasty ring . There was severe MR with two large jets; one para-ring jet passing through the dehiscence (vena contracta area of 0.23 cm2) and one trans-ring jet passing through the centre of the ring (vena contracta area 0.53 cm2) ( and Video 1 and 2). Right heart catheterization showed a pulmonary artery pressure of 50/22 mmHg, mean of 32 mmHg, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 20 mmHg. The patient was considered at prohibitive risk for redo open heart surgery and the patient also firmly declined this option. Edge-to-edge repair was considered, however, anatomy of the MV leaflets was deemed unfavourable due to inadequate length of the posterior leaflet.
After discussion with the Heart Team, a transseptal mitral ViR repair was planned with a subsequent percutaneous intervention to correct MR through the dehiscence with a vascular occlusion device. On computed tomography the annuloplasty ring had internal dimensions of 33 mm × 22 mm and the neo left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) area was 350 mm2 with a 29 mm prosthesis thus considered low risk for LVOT obstruction. Under general anaesthesia, the patient underwent ViR TMVI via transseptal approach with a balloon-expandable 29 mm Edwards Sapien 3 THV (Edwards Lifesciences). The THV was successfully implanted with 5 mL overfilling of the deployment balloon ( and Video 3). Transoesophageal echocardiography showed elimination of the trans-ring regurgitation (as expected) and surprisingly showed reduction of para-ring regurgitation to a minor, haemodynamically insignificant jet ( and ). The procedure was uncomplicated with no evidence of LVOT obstruction and the patient was discharged the following day. At 3-month follow-up, repeat transthoracic echocardiography revealed no trans-ring MR and only mild para-ring MR that required no further intervention. At 6-month follow-up the patient reported significant symptomatic improvement.