An 18-year-old, gravida 0, white woman presented to an ED with acute lower abdominal pain. The pain began gradually during her strenuous sporting practice hours earlier, limiting her ability to participate. She localized the pain to her lower abdomen, describing it both as similar to menstrual cramps and reminiscent of her appendicitis 3 years ago. Hours later, she experienced nausea and emesis. She found pain relief when crouching, exacerbation during emesis and micturition, and no relief with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
She was previously healthy and physically active, with no surgical history besides an uncomplicated appendectomy. Menarche was at 12-years old and her menstrual cycles were regular, not painful, and occurred every 60 days. She was previously sexually active, with no history of sexually transmitted infections. Her last menstrual period was 7 months prior to her current symptoms. She had a 3-year history of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) use for contraception. Her family and social history were otherwise non-contributory.
On examination, both her lower abdominal quadrants were severely tender to light and deep palpation, without rigidity, rebound tenderness, or palpable masses. A pelvic examination was not performed. She was afebrile; her vital signs were age appropriate and stable. A complete blood count showed an elevated white blood cell count at 16.4×103/μL (reference range 3.8 to 11.0) with no left shift on automated differential. Her pregnancy test was negative. The ED provider listed menstrual cramps as the main differential diagnosis at the time and she was sent for pelvic ultrasonography.
Transabdominal and transvaginal pelvic ultrasound was performed and her uterus was measured to be 7.1×4.6×5.4 cm. The endometrium was distended with homogenous echogenic fluid. No discrete mass or congenital anomaly was identified. Her left and right ovaries were of appropriate size with normal echotexture and blood flow bilaterally. She was discharged home with next day Obstetrics and Gynecology (OB/GYN) follow-up and no new findings were reported on subsequent examination. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. ) was then performed which revealed a fluid-filled endometrial cavity and endocervical canal; however, the canal appeared to be non-dilated at 1 to 2 mm. Hematometra was suspected at this time. Again, there were no discrete obstructing mass or congenital anomaly identified on imaging.
She was scheduled for hysteroscopy followed by fractional dilatation and curettage under general anesthesia. During the procedure, her cervix was sequentially dilated up to 8 mm using a Hegar dilator. Her cervix did not appear to be constricted. A large amount of old bloody material was expelled from her cervix upon dilation and after entrance into her uterine cavity with a hysteroscope. The old bloody material was washed out with sterile saline. Her uterine lining could then be visualized and was noted to be pale and thin, consistent with her history of DMPA use. Both ostia were present and there were no masses or other abnormalities upon visualization. Dilation and curettage by endocervical and endometrial curettings was performed and tissue was sent for pathology. She tolerated the procedures well.
The pathology of her endocervix showed normal benign tissue. The endometrium showed benign inactive to weakly proliferative endometrium and the lower uterine segment had scattered plasma cells consistent with chronic endometritis along with patchy mild nonspecific acute inflammation.
Her symptoms were resolved by the procedure and her 6-month follow-up showed no recurrence of hematometra or other complications. Her DMPA was discontinued at the same time and she switched to oral contraception.