A 63-year-old female sustained left knee pain and activity limitation after falling off an electric bicycle. Details of the injury situation were unclear. The doctor of the local hospital ignored the intra-articular fragment, and the provided treatment included plaster immobilization, elevation to decreases welling, and oral analgesics to alleviate pain. After conservative treatment for 7 days, she was transferred to our department. We found obvious swelling of left knee, positive local tenderness. Plain radiographs and computer tomography (CT) showed a posterolateral split and collapse type fracture of the tibial plateau (Schatzker type II) and a large isolated fracture fragment in the patellofemoral compartment . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed injuries to the anterior cruciate ligament and lateral meniscus, but no damage to the medial or lateral collateral ligaments or the posterior cruciate ligament. In addition, severe bone contusions could be seen on the lateral femoral condyle, lateral tibial plateau, and in the fibula head .
The patient underwent operation on the second day after admission . The lateral knee approach was adopted (the incision starts at the level of the middle of the patella, 3 cm outside of the patella, and extends the incision downwards while continuing to flex the knee joint, to above the Gerdy tubercle of the tibia and 4–5 cm away from the joint line) and the fracture fragment behind the patella was removed. Partial compression of the articular cartilage surface was found, and the fracture fragment exactly matched with posterolateral tibial plateau . After anatomical reduction, two headless, cannulated, partially threaded screws (diameter 3.0 mm, Zimmer) were applied from proximal to distal, and freeze-dried cancellous allografts were introduced to the defect via a bone window and impacted with tamp to resist collapse of the articular surface. Because of the posterolateral split and collapse of the tibial plateau, the bone window was designed laterally above the tibial tuberosity which did not disturb the reconstruction of the ACL. Then, an anatomic lateral proximal tibia plate (Zimmer) was used to achieve surgical fixation . We used double-looped semitendinosus and gracilis to reconstruct the anterior cruciate ligament and an all-inside technique to repair the lateral meniscus. The incision was closed, and the patient returned to the wards. One week after surgery, the patient was discharged to home with non-weight-bearing advice, and the knee was immobilized with a hinged range-of-motion brace at 20° of flexion. After 4 weeks, the knee brace was removed, and range of motion exercises were initiated. However, the non-weight-bearing was continued for 12 weeks.
At the 12-month follow-up, the patient was walking with no pain. Through physical examination, good knee joint stability under anterior, posterior, valgus, and varus stress was confirmed, and the range of motion of the knee joint was 0°–120°.