A 61-year-old man was admitted to the Emergency Department immediately after he experienced global aphasia and right-sided hemiparesis. The clinical diagnosis of acute cerebral ischaemia in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory was made by a neurologist. A cranial CT-scan showed no early signs of cerebral infarct and no intracranial bleeding. Atrial fibrillation was recognised on the initial ECG and an cerebral infarct of cardiac embolic origin was assumed. The patient had no history of stroke but suffered from coronary heart disease and sustained an anterior cardiac wall infarction in the past. Further known vascular risk factors were hypertension and smoking. Even so, the patient took no medication at the time of admission.
Thrombolysis with 70 mg rt-PA (0.9 mg/kg) was started two hours after the onset of symptoms. The neurological status during and after rt-PA treatment remained unchanged. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) performed 12 hours after initiation of thrombolytic therapy revealed a moderately reduced left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction: 41%), left ventricular regional dyssynergy, and no intracardiac thrombus.
The D-Dimer antigen plasma concentration as a marker of coagulation activation was raised 24 hours after rt-PA treatment and showed a tendency to normalisation during the following days.
Extracranial Duplexsonography revealed moderate arteriosclerotic plaque formation in the carotid bulb on both sides but no hemodynamic stenosis of the carotid and vertebral arteries. Using transcranial duplexsonography a severe stenosis was found in the proximal segment of the left middle cerebral artery. No diabetes or hyperlipidaemia were diagnosed. Cerebral MRI, twenty-four hours after lysis revealed a cortical infarct with a clinically asymptomatic haemorrhagic transformation in the left-sided MCA territory. Antithrombotic treatment with subcutaneous low-dose heparin (Dalteparin 2/d) was initiated 24 hours after thrombolysis. The fluid balance was continuously monitored and kept net 0 ml/24 hours to avoid fluid overload.
On the 3rd day after admission, the patient developed acute dyspnea, tachypnea, tachycardia, and an elevated blood pressure. Acute myocardial infarction was excluded on the basis of ECG and blood tests (CK, CK-MB, Troponin were normal). A CT-scan detected no pulmonary embolism, but massive bilateral pleural effusion. TTE revealed an apical thrombus measuring 2.0 × 2.0 cm in the left ventricle with left ventricular ejection fraction reduced to 20%. The thrombus, was fixed to the hypokinetic anteroseptal wall. Serial TTE performed two days later revealed complete resolution of the thrombus and hypokinesia; with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40%. In the mean time the patient recovered from the acute cardiac decompensation. The neurological clinical picture remained stable during the acute phase with a slight improvement of aphasia and hemiparesis within the following 5 weeks.