A 72-year-old male patient presented to our department, complaining of blurred vision in his only seeing left eye (LE). The patient’s right eye was lost to a childhood accident. Visual acuity (VA) in the LE was 1/10 Snellen and a complete ophthalmologic examination revealed a pseudophakic, macula split superior RRD extending linearly from 11th to 5th clock hour with a single retinal break at the superior temporal quadrant. We proceeded into a 25 G pars plana vitrectomy, endolaser photocoagulation to seal off the retinal break and SO tamponade of 1,200 cs. The patient was instructed to keep face-down head posturing for 24 h postoperatively and on a regime of 8 h per day for the following 6-day period, divided into 4 h in the morning and as many hours in the afternoon, as well as to avoid supine position overnight.
Regular examination visits were performed, based on protocol, and color fundus pictures as well as spectral domain (SD) OCT and OCT-angiography were acquired at each visit. At 1 week postoperatively, VA was 5/10 with flat retina and a shallow layer of SRF spread across the line of the former detachment . In the following examinations, VA gradually decreased to 3/10 and to 1/10 at 2 and 3 months postoperatively, respectively, accompanied by severe metamorphopsia. The gradual visual loss was accompanied by the disorganization of the retinal layers and the late development of inner RFs and ORFs, along with the formation of an epiretinal membrane (ERM) (, ). The RFs had mixed features of “ripple” and “taco” morphology and, of note, showed signs of aggravation over time. Additionally, RFs were observed in various topographic points of the macular region, not necessarily corresponding to the oblique line of the preexistent retinal detachment. The aggressive deterioration of the retina’s architecture and the rapid decline of VA dictated the removal of SO at 3 months following the primary repair combined with ERM and internal limiting membrane peeling. Despite the fact that the SO removal and ERM/internal limiting membrane peeling appeared beneficial for both VA and retinal layer architecture, there was only a mild positive effect on ORFs by withholding their aggravation without promoting their resolution. In fact, the combination of “taco” and “ripple” types persisted (, ).
In OCT-angiography, a signal reduction is noted at the level of the choriocapillaries along the “taco” ORF and the SRF beneath it, presenting an improvement over a period of 5 months (, ). Τhe fundus image of the post-SΟ removal period depicts the lesions corresponding to the ORFs . We may observe that these lesions appear to be vertical to the RRD which, as mentioned above, extended superotemporally from 11th to 5th o’clock. That would be yet another point, along with the SD-OCT findings, to reveal that RFs may not have occurred in the immediate postoperative period.
Another site of SRF could be found superonasally to the macula, proximal to the superior temporal vascular arcade with more of the “ripple” type ORFs nearby . The persistent pockets of SRF may have contributed to the RFs formation under the presence of SO or, alternatively, be associated with the remission of the folds and IS/OS changes. SD-OCT indicated a hypo-reflective gap between the IS/OS and the retinal pigment epithelium .
In the long-term follow-up examinations in our case, the RFs have either partially settled down or disappeared (, , –) without any intervention, leaving minor defects in the IS/OS. Such was identified for both the “taco” as well as the “ripple” type of ORFs.