A 32-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with a chief complaints of persistent upper abdomen pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting for 2 d. He developed chest tightness and shortness of breath twice during treatment.
The patient, who had a high-fat diet and heavy drinking habit, had experienced persistent upper abdomen pain radiating to his back for two days, accompanied by nausea and vomiting. He had no fever, dyspnea, cough, expectoration, chest pain, or other discomfort. He was diagnosed with AP. Five hours after admission, he developed chest tightness and shortness of breath. On day 4 of admission, his dyspnea gradually improved after treatment. Subsequently, the patient’s body temperature peaked and gradually decreased, his abdominal pain was significantly relieved, and his intestinal function was also restored. On day 12 of admission, the patient developed chest tightness and shortness of breath again, accompanied by profuse sweating and conscious indifference. Unfortunately, the patient suffered cardiac arrest.
The patient had a history of obesity [Body mass index (BMI): 33.8 kg/m2]. He denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, tuberculosis, thromboembolic disease, drug use, or any other medical disease.
The patient had been consuming about 160 g of alcohol every day for 10 years and had been smoking 20 cigarettes every day for 20 years. No family members had similar diseases.
The patient’s vital signs on admission were as follows: temperature: 37.2 °C; heart rate: 117 beats per minute; respiratory rate: 18 breaths per minute; and blood pressure: 118/78 mmHg. The entire abdomen was flat and soft. Tenderness was obvious in the upper abdomen, but there was no rebound pain. We could not hear the patient’s bowel sounds.
Five hours after admission, he developed chest tightness and shortness of breath for the first time. He developed a fever, and his body temperature fluctuated between 38.7 and 38.9 °C. His heart rate and respiratory rate quickened, fluctuating between 130 and 140 beats per minute and 30 and 37 breaths per minute, respectively. His blood pressure was normal. On day 4 of admission, the patient’s body temperature peaked and gradually decreased, and there was no tenderness or rebound pain in the upper abdomen.
On day 12 of admission, the patient developed chest tightness and shortness of breath again. The patient’s vital signs were as follows: heart rate, 130 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 29 breaths per minute; temperature, 38.7 °C; blood pressure, 129/79 mmHg; and pulse oximetry, 46%. Immediately afterward, the patient fell unconscious, his heart rate slowed, and his pulse oximetry continued to drop. Unfortunately, the patient suffered cardiac arrest. After 4 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient achieved a return to spontaneous circulation, and his heart rate and oxygen saturation recovered to 143 beats per minute and 95%, respectively. Over the next few hours, the patient’s oxygen saturation levels decreased to 84%–92%, and his blood pressure started to decrease despite receiving up to 40 mcg/min of norepinephrine and 67 mg/h of dopamine hydrochloride. On day 18 of admission, the patient was conscious and had stable vital signs.
On admission, his amylase level was 201 U/L. A further examination revealed triglycerides of 26.57 mmol/L. Five hours after admission, his white blood cell count was 18.8 × 109/L with 87.6% neutrophils. His C-reactive protein level was high (314.3 mg/L). His pressure of arterial oxygen to fractional inspired oxygen concentration (PaO2/FiO2) was 263. Arterial blood gas (ABG) measurements showed a potential of hydrogen (pH) of 7.31, a partial pressure of oxygen of 87 mmHg, a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 41 mmHg, bicarbonate level of 20.2 mmol/L and lactic acid level of 4.0 mmol/L at an oxygen ﬂow rate of 3 L/min nasal cannula. Plasma dimerized plasmin fragment D (D dimer) levels were 1.55 mg/L. His brain natriuretic peptide and troponin levels were normal.
On day 12 of admission, his ABG measurements were as follows: pH: 7.18, pCO2: 74 mmHg, pO2: 63 mmHg, bicarbonate: 20.2 mmol/L and lactic acid: 2.6 mmol/L. His PaO2/FiO2 was 140. The patient’s D-dimer level was significantly elevated (> 20 mg/L) and began to decline until day 18 of admission (17.42 mg/L), and the D-dimer level was 2.65 mg/L at discharge. On day 16 of admission, the patient’s platelet count decreased (Lowest value: 23 × 109/L) but recovered to 112 × 109/L at discharge.
The test results for antinuclear antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) and thrombophilia screen for antithrombin III, protein C, and protein S deficiency were negative. The results for factor VIII, factor IX, factor XI, plasminogen activity, and homocysteine were normal. The genetic test results for the prothrombin gene mutation, factor V Leiden, and the mutation of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene were negative.
After admission, computed tomography (CT) scans of his upper abdomen were consistent with pancreatitis .
On day 12 of admission, the patient’s electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 145 beats per minute . Chest X-ray revealed exudative changes in the left lung . Doppler echocardiography revealed that his right atrium was enlarged, and his artery systolic pressure was 30 mmHg.
On day 14 of admission, PE was identified by chest CT angiography (CTA) involving the right main pulmonary artery and multiple lobar pulmonary arteries . Color Doppler ultrasound of the upper limbs, lower limbs, and abdomen did not show thrombosis. Partial resolution of thrombosis was documented on follow-up chest CTA .