We present the case of an 87-year-old male with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis. He described progressive exertional dyspnoea (New York Heart Association Class III).
Medical history included hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and ischaemic heart disease with coronary artery bypass grafting and subsequent percutaneous coronary intervention to both saphenous vein grafts. He presented with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, left hemispheric stroke in 2013, and peripheral vascular disease. He required aorto-bi-iliac kissing stents (Genesis, Cordis, Santa Clara, CA, USA) in 2009, followed by EndoVascular Aortic Repair (EVAR) in 2011 for severe aortoiliac occlusive disease using AFX (Endologix, Irvine, CA, USA). The patient lived independently with a Katz index of 6/6.
On presentation, he was euvolemic without evidence of peripheral oedema. He had a loud harsh systolic murmur which peaked mid systole and radiated to the right carotid artery. He was apyrexial with a blood pressure of 119/58 and a heart rate of 69. His respiratory rate was 16 with oxygen saturation of 96% on room air.
Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed severe aortic stenosis with a mean transvalvular gradient of 65 mmHg and an aortic valve area 0.67 cm2. Left ventricular function was preserved.
Multi-slice computed tomography was performed for TAVI planning. This revealed bilateral circumferential calcification with 4 mm luminal diameter in both external iliac arteries. A heavily calcified iliofemoral vasculature was noted with maximum lumen diameters of 4.2 mm (right) and 4.3 mm (left), a small right subclavian artery of 4.5 mm, and a bovine aortic arch with left vertebral artery arising from the aortic arch, and occluded left subclavian artery . The left common carotid artery was calcified with 70% left internal carotid artery stenosis . Otherwise, the aortic root anatomy was suitable for implantation of a 29 mm CoreValve Evolut PRO (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The ankle-brachial indexes were 0.45 bilaterally. The patient’s risk assessment demonstrated a EuroSCORE II of 17.10% and a Society of Thoracic Surgeons predicted risk of mortality of 7.9%.
The patient was discussed by the Institutional Heart Team and was declined surgical aortic valve replacement. A conservative management strategy was considered but ultimately TAVI was suggested due to debilitating symptoms.
Since transfemoral TAVI was precluded we opted for transcarotid access. Although the minimal lumen diameter of the left common carotid artery was 7.3 mm in our patient, he had a 70% stenosis of the left carotid artery with history of stroke. Hence, we opted to perform left transcarotid vascular access with the possibility to proceed to CEA in case of arterial disruption.
Under general anaesthesia, cerebral regional oxygenation was monitored using the INVOS (Medtronic) Near InfraRed Spectrometry system. Right radial access was achieved and a pig tail angiographic catheter positioned in the aortic arch. The left common carotid artery was exposed through a longitudinal cervical incision along the anterior border of sternocleidomastoid . A Vessel-Clude (Medica Europe BV, Eindhoven, Netherlands) surrounded the carotid artery and a 6 Fr sheath was initially introduced and was subsequently upsized over a stiff guidewire to a 20 Fr sheath (Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA). An intravenous bolus of 5500 IU of heparin was administered to achieve an activated clotting time of >300 s and a multi-purpose angled clamp was placed on the common carotid artery, cranial to the introducer sheath, below the carotid bifurcation.
The aortic valve was subsequently crossed and a stiff guidewire placed in left ventricle (Safari, Boston Scientific, MA, USA). Balloon aortic valvuloplasty was performed due to the severely calcified nature of the aortic valve with an 18 mm NuMED balloon (NuMED Inc., Hopkinton, NY, USA) under rapid ventricular pacing. A 34 mm CoreValve Evolut Pro (Medtronic) transcatheter heart valve was positioned at a depth of 3 mm and deployed . A 34 mm CoreValve Evolut Pro transcatheter heart valve was chosen due to its low delivery profile and its indication to treat an annulus up to 30 mm. Aortography demonstrated moderate paravalvular leak and hence post-dilatation was performed with a 26 mm NuMED balloon . This resolved the paravalvular leak to trivial and the final peak-to-peak transvalvular gradient was 3 mmHg.
On removal of the vascular access sheath and closure of the arteriotomy, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed no run off in the distal internal carotid artery . Through the same longitudinal incision, a routine left CEA without shunting was performed. The carotid was dissected in a plane anterior to the internal jugular vein, preserving venous branches. The common carotid, external carotid, and internal carotid arteries were clamped in sequence and angled to lateralize the arteriotomy plane so that the closure line would lie away from the oesophagus. An arteriotomy was performed extending from the common carotid artery to the internal carotid artery as far as the termination of the carotid plaque. A plane of dissection in the vessel wall media was initiated and the plaque removed using a Watson-Cheyne endarterectomy tool. The endarterectomy plane was cleaned removing residual tissue in the axial direction. No tacking sutures were required and the arteriotomy was closed primary for fear of patch infection. The arterial clamps were removed in sequence from the external, common, and internal carotid arteries. Completion DSA showed normal blood flow to the brain without dissection flap .
The patient was immediately extubated and transferred to the high dependency unit. A temporary transvenous pacemaker was left in situ for 24 h due to the presence of a new left bundle branch block (QRS duration 150 ms). The patient was discharged home after 72 h on aspirin 75 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg. He was last reviewed 6 months postoperatively and was well from both cardiac and neurological perspectives.