A 43-year-old female presented with recurrent subcutaneous mass in the left superolateral orbital region . The mass has been present since she was 4 years old, and there have been no episodes of local infections. She had a history of partial resection of this mass at another department 2 years ago, where only subcutaneous component of the cyst was ligated and resected. Pathological diagnosis was dermoid cyst. In 2 years’ follow-up, she developed a recurrent mass in the same region. Due to her active asthma and the history of adverse events that occurred after contrast MR imaging, contrast imaging studies were not performed. CT and MR imaging showed a subcutaneous mass with possible continuity to the Sylvian cistern by a tract in the sphenoid ridge and lesser wing of the sphenoid bone [ and ]. As 2 years have passed since the initial surgery, we speculated the lesion had already penetrated the subarachnoid space through the dura based on the preoperative imaging. While she had no headache or showed any signs of neurological deficits, we decided to reset the mass and the tract to prevent further recurrence.
She underwent frontotemporal craniotomy. When musculocutaneous flap was retracted, the cyst duct was inadvertently damaged, resulting in spill out of greasy and whitish yellow cyst content . The tumor was relatively large and fanning toward the skin, suggesting that dissection of the tumor through the temporal muscle and fascia could lead to damage to the frontal branch of the facial nerve. We thus cut the cyst duct and followed the duct toward the bone and to the dura. The duct looked ending in a blind pouch at the surface of the dura near the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. As the lumen was exposed, yellowish debris and hair were appreciated. Intradural space was then carefully inspected and showed no evidence of lesion continuity. Finally, the remaining extracranial mass was totally resected with careful inspection of the facial nerve using a nerve stimulator.
The resected specimens showed a cystic lesion filled with keratinized debris and a ductal structure which was connected to the cyst. The cyst wall was lined by a stratified squamous epithelium similar to epidermis. It contained adnexa of skin, such as sebaceous glands and sweat glands . As for the transitional segment from the cystic lesion and the dura, histiocytes infiltration and hyalinized dura were appreciated, with no dermoid components. Consequently, dermoid cyst and sinus tract were diagnosed.
The patient developed mild facial palsy of the corrugator supercilii. House and Brackmann grade was 2. She was discharged home 8 days after operation with modified Rankin scale of 1. At 6 months after the second surgery, she was free of recurrence clinically and radiologically.