A 10-year-old girl presented with a 4-month history of neck pain which was dull, aching, constantly extending from mid-portion to occipital region without any features suggestive of radiculopathy, and increased with extremes of flexion and rotation. There was no history of trauma, fever, or neck rigidity. Although there was no associated neurological weakness, we could elicit local tenderness on the rotation of the spinous process. The neck pain was relieved with support like a collar. A plain radiograph revealed a suspicious radiolucent lesion with sclerosis involving the fifth cervical (C5) vertebral body . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a T1W hypointense and T2W heterogeneous lesion in C5 vertebral body with mild peripheral enhancement on contrast-enhanced T1-fat suppressed sagittal (-). There were no associated soft-tissue shadows. Her routine blood investigations for infection screening were within normal limits (total leukocyte count: 7,000 cells/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 10 mm/first hour, and C-reactive protein: 0.6 mg/dL). A complete skeletal survey and an abdomen ultrasound were also negative for any multifocal lesion. Considering the anterior positioning of the spinal lesion, a mini-open biopsy was planned.
An inch oblique incision was placed over the C5 vertebra, and a true cut biopsy was obtained using Jamshidi needle (mention size) under fluoroscopic guidance. The tissue was sent for microbial culture and histopathological examination (HPE). Cultures for pyogenic organisms, tuberculosis and fungi showed no growth. HPE showed a benign fibro-osseous lesion comprising of lymphomononuclear inflammatory cell collections admixed with scattered histiocytic cells with grooved and folded nuclei . On immunohistochemistry (IHC), the histiocytes with grooved nuclei showed weak staining, thus confirming the Langerhan cells. Histomorphology, in correlation with IHC, were in favor of LCH (EG) . The patient was reassured, sent home with an advice to wear a soft collar, and prescribed analgesics for 3 weeks. There was no restriction of activities thereafter. At 1-year follow-up, she was pain-free with a full range of movement ( and ). The X-ray showed a partial collapse with complete remodeling and ongoing fusion ( and ). No further MRI was done in as patient was asymptomatic and X-ray showed sclerosis of vertebral body with ongoing fusion. (why not? You should comment the reason.)