A 21-year-old male reported with a diffuse swelling and pain in the lower right posterior region of jaw for 4 months. Pain was dull and intermittent with increase in difficulty during eating and speech. The patient gave a history of extraction 1 month before for the same complaint, but there was no relief. After 2 months, growth appeared intraorally. Medical history was non-contributory.
Extraoral examination revealed a diffuse swelling on the right side of mandible, extending anteroposteriorly from 1 cm behind angle of mouth to angle of mandible. Superoinferiorly, 2 cm below line drawn from angle of mouth to tragus of ear to 4 cm below lower border of mandible roughly measuring around 5 cm × 4 cm in size. Skin over swelling appeared normal on inspection and firm and tender on palpation. Right submandibular lymph node was palpable, enlarged, firm to hard, and fixed . Intraoral examination revealed a soft tissue growth along the right side of mandibular arch. It extended from first premolar to retromolar region causing obliteration of buccal and lingual vestibule. Overlying mucosa was red. Surface appeared smooth with areas of depression at places .
Radiographic evaluation included panoramic radiograph, occlusal radiograph, and cone beam CT. Panoramic radiograph revealed an ill-defined mixed radiolucent and radiopaque lesion along the right side of body of mandible denoting irregular areas of osteolysis . The cross-sectional occlusal radiograph of the right side of body of mandible showed bicortical expansion and presence of radial spicules which spread outside the lingual side of jaw bone giving sunray appearance . Aspiration was done which gave yellowish viscous blood tinged fluid. Based on clinical and radiological findings, the provisional diagnosis of malignancy of right side of the mandible, hemangioma, and osteosarcoma was given.
The incisional biopsy revealed osteoid tissue with irregular trabeculae with osteoblasts which were large round to oval, epithelioid in appearance with hyperchromatic nucleus and prominent nucleoli and occasional atypical mitoses. Intertrabecular areas showed solid cellular stroma. As the biopsy was incisional, tumor border cannot be traced. Hence, the diagnosis was given as aggressive osteoblastoma/Osteoblastoma like osteosarcoma. Lesion was excised. Grossly, there was extensive soft tissue destruction with an associated soft tissue mass .
The histopathology revealed abundance of osteoid and tumor bone without osteoblastic rimming suggestive of osteoblastic osteosarcoma . Other areas showed fibrous spindle cell areas where osteoid or tumor bone was scarce i.e. (fibroblastic/fibrohistiocytic type ). At focal places, vessels were numerous, dilated and proliferating giving a haemangiopericytomatous appearance (Staghorn type appearance).