A man in his 80s presented with 2 years of recurrent cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the left temple with zygomatic bone metastasis. He also had significant unilateral hearing loss secondary to perineural involvement. The 2 years of therapy preceding evaluation in our oncodermatology clinic is described below. In addition to Mohs micrographic surgery, the patient had also received two rounds of adjuvant radiotherapy. In the first round of radiotherapy, the patient received a total dose of 5000 cGy in 25 fractions delivered with 3D conformation irradiation to the tumor bed and facial nodal basins. Eight months later, a bony metastasis of the mandible led to another 5000 cGy dose, which was delivered in 25 fractions using intensity-modulated irradiation tracking along the V2 branch of the trigeminal nerve to the ipsilateral skull base and encompassing the cavernous sinus. Yet another bony metastasis was discovered 5 months later, at which time he consented to 5 cycles of off-label, palliative, compassionate-use nivolumab monotherapy. However, following 2 months of nivolumab treatment, repeat MRI showed continued tumor progression. At this time he presented to our clinic complaining of a 3 week history of a rapidly enlarging painful nodule over his left zygoma. Tumor genomic analysis of the nodule using next-generation sequencing (FoundationOne®, Cambridge, MA) revealed a somatic missense (R135C) mutation in the ERBB3/HER3 gene, as well as multiple other mutations and a high tumor mutation burden (75 mutations per megabase).
In an effort to target the ERBB3/HER3 mutation, therapy with 1,250 mg of lapatinib daily in combination with 240 mg nivolumab every 2 weeks was initiated. Additional tumor debulking in conjunction with cryotherapy to the base of the lesion was performed by our Mohs surgeon. Significant improvement in the clinical size of the lesion was noted after 2 months of lapatinib therapy. After 6 months, there was continued clinical improvement and MRI showed significant regression of muscle, nerve, and bone involvement . The patient experienced a significant decrease in narcotic pain medication dependence and improvement in hearing of the ipsilateral ear. Other than fatigue, he experienced no side effects from this therapy.