A 50-year-old man, with a known MTHFR homozygous genetic mutation and recent minor stroke underwent percutaneous PFO closure at another institute. After transoesophageal echo showing mild interatrial septal bulging with a tunnel-like PFO, clinicians planned a suture-based NobleStitch EL (Kardia, Italy) closure procedure .
This unique device consists of two dedicated suture delivery catheters to capture and suture the septum secundum and the septum primum using a polypropylene suture. A third element, the KwiKnot™ catheter (HeartStitch, Inc.), is advanced over the septum secundum and septum primum sutures to approximate both septa, achieving closure by securing the stitch and trimming the excess suture material. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) performed after PFO closure showed significant residual right-to-left (R-L) shunt, unchanged in severity at 1- and 3-months of follow-up. The treating physician suggested for a TTE 6 months later, leaving the patient on single antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/daily).
At 9 months of follow-up, after evidence of persistent severe R-L shunt at contrast-TTE , the patient, still on aspirin alone treatment, asked for a second opinion consultation. On consultation, patient was in good clinical conditions and physical examination was unremarkable. The consultant physician asked for a 3D echo showing interatrial septal bulging together with the persistence in place of one of the polypropylene sutures attached to the septum primum, together with the Kwiknot . The patient was not allergic to nitinol and without contraindications to permanent metallic device implantation. Therefore, a device-based PFO closure was planned by bilateral femoral vein approach under intracardiac echo guidance (ICE; 9 F, 9-MHz Ultra ICE; EP Technologies, Boston Scientific Corporation, San Jose, CA, USA). ICE confirmed PFO patency and a 27–30 mm Figulla Flex II (Occlutech GmbH, Jena, Germany) occluder device deployment was performed with zero R-L shunt at intracardiac contrast injection . At postoperative TTE, there was no evidence of device malposition or thrombosis. The patient was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/daily; clopidogrel 75 mg/daily for 3 months). At 6-month follow-up, patient was asymptomatic and contrast TTE showed device in place without RS.