A 39-year-old man presented with increasing pain in his left eye on the first day following vitrectomy at the Peking University People’s Hospital in Beijing, China.
Symptoms started on the first postoperative day with decreased vision. The patient was diagnosed with vitreous hemorrhage and tractional retinal detachment in the left eye due to diabetic retinopathy. Consequently, the patient underwent a standard 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy involving membrane peeling, endo-laser photocoagulation, and silicone oil tamponade. On the morning of the first postoperative day, the patient’s vision in his left eye was counting fingers (CF)/20 cm, his intraocular pressure (IOP) was 15 mmHg, and the retina was reattached. Ofloxacin and Prednisolone Acetate Ophthalmic Suspension eye drops were administered four times daily, along with tropicamide administered twice daily.
The patient’s right eye was rendered blind due to more advanced diabetic retinopathy.
The patient had a history of diabetes spanning over 20 years. There were no significant findings in the family history.
The patient’s vision was CF/15 cm. Silt-lamp examination revealed flare and 2+ cells, accompanied by the presence of a hypopyon in the anterior chamber. The red reflex was observed; however, the retina could not be observed as clearly as in previous observations.
An aqueous humor specimen was obtained through anterior chamber tap for microbiological analysis. Due to economic constraints, a polymerase chain reaction test was not conducted. However, the aqueous humor culture results were negative.
Follow-up imaging examinations included silt-lamp assessments on different postoperative days. On the second day after the surgery, the silt-lamp examination revealed a hypopyon and cells in the anterior chamber . By the fifth day post-surgery, the examination revealed a decreased hypopyon . One week after the surgery, the silt-lamp examination indicated a clear anterior chamber . The optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus examination conducted 3 mo later showed diabetic macular edema in the nasal region of the posterior pole. However, most of the structure appeared normal, with successful reattachment of the retina observed .