A 55-year-old African man presented to our ophthalmologist with complaints of growth on the right upper eyelid for 8 months. Eyelid swelling started from the orbital ridge and progressed to involve the whole upper lid. There was a history of spontaneous unprovoked bleeding from the lesion noticed prior to presentation as well as eye discharge and rashes. He was unable to open the affected eye fully. He had no history of trauma, photophobia, weight loss, or tearing.
He had surgery and chemotherapy for rectal carcinoma 6 years prior to presentation and received his last dose of chemotherapy 5 years before seeing our ophthalmologist. He is a known patient with asthma. There was no family history of similar conditions.
Examination of the right eye revealed a projecting fleshy mass, measuring 3.3 × 2.0 cm, located on the upper eyelid. The mass was firm, lobulated, and nontender with irregular rough surfaces. There was a mildly tender, mobile, nonmatted, right preauricular lymph node.
He subsequently underwent surgical excision under general anesthesia. We confirmed the tumor to be malignant using frozen sections and ensured that the resection margins were free of tumors. The resected lymph node was not involved by the tumor. The surgery was followed by reconstruction of the upper eyelid using the Cutler-Beard procedure. There were no postoperative complications. The patient is alive and well 1 month after the surgery.
Histology of the mass showed an effaced architecture due to proliferating malignant epithelial cells disposed as trabecules, solid nests, and tongues. The individual malignant cells were basaloid, with marked nuclei pleomorphism, irregular nuclei outline, and open vesicular chromatin with prominent nucleoli. Mitoses were up to 11 per high power field with few atypical forms. In some areas, these cells appeared multivacuolated. Areas of squamous differentiation were also present. The features, some of which are shown in Figs. , , and , are conclusive of sebaceous carcinoma. Microscopic examination of the lymph node showed variably sized and shaped lymphoid follicles with few prominent germinal centers. The lymph node was not infiltrated by malignant cells.
Figure shows the right eye with a projecting fleshy mass on the upper eyelid. The mass was firm, lobulated, and nontender with irregular rough surfaces.
Figure shows infiltration of the fibrocollagenous stroma by malignant epithelial cells. There was reactive lymphocytic infiltration and neovascularization. Prolific vascular proliferation could explain the spontaneous bleeding experienced by the patient.
The photomicrograph shows malignant cells with multivacuolated cytoplasm in many areas of the tumor. This is strong evidence of sebaceous differentiation.