A 74-year-old male patient was admitted to our department due to experiencing patchy erythema and pruritus in the perineal area for over 5 years and the lesions progressively expanding with skin ulceration over the past 3 months. Five years ago, the patient initially noticed the patchy erythema on the scrota skin, which was covered with a small amount of white scales and accompanied by pruritus. The patient initially used acyclovir ointment to treat it by himself. After the pruritus symptoms relieved, the patient did not seek further medical care. However, 3 months ago, the patient observed that the lesions of scrota skin had gradually expanded to the pubic mound and penis, so he was admitted to our hospital for treatment. The patient had a medical history of hypertension for more than 14 years and diabetes for over 3 years. Upon physical examination, no abnormalities were detected in all systematic examinations and no enlargement of the lymph nodes was found in the bilateral inguinal region. Flake erythema of about 12.5 cm × 10.0 cm could be seen in the scrotum, penis, and pubic mound, with a few white scales overlying it. Skin ulceration and dark red blood scabs could be observed in the lesion. There were clear boundaries between the lesion and surrounding tissue . There were no obvious abnormalities in blood routine, urine routine, liver and kidney function, and other laboratory examination tests. PET/CT results showed that the skin of bilateral scrotum was slightly thickened with increased metabolism, which was consistent with the appearance of malignant tumor, and the density and metabolism of the left testis were increased, which were considered as tumor invasion . In histopathological examination, many scattered vacuolated Paget cells were observed in the epidermal layer, which had large cell bodies, abundant and light-stained cytoplasm, large and dark-stained nuclei. Besides, abnormal mitotic images were observed in Paget cells . Immunohistochemical results showed GCDFP-15(focal +), CK7(+), CK20(+), EMA(+), MUC5AC(+), CEA(+), GATA3(+), CK5/6(−), P40(−), P63(−), Ber-EP4(−), KI-67(+30%), P53(+5%), CD56(−), Syn(−), AR(+) . The pathological diagnosis was Paget’s disease of the scrotum and penis. Under general anesthesia, a wide local excision (WLE) of the lesion, bilateral orchiectomy, and adnexectomy were performed on the patient. The 2 cm outside the skin lesion was used as the initial surgical margin, and free skin flap transplantation was used to repair the surgical wound. The patient recovered well and was discharged 1 week after surgery.