In 2013 an 11-year-old female was admitted to the Department of Maxillofacial Surgery Medical University of Gdańsk due to multiple lesions of the mandible and the maxilla detected on an orthopantomogram (OPG not available). At the age of 7 the patient was diagnosed with the classic type of Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (skin hyperextensibility, joint hypermobility [major symptoms], smooth skin, easy bruising, positive family history—father with EDS [minor symptoms]). The patient had been hospitalized twice before: in the orthopaedic ward due to Sprengel’s deformity and scoliosis and in the ophthalmological ward due to exotropia and hyperopia. No other significant information was found in the anamnesis.
The physical examination on admission revealed joint hypermobility, high scapula, thoracic spine scoliosis, skin hyperextensibility , hypertelorism, exotropia and wide position of zygomatic bones. Deformation of the right ramus of the mandible and teeth displacement due to migration were observed intraorally.
Based on the OPG, multiple cysts in mandible and maxilla were suspected (radiolucent lesions circumscribed by a radiopaque halo, involving corpus, ramus and angle of mandible on both sides; radiolucent lesion around impacted right upper canine). Due to the large number of lesions, first enucleation of lesions on the right side of the mandible was planned.
The operation was performed under general anaesthesia. Intraoperatively, after muco-periosteal flap elevation, massive destruction of the buccal cortical plate and right mandibular body was observed. There was no bone support for the mesial root of the first right mandibular molar. Second right lower deciduous molar was extracted. The cysts associated with the impacted mandibular right second premolar and with the mandibular third right molar were both enucleated, the teeth involved were removed and the bone lodges were curetted. Excised tissue was submitted for histopathological examination (histopathological specimen 1, histopathological specimen 2). The wound was sutured. Post-operative healing process was uneventful.
Histopathological examination of both tissue samples exhibited corrugated keratinised stratified squamous epithelium without features of dysplasia, hyperchromatic nuclei, and palisading arrangement of basal cells. The results confirmed the diagnosis of odontogenic keratocyst in both cases . The diagnosis of Gorlin–Goltz syndrome (GGS) was established on the basis of clinical features as she had multiple odontogenic keratocysts (one main criterium), protrusion of the frontal bone, hypertelorism, scoliosis and Sprengel's deformity (four minor criterias). Diagnosis of GGS has not been extended by genetic tests. One month after the operation, normal tissue healing was observed. OPG was performed . A second surgery was planned for enucleation of the others lesions.
The patient did not show up for the second operation and discontinued the treatment. Between 2013 and 2017 she had been consulted in two maxillofacial surgery clinics, but there had been no surgical treatment. The patient was readmitted in January 2017. She reported throbbing pain in the left mandibular angle and the anterior part of the mandible, as well as numbness of the chin on the right side. OPG was performed and revealed a very good bone healing in the areas of previous post-operative lodges of the right mandibular body and ramus. Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) was performed for imaging assessment and showed an enlargement of the radiolucencies located in the left mandibular body and ramus were observed. The examination did not reveal any additional information of importance.
Under general anaesthesia, the remaining mandibular cysts associated with the impacted mandibular left canine and with the mandibular left third molar were both enucleated, the teeth involved were removed and the bone lodges were curetted (histopathological specimen 3, histopathological specimen 4). Keratocystic masses were removed from the cysts. The tissue was submitted for histopathological assessment. The wound was sutured. Post-operative healing was uneventful and the patient was discharged the day after. Histopathological examination revealed odontogenic keratocysts in both samples.
The patient has been lost and showed up in October 2020 due to the presence of a purulent intraoral fistula located in the area of the lower left premolar. According to the documentation brought by the patient, she underwent another surgery in August 2019 in a different maxillofacial surgery department of the country. Enucleation of the lesion associated with the impacted maxillary right canine and lesions in the left side of the mandible were performed by others surgeons. Consecutively to this surgery, patient suffered from post-operative paraesthesia located in the nervous territory of the left inferior alveolar nerve. CBCT performed in our Hospital in October 2020 did not reveal any early recurrence . A follow-up for at least 5 years was planned. Figure summarize the management of the patient.