A 7-year-old Chinese female patient who presented with a history of night blindness since childhood was referred to our hospital. After clinical examinations, she was diagnosed with Oguchi disease. In the medical history of this patient, her parents and grandmother and her younger brother were all healthy. Written informed consent to participate in the study was obtained from the patient and her relatives. As the patient is a minor, her informed consent was signed by her father. The research protocol was approved by the Ethics Review Board of the First People's Hospital of Linping District. The protocol adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.
On the initial evaluation, her visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally. Examination of the anterior segment of the eyeball showed no obvious abnormalities. Ophthalmoscopic examination showed the golden metallic reflex in all areas of the fundus . There was neither retinal bone spicule pigmentation nor attenuation of the peripheral retinal vessels in either eye. After 3 hours of dark adaptation, the Mizuo phenomenon was demonstrated . The images obtained with a nonmydriatic retinal camera (TRC-NW200, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) showed that the fundus color changed to normal. During 30 minutes of light adaptation, the golden sheen reappeared.
Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (RS-3000, NIDEK CO., LTD., Tokyo, Japan) is shown in Fig. . In the foveal area, three hyperreflective bands representing the inner segment/outer segment junction of the photoreceptors, the cone outer segment tips, and the RPE/Bruch’s membrane complex are clearly distinguished. However, in the parafoveal areas of both eyes, the boundaries of these hyperreflective bands become densely packed and indistinguishable. This packed structure of the parafovea is thought to be a specific feature of Oguchi disease.
Electroretinographic (ERG) (Roland Consult, Brandenburg, Germany) responses were recorded according to International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) guidelines with 30 min of dark adaptation . Response amplitudes and timing were compared with normative ranges. The dark-adapted scotopic response revealed the loss of a and b-wave amplitudes .
Peripheral blood samples of the patient, her parents, younger brother and grandmother were obtained for further genetic testing. The younger brother, parents and grandmother have no eye problems. All of them had given informed consent. Genetic testing was performed by MyGenostics (Beijing, China). Sequencing results were analyzed with REVEL (rare exome variant ensemble learner) by aligning to the Human Reference Genome Sequence (GRCh37/hg19). The pathogenicity of the variation was analyzed according to the ACMG guidelines, was predetermined as Pathogenic variation (Pathogenic) PVS1+ PM3_strong +PM2. No GRK1 gene mutation was found in the patient and her relatives, but sequencing of the SAG gene indicated new heterozygous mutations in exon 2 and exon 6 . Sequencing revealed a heterozygous change in nucleotide c.72_75+15delATCGGTGAGTGGTGCACAA in exon 2 of the SAG gene in this patient, her mother and her younger brother . This nucleotide change causeed a nonsense mutation, p.S25X. A splicing alteration of nucleotide c.376-2A>C was identified in exon 6 of the SAG gene with heterozygous status in this patient and her father . The splicing mutations were analyzed and evaluated through the SPIDEX database. This model scores the influence of the mutation on RNA splicing by analyzing the DNA sequence and mutation information. The score ranges from -100 to 100. The closer the absolute value of the score is to 100, the greater the impact of mutations on RNA splicing. The scores of the two mutation sites were -0.5639 (Exon 2) and -51.2080 (Exon 6), respectively. According to the retrieval results of Interpro database, Exon2 of SAG is not included in the domain, and Exon6 is located in the N-terminal domain.
Thus, we diagnosed the patient with Oguchi disease based on her characteristic clinical appearance and molecular genetic test results.