A 46-year-old male patient was admitted by gastroenterology department for having tarry stools in the past 5 d. A CT scan was suggested to find the source of his hematochezia during which a lesion was discovered in the liver and thus the patient was transferred to the hepatobiliary surgical department to investigate the incidentally found lesion while concurrently being treated for his hematochezia by the gastroenterology department.
Patient’s symptoms started about 2 d prior to admission with regards to the hematochezia and had no previous history with regards to the lesion.
Patient denied any history of chronic cirrhotic liver disease.
The patient showed no tenderness, rebound tenderness or muscle tension on abdominal palpation. His liver and spleen were not enlarged, no vessel murmur and normal bowel sounds were found during auscultation, and superficial lymph nodes were not palpable.
Routine blood test showed a decrease in red blood cell (RBC) (2.52 × 109/L, normal range: 4.3 × 109/L-5.8 × 109/L) and hemoglobin (Hb) (75.0 g/L, normal range: 130-175 g/L) and hematocrit (Hct) (22.8%, normal range: 40%-50%).
Liver function tests revealed that the total protein levels (59 g/L, normal range: 60-83 g/L), albumin 40 g/L were slightly lower considered related to his gastrointestinal bleeding, and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is within normal range.
Upper-abdomen CT images revealed a homogeneous mass without enhancement, enhanced CT showed a hypodense lesion in the right lobe of the liver, in the arterial phase, a well-defined mass was observed in the portal venous phase, and the isodense lesion was observed in the delayed phase, the radiologists considered it was a hepatic hemangioma however couldn’t exclude neoplastic lesion, so further MRI was recommended. MRI Imaging prior to contrast enhancement: started with successive acquisition of localizer T2-weighted (3 planes), T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images. For the contrast-enhanced scans, the system automatically issues breath-hold commands and adheres to typical delays between the different phases. After simultaneous initiation of contrast injection and imaging countdown, arterial, portal-venous and delayed phase imaging will be performed automatically with predefined pauses (15-25, 25-60 and 60-120 sec respectively). Approximately 15 min after contrast injection, the hepatobiliary phase scans including T1-weighted images (in both coronal and axial orientation) started Primovist (Bayer Healthcare) was used as contrast agent. MRI , the lesion displayed iso T1 and long T2 signals, with slight enhancement in the arterial phase, wash-out in portal phase, and restriction in diffusion-weighted sequences. However, radiologists concluded that it might be a small hepatocellular carcinoma and also could not rule out an atypical hemangioma, which was completely opposite to what the CT scan suggested.
As differentiation of this lesion was important, we performed CEUS. We used B-mode ultrasound to localize the 1.1 cm × 0.8 cm hypoechoic nodule with a clear boundary in the right anterior segment of liver and then MBCA, SonoVue (Bracco, Italy), was injected subsequently to reveal more characteristics. The parameters used were as follows frame rate: 8 Hz; MI: 1.1; color gain: 54%; color scale 7.7; wall filter: 85 Hz. However, we did not see any MBCA filling during the dynamic real-time observation of arterial, portal and delayed phase .