A 32-year-old woman, who presented by chronic fatigue and dyspnea on exertion, was referred to the arrhythmia clinic of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences for investigation of an irregular rhythm on electrocardiography (ECG). She had not any previous disorder and there was no history of cardiac disease in her family. On physical examination, the patient was a slender woman with a resting pulse rate of 75 beats per minute and blood pressure of 135/80 mmHg. The "a" waves were absent in jugular venous pulse. The apical impulse was normal. First heart sound was variable, the second heart sound was normal, and a systolic ejection murmur of grade 2/6 with maximal intensity in apex was heard. ECG and Holter monitoring showed fine P waves resembling f waves with group beating of narrow QRS complexes and without pre-excitation ( and ). Exercise tolerance test with Bruce protocol was performed. During exercise, the narrow QRS complexes rate increased regularly due to increased atrioventricular (AV) node conduction. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%, enlarged atria without clot in LA, left atrial auricle or RA. There was no intracardiac shunt such as atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, or patent foramen ovale. By impression of atrial flutter with variable block, due to fine P waves in ECG, after obtaining informed consent, the patient was transferred to the electrophysiology (EP) laboratory in fasting state and EP study was performed. EP study revealed variable cycle length (CL) of 834 to 1538, QRS of 100, and QT of 376 and HV of 44 millisecods with variable AV conduction. AH was not recordable. During EP study, no electrical activation was recorded from RA . Moreover, maximal output pacing failed to capture the RA , which was confirmed electrically and fluoroscopically. Coronary sinus (CS) activation by decapolar catheter showed AT with CL of 365 milliseconds, with atrial activation from proximal to distal part. No electrical activity was detected from different poles of duodecapolar catheter in RA. AT was stopped with overdrive pacing from proximal of CS. Slow escape rhythm from distal of CS with CL of 850 milliseconds was started . EP study confirmed right atrial standstill with AT from in LA. A single chamber permanent pace maker (VVIR) was implanted and oral anticoagulation and calcium channel blocker started.