A 51-year-old man (height 168 cm; weight 57 kg) had severe mitral regurgitation due to posterior leaflet prolapse (P2) with exertional dyspnea. He had normal systolic function (ejection fraction 75%) with no past history. He was scheduled to undergo robot-assisted mitral valve repair.
General anesthesia was induced with 5 mg of midazolam, 50 mg of rocuronium, and 0.5 μg/kg/min of remifentanil intravenously. The trachea was intubated with a left-sided 37-French (Fr) double-lumen tube, followed by an insertion of a TEE probe CX-50 TEE machine (Philips Medical Systems Andover, MA). A central venous catheter and pulmonary artery catheter were placed in the left internal jugular vein, and a 16-Fr venous cannula was inserted through the right internal jugular vein for drainage of the superior vena cava, with the tip at the junction of the superior vena cava and innominate vein. Anesthesia was maintained with 1.5% of sevoflurane in oxygen, continuous infusions of 0.2‑0.4 μg/kg/min of remifentanil, and 4 mg/kg/h of propofol.
TEE showed posterior leaflet prolapse (P2) with a marked eccentric jet in the mid-esophageal long-axis view . After turning the probe clockwise from the mid-esophageal long-axis view, TEE showed a moderate central regurgitation jet . In the mid-esophageal commissure view, the “cobra head sign” indicating P2 prolapse was noted. Moreover, a central regurgitation jet that was induced between the anterior leaflet (A3) and posterior leaflet (P3) was observed .
The three-dimensional (3-D) en face view showed a profound indentation, indicating that the cleft between P2 and P3 was noted at early diastole . TEE showed not only P2 prolapse but also a cleft between P2 and P3, and mitral regurgitation was caused by both etiologies.
After establishing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), an antegrade cardioplegia cannula was inserted into the ascending aorta and a flexible cross-clamp was subsequently applied.
For the mitral valve repair procedure, posterior leaflet resection was not performed; instead, neochordal reconstruction of P2 and P3 and ring annuloplasty were performed due to the risk of cleft dilation after resecting the posterior leaflet. After declamping of the aorta, a 3 μg/kg/min dopamine infusion was started. Weaning from CPB was very smooth. However, systolic anterior motion (SAM) occurred immediately after weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass. Dopamine was stopped to administrate. After volume loading and beta-blocker administration, SAM was improved. The hemodynamic status was stable. Subsequently, residual mitral regurgitation was not observed, and the postoperative course was uneventful.