A 77-year-old man was admitted with a complaint of low back pain accompanied by left lower limb pain for 1 month. A month ago, the patient presented low back pain with no apparent cause, mainly in the left sciatic nerve distribution, accompanied by weakness in the left lower limb and numbness in the left calf and foot, which did not ease with time, change of position, or rest. His medical history included the loss of the end of his left index finger due to a car accident five years ago. Three weeks ago he had his blood pressure measured at the local hospital at 180/90 mm Hg without a history of hypertension and taking antihypertensive agents. Magnetic Resonance (MR) of the lumbar spine revealed herniated discs at 3rd to 4th and 4th to 5th lumbar vertebrae. After management with Mannitol to reduce neuroedema, Cytosine to improve circulation and Lofenestine tablets to relieve pain, symptoms were not relieved. Scattered petechiae above the skin surface on the left lower leg, especially on the extensor surface, with flaking and mild tingling of the skin, were noted three weeks ago.
Our ultrasound showed left lower extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT), including a thrombus in the popliteal vein measuring approximately 43.5mm × 5.0 mm . Electromyography revealed no neurogenic or myogenic injury in either lower limb. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) showed no signs of thrombosis in the pulmonary artery and severe stenosis of the proximal lumen of the abdominal trunk.
Computed tomography venography (CTV) revealed bilateral lower limb iliac vein lumen stenosis with paravalvular formation around and in front of the sacrum . Distorted and thickened vascular shadows were seen in the bilateral calf muscle spaces, especially on the left side. Then, CTV of IVC suggested that the left common iliac vein traveled cranially and crossed the bifurcation of the common iliac artery, and continued cephalad as a ventral vessel, while the right common iliac vein extended cephalad as a dorsal vessel. The dorsal vessel was narrowed at the level of 4th lumbar vertebrae, by the compression of the hyperplastic bone and the osteophyte . Both vessels run parallel to the abdominal aorta and converged on the right side of the abdominal aorta, at a level where bilateral renal veins converge 12.5 mm pedal to the IVC. The suprarenal segment, renal segment and bilateral renal veins of the IVC are normal.
Bilateral femoral vein was punctured under local anesthesia and a 5F catheter was sent for bilateral iliac venography with Posterior Anterior (PA) and Left Anterior Oblique (LAT). A 12 mm × 8 cm balloon was used to dilate the right and left common iliac veins and repeated the left and right iliac venograms. A total of about 120 ml of iodixanol was used and the operation went smoothly without adverse effects. Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) suggested stenosis of the left common iliac vein, approximately 50%–80%. After balloon dilatation, the stenosis was improved, and the visualization of collateral vessels was significantly enhanced . The lumen of the right external iliac vein and right common iliac vein is still patent, with no significant stenosis or obstructive lesions. The distal segment of the IVC appears to have a limited defect. After discharge, the patient was treated with long-term anticoagulation.