A 79-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with a bulge and pain in the left inguinal region. The patient had been aware of the bulge in the left inguinal region for more than 20 years; however, it had been left untreated because it naturally reduced in the supine position. However, the left inguinal bulge had been incarcerated for several recent years. At the time of admission, the patient’s body temperature, blood pressure, and pulse rate were 36.6 °C, 112/56 mmHg, and 75 beats/min, respectively. Physical examination showed that the abdominal wall in the left inguinal region was swollen to the size of a child's head and was mildly tender upon palpation. No symptoms of peritoneal irritation were observed on the abdomen. Blood biochemical analyses showed chronic anemia (hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL, red blood cells 4.25 × 106/µL, hematocrit 32.0%, serum iron 22 µg/dL), hypoalbuminemia (albumin: 2.6 g/dL), increased inflammatory reaction (white blood cell count 15,120/µL, C-reactive protein 3.15 mg/dL), and elevated tumor marker levels (carcinoembryonic antigen 6.7 ng/mL, cancer antigen 19–9: 20.3 U/mL). Plain computed tomography (CT) at admission revealed thickening of a part of the intestinal wall within the hernia sac, along with a large amount of feces in the intestinal tract proximal to the same area. No abscesses, free air, or signs of intestinal strangulation were observed. Based on these CT images, we diagnosed Incomplete bowel obstruction caused by a tumor in the intestinal tract pouch, and the patient was admitted on the same day. The absence of signs of strangulation or perforation in the CT findings, combined with the patient's lack of peritoneal irritation symptoms and presentation of watery stools, led us to plan elective surgery after a definitive diagnosis.
Two days post-admission, the contrast-enhanced CT showed that the sigmoid colon within the hernia sac had wall thickening with contrast enhancement. No ascites was observed in the peritoneal cavity or hernia sac, leading us to suspect sigmoid colon cancer with extra serosal invasion but without peritoneal dissemination . The next day, we performed colonoscopy to biopsy the lesion and insert a colorectal tube. The scope (PCF290ZI; Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) easily passed through the hernia ostium and was inserted into the sigmoid colon within the hernia sac. A circumferential type 3 tumor was confirmed in the same area and a biopsy was performed . However, we were unable to insert the colorectal tube as neither the scope nor the guidewire could be advanced past the tumor into the proximal colon.
The pathological diagnosis identified the tumor as adenocarcinoma (tub1 > tub2). Contrast-enhanced CT revealed no invasion into the surrounding tissues (hernia sac, spermatic cord, or testis) and identified two enlarged paracolic lymph nodes (12 mm) and intermediate lymph nodes (10 mm). There were no distant metastases to the lungs or liver. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with sigmoid colon cancer within a left inguinal hernia, staged as cT4aN1bM0, stage IIIb according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM classification.
The treatment approach was explained to the patient as follows: advanced colon cancer is typically treated through tumor removal, including lymph node dissection, followed by suturing the intestinal tracts together in a single surgery. However, for patients with Incomplete bowel obstruction like you, a temporary ileostomy is often created to reduce the risk of suture failure. This ileostomy is then closed in a second surgery on another date. We proposed this surgical procedure. Given the patient's strong preference for a single surgery, we re-proposed Hartmann procedure and non-mesh hernia repair simultaneously. The planned surgical procedure included the following steps: first, gaining access to the abdominal cavity via a lower median incision; second, releasing the incarcerated sigmoid colon from the hernia sac; third, performing an oncological sigmoid colectomy including lymph node dissection and colostomy; and finally, repairing the hernia using a non-mesh approach through an inguinal incision.
We performed the surgery on the tenth day after admission. An incision was made in the lower abdomen, and the sigmoid colon was pulled from the abdominal cavity, which was inserted into the left inguinal hernia; however, we were unable to release the intestinal tract. Therefore, to remove the fecal mass in the intestinal tract within the hernial sac, we transected the intestinal tract approximately 10 cm proximal to the hernia and inserted a 5-cm-diameter tube. Subsequently, we successfully evacuated the intestinal contents through the tube; however, we were unable to remove the intestinal tract from the left inguinal hernia. Therefore, we decided to remove the tumor via the inguinal side, and then mesentery of sigmoid colon including blood vessels and lymph nodes from the abdominal side. However, since the mesentery of sigmoid colon was bundled with the hernia orifice as its apex, the blood vessels within the mesentery, including the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA), showed deviation. We confirmed the course of the IMA, sigmoid artery, and superior rectal artery (SRA) by referring to the reconstructed images from contrast-enhanced CT performed before surgery . Considering the location of the enlarged lymph nodes (para-intestinal and intermediate lymph nodes), we decided on the resection line to cut only the S1 branching from the SRA and preserve the SRA. Dorsal sigmoid resection was not performed. A second incision was made on the inguinal side. After opening the inguinal canal and hernia sac, we confirmed the presence of the sigmoid colon within the hernia sac. We performed dissection around the tumor and were able to preserve the vas deferens and testicles. After the proximal intestinal tract was retracted to the inguinal side, the sigmoid mesocolon was resected . The intestinal tract was excised from the abdominal side, and the specimen was removed from the inguinal side. Single-hole colostomy was performed on the left lower abdomen. The hernia was repaired using the Iliopubic Tract Repair method without a mesh. The operation time was 5 h and 47 min, and the blood loss was 647 mL.
The pathological results are as follows. No cancer invasion was observed into the peritoneum of the hernia sac (T4a), and no lymph node metastasis was observed. We diagnosed sigmoid colon cancer type 1, 75 × 45 mm, pT4a N0M0 stage IIb, according to the UICC 8th ed. TNM classification. The patient developed pancreatitis during the postoperative course. However, he showed improvement with conservative treatment and was discharged on the 17th hospital day. At 8 months after the surgery, the patient has shown no recurrence of the hernia or cancer.