We report a case of a man in his 80s who initially noted a lesion on his right back thought to be an infected cyst in 2014. Evaluation noted right axillary adenopathy, which prompted a biopsy of the mass and of the cyst-like lesion. Pathology demonstrated morphologic and immunohistochemical (strongly cytokeratin-20, neuron specific enolase and CD56 positive and thyroid transcription factor-1 negative) findings in both lesions consistent with MCC. Polymerase chain reaction performed on deoxyribonucleic acid extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissue alongside appropriate controls using a previously described protocol demonstrated that the tumor lacked detectable Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) large T antigen and small T antigen [, ]. Staging fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed lesions in right upper lung, right upper back, right axilla and right adrenal gland consistent with metastatic disease . Subsequent biopsy of the right lung confirmed metastatic MCC. Following extensive discussions regarding the implications and options, he refused chemotherapy. At that time, no clinical trial was available to him, but programmed death-1 (PD-1) inhibitor therapy was being tested on trial (ClinicalTrials.gov. NCT02267603). Nivolumab, a humanized IgG4 monoclonal anti-PD-1 antibody, was obtained from Bristol-Myers-Squibb outside of a clinical trial, and he was subsequently treated with nivolumab 3 mg/kg intravenously every 2 weeks for six cycles in 2015. Following two cycles, he had an excellent partial response on physical exam with decreased adenopathy. After five cycles, he achieved a marked partial metabolic response by FDG-PET/CT . He continued on therapy, but after cycle six, treatment was complicated by pneumonia and autoimmune hepatitis. He improved on intravenous steroids at an outside hospital and was discharged on prednisone 1 mg/kg per day. He completely recovered with a slow steroid taper, and no further treatment with nivolumab was given. He continued on surveillance alone for 8 months, and his disease remained well controlled with no recurrence on physical exam and at least an excellent partial response in his distant metastasis with no new sites of disease.