A 40-year-old Caucasian woman with training in human resources but unemployed since 2014 due to borderline personality disorder and active suicidal thoughts, was found unconscious at home by her husband. She was a nonsmoker and a social drinker. Her medical treatment consisted of clomipramine 150 mg once daily and lorazepam 2.5 mg twice daily. She was rapidly transported to the emergency room (ER) by ambulance with an oxygen mask. On arrival, her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 119/62 mmHg, heart rate of 62 beats/min, and temperature of 35.0 °C. She was unalert with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 5/15 (E1 V1 M3) and presented no protective airway reflexes. The result of her cardiopulmonary examination was normal, and we found no abdominal distention or guarding and no masses on palpation. Neurological examination revealed an unconscious patient with a slight reactive bilateral miosis and no focal neurological deficits on cranial nerve or peripheral neurological examination. Laboratory findings were within normal range, including a complete blood count (hemoglobin of 133 g/L, white cell count of 6.2 × 109/L, platelet count of 153 × 109/L), coagulation test, full electrolytes, kidney and liver function tests. Arterial blood gas showed a nonhypoxemic respiratory acidosis (pH 7.34, partial pressure of oxygen 56.9 kPa, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 6.2 kPa, bicarbonate 24.8 mmol/L). We proceeded to perform an endotracheal intubation (propofol 50 mg, fentanyl 50 μg, suxamethonium chloride 70 mg, rocuronium 50 mg, propofol 100 mg/h, and a slow drip of 250 ml of Ringer’s lactate solution) followed by a chest x-ray that revealed multiple coffee grain-sized opaque masses in the stomach. Empty blister packs found around her by paramedics suggested an ingestion of up to 8,625 g of slow-release clomipramine (Anafranil SR® 75 mg; Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland), 125 mg of lorazepam (Temesta® 2.5 mg; Pfizer PFE Switzerland GmbH), and 160 mg of domperidone (Motilium® 10 mg; Janssen-Cilag AG). In accordance with the national poisons information center (Tox Info Suisse, Zürich, Switzerland), we started a multidose activated charcoal (AC) regimen (60 g loading dose in the ER, completed by 30 g every 6 h for 24 h), followed by a gastric endoscopy that found an important pharmacobezoar extending from the fundus to the great curvature of the stomach . Three liters of normal saline were used in the stomach to fragment the aggregate, and a manual extraction of the tablets was performed with a wire basket with partial success. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for mechanical ventilation and further observation, and she never showed any signs of cardiovascular disturbance. Her treatment in the ICU consisted of fentanyl 0–50 μg/h, enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneously once daily, AC 30 g every 6 h, and glucosaline intravenous drip 1 L/day. Eight hours after ICU admission, another abdominal x-ray confirmed a persistent gastric tablet aggregate, and a second attempt at gastroscopic extraction was performed. The patient gradually awakened and was weaned off mechanical ventilation after 30 h. She was transferred to our psychiatric unit on day 3 for further care. During her stay, she had normal electrolytes, hemoglobin, and white blood cell count. She never presented any hemodynamic instability, had no QT interval prolongation on electrocardiogram or any arrhythmias, and we had no clinical argument for seizures. No therapeutic drug monitoring of clomipramine was performed at baseline or during the patient’s hospital stay because she improved and recognized having taken all the tablets from the empty blister packs found at her home. She was hospitalized in our local psychiatric hospital and discharged after 10 days. Regular follow-up with her psychiatrist was uneventful for the next 2 years.