A 55-year-old male presented with a 2-week history of a bulge in the left inguinal area which was not painful but caused discomfort. The patient had no significant past medical history. Physical examinations showed that vital signs were normal, and a bulge in the left groin was soft and easily reducible, consistent with an inguinal hernia. Elective hernia repair was performed with the Lichtenstein method 1 week later. During operation, we found a white nodule inside the hernia sac, which measured 10 mm in diameter. The nodule was excised and examined histopathologically. The postoperative course was unremarkable, and he was discharged without complications. Examination of the nodule revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemistry showed positive CK7, CK20, and AE1/AE3, and negative prostate-specific antigen and calretinin. The nodule clearly represented peritoneal seeding from an adenocarcinoma of unknown primary. Ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) scan, and esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed no obvious site of the primary tumor. Colonoscopy did not show any typical findings of colon cancer, but there were many diverticula in the sigmoid colon, two of which contained mucosal erosions or inflammatory lesions. These lesions each measured 2 cm in diameter . Biopsies of the lesions were negative, and repeat biopsy was also negative for malignancy. A positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan revealed two lesions in the sigmoid colon, with maximum standardized uptake values elevated to 10.7 and 11.2, respectively . Sigmoid colon cancer was considered the most likely diagnosis. Laparoscopic sigmoid colon resection was performed. At operation, no other metastatic lesions were found. In the specimen, the two lesions seen at endoscopy were identified . The final pathology of both lesions revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas, within diverticula in the sigmoid colon which histologically appeared the same as the nodule found in the hernia sac.