A 43-year-old male patient was hospitalized due to chest tightness and shortness of breath that worsened for 5 h. He was previously diagnosed with LVNC and improved after treatment with furosemide, spironolactone, digoxin, amiodarone hydrochloride, metoprolol tartrate, and perindopril tert-butylamine.
He denied a family history of heart disease (his father died, and his mother was alive). Admission examination showed a pulse rate of 100 beats/min and blood pressure of 113/85 mmHg. Lung auscultation shows signs of pulmonary oedema. Heart percussion showed enlargement of the heart border to the left. Additionally, the heart rhythm was definitely irregular, the first heart sound was unequal in strength, the heart sound was low, premature beats could be heard, and no murmur was heard in each valve auscultation area. The rest of the examination did not show any obvious abnormalities.
Bedside chest X-ray shows pulmonary congestion. The echocardiogram suggested LVNC (increased myofascicular echogenicity in the posterior lateral wall and apical region of the left ventricle, myocardial laxity, and crypt-like changes), reduced left ventricular systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction: 19%, normal range is 50-70%, and left ventricular stenosing rate: 9%), left ventricular dilatation (left ventricular end-systolic internal diameter: 63 mm, and left ventricular end-diastolic internal diameter: 68 mm), trivial aortic regurgitation, moderate mitral regurgitation, mild tricuspid regurgitation, increased pulmonary artery pressure (47 mmHg), and left ventricular diastolic dysfunction . The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with tachycardia. The amino-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide precursor was 6559 pg/ml (normal range < 300 pg/ml). Multigene sequencing of the patient for genetic cardiovascular disease revealed a variant in the TTN gene, c.87857G > A (p. Trp29286*). This mutation is a nonsense mutation, that can cause the severe loss of function of its encoded protein, titin, and is a heterozygous variant . The patient was diagnosed with LVNC, heart failure, New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV, arrhythmia, and atrial fibrillation. After admission, he was discharged after being treated with rivaroxaban (20 mg, qd) anticoagulation, bumetanide (1 mg, bid) diuretic, sacubitril valsartan and spironolactone (20 mg, qd) to inhibit ventricular remodelling, and amiodarone hydrochloride (0.2 g, qd) to control ventricular rate. The patient was followed up regularly after discharge (after 1 month and 3 months) and was found to have stable symptoms, significant relief of chest tightness and shortness of breath, significant improvement in activity tolerance, and NYHA class I. Echocardiography at 3 months showed LVNC, reduced left ventricular systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction: 33%, and left ventricular stenosing rate: 16%), left ventricular dilatation (left ventricular end-systolic internal diameter: 56 mm, and left ventricular end-diastolic internal diameter: 67 mm), and increased pulmonary artery pressure (39 mmHg).