A 73-year-old African-American woman, gravida 4 para 4, presented with a three-week history of postmenopausal vaginal bleeding, with associated suprapubic pain and urinary retention for the past two days. A pelvic exam revealed a 5 cm fungating left vaginal wall mass extending to the bladder trigone, and a closed cervix. There was no cervical motion tenderness and no palpable adnexal mass. Our patient had suprapubic tenderness with no palpable mass in her abdomen. All other examinations were unremarkable. Pelvic and transvaginal sonograms showed a thickened complex endometrial echo (2.4 cm) and her uterus measured 9.7×6.2×5.4 cm. Her ovaries were normal in size (2.5×1.8×1.5 cm). Computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed a heterogeneous vagina and two hepatic masses measuring 7.7 cm and 3.4 cm, respectively. A CT scan of her brain with contrast and a bone scan did not show any evidence of metastasis. Two biopsies were taken from the endometrial and vaginal wall masses. Grossly, the endometrial biopsy consisted of multiple fragments of blood clots and grayish tissue, 3.9 cm in aggregate. The vaginal wall biopsy consisted of multiple fragments of brown-red, soft and firm tissue, measuring 3.3 cm in aggregate. Histological examination was suggestive of choriocarcinoma. The non-lesional endometrium showed decidualization . On immunohistochemistry tumor cells appeared positive for β-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-hCG) and cytokeratins (AE-1, AE-2) and negative for octamer binding transcription factor (OCT)-3/4, α-fetoprotein (AFP) and CD-30. There was no histological evidence of any other type of malignancy (no germ cell component, no endometrial carcinoma). Percutaneous CT-directed core needle biopsy of the larger liver lesion demonstrated extensive necrosis with atypical cells suggestive of malignancy.
Our patient's β-hCG level was 2,704,040 mIU/mL. Cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) and AFP levels were normal. Chemotherapy with etoposide, methotrexate and dactinomycin, followed by cyclophosphamide and vincristine (the so-called EMA/CO regimen) was initiated. Her β-hCG level at follow-up (after the first cycle of chemotherapy) was 646 mIU/mL. Her vaginal bleeding and urinary symptoms resolved after the first cycle of chemotherapy. After seven cycles of EMA/CO chemotherapy her β-hCG level dropped below 5 mIU/mL. A repeat CT scan (after four months) showed a normal-appearing uterus and a decrease in size of the metastatic liver masses (4.5 cm and 1.7 cm). Our patient is now clinically asymptomatic and is on regular follow-up at our cancer center. Her β-hCG level stayed below 5 mIU/mL at one year of follow-up.
Our patient's obstetric history was significant for four normal vaginal deliveries (the last at 35 years of age) and menopause at 50 years of age. She denied any episode of postmenopausal bleeding before this presentation.