In April, 2021, a 15-year-old boy was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia with RUNX1-RUNX1T1. Cytogenetics revealed t(8;21) (q22;q22) in addition to trisomy 4. He started chemotherapy following the JPLSG AML-12 protocol, which includes high-dose cytarabine as initial induction therapy with combination therapy of the continuous administration of cytarabine. He entered complete remission after induction therapy. His treatment finished in October of that year; however, the leukemia relapsed in January, 2022. He underwent chemotherapy with the relapse protocol, which comprises fludarabine, cytarabine, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and idarubicin. In January, 2022, a Hickman catheter was placed to facilitate intravenous chemotherapy. A second course of chemotherapy was started in May, 2022, which resulted in prolonged pancytopenia. His medical history revealed a diagnosis of an epidural tumor, treated by resection and laminectomy in April 2021, followed by multiple cycles of chemotherapy. Postoperatively, no neurosurgical devices were left behind.
On Day 6 post-initiation of chemotherapy, he developed fever, which was treated empirically with intravenous cefepime. At the time, he was alert. His temperature was 40 °C, his pulse was 120 beats per minute, his blood pressure was 97/46 mmHg, and his respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute. Physical examination was unremarkable, including nuchal rigidity. The patient’s laboratory results were as follows: absolute neutrophil count, < 0.1 × 109/L; platelet count, 36 × 109/L; and C-reactive protein, 1.65 mg/dL (elevated). The fever improved after treatment. On Day 13, the patient again developed fever. Cefepime was switched empirically to meropenem. Two sets of blood cultures were obtained, and both were positive for S. haemolyticus . After 11 and 14 h of incubation, the blood culture bottle from the central venous catheter and peripheral vein, respectively, were reported positive for S. heamolyticus; based on this, we made a diagnosis of catheter-related bloodstream infection (differential time to positivity > 2 h) . Therefore, vancomycin was added and the central venous catheter was removed. Repeat blood culture on Day 18 was negative, despite prolonged fever and neutropenia. On Day 26, the patient developed a tendency to somnolence and impaired speech; the fever persisted, but there was no headache or nuchal rigidity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed no abnormalities. A lumbar puncture performed on Day 27 revealed clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), with 2 cells/μL. CSF glucose levels were slightly low (2.1 mmol/L) and protein levels were normal (3.9 g/L). Gram staining of the CSF did not detect any microorganisms. However, S. haemolyticus was isolated from the CSF; these isolates showed the same susceptibility as the isolates from blood cultures . On the same day, a complete blood count revealed an absolute neutrophil count of 0.09 × 109/L. At that time, there was no strong suspicion that this organism was the true pathogen. A second lumbar puncture on Day 33 revealed that the total cell count in the CSF was 260/μL, the glucose level was 2.1 mmol/L, and the protein level was 4.4 g/L, indicating a diagnosis of meningitis. No organisms were isolated from blood and CSF cultures. On the same day, a complete blood count revealed an increased absolute neutrophil count of 1.48 × 109/L. We continued to administer vancomycin. A third lumbar puncture performed on Day 40 revealed an improvement in CSF parameters (cell count, 65 cells/μL; glucose, 2.2 mmol/L; and protein, 4.1 g/L), but a CSF culture was positive for S. haemolyticus. The antimicrobial susceptibility profile was the same as that for strains detected in the blood and CSF. The diagnosis of meningitis was confirmed, and so oral rifampicin (300 mg every 12 h) was added to the regimen. The vancomycin concentrations in the blood and CSF were measured during treatment. Serum trough concentrations of vancomycin were within the therapeutic range of 13.0 to 22.4 mg/L, with a peak serum concentration of 22.4 mg/L on Day 35. However, the CSF trough level was < 2.5 mg/L on Day 46, so we switched from vancomycin plus rifampicin to intravenous linezolid (600 mg every 12 h). After initiation of linezolid, several lumber puncture tests were performed, which showed no growth after the third lumber puncture. Contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain and spinal cord showed no abnormalities suggestive of a local disturbance of the blood-CSF-barrier, abscess, or ventriculitis during treatment. Antibiotic treatment was continued until Day 72, and the patient was discharged without complications on Day 72.