Here, we report a case of a 51-year-old female diagnosed with S. suis meningoencephalitis.
The patient was a slaughterhouse worker and had no chronic illnesses. In addition, the patient had no history of alcohol or illicit drug use, but had a three-centimeter-long wound on her left leg before disease onset. The patient presented to our emergency department with a 3-day fever, with a temperature of nearly 39.0 °C.
At the time, the patient did not experience any other symptoms, such as cough, expectoration, or chills. Initially, the patient was treated for putative infection at a local clinic (specific treatment information was not available), but her symptoms did not improve significantly. On the 3rd day of symptom onset, she experienced an occipital headache of unknown nature and duration, accompanied by dizziness, nausea and vomiting, without obvious limb weakness, incoherent speech, abnormal mental behavior, convulsion or other discomfort. The patient was transferred to our hospital’s emergency department for further treatment. Routine blood analysis at the emergency department revealed a WBC count of 10.56 × 10^9/L, N%: 94.4%. A head CT scan did not reveal any obvious abnormality. Within 24 h, the patient was admitted into the intensive care unit. In the morning after admission, a lumbar puncture was performed which showed turbid CSF. The CSF pressure was 310 (mmH2O) and the color of the CSF was light yellow, with slight turbidity. The WBC count was 850/μLand the WBCs were multinucleated. Biochemical analysis of the CSF revealed that the levels of glucose, chloride and protein were 0.15 mmol/L, 117.5 mmol/L, and 4275 mg/L, respectively. About 5 mL of the CSF was sent to KingMed Diagnostics for CSF pathogen identification using next generation sequencing. At this time, the patient was treated with meropenem. A repeat lumbar puncture 5 days after symptom onset revealed relatively clear CSF and lower CSF pressure relative to the previous value. CSF WBC count also dropped to 680/μL. Biochemical studies demonstrated that the levels of glucose, chloride, and protein were 4.18 mmol/L, 124.9 mmol/L, and 1324 mg/L, respectively. Cranial MRI revealed a wide range of enhancement patterns. Viral and tuberculosis tests were negative.
Four days after admission, analysis for wide-spectrum bacterial nucleic acids did not detect bacteria in the CSF. By contrast, CSF mNGS analysis confirmed the presence of S. suis with a very large number of sequences . Very low levels of Streptococcus dysgalactiae were also detected, which was more likely to be non-specific matching of homologous sequences. Studies have shown that Streptococcus dysgalactiae can colonize the skin of humans hence may cause CSF contamination . Together with medical history, we concluded that the patient was infected by S. suis. The patient’s EEG showed diffuse slow waves, with no epileptic wave. Repeated lumbar puncture 9 days after admission revealed a CSF pressure of <180mmH2O, WBC count of 40/ul, a glucose level of 3.23 mmol/L, a chloride determination level of 123.2 mmol/L, and a protein level of 703.0 mg/L, indicating marked patient improvement. The results of 4 CSF tests are shown in Table .
On the 10th day after admission, the patient was transferred to the general ward and treated with ceftazidime in the subsequent days. Since then, she complained of dizziness and hearing loss. We have attempted to try to correct the hearing loss of the patient by some drugs such as hormones and vitamins, but the effect was not obvious. Repeat lumbar puncture 20 days after symptom onset revealed completely normal values for routine and biochemical CSF analyses. The patient’s physical condition also gradually improved and asked to be discharged from hospital. The patient still had some hearing loss at the time of discharge.
During hospitalization, bacterial culture and gram staining of CSF showed normal results. Repeated CSF acid-fast staining was also negative. This indicates that mNGS is more effective than conventional microbial detection methods. Due to its high costs, mNGS reanalysis was not done. At one-month follow-up, the patient still complained of left hearing loss but could function independently.