A 33-year-old female was diagnosed with SLE 3 years previously in another hospital. She visited our hospital in May 2018 due to pain in lower back and began to take methotrexate. Advice from her physician was methotrexate (10 mg) once a week, but she made the mistake of taking this dose every day. She developed severe bleeding from an ulcer in the oral mucosa, and was admitted to our hospital 1 month later. She was diagnosed with SLE and methotrexate poisoning.
Even though she had stopped using methotrexate, her white blood cell (WBC) count was 1.67 × 109/L, red blood cell (RBC) count was 3.02 × 109/L, hemoglobin level was 119 g/L, and platelet count was 66 × 109/L, which suggested bone suppression. On day-7 of hospital administration, the patient developed fever (38.3 °C) and infection was suspected. Laboratory analyses revealed a level of C-reactive protein (CRP) of 19.19 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 5 U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) of 8 U/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) of 91 U/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 23 mm/h. Blood samples were taken and empirical therapy with metronidazole and cefoperazone/tazobactam was started because of fever with oral mucositis. At day- 11 of hospital admission, spindle-shaped Gram-negative rods were isolated from one of four blood samples . After 24 h of incubation in an anaerobic environment with 5% CO2, growth on blood agar showed light yellow-pigmented colonies that were smooth, gray, catalase-positive and oxidase-negative . The organism was identified as Leptotrichia trevisanii by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization- time of flight-mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) undertaken on a Biotyper system (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) . In addition, the organism was confirmed as L. trevisanii using 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing as described previously , which matched 98% with the L. trevisanii strain (NR 029805.1). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with L. trevisanii bacteremia and received the therapy mentioned above continuously.
Next, we collected samples of the ulcer in the oral mucosa using a swab for anaerobic culture but L. trevisanii was not isolated, which might have been caused by exposure to an aerobic environment. After 10 days of treatment, the fever disappeared and the mucositis improved obviously. Routine blood analyses revealed the WBC count to be 11.19 × 109/L, RBC count to be 3.7 × 1012/L, hemoglobin level to be 110 g/L and platelet count to be 256 × 109/L, suggesting that bone-marrow suppression was also restored. Therefore, sepsis had resolved and there was no recurrence of bacteremia.