A 40-year-old nulliparous woman of South Indian origin reported to our outpatient clinic with complaints of a mass in the lower abdomen for one year and lower abdominal pain for three months. The patient was apparently asymptomatic one year previously, and then she noticed a mass in the lower abdomen that gradually increased in size. She provided a history of a rapid increase in size for the past three months. She also had associated lower abdominal pain, which was dull and aching in type, dragging in nature and continuous with no aggravating or relieving factors. Her menstrual cycles were regular and normal. She had no history of genital bleeding.
On examination, pallor was present, and the patient's vital signs were normal. She was thinly built. On abdominal examination, an irregular midline mass arising from the pelvis was present. The upper and lateral borders of the mass could be made out; the lower margin could not be ascertained. The mass was firm to hard in consistency with restricted mobility and nontender with no free fluid. There was no hepatosplenomegaly.
On vaginal examination, the patient's uterus was enlarged to 20 weeks' gestational size and nodular, occupying the whole pelvis. No mass could be appreciated separate from uterus. Computed tomography (CT) scan findings were suggestive of a large, multiloculated, multiseptate growth containing both solid and cystic elements arising from the pelvis and extending into the abdomen, measuring 25 × 17 cm, adherent to both the uterus and bladder. CA125 was 94.80 ng/mL (0-35 ng/mL). Other results were normal, and the patient was posted for exploratory laparotomy.
Intraoperatively, omental adhesions to the mass were noticed. A mass of 20 weeks' size was arising from the fundus of the uterus . It was lobulated with solid, cystic and hemorrhagic components. Both ovaries were normal, and the fallopian tubes were edematous .
Total abdominal hysterectomy (along with tumor) with bilateral salpingo oophorectomy was done . The uterus measured 8 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm with a subserosal bosselated growth from the fundus measuring 18 cm × 15 cm × 11 cm with variable consistency. Omental biopsy and external iliac lymph node biopsy were taken and sent for histopathologic examination. Histopathologic examination showed a cellular tumor arranged in interlacing bundles of spindle cells with elongated hyperchromatic nuclei. The tumor cells were exhibiting moderate pleomorphism and bizarre nuclei with multinucleate tumor giant cells. There were scattered areas and normal and abnormal mitotic figures (> 4/high-power field) with marked nuclear atypia suggestive of uterine leiomyosarcoma . The omentum and external iliac lymph node were free from tumor cells.