A 23-year-old post-graduate male student was examined for sudden deafness. In May 2014, he was suddenly unable to hear clearly, although he could still hear sound. Pure tone audiometry was performed and was normal, with 7.5d B in the right ear and 16.3d B in the left . The results of SDS (speech discrimination score) were normal. Despite this, he was adamant in his complaint and was experiencing difficulty listening in class. The result of his MRI was normal and we could not diagnose any
organic disorder. The cause of his symptoms
was unclear, but because the symptoms were similar to sudden deafness, he was administered an injectable steroid for 7 days. However, his hearing disturbance improved only slightly and he began to experience balance problems. Repeat examination revealed a spontaneous nystagmus to the right and a bedside head impulse test indicated left-sided canal paralysis. Static posturography showed a slight increase in the total length of path (LNG) and environmental area (ENV.AREA), as shown in .
The Dizziness Handicap Inventory (DHI) and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) scores were 82 (physical= 24, emotional= 26, function= 32) and 23 (anxiety= 12 and depression= 11). During examination 2 weeks later, no spontaneous, gaze-evoked, or positional nystagmus were found. The Fukuda stepping test was normal and the electronystagmogram with caloric test did not reveal any canal paralysis . Vestibular rehabilitation was initiated, but did not improve his subjective dizziness.
After carefully reviewing his clinical history, we determined that he could hear sound normally, but his ability to listen was decreased. In addition, we found that the patient had a sleep disturbance. Zolpidem 5 mg was prescribed, which improved his sleep difficulty. His dizziness improved gradually, but he still experienced dizziness and hearing difficulty. Further investigation of his sleep disorder was recommended and the patient was referred to a sleep specialist. Polysomnography (PSG) was conducted. The sleep time was 413.5 minutes over a 651-minute recording period. Therefore, the sleep efficacy was 56.6%, which was significantly reduced. The Apnea-hypopnea Index (AHI) was 2.3 times/hour, and the Arousal Index was 12.16 times/hour. Arousal due to apnea-hypopnea and periodic limb movement were each 0.94 times/ hour. PLM index was 4.91 times/h. Collectively, these findings clearly indicated insomnia without apnea or hypopnea. RLS was suspected; therefore, pramipexole 0.125 mg was prescribed. His subjective insomnia, dizziness, and hearing disturbance disappeared within 4 days. The pure tone audiometry results were unchanged .
The posturography results improved, as shown in ; however, he still required several hours to fall asleep despite taking zolpidem 5 mg. Delayed sleep phase syndrome was strongly suspected and ramelteon 8 mg was prescribed. His sleep rhythm subsequently improved.