A 37-year-old Caucasian gentleman with past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and severe hypertriglyceridaemia as well as family history of extensive premature coronary artery disease presented with progressively worsening dyspnoea that began 1 week prior to admission. Prior to the onset of dyspnoea, he had developed acute onset left-sided chest discomfort radiating to the left arm. He had deferred seeking medical care due to the COVID-19 global pandemic, and only presented to an outside hospital when his dyspnoea progressed to the point where he was experiencing symptoms at rest with profound orthopnoea. His medications prior to admission included atorvastatin and lisinopril. Examination was notable for jugular venous pressure at the angle of the mandible, 4/6 holosystolic murmur with associated thrill, and bilateral lower extremity oedema. Initial electrocardiogram demonstrated poor R-wave progression in the precordial leads concerning for anterior infarction . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a severely dilated left ventricle with aneurysmal anterior, anteroseptal, inferoseptal, and apical segments (Video 1). The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was severely reduced at 21%. A large VSD was noted in the mid to distal anteroseptum measuring 1.3 cm in diameter with peak pressure gradient of ∼40 mmHg (Video 2). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging noted a transmural infarct and pseudoaneurysm in the left anterior descending (LAD) territory with large associated muscular VSD, with an aperture measuring 1.3 cm ( and ). The anterior wall demonstrated severe hypoperfusion suggestive of non-viable myocardium. Subsequent cardiac catheterization demonstrated elevated right- and left-sided filling pressures (right atrial pressure 21 mmHg and pulmonary artery wedge pressure 28 mmHg), elevated pulmonary artery pressure (52/30 mmHg with mean 40 mmHg), and a significant left-to-right shunt (Qp:Qs 2:1). His systemic cardiac output was estimated at 3.1 L/min by indirect Fick. Subsequent coronary angiography revealed a completely occluded LAD just beyond a large diagonal branch and right coronary artery with moderate proximal disease; the circumflex was free of significant disease.
The patient was diuresed aggressively, losing a total of 30 lbs. Despite his low systemic cardiac output, he had no clinical evidence of impaired end-organ perfusion and thus inotropes and temporary mechanical circulatory support were deemed unnecessary prior to intervention. Throughout his hospitalization, he was started on heart failure guideline-directed medical therapy including sacubitril–valsartan 26–26 mg twice daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, and dapagliflozin 10 mg daily.
After a multidisciplinary discussion between our heart failure, cardiothoracic surgery, interventional cardiology, and congenital heart disease teams, he was taken for transcatheter VSD closure with an Amplatzer™ post-infarction VSD occluder (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) under the auspices of a Humanitarian Device Exemption.
Right internal jugular venous and right femoral artery access was obtained, and a 0.035″ J-wire was advanced through the femoral artery sheath into the ventricle and across the septal defect into the right pulmonary artery. A 6 Fr balloon-tipped 0.035″ pulmonary artery catheter was advanced into the right pulmonary artery through the internal jugular sheath. A 0.035″ exchange length guidewire was advanced through the pulmonary artery catheter and the catheter was withdrawn. A 6 Fr 25 cm gooseneck snare was advanced over this exchange wire and exposed in the pulmonary artery. The J-wire was snared and externalized through the internal jugular sheath. An FR4 catheter was advanced over the externalized rail into the right atrium.
A 10 Fr TorqVue™ (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) system was advanced over the rail through the internal jugular sheath to the point that it touched the FR4 catheter in the right atrium. The system was then advanced across the defect back into the left ventricle across the aortic valve so that the distal end of the TorqVue™ was in the ascending aorta. The externalized rail was withdrawn through the femoral arterial sheath.
A 20 mm Amplatzer™ post-infarction VSD occluder device was prepared, advanced into the TorqVue™ system, and brought to the tip of the catheter. Under transoesophageal (TEE) ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance, the catheter was withdrawn back into the left ventricle and the left ventricular disc was exposed. The device was then withdrawn so that contact of the left ventricular disc with the left ventricular wall was made. The neck was then exposed followed by the right ventricular disc. Once appropriate positioning was confirmed, the device was deployed. Transoesophageal and ventriculography confirmed no significant leak across the defect .
After the successful procedure which the patient tolerated from a haemodynamic standpoint, metoprolol succinate was started. Computed tomography angiography obtained 72 h post-procedure demonstrated successful closure of the VSD and the estimated Qp:Qs by volumetric analysis was 1.1:1. Two months later, his post-procedure transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated an improvement in his LVEF to 31%. He denied any additional heart failure symptoms during outpatient follow-up.