A 34-year-old Palestinian female patient with a past medical history of gestational diabetes 2 years ago and COVID-19 infections 30 days ago presented to the emergency department with a 3-week history of worsening severe pain on her left side of the face and loss of vision and movement of the left side. Her symptoms started immediately after recovery from COVID-19, which lasted for 10 days. One week prior to presentation, she was treated with ceftriaxone 2 g once daily and dexamethasone 4 mg three times daily for a presumed diagnosis of facial nerve palsy with no improvement. Past medical treatments include multiple steroid injections from an outpatient clinic for COVID-19 treatment. The patient had no history of follow-up or diabetes treatment.
On admission, she was alert, oriented, and hemodynamically stable. Further evaluation by the medical team revealed periorbital oedema, complete left eye proptosis, dilated non-reactive pupil, left eye ophthalmoplegia, loss of vision, trigeminal involvement (v1.v2.v3), decreased hearing on the left side, and a vesicular rash on the left cheek. Laboratory results showed hemoglobin: 13.2 g/dl, white blood cell count (WBC): 14.5 K/uL (90% neutrophils), platelets count: 269 K/ul, creatinine: 0.54 mg/dl, serum potassium 4.9 mmol/l, random blood sugar (RBS): 277 mg/dl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 101 Mm/hr, C-reactive protein (CRP): 174 mg/dl. Clinical diagnosis of orbital cellulitis and suspected dural (cavernous) sinus thrombosis versus optic neuritis. The patient was empirically treated with vancomycin (1 g twice daily), piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g four times daily), enoxaparin (80 mg twice daily), and methylprednisolone (1 g once daily). On day 3, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with orbital view showed multifocal infarction , a paranasal sinus extensive mucosal disease , and cavernous sinus thrombosis . In addition, serial blood sugar measurements were 469m/dl, and the hemoglobin A1c level was 18%. Arterial blood gases (ABGs) and urine analysis were ordered and showed: pH 7.21, HCO3: 5, PCO2 9, PO2: 100, urine analysis revealed: traces of protein, glucose +2, and ketone bodies +3. The Methylprednisolone was discontinued, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for DKA. DKA management was initiated according to the local protocol with intravenous fluids, regular intravenous insulin infusion, and potassium. ABGs, serum electrolytes, and RBSs were monitored every 2 hours. Mucormycosis was suspected based on the patient’s clinical presentation, DKA, and MRI findings.
On the second day in the ICU, facial swelling, periorbital edema, and erythema which were more prominent on the left side as shown in , and black eschar were visible in the nasal mucosa, palate, and skin overlying the orbit of her left side of the face with left auditory canal involvement as presented in . Based on the clinical and radiological findings, the patient was diagnosed with rhino-orbital-cerebral mucormycosis. Conventional amphotericin was initiated, and the surgical team was informed of possible surgical debridement. Unfortunately, the patient rapidly deteriorated, became unconscious, and was hemodynamically unstable with refractory metabolic acidosis. She developed cardiac arrest and expired on day four of hospitalization.