A 16-year-old male was diagnosed with celiac disease 7 years ago. This was a clinical diagnosis based on clinical symptoms of steatorrhea and malnutrition. No serology or duodenal biopsy was performed due to the lack of resources at times of crisis. The patient was put on an experimental celiac disease gluten-free diet but he did not adhere to it. During these 7 years, steatorrhea persisted and the child had associated progressive weight loss. Also, he was repeatedly hospitalized for respiratory infections.
At the present time, he was referred to Assad University Hospital after a 2-week history of gradual abdominal distension and fever. He had a productive cough with yellow sputum for ten days and second-grade dyspnea. On the physical examination, the patient had pallor, clubbing, and pitting edema. He weighed 40 kg, his height was 150 cm, and with BMI = 17.7 Kg/m2. Abdominal examination showed generalized tenderness and shifting dullness. On the lung examination, there was generalized wheezing in the two lungs, prolonged exhalation, and dullness in the right apex pulmonis. Groin, chest, and armpit hair were absent, with Tanner stage = 1. Laboratory evaluation showed: hemoglobin 9.9 g/dL; total protein 5 g/dL; albumin 2.8 g/dL; ALT 81 IU/L; AST 98 IU/L; ALP 320 IU/L; total bilirubin 2 mg/dL; direct bilirubin 1.6 mg/dL; PT 31%; INR 2,4; Total IgA 580 mg/dL; TTG IgA negative. Chest X-ray revealed opacity in the right apex pulmonis with bilateral interstitial alveolar infiltrates. A computed tomography scan (CT) of the abdomen showed a moderate amount of fluid, severe heterogeneity of the hepatic tissue, and a small-sized pancreas with fatty infiltrations. On chest CT, we found atelectasis in the right upper lobe, tree-in-bud sign on both sides, and right periumbilical mass with several enlargements in the mediastinal nodes. Ascites paracentesis showed a high SAAG gradient and low-protein fluid. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed esophageal varices < 5 mm. Duodenal biopsies did not show atrophy or inflammation. While stomach biopsies showed mild chronic nonspecific inflammation. On bronchoscopy, there were massive purulent discharges that plug the right bronchus. Samples were taken to culture after suctioning the plugging discharges. TTG IgA negative result and negative findings in biopsies ruled out the former presumed celiac disease. The sweat chloride test resulted in a chloride level of 90 mEq/L, which confirmed the CF diagnosis. Steatorrhea improvement with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy and the small-sized pancreas confirmed exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Subsequent genetic testing revealed the rare G85E mutation. The patient’s health improved with treatment and he was discharged after recovery. Later, he was hospitalized again because of another pulmonary infection, resulting in respiratory failure and death.