A 42-year-old man, from Baluchistan, Pakistan, with no significant prior comorbidity, presented with a 5 to 7-day history of
left frontal and retro-orbital headache, left facial numbness, right upper limb weakness, and speech difficulty.
He had no prior history of immunosuppression or weight loss and had no recent travel. Prior to these complaints,
he had a one-month history of injudicious detention in prison with reported torture. On examination, he was afebrile,
alert, and oriented to time, place, and person. He had dysarthria, left-sided facial weakness, and reduced power in the right upper limb.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast showed a space-occupying lesion in the basal ganglia region .
Other investigations performed at admission are summarized in . The patient underwent supratentorial craniotomy
for the excision of the left thalamic space-occupying lesion, revealing thick-walled cavity with gross purulent (greenish-brown)
discharge. He was subjected to maximum excision, and the tissue specimen was sent for histopathological and microbial examinations.
Apart from becoming aphasic, the patient recovered rapidly in the postoperative period.
The tissue sample was mixed with 10% KOH and visualized at 10× and 40× magnification. It was initially examined with hematoxylin
and eosin stain revealing glial parenchyma with chronic granulomatous inflammation, showing the collection of histiocytes
and multinucleated giant cells . Further staining with periodic acid-Schiff highlighted the presence of moderate
to darkly pigmented septate hyphae with no yeast formation .
The patient was empirically treated with intravenous (IV) voriconazole (200 mg) 12 h after loading a dose of 400 mg every 12 h.
However, he developed worsening drowsiness and complete right- sided hemiplegia. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan
of the head showed signs of mass effect with a midline shift of 10 mm towards the right side. In view of disease progression,
voriconazole was switched to IV amphotericin B deoxycholate (1 mg/kg/day). Furthermore, 3% hypertonic saline and dexamethasone
were continued to reduce intracranial pressure. In order to determine the microbiological identification of the organism,
the brain tissue specimen was inoculated on sheep blood agar (Merck, Germany), Saboraud’s dextrose agar (Merck, Germany),
and potato dextrose agar (Merck, Germany). The plates were incubated at 27oC and 37oC and were observed daily. After 5 weeks,
the growth of black yeast-like fungi was observed . Slide culture was prepared on malt extract agar (Merck, Germany),
and the Rhinocladiella-type sporulation (“Mickey Mouse” appearance) of fungi were seen ,
which were morphologically classified as R. mackenziei.
Since no facility was available at our institute for the molecular testing of rare fungi,
the diagnosis of cerebral phaeohyphomycosis secondary to R. mackenziei was made on the basis
of morphological characteristics. It was not possible to perform antifungal susceptibility testing.
The patient was started on oral posaconazole (300 mg) once a day, in addition to IV amphotericin B deoxycholate.
Despite being kept on hyperosmolar therapy and antifungals, the patient condition deteriorated after 18 days and
the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) dropped from 11 to 4. Urgent non-contrast CT scan of the head showed an increased
midline shift of up to 11.2 mm towards the right side resulting in diffuse cerebral edema and left uncal herniation .
The patient underwent emergent decompressive craniectomy. Postoperatively, the GCS improved to 11/15, and he
was able to localize from the left side. Along with amphotericin B and posaconazole, a therapeutic trial of flucytosine (3 gm)
was also initiated every 6 h but later discontinued as there was no meaningful improvement, and financial constraints
led to difficulty in procurement. Currently, the patient has recovered with neurologic sequelae and is still undergoing
treatment with IV amphotericin B and oral posaconazole, along with neurorehabilitation therapy.
Ethical considerations
Informed consent was obtained from the next of kin, and the study was approved as an exemption by the Ethical
Review Committee of Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan (Reference # 2019-1792- 4664).