A 68-year-old male patient was referred to our institution with complaints of refractory chest pain and shortness of breath. His past medical history was notable for severe stenosis due to bicuspid aortic valve. A TAVR procedure with four bioprostheses was performed through femoral route in other institute three months before. The preoperative echocardiography demonstrated a reduced LVEF (37%) and he had stage four CKD. During the previous operation the first device (26 mm Venus A self-expanding bioprosthesis, VENUS MEDTECH, China) migrated from the anulus to the ascending aorta soon after deployment. The hemodynamics deteriorated rapidly and attempt of repositioning was failed. Another 26 mm prosthesis was immediately prepped and positioned with the lower mark at 5 mm below the bottom of non-coronary sinus. However, a moderate paravalvular leakage (PVL) was noticed after the deployment of the second prosthesis. A third 26 mm and a fourth 23 mm prosthesis were deployed inside the gap between the first and second device, with the goal to eliminate the leakage. The patients were then transferred to ICU with a residual mild PVL and was discharged at post-op day 7. He was doing well for the first postoperative months until the symptoms deteriorated in the next month.
The CTA demonstrated four high density shadow were located inside the ascending aorta , crown frame of the upper device was identified to protrude outside of the aortic wall . Additionally, the echocardiography showed that the PVL aggravated and severe mitral regurgitation developed due to the deep deployment of the TAVR device .
A surgical explantation was performed soon after the admission (see Video). The femoral artery and vein were cannulated to establish the cardio-pulmonary bypass before median sternotomy, right axillary artery was cannulated for cerebral perfusion. Hematopericardium was discovered after the pericardium was opened. Penetrations of aortic wall by knobs of the bioprosthesis crown was confirmed . Retrograde cardioplegia was delivered because the ostias of coronary arteries were inaccessible under such circumstance. A safe cross-clamp site was dissected between the anonymous artery and left common carotid artery. After the heart arrest, a transverse aortotomy was performed and the prostheses were exposed. The first (upper) device was stuck inside the ascending aorta and the other three devices were overlapped and sited inside the left ventricular outflow tract. Circumferential neoendotheliazation was presented most prominently at the outermost prosthesis , careful dissection was made to avoid injuries to the aortic wall. The valve scaffolds were compressed and folded with the aid of Kocher clamps, thereafter Four bioprostheses were integrally explanted . The native calcified aortic leaflet was then removed and inspection was made to confirm the normal functioning of mitral valve. A 23 mm bioprosthesis (Perimount Magna, Edwards Lifescience) was then implanted. Afterward, the impaired segment of ascending aorta was replaced with a Dacron graft and the patient was weaned from CPB. He recovered well and was discharged on post-op day 17.