A 46-year-old male presented to our hospital with complaint of painful vesicular eruption that had begun 3 d prior on his left chest and steadily progressed to involvement of his back.
The patient characterized the pain as ‘stinging’ and reported that it had begun after he participated in strenuous outdoor activities. He noted that the pain was accompanied by the vesicle eruption. He denied any history of trauma.
The patient denied VZV infection (i.e. chickenpox or any form of HZ) in his medical history.
The patient’s other personal and family medical history was unremarkable for this case.
Vesicular eruption was present on the left chest to the axillary side, being limited within the T5-T8 dermatome . Using the visual analogue scale (VAS), the patient classified the stinging pain intensity of the vesicle eruption as 7.
Blood tests for serum VZV immunoglobulin (Ig) M and VZV IgG were positive.
Chest computed tomography (CT) findings were nonspecific.
The patient was diagnosed with HZ and ordered treatment with an antiviral drug (Clovir tablet, famciclovir at 250 mg bid; Dong Wha Pharm, Seoul, Korea), steroid (dexamethasone at 5 mg bid; Daewon Pharm, Busan, Korea), and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (Naxozole tablet, esomeprazole strontium 24.6 mg/naproxen 500 mg bid (Hanmi Pharm, Seoul, Korea); Valentac, declofenac sodium at 75 mg/mL intramuscular injection (WhanIn Pharm, Seoul, Korea). After 1 wk, the patient showed improvement , with pain score reducing to VAS 2, and was discharged to home.
However, 10 d after discharge, the patient returned to the hospital with complaint of pain recurrence (VAS 7-8) and was referred to our pain clinic. The same dermatome region showed re-eruption of the vesicles. Upon readmission, we administered ultrasound-guided erector spina plane block (commonly referred to as ESPB) and prescribed Lyrica Capsules (pregabalin at 75 mg bid; Pfizer, New York, NY, United States) and Targin prolonged-release (oxycodone at 5 mg/naloxone at 2.5 mg bid; Mundipharma, Seoul, Korea) for pain control. After the ESPB, the patient reported his pain reduced to VAS 2 and he was again discharged. At 2 d later, however, his pain worsened (VAS 6–7), and he returned to hospital and was again readmitted for pain control. This time, we inserted a patient-controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA) port. First, with the patient in prone position, an 18-G Tuohy needle was advanced using the paramedian approach at the thoracic spine level 9–10 under C-arm guidance. The epidural space was identified using loss-of-resistance technique and the contrast medium was injected. After confirming loss-of-resistance using C-arm, a flexible epidural catheter was passed cranially for about 2–3 cm and secured with the skin. Initially, the port was used to administer 300 mL of 0.1% ropivacaine at a continuous infusion rate of 4 mL/h via a disposable silicone balloon infuser (AutoFuser; ACE Medical, Beverly Hills, CA, United States). During the maintenance of PCEA, the patient reported his pain to be reduced to VAS 3. However, that night, the patient began to experience difficulty urinating as well as mild motor weakness (motor grade 4) and paresthesia in the bilateral distal lower extremities. The epidural catheter was removed immediately.
A catheter tip culture was ordered but revealed no microorganism. To rule-out central nervous system infection, a T-spine MRI was performed. The T2-weighted images showed high signal intensity within the left spinal cord level T2-8 . The neurologic examination revealed mild paresthesia and normal motor strength at the bilateral distal lower-half extremities and hyperactive deep tendon reflex on the left side. The need for a CSF study was explained, but the patient’s guardian refused consent.