A previously healthy 21-year-old female elite swimmer presented a few hours after acute onset of vomiting, with severe pain in her left iliac fossa. She had been unwell for 3 days with dysuria and constipation. She had a history of irregular periods and was on combined hormonal contraception (NuvaRing intra-vaginal ring, Organon Pharma). She had received both doses of the mRNA-127s vaccine (Moderna, USA) 6 months prior to this incident. She was a non-smoker with no family history of thromboembolic disease.
The patient was tender in her left flank, with a urine dipstick positive for hematuria. Her white cell count was 10.7 × 109/L, CRP 91.2 mg/L, and serum creatinine 131 µmol/L. A computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast demonstrated a grossly oedematous left kidney with perirenal fat stranding and free fluid tracking along the perirenal space down to the left iliac fossa. The left renal vein was abnormally distended and hyperattenuating, suggesting left RVT. A subsequent contrast-enhanced 3-phase CT angiogram showed normal renal arteries but delayed left parenchymal enhancement and no excretion of urine . The distended left renal vein did not opacify, confirming the suspicion of total venous obstruction . The thrombus did not extend into the inferior vena cava (IVC). The right kidney was entirely normal. The patient was started on heparin infusion.
In view of complete venous obstruction with progressive pain and acute kidney injury, the patient was offered an attempt to recanalize the renal vein endovascularly. After 24 hours of the onset of her symptoms, a 4 F catheter was gently negotiated through the fully thrombosed left renal vein into the hilus of the kidney from a percutaneous femoral approach. The left renal vein was completely thrombosed and no significant outflow by any collateral veins could be observed either. Infusion of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rTPA) was initiated via the catheter at 1 mg/h and continued overnight. A lysis check at 18 hours showed partial recanalization of the renal vein with restoration of some flow. Massive thrombi persisted in the vein, and the patient was still in pain. A Fogarty maneuver was therefore carried out with a 12 × 40 mm2 balloon catheter over the wire . A subsequent completion venography demonstrated brisk venous flow and the patient reported immediate pain relief. However, significant thrombi still persisted and to avoid re-thrombosis, local lysis was continued for another 24 hours. A final completion venogram showed complete resolution of the RVT with brisk flow into the IVC. No predisposing stenosis or external compression of the vein was observed. Clinically, the patient became completely pain-free and polyuric, suggesting recovery of the left kidney. She was hydrated on IV fluids and immediately anticoagulated. Repeat 3-phase CT angio on the following day showed opacification of the left renal vein, with only minor thrombi remaining in the renal hilum. Reconstructions of the CT scan did not suggest compression of the renal vein, such as in nutcracker syndrome. A Doppler ultrasound scan 3 days later confirmed normal renal resistance as well as unobstructed flow in the left renal vein. Extensive coagulation, renal, hepatic, and rheumatologic screens proved unremarkable initially, but subsequently increased Factor VIII activity was identified when screening for less common thrombophilia. The patient was discharged on Apixaban 5 mg twice daily. Her hormonal contraceptive therapy was discontinued. She remains asymptomatic at 6 months with normal renal function. She is back to swimming.