The patient, a 35-year-old female, was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of headaches of 3 days duration accompanied by nausea and vomiting for 2 days. The patient had fevers and chills for 3 days before admission; the peak body temperature was 38.5 °C. 2 days before admission, the patient developed headaches, which were persistent and intolerable, accompanied by four episodes of vomiting. The patient had a splenectomy in our hospital 2 years earlier for thrombocytopenia and was thought to be immunocompromised. The findings on physical examination, imaging, and laboratory testing after admission were as follows: skin and mucous, normal; heart, lung, and abdomen, normal; neck stiffness, present; Kernig’s sign, negative; lumbar puncture: pressure, 300 mmH2O; Pandy’s test, positive; white blood cell (WBC) count, 1536 × 106/L; monocyte count, 602 × 106/L; monocyte percentage, 39.2%; multinucleate cell count, 934 × 106/L; multinucleate cell percentage, 60.8%; protein, 1.08 g/L ; head and chest CT, normal; head contrast MRI + MRA + MRV, normal; WBC count, 21.1 × 109/ L; neutrophil percentage, 85.3%; neutrophil count, 20.55 × 109/L; C reactive protein (CRP): 136.4 mg/L; procalcitonin, 6.70 ng/mL; liver and kidney function, normal; and electrolytes, normalMeropenem (2.0 g intravenous infusion every 8 h) was administered with other symptomatic support treatments, such as reducing intracranial pressure by mannitol. The temperature fluctuated around 38 °C. There was no significant relief from the headaches. A lumbar puncture was repeated 6 days after admission. The cerebrospinal fluid culture and drug sensitivity testing showed an Enterococcus gallinarum infection and sensitivity to linezolid , respectively. Thus, an intravenous infusion of linezolid (0.6 g every 12 h) was administered. On the second day of linezolid, the temperature began to decrease. After 3 weeks of anti-E. gallinarum treatment, the temperature returned to normal and the headache resolved. A lumbar puncture was repeated three times. The cerebrospinal fluid was colorless and transparent, the pressure and WBC count were decreased, and the bacterial cultures were negative. The patient was discharged from the hospital when stable and in good condition.