A 60-year-old woman had abdominal pain, diarrhea, and bloody stool in July 2019.
The patient had abdominal pain intermittently 11 d before admission. She also had diarrhea and bloody stool, due to which she sought hospital admission.
In 2004, a melanoma in the patient’s left fifth toe was resected, and inguinal lymph node dissection was performed. The patient underwent five courses of adjuvant chemotherapy with dacarbazine, nimustine, vincristine, and interferon-β.
In June 2015, she developed intussusception and was diagnosed with melanoma metastasis following laparoscopic partial resection of the small intestine. In September 2016, she underwent partial resection of the small intestine and mesenteric lymph node removal for mesenteric lymph node metastasis. In September 2016, she was referred to our hospital after undergoing partial resection of the small intestine and mesenteric lymph node removal for mesenteric lymph node metastasis. Left supraclavicular lymph node enlargement was noted in a follow-up evaluation; thus, in July 2017, treatment with talimogene laherparepvec was initiated, but the lymph node enlargement persisted. In January 2018, pembrolizumab therapy was started. The patient’s lymph nodes gradually reduced in size.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
Her vital signs were normal. Physical examination revealed diffuse abdominal tenderness without rebound tenderness.
The results of the laboratory tests showed normal values, which were as follows: Hemoglobin, 12.4 g/dL; white blood cell count, 5.4 × 103/mm3; and C-reactive protein, 0.12 mg/dL.
Computed tomography, which was performed on the day of admission, revealed antegrade intussusception in the descending colon without intestinal necrosis and perforation . Therefore, colonoscopy was performed for diagnostic purposes. The patient was examined using carbon dioxide and water insufflations. Colonoscopy showed a greyish-white protruded lesion in the descending colon ; the mucosa surrounding the tumor was reddish and edematous, and the tumor in the descending colon fell to the anal side, causing intussusception. Intussusception was reduced naturally during the examination . After the examination, the abdominal symptoms subsided. Biopsy of the protruded lesions revealed that the tumor was a metastatic melanoma.