A 13-year-old female patient presented to the Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry with a chief complaint of “pain and mobility in the lower incisors” . The pain was first noticed on biting or chewing food and was relieved by itself. This aggravated two days before the patient reported.
Extraoral examination showed no signs of any pathological condition or trauma. However, a deep mentolabial sulcus angle was observed (96°). The mentolabial angle is formed by the line joining the labrale inferius and the depth of the sulcus to the pogonion point. Individuals with a class II skeletal base exhibit a deep mentolabial sulcus .
Intraoral examination showed plaque deposits on tooth numbers 31, 32, 41, and 42. Erythematous gingiva and gingival recession were also observed. Wear facts were present on tooth numbers 31 and 41. All four lower incisors were tender on percussion followed by grade I mobility. The probing depths were normal indicating a healthy periodontal tissue. However, the labial mucosa was tender on palpation. The patient also had a class I molar relation with increased overbite with retroclined maxillary and mandibular incisors.
Radiographic investigation revealed a large periapical lesion involving the four mandibular incisors ( and ). Vitality testing was done using electric pulp test (EPT) which showed all four incisors to be nonvital. Fremitus test was positive with vibratory movements palpated on occlusion. The patient also exhibited an increase in overbite along with retroclined incisors. The overbite was measured at 6 mm on the diagnostic cast. Based on clinical findings and investigations, the condition was diagnosed as primary trauma from occlusion.
Primary occlusal trauma is an injury that occurs due to excessive occlusal forces to teeth with healthy periodontal support resulting in tissue changes. It occurs in cases with normal clinical attachment and bone levels.
Phase I Treatment
Following parental consent of the parents, full mouth oral prophylaxis was done and endodontic treatment was initiated for tooth numbers 31, 32, 41, and 42. The patient was also started on a 5-day antibiotic course along with daily chlorhexidine mouth rinses. The occlusal prematurities were identified using articulating paper and selectively removed by coronoplasty.
The endodontic treatment was completed in multiple visits. Following the cleaning and shaping, metapex dressing was given for a period of 3 months. A semirigid wire and composite splint were given from canine to canine, lingually, to restore masticatory function and stabilize the teeth . A splint is an apparatus that supports, protects, and immobilizes teeth with compromised periodontal support due to trauma fracture or certain endodontic surgical procedures. Splinting has been advocated to optimize healing outcomes for the periodontal ligament.
The patient was kept on follow-up visits every 3 weeks . The patient was assessed based on clinical and radiographic signs and symptoms. Radiographic signs of healing were seen within 3 months following which permanent obturation was done using gutta-percha and mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) root canal sealer. The access cavities were sealed with composite resin cement.
Phase II Treatment
For correction of the traumatic bite, a removable Hawley's appliance with anterior bite plane was prescribed to guide the premolars into occlusion and thus increase the overbite . Full-time wear of the appliance was prescribed for a period of 6 weeks with follow-up visits every 2 weeks . Following 3 months of wear of the appliance, the deep overbite decreased from 6 mm to 3 mm .
A radiograph taken at 1 year follow-up showed complete resolution of the lesion apically . The periodontal tissue was healthy and the treated teeth showed satisfying esthetics and function. The patient was then advised to undergo fixed appliance orthodontic treatment for final correction of malocclusion related to deep bite and incisor inclinations.