A 53-year-old man presented to a head and neck surgeon with a slow-growing nodule at the anterior aspect of the left Stensen's duct. His medical history indicated that he suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and a remote dental abscess. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck showed a circumscribed, enhancing oval mass along the course of the left parotid duct immediately superficial to the left masseter muscle .
There was no cervical lymph node enlargement. Fine needle aspiration (FNA), performed 3 times, yielded scant fibrous tissue and lymphocytes. He was taken to the operating room for local resection with a preoperative diagnosis of a tumor arising from the Stensen's parotid duct. The lesion was isolated, confirmed as contiguous with the duct, and removed together.
Frozen section was interpreted as a spindle cell tumor. Sacrifice of the parotid duct was necessary and a superficial parotidectomy was performed. Two small buccal branches of the facial nerve were divided in the course of the resection and repaired. Postoperative facial nerve function was normal. At a 2-year follow-up, there was no evidence of tumor recurrence or metastasis.
The lesion was a firm, well-circumscribed, homogeneous pink-tan mass measuring 2 cm x 1.7 cm x 1 cm. Upon microscopic examination, the tumor was composed of spindle cells arranged in haphazard short interlacing fascicles.
The tumor cells had tapering, bland-looking nuclei, and were separated by keloid-like collagen .
Mitoses were identified at less than 1 per 10 high-power fields (HPF).
Necrosis was absent. Medium-sized branching vessels within the tumor showed thickened and hyalinized walls . Stensen’s duct was identified, entrapped at the periphery of the tumor , with abundant periductal collagen and lymphocytes . The tumor cells showed diffusely positive immunostaining for CD34, CD99, and Bcl-2; focally positive staining for CD68; and no immunoreactivity for pan-cytokeratin, EMA, α-SMA, h-caldesmon, desmin, S100 protein, CD31, p63, and ALK-1. The gross, histopathological, and immunohisto chemical findings were in keeping with a solitary fibrous tumor.