A 46-year-old woman (height; 172 cm, body weight; 54 kg) visited a neighborhood hospital complaining of abdominal distension. She had no previous history except heminephrectomy for renal angiomyolipoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large left ovarian tumor. Together with markedly elevated tumor marker levels; carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19–9 of 606 U/mL (normal, < 37 U/mL) and CA 125 of 432 U/mL (normal, < 35 U/mL), malignant ovarian tumor was suspected and surgery was planned. Anticoagulant therapy with edoxaban 30 mg/day was started because of remarkably increased D-dimer level (17.5 μg/mL) and an old thrombus in the left soleal vein revealed by ultrasonography. She developed acute onset of left hemiparesis 10 days later and was admitted to another hospital in an emergency. Multiple cerebral infarctions as well as total occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery were revealed by MRI and MR angiography, respectively . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed splenic and left renal infarctions, resulting in the diagnosis of Trousseau’s syndrome. Despite the administration of tissue-plasminogen activator and endovascular thrombectomy, incomplete left hemiparesis remained, and cilostazol 100 mg/day was added to edoxaban.
She was transferred to our hospital on the 17th day, and was scheduled to undergo a semi-radical surgery for the malignant ovarian tumor on the 31st day (1 month) after the cerebral infarction. To reduce the relative risk of pulmonary embolism, a temporary inferior vena cava (IVC) filter (Denali™ Vena Cava Filter, BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, US) was placed on the 2nd day after admission. Both edoxaban and cilostazol were discontinued 5 days preceding surgery, and intravenous (IV) infusion of unfractionated heparin was initiated on the next day. Preoperative electrocardiogram showed regular sinus tachycardia. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and carotid artery echography did not detect causative embolic sources or abnormalities such as an intracardiac right to left shunt. Blood test results the day before surgery were not remarkable except activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 40 sec, fibrinogen of 656 mg/dL, and D-dimer of 1.4 μg/mL. Heparinization was terminated 6 h prior to surgery. In addition to standard monitoring, we observed depth of anesthesia (BIS™, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), and regional cerebral oxygen saturation levels (rSO2; INVOS™ 5100C, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) during anesthesia. The baseline rSO2 at room air was 58% and 66% on the right and left side of the forehead, respectively. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was kept at hand in preparation for hemodynamic instabilities such as pulmonary embolism.
General anesthesia was induced with propofol 60 mg and rocuronium 40 mg after starting infusion of remifentanil at 0.4 μg/kg/min and the trachea was intubated. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane and continuous infusion of remifentanil to maintain bispectral index between 40 and 60. An arterial pressure catheter was inserted in the right radial artery, followed by an ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block and rectus sheath block with 0.125% levobupivacaine. Rocuronium bromide was added to keep the train-of-four visible twitch at less than 1 count, and IV infusion of fentanyl set at 25 μg/h was initiated about 30 min after the start of surgery for postoperative patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). Intraoperative respiratory and circulatory dynamics were relatively stable, and low BP requiring intervention only occurred twice. A single bolus injection of ephedrine 4 mg or phenylephrine 0.05 mg was used to adjust the low BP. A temporary reduction in bilateral rSO2 levels 54%, 58% respectively was observed before the start of surgery, which returned to normal without intervention. Bilateral rSO2 levels were stable thereafter, and fluctuated in the range of approximately ± 10% of its initial values. Total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy was accomplished uneventfully. The operation duration was 159 min, and total anesthetic time was 204 min. Along with continuous infusion, an intermittent bolus injection of fentanyl (total dose; 300 μg) resulted in the estimated effect-site concentration of 1.35 ng/mL at the end of surgery. After completion of surgery, residual muscle relaxant confirmed by neuromuscular monitoring was reversed with sugammadex 200 mg. She immediately emerged from general anesthesia with no additional neurological deficits, and was transferred to the intensive care unit. Total intraoperative bleeding was 515 g, and the hemoglobin level immediately after the surgery was 9.9 g/dL. Postoperative vital signs were also stable, and no blood products were transfused. IV infusion of heparin was restarted 6 h after surgery without increased blood drainage, which was then substituted with a subcutaneous injection on postoperative day (POD) 3. Tumors, including disseminated lesions, were considered to be fully resected, heparin administration was finally discontinued on POD 7, and edoxaban (30 mg/day) for residual venous thrombus was resumed. On POD 9, the IVC filter was removed, to which a small amount of white thrombus was attached. She was discharged on POD 18 to a rehabilitation hospital without cerebral complications such as hemorrhagic infarction and thromboembolic stroke.