The case was a Latin American 32-year-old man affected by MEN2A syndrome with a germline RETCys618Arg mutation localized in exon 10 and characterized by MTC with cervical and mediastinal lymph node metastases and bilateral pheochromocytoma.
In 2010, at age of 24 years, due to instrumental detection of an adrenal incidentaloma along with elevated metanephrines, the patient underwent right adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma in another country. Five years later, a diagnosis of MTC with cervical and mediastinal lymph node metastases was performed, and the patient underwent total thyroidectomy, central and lateral lymph node dissection and external beam radiotherapy. Unfortunately, CTN and CEA levels before surgery are not available, but we found that CTN was >2000 ng/L at first postoperative evaluation in 2015. Later, in 2017, he moved to Italy and he was initially referred to another hospital. In April 2017, CTN and CEA were 16,527 pg/mL and 118.7 ng/mL, respectively. Contrast-enhanced CT showed the presence of cervical and mediastinal lymph node metastases and a single lung micronodule of uncertain significance. Biochemical and imaging evaluation documented in addition a pheochromocytoma in the left adrenal gland, so the patient underwent left adrenalectomy. In agreement with a family history that showed that patient’s father died (at age of 56 years) of thyroid carcinoma (as well as paternal grandfather and uncle) and with clinical course, genetic analysis was performed and revealed a RETCys618Arg heterozygous germline mutation. Genetic analysis was negative in his surviving relatives (sister and mother).
He was referred to our department in April 2018 after the appearance of cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes metastases and lung micronodules at CT scan combined with a significant increase in both CTN and CEA serum tumor markers.
At first evaluation in our institute, serum CTN was 18,889 ng/L (n.v. < 11.5) and CEA was 167.9 µg/L (n.v. < 5.2) . Urinary-fractionated metanephrines were in the normal range. CT scan confirmed the presence of multiple vascular-rich lymph nodes in the cervical region and upper mediastinum and lung-scattered micronodules. The patient was asymptomatic, except for an apparently unrelated premature ejaculation. For this symptom, he underwent andrological and urological examination. No palpable nodule in the testes was found, but US imaging showed two symmetrical hypoechoic lesions of 5 mm in the lower part of the left testis and in the middle part of the right testis, without a clear vascular pattern . Suspecting a testicular cancer, according to the most recent guidelines , beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (BHCG), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were evaluated and were within normal values (BHCG < 0.5 UI/L, n.v. < 1 UI/L, AFP 1.6 µg/L, n.v. < 7 µg/L, LDH 171 U/L, n.v. 135–225 U/L). Therefore, the patient underwent enucleoresection of both testicular lesions. Histopathology revealed the presence of atypical cells with focal granular cytoplasm and ‘salt and pepper’ chromatin, morphologically resembling MTC. Immunohistochemistry showed reactivity for chromogranin A, CTN, CEA, CD56 (neural cell adhesion molecule), transcriptional thyroid factor 1, synaptophysin, OCT4 (cytoplasmatic pattern), CK-Pan (‘dot-like’ pattern), thus confirming the diagnosis of metastases from MTC . No reactivity was shown for anti-placental alkaline phosphatase, CD30, CD117, inhibin, α-FP. The MIB-1 proliferation index was about 10%. The evaluation of serum tumor markers in the postoperative period showed a transient reduction of their values, mainly of CTN .