A 73-year-old woman patient was transferred to our centre to study a cardiac mass detected in TTE after a TIA (transient binocular diplopia). The patient had no previous history of any similar neurological/embolic events and dyslipidaemia and arterial hypertension were the only risk factors. At the time of our first contact, the patient had a normal cardiological/neurological examination and no relevant alteration in laboratory tests. On the day of arrival, our group performed a new TTE2D (, , ) and 3D (, , ), which showed a left intraventricular mass (long arrow) of 10 × 9 mm, pedunculated (short arrow ), irregular morphology, with wide anarchic and independent movement, anchored at the level of the anterolateral papillary muscle. An adequate contractility of all the myocardial segments, as well as the absence of visualization of the mass after infusion of Sonovue® (see , ), ruled out the possibility of thrombus. With the differential diagnoses of papillary fibroelastoma vs. myxoma of atypical location, CMR was performed the same day for mass characterization.
In CMR , the left intraventricular mass described in TTE was identified with the following behaviour in specific sequences: hyperintense (black blood-T2) and isointense (black blood-T1) with respect to myocardium, with very prolonged intramass values in myocardial mapping sequences, native myocardial T1 of 1848 msg and T2 mapping of 161 msg. After gadolinium infusion, no gadolinium uptake was observed in the first-pass sequence ; on the contrary, its intense uptake was evidenced in late enhancement sequences . With the diagnosis by CMR of a benign cardiac mass of primary origin of papillary fibroelastoma type, the patient underwent surgery the following day by our cardiovascular surgery department, resecting the mass in question, which macroscopically resembled a cardiac myxoma . Finally, in the pathological anatomy performed after the immunohistochemical study, the surface lining cells showed immunoreactivity with CD34, CD31, and factor VIII, but were negative for calretinin, excluding the possibility of cardiac myxoma and confirming the presumptive diagnosis by CRM of papillary fibroelastoma.
On the eighth day after admission, the patient was discharged under treatment with acetylsalicylic acid, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and statins, cardiological/neurologically asymptomatic and without evidence of masses in control echocardiography. The patient has remained asymptomatic and without new evidence of intracardiac masses in clinical control to date.