A 66-year-old man was referred to the hospital due to ulcerated lesions incidentally found on an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which is a regular health screening process provided by the Korean National Health Insurance Service for all individuals aged ≥ 40 years.
The patient was a 40 pack-years smoker and a heavy alcohol user who was taking medication for hypertension.
No previous signs or symptoms were observed.
No previous personal or family history was recorded.
Vital signs and physical examination results were within normal limits.
Laboratory findings were nonspecific except for slightly elevated liver enzyme levels.
No imaging was done before treatment plan was established.
The initial EGD showed two healing-stage ulcer craters located at the posterior wall of the mid-body . Abnormal fold changes including clubbing and fusion were observed around the ulcer craters. An initial biopsy was diagnosed as atypical glands that could not exclude malignancy. After 3 mo, during the first follow-up EGD, the ulcer healed and was covered with a reddish scar. Several bulging areas of the normal mucosa were observed around the ulcer scar . Biopsy of the ulcer scar was not definitive for malignancy. The second follow-up EGD was performed after 3 mo with repeated biopsies. Histological results were the same as those of the previous biopsy. The third follow-up EGD performed 3 mo later revealed a huge ulcero-infiltrative lesion measuring up to 4.5 cm with an irregular margin in the posterior wall of the mid-body . This lesion was covered with an unevenly distributed regenerative epithelium and a whitish discoloration . The endoscopic impression was advanced gastric cancer with a gross feature of Bormann type 3. Multiple biopsies were performed to rule out malignancy and histological examination revealed a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma.
Preoperative computed tomography of the stomach revealed a 4.6 cm-sized lesion at the posterior wall of the mid-body . Differential diagnosis included a large ulcerative lesion with focal involvement of carcinoma or a 4.6 cm-sized Bormann type 3 cancer. No lymph node or distant metastases were observed.