A 21-year-old Russian woman at 38 weeks’ gestation was admitted to the Regional Maternity Hospital, Kemerovo, Russia in March 1998. She presented in critical condition associated with decompensated heart failure. The first manifestations of the disease had occurred at 28 weeks’ gestation after an acute viral respiratory infection with long-lasting elevated body temperature. Toxic shock syndrome developed, and her heart failure symptoms worsened. Echocardiography (ECHO) revealed infective endocarditis, mitral valve failure (rupture of the anterior mitral valve leaflet with grade IV regurgitation) and mobile vegetation at the posterior leaflet. A healthy baby was delivered by cesarean section at 39 weeks’ gestation. She then received goal-directed therapy in the cardiac surgery unit aimed at suppressing sepsis and compensating for heart failure: initially New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV. Mitral valve replacement with bioprosthetic heart valve KemKor-30 was performed 6 weeks after delivery. The management of primary infective endocarditis (enterococcal infection verified by blood culture study) and subsequent prevention of prosthetic endocarditis was performed in accordance with the existing (at the time of the follow-up period) guidelines. She received ceftriaxone, 2 g/day administered intravenously in a single daily dose. Her postoperative period was without complications (discharge with NYHA class II). The choice of a bioprosthetic heart valve was determined by her desire for future pregnancy.
Indirect anticoagulant (phenindione) therapy was discontinued 6 months after surgery, because of the absence of heart failure symptoms and cardiac arrhythmias and satisfactory prosthesis function. She became pregnant again in 2002, 3 years after surgery. In the follow-up period, she did not receive any cardiotropic agents and anticoagulants, her condition was satisfactory. Her pregnancy was not contraindicated, according to clinical assessment and testing. She was supervised by surgeons, cardiologists and obstetricians during her pregnancy. She delivered a healthy baby boy vaginally without complications. Her child was breastfed. Annual examinations were performed to monitor for bioprosthetic valve failure, because breastfeeding is known to increase the risk of calcification.
A moderate calcific degeneration of the leaflet was found 12 years after heart valve replacement, a common finding in bioprosthetic heart valves. Dynamic ECHO revealed a moderate decrease in the effective orifice area and an increase in the mean diastolic transprosthetic pressure gradient and mean transprosthetic blood flow velocity. However, these changes still met the criteria for normal prosthetic heart valve function . She did not receive medical treatment.
She reported pregnancy at 5 weeks’ gestation. Despite the risk of complications associated with limited durability of the prosthetic heart valve and hormonal changes associated with pregnancy and lactation, which could worsen structural valve deterioration, she decided to continue her pregnancy. There were no signs of cardiac arrhythmias on her daily electrocardiograms (ECGs) or signs of heart failure during patient monitoring.
Five ECHO examinations revealed the natural physiological changes caused by cardiovascular adaptation to the increased metabolic needs of pregnancy to ensure adequate oxygenated blood delivery to the peripheral tissues and the fetus. The changes included increased circulating blood volume, heart rate, myocardial contractility and systemic blood pressure, which certainly influenced intracardiac hemodynamic parameters . Her left atrium enlarged from 3.4 to 4.0 cm and her left ventricular end-diastolic volume rose from 81 to 99 ml, related to the circulating blood volume and increased preload during pregnancy. A similar mechanism was identified in the central regurgitation across the bioprosthesis registered at 8 weeks’ gestation. The initial transprosthetic regurgitation of > grade I had increased to grade I to II by delivery. However, the absence of significant changes in her diastolic gradient and blood flow velocity confirmed that the prosthesis maintained functional durability .
Her elevated cardiac output and her left ventricular dilatation were caused by increased myocardial contractility. Her left ventricular ejection fraction rose from 63 to 76 % during her pregnancy. The physiological increase in her heart rate in the last trimester was associated with the overestimation of the effective orifice area. Tachycardia affected the Doppler characteristics of the mitral valve and biased the resulting ECHO parameters. Her mean pulmonary artery pressure increased from 10 mmHg at 5 weeks’ gestation to 16 mmHg at 39 weeks’ gestation, contributing to a moderate increase in peripheral resistance and arterial blood pressure after 32 weeks’ gestation.
The bioprosthesis, implanted in the mitral position, contributed to the physiological changes in functional and morphological parameters of cardiac remodeling, whereas cardiac reserve was not impaired during her pregnancy.
Natural vaginal delivery of a healthy full-term male newborn (3670 kg, 52 cm, Apgar scores 8 to 9) occurred in October 2011, at 39 weeks’ gestation. Her postpartum period was uneventful and she was discharged on the sixth day after delivery.
ECHO findings included reduction of bioprosthesis regurgitation to grade I, reduction of left ventricular end-diastolic volume to 85 mL and increase in mean pulmonary artery pressure to 12 mmHg, indicating stabilization of her intracardiac hemodynamics .
No significant health problems arose for our patient or her baby during a 2-year follow-up. Her baby was breastfed for 12 months. Our patient did not have any signs of heart failure or clinically significant cardiac arrhythmias. There were no indications for cardiotropic drugs. Dynamic ECHO assessment of the mitral bioprosthesis revealed its functional safety, despite the thickening of its leaflets. Sixteen years after mitral valve replacement, satisfactory left ventricular ejection fraction (64 %), target blood pressure, mean diastolic transprosthetic gradient (4.2 mmHg) and mean transprosthetic flow velocity (96 cm/second) were maintained. The effective orifice area was 2.8 cm2. Her left ventricular end-diastolic volume (84 mL) and mean pulmonary artery pressure (13 mmHg) remained stable. Despite grade I regurgitation, the size of her left atrium did not exceed the upper limit of normal (3.9 cm).