A 57-year-old married woman came to our psychiatric outpatient clinic due to depressed mood for one and a half years. Accompanying symptoms included insomnia, loss of interest, fatigue, memory impairment, decreased appetite, and suicidal ideation. Also, bilateral lower limbs restlessness had been noted by her daughter for one and a half years. This lower limbs restlessness was accompanied with frequent pacing. According to her daughter and herself, the lower limbs restlessness and pacing occurred before she started taking antidepressants. She initially sought help from a neurologist for the above problems one year prior to this visit and was diagnosed as having major depressive disorder. She was prescribed escitalopram 10 mg daily and clonazepam 0.75 mg daily for one year, with full compliance. Her depressed mood and other depressive symptoms improved, but her insomnia and bilateral lower limbs restlessness persisted. Also, her akathisia aggravated during the most recent five months. Neurological examination showed mild crossing and uncrossing of the legs while sitting. Her akathisia was rated 3 on the Extrapyramidal Symptoms Rating Scale (ESRS) . We completed a survey including blood tests and images to rule out other underlying diseases that would possibly cause the symptoms. The blood tests included thyroid function, hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c), homocysteine, copper level, ceruloplasmin, rheumatologic factors (IgG, IgM, IgA, RF, ANA, ENA), cryoglobulin, RPR (rapid plasma reagin), hepatitis antigen/antibody (HBsAg and anti-HCV) and antiphospholipid antibody (anti-beta 2 GPI-IgG, cardiolipin-IgG, and cardiolipin-IgM). Laboratory data revealed elevation of HbA1c whose level was 8.4%. Otherwise, she had no thyroid dysfunction, homocysteinuria, Wilson’s disease, rheumatologic diseases, immunological diseases, syphilis, hepatitis or antiphospholipid syndrome. Brain CT showed a negative result. Medical history included hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), hyperlipidemia, and hyperthyroidism status post-thyroidectomy under treatment with a thyroxine supplement. She maintained Sevikar (amlodipine 5 mg + olmesartan medoxomil 20 mg) daily, atorvastatin 40 mg daily, and Glucomet (glyburide 5 mg + metformin 500 mg) twice daily for 10 years.
The patient was given escitalopram 10 mg daily, clonazepam 2 mg nightly, and zaleplon 10 mg nightly at our outpatient clinic. However, her akathisia did not improve much. Thus, we informed her endocrinologist about her akathisia, and suggested her antihypertensive agent be switched from Sevikar (amlodipine 5 mg + olmesartan medoxomil 20 mg) to bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily. During a 3-month follow-up, the patient reported subjective improvement in her akathisia, which was rated 1 on the ESRS.