A 67 year-old man was admitted to the emergency department with a moderate, dull, left-sided abdominal pain. The pain had 12 days of evolution, progressive worsening and was associated with nausea and inappetence. He denied fever, respiratory symptoms or changes in bowel or urinary habits. The patient initially sought the Basic Health Unit due to abdominal pain and positive epidemiology. RT-PCR was performed for SARS-Cov-2, which became positive. He was medicated with simple analgesia, but there was a worsening of abdominal pain, leading the patient to seek medical attention again. He had a history of systemic arterial hypertension. His daily medications included enalapril and hydrochlorothiazide.
On physical examination, the patient appeared well, was alert, communicative and afebrile. He was in no acute distress, and his lungs were clear on auscultation. Lower limbs without edema, palpable and symmetrical pulses in all segments and presence of ocher dermatitis in the left lower limb. His abdomen was soft with mild tenderness in the left upper quadrant in superficial and deep palpation, without peritoneal irritation.
On admission, his complete blood count (CBC) and comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) were unremarkable. However, he had an elevated D-Dimer of 1523 ng / ml.
A computed tomography (CT) of the chest and total abdomen with IV contrast (, ) showed the presence of splenic infarction involving about 70 % of the parenchyma with distal thrombus in the splenic artery, absence of lesions of other intra-abdominal viscera and absence of free liquid or pneumoperitoneum. Chest CT reveals small, patchy ground-glass opacities in bilateral pulmonary bases, less than 30 % of involvement of the parenchyma, suggestive of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
The patient underwent a routine clinical evaluation for malignancy, followed by a review of the CT images. Chest-abdomen-pelvis CT examination and laboratory markers were all negative for malignancy. The patient also had recent upper endoscopy and colonoscopy, both negative.
He had no clinical signs of gastrointestinal tract infection, nor any other localized infections. Furthermore, he did not present fever, the blood cultures were negative, transthoracic echocardiography was normal, and there was no other clinical sign for endocarditis.
The patient was diagnosed with splenic infarction due to coagulopathy related to SARS-Cov-2 infection. We opted for conservative treatment with full anticoagulation with Enoxaparin1mg/kg twice daily.
The patient’s abdominal pain decreased gradually after anticoagulation and simple analgesia. On day 5, the patient was discharged home on oral Rivaroxaban with outpatient return in 1 month. At the return, the patient was assintomatic. On the follow-up CT the spleen decreased in size and there was no clinical sequelae.