A 22-year-old female presented to a gastroenterologist in Mashhad, Iran in March 2020, with the chief complaint of abdominal pain lasting for more than 1 year. The pain had progressively worsened and she had developed icterus a week prior to her presentation. She did not have any loss of weight, and no other comorbidities.
The initial abdominal ultrasound revealed dilation of bile ducts. Computed tomography (CT) scan illustrated a hypodense mass in the head of pancreas, suspected to be a focal pancreatitis or a pancreatic mass . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed a lobulated pancreatic mass measuring 2 × 2.2 cm in size. The patient was referred for surgery, and during surgery, a tumor originating from the pancreatic head, located close to the hepatic artery, was revealed. A Whipple resection with extended lymphadenectomy was performed. The postoperative period was uneventful and she was discharged after 1 week.
Gross pathological examination demonstrated a firm, creamy, infiltrating tumor mass, measuring 4.5 × 4 × 4 cm, located in the pancreatic head, invading the peripancreatic tissue and an adjacent lymph node. The tumor had focally invaded the duodenal wall, but did not seem to be originating from it. Microscopic and immunohistochemistry studies identified the tumor as leiomyosarcoma of the pancreas .
By May 2020, 1 month postsurgery, she was completely active with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status score of 0, and free of symptoms. On physical examination neither organomegaly nor tenderness of the abdomen were detected. After presenting the case to a multidisciplinary care team, and discussing the benefits and drawbacks of all available adjuvant options, she was then further treated with adjuvant external beam radiotherapy at a dose of 5040 cGy in 28 fractions by intensity modulated radiotherapy technique on the basis of invasion to neighboring organs.
After 20 months of follow-up, she has been disease free as evidenced by chest and abdominopelvic scans obtained every 3 months. She is completely active with an ECOG Performance Status of one. She only complains of abdominal discomfort, weight loss, digestive problems, and chronic fatigue.