A 42-year-old Caucasian man complained of headache, vomiting, and blurred vision. A pituitary tumor was diagnosed after a skull X-ray, and he received 3300 rad to his sella. Two years later, he presented with impotence, joint pains, and perspiration. His serum GH level was 16.2μg/L (reference range is 0.45 to 2.2) and was not suppressed by the administration of oral glucose. His serum testosterone level was subnormal at 423nmol/L (reference range is 797 to 3470). His visual fields were normal, but a skull X-ray demonstrated an enlarged sella. Acromegaly with partial hypopituitarism was diagnosed. Further radiation therapy (4000 rad) was administered, and he received testosterone replacement. His GH levels were normalized, but 3 years later hypothyroidism and hypoadrenalism were diagnosed, and appropriate replacement therapies were begun.
Fourteen years after the initial diagnosis, his GH levels again became elevated (25μg/L). A computed tomography scan revealed a partially empty sella but no tumor. He received therapy with up to 5mg of bromocriptine twice daily for 1 year and then the drug was discontinued because of intolerable side effects (nausea, headache, and diarrhea). Surgical exploration was deemed inappropriate because of previous irradiation, especially in the absence of radiologic evidence of a pituitary mass. After 18 years, a computed tomography scan, which was performed because of progressive enlargement of the hands, feet, and nose and an elevation of the GH level (104.5μg/L), revealed a sellar mass. Attempted transsphenoidal exploration was abandoned as a result of failed intubation.
Therapy with octreotide by subcutaneous injection was initiated. The dose was gradually increased to the maximum approved level of 500mg three times daily and was administered by continuous subcutaneous infusion. GH levels were reduced to 14.5μg/L but not normalized. After four more years, octreotide was discontinued and therapy with pergolide commenced. However, GH levels continued to increase.
Twenty-seven years into the disease course, the patient developed a soft, painless, 4cm mass below the angle of his right mandible. Fine-needle aspiration was suspicious for lymphoma, and an excisional biopsy was performed.
Histopathology revealed tumor cells with abundant pink cytoplasm. Electron microscopy demonstrated cells containing membrane-bound dense core granules indicative of a neuroendocrine tumor. Some cells contained globular fibrous bodies of intermediate filaments suggestive of a GH-secreting tumor . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for synaptophysin, GH, and prolactin but negative for other anterior pituitary hormones. A diagnosis of metastatic pituitary carcinoma was made.
The GH level decreased from 363μg/L before surgery to 101μg/L but on subsequent follow-up began to rise again. One year later, a radionuclide scan with indium-labeled octreotide showed continued uptake in the region of the sella, neck, and spleen. The patient declined further investigation or active treatment for acromegaly and was treated symptomatically before he died, at the age of 72, 30 years after initial presentation.