A 63-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Ren Ji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Shanghai, China) on May 22, 2018. The patient had undergone appendicectomy 30 years ago and orthotopic liver transplantation on January 28, 2011 due to hepatocellular carcinoma with decompensated liver cirrhosis of hepatitis B. During the operation, we dissected the first hepatic hilar region and cut off the common hepatic duct above the junction of cystic duct. We cut off the left and right hepatic arteries above the bifurcation respectively. We dissected and cut off the portal vein, the infrahepatic and suprahepatic vena cava after blocking the blood flow. Then we reconstructed the inferior vena cava, portal vein, artery and biliary duct between donor liver and recipient liver. Postoperative pathology revealed hepatocellular carcinoma in the native liver. Upon further questioning, the patient admitted weight loss about 7.5 kg (from 72.5 kg to 65 kg) during the last several months but denied any history of visible gastrointestinal bleeding. The patient had no noticeable family history, nor did he have a history of smoking, alcohol drinking, or toxic environment exposure.
The patient had been taking tacrolimus (3 mg), CellCept (0.5 g), entecavir (0.5 mg) after liver transplantation every day, and his blood concentration of FK506 was maintained at about 2.3 ng/ml. Routine blood and liver function tests were both normal, and the results of AFP, CEA, and hepatitis B virus tests were all negative. However, the CA19-9 level was moderately elevated (68.24 U/ml, compared to a normal range of up to 33 U/ml).
Gastroduodenoscopy revealed a mass lesion located in the descending part of the duodenum . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan showed a mixed density mass in the descending part of the duodenum, and its metabolism of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) increased unevenly (SUVmax = 5.5) , and no metastasis to other organs. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected a tumor of approximately 6.5 cm in diameter that was located in duodenum . Further, Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) found that the duodenal tumor caused dilation of extrahepatic bile duct and pancreatic duct . Tissue biopsy was then obtained and pathologically examined. The results indicated mixed adenocarcinoma (tubular adenocarcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma). In addition, CT angiography with three-dimensional reconstruction was performed to reveal the anatomical structure. From the reconstructed liver structure, it can be seen that the donor liver's artery went from inferior and posterior side of portal vein to superior and anterior side of it. Also, the gastroduodenal artery was clearly visible .
Because the patient was in good physical condition and pre-operative imaging suggested the disease as resectable, pancreatoduodenectomy (PD) was performed and complemented with pancreatojejunostomy Roux-en-Y anastomosis with peripancreatic lymph nodes dissection and vascular dissection . Intraoperative examination revealed no peritoneal dissemination. The operation lasted for nearly 10 h and intraoperative blood loss was about 500 ml. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after surgery and was discharged in 12 days. 4 weeks after the operation, the patient was given 4 cycles of oral chemotherapy (days 1–21,S-1/ Tegafur, Gimeracil and Oteracil Potassium Capsules, 50 mg orally B.I.D; cycle repeated every 28 days). Following the pancreatoduodenectomy, the patient continued tacrolimus usage daily and his blood concentration of FK506 was maintained at about 3 ng/ml.
The gross appearance of the resected specimen was a tumor with ulceration measuring 6.5 × 5 × 5 cm . Postoperative pathological examination showed mixed duodenal adenocarcinoma (tubular adenocarcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma) with medium differentiation. The tumor had infiltrated the full wall of the duodenum and invaded the pancreas and part of the bile duct. Resection margins and lymph nodes dissected were both negative. According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual (Springer International Publishing, 8th Edition 2018), the tumor was classified as stage IIB (T4N0M0).
After 13 months of regular follow-up, there was no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence. CA19-9 was dropped and remained low. In July 2019, however, MRI and PET-CT scan indicated a metastatic lesion of approximately 8.9 cm × 5.3 cm located at the right seventh rib . At that time, AFP, CEA and CA19-9 were not elevated. We performed surgical resection of the metastatic lesion in the rib. First we confirmed that the right lung was not invaded by the tumor. Then we cut off the right 7th and 8th ribs, completely remove the tumor, and sutured the intercostal artery. We reconstructed the bone structure of chest wall with matrix steel plates. The gross appearance of the resected specimen was a tumor measuring 11 cm × 7 cm × 5 cm . Postoperative pathological examination of the tumor specimen indicated hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis . By August 2022, CT didn't show evidence of recurrence. AFP, CEA and CA19-9 were maintained within normal limits.