A 72-year-old right-handed man with chronic sinusitis, obstructive sleep apnea, and hyperlipidemia presented with 3 weeks of progressive headache, altered mental status, right retro-orbital pain, and blurred vision. Initial evaluation by an optometrist revealed a left homonymous hemianopsia. On the drive home from his appointment, he hit the left road median and was brought to an emergency department. There he underwent head CT and was diagnosed with sinusitis. Despite antibiotics, over the next week he developed disorientation, memory impairment, slowed speech, and a refractory headache, prompting re-presentation.
In the preceding months, he had travelled to Mexico, Panama, and Costa Rica with exposure to mosquitos and a freshwater lake. He worked for an air conditioning company. He occasionally smoked tobacco, drank two glasses of alcohol nightly, and had no illicit drug use. He had no significant family history.
Brain MRI without contrast demonstrated multifocal acute infarcts in the right parieto-occipital region with associated focal cortical superficial siderosis, and a right temporal mass-like lesion with associated mild vasogenic edema. Brain and neck vessel imaging and echocardiogram were unrevealing. He left against medical advice. As an outpatient, an otolaryngologist performed an unrevealing nasal endoscopy.
His symptoms progressed and he re-presented a week later with rapidly progressive dementia, now unable to care for himself. Serum workup was unremarkable. CSF revealed white blood cell (WBC) count 20 cells/microliter (4% eosinophils, 72% lymphocytes, 24% monocytes), protein 1.75 g/L, glucose 3.1 mmol/L, and red blood cell (RBC) count 140 cells/microliter. Brain MRI with and without contrast demonstrated multifocal strokes and co-localized right temporo-parieto-occipital vasogenic edema, cortical superficial siderosis, and diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement. He was empirically started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and antivirals and transferred to our facility.
On initial exam, vital signs were normal. He had meningismus, somnolence, inattention, and executive dysfunction. He had a mild left hemiparesis, left homonymous hemianopsia, and bilateral optic nerve swelling with peripapillary hemorrhages. Serum studies demonstrated no leukocytosis or eosinophilia. Lumbar puncture revealed a markedly elevated opening pressure of 46 cm H2O, worsened eosinophilia (WBC 14 cells/microliter: 19% eosinophils, 65% lymphocytes, 16% monocytes), protein 2.25 g/L, glucose 3.5 mmol/L, 2 unique oligoclonal bands, immunoglobulin G index 1.0, and benign cytology and flow cytometry. MRI brain with and without contrast showed progression. MR angiography showed diminished number and caliber of right middle cerebral artery branch vessels without large vessel occlusions or irregularities . Conventional cerebral angiography was not obtained. He had extensive negative serum and CSF testing for bacterial, viral, fungal, mycobacterial, and parasitic causes of eosinophilic meningoencephalitis including angiostrongyliasis, baylisascariasis, neurocysticercosis, universal polymerase chain reaction, and metagenomic next generation sequencing. Broad evaluation for autoimmune and neoplastic disorders, including whole-body CT and fluorodeoxyglucose-PET, were unrevealing. Video-EEG for 72 h revealed diffuse severe slowing and asymmetric right-sided, posterior-predominant voltage attenuation suggestive of focal cerebral pathology, aligning with imaging findings. There were no epileptiform discharges or seizures.
He underwent biopsy of a region of enhancement and edema in his right lateral temporal lobe and leptomeninges. Pathology showed a dense inflammatory infiltrate involving the leptomeninges and underlying cortex, composed predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells with a smaller component of eosinophils. No granulomatous inflammation or vasculitis was present. Gram, Periodic Acid Schiff, Grocott’s methenamine-silver, Steiner silver, and Kinyoun acid-fast stains were negative for bacterial, fungal, spirochete, and acid-fast organisms. No parasites were seen. Congo Red stain was negative.
He became obtunded and continued to worsen radiographically, prompting initiation of empiric antifungal, antiparasitic, and high-dose steroid therapy. He had serial lumbar punctures for intracranial hypertension. Diagnostically, he underwent a second brain biopsy targeting worsening enhancement and edema in the right occipital lobe. Biopsy revealed thickening of the small and medium caliber blood vessels within the leptomeninges and cortex by a homogenous eosinophilic material . Additionally, granulomatous and transmural lymphoplasmacytic inflammation of several blood vessels with focal vessel wall necrosis were seen, consistent with angiitis . Immunohistochemical stains for amyloid-β and Congo red were extensively positive in the blood vessel walls and in numerous diffuse and neuritic parenchymal plaques.
He was diagnosed with ABRA and received 5 days of high-dose methylprednisolone with a prolonged taper and pulsed intravenous cyclophosphamide. His clinical course stabilized, his intracranial hypertension resolved, and his MRI enhancement resolved. His exam stabilized but only marginally improved. At 9 months follow-up, he remained dependent in activities of daily living, reliant on a feeding tube, and bedbound.