A 47-year-old female patient presented to the dialysis unit with decreased level of consciousness and sleepiness of two days duration. Her past medical history is end stage renal disease and regular hemodialysis 3 times/week for 2.5 years, controlled hypertension. She is non-diabetic. Her past surgical history included arteriovenous fistula before 2.5 years, appendectomy and tonsillectomy long time ago.
The patient was in her usual state of health of moderate exercise tolerance until two days before admission when she started to experience lower back and bilateral knee pain that was vague in nature and associated with insomnia. That time, she received one tablet of baclofen 25 mg from her sister. Her sister used to ingest baclofen for chronic neck pain. The patient fell into a deep sleep throughout that night and entire next day without any wakefulness periods. Two days later, she went to her usual hemodialysis session and there the medical personnel noticed her high blood pressure and a state of unconsciousness for which she was sent back to the emergency department after the hemodialysis session. The family denied any previous similar episodes or limb weakness, numbness, dysarthria, dysphagia or mouth deviation before the event. There is no history of fever, photophobia, neck stiffness, falling down or any psychosocial problems. She had not travelled or had any contact with sick people. She was compliant to her hemodialysis sessions. She is a 20 pack-year smoker but does not use any illegal drugs or consume alcoholic drinks. Her home medications were: Atenolol 50 mg/day, Amlodipine 5 mg/ day, CaCO3 600 mg /day and alfacalcidol 0.25 ugm/day.
On examination, the vital signs were as follows: Temperature: 36.4 °C, Blood pressure: 220/110, pulse: 95 beat/minute, respiratory rate: 14/min, oxygen saturation: 95% on room air. On admission, the Glasgow Coma Scale was 9/15. She was unconscious. Deep tendon reflexes were absent. There was no obvious facial asymmetry, left pupil was round and reactive to light (right eye is artificial due to previous trauma). Gag reflex was intact but the cranial nerves could not be assessed. The fundus was examined and no papilledema or hemorrhage were seen. The breathing sounds were heard bilaterally on the chest with no added sounds. Abdominal examination was unremarkable.
Lab results at admission were: Hemoglobin: 16.1 g/dL, White blood cells: 6.8 K/ul, platelets: 155 K/ul, Sodium: 138 mEq/L, potassium: 4.4 mEq/L, chloride: 95 mEq/L, CRP: 1.6 mg/L, Glucose: 99 mg/dL, ABG’s: pH:7.44, pCO2: 36.6 mmHg, pO2: 88 mmHg, HCO3: 24.4 mEq/L, albumin: 4.4 g/dL, alkaline phosphatase:88, total bilirubin: 0.5 mg/dL, direct bilirubin: 0.2 mg/dL, BUN: 27 mg/dL, Creatinine: 5.5 mg/dL. Liver function tests were within normal ranges. To rule out any brain ischemia or hemorrhage, brain computed topography (CT scan) was done on the day of admission and Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was done on the second day of admission. CT scan showed no significant lesions, no hemorrhage or any other defects. MRI showed no signs of recent ischemic stroke, intracranial hemorrhage, space-occupying lesion or midline shift. The hypertension was controlled by labetalol IV infusion pump.
After ruling out all possible causes of her decreased level of consciousness, including Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), baclofen toxicity was considered as the cause. She was started on flumazenil 0.25 mg and on intensive daily ultrafiltration hemodialysis sessions since the first day of admission with total of three extra hemodialysis sessions. The improvement started to be noticed at the second day when she was semi-conscious, hallucinating, obeying commands as ordered but still not oriented to time, place or person. GCS was 10/15. The dramatic improvement was on the next day after a total of two extra hemodialysis sessions, she was fully awake, GCS 15/15, able to obey commands but still not well oriented so a third extra session was considered. After three days of admission and a total of five hemodialysis sessions, she was discharged after she had returned to her previous baseline state of health and she was instructed not to receive baclofen again.