A 41-year-old man presented in March 2005 to the internist due to frequent headaches and plethoric face. The CBC results showed a hematocrit of 65.1%. The number of red cells was elevated: 7,32 × 106/mm3. The mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was within normal levels: 88,9 fl. Oxygen saturation was 99%. The patient was a non-smoker. Hemoglobin was 21.7 g/dl, with all other hematological, biochemical and urine examinations being normal, apart from a small cholesterol (232 mg/dl) and GPT (72 U/L) level elevation. The patient was taking no medications and his medical and surgical history was clear.
Findings of the abdominal ultrasound examination were normal, apart from a solid mass on the lower pole of the right kidney, measuring 8.1 × 6.1 cm, with calcifications. The left kidney was normal. On subsequent CT and MRI examination this mass was enhancing. It measured 6 × 6 × 7 cm and the differential diagnosis included oncocytoma and renal cell carcinoma. There was evidence of a tumor pseudocapsule with similar uptake to that of the normal renal parenchyma and a central part showing homogeneously diminished contrast uptake. No central scar was detected. Furthermore, the mass appeared to distort the lower pole calyces of the right kidney. No renal vein invasion or lymph node enlargement was noted. Erythropoietin level was 17.4 mIU/ml (normal range: 9–26 mIU/ml).
Subsequently, after phlebotomy (twice) to prevent perioperative thrombotic complications, the patient was subjected to open partial nephrectomy via a flank approach. This decision was based on the fact that the patient was young and had a relatively higher probability to develop chronic renal insufficiency had he been subjected to radical nephrectomy. Another reason was the favorable peripheral location of the tumor and some recent evidence that tumors>4 cm can be treated by partial nephrectomy . Macroscopically, the tumor demonstrated a brownish color. It was solid, well circumscribed and showed no areas of necrosis. A central scar was apparent on macroscopic examination. Microscopically, the tumor showed the morphological and immunohistochemical characters of oncocytoma (vimentin (-), CK7 (-), CD10 (+)).
The hematocrit levels dropped to normal levels in the perioperative period (probably due to phlebotomy and blood loss during the operation). Because of the need to closely follow his postoperative status, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 11th postoperative day after an uneventful recovery period. On follow-up examination 1, 3 and 6 months later the hematocrit remained normal (42 to 43%, hemoglobin 14–14.5 g/dl) and after 9 months the hematocrit was 42.5%. Follow-up MRI at 9 months was normal and erythropoietin levels dropped to 14.5 mIU/ml one year after the operation.