A 50-year-old Caucasian woman with no significant medical history presented to our hospital with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and a low-grade fever for 5 days. Her exam was remarkable for periumbilical tenderness to deep palpation. Her cardiovascular exam was normal, with clear S1 and S2, regular rate, no murmurs, gallops, or rubs. Laboratory studies revealed moderately elevated lactate dehydrogenase at 301 units/L (110–216) and elevated non-specific inflammatory markers—erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 76 mm/h (0–20) and c-reactive protein at 16.5 mg/dL (<0.8). Electrolytes, cardiac biomarkers, complete blood count, and electrocardiogram were normal. A non-contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed wedge-shaped bilateral renal and splenic infarcts and colonic wall thickening. Blood cultures were obtained, empiric antibiotics begun, and intravenous heparin initiated for suspected emboli. Vasculitic, thrombophilic and infectious work-up were ordered (later returned negative). Transthoracic echocardiogram (technically difficult due to body habitus) showed an ejection fraction of 65%, but no vegetation, thrombus, mass or intra-cardiac shunt. A CT chest and abdomen with contrast was performed to confirm splenic and renal infarcts, to assess for other areas of systemic embolization, and to assess for vasculitic changes in the great vessels.
The CT did not show vasculitis but revealed a filling defect in the left ventricle measuring 3.5 cm × 4.5 cm, concerning for thrombus . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for further tissue characterization and showed a poorly defined mass invading the anterior wall and septum with projections into the left ventricle . Late gadolinium enhancement imaging with long inversion time revealed a mass homogeneous with the myocardium, suggesting that this was not a thrombus. The mass was slightly hyperintense on T1 and T2 weighted sequences . Rest perfusion revealed mild appearance of vascularity . Tissue characteristics by MRI suggested malignancy, but tissue biopsy was recommended for confirmation.
Guided by transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE), left ventricular (LV) endomyocardial biopsy was attempted but was inconclusive as the procedure was aborted prematurely due to ventricular arrhythmias. Noted on TOE was a large and complex mass invading the anteroseptum , with attached smaller mobile echodensities causing intermittent obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract . Cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) imaging was performed with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) to determine if the mass was indeed malignant. This was performed after a high-fat diet for 24 h and injection of heparin to suppress baseline myocardial glucose uptake. The PET imaging showed a focal area of increased FDG uptake in the basal anteroseptum of the left ventricle with a maximum standardized uptake value of 10.7, consistent with a malignant rather than benign mass . A second biopsy attempted by left anterior mini-thoracotomy and needle biopsy failed to obtain adequate specimens primarily due to location of the mass on the septum. The patient was subsequently discharged in stable condition with outpatient appointments with the cardiac surgeon. However, she returned a week later with pericardial effusion and tamponade physiology. Prior echocardiograms had not shown effusion. Therefore, a slowly expanding iatrogenic effusion post-biopsy was suspected to be the aetiology. A subxyphoid pericardial window was created with subsequent resolution of tamponade.
Owing to inconclusive biopsies, given the malignant appearance, and out of concern for further systemic emboli, complete resection was performed in a high risk open-heart surgery that included mitral valve repair. Pathology yielded diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) . She completed six cycles of chemotherapy with R-EPOCH (rituximab + etoposide + prednisolone + Oncovin/vincristine + cyclophosphamide + hydroxydaunorubicin). A PET scan before the third cycle showed no FDG-avid lesions. Repeat cardiac MRI 6 months post-resection and chemotherapy showed no residual mass . At the time of this manuscript (more than a year from presentation), she is alive and has normal functional capacity.