A 57-year-old female with history of stage IV uterine cancer with metastasis to the liver status post total abdominal hysterectomy/bilateral salpingo-oophrectomy (on lenvatinib 8 mg PO daily/pembrolizumab 200 mg IV every 3 weeks), primary adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroidism, hypertension, and history of pulmonary embolism on rivaroxaban, presented to the emergency department with complaints of an acute onset of epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, and decreased appetite over the course of 1 day.
In the emergency department, vital signs were significant for tachycardia (124) and hypertensive blood pressure (142/94). Patients’ height was 157 cm (5 feet 2 inches), and their weight was 57.5 kg (126 lb and 12.2 oz) with a BMI of 23.2 kg/m2. Physical exam was significant for epigastric tenderness. Initial workup was significant for: an acute kidney injury with the creatinine increased from baseline (1.99), elevated lactate (6.8), hypocalcemia (5.5), lipase of 1,508, and triglycerides of 2,052. CT abdomen and pelvis, as seen in , displayed diffuse peripancreatic inflammation and edema, which was consistent with acute pancreatitis. Patient was started on an insulin drip at 0.1 units/kg/h and IV fluids with dextrose 5% in water (D5W) and admitted to the ICU for hypertriglyceridemia-induced acute pancreatitis. There were no diagnostic challenges during the initial workup for the diagnosis.
While in the ICU, serum triglyceride levels were measured every 12 h and steadily declined. Once the triglyceride levels reached 469, the patient was transitioned off the insulin and dextrose 5% in water, and triglycerides were no longer trended; IV fluids were continued, and the patient was downgraded from the ICU.
Oncology was consulted given the history of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the endometrium and the fact that the patient was undergoing chemotherapy with the last dose of pembrolizumab 200 mg IV administered on February 16, 2022, 2 days prior to admission. Per chart review, it was noted that the patient was started on lenvatinib and pembrolizumab on March 31, 2021; her last lipid panel, which was performed on April 28, 2021, was significant for an elevated triglyceride level of 312, but otherwise the lipid panel was within normal limits. Patients’ lipid profile over time is depicted in a with patients triglyceride levels depicted over the course of time in b. Given that the patient denied any other changes to lifestyle such as dietary changes or alcohol consumption, stable normal weight BMI, and no other risk factors for pancreatitis, there was a concern that this patient’s pancreatitis could have been due to chemotherapy administration. Oncology recommended that supportive management be continued with IV fluids, PO intake as tolerated, and continuing to trend triglycerides. Patient’s symptoms improved during the course of hospitalization, and patient was discharged with outpatient follow-up with oncology, where she was continued on her chemotherapy with serial triglyceride levels to monitor for hypertriglyceridemia, at which point cessation of the medication or decreased dosing were to be discussed. However, the patient’s triglyceride levels remained stable, and no adverse event occurred.