The patient presented with intermittent pain under the right costal arch for four months.
A 20-year old female patient presented with intermittent pain under the right costal arch for four months, and was diagnosed with an adrenal tumor with IVC and right atrium tumor thrombus. Before admission, the patient had visited a number of different hospitals. However, due to the position and size of the tumor, and complications such as pulmonary embolism, no surgery was performed. The Department of Urology in our hospital has treated more than 100 cases of adrenal or renal tumors with Mayo Clinic stage I-IV tumor thrombus[,]. Thus, we have experience in tumor excision and emergency treatment for these circumstances. Considering the rapid development of the tumor and risks of a stuck valve that could occur at any time, the patient was admitted to hospital. Prior to admission, the patient and her family members were fully informed that the operation was a form of palliative treatment.
The patient had no remarkable past medical history.
The patient had no remarkable personal and family history.
Physical examination showed a temperature of 37 ºC, heart rate (HR) of 101 bpm, blood pressure (BP) of 92/60 mmHg, respiratory rate of 17 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 91% in room air.
Laboratory examinations showed an elevation of renin 1.51 ng/mL/h (normal range: 0.05-0.79 ng/mL/h) and angiotensin II 191.01 pg/L (normal range: 55.3-115.3 pg/L). The high renin-angiotensin secretion was possibly attributed to decreased renal perfusion. The 24 h urine catecholamine levels were normal and pheochromocytoma was excluded. Although endocrine changes were not typical, adrenal cortical carcinoma was highly suspected. Reduced platelets (PLT, 68 × 109/L) and an abnormal coagulation test (prothrombin time (PT): 15.5 s and international normalized ratio (INR): 1.45) were present. The hematologist recommended maintaining perioperative PLT > 80 × 109 in order to reduce intraoperative blood loss.
Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a retroperitoneal mass with a diameter of 22 cm, which most likely originated from the right adrenal gland and was closely related to the liver . Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) revealed a huge heterogeneous mass with elevated glucose metabolism in the right hepatic lobe and the space between the liver and the right kidney. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed that the proximal IVC was 25.7 mm wide with a strong echogenic filling extending into the right atrium and ventricle and the distant tumor thrombus was 70 mm approximately. Preoperative left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 64% . Cardiac enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the filling in the right atrium and ventricle .