A 41-year-old man was diagnosed with stage IIA good risk non seminoma of the left-sided testis and treated with hemiorchidectomy and adjuvant three cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin. He received a total dose of 270 mg bleomycin during treatment. After the last course of chemotherapy, a chest and abdominal CT-scan (CT 1) revealed complete remission of the metastatic lesions. However, we unexpectedly discovered fibrosis in both lungs with signs of bronchiolitis obliterans and focally organizing pneumonia, probably induced by bleomycin (Figure a), while liver lesions were absent (Figure b). He had no pulmonary complaints. No broncho-alveolar lavage was performed. Our patient was closely monitored according to national guidelines
. A year after end of chemotherapy, with pulmonary infiltrations resolving (Figure a) routine CT scan (CT 4) showed four new hypo-dense lesions in the liver with a maximal diameter of 20 mm (Figure b. At that moment, the patient reported no complaints. Tumor markers, human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha fetoprotein levels and lactate dehydrogenase, were normal. Laboratory findings reported 7.3×109/l leucocytes with 11% eosinophils (absolute eosinophil count 0.8 × 109/l, normal value < 0.5) normal liver enzymes, bilirubin level and liver function tests (prothrombin time, albumin and glucose). The patient had no history of travel related diseases, dietary habits and other risk factors for eosinophilia. Sarcoidosis was ruled out by a normal serum angiotensin-converting enzyme. Hepatitis serology and bacteriological cultures were all negative. Additional, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for further characterization (Figure a and
b). On the non-contrast T1-weighted axial MRI image (Figure a) a lesion with a hypointense rim and isointense centre was seen. On the contrast enhanced T1-weighted fat-suppressed axial MR image (hepatocyte phase, Figure b) a lesion with centrally low signal intensity and rim enhancement suggestive for small abscess was seen. A needle biopsy of one of the liver lesions showed no signs of tumor, normal architecture of central veins and portal fields and portal inflammation with infiltration of eosinophils and lymphocytes with focal necrosis (Figure ). Extensive discussions in our tumor panel and with our hepatology experts led to the diagnosis of bleomycin induced focal hepatitis with eosinophilic infiltration based on exclusion of other possible diagnoses, time-relationship with BIP regression and pathologic findings. A wait-and-see policy was adopted with CT scanning (CT 6) three months later (Figure ).
This CT revealed further regression of pulmonary fibrosis, and regression of liver lesions in segment 2 (n = 1) and in segment 8 (n = 3). At 10 months one lesion was further decreased 3 lesions were stable. Interestingly, subsequent blood measurements showed a normalization of the percentage eosinophils in the three months between the first occurrence of liver lesions on CT and second CT with diminishment of these liver lesions and eventually calcification. This leads to the hypothesis that both findings are related to each other (Figure ).