The patient is a 94-year-old active male with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia and stage 3A renal insufficiency, who presented to the emergency department with mental status changes, in addition to months-long worsening of exertional dyspnea. He was diagnosed with a stroke with findings on head computed tomography of a hypodense area in the right occipital region, most likely due to new-onset atrial fibrillation (AF). Echocardiography showed concentric left ventricular wall thickening with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40%, in addition to evidence of severe AS with aortic valve (AV) area of 0.8 cm2 and peak and mean gradients of 29 mmHg and 18 mmHg, respectively. Heart catheterization demonstrated mild coronary artery disease as well as low-flow, low-gradient severe AS.
Baseline mean AV gradient was 18 mmHg with a valve area of 0.6 cm2 and transvalvular flow rate of 112.18 mL/sec. Dobutamine challenge at 10 mcg/kg/min revealed an increase in mean AV gradient to 47 mmHg and valve area of 0.8 cm2. The transvalvular flow rate more than doubled to 243.45 mL/s, confirming severe AS. The patient’s electrocardiogram did not show signs of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), raising suspicion for CA. Nuclear scintigraphy with technetium pyrophosphate was highly consistent with wild-type (transthyretin) cardiac amyloidosis .
The patient was placed on aspirin (ASA) and direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) for his AF and stroke. His neurological symptoms completely resolved at the time of his initial presentation, and he underwent successful TAVR two months later . Postoperatively, the patient was observed in the intensive care unit and was discharged home the following day with no complications. His anticoagulants (ASA and DOAC) were continued, and follow-up echocardiography demonstrated normal functioning of the prosthetic valve with AV area of 2.0 cm2 and peak and mean gradients of 9 mmHg and 5 mmHg, respectively. Treatment of his CA with Tafamidis was recommended; however, the patient declined due to its cost and personal preference.