We report on a case of a 16-year old male patient who was diagnosed with DF of the right upper thorax in 2011 . The primary approach consisted of partial tumor resection for functional preservation. Systemic therapy with MTX/VBL was started after completion of surgery in order to maintain tumor control. However, MTX-associated nausea and fatigue led to discontinuation of MTX after 6 months of treatment. Instead, sulfonylurea had been added to VBL, but again, nausea limited the applicability of this combination and treatment was provided as single agent sulfonylurea.
Two years after the initial resection, a symptomatic tumor recurrence was detected while receiving medical treatment. Local recurrence involved the right brachial plexus, which was incompletely resected for the purpose of function preservation.
Systemic therapy was reconvened with MTX and vinorelbine, which achieved symptomatic improvement of pain with disease stabilization as best response on MRI. However, the treatment was not sustainable because of grade 1 nausea and fatigue and led to treatment discontinuation after 4 months.
Within 4 months, the patient complained of recurrence of grade 1 tumor pain and the MRI showed gradual tumor growth. At this time, radiotherapy was not considered appropriate given the young age and the proximity to the plexus nerves, instead medical treatment was discussed with the patient. Re-challenge with chemotherapy was not preferred by the patient, and an individual approach to medical treatment was sought. Based on the hyperperfusion of the patient’s tumor and the promising results of sorafenib in DF, we implied future treatment with bevacizumab 15 mg/kg q3wks., given the excellent tolerability profile of this agent.
During the course of treatment, tumor pain disappeared and the patient experienced functional improvement. Initial radiological response was detected after 1 month, with a tumorshrinkage of 16 %. Treatment was continued for a total duration of 12 months with a further decrease in tumor diameter of 38 % . Further follow-up is performed by 3 months intervals by MRI and clinical visits. The first post-therapy scan confirmed tumor response in our patient, indicating sustained clinical activity.