A 50-year-old female visited our clinic with sudden visual loss in her left eye.
The past medical history included retinal vasculitis of the right eye, Sjogren syndrome, coronary heart disease, type 2 DM, and HTN. The patient had DM and HTN for about 3 years. Both DM and HTN are well controlled in the past few years. This patient suffered from right tinnitus, vertigo, persistent vomiting, and dry mouth 2 years ago. Serological examination and labial gland biopsy revealed Sjögren’s syndrome. The patient started immunosuppressive drugs with prednisolone 5-10 mg/day and methotrexate 10 mg/week since then. The rheumatologist tapered prednisolone from 5 to 10 mg/day to 2.5 mg/day and kept methotrexate 10 mg/week 3 months before this event. Before this event, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers (CF)/20 cm in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. Recently, she experienced dizziness and walking instability. Sudden decrease in vision was noted when she squatted.
On examination, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers/20 cm in the right eye and 2/100 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 21 mmHg in both eyes. No iris rubeosis, inflammation, or relative afferent pupillary defect was noted in either eye. Fundus photograph of the left eye showed venous dilation and attenuated arterioles . Fluorescein angiography (FAG) image taken at 56 s (arterial phase) demonstrated prolonged arm-to-retina circulation time and a patchy choroidal filling pattern . Laboratory studies showed erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 2 mm/hr.; hemoglobin, 14.0 g/dL (mean corpuscular volume, 106.4 /fL); white blood cells (WBC), 22.87 × 103/μL (neutrophils 89%, lymphocytes 8%, monocytes 2%); and platelets 27.0 × 104/μL. Blood chemistry was normal. Chest radiography was unremarkable. Brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed a total absence of flow in the right internal and external carotid arteries as well as left extracranial carotid arteries . Ultrasonography of the ophthalmic artery showed reverse blood flow in the bilateral ophthalmic arteries . Furthermore, aortography revealed total occlusion of bilateral CCA, and computed tomography angiography (CTA) demonstrated nearly total occlusion of the bilateral CCA and nearly total occlusion of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) . Consequently, a tentative diagnosis of OIS with BCCAO was concluded. The patient then was transferred to the cardiology department for further management. After carotid artery stenting for the left common carotid artery, the patient’s BCVA in the left eye improved to 30/100, and examination of the fundus showed diffuse midperipheral retinal hemorrhage . The corresponding fluorescein angiography image taken at 20 s (arterial phase) demonstrated diffuse blocked fluorescence .