A 67-year-old man presented at our Department of Ophthalmology for treatment recommendation of recurrent conjunctival ″granuloma″ in his left eye. For the first time, the conjunctival granuloma occurred within the first six weeks after cataract surgery. One excision of such a lesion in the right eye and 5 excisions in the left eye had already preceded. The last surgical treatment in the left eye was performed only 4 weeks earlier.
This time, the patient complained of decreased visual acuity, foreign body sensation, and an increasingly hanging left eye lid.
Apart from the aforementioned operations, the patient had no other ophthalmological problems. Systemically the patient had arterial hypertension and hypothyroidism.
At the time of the initial presentation, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 on the left. The left eye presented a hanging eye lid to the middle of the pupil and a wood-like granulation tissue of the bulbar conjunctiva extending from 10 over 12 to 1 o'clock from the limbus to the midperipheral cornea . Otherwise, there was a regular pseudophakia. In the right eye, BCVA was 20/20 and there was no recurrence of the reported “granuloma”. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. The funduscopic results showed no abnormalities bilaterally.
A tumor excision with free conjunctival autograft was performed in the left eye. The first postoperative day revealed a well localized autograft. The granuloma was completely removed . After excision in our clinic, the patient was treated with a topical therapy consisting of prednisolone acetate 3 times a day, fluoroquinolone 3 times a day and lubricant 3 times a day. The patient was discharged after 2 nights with a well-adapted conjunctival graft. Later, histology showed an intact epithelium and a subepithelial accentuated chronic inflammation with deposits of mucin and eosinophilic hyaline material in the Alcian blue staining. In the Congo-red staining, the cross section of the conjunctiva showed a negative staining, no apple green birefringence in polarized light and only red-stained erythrocytes . These findings were consistent with a ″pseudomembrane in conjunctivitis lignosa″.
After two weeks, the patient presented with worse findings in the operated left eye. Clinical examination revealed two lesions: One at the original excision site and a second, new lesion at the excision site of the conjunctival graft at 5 o´clock .
Based on the histologic findings and literature research, we performed a blood coagulation analysis. This showed a plasminogen concentration of 1.5 g/l (normal value: 6-25 g/l) and a plasminogen activity of 21.98% (normal value: 75–150%) which confirmed the histological diagnosis of LC.
We started topical therapy with alteplase (plasminactivator) on an hourly basis, prednisolone acetate 3 times a day, cyclosporine 0,1% at night, and heparin 8 times a day. The patient did not receive a systemic therapy. We scheduled follow-ups at 1, 3, 5, 8, and 12 months after initiation of the therapy. At the first presentation after one month of topical therapy, we already saw a significant improvement of the findings . We continued with this therapy and planned a new check-up three months later. At that time, there was complete regression of the lesion at 5 o'clock and a minor residual lesion at 12 o'clock . Therefore, we decided to perform another excision while continuing the existing local therapy.
The postoperative follow-up after two months showed a vascularized arcuate corneal scar without signs of recurrence and the BCVA increased to 20/25 in the left eye so that topical therapy with alteplase eye drops could be reduced from hourly to five times daily. After eight months, the treatment with alteplase eye drops and heparin eye drops was reduced to two times daily for another three months. Even after five years without therapy, the findings were free of recurrence. The BCVA at that time was 20/20 in both eyes. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed an anterior segment within normal limits in the right eye. The left eye showed a flat conjunctival scar from 10 to 1 o'clock at the limbus without signs of recurrence .