A 71-year-old man was admitted to his local hospital with sudden onset aphasia and weakness in his lower limbs, which had occurred whilst playing golf. He reported no loss of consciousness, headache, nausea and/or vomiting, convulsions or incontinence. He had no significant past medical history and had no vascular risk factors. Routine full blood count and biochemical analysis were normal. Cranial computerised tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed in the original referring hospital were reported as demonstrating a bifrontal parasagittal space-occupying lesion crossing the head of the corpus callosum (thought to be a primary cerebral tumour); see Figure . He was therefore transferred to the regional neurosurgical unit for further management.
On examination post-transfer he was found to be conscious, alert and orientated. The patient had a degree of receptive dysphasia, mild bilateral lower limb weakness and altered behaviour and personality, suggestive of frontal lobe disruption. MRI was reported as in keeping with the initial suggestion of a space-occupying lesion . Given the sudden onset of his symptoms, the possibility of vascular aetiology was considered. Digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) revealed a hypoplastic left anterior carotid artery with the left medial frontal territory being fed by branches of the contralateral pericallosal artery (an anatomical variation); see Figure . This finding reinforced the clinical suspicion of a bifrontal infarction and therefore no neurosurgical intervention was proposed.
CT and MRI repeated 2 weeks after the onset of symptoms showed interval reduction in oedema within what appeared to be subacute bilateral anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory infarcts. The infarction was attributed to thrombo-embolism in the right ACA. Cranial CT carried out at the 12-month follow-up appointment revealed cortical volume atrophy consistent with a bifrontal parafalcine infarction. Eighteen months after his initial presentation, the patient has made a good recovery and is continuing cognitive rehabilitation therapy.