A 17-year-old female presented with a sudden onset severe headache followed by a loss of consciousness for the past 2 days. She had left blurring of vision and weakness in the left half of her face for the past 2 days. The patient had no history of seizures or systemic infections. There was no history of substance abuse or any history favoring coagulation disorders. No similar history was present in any of the family members. Normal developmental milestones were met by the patient. On examination, Glasgow Coma Scale was E3V4M5, pulse was 78/min, and blood pressure was 112/72 mmHg. There was no neck rigidity. The tone and deep tendon reflexes were normal. The plantar was an extensor on the left side. Cranial nerve examination revealed the left homonymous hemianopia and upper motor neuron type of the left facial paresis (House-Brackmann grade 2).
A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain revealed a large acute intraventricular with minimal subarachnoid hemorrhage . Routine blood investigations were within normal limits. The coagulation profile was reported to be within the normal range. The patient underwent six vessels selective digital subtraction angiography (DSA) on a biplane DSA machine emergency basis and the report revealed a distally placed aneurysm arising from the left MPCA. The neck of the aneurysm was 0.6 mm and the dome sized 1.4 × 1.2 mm was directed upward and medially [ and ].
Due to its distal location in the atrium below the splenium, the microsurgical approach may have increased the patient’s visual problem and it was technically difficult to localize the aneurysm. Microsurgical dissection may also have more chances of intraoperative rupture so we planned for endovascular embolization. Under general anesthesia, femoral artery access was achieved. For distal access, we used a 5F long femoral sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA), NavienTM Intracranial Support Catheter (Covidien Vascular Therapies, Mansfield, MA, USA), MarathonTM microcatheter (010) (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA), and MirageTM microguidewire, (008) (EV3, Mansfield, MA, USA). Moreover, we performed super-selective angiography to look for the angioarchitecture of the aneurysm and the parent vessel . We have to use a MarathonTM flow-guided microcatheter as we could not negotiate a microcatheter of 014 sizes used for coiling. We performed super-selective angiography for better anatomical localization of branching vessels and configuration of the aneurysm. Since coiling was not an option for us in the present case, we performed endovascular glue embolization. N-butyl cyanoacrylate, Histoacryl® (B/Braun, Tuttlingen, Germany), was mixed in a 1:3 ratio with Lipiodol® UltraFluid (Guerbet, Villepinte, France) and used for the embolization of both the aneurysmal sac and the affected portion of the parent artery . The patient was kept intubated, closely monitored in the neurosurgical intensive care unit, and extubated on postoperative day 1. Serial check non-contrast CT revealed a resolving hemorrhage with glue cast in situ [ and ]. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging brain showed abnormal blooming in the area of the trigone and left occipital horn junction with no infarct or hemorrhage [ and ]. Postoperatively, the left homonymous hemianopia improved together with the left facial palsy. The patient was discharged in satisfactory condition on postoperative day 5. On follow-up of 3 months, the patient has no neurological deficit with follow-up CT angiography revealing no residual aneurysm or infarct with resolved intraventricular hemorrhage.