A 14-year-old girl, a gymnast, attended to our hospital with pain and restricted range of motion in her both elbows. Six years ago, she had an accident while training and presented with intermittent pain, without tissue swelling and limited range of motion of the elbow during that period. The elbow pain disappeared gradually after conservative treatment, mainly including rest, stop training and taking some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Two years after, when the girl was on training, she suddenly felt pain on both the elbows and it kept on getting worse, with restriction of the elbow motion.
On physical examination, the significant increases in the size of both elbows were noticed. At palpation, masses were found in the bilateral elbow fossa. The left side was about 3.0 cm × 2.0 cm, and the right side was about 2.0 cm × 2.0 cm. The skin on the surface of the mass was free from redness, swelling and ulceration, and no venous bulging. Her elbow motion was poor on both sides, with 80 ° left flexion, 10 ° extension, right 90 ° flexion, 15 ° extension, so she could not touch her shoulders. However, the pronation and supination functions were not affected. Feelings and blood flow at the ends of the fingers of both upper limbs were normal. Laboratory tests were normal for white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and rheumatoid factor. Complementary imaging examinations and serum tests were performed and found no clinically considerable significance. The initial X-ray and CT and 3 Dimensions (3 D)-reconstruction imaging of the bilateral elbows showed multiple calcified densities surrounding anterior and posterior aspect of the elbow joints. Besides, there were sclerotic changes in the articular surface and the joints space were decreased in CT finding.
Open surgery was performed simultaneously to the patient with diagnosis as Synovial Chondromatosis of bilateral elbow. First, cubital fossa was exposed and several loose bodies were observed anterior and posterior to the medial epicondyle in the joint capsule, varying in size from millimetres to 3 cm . After Capsulotomy, all loose bodies were removed out and the proliferative synovia were cut off. Finally, loose bodies were collected for histological examination. Histological studies showed that chondrocytes and mature cartilage tissue formed nodular lesions, no abnormal cells or signs of malignancy were found, and the final diagnosis was synovial chondropathy. .
Postoperative elbow examination for passive movement was unrestricted and encourages active movement based on pain tolerance. Rehabilitation protocol: 1 ~ 3 d after surgery: Patients were educated to make them understand the significance of postoperative rehabilitation. Passively moving the affected shoulder and wrist joints to strengthen the isometric contraction of the affected limb muscles and active grasping of the affected hands to facilitate swelling. 4 d ~ 3w after surgery: passive flexion and extension of the wrist and stretching exercise, gradually doing biceps, triceps, wrist extension, wrist flexion, pronation, supination muscle group resistance exercise. Oral celebrex was given to patients within 3 weeks after surgery to reduce pain and prevent ectopic ossification. 4 ~ 8w after operation: continue to train the muscle strength of the affected limb and flexion and extension of the elbow. After each training, the affected elbow was applied with ice for 15 min. 2 ~ 6 months after operation: further strengthen the mobility training of the affected elbow joint, and gradually start the strength training of the affected limb and activity training of daily life. At a month after surgery the girl came for follow-up examination. She didn’t complain of any pain during that period and her range of motion were between − 10°and 130° in both the elbows. The X-ray was repeated during that period and found no calcified densities . Her elbow joints were physical examined after 1 year, the flexion, extension, pronation and supination were not restricted..