A 47-year-old Japanese man, stabbed in the back with a knife, was transferred to our emergency room. He presented with a stab-wound in his left back, and slight tenderness in his abdomen; although his hemodynamic state was unstable, it was improved by a bolus infusion. Upon blood examination, most laboratory parameters were normal, including hemoglobin and coagulation; both serum amylase and lipase levels were within normal ranges (61 U/L and 9 U/L, respectively). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) showed extravasation of the contrast medium around the pancreatic head, as well as hematomas behind the pancreas and in the left psoas muscle ; no other visceral or major vascular injuries were presented. We performed abdominal arterial angiography and extravasation of the contrast medium through the inferior pancreatoduodenal artery (IPDA), revealing a pseudo aneurysm in the IPDA branch . Coil embolization of the IPDA was therefore performed, and the hemodynamic state was stabilized.
On day 1, the serum amylase level was elevated (1366 U/L); however, duct injury was not confirmed via CT. Acute pancreatitis was diagnosed due to pancreatic trauma, and conservative treatment using octreotide was initiated. Additionally, magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography was planned to evaluate duct involvement; however, it was acknowledged that the metal clip used in a cholecystectomy performed more than 20 years prior might be contraindicative to magnetic resonance imaging. We therefore selected endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP), as the presence of duct disruption was not completely denied.
On day 5, although ERCP was performed, the scope did not reach Vater’s papilla due to the narrow cavity of the decompressed duodenum. The serum amylase level gradually decreased and then normalized. On day 12, CT revealed a wedge-shaped, low-density area in the pancreatic head, and consecutive pseudocysts behind the pancreas and in the left psoas muscle . Thereafter, a percutaneous drain was placed through the stab wound, behind the pancreatic head. On day 22, contrast radiography through the percutaneous drain revealed the proximal and distal parts of the main pancreatic duct ; therefore, the patient was diagnosed with AAST grade IV pancreatic injury. On day 26, an endoscopic nasopancreatic drainage (ENPD) tube was inserted across the disruption , and on day 38, CECT showed a marked reduction in the fluid collection . The ENPD tube was changed to an endoscopic retrograde pancreatic drainage (ERPD) tube on day 40, and he was discharged on day 61. The ERPD tube was removed 10 months later, and stenosis has not been confirmed on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography after 1.5 years.