A 25-year-old female with no prior medical history presented to the emergency department due to high fever (up to 39°C) since 3 days. She complained of left flank pain and gross hematuria. On physical examination, left costovertebral angle tenderness was noted. The urinalysis confirmed the hematuria (2055 red blood cells per high-power field). The urinary dipstick was negative for leukocyte esterase and for nitrites, but significantly positive for albuminuria (2+). On microscopic examination of the urine, pyuria was minimal (6 white blood cells per high-power field) and no bacteriuria was noted. She denied having taken antibiotics before presentation. Urine and blood cultures were obtained. The laboratory tests revealed a significantly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP = 28 mg/dl), a high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (107 mm/h), and an elevated creatinine (1.21 mg/dl) with normal blood urea nitrogen (16 mg/dl).
She was admitted to the internal medicine ward with a preliminary diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis, and she was started on intravenous ceftriaxone. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography the next day revealed a hypoenhancing region in the upper pole of the left kidney, suggestive of pyelonephritis . However, considering the significant hematuria in the absence of pyuria and bacteriuria, and the persistently elevated creatinine (1.55 mg/dl on day 3), a nephrologist was consulted. Microscopic evaluation of the urinary sediment revealed dysmorphic red blood cells suggesting glomerular disease (2 red blood cell casts and 60–80 red blood cells per high-power field with >10% of G1 cells and >80% dysmorphic erythrocytes). The spot urine protein to creatinine ratio obtained on the 5th day of hospital stay was also elevated (929 mg/g). Furthermore, both urine and blood cultures came back negative, and no fever was recorded during the hospital stay. Ceftriaxone was discontinued after 7 days of treatment.
A biopsy of the left kidney was performed at the 6th day of hospital stay and confirmed a diagnosis of IgA nephropathy (immunofluorescence was strongly positive for mesangial IgA deposition, complement component C3, and lambda light chains and moderately positive for IgM). The patient denied any recent respiratory tract infection symptoms. Other lab tests sent during her hospital stay were normal (lactate dehydrogenase, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, anticardiolipin IgG and IgM, anti-beta-2 glycoprotein I IgG and IgM, protein electrophoresis, serum complement C3c and C4 level, rheumatoid factor, and transesophageal echocardiography). She was started on lisinopril 5 mg daily. Furthermore, considering the significant proteinuria, the elevated creatinine and the negative prognostic features of the biopsy, (M1E1S1T0C1 according to the Oxford classification ) she was started on glucocorticoids (three-day pulse of methylprednisolone 1g in months 1, 3, and 5 in addition to oral prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg every other day for 6 months) . At follow-up at 2 months, both creatine (0.86 mg/dl) and the spot urine protein to creatinine (114 mg/g) were normal. CRP at follow-up was 0.4 mg/dl.