In August 2020, a 40-year-old female, with a three-year history of bilateral otalgia with severe itching and creamy discharge from the ear canal was admitted to the department of otorhinolaryngology.
She complained of ear eczema and received ciprofloxacin and gentamicin for possible bacterial infections. She also received betamethasone for inflammation (i.e., redness and swelling)
and itching of the external ear canal. Notably, she had no history of traveling abroad, and the only predisposing factor which the patient remembered was repeated ear manipulation.
The ear discharge was collected using a cotton swab and inoculated on Sabouraud dextrose agar (Difco, USA) supplemented with chloramphenicol and CHROMagar Candida (CHROMagar Company, France).
It is noteworthy that round to ovoid yeast cells were observed in the direct examination. After incubation for 48 h at 30 °C, it was identified initially as non-albicans
Candida due
to the growth of pale pink to dark purple colonies on CHROMagar Candida . Identification was performed by amplification of internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
regions using ITS1 and ITS4 as described previously [ , ].
The DNA sequences of the ITS region were analyzed using GenBank, and the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool showed 100% similarity with the ex-type isolate
of C. auris (MH427523) and deposited with the accession number of MW019910.1. Moreover, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using specific primers
for C. auris designed by Kordalewska et al. which resulted in a 163-bp PCR product The unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean analysis was performed in MEGA X software (version 10.1) with bootstrapping using 1000 replicates .
The in vitro antifungal susceptibility testing was performed on fluconazole, voriconazole, amphotericin B, nystatin, miconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, ravuconazole,
isavuconazole, ketoconazole, and anidu-lafungin using the CLSI M27-S4 broth microdilution document .
Based on the results of the antifungal susceptibility test, C. auris isolate had a high fluconazole MIC (≥32 µg/ml). The MIC values of voriconazole, itraconazole, miconazole,
amphotericin B, posaconazole, isavuconazole, ravuconazole, ketoconazole, clotrimazole, nystatin, micafungin, and anidulafungin were 1, 0.016, > 16, 0.25, 0.016,
0.016, 0.5, 2, 2, 2, 0.032, and 0.016 μg/mL, respectively.
The otomycosis was managed by antifungal therapy consisting of topical administration of clotrimazole 1% and miconazole 1% cream b.i.d. for
eight weeks. During the follow-up, it was found that the patient had completely improved, and there was no evidence of recurrence.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Babol University of Medical Science (ethics code: IR.MUBABOL.REC.1399.288). This case report was performed
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and informed consent was obtained from the patient for the inclusion of the details in the manuscript and for publication.