A 52-year-old female patient with a chief complaint of visual disturbance in her left eye (OS) for four days was referred to our ophthalmology department. She denied a past relevant medical history. Ocular examination revealed that the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the right eye (OD) was 20/20, while that of the left eye was 20/100. The intraocular pressure in both eyes was normal, and the right eye was unremarkable. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed conjunctival hyperaemia and 2 + anterior chamber cells with 2 + flare OS. The vitreous had 2 + cells and 2 + haze OS. Fundus examination revealed bullous RD with subretinal fluid, which shifted with changes in body position. No retinal breaks were observed . Ultrasonography (B-scan) revealed thickening of the sclera and hyper-echoic banding in the temporal and inferior quadrants, consistent with retinal detachment . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed subretinal fluid in the macula OS . The anterior chamber depth was 2.25 mm. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) demonstrated diffuse thickening of the ciliary body and choroid, with a mass of low echogenicity in the pars plana and pars plicate; the internal structure was inhomogeneous, and the boundary was unclear. A lesion with ciliary body granulomatous inflammation measuring 9.25*1.67*12.92 mm was confirmed . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) revealed non-perfusion zones with accumulated fluorescence. The results of indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) were unremarkable. We carried out comprehensive systemic examinations, including serological tests for infectious and rheumatological disorders such as hepatitis, syphilis and tuberculosis. All results were negative except for the results of T-cell-based release assay (T-Spot®.TB, T-SPOT) test, which were positive, and those of the purified protein derivative (PPD) test, which were strongly positive (with an induration diameter of 20 mm). Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple pulmonary nodules, some of which were ground-glass opacities. A consultation from the Infectious Diseases Department was sought to evaluate the patient and ruled out active tuberculosis, as the patient had no systemic symptoms.
According to the patient’s medical history and clinical findings, we considered a diagnosis of tuberculous ciliary body granuloma (clinically suspected). Anti-tuberculosis regimens, including isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide combined with prednisone (oral 40 mg/d, tapering according to the patient’s condition), were prescribed. One month later, the BCVA OS was 20/100, and the anterior chamber cells and flare were significantly reduced. OCT revealed significant resolution in the subretinal fluid . Seven months after initial treatment, the BCVA OS was 20/60, and the retina was completely reattached . OCT revealed minimal residual fluid in the fovea . UBM revealed a significant reduction in the size of the ciliary body granuloma to approximately 7.82*0.75*2.54 mm . The patient stopped anti-tuberculosis treatment (ATT) following one year of consistent therapy. After another eight months, the BCVA was 20/100 OS, and the lens was opaque . UBM suggested that the size of the ciliary body granuloma was 1.96*0.23*1.16 mm . The BCVA of her left eye reached 20/50 after cataract surgery.