A 27-year-old Chinese woman gravida 1 para 1 was treated with Mirena® implantation for adenomyosis and menorrhagia in our hospital in September 2012. The patient was in good general health and had regular menstrual cycles. She had a caesarean section to deliver a baby boy in 2003. Six months after the delivery, she received a triangular-shaped metal intrauterine device (IUD) insertion for contraception. The IUD was then removed two months later due to unbearable vaginal spotting. The patient had a history of moderate alcohol consumption but no history of allergic reactions to plastic, metal, alcohol, medications, and povidone-iodine. Her routine gynecological examination before the operation appeared normal.
A Mirena® LNG-IUS was inserted into her uterine cavity according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The patient did not complain any discomfort during the operation. The operation was successful. However, 2 hours after the operation, the patient developed an erythematous skin rash on her body. The lesion first appeared around her umbilical area, then on her chest, face, legs, arms, and feet. The rash covered her entire body in a short time . Other symptoms accompanied with the development of the rash included pruritic, slight left lower quadrant pain, and slight dizziness. The patient did not have fever, nausea, and vomiting. Her vital signs appeared normal and stable. Her gynecological examination did not showed any significant abnormality. Her vulva development was normal. She was sexually active and had no prior vaginal delivery. Her genital skin and mucosa did not exhibit any rash and congestion. Small amount of bloody discharge was present in her vagina. Her cervix was smooth. Her uterus was anteverted, slightly enlarged, and soft. She did not feel tenderness around uterus area. Her ovaries and ovarian attachments did not show any obvious abnormality.
The diagnosis from a dermatologist was acute urticaria possibly caused by allergic reactions. The patient was advised to have the Mirena® removed immediately. After the Mirena® was removed, her pruritic was slightly relieved. The patient then took 10 mg oral methylprednisolone and 5 mg desloratadine tablet daily for five days. The patient came back to follow-up visit three days after the operation. Her abdominal pain and pruritic resolved completely, her skin condition also improved significantly . The medication was discontinued five days after the operation. Her urticaria subsided and did not recur.