A 67-year-old male patient presented to our dermatology outpatient department with complaints of bilateral joint pain along with a few senile purpuric patches over the arms. On examination, there was a swelling in the right elbow posterior aspect measuring 2 × 2 cm, firm to hard and non-tender on palpation with the presence of ulceration for 3 months. Another swelling in the left elbow is firm to hard with overlying reddish skin present for the last 1 year. [Fig. a,b,c,d] The patient had a history of falls 6 months back over bilateral elbows. There were a few purpuric lesions on the arms with superficial crusting.
X-ray from B/L elbow shows inflammation with irregular fluid collection into the posterior aspect of the right elbow in the subcutaneous plane and irregular erosion of the olecranon. Features were suggestive of infective/inflammatory etiology. [Fig. e]
Routine laboratory investigations revealed Haemoglobin- 13.9gm/dl, Total leucocyte count-14.3*103/µL; Fasting sugar- 261 mg/dl, Postprandial sugar- 227 mg/dl, and HbA1c- 8.2%. Lipid profile revealed higher triglycerides values (203 mg/dl), and other parameters were normal. His viral serological markers were negative. Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) stain for Acid fast bacilli (AFB) in the smear was negative & Catridge based Nuclei acid amplification testing (CB-NAAT) was negative from the sputum sample. With the above findings, the clinical suspicion was of gouty arthritis.
The patient was advised FNAC from the swelling in bilateral elbows. Rapid on-site evaluation (ROSE) was performed using 1% aq. toluidine blue. There was 1 ml of pus-like material aspirated from the left lesion and 1 ml of straw yellow fluid from the right lesion. Smears in ROSE revealed the presence of numerous neutrophils with fibro histiocytic tangles. The slides from both elbows were labeled separately and sent to routine cytological staining, MGG and PAP smears for the slide showed plenty of neutrophils, cyst macrophages, nuclear debris, and necrotic granular fluid background. There was the presence of a few fungal spores in the left elbow smears. A Periodic-acid Schiff (PAS) stain was done and confirmed the fungal spores. [Figures a-d & a, b] ZN stain of smears was negative for mycobacterium bacilli. The polarised microscope revealed no crystals. The separate sterile sample was then sent for fungal culture with a positive growth after 21 days morphologically resembling Cladosporium sps. [Fig. ] The patient was called for revaluation and was advised itraconazole in a dosage schedule of 200 mg BD for 1 month. There is gradual decrease in size of the lesions and the patient has been kept under follow up.