A 37 years-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with blurred vision in both eyes for over a year and an aggravation of the symptoms for a month. He had experienced decreased visual acuity and color vision disorder in both eyes with unknown cause for over a year. The patient stated that he could not see the traffic light clearly when crossing the street. He was diagnosed with chorioretinopathy in both eyes at a local hospital but did not receive standard treatment. Since then, the patient has visited different hospitals successively and taken methylcobalamin supplements, but without significant response. This patient reported no history of chronic or genetic diseases. He visited sex workers twice before admission. One occurred 1 year ago, and the other occurred 2 months ago.
The examination results in other hospitals are as follows: (1) Fundus angiography (3 months after onset): the circulation time was roughly normal. Optic disc fluorescence was fair in both eyes. Dotted translucent fluorescence was observed in the retina of the right eye. Subretinal fluorescence was stained in the late circulation of both eyes. The diagnosis was chorioretinopathy in both eyes. (2) Visual evoked potential (VEP) (7 months after onset): the VEP was abnormal in both eyes. Conduction disorder of the visual pathway was detected, especially in the right eye. (3) Optical coherence tomography (7 months after onset): the mean thickness of RNFL: OD, 66 μm; OS, 70 μm. The symptoms at admission were blurred vision in both eyes with color vision disorder but no optical rotation, double vision, dizziness, headache, or other discomforts.
The results of physical examination at admission in our hospital are as follows: Body temperature, 36.8°C; heart rate, 84 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breath/min; blood pressure, 118/74 mmHg. The patient had no rash on the skin, mucous membranes of the whole body, or enlargement of superficial lymph nodes. He exhibited Argyll Robertson pupils: bilateral pupils significantly constricted with a diameter of approximately 2 mm; weak direct and consensual light reflex; normal near reflex. The visual acuity was determined by examining whether the patient could recognize hand movement in front of the right eye and count fingers 50 cm from the left eye. This patient also presented significant color vision changes.
The urine routine, stool routine, coagulation, liver and kidney function, electrolyte, and levels of C-reactive protein, blood lipid, blood glucose, and myocardial enzyme at admission were normal. This patient tested positive for serum Treponema pallidum-specific antibody, with a 1:32 (Trust test) titer on the third day of admission. The fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test showed that the FTA-ABS-IgG and FTA-ABS-IgM antibodies were positive. The result of the human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV) test was negative. The results of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) test were as follows: (1) pressure: 190 mmH2O; (2) white blood cells WBC: 59.0 × 106/L, (3) neutrophil percentage: 3%; (4) lymphocyte percentage: 30%; (5) monocyte percentage: 67%; (6) Cl levels: 121.8 mmol/L; (7) glucose levels: 3.24 mmol/L; (8) protein levels: 1142 mg/L; (9) CSF IgG concentration: 34.3 mg/dL . The antibody was tested by flow cytometry using the EUROIMMUN kit (Germany) and the CBA-IF method of the Neurological Research Laboratory of Medical Innsbruck. The patient tested positive for the MOG antibody IgG (1:200) in both serum and CSF samples on the fifth day of admission. The serum and CSF samples also tested negative for anti-flotillin-1/2 antibody IgG, anti-MBP antibody IgG, and anti-AQP4 antibody IgG. The CSF was reexamined 1 week after treatment: (1) pressure: 135 mmH2O; (2) WBC: 44 × 106/L; (3) Cl levels: 128.1 mmol/L; (4) glucose levels: 4.0 mmol/L; (5) protein levels: 881 mg/L; (6) CSF IgG concentration: 25.5 mg/dL . The patient tested positive for CSF anti-treponema pallidum antibody IgG, with a titer of 1:26 (FTA-ABS test).
The visual acuity examination showed a visual acuity of 0.2 in the right eye and 0.15 in the left eye. The color vision test indicated red-green color weakness. The fundus examination revealed significant optic disc edema and blurred disc margins in the left eye .
The visual field examination showed an insular visual field, referring to severe concentric narrowing with only a remaining visual field within a range of 5 to 10 degrees around the center, in the inferotemporal region of the right eye (,), a central scotoma connected to the physiological scotoma in the left eye (,), and an arcuate scotoma on the nasal side. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and enhanced scan detected a few small microvascular lesions in the bilateral frontal lobe, parietal lobe, and right insular lobe. No abnormal signal was observed in the cerebellum or brainstem. No abnormal enhanced lesion was observed in the enhanced scan of the brain (,). The cervical spine MRI and the enhanced scan revealed mild posterior median protrusion of the cervical intervertebral disc 3–4, 4–5, 5–6, and 6–7, cervical intervertebral disc degeneration, and mild hyperosteogeny of the cervical vertebral body 3–7 . No abnormal enhanced lesion in the enhanced scan or abnormal signal in the cervical spinal cord was detected. No abnormality was observed in the orbital MRI.
The VEP showed poor bilateral P100 differentiation and delayed latency, suggesting abnormal bilateral visual pathway conduction. Based on the medical history and results of the auxiliary examination , the diagnosis of neurosyphilis combined with MOGAD was made. This patient received intravenous administration of 3.2 million units of procaine penicillin every 4 h for 2 weeks, followed by intramuscular injection of benzathine penicillin for an additional 2 weeks. The examination results showed serum Treponema pallidum (+) with a titer of 1:8 (TRUST test) and cerebrospinal fluid Treponema pallidum (+) with a titer of 1:5. Penicillin sodium at 3.2 million U (q4h) was administered for 2 weeks. Then, methylprednisolone sodium succinate at 1,000 mg/day was given via intravenous infusion. The dosage was successively reduced to 500 and 240 mg/day every 3 days. Next, prednisone tablets (60 mg/day) were orally administered, and the dosage was reduced by 5 mg/day every 3 days until it was 30 mg/day. When corticosteroid treatment started, penicillin sodium treatment was replaced by intramuscular administration of benzathine penicillin, which lasted for 2 weeks . The patient’s visual acuity (0.8 in the right eye, 0.6 in the left eye) were improved after 26 days of hospitalization. However, the visual field and color vision did not. Then, the patient and his family requested discharge and refused lumbar puncture. The CSF examination was not performed before discharge. The patient was advised to take prednisone tablets (30 mg/day) orally and continue the treatment after discharge. The symptoms were not significantly improved at 3 months of follow-up. This patient exhibited no meningeal irritation signs during the disease.