A 68-year-old Caucasian man with no relevant medical or surgical history or colorectal cancer family history came to our department with microcytic anemia of unknown origin. In order to understand the primary cause of the presented condition, he underwent several clinical investigations. Endoscopy allowed us to detect a tan, 4-cm-wide neoformation of the cecum with small foci of hemorrhage . Biopsies were received from the mucosal lesion. A few days later, a histological diagnosis of invasive G2 adenocarcinoma was made. The patient was admitted to our unit for surgical treatment. He underwent right hemicolectomy with ileocolic, side-by-side isoperistaltic anastomosis after intestinal preparation with 4 L of polyethylene glycol (PEG) the night before surgery. Soon after intestine removal, some gauzes soaked in polyvinylpyrrolidone 5% were inserted into the open abdomen for 15 minutes in order to drape the bowel stumps and avoid fecal leakage. The anastomosis was hand-sewn with extramucosal, separated, 2-0 absorbable stitches. The patient’s postoperative course was normal, and he was discharged 6 days after surgery.
Histology of the specimen showed the presence of adenocarcinoma (G2) invading the whole intestinal wall and extending to the fibroadipose perivisceral layers. The resection edges were unharmed, and the lymph nodes were exempt from metastatic colonization . The patient refused adjuvant chemotherapy, and he was referred to a program for endoscopic follow-up.
Two months later, endoscopy revealed a wide and well-functioning anastomosis with a hyperemic, hard, and thickened mucosal area of about 2 cm in diameter. Biopsies showed the presence of an adenocarcinoma with the same grading of the previous lesion. Ten days later, the patient underwent a new operation; the last 10 cm of the ileum and half of the remaining transverse colon were resected, and the patient started adjuvant therapy. Specimen examination confirmed the presence of adenocarcinoma (G2) penetrating the muscular layer of the wall; also, in this case, the resection edges were free from tumoral invasion, and the removed lymph nodes were exempt from neoplastic colonization . The patient was seen in follow-up for about 5 years, and he did not show local or systemic manifestations.