The patient was a 74-year-old man. He was referred to the Head and Neck Cancer Center, Iwate Medical University Hospital, in May 2021, because tongue cancer was suspected. He developed HL 1 year and 5 months prior to his first visit to our center. The pathological findings of HL were as follows: hematoxylin–eosin staining of the lymph nodes showed solitary or small clusters of atypical cells with rather large, irregular nuclei in the paracortical region . Immunohistologically, the atypical cells were cluster of differentiation 30-positive. PAX5 also showed strong positivity for background B-cells and weak positivity for tumor cells . The HL-affected areas were the right neck, right supraclavicular fossa, right pulmonary apex, right pulmonary hilum, around the right posterior rib, and mediastinum . The HL was the mixed cell type, stage II. The patient had received six courses of doxorubicin hydrochloride, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine for HL 1 year and 6 months prior to presentation. The total dosage of each chemotherapeutic agent was 377.5 mg for doxorubicin hydrochloride, 85 mg for bleomycin, 90 mg for vinblastine, and 3360 mg for dacarbazine. Chemotherapy resulted in complete remission . Blood examination at the initial visit to our center did not identify abnormal findings . A tumor with ulceration and surrounding induration, with the longest diameter of 26 mm, was observed on the right side of the patient's tongue .
The tongue tumor was biopsied and diagnosed as well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma histopathologically. CT revealed a 24.0 × 19.3 × 14.2-mm, contrast-enhanced tumor extending from the right side of the tongue . Hypo-absorption of contrast was seen in the left level IB and III lymph nodes. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a contrast-enhanced 23.4 × 19.6-mm, tongue tumor with a depth of invasion (DOI) of 13.9 mm (data not shown). FDG-PET/CT revealed a tumor with abnormal accumulation and with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 14.5 at the right lingual border. Additionally, enlarged lymph nodes were seen at left level IB and III, with abnormal accumulation and SUVmax values of 4.10 and 9.00, respectively . Although these preoperative imaging findings of the lymph nodes at left level IB and III suggested malignant tumors, histopathology could not confirm whether the changes in these lymph nodes indicated metastases of the tongue cancer or recurrence of HL. Therefore, our preoperative diagnosis was tongue cancer with cervical lymph node metastasis (cT3N2cM0), or tongue cancer (cT3N0M0) and recurrent HL.
Surgery was performed on the basis of the results of a biopsy of an enlarged lymph node at left level IB. As this lymph node was identified as metastatic squamous cell carcinoma on intraoperative frozen section rapid pathological diagnosis, bilateral neck dissection was performed.
Postoperative histopathological examination revealed that the tongue cancer was radically resected, and one metastatic lymph node of squamous cell carcinoma at left level IB and three nodes at left level III were found, none of which showed extranodal extension . Additionally, the right cervical lymph node, which was in remission after HL treatment, did not show the structures seen in normal lymph nodes, such as lymph follicles, cortex, and medullary cords. Instead, internal vitreous degeneration was seen, with no evidence of squamous cell carcinoma metastasis or HL . Postoperative radiation therapy with cisplatin chemotherapy was proposed owing to the multiple cervical lymph node metastases of tongue cancer. However, in accordance with the patient's strong desire, a follow-up plan was chosen. One year and 7 months after the tongue cancer treatment, there was no evidence of metastasis of the tongue cancer or recurrence of new Hodgkin-affected lymph nodes.