A 13-year-old Caucasian boy presented to the regional hospital with a two-day history of abdominal pain, fever up to 40 °C, and polyuria. Three weeks before the symptoms appeared, the boy had fallen off his bicycle and sustained a handlebar injury to his upper abdomen. However, he was completely asymptomatic in the meantime and, when asked about the possibility of a recent abdominal trauma, the child and his mother at first denied any such event. Apart from that, his general past medical history was unremarkable. Physical examination on admission revealed a soft, non-tender, and non-distended abdomen, without masses. The liver and spleen were not palpable below the costal margins. The laboratory tests showed significantly elevated inflammatory parameters (C-reactive protein (CRP) of 154.68 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 53 mm/h), leukocytosis (his white blood cell count was 13.81 × 109/L), and mildly elevated levels of aminotransferases (alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels were 77 IU/L and 52 IU/L, respectively). The urinalysis did not detect the presence of nitrites and white blood cells, and his urine culture was negative. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a unifocal, predominantly hypoechoic lesion in the right hepatic lobe, with irregular internal echoes. Contrast-enhanced portal phase computed tomography (CT) scan showed a single, well-defined, low-attenuation liver lesion, located in the segment VIII, measuring 65x56x41mm (LLxAPxCC) . The lesion was multiloculated, with contrast-enhanced internal septa, which represents a “cluster sign” of PLA. Right and middle hepatic veins were compressed and slightly dislocated by lesion, but patent. Empiric antibiotic therapy was initiated with ceftriaxone, and subsequently, amoxicillin/clavulanate was added. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the determination of anti-Echinococcus IgG antibodies was negative. On the fourth day after admission, the boy’s overall condition significantly improved, and he was afebrile for the rest of his hospital stay in the regional hospital.
On day 7 after admission, the patient was transferred to the tertiary care pediatric hospital for further diagnostic evaluation and treatment. The physical examination on admission was unremarkable; laboratory test values were within normal ranges except for leukocytosis with neutrophilia (total leukocyte count: 13.35 × 109/L; neutrophils: 74.42%), and elevated levels of CRP (49.8 mg/L) and ALT (72 IU/L). Alpha-fetoprotein and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin values were within the reference ranges. The patient’s blood culture showed no growth.
Antibiotic therapy was switched to cefazolin and metronidazole. On the 11th hospital day, open surgical drainage of the liver abscess was performed. Upon entering the abdominal cavity through the right subcostal incision, the falciform ligament, the coronal ligament and the right triangular ligament were sectioned to allow the mobilization of the right lobe of liver, and a solitary lesion was identified in its anterosuperior portion. The incision on the surface of the liver parenchyma allowed access to the multiloculated hepatic abscess cavity filled with viscous pus. The loculations were manually broken down to ensure complete drainage and, additionally, a surgical drain was left in situ. The abscess material was sent for microbiological analysis. Gram staining revealed Gram-positive pleomorphic cocci and coccobacilli arranged in chains. Cultures yielded scanty growth on Columbia and chocolate agar. MALDI-TOF MS identified the isolated bacterium as Abiotrophia defectiva. Also, a tissue sample of six fragments measuring 2x2x0.5 cm in total was sent for histopathological analysis. Microscopically, around a central area of the confluent microabscesses, a thick zone of granulation tissue with hyperemic, young capillaries, and peripheral maturation in the form of proliferating fibroblasts, presented the typical picture of chronic PLA . The surrounding hepatocytes showed mild regenerative atypia.
Postoperatively, the patient received triple-antibiotic therapy with cefazolin, gentamicin, and metronidazole. After the microbiological culture report came in, these were switched to ceftriaxone. The boy recovered very well after the surgical procedure. He spent 3 weeks in total on intravenous antibiotic therapy, followed by 3 weeks of peroral amoxicillin/clavulanate. Meanwhile, a thorough oral cavity and dental examination was performed to look for a potential source of infection, and no decayed teeth or pathological changes were identified. The patient was doing well after 3 months of follow-up. His physical examination and laboratory tests showed no abnormalities, and the abdominal ultrasound imaging indicated that pyogenic liver abscess had resolved to almost normal liver parenchyma.