A 38-year-old female was admitted to our center with a complaint of abnormal urine tests. She was diagnosed with chronic nephritis syndrome 10 years ago, but did not receive appropriate medical care during this period. The patient also complained of menorrhagia with unexplained anemia. Physical examination revealed no positive signs such as bilateral lower limb edema or hepatosplenomegaly. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria (2+), blood (3+), and more than 75% the dysmorphic red blood corpuscles. The protein content was 0.71 g in 24-h urine analysis. The urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase was 11.14 U/g·Cr, and urinary α1 microglobulin was 12.6 mg/L. In additional renal function tests, creatinine clearance rate was 96.1 ml/min, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 93.1 ml/min; and serum creatinine was 71 μmol/L. The albumin content was 34.5 g/L, and the results of thyroid function tests were within the normal ranges. Tests for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies were negative. No viral markers of hepatitis were detectable, and all the antibodies were negative except the surface antibodies. Levels of serum IgA and complement component C3 were also normal. Ferritin level was 44.1 ng/mL. Complete blood tests revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia. Hemoglobin (Hb) was 84 g/L, mean corpuscular volume was 69 fL, and mean corpuscular Hb was 22 pg. Ultrasonography results of kidney were normal. Results of renal biopsy showed that 15 glomeruli were detected by light microscopy and one of them exhibited fibrocellular crescents. Renal tubules displayed localized atrophy, and inflammatory cell infiltration as well as fibrosis in the interstitium. Arteries and arterioles were unremarkable. Immunofluorescent analysis revealed diffuse IgA (3+) and C3 (2+) staining were present in several mesangial areas. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with IgAN accompanied by iron deficiency anemia. We treated the patient with a combination of oral prednisolone, leflunomide, and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). In addition, polysaccharide-iron complex was also administered. A complete remission of proteinuria was observed, and hematuria was also relieved. However, Hb was constantly under the normal reference range, which could not be explained by the iron deficiency anemia. In 2016, the patient was diagnosed with α-thalassemia based on the results of our genetic tests showing the deletion of --SEA gene. Serum HbF and HbA2 were elevated to 2.47 and 3.04%, respectively. During the 3-year follow-up, a significant improvement in anemia was observed following the treatment consisting of a small dose of ARB with folic acid and mecobalamin administration. Laboratory tests in March 2019 showed that Hb levels were elevated to 157 g/L. Urine occult blood was 2+, 24-h proteinuria was reduced to 0.08 g, and serum creatinine and albumin were normal.