A 5-year-old HIV-free girl of African descent was referred to us with chief complaints of recurrent syncopal attacks and effort intolerance since birth. She is a third-born child to a 38-year-old, single, HIV-infected woman. Her mother first gave birth at the age of 27, she was HIV-free then but the baby was born with spina bifida and anencephaly and survived for just a few hours after birth. She then gave birth to a baby girl 2 years later; the child is healthy and alive until today. She became pregnant again 4 years after the birth of her second child. During an antenatal clinic visit for this pregnancy, she tested negative for hepatitis B and her syphilis screening was nonreactive. She was never screened for rubella or autoimmune conditions. She had low hemoglobin concentration throughout (9.4–10.9 g/dL), but received hematenics, antihelminthics, antimalarial and tetanus toxoid immunization as per protocol. She was diagnosed with HIV infection during the antenatal clinic visit at 24 weeks’ gestation and was started on antiretroviral medication. She reported that she took the medication for 3 days only and decided to stop because she did not want her family to know of her HIV serostatus. She had severe hyperemesis gravidarum during her first trimester and was hospitalized seven times due to this. Her pregnancy thereafter was uneventful and she gave birth to a full-term baby girl weighing 2.3 kilograms who scored 7/10 on the APGAR scale. The child was given nevirapine at birth and she was instructed to continue giving it for 6 weeks, but for the same reasons she stopped her child’s nevirapine on the third day. She exclusively breastfed her child for 6 months and never resumed her or her child’s antiretroviral medication during this period. The mother denied any symptoms suggestive of hypothyroidism, connective tissue or autoimmune disorders before, during, and after pregnancy.
During her third child’s first few weeks of life, the mother observed that she was breastfeeding poorly and was sleeping for longer duration compared to her sister at her age. At about 8 weeks, it was observed that the child would go into an unarousable state on exertion or while breastfeeding. This state lasted between 30 minutes and 1 hour, and upon regaining consciousness, the child was lethargic. The child never presented with a crying episode or convulsions prior to her loss of consciousness. The child was taken to a health facility and the mother was told that her child’s heart was beating slower than usual but was assured that it would go away with time. She continued to present with syncopal attacks until the age of 2 years but was never admitted for this or any other illness and had normal developmental milestones. She was free of such episodes for about 3 years, however, she was mostly lethargic with a decreased effort capacity, had a poor weight gain and was generally inactive for her age. Three weeks prior to this index admission, she presented again with episodes of loss of consciousness which persisted until she came to our attention. She had experienced between three and five episodes per day, each lasting for about an hour and after regaining consciousness she slept for up to 12 hours. This time round, minor activities including swallowing and rising from a lying position led to syncope. Since birth, the child had never had features of heart failure or a transient rash suggestive of neonatal lupus erythromatosus. Furthermore, the mother denies any prescription of steroids for herself or her child between pregnancy and now.
Upon admission to our institute, the child underwent a thorough physical examination and a series of investigations. The physical examination was unremarkable except for her being small for her age (body mass index (BMI) 16.3 kg/m2) and bradycardia. Her vital signs were within acceptable range with the exception of her pulse rate, which ranged between 22 and 34 beats/minute. She had normal electrolytes, renal and liver function, full blood count and random blood sugar test results. Serology results for HIV and hepatitis (B and C) were negative. An echocardiogram revealed a sinus bradycardia, otherwise a structurally normal heart. An ECG showed AV dissociation in keeping with third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, Fig. . Anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La antibodies tests are unavailable in the country and were not screened for, however, the mother tested negative for anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA), antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) autoantibodies. The child underwent a permanent epicardial pacemaker insertion and has been symptom-free following pacing.