A 58-year-old Japanese man complained of mild weakness in both legs 3 days prior to hospitalization. He was admitted to our hospital because he was unable to move his legs and had lost sensation in both legs 1 day prior to hospitalization. He had no remarkable medical history. Although he was lucid, he had a blood pressure of 99/67 mmHg, pulse of 110 beats per minute (bpm), body temperature of 36.1 °C, respiratory rate of 28 breaths/minute, and paralysis and numbness below the T11 level. Because we recognized signs of an abdominal aortic aneurysm and paraplegia on physical examination, we suspected an occlusion of the artery of Adamkiewicz and so performed a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan. It revealed the formation of an aneurysm with gas in the aortic wall extending from his chest to his abdomen as well as in both kidneys ; no malignant tumor was detected. Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging also revealed a spinal cord infarction below the T11 level. We initiated antibiotic therapy with 9 g/day ampicillin/sulbactam, 1800 mg/day clindamycin, and 120 mg/day gentamycin; during this period, metronidazole was not available for intravenous injection in Japan. We then performed an emergency surgery for source control of the infection. However, owing to his poor general condition and septic shock, surgery for the mycotic aneurysm was deemed impossible. Thus, we performed bilateral nephrectomy as a source control, and postponed the surgery for the aortic aneurysm until his condition had stabilized. After the bilateral nephrectomy, we initiated mechanical ventilation, continuous hemodialysis, and hemoperfusion treatment with polymyxin B-immobilized fiber (PMX-DHP; Toray Medical Co., Tokyo, Japan).
On postoperative day 3, we began gradually tapering the doses of dopamine and noradrenaline. On postoperative day 5, we transitioned from continuous hemodialysis to intermittent hemodialysis. A culture of the samples taken from the infected region and four consecutive blood cultures revealed C. septicum. On postoperative day 6, we performed extubation, after which his condition gradually improved. However, on postoperative day 7, the onset of respiratory muscle fatigue necessitated reintubation. We resumed dopamine on day 9. We planned to operate on the aortic aneurysm; however, his condition deteriorated rapidly. On postoperative day 10, 1500 mL of blood was lost within approximately 20 minutes from the drain; as a consequence, he died. The cause of the hemorrhage was considered to be an aortic rupture. An autopsy was not performed.