A 46-year-old woman had symptoms of dizziness and fatigue for two years, during which she suffered from recurrent anemia and frequently required blood transfusions at a local hospital.
Hypoferric anemia was found by bone marrow aspiration, and erosive gastritis was observed by an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) in the local hospital. Due to recurrent anemia, she was initially hospitalized in the Department of Hematology in our hospital.
Her father died from liver cirrhosis, and she denied a history of viral hepatitis, alcohol use and schistosomiasis.
During the physical examination, she was pale, yet remained cardiovascularly stable, with the following vital signs on admission: temperature was 37.1°C, heart rate was 92 beats per minute (bpm), initial blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, and expiration was 20 bpm. In addition, her lungs and heart were found to be normal by auscultation, and the abdomen was soft and flat.
Abnormal laboratory data of complete blood count were as follows: RBC 1.64 × 1012/L, Hb 32 g/L, HCT 0.125%, MCHC 256 g/L, WBC 2.87 × 109/L, PLT 76 × 109/L, and they progressively decreased in the days after admission. Other abnormal results included the following: Positive fecal occult blood test (FOBT), transferrin 2.99 µg/L, HBsAg 138.5 IU/mL, hepatitis B virus DNA 8.01e + 0.03 IU/mL. In addition, bone marrow aspiration revealed hyperplasia of granulocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets.
Anemia may be attributed to the bleeding of gastrointestinal tract based on the reduced Hb and RBC count, as well as the positive FOBT. In order to detect the potential cause of hemorrhage, an EGD was performed 5 d after admission to the hospital, and four grade 1 esophageal varices without any evidence of recent bleeding, as illustrated in Figure . Further observation demonstrated the presence of a small amount of fresh blood in the stomach. When reaching the duodenum, the authors observed the occurrence of more fresh blood, as well as evidence of upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, and further detected a large submucosal vermicular mass located in the first and second duodenum .
The patient was then transferred to our department to examine the cause of esophageal and duodenal varices associated with portal hypertension, which was followed by the corresponding treatment. In addition to a contrast-enhanced CT scan that demonstrated dilated and tortuous duodenal varix, dilated portal and splenic vein, and splenomegaly, but normal liver, liver function, renal function, coagulation function and liver fibrosis was normal. Serum was negative for anti-hepatitis A, C and E virus antibody, and also negative for autoimmune liver disease and Wilson disease. Moreover, Doppler ultrasound of hepatic vein, portal vein and inferior vein was normal.
Histological evaluation of liver biopsy was performed by two pathologists, aiming to determine the unexplained cause of PH. An integrated structure was observed in hepatic lobule, while there was no evidence of pseudolobuli formation based on Hematoxylin & Eosin staining that was used to detect the extreme extension and occlusion of portal branches in portal regions . Furthermore, periportal and perisinusoidal fibrosis was demonstrated through Masson staining , suggesting that IPH contributed to these manifestations.