Our patient was a 41-year-old man who suffered from nasal congestion and pharyngalgia for a month before seeking treatment at the local hospital, but his symptoms were not resolved after receiving treatment. The patient was sent to our hospital because of anorexia, weakness, perspiration while sleeping and abdominal distension as well as nasal symptoms; after admission to our institution, he had a high fever of 40.1 °C, and the physical examination revealed several palpable superficial lymph nodes on his armpit and both sides of his groin. An initial ulcer 1.5 cm*0.5 cm in size with a white purulent secretion and necrotic tissue on the surface could be seen on the palate and ultimately perforated into the oral cavity 5 days later, after which the patient complained there was outflow from his nasal cavity when he drank liquids for a communication between the oral cavity and the nasal cavity was created . The abdomen was soft, and the liver was impalpable; however, the spleen was palpable 5 cm below the left costal margin. The blood parameters were as follows: (1) white blood cells (WBC), 2.5 × 109/L; red blood cells (RBC), 3.91 × 1012/L; platelets (PLT) 93 × 109/L, and hemoglobin (HGB) 108 g/L; (2) ALT, 57 U/L; AST, 70 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 642 IU/L; and C-reactive protein (CRP), 44.15 mg/L; and (3) activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 38.0 s. The ferroprotein levels were >1650 ng/ml (normal range 22–322 ng/ml), and the urine examination indicated proteinuria (+++); however, the patient was negative for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Computer tomography scans revealed an enlarged liver and spleen, an occupied nasopharynx and small nodules in the lung . B-mode ultrasonography showed enlarged lymph nodes on the neck, axilla and groin. The bone marrow smear revealed approximately 16% abnormal lymphoid cells that had a slightly basophilic cytoplasm; additionally, some of these cells presented azurophilic granules and slightly immature nuclei with inconspicuous or distinct nucleoli. The peripheral blood analysis indicated that 5% of the cells observed exhibited analogous traits as those in the abnormal lymphoid cells [Fig. ]. Flow cytometry of the bone marrow showed that the immunophenotype of the neoplastic cells was as follows: HLA-DR+, CD2+, cytoplasmic CD3+, CD7+, CD56+, surface CD3-, CD4-, CD8-, CD16-, CD57-, TCR α/β-, and TCR γ/δ-. In addition, the analysis of TCR-γ gene rearrangement in these cells was negative.
The patient’s nose was examined, and three small tissue samples were collected from nasal cavity for biopsy, two of which were microscopically assessed as nasal mucosa and coagulative necrosis whereas the third sample was gray-white in color, 0.5 cm × 0.2 cm × 0.2 cm in volume and contained infiltrated monomorphic medium-sized lymphoid cells. Immunohistochemically, these neoplastic cells were identified with the following markers: CD2+, cytoplasmic CD3+, CD20-, CD56+, EBER+, TIA-1+, perforin+, and Ki-67 > 80% [Fig. ]. Taken together with the results of the clinical and laboratory examinations, a final diagnosis of ANKL was made.
Aside from the nasal symptoms, the patient presented high fever, fatigue and weight loss when he was first admitted. He was treated with an EPOCH (etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin) plus thalidomide chemotherapy regimen starting on day 3 after the diagnosis was made. The fever, abdominal distension and poor appetite were temporary abated after treatment for a week, and the physical examination showed that the spleen was impalpable with simultaneous relief of the sternal tenderness. However, the symptoms in the nose and palate remained, and after a short time he underwent a rapid clinical decline with an enlarged spleen that was palpable 4 cm under the left costal margin. Unfortunately, he was died 8 weeks after initial admission due to multiorgan failure.