A 55-year-old woman arrived at the emergency department presenting with a closed-head traumatic brain injury due to a car accident. She had a history of migraines with auras consisting of fortification spectra (expanding zigzag pattern) and transient flashing white lights, mostly recurring in the left visual field, followed by a moderate to severe left-sided throbbing headache several minutes later.
However, the headache was not predominantly present (acephalgic migraine with visual aura). The aura episodes lasted several minutes and were associated with nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and headache, which persisted for several hours. These symptoms were relieved by sleeping and administration of oral analgesics. Analysing her medical history, the patient presented with a MIDAS score of 10 points, with grade 2, which corresponds to medium disability. During the three months before the incident, the patient experienced difficulties in carrying out daily activities and she had to take a break from work due to severe episodes of headaches. These episodes were accompanied by the visual aura that caused the patient to stay in bed and to avoid noise and light exposure. Her physical, neurological and fundoscopic examination, including blood pressure and meningeal signs, were normal.
Electroencephalography did not reveal any abnormalities. As part of the workup, a CT scan of the brain was obtained. Imaging showed a hypodense area of 40 × 44 mm in size within the left parieto-occipital region. Further evaluation using contrast-enhanced MRI revealed the presence of an extra-axial mass arising from the left tentorial leaflet. This mass exerted compressive effects on the left lateral ventricle’s trigone and occipital horn, with no signs of cerebral oedema.
The signal intensity of the mass showed characteristics of the adipose-tissue type with a small substantial peripheral component. MRI showed the lesion’s hyperintensity on both T1- and T2-weighted sequences, along with the contrast enhancement after an intravenous Gadolinium injection.
The patient underwent a left parieto-occipital craniotomy for a Simpson grade one tumour performing an “en bloc” resection. The lesion, implanted on the superior aspect of the tentorium, appeared well-circumscribed. A clear cleavage plane between the tumour and the normal parenchyma was identified. No brain invasion was found. From intraoperative photography , the tumour appeared greyish (with a yellowish component) in colour and rubbery in consistency.
The histological examination showed a mixture of meningothelial lobules and adipocyte-like cells consistent with a lipomatous meningioma diagnosis .
The tumour cells were positive for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and Progesterone Receptor (PgR). Ki-67 was <2%. The patient’s recovery and postoperative course were uneventful. MRI images at a nine-month follow-up show no sign of residual or recurrent disease .
She was discharged on postoperative day 7. The neurological examination at discharge was normal except for persistent transient flashing white lights. For this reason, the patient was subjected to the MIDAS-score assessment during the follow-up. The MIDAS-score result was significantly improved with respect to the pre-operative assessments. At one year follow-up, the patient was free of migraine episodes with seldom white light spots which no longer led to difficulty with daily activities.