A 58-year-old male visited the emergency department complaining of lower back pain, fever, and chills. The patient had a history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus without diabetic medication during the previous 3 months, and he had received injection around the lumbar area in private clinics once a month for 3 months. An initial evaluation revealed a temperature of 38.1 °C, relatively stable hemodynamics (blood pressure 126/80mmHg, heart rate 109/min, and SatO2 96 %) and alert mentality. Physical examination demonstrated no infectious signs on the patient’s back, including fluctuation, erythema, or local heat, although local tenderness was noted at the right dominant lumbar paravertebral area. The neurological examination was within the normal limit without pathologic reflexes. Laboratory data revealed a white blood cell count of 19,710 /mm3 (92.7 % segmented neutrophils), erythrocyte sedimentation (ESR) of 40 mm/h, and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 30.7 mg/L. Initial assessment of diabetes mellitus showed Hb A1c of 13.5 %, glycated albumin of 53.4 %, and glucose 329 mg/dL. The other laboratory data are represented in Table . Laboratory risk indicator for necrotizing fasciitis (LRINEC) score was 9, which implied high suspicion for necrotizing fasciitis. The plain radiographs showed a small gas-forming lesion around the lumbar paravertebral area . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multifocal fluid pockets containing innumerable air bubbles in the paraspinal area, whole lumbar area, and epidural space in T2-weighted sagittal view . Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed subcutaneous emphysema in the right paravertebral muscles including the multifidus and quadratus lumborum, mainly in the right side, as well as in the lumbar epidural space at L2-S1 . Ultrasound-guided aspiration was performed in the back area for evaluation of the infectious focus, and empirical antibiotics (piperacillin 4 g/tazobactam 0.5 g every 6 h) were immediately started to cover gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. An emergent operation for abscess drainage and debridement of the infected paravertebral fascia and musculature was recommended, but the patient refused the surgical intervention. Unfortunately, the patient was discharged against medical advice and prescribed with only antibiotic drug (cefadroxil 500 mg BID [bis in die] for 5 days).
Two days later, the patient returned to the emergency department complaining of more severe back pain and persistent fever (38.4 °C). His vital signs and laboratory data had deteriorated . He was hypotensive (81/49mmHg), tachycardic (heart rate 141/min) and high level of serum lactic acid (6.9 mmol/L) in arterial blood gas analysis, implying a septic condition. Cultures from the previous aspirates and peripheral blood were isolated Klebsiella pneumoniae (K. pneumoniae). Antimicrobial susceptibility test of K. Pneumoniae showed all sensitive except for ampicillin and targeted antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g) were administered every 24 h in consultation with Department of Infectious Disease. The follow-up radiological examinations (plain radiograph, CT, and MRI) showed aggressive dissemination of innumerable air bubbles from the whole lumbar area to the T5 level . Especially, innumerable air bubble was observed throughout bilateral psoas muscles in the coronal view of CT, which showed bilateral necrotizing fasciitis of the psoas muscles . The patient underwent emergent decompressive laminectomy for abscess drainage from L2 to S1 and debridement of the infected paravertebral fascia and musculature using metzenbaum scissor and rongeur. The intra-operative findings showed more severe and extensive than radiological findings, which disseminated to epidural region, ligament flavum, all muscle layer, and just beneath skin region. A large amount of dishwater-like exudate along the superficial fascia, devitalized color change along the membrane of fascia, and purulence was also observed in the epidural spaces from L2 to S1 . We would have planned second-stage operation for psoas muscle fasciitis after patient’s condition improved with use of antibiotics in Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Therefore, we applied vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) for potential residual infection and wound care after massive irrigation (dilute iodine solution, normal saline, and saline with added ceftriaxone by simple syringe irrigation) and debridement of the devitalized tissue. K. pneumoniae was detected in cultures obtained from intra-operative samples. Despite intensive care for his deteriorated vital signs and back wound, the patient did not recover and died on postoperative day 3 due to multi-organ failure.