A 41-year-old Asian woman was referred to our hospital for evaluation of a splenic artery aneurysm noted on abdominal ultrasound. The patient had no subjective symptoms. The patient’s clinical history included neurofibromatosis type 1, Noonan syndrome, peptic gastric ulcer, endometriosis, and ventricular septal defects. At the age of 27 years, the patient underwent excision of a cutaneous nodule on the right thigh, the pathological diagnosis of which was plexiform neurofibroma. The patient had no relevant family history of vasculopathy, and no psychosocial history. She had no history of regular medications. The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. The patient was 151 cm tall and weighed 60 kg. On the initial medical examination, there were no relevant physical or neurological findings, her blood pressure was 125/77 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 85 beats per minute. The patient’s laboratory data were within normal limits. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 28-mm aneurysm in the splenic hilum . Angiography revealed similar findings . She was asymptomatic, but because her splenic artery aneurysm was > 20 mm in diameter, it had the potential to rupture, causing life-threatening complications. Therefore, we determined that it was indicated for treatment. Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was attempted, but it was difficult due to the tortuosity of the splenic artery . Therefore, we suggested surgery, especially minimally invasive procedures, such as laparoscopic and robotic techniques. The patient underwent robotic resection of the splenic artery aneurysm with preservation of the spleen . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the eighth day after surgery. At 1 year of follow-up, the patient was doing well, with no evidence of recurrence.
The gross examination revealed that the aneurysm was approximately 20 mm in size . A histopathological examination showed severe intimal thickening of the aneurysm, with the internal elastic lamina of over half of the circumference having disappeared . Neurofibromas attached to adventitia were also observed . The pathological diagnosis was a splenic artery aneurysm associated with neurofibromatosis.