A 17-year-old male with congenital aortic stenosis presented to his pediatric cardiologist for follow-up. He had been diagnosed with aortic stenosis after a murmur was heard in the newborn nursery, and subsequently underwent aortic balloon valvuloplasty 6 weeks after birth. He had been regularly followed up since and underwent numerous cardiac catheterizations, including another aortic balloon valvuloplasty at age 13.
Upon presentation, echocardiography was performed and revealed a mean gradient of 54 mmHg, maximum gradient of 119 mmHg through the aortic valve orifice, aortic valve area of 0.4 cm2/m2, and septal diameter of 1.6 cm2 . Subsequently, the patient was scheduled for AVR 3 weeks later. A CT angiography was obtained before surgery and revealed a mild ascending aortic dilation of 34.4 × 42.2 mm in maximal diameter, without increased annular size .
During pre-operative examination, the patient admitted having dyspnea during exertion but had never experienced angina, palpations, or syncope. He reported being very physically active. A 4/6 crescendo/decrescendo systolic murmur was auscultated over the whole precordium, with the murmur radiating to the neck. Lung auscultation was clear and jugular venous distension was absent. His chest X-ray was normal with cardiac index within referral range. The patient and his parents expressed their desire for biologic valve implantation.
AVR was performed under normothermic cardiopulmonary bypass. Following aortotomy an unicuspid unicommissural aortic valve was revealed, with a single commissure located just right of the left coronary ostium. The valve was thickened and extremely stenotic with mild calcification underneath the right coronary ostium . The valve was removed in one piece using scissors and knife, and replaced with a 27 mm biologic Freestyle valve (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota) using continuous 4–0 Prolene sutures. The stentless valve was implanted subcoronally to allow for a nonobstructive position for the right and left coronary ostia between the commissures of the newly implanted bioprosthesis. Finally, the ascending aorta was closed using continuous 4–0 Prolene sutures.
Post-operatively, there were no adverse events and the patient recovered well. He was discharged 5 days after surgery in good condition. At follow up 6 weeks later, the patient had returned to his daily activities and was completely symptom-free. An echocardiography revealed a functional valve with no regurgitation and insignificant gradient across the valve. The left ventricular hypertrophy was receding with a measured septal diameter of 1.2–1.4 mm. Left ventricular function was considered normal and no pericardial effusion was noted.