A 39 years old man was admitted to our hospital on January 2, 2019 with the chief complaint of recurrent diarrhea and black stool for 3 weeks. A gastroscopy showed erosion, hyperplasia and protuberance of cardia mucosa. Pathological biopsy of the protuberant lesions showed cardia adenocarcinoma. Further immunohistochemistry showed MSH2 (+), MSH6 (+), PMS2 (+), MLH1 (+), HER-2 (2+). And negative for HER-2 fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) test and Epstein-Barr encoding region (EBER) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. A positron emission tomography - computed tomography (PET-CT) was conducted and showed thickened gastric cardia wall, multiple enlarged lymph nodes with high standard uptake value (SUV), including left supraclavicular lymph nodes, multiple lymph nodes adjacent to the cardia and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, multiple destructive bones (left scapula, right 5th rib, Th8-10 vertebrae, L3 left adnexa, sacrum and left iliac bone). He denied any family history of hereditary diseases and special medical history. The laboratory examination showed elevated carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA19-9) of 52.1U/ml and normal carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP) level.
After admission, the patient received 4 cycles of FOLFOX4 chemotherapy from January 9, to February 27, 2019. After the initial 4 cycles of chemotherapy, the patient complaint of aggravated chest and back pain. Besides, CA125 and CA19-9 were increased from 32.1 U/ml to 62.9 U/ml and from 52.1 U/ml to 78.4 U/ml respectively. A computed tomography (CT) scan suggested an increase in the size of metastatic lymph nodes and the extent of bone metastases compared to that before treatment . Thus, the curative effect was evaluated as progressive disease (PD) with a progression-free survival (PFS) of 3.5 months.
In order to look for more effective treatment, a next generation sequencing (NGS) (unpublished report) was performed and showed CCND1 gene amplification, RICTOR gene amplification, TMB-L (TMB 5 Muts/Mb) and MSS. The immunohistochemistry of PD-L1 with 22C3 antibody showed a Combined Positive Score (CPS) with 0 . Then, the patient accepted second-line chemotherapy of albumin paclitaxel combined with tegafur (S-1) for 6 cycles from March 15th to July 10th, 2019. In the meantime, thoracic spine and lumbar spine radiotherapy of DT 36Gy/12F was performed to relieve the pain. CT scans after every 2 cycles of chemotherapy suggested sustained stable disease (SD). CA125 and CA19-9 decreased to the normal level during the second-line chemotherapy gradually. The patient reported improving quality of life by relieving pain. Thus, single agent maintenance chemotherapy with S-1 was initiated from Aug. 2nd,2019. The regular visit 2 months later showed increased CA19-9 from 30.8 U/ml to 354 U/ml. And the pain was aggravated gradually. The CT scan suggested PD with newly formed bone metastases after maintenance chemotherapy with S-1 for only 2 months . Therefore, a third-line treatment was considered. And in the choice of third-line treatment regimen, either Apatinib or anti-PD-1 was considered according to the Chinese guideline at that time. While considering that the previous paclitaxel was effective as the second line therapy and the high cost of Apatinib or PD-1 antibody at that time, single-agent docetaxel was accepted as the final choice. Docetaxel was used for 3 cycles. And at the same time, right iliac and left acromioclavicular head radiotherapy was conducted at a dose of 30Gy/10F to relieve the pain. The evaluation after three cycles of third line docetaxel showed enlarged lymph nodes in the neck and axilla with aggravated cough, which suggested PD .
Luckily, a clinical trial of PD-1 antibody SCT-I10A (unlisted) for metastatic gastric cancer was recruiting in our center and the patient was a qualified participant. After informed consent, the patient took part in the clinical trial and received the first dose of PD-1 antibody (SCT-I10A) on January 10, 2020. Surprisingly, the patient reported that the cough disappeared around 3 weeks after the first dose of the drug. Then, due to the pandemic of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), the treatment was discontinued for nearly 3 months without any treatment. After the pandemic, the patient returned to the hospital for further evaluation. The result showed reduced pleural fluid, shrunken mediastinal, neck, axillary and retroperitoneal lymph nodes and normal tumor markers, which were suggestive of partial response (PR) . Considering the inspiring response, another 23 cycles of PD-1 antibody therapy were conducted with the last treatment on 2021.7.16 and the efficacy was assessed as sustained PR.
To further clarify whether this patient has specific gene mutations that make him sensitive to immunotherapy, a NGS test of peripheral blood was conducted on Jan. 28th, 2021. The results showed no gene mutations with MSS and TMB-L.
Up to now, the patient has an overall survival (OS) of over 30 months and has no discomfort. The timeline of patient treatment and change of tumor markers was shown in .