A 51-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Surgery at our hospital for complaints of fever and anorexia. There was no abdominal pain, nausea, or abdominal distension. He had a high fever, anorexia, tachycardia, and tachypnea. He had no comorbidities or surgical history. The white blood cell count, liver enzymes, and C-reactive protein level were elevated. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic lesion with a maximum diameter of 40 mm in the left lobe of the liver . Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a lesion with coexisting low- and high-density areas in segment III of the liver. The lesion was adjacent to the stomach antrum and had a maximum diameter of 55 mm, with enhancement at the edge. The lesion contained air and a high-density linear object measuring about 24 mm . We suspected a liver abscess secondary to gastric perforation caused by a foreign body. The patient underwent abscess drainage and removal of the foreign body using five-port laparoscopic surgery. Adhesions had formed between the liver and reticulum due to inflammation . We confirmed pus leakage, performed lysis of adhesions, and found a fish bone inside the reticulum . The fish bone was removed laparoscopically. We lavaged the abscess cavity with saline. The operation was completed with the insertion of a drain inferior to the left lobe of the liver. There was no bile leakage from the abscess cavity. The total operative time was 62 min, and the total intraoperative blood loss was 20 ml. The pus culture showed the presence of Streptococcus anginosus, which matched the result of the blood culture. We used meropenem until postoperative day 10. The clinical course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11. When the patient was discharged, we changed the antibiotic treatment from meropenem to a combination of potassium clavulanate and amoxicillin hydrate according to the indications of the blood culture. On outpatient postoperative follow-up, he had no complaints and laboratory tests were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography indicated that the hypoechoic region was smaller . There has been no recurrence.