A 15-year-old boy presented with three episodes of allergic symptoms induced by exercise following ingestion of certain fruits. First, he had generalized urticaria induced by exercise after ingesting mixed fruit with canned peach. Moreover, he had generalized urticaria and cough induced by exercise after ingesting yogurt and apple. Furthermore, he had generalized urticaria and swollen lips induced by walking fast to school after ingesting strawberries and yogurt. He had no prior history of allergic symptoms presenting after ingestion of other foods. The patient underwent OFCTs, which included ingesting 10 fresh strawberries, one commercially available yogurt cup, one whole canned peach, or one and a half apples along with aspirin, followed by a 500-m sprint after 15 min, each on a different day. He experienced generalized urticaria after fruit consumption and exercise but not after eating yogurt with aspirin and/or exercise. He was diagnosed with exercise-induced strawberry, peach, and apple allergies. He had pollinosis, and his specific IgE levels (ImmunoCAP; ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for Japanese cedar and cypress pollen were 26.4 and 9.73 UA/mL, respectively, whereas those for birch, alder pollen, and rBet v 1 were normal (< 0.30 UA/mL). His fruit-specific IgE levels, including those for strawberry, peach, apple, rPru p1, rPru p 3, rPru p 4, rMal d 1, and rMal d 3, were normal .
We performed a skin prick test with fresh strawberries using the “prick-prick” procedure. Histamine dihydrochloride (10 mg/mL) and saline were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. The patient exhibited positive reactions for strawberry (wheal, 4 mm) and the positive control (wheal, 10 mm) in the prick test and negative reactions for the negative control (wheal, 0 mm).
For component analysis, we prepared peach GRP and LTP by immunoaffinity columns using monoclonal antibodies, as reported previously . Strawberry GRP was purified using a monoclonal antibody against peach GRP, which exhibited cross-reactivity to strawberry GRP. Each purified protein showed a single band on sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under reducing or non-reducing conditions. The specific IgE levels to each protein were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with peroxidase-labeled anti-human IgE (SeraCare Life Sciences, Milford, MA). Data exhibiting absorbance at values 450 nm over the mean + three standard deviations of those of negative controls (four non-allergic individuals) were considered positive. We included control patients with strawberry, peach, and apple allergies among the patients of our hospital to evaluate the immunological difference in the reactivity of systemic and local symptoms to strawberries and peaches. Control Patient 1 had episodic generalized symptoms after ingesting peaches and mild oropharyngeal pruritus after ingesting strawberries without generalized symptoms. Control Patient 2 had mild oropharyngeal pruritus and swelling of the lips after ingesting peaches, apples, and strawberries without presenting generalized symptoms. Differences in the clinical backgrounds and allergen-specific IgEs between the case patient and controls are shown in Table . The patient’s serum exhibited a strong positive result to strawberry GRP but a negative result to peach GRP and peach LTP. Control Patient 1 exhibited a strong positive result to peach GRP but not to strawberry GRP or peach LTP. Control Patient 2 did not react to any component. These results are shown in Fig. .
Basophil activation (BA) was tested using an allergenicity kit (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA), as previously described . Samples were analyzed using a FACSCalibur™ cell analyzer with CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Basophils were identified based on their forward- and side-scatter properties, absence of CD3, and presence of CRTH2. We evaluated allergen-specific BA using serially diluted components (five concentrations, 0.1–1000 ng/mL of total protein). We constructed dose-response curves for BA based on tenfold decreasing concentrations of the respective extracts. The area under the curve (AUC) of BA was evaluated. The patient’s basophils reacted with strawberry and peach GRP but not with peach LTP . The AUCs of BA due to strawberry and peach GRP were 11,221 and 9507, respectively. Basophils of Control Patient 2 did not react with these components (highest value: 4.0%). The BA of Control Patient 1 could not be evaluated.