A 74-year-old woman with a history of essential tremor and dyslipidemia presented to the emergency department with shortness of breath. Her electrocardiogram and laboratory panel were normal, but coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography showed a large low attenuation mass on the LV septum though there was no significant stenosis in coronary arteries. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed severe subvalvular stenosis of the aortic valve (AV) but preserved other valves and LV function. In cine magnetic resonance imaging, the mass was found to be attached to the LV septum, causing dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction (Supplementary video ).
An urgent operation was performed the following day using a median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass with bicaval cannulation in case we need a combined approach through both the aortic and mitral valves. After the aortic cross-clamping, a “hockey-stick” aortotomy was following the infusion of antegrade del Nido cardioplegic solution. The aortic valve was intact but, the LV outflow tract was obstructed by the LV mass. A partial oblique resection of the mass was first performed to help create a space for further dissection and to obtain deeper endoscopic views. This strategic interim partial resection also facilitated the removal of the entire mass, which would have otherwise been challenging to extract through the relatively much smaller AV orifice. The lowest rectal temperature was 31 °C. The CPB and ACC times were 141 and 76 min, respectively. A 5-mm thoracoscope was used to aid in visualizing the tumor margin. The attached portion of the residual tumor could be safely and clearly dissected out from the LV septum using Metzenbaum scissors and a suction tip . On gross examination, the tumor size was 6.0 × 3.5 × 3.0 cm, and it had an irregular and smooth surface with a rubbery to firm consistency . Frozen section biopsy indicated increased cellularity and spindle cell proliferation, suggesting a malignant rather than benign tumor. The entire mass was confirmed to be a cardiac sarcoma upon pathological examination .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. She stayed in intensive care unit for one day and was discharged on postoperative day 7. Follow-up chest-CT, fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography, and TTE were performed a month after discharge and showed no abnormal hypermetabolic lesion suggesting metastasis or residual intracardiac malignancy. However, the patient rejected the recommended adjuvant radiation therapy. Five months later, a follow-up chest-CT revealed the development of an 11 mm-sized nodule in the LV septal wall (Supplementary Fig. ), but the patient reported no related symptoms and still refused further treatment.