A 73-year-old Japanese man with a history of olmesartan intake (20 mg daily for 5 years) for hypertension treatment was admitted to a local hospital complaining of watery, nonbloody diarrhea approximately 10 times daily since 2 months. In 2 months, he lost 10 kg of his weight. Blood tests, CT, and endoscopy were performed, but the cause of his diarrhea remained unknown. Hence, he was referred to our hospital for further examination. His physical examination results were unremarkable. However, laboratory results (Additional file ) indicated anemia (hemoglobin, 10.5 g/dL) and hypoalbuminemia (3.4 g/dL). We searched DQA1 and DQB1. HLA DQ4 and DQ6 were positive. Meanwhile, stool culture, Clostridium difficile toxin, HLA-DQ2/DQ8, and IgA antibodies to tissue transglutaminase and endomysial, were all negative. Abdominal computer tomography was unremarkable. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed villous atrophy and a mosaic pattern of the duodenal mucosa , while colonoscopy (CS) detected villous atrophy of the terminal ileum and diffuse slight edema of the colon (Additional file ). The stomach, duodenum, terminal ileum, and colon were randomly biopsied. Pathological findings of the duodenum and ileum showed villous atrophy, intraepithelial lymphocyte infiltration, and collagen band, and those of the colon showed a 14 μm collagen band . Moreover, capsule endoscopy displayed villous atrophy of the entire small intestine. Taken together, we suspected that the patient had olmesartan-associated spruelike enteropathy. Hence, olmesartan, which was stopped on admission because of hypotension, remained withdrawn, and was switched to amlodipine.
Within 3 weeks after olmesartan discontinuation, his clinical symptoms improved. Three months later, diarrhea resolved, and the duodenum, terminal ileum, and colon showed a normal appearance on EGD/CS . As shown in the biopsies of the duodenum and terminal ileum, the villous architecture of the duodenal and ileal mucosa almost completely recovered , but in colonic biopsies, the collagen band only slightly improved (Additional file ). Six months after discontinuing olmesartan, follow-up endoscopy showed a histologically normal colonic mucosa.