An 11-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat presented with a 3 month history of intermittent behavioural changes (excitability, pacing and disorientation). No seizures or collapsing episodes had been observed. On presentation the cat was bright, alert and responsive, with a body condition score of 4/9 (weight 3.9 kg). General physical examination revealed moderate bradycardia (heart rate 80–100 beats per min), regular cardiac rhythm, synchronic femoral pulses and a firm, non-painful mass in the cranial abdomen. Pupillary light reflex was bilaterally reduced, but the cat had no problems navigating around the consultation room when allowed to.
Haematology was within the reference intervals (RIs). Serum biochemistry revealed severe hypoglycaemia (1.2 mmol/l; RI 3.5–5.5 mmol/l), markedly increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity (1219 U/l; RI 15–60 U/l) and mildly increased alkaline phosphatase activity (90 U/l; RI 0–40 U/l). Coagulation times, bilirubin and pre-prandial bile acids were within the RIs, as were total thyroxine and basal cortisol concentrations. Feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukaemia virus SNAP tests (IDEXX Laboratories) were negative. Electrocardiography revealed sinus bradycardia and systolic blood pressure (Doppler device) was 140 mmHg. Measurement of fructosamine concentration confirmed chronic hypoglycaemia and insulin concentration (immunoradiometric assay; Nationwide Specialists Laboratories, Cambridge, UK) was not consistent with insulinoma. Insulin autoantibody serology was negative, essentially excluding immune-mediated disease as the cause of hypoglycaemia. Serum insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1; radioimmunoassay [Nationwide Specialists Laboratories, Cambridge, UK]) was within the RI .
CT of the head, thorax and abdomen revealed a 15 cm maximum diameter, multilobular cystic mass arising from the caudal left liver lobe . The spleen was diffusely heterogeneous and slightly enlarged. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates of the mass revealed well-differentiated, vacuolated hepatocytes. Fine-needle aspirates from the spleen showed no cytological abnormalities. Histopathological evaluation of a needle core biopsy of the liver mass suggested either primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) or hepatoma.
The cat was hospitalised for 48 h awaiting surgical excision of the liver mass, and hypoglycaemia persisted despite administration of glucose, dextrose and prednisolone. The left lateral liver lobe and associated mass were excised en bloc using an Endo GIA stapler with a 2.5 mm vascular cartridge placed across the lobe base. Abdominal exploration showed no gross evidence of metastatic disease.
Histopathological examination of the mass revealed well-differentiated but neoplastic hepatocytes with mild-to-moderate anisokaryosis and anisocytosis (mitotic index 2 per 10 high-power fields), consistent with a solid to trabecular, well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. IGF-2 immunohistochemistry on sections from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded liver biopsies using an IGF-2 antibody (1:200; ab9574 [Abcam]), and feline colonic tissue as a positive control, revealed scattered positive staining in normal hepatocytes but not in neoplastic cells .
Serum glucose concentration and heart rate normalised within 2 h of tumour removal. Twenty-four days after surgery the patient was normoglycaemic, and serum ALT was practically normal (68.84 U/l; RI 15–60 U/l). At follow-up 4 and 8 months after surgery no hypoglycaemic events or abnormal behaviour were reported. On both occasions, ultrasonographic examination revealed no tumour recurrence. Maintenance treatment with toceranib phosphate (Palladia; Zoetis) was discussed with the owner (based on the evidence of the use of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib in humans with HCC and the poorly understood behaviour of this tumour in cats) but declined. The patient was still alive 20 months after diagnosis.