A 76-year-old man with a history of renal cell carcinoma with prior left nephrectomy and chronic kidney disease presented with low libido and erectile dysfunction ongoing for several years. Laboratory evaluation revealed low testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and follicle stimulating hormone levels, consistent with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism . This prompted brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which demonstrated a large sellar mass (up to 2.7 cm in diameter) with suprasellar extension, optic chiasmal contact, and extension into the right sphenoid and cavernous sinuses . The patient was diagnosed with a nonfunctioning pituitary macroademona with partial hypopituitarism . At this time, despite radiological evidence of optic chiasm compression and cavernous sinus extension, the patient had no clinical evidence of a sellar mass effect, including intact visual fields, normal funduscopic appearance of the optic nerves, and absence of ophthalmoplegia bilaterally. He had no symptoms of hypopituitarism other than sexual dysfunction.
Concurrently, abdominal MRI identified a right kidney mass (1.4 × 3.4 × 5.6 cm) concerning for recurrent malignancy. Given high suspicion for malignancy in the solitary kidney in the setting of chronic kidney disease, a partial right nephrectomy was planned. Transphenoidal resection of the pituitary adenoma was deferred at this time.
The patient underwent partial right nephrectomy with pathological confirmation of clear cell renal carcinoma. Given the patient’s low preoperative morning cortisol level , the patient was treated with 2 days of intravenous corticosteroid supplementation beginning the day of surgery. The intraoperative course was complicated by bleeding at the surgical site with significant blood loss (estimated 3 L) requiring 3 units packed red blood cells and 4 L fluid replacement intraoperatively, as well as brief vasopressors postoperatively. The period of hypovolemia was likely significant, as the patient had postoperative anuria ultimately requiring ureteric stenting on postoperative day 5.
On postoperative day 2, the patient reported new-onset moderate headache and near-complete right-sided ptosis was observed. When the right eyelid was lifted, he experienced binocular diplopia. Examination showed severe right-eye ophthalmoplegia (80–90% limitations in adduction, elevation, and depression, and complete limitation of abduction), mild right pupillary mydriasis with normal reactivity, and no relative afferent pupillary defect. Visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye (reduced from 20/20), though color vision was intact, visual fields were full by confrontation field testing, and the structural eye examination was normal. He was diagnosed with right-sided pupil-involving partial third nerve palsy, complete sixth nerve palsy, and possible early compressive optic neuropathy.
Postoperative laboratory evaluation revealed panhypopituitarism and intravenous corticosteroid supplementation was resumed. Repeat brain MRI on postoperative day 7 was performed without contrast (in the setting of acute-on-chronic kidney injury with solitary partial kidney) and demonstrated increased heterogeneity of the sellar and suprasellar mass with areas of predominantly right-sided hemorrhage, consistent with expected radiographic changes observed in the days following pituitary apoplexy . Extension to the optic chiasm, right sphenoid sinus, and right cavernous sinus was unchanged. The patient was transitioned to oral corticosteroid replacement therapy with close monitoring of visual parameters.
By postoperative day 10 (after 48 hours of oral corticosteroid therapy), visual acuity improved to baseline and ophthalmoplegia improved with reduced extent of cranial nerve 3 palsy, though cranial nerve 6 palsy remained complete. On postoperative day 11, the patient was discharged with continued corticosteroid replacement therapy. At 6 weeks post nephrectomy, the patient’s visual acuity remained normal and visual fields remained full by formal automated testing (Humphrey 24-2). His third nerve palsy fully resolved by postoperative week 6 while the sixth nerve palsy did not fully resolve until postoperative month 5. Throughout his course he showed no evidence of optic neuropathy by funduscopic examination nor by ophthalmic imaging with optical coherence tomography.
On a subsequent admission 2 months after nephrectomy, the patient was found to have left lower extremity deep vein thromboses (DVT) without evidence of pulmonary embolism on computed tomography pulmonary angiogram. Repeat brain MRI showed resolution of pituitary adenoma hemorrhage with partial involution , and the patient was administered therapeutic anticoagulation. The patient did not develop further clinically evident DVT, and his pituitary apoplexy did not recur.