A 60-year-old woman sought medical attention after a 2-month history of minor rectal bleeding and an anal nodule. On physical examination, a 3-cm mobile anterior ulcerative mass in the anal canal was palpable, beginning at 1 cm from the anal verge with no extension to the anorectal junction. No nodes were appreciated in the inguinal regions. A biopsy revealed an invasive squamous cell carcinoma, well-differentiated . Staging computerized tomography (CT) of the thorax/abdomen/pelvis did not show any lymphadenopathy or distant metastatic disease. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 3-cm mass in the anal canal extending to the anorectal junction . There was no pelvic or inguinal lymphadenopathy. Her laboratory investigations including HIV-1 and HIV-2 serology were negative. A recent Papanicolau smear of the cervix was reported to be negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy.
The patient had a past medical history remarkable for an in-situ cervical carcinoma treated with laser therapy over 20 years ago with no subsequent recurrence. She also underwent a right salpingo-oophorectomy for an endometriotic cyst of the right ovary 8 years prior to her anal canal cancer diagnosis. She is a life-time non-smoker and social alcohol drinker. There was no past history of any autoimmune disorders.
For her T2N0M0 anal cancer, the patient underwent a course of chemo-radiotherapy as per institutional protocol. The total dose was 54 Gy in 30 daily fractions to the primary and elective nodal irradiation consisted of 36 Gy in 20 fractions to the inguinal/femoral, mesorectal, presacral and external/internal iliac nodal regions. The radiation treatment was delivered using volumetric modulated arch therapy (VMAT) technique. The chemotherapy regimen consisted of mitomycin C (10 mg/m2 on day 1) and infusional 5-fluorouracil (1000 mg/m2/day for 4 days), given concurrently on week 1 and week 5 of radiation. The patient developed RTOG grade 3 skin and perineal reactions. She had an episode of fever without neutropenia managed by oral antibiotics.