The patient is a 32-year-old male without any significant past medical history. He is an active duty United States Air Force (USAF) Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) pilot who was at an informal, outdoor military function with his unit when he was struck with a water balloon launched by a slingshot into his left eye. The patient was not wearing any glasses or eye protection. Two physicians were on scene and immediately evaluated him in the field. On presentation, the patient complained of blurry vision, mild left eye pain, and a bloody nose. He denied any double vision. Physical exam was significant for periorbital swelling, mild injection of the sclera, and moderate epistaxis. Visual fields were grossly assessed and within normal limits. All extraocular movements were intact despite mild pain on left lateral gaze. The pupils were equal, round, and reactive, and there was not complete 360° subconjunctival hemorrhage. The patient was asked if he experienced any changes in vision, which he denied. During our examination, the patient attempted to clear some of his epistaxis by blowing his nose, and he immediately developed subcutaneous emphysema with increased pain in his left eye. He was escorted to the nearby emergency department for further evaluation. Computed tomography (CT) of his orbits demonstrated a nondisplaced left medial orbital wall fracture with orbital and subcutaneous emphysema . The patient was administered intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam and transferred to another hospital for evaluation by a plastic surgeon.
The plastic surgeon determined he was not a surgical candidate, stating the patient’s fracture was nondisplaced and without other serious comorbidities, such as exophthalmos or extraocular muscle entrapment. Our patient was then discharged. On follow-up the next week, the surgeon recommended conservative treatment and that the patient be ‘cleared for full duty and flight status.’ Follow-up with an optometrist noted no significant ocular trauma and no change in visual acuity. Finally, a flight surgeon evaluated him at the patient’s duty station. After thorough examination noting complete resolution of the patient’s symptoms and with the concurrence of the plastic surgeon, the patient was returned to flying status 4 weeks after his initial injury.
We followed up with the patient several months later to discuss his injury and its relation to his flying career. Fortunately, he reported no further symptoms on the ground or in the air, and he has had no other instances of subcutaneous or orbital emphysema.