A 51-year-old woman ingested cibenzoline succinate (6,900 mg) with alcohol during a suicide attempt. Approximately 75 min after ingestion, she was brought to our emergency department. Physical examination at arrival revealed the following: respiratory rate, 17 breaths/min; pulse rate, 20–30 b.p.m.; blood pressure, 84/50 mmHg; tympanic temperature, 35.5°C; and Glasgow Coma Scale score, 7 (E1V1M5). Her electrocardiogram showed a wide QRS (0.36 ms). Blood examination revealed mild liver dysfunction.
Echocardiography revealed dyssynchrony in left ventricle wall motion, with 30% left ventricular ejection fraction. Considering her worsening clinical condition, including hypotension and bradycardia, she was intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation. Treatment with noradrenaline (0.2 μg/kg/min) and transcutaneous pacing were ineffective.
Approximately 26 min after admission, her electrocardiogram indicated ventricular fibrillation (VF). Twenty minutes later, venoarterial extracorporeal membranous oxygenation (V-A ECMO) treatment was started for cardiac arrest with VF. She developed alternating bradycardia and VF during V-A ECMO. Changes in plasma her cibenzoline succinate levels were observed during treatment .
Plasma exchange was carried out for 2 h using Plasmaflo (Asahi Kasei Medical, Tokyo, Japan) at quantity of blood flow rate of 100 mL/min and quantity of plasma flow rate of 25 mL/min to reduce her plasma cibenzoline succinate concentration; however, her hemodynamics did not improve. Continuous hemofiltration (CHF) was undertaken to treat acute kidney injury with anuria using AEF (Asahi Kasei Medical) at quantity of blood flow rate of 180 mL/min and quantity of filtration rate of 2000 mL/h.
Due to continuous arrhythmias and lack of improvement in her hemodynamics, approximately 15 h after cibenzoline ingestion, DHP was carried out using Hemosorba CHS-350, which included an activated charcoal-coated hemoperfusion column (Asahi Kasei Medical). After DHP, her electrocardiogram showed a change from a wide QRS to a narrow QRS, hemodynamics improved, and she no longer had anuria; therefore, CHF and DHP were terminated after 4.5 h. However, 40 min after withdrawal, her electrocardiogram showed a wide QRS and ventricular tachycardia, indicating clinical deterioration.
Her clinical condition immediately improved following a second DHP, and her electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm within a normal QRS range . We decided there was no need to resume CHF, because her renal function had been gradually improving. On day 3, her hemodynamics stabilized and the left ventricular dyssynchrony disappeared. Hence, we decided to withdraw DHP; her hemodynamics were monitored carefully for a few hours, after which ECMO was safely withdrawn. On day 5, mechanical ventilation was successfully withdrawn. On day 9, she was transferred to another hospital for treatment of her psychological disorder, without arrhythmia recurrence.