An 18-year-old Caucasian man with recurrent hemoptysis was referred to our hospital. A diagnosis of Hughes-Stovin syndrome had already been established in a previous hospital admission . He had had some incidents of spontaneous non-productive cough several days prior to his admission.
During his previous admission three months before his current presentation, his physical examination was normal apart from mild, tender swelling of his left thigh and calf caused by DVT (left external iliac and femoral vein) detected by color duplex examination. His oropharynx and larynx were normal, and his mucous membranes were free of ulcers. Chest radiography revealed a round opacity in the right medial pulmonary field. CT of the chest showed an aneurysm in the right lower lobe pulmonary artery, together with mural thrombus, that had a diameter of 3.5 cm in the lower lobe of the right lung. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the cerebral venosus sinuses and the pulmonary arteries was performed to clarify the etiology of the patient's headaches and to plan possible embolization of the aneurysm. Cerebral MRA revealed multiple chronic thromboses of the sclera mater venous sinuses. The rare diagnosis of systemic vasculitis Hughes-Stovin syndrome was made on the basis of the pulmonary artery aneurysm and peripheral venous thromboses in such a young patient. There were no findings consistent with Behçet's disease.
The patient was initially treated with corticosteroids. His hemoptysis resolved with intravenous methylprednisolone treatment after about 25 days. Upon his second admission, because of his recurrent hemoptysis, we decided to perform percutaneous embolization of the pulmonary artery aneurysm.
The aneurysm was initially embolized with steel microcoils via an infusion catheter. Subsequently, an Amplatzer Vascular Plug (AGA Medical Corp., Plymouth, MN, USA) with a diameter of 16 mm was inserted into the cavity of the aneurysm. The procedure ended without any complications, and afterward there was no evidence of the pulmonary embolism . The patient's post-interventional course was uneventful, and he was discharged 30 days after the procedure. He was prescribed anti-coagulants (acenocoumarol) and immunosuppressant corticosteroids (methylprednisolone) to control his vasculitis. The patient developed a new DVT in his lower extremities during follow-up (in the 30th month) after temporary discontinuation of anti-coagulant treatment. Nevertheless, he has not had any complications from the aneurysm 36 months after undergoing embolization, and follow-up CT showed the completely thrombosed pulmonary artery aneurysm.