A 44-year-old White Caucasian man who is HIV positive presented with multiple, pruritic, purplish colored plaques on the gluteal areas and thigh for 3 months. He was HIV positive for about 15 years. He was already at the stage of late symptomatic acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) with a CD4 count of 350 cells/mm3 for 6 months. The HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) titer was 7000 copies/mm3. His antiretroviral therapy included 600mg twice a day indinavir, 100mg twice a day ritonavir and 400mg lopinavir, 1200mg twice a day nelfinavir, 600mg per day zidovudine, and 150mg per day lamivudine. He had been treated with anti-HIV drugs for the past 6 months. He was also taking prophylactic azithromycin, dapsone, valacyclovir, gancyclovir and antifungals. His past medical and family history were unremarkable other than his HIV positivity. He denied the presence of a previous trauma, atopy or an arthropod bite. He also informed us that he had been treated with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone in 0.3 to 0.5mg/kg doses a few weeks before without an exact histopathological diagnosis. A dermatological examination revealed multiple, confluent Kaposi’s sarcoma-like purple colored, deep plaques and nodules on his right gluteal area . There were also similar irregular shaped plaques with a pebbled surface on his right thigh . All the lesions were deeply extended through the subcutaneous tissue. On histopathological examination it was observed that most of the inflammation was in the subcutis, in and near the septa and lobules (hematoxylin and eosin stain ×40) . A mixed inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages, and numerous eosinophils involving both septa and lobules of the subcutis were noted. There was a marked abundance of eosinophils in the infiltrate . The full blood examinations and urine analysis were all normal other than a mild lymphopenia (0.8 × 109/L). The sedimentation rate was increased (26mm/hour). Neither peripheral eosinophilia, nor an increase in total immunoglobulin E (IgE) level was observed. The serological tests including polymerase chain reaction were negative for Toxoplasma gondii, cytomegalovirus and human herpes virus-8. Hepatitis markers and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory tests were also negative. Direct radiographies and microbiological cultures excluded the presence of an infection, parasitic infestations, neoplasm and sarcoidosis. A punch biopsy sample was also sent for Gram stain, acid-fast bacillus staining, and fungal cultures, all of which were negative. With all these clinical and histopathological findings the patient was diagnosed with EP. He was given intravenous (IV) 60mg per day methylprednisolone for 3 consecutive days a week for 6 months. The lesions resolved almost completely after 6 months. No recurrence was noted during 6 months of follow-up.