A 32-year-old full term pregnant woman presented for semi-urgent repeat Cesarean Section due to a previous low transverse incision and chorioamnionitis. The patient had a history of having had a benign brain tumor resection three months previously. She had had symptoms of increasing headaches, inability to fully control and coordinate her left leg and left arm motor function; ataxic gait; blurred vision; loss of hearing in the left ear; facial numbness; and left ophthalmoplegia. An MRI of the brain prior to surgery revealed a left heterogeneous enhancing mass on the left cerebello-pontine angle (CPA) region with significant mass effect on the brainstem . The patient underwent a left suboccipital craniotomy and resection of a 4cm CPA tumor at 26 weeks of gestation age with an uneventful perioperative course. The pathohistology showed a choroid plexus papilloma originating from the fourth ventricle. A CT scan of the head with and without contrast was taken on post operative day 1, revealing postsurgical changes in the left CPA. The operative report indicated “complete removal of a CPA tumor”. No further post-operative MRI was ordered. The “impression” of a successful total resection of the brain tumor was described and no further intervention was suggested.
However, when presenting in active labor, the patient continued to suffer from residual and multiple neurological deficits with no resolution since the brain surgery. The operative neurosurgeon was contacted by the anesthesia team and he stated that the tumor had been totally removed and that the patient had no further mass effect. There was no time to perform an MRI prior to cesarean section. After case discussion with the obstetric surgeon and a neuroanesthesiologist, general anesthesia was chosen. The patient was in a left lateral uterine displacement position, and standard ASA monitors were applied. A rapid sequence induction with cricoid pressure was performed using 200 mg of propofol IV, 100 mcg of fentanyl IV, and 80 mg of succinylcholine IV after 40 mg of lidocaine IV. The trachea was easily intubated, and anesthesia was maintained using 1 MAC of sevoflurane with a propofol infusion at 50 mcg/kg/min, fentanyl 3 mcg/kg and O2. Mild hyperventilation to produce an end tidal CO2 of 30 mmHg and crystalloids were used to prevent a possible sudden increase in intracranial pressure. A healthy infant was delivered with Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes of 9/9. The operative course was unremarkable and the patient remained stable throughout the procedure. The trachea was extubated and the patient had an unchanged neurological status similar to her preinduction examination without development of any new neurological deficits or any increase in headache intensity following operative delivery.
One week postoperatively, the MRI with and without contrast revealed a residual mass (measuring 2.5 × 1.6 × 2.2 cm3) at the level of the very thin left middle cerebellar peduncle. An associated extra axial cyst located anterior to the mass and on the left aspect of the pons and medulla measured 1.5 × 1.7 cm2. Mass effects on the left aspect of the pons, medulla and the cisternal segments of cranial nerves VII and VIII were also identified [Figures and ].