A 41-year-old male was presented in our hospital on February 15th, 2020, for bilateral lower limb paralysis for more than 10 days. In the middle of January 2020, he was admitted in the local hospital due to he had fever for more than one month. He was diagnosed with AIDS, bacterial pneumonia, and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in the local hospital. Seven hundreds copies /ml of CMV were detected in urine On January 16th, and 5.77 × 103 copies /ml of CMV were detected in sputum on January 20th. After antimicrobial and anti-CMV treatment, the patient’s condition improved. The combined ART regimen of Nevirapine, Lamivudine, and Tenofovir was taken on January 27th, 2020. In the following days after cART initiation, he experienced weakness of lower limbs and developed paralysis of both legs and incontinence in a short time. He reported no skin lesions, fear of cold, fever, dizziness, headache, vomiting, limb convulsions, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or any other discomfort. He also reported no special medical history or trauma history. We gave him a physical examination when admission: his lower limb muscle tension was low, and the muscle strength was level 0. But the passive range of motion of all joints of the body was normal. His sensation disappeared in the sacrococcyx, buttocks, front and lateral thighs, back and medial sides, calves, and feet. However, pathological emission did not elicit.
The clinical tests after admission showed that the CD4+ T cell count was 35 cells/µL, white blood cells (WBC) count was 4.8 × 109/L, red blood cell (RBC) count was 3.24 × 1012/L, hemoglobin (Hb) was 90 g/L, Platelets (PLT) was 259 × 109/L, and the percentage of neutrophile granulocyte was 76.4 %. No abnormalities were found in liver and renal function tests. Screening for hepatitis B virus infection, hepatitis C virus infection, and syphilis were negative. Neither was the Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infecting T cells test. DNA tests for CMV and Mtb in blood and CSF were negative, too. CSF examination showed the opening pressure was 60 mm H2O by lumbar puncture, the Pandy test was weakly positive, 16.00 × 106 WBC/L, and a normal level of adenosine deaminase (2.01 U/L). The biochemical indicators of CSF revealed protein concentration was 960.60 mg/L (normal range, 150–450 mg/L), normal level of glucose (3.59 mmol/L), and chloride concentration was 111.30 mmol/L (normal range, 120–132 mmol/L). No bacteria or fungi was found in CSF smear and culture. MRI of the brain and electrocardiography were normal. However, MRI of the spinal cord showed the morphology of the thoracic spinal cord was irregular and locally inflated, and the signals of T1 and T2 were slightly longer . It indicated infection.
To figure out the pathogens that induced the infection in the spinal cord, the CSF was used for the super broad-spectrum pathogenic microorganisms mNGS by MAPMITM (CapitalBio MedLab Co. LTD, Beijing, China). The mNGS was done on BioelectronSeq4000 platform (CapitalBio). After quality filtering, eliminating replicate reads, removing reads matching human genome sequence, reads were classified against the NCBI reference/representative bacterial, archaeal, and fungal genomes, as well as genomes of DNA viruses infecting humans and DNA bacteriophages. Of 25,337,336 quality filtered sequencing reads, 23,485,313 were human, 53,502 were assigned to microbe, and 3935 were mapped on Human_alphaherpesvirus_3 (VZV). The VZV genome coverage was 95.55 %, and the estimated VZV DNA concentration was 2.6 × 103copies/ml (computed from VZV to human read counts ratio combined with a TaqMan-based quantification of human DNA). Screening results for bacteria, fungi, and parasites were negative. The results indicated the pathogen was VZV (three representative DNA sequences got from mNGS and the reference sequence were showed in Additional file and Additional file ). The patient was confirmed as AIDS with VZV induced thoracic myelomyelitis.
After admission, he was treated with sodium phosphonate 3.0 g/3 times a day for 50 days, adjuvanted with traditional Chinese acupuncture for more than a month to control the symptom. Acyclovir 0.5 g/3 times a day was used for 22 days after he was diagnosis as VZV infection by mNGS. The MRI reexamination of the spinal on April 3rd showed that the edema of the lesion was reduce . However, his disease progression did not improve or get worse after more than 1 month’s treatment. Therefore, he abandoned further treatment automatically and was discharged from our hospital.