A 51-year-old man was found to have a diffusely infiltrative tumor in the bilateral frontal lobe and right thalamus . The patient had undergone removal of a right frontal tumor, diagnosed as anaplastic astrocytoma (AA), on February 18, 2005. During local 60 Gy irradiation, chemotherapy consisting of procarbazine, nimustine hydrochloride (ACNU) and vincristine was given. After the radiation-chemotherapy, MRI showed complete disappearance of the lesion, including the thalamic tumor . This combination chemotherapy was repeated every 3 months, but MRI on November 16, 2005, revealed recurrence in the right thalamus . The patient received stereotaxic radiotherapy with 18 Gy (target volume 0.8 ml) for the recurrence in the thalamus, but follow-up MRI in January 2006 showed enlargement of the thalamic mass .
To differentiate radiation necrosis from recurrence, a fluorodeoxy glucose (FDG) PET study was performed. As the FDG-PET findings strongly suggested recurrence, TMZ chemotherapy was started. The patient was treated with the usual 5-day protocol repeated in cycles every 28 days, i.e. TMZ 150 mg/m2 for the first 5 days, escalated to 200 mg/m2 in the following cycles. Although the TMZ chemotherapy seemed to have some effect, the tumor continued to grow. After 6 cycles, the patient developed dysarthria and hemiparesis, and Karnofsky performance status (KPS) decreased from 100% to 70%. From the clinical course, the serial MRI findings and the previous FDG-PET data, we considered this was due to progression of the recurrent disease, and therefore we abandoned TMZ monotherapy. After application to the IRB, and with the informed consent of the patient, a combination of interferon-beta and TMZ treatment was started. On July 12, 2006, 3 × 106 international unit (IU)/body interferon-beta (Feron®) was given intravenously followed by 5 days of 200 mg/m2 TMZ (Days 2 – 6).
The patient's neurological symptoms improved after this first cycle, and MRI after the second cycle showed shrinkage of the tumor . The patient's neurological symptoms also showed further concomitant improvement. This treatment was repeated every 28 days. After 8 cycles, the tumor showed further shrinkage, and since then the patient's condition has been improving, with a KPS of 100 in April 2007. During this treatment, no steroid has been administered and there have been no significant side effects exceeding grade 3 in terms of hematological and other clinical parameters.
The MGMT protein expression of the tumor specimen taken at the initial surgery was performed using immunohistochemical method as described previously . Briefly, after antigen retrieval through autoclave treatment, the tissue sections were incubated in 0.3% hydrogen peroxidase for 30 min, then were incubated with the Ready-to Use anti-MGMT monoclonal antibody (clone MT3.1, Lab Vision, CA) overnight at 4°C. The sections were treated with a second biotinylated antibody (DAKO) then were incubated with streptavidin-biotin-peroxidase (SAB) complex (DAKO). Visualization was carried out with 3',3'-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB).
More than 40% of the tumor cells were positive for this staining thus it is confirmed that this tumor moderatelyexpressed MGMT protein .