A 78-year-old male patient presented for a second opinion, with bullous keratopathy and a detached DSAEK graft in the presence of an ACIOL in his left eye. The patient had history of diabetes mellitus for 35 years. DSAEK surgery was performed 7 weeks prior to his presentation. This was the second DSAEK procedure. The first DSAEK was performed 1 month prior to the second one (11 weeks prior to the presentation). The indication for DSAEK was pseudophakic bullous keratopathy in the setting of an AC lens. The patient had a history of congenital cataract surgery. The first graft was complicated by graft detachment. The patient was brought back to the operating room, where the original graft was repositioned, sutured to the host cornea, and rebubbled. However, the graft failed to adhere. Owing to the detachment and failure of the first DSAEK graft, the referring surgeon chose to add two steps in the second DSAEK surgery: suturing the second DSAEK graft superiorly during the primary procedure and injecting 20% filtered SF6 intracamerally as air was injected in the first DSAEK.
The endothelial cell count of the second DSAEK graft was 2,946 pre-cut and 2,941 post-cut. A 7.75 mm graft was prepared using a Barron corneal punch. The previously failed corneal graft was mobilized and removed using a reverse Sinsky hook. Healon was placed in a bed on the temporal conjunctival surface. The endothelial graft was separated using a Paton spatula and then transferred, endothelium side down, to the temporal bed of Healon. The graft was then pushed into the AC using a previously bent 30-gauge needle on a 3-cc syringe. The incision was closed using interrupted 10-0 nylon sutures. Air on a cannula was used to inflate the AC and support the endothelial graft in position. A single 10-0 nylon was passed through the endothelial button via the superior paracentesis to attach it to the host cornea; the knot was rotated and buried. Twenty% filtered SF6 gas was injected into the AC using a 30G needle.
Postoperatively, the second DSAEK also detached. The graft approximated the cornea at the superior suture site; otherwise, it was detached. The gas did not remain in the AC, migrated posteriorly in the setting of the ACIOL and the iridectomy and the patient had a poor gas fill on post-operative day 1.
At the patient’s first visit to us, his visual acuity was counting fingers at two feet in the left eye. shows a Scheimpflug picture of a partially detached graft. The right eye also had an ACIOL, but the cornea was clear and the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/60.
The patient elected to proceed with IOL exchange (ACIOL would be exchanged for a scleral fixed IOL), pars plana vitrectomy, and repeat DSAEK. The patient was prescribed prednisolone acetate eye drops four times a day, sodium chloride 5% eye drops four times a day, and sodium chloride 5% eye ointment at bedtime.
The patient was evaluated by a vitreoretinal surgeon before proceeding with the ACIOL to PCIOL exchange. He had a known history of mild to moderate non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy in both eyes. On retina exam, he was found to have mild macular edema and inner retinal thinning by optical coherence tomography in both eyes.
He was scheduled for surgery, but approximately 3 months after his second DSAEK, he called stating that he noticed a spontaneous improvement in his visual acuity. He was re-examined, and his vision improved to 20/125 in the left eye. On slit-lamp examination, the graft was attached, a little decentered but clearing, as shown in . The surgery was canceled.
Five months after DSAEK surgery, the graft remained attached and clear. At that time, the suture passing through the graft was removed, as shown in . The graft remained attached at subsequent follow-up visits. The graft remained attached and clear, with a visual acuity of 20/70 8 months after DSAEK surgery.