A 68-year-old male patient was referred to our department from neurosurgery due to the occurrence of diplopia 10 days after a head surgery that was performed following a pedestrian traffic accident. On the day of the initial trauma, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit after neurosurgical evaluation, because of a compound comminuted depressed fracture of the right temporal bone. In the initial ophthalmologic examination, there were no ocular symptoms. On day 4 after trauma, an open reduction and internal fixation were performed on the temporal bone fracture by the neurosurgeon. On day 2 after neurosurgery, the patient complained of diplopia and orbital computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral orbital superior wall fractures. In contrast to the fact that a herniation of the brain parenchyma was unclear on the initial facial CT scan , the fracture fragment and the brain parenchyma were downwardly moved into the orbit, observed on CT scans taken when diplopia occurred . Upon physical examination at the time of admission to the department of oral and maxillofacial surgery, right eye movement limitation and right eye protrusion were observed . The surgical plan was to reconstruct the bilateral medial orbital wall using a titanium mesh via coronal approach. For better fitness of the titanium mesh, the mesh was contoured preoperatively on a model of the patient’s skull that included the orbital wall defect. The defect on the model was restored using a plate wax ; following pre-operative manipulations, the mesh was sterilized.
The reconstruction of the orbital wall was performed 1 month after trauma. A bicoronal approach was attempted in order to easily access the tissue on the right orbital wall. Due to severe tissue adhesion, a craniotomy was performed on the frontal bone to approach the anterior cranial base, even though this is a more invasive approach. Despite utilizing this approach through the anterior cranial base, sufficient tissue dissection was not achieved due to severe adhesion. We thus decided to remove the superior orbital rim in order to secure the operating field, which was successful. Before the osteotomy of the superior orbital rim, a miniplate for fixation of the bony fragment was prepared to reposition the fragment in its original position. After osteotomy, strong adhesions between the brain parenchyma and orbital contents were found . Further forcible dissection of the adherent tissue was expected to cause damage to the meninges and parenchyma, so after a neurosurgery consultation, neurosurgical procedures were performed in order to dissect the adherent tissue, remove the fractured fragment and necrotic brain tissue, and repair the damaged meninges . After the adhered tissue was dissected, the superior orbital wall was reconstructed with a pre-prepared titanium mesh, and the superior orbital rim bone fragment was placed in the original position with a miniplate .
In the left superior orbital wall fracture where the tissue adhesion was not severe, tissue dissection was completed without an osteotomy of the superior orbital wall rim. The titanium mesh was placed and fixed through conventional methods. After fixation of the fracture fragment, which had been obtained from the craniotomy site, the surgical site was closed.
We could confirm the improvement of the exophthalmos immediately following surgery as the CT scan taken immediately after the operation showed that the brain parenchyma that had been protruding into the orbit returned to its normal position . Postoperative diplopia and exophthalmos were improved, and the patient was discharged without complications. At 3 months after surgery, further improvements in diplopia and exophthalmos with no limitation of ocular motility were found .