A 73-year-old man (weight 73 kg, height 170 cm) with a history of hypertension was scheduled for aortic valve replacement (AVR) because of severe aortic regurgitation (AR). The patient was taken to the operating room and anesthetized with midazolam, remifentanil, and sevoflurane. After tracheal intubation, a TEE probe, X7-2t Live 3D TEE xMATRIX array transducer (Philips Ultrasound, Inc., Austin, TX) was inserted into the esophagus. An initial intraoperative TEE revealed severe AR. Spectral Doppler imaging revealed holodiastolic flow reversal in the descending thoracic aorta. In the midesophageal (ME) aortic valve (AV) long-axis (LAX), the aortic root diameter, sinus of Valsalva diameter, and diameter of the sinotubular junction were measured as being 3.0 cm, 4.0 cm, and 2.7 cm, respectively, and the vena contracta of eccentric AR was 5.3 mm with color flow Doppler (CFD). Moreover, TEE showed slightly reduced left ventricular motion (ejection fraction 39% in the modified Simpson method), trivial mitral regurgitation, and trivial tricuspid regurgitation. A patent foramen ovale (PFO) was confirmed using contrast TEE and CFD before CPB.
AVR was performed in the supra-annular position with a 23-mm Carpentier-Edwards Perimount Magna Ease aortic valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) using the non-everting mattress suture technique with pledgets; the PFO was closed directly. The patient was weaned from CPB on low-dose dopamine and dobutamine. TEE confirmed a well-seated AV prosthesis with good mobility of the biological valve in the ME AV LAX and ME AV short-axis (SAX) views. However, CFD revealed perpendicular and turbulent flow from the sewing ring near the stent post to the opposite side in the ME LAX view . The color flow jet ran perpendicularly from above the sewing ring though between the stent post and the sewing ring, as characteristic of non-central non-PVLs . However, in the ME AV SAX view, a considerable flow convergence was seen adjacent to the stent post and originated from outside the sewing ring . The range of flow convergence seemed to be too large to be caused by TVL alone originating between the stent post and sewing ring. Further examination with CFD revealed that a turbulent flow from the outside of the sewing ring ran through perpendicularly below it and towards the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) on the opposite side , which was different from the turbulent jet shown in Fig. . These TEE findings suggested that both PVL and TVL existed in close proximity to each other . We were convinced that one of the turbulent jets was PVL; therefore, CPB was reinstituted to inspect the prosthesis directly.
An aortic cross-clamp was placed and antegrade cardioplegia was administered into the aortic root to arrest the heart. We monitored the left ventricle with TEE to avoid additional distension because of AR whilst cardioplegia was administered. Inspection of the prosthesis itself indicated that the leaflets, stent post, and sewing ring appeared to be normal within the annulus; however, there was a region adjacent to the anterior stent post near the right coronary ostium where the tip of the curved Pean forceps entered between the sewing ring and the native annulus. The region was consistent with the TEE findings and may have contributed to the observed leakage. The prosthesis was removed by cutting the surgical sutures without dropping the pledgets to the left ventricle, and it was confirmed to be uninjured. Simultaneously, the annulus and pledgets sutured to the annulus were checked. AVR was performed with the same prosthesis again in the supra-annular position using the non-everting mattress suture technique with pledgets, similar to the first AVR. It was verified that there was no loose region between the annulus and the sewing ring before the ascending aorta was closed. After weaning from CPB, TEE was performed immediately, which revealed that the unusual perpendicular turbulent flow had disappeared and only a few small TVLs were observed.
Subsequently, the patient’s course was uneventful, and he was discharged from our hospital after approximately 2 weeks. Postoperative follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed only mild TVL with no evidence of PVL. The patient gave written consent for publication of clinical reports and echo images.