A 12-year-old Japanese boy with a limbal mass lesion in the left eye was referred to our clinic. The patient had been diagnosed with allergic conjunctivitis and treated with topical administration of pemirolast and/or corticosteroid (fluorometholone or betamethasone) at another clinic for 2 months. According to the referral letter, pruritus, the patient’s first main complaint, had resolved after initiation of topical betamethasone administration, while a limbal mass lesion had appeared during the treatment and developed chronically. The patient had no medical history of atopic disease or previous ocular abnormalities, nor was there a family history of allergies.
At the initial visit to our clinic, a noticeable mass lesion, milky-white colored with a partially red appearance, was found at the inferior-temporal limbus in the left eye . There was no corneal change including superficial punctate keratitis in both eyes . Horner-Trantas’s dots were observed at the superior limbus in the same eye . We found mild papillae formation, not as large as cobblestones, at the upper tarsal conjunctiva in both eyes . The bulbar conjunctiva and the limbus in the right eye were normal. A pseudomembranous structure covered the limbal mass lesion and was readily dissected . Given that the patient’s presentation and a medical history that suggested chronic allergic stimuli, we diagnosed that the limbal mass lesion in the left eye was an unusual finding of limbal VKC.
Because the patient did not complain of any subjective symptoms such as pruritus, we stopped the topical corticosteroid administration and continued only with that of pemirolast as a mast cell stabilizer after dissection of the pseudomembranous structure. However, one month later, the mass lesion became larger than that at the initial visit, measuring 4 × 4 × 4 mm . We resected the limbal mass lesion for therapeutic purposes and sent the obtained specimen for pathological analysis. Hematoxylin-eosin staining detected rich infiltration of eosinophils and lymphocytes in the subepithelial lesion and the substantia propria of the mass lesion . Fibroblasts were also observed in both areas . Immunohistochemical staining detected that CD3-positive T lymphocytes had predominantly and diffusely infiltrated in the subepithelial lesion and the substantia propria of the mass lesion . By contrast, relatively small numbers of CD20-positive B lymphocytes and CD138-positive plasma cells were locally detected and tended to aggregate . These histopathological findings supported our diagnosis that the limbal mass lesion was a hypertrophic response induced by chronic allergic stimuli, rather than by ocular squamous neoplasia .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. We have been using topical administration of corticosteroids (betamethasone or fluorometholone) and/or that of tacrolimus to control the allergic conjunctivitis. The limbal mass lesion did not recur over 8 years .