A 50-year-old male presented with intermittent abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea.
He had tenesmus 3 mo before his first admission. One month before presentation, he had bloody diarrhea and lower abdominal pain, which was alleviated by defecation. Five days before admission, these symptoms became worse, and he visited our hospital.
The patient had hypertension, lipidosis, sleep apnea syndrome, and urinary stones. He had no history of trauma or abdominal surgery. He had undergone a colonoscopy 2 years ago because of fecal occult blood, and a colon polyp was detected. No abnormalities were detected in a second colonoscopy performed 6 mo ago. Because of attacks of urinary stones, he had previously undergone non-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT).
His father had cholangiocarcinoma, and his mother had hypertension.
He was afebrile with normal vital signs. Physical examination showed abdominal tenderness in the lower abdominal quadrants without signs of peritoneal irritation. No mass was detected in the abdomen.
His laboratory data were unremarkable except for mild anemia (hemoglobin level, 12.9 g/dL).
Non-enhanced abdominal CT showed hypodense thickening of the sigmoid and rectal wall. Colonoscopy revealed diffuse ulcerations, edema, and erythema from the descending colon to the rectum. These mucosal findings were most evident in the upper rectum . Biopsy specimens from the colon showed atrophy of crypts and infiltration of inflammatory cells, which were consistent with ischemic colitis.
Stool samples were negative for infectious causes. Cytomegalovirus antigenemia and Entamoeba histolytica immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody were also negative.
After the diagnosis of ischemic colitis, he was treated with fasting and fluid replacement. However, his tenesmus continued, and his abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea improved. He was discharged from the hospital 12 d after admission.
Three weeks after discharge from the hospital, he presented to our clinic with similar abdominal pain. He underwent contrast-enhanced abdominal CT, which showed a nidus of small corkscrew vessels arising from the superior rectal artery (branch of the inferior mesenteric artery) and marked early inferior mesenteric vein enhancement .