Our patient was a 39-year-old Ethiopian man who presented with left-side body weakness of 6 years’ duration. He was admitted to our hospital with worsening of symptoms of 6 months’ duration with failure to communicate of 1 week and frequent falling episodes while attempting to walk. His left-side body weakness initially started from the left lower extremity, followed by the left upper extremity. The patient also had worsening of headache, abnormal body movement, and left-side facial deviation, as well as choking episodes. He also complained of occasional urinary incontinence; otherwise, he had no history of trauma, ear discharge, past history of sinusitis, or meningitis treatment. He had no history of fever or previous treatment for tuberculosis. He had no history of smoking or alcohol intake and no history of known medical illness or drug intake. He was a priest working in a church for the past 25 years. He is a father of two and had discontinued his education at grade 6.
His physical examination revealed vital signs of blood pressure 110/80 mmHg, pulse rate 88 beats/minute, respiration rate 16 breaths/minute, and temperature 36.5 °C. A pertinent finding was that upon central nervous system examination, the patient was oriented to time, place, and person. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 15/15. He had left-side supranuclear facial palsy. His muscle power was 4/5 in the left upper and lower extremities. His meningeal signs were negative. Laboratory investigations showed a white blood cell count of 4.91 x 103/μl with 61% neutrophils and 28% lymphocytes and hemoglobin 17.1 g/dl. The patient’s coagulation profile, organ function test, and serum electrolytes were within normal ranges. We did not do purified protein derivative skin test, because the patient had a bacillus Calmette-Guérin vaccination history, but his erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 04 mm/hour. His chest x-ray was normal. He had no history of trauma, meningitis, or previous surgery. The routine laboratory tests were all within the normal range.
On precontrast brain CT images, there was a left frontal, parietal, and temporal convexity, peripherally calcified, extra-axial, subdural, hypodense collection with focal areas of hyperdensity. There was a mass effect on the adjacent brain parenchyma .
Post-contrast images showed no abnormal enhancement of the lesion .
Brain MRI showed left frontoparietal convexity subdural collection that had mixed iso- and hypointense on axial T2-weighted images and slightly hyperintense signal on axial T1-weighted images with mass effect on the ipsilateral lateral ventricle . Axial T1-weighted postcontrast images showed no abnormal contrast enhancement .
In the preoperative period, the patient was administered analgesic diclofenac 75 mg intramuscularly as needed and deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis heparin 7500 IU subcutaneously twice daily. He took antibiotic ceftriaxone 1 g upon call to the operating room and for the next 24 hours for surgical wound prophylaxis, which was continued 24 hours postoperatively.
Intraoperatively, the pus was sent in three separate tubes: one for cell count, another for chemistry (glucose and protein), and the last one for Gram stain culture (which includes acid-fast bacillus stain and fungal culture), and all of the results were not revealing.
The patient underwent left frontoparietal craniotomy in April 2019. Intraoperative findings were a calcified subdural empyema, which was completely covered by the dura. When the outer capsule was resected, there was thick, nonoffensive pus more organized in the frontal area. The pus was evacuated, and the cavity was irrigated with copious amounts of normal saline . The inner capsule was not densely calcified compared with the outer capsule, but it was adherent to the underlying pia and cortical vessel. A biopsy was taken, and resection of the inner capsule was deferred. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and was extubated with a GCS score of 15/15.
Two days after surgery, the patient’s mentation started to deteriorate, and he had two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Control CT showed bilateral tension pneumocephalus with subdural collection . The patient underwent emergency reoperation, and exploration was done. Intraoperatively, there was moderate blood in a mixed subdural collection and a gush of air came out upon elevation of the bone. The patient was transferred to the ICU and intubated and was started on ceftazidime 2 g intravenously three times daily and vancomycin 1 g intravenously twice daily. During his stay in the ICU, blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures were performed. The initial culture as well as the subsequent cultures for all three samples did not show any growth through the 14th day. Despite the high dose of broad-spectrum antibiotic, the patient continued to have persistent high-grade fever, and subsequently he developed shock with multiorgan failure. The result of the culture from the evacuated pus was negative. Our patient died 10 days after surgery with a possible diagnosis of aseptic meningitis. An autopsy was not performed.