A 69-year-old woman fell 3 m into a shallow river, bruising her head and chest. She was admitted to our hospital as an emergency case with no relevant medical history. In the emergency department, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was determined to be 11. She had a headache, nausea, and amnesia at the time of injury, but no apparent paralysis. She had a bruise on the right side of her head and swelling on the precordium.
Computed tomography (CT) showed SAH in the posterior fossa and left Sylvian fissure, IVH with slight ventriculomegaly, and contusion of the left temporal lobe [ and ]. Fractures of the right temporal bone and zygoma were also observed . A cerebral CT angiogram revealed no aneurysm and vascular abnormalities without right dominant PICA [ and ]. Chest and abdominal CT showed pneumothorax and multiple rib fractures on the right side. A tube thoracostomy was performed to treat the traumatic hemothorax and pneumothorax. Laboratory examination revealed coagulation disorders, including a d-dimer elevation of 175 μg/mL and international normalized ratio of 1.35. The platelet count was 14.1 μg/mL. We suspected disseminated intravascular coagulation due to severe trauma. Six units of fresh frozen plasma and four units of red blood cells were administered to correct the coagulopathy, and 1 g of tranexamic acid was administered twice. We decided to perform conservative treatment and careful follow-up for intracranial hemorrhage. However, the patient suddenly fell into a semi-comatose condition 1 h later. Cerebral CT showed increased SAH, IVH, and ventricular enlargement .
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed to identify the source of the hemorrhage. Under local anesthesia, a 5-French introducer sheath was placed in the right femoral artery (FA). A six-vessel selective cerebral angiogram was performed using a 5-French JB2 125-cm catheter (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan). A right vertebral artery (VA) angiogram revealed an 11 mm aneurysm in the right PICA anterior medullary segment (AMS). It was considered a pseudoaneurysm because of its small and unclear aneurysmal neck [ and ]. No other vascular lesions causing SAH were observed. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with SAH due to a ruptured traumatic PICA pseudoaneurysm.
Under local anesthesia, 3000 units of heparin were injected intravenously, and activated coagulation time (ACT) was extended to 250 s. A 5-French JB2 125 cm catheter was placed in the left VA for angiography to confirm blood flow. A 6-French introducer sheath was placed in the left FA, and a 6-French FUBUKI guiding catheter of 90 cm (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) was placed in the right VA. A Marathon microcatheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) was inserted into a 6-French FUBUKI with a Tenrou 1014 (Kaneka Medics, Kanagawa, Japan) to approach the aneurysm. However, with this approach, it was difficult to guide the microcatheter because the direction of the microcatheter and the aneurysm neck was almost at 180° with each other . A Marathon catheter and a Tenrou 1014 were inserted into the 5-Fr JB2 125 cm catheter in the left VA and guided beyond the union to the right PICA . We managed to guide the Marathon microcatheter and a Tenrou 1014 to the entrance of the aneurysm but were unable to guide them into the aneurysm. Microcatheter angiography revealed an aneurysm and backflow to the VA and PICA . The diameter of the small space at the entrance of the aneurysm where the Marathon microcatheter could be placed was approximately 1.5 mm. It was predicted that the Marathon microcatheter would be extremely unstable. The coil could not be placed inside the aneurysm; hence, it was embolized using n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA). NBCA (12.5%) was injected into the aneurysm while blocking the proximal part of the right VA with a SHOURYU HR balloon (7 mm × 7 mm) (Kaneka Medics, Kanagawa, Japan) and suppressing the backflow to the VA . Using NBCA, we were able to embolize a small part of the aneurysm neck. The Marathon microcatheter was carefully removed, but its removal from the aneurysm caused NBCA to scatter into the PICA . An angiogram revealed that the aneurysm had disappeared, but blood flow in the PICA was extremely slow . The puncture site was manually pressed to stop the bleeding.
Immediately after the surgery, the level of consciousness was somnolent due to sedation, but no anisocoria was observed. Cerebral CT revealed dilated ventricles and contusive hemorrhage in the left temporal lobe with uncal herniation . After CT imaging, the respiratory condition deteriorated and intubation was performed. The mydriasis of the left pupil was observed. We then decided to perform decompression craniectomy on the left side of the head. However, it was difficult to stop the bleeding during the surgery, likely due to considerable swelling of the brain and abnormal coagulation. Although decompression craniectomy and hematoma removal were performed, postoperative CT showed an enlarged contusion hemorrhage and uncal herniation [ and ]. Brain death was confirmed on the 2nd day after the surgery, and the patient died on the 4th day.