A 23-year-old woman and 6 months postpartum, a known case of complex partial seizure for past one year under oxcarbazepine was switched to lamotrigine 50 mg two weeks back after she complained of diplopia and visual disturbances. Nearly two weeks after initiation of therapy, she started complaining of difficultly in swallowing, burning micturition, burning sensation in eyes, and developed oral ulcer and generalized purpuric rashes. She was initially admitted to the ward but few days later was shifted to ICU for monitoring and isolation because of the progression of skin lesion. Her SCORTEN score was 2. During admission in ICU, the rashes had involved more than 30% of body surface area along with epidermal necrosis, and Nikolsky's sign was positive. The Naranjo Algorithm or Adverse Drug Reaction Probability Scale was used to assess the casualty analysis and it was found “probable” with lamotrigine . The diagnosis of lamotrigine induced TEN was made. Her vitals were stable. Offending drug was stopped. She was put on clobazam, antihistamines, steroids, adequate oral, parenteral hydration, and adequate calories. Other symptomatic management was done accordingly.
Over the next few days, her lesions and erythema progressed along with epidermal peeling to involve more than 80% of the Body Surface area. She started developing fever, her swab culture showed Methicillin Resistant CoNS, and blood culture showed Acinetobacter spp. She was switched to sensitive antibiotics. Her WBC count decreased to 1520 cells per cubic ml and absolute Neutrophil count to 608. Inj. Filgrastim was started until the absolute neutrophil count rose above 1000. Aminotransferases, SGOT, and SGPT values were also increased to 378 and 78. However, procalcitonin values were within the normal range. She also developed 2 episodes of GTCS which was managed with midazolam and an increasing dose of clobazam (See ).
Gradually, her condition started improving. Her fever subsided, counts increased, cultures became negative, seizures controlled and skin lesions started improving. After 9 days of ICU admission, she was shifted to ward than a week later discharged home.