A 25-year-old woman, gravida 1 para 0, was referred to our hospital at 23 weeks of gestation because of ultrasound abnormality of the fetus that abnormal curvature of spine. Pregnant denied history of immune system disease, exposure to alcohol or drugs such as warfarin and phenytoin.
Ultrasound examination with 5-7 M Hz probe of the fetal system was then performed. Prenatal ultrasound phenotype are as followed: Fetal external genitals is male, face is flat, nose bridge is depressed, nasal tip is collapse , and the upper alveolar is square . The spine loses normal physiological curvature, some vertebral bodies are small, and the spinal canal is narrow. The T9-L1vertebra is most obvious . The inner diameter of the narrowest part is only 2 mm. The diameter of the thoracic spinal canal above the stenosis segment was about 4.1 mm, and that of the lumbar segment below the stenosis segment was about 4.0 mm. Secondary ossification centers appear in the epiphyses of both femurs . Based on these ultrasound phenotypes, we recommend that the patient undergo fetal magnetic resonance and amniotic fluid testing to further clarify the diagnosis.
The GE 1.5 T MRI showed the disappeared normal curvature of the fetal spine, partial depression of lower thoracic segment, thinner of muscular layer, and abnormal and narrow down of the spinal canal in the range of about 1.9 cm. Axial view shows abnormal shape of spinal canal and thinning of adjacent spinal cord .
Chromosome analysis of the amniotic fluid cells was performed with conventional G-banding and revealed 46, XY without any structural aberrations. Parents were informed of the purpose of the study and signed the informed consent. Genomic DNA was isolated from amniotic fluid and peripheral blood leukocytes using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Dusseldorf, Germany) and QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Dusseldorf, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Whole exome sequencing: Roche SeqCap EZ MedExome Enrichment Kit was used to perform exome target enrichment. The captured library was sequenced on the illumina Hiseq X-ten Sequencer with PE150 and mean sequencing depth of 100×, and more than 95% of the area with a coverage of more than 20×. Raw data of exome sequencing in FASTQ format and processed with bioinformatization. A novel missense mutation of ARSE gene c.640G > A (p.G214R) on X chromosome was found in fetus (refer to the human genome hg19 reference sequence in UCSC database). To further confirm the variant, Sanger sequencing was performed in pedigree. The mother carried the mutation, the maternal grandparents did not have the mutation, the fetus inherited the mutation from the mother . Three protein function prediction software FATHMM、Polyphen-2、PROVEAN have shown that the novel missense mutation of c.640G > A in this study was pathogenic.