A 24-year-old man experienced a bout of syncope with vomiting and incontinence at home. After recovering consciousness, he called the emergency medical service by himself. He was brought to the emergency room and was witnessed to spontaneously go into ventricular fibrillation (VF) successfully converted by an external defibrillation. After the defibrillation, his ECG showed atrial fibrillation with a coved-type ST segment elevation recorded from the 3rd intercostal space . Previously, he was diagnosed with a type I Brugada electrocardiogram pattern by a pilsicainide administration test in another hospital. Although he had a family history of sudden cardiac death in 3 relatives, including his brother, he was followed closely without any therapies because he had never had an episode of syncope. His physical examination was unremarkable. The cardiovascular examination revealed an irregular rhythm, with no pericardial friction rub, murmurs, carotid bruits, or jugular venous distention. In the evaluation of the patient, structural heart disease was ruled out by the results of exercise testing, chest roentgenography, echocardiography, and contrast-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging. In addition, ischemia and metabolic or electrolyte disturbances were ruled out by the laboratory test results. He was diagnosed with Brugada syndrome and was implanted with an S-ICD without any trouble. Ventricular fibrillation was induced and detected in the primary vector, which included the proximal sensing electrode and generator. Sinus rhythm was effectively restored via a sub-maximal 65 J shock. The device was programmed with a conditional zone of over 220 bpm and shock only zone of over 250 bpm.
Seven months later after the S-ICD implantation, he was transferred to our hospital due to a VF storm with 11 appropriate S-ICD therapies. He was effectively treated with an intravenous administration of amiodarone, which was subsequently converted to an oral preparation. We planned to perform an epicardial catheter ablation for Brugada syndrome. However, his VF recurred 3 weeks after the cessation of the amiodarone prior to the Brugada ablation. The analysis of his S-ICD data revealed that 4 consecutive shock deliveries could not terminate his VF, and the final shock delivered could fortunately terminate it . Furthermore, a high defibrillation threshold (DFT) at that time was proven by an increasing shock impedance (64 to 90 Ω). First, we performed an epicardial Brugada syndrome ablation. Then, we replaced and repositioned the S-ICD can more infero-dorsally and the S-ICD lead from a left to right parasternal site. After the re-implantation of the S-ICD, the DFT and shock impedance improved to within the normal range (62 Ω). The device was received at the post Quality Assurance laboratory, and a thorough evaluation of the device was performed. The S-ICD device was exposed to simulated heart load conditions, and the defibrillation and sensing function were tested. The impedance testing was completed and all measurements were within normal limits. The device operated appropriately with no interruption in the therapy output at the programmed settings it was returned with. A series of electrical tests was also performed, and again, a normal device function was observed. This suggested that there were no abnormalities in the device itself. According to the pathological analysis, infiltration of inflammatory cells and extensive fibrosis were confirmed in the subcutaneous tissue around the S-ICD can . Frequent S-ICD therapies for VF storms might cause various pathological changes around the device and lead to a high DFT.