In July 2017, a 54-year-old male was hospitalised for the recent appearance of multiple purpuric spots on the legs associated with gum bleeding. The patient was an HIV-negative man having sex with men, receiving HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis with tenofovir/emtricitabine for over a year. His medical history was significant for a primary syphilis in 2014 and multiple episodes of urethritis in the recent years. He reported frequent unprotected anal sex, with occasional bleeding, insertive and receiving fisting without gloves, and the use of nasal mephedrone during sexual encounters. He was previously diagnosed with an acute genotype 4 HCV infection in 2011 (Versant HCV genotype 2.0 assay (LiPA), Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany), cured following a 6-month course of pegylated interferon (IFN) and ribavirin. Acute genotype 1a HCV reinfection was diagnosed on 2017, June 26th (NS5A Sanger sequencing), while HCV-RNA was still negative on 2017, April 4th (Abbott RealTime HCV, Abbott, Molecular, Des Plaines, USA). The patient was asymptomatic at that time, platelet count was normal and HCV-RNA surveillance was scheduled, following the recommendations from the European AIDS clinical society .
Initial physical examination found no other symptoms apart from a petechial purpura of the lower extremities and oral haemorrhagic blister. Blood pressure was 130/97 mmHg, heart rate 60 bpm with no fever, lymphadenopathy, or splenomegaly. There was no evidence of severe haemorrhage. Laboratory data at the admission are resumed in Table . Complete blood count found a severe thrombocytopenia (5 G/L) without any other cytopenia. Thrombocytopenia was confirmed on the peripheral blood smear which exhibited no morphological abnormalities and the absence of schistocytes. No other associated haemostasis abnormality was present (normal fibrinogen and factor V). Serum protein electrophoresis found no clonal gammopathy. Thyroid-stimulating hormone was normal. HIV serology was repeatedly negative and Hepatits B surface antibodies were detectable following a previous vaccination. At that time, mild elevation in aspartate transaminase (AST, 6 times the upper limit of normal (ULN)) and alanine transaminase (ALT, 7 x ULN) was found associated with a detectable HCV viral load of 4.9 log IU/mL . There was no evidence of other replicating viruses including cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, human herpes virus type 6 and type 8 (except a slight Epstein-Barr virus replication which was considered insignificant (348 UI/mL). Cryoglobulin investigation was negative. No circulating anti-platelet IgG antibodies were detected. A bone marrow aspiration was performed; normal cellularity with an increased number of megakaryocytes and normal erythropoiesis and myelopoiesis was found, thus confirming the diagnosis of ITP secondary to acute HCV infection.
An initial administration of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG; at the dose of 1 g/kg on day 1 and day 3) had clinical benefit (regression of gum bleeding and purpura), but did not have any effect on the platelet count which remained below 10G/L. A second administration of IVIG (1 g/kg daily for 2 days) combined with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg daily) improved platelet count which reached 40G/L but a normal value was not attained . At which point it was decided after collegial discussion to start treating the infectious trigger. Pegylated IFN and ribavirin combination was contra-indicated because of severe thrombocytopenia, therefore a 12 weeks course of sofosbuvir-ledipasvir was indicated. At initiation of the treatment, the platelet count was 43 G/L and HCV viral load was 6.3 log IU/mL. At day 15 of antiviral treatment, HCV viral load was undetectable (< 12 IU/ml) and the platelet count had increased to 108 G/L allowing rapid tapering and discontinuation of corticosteroids before the end of antiviral therapy. HCV viral load remained undetectable until week 12 post-treatment, confirming HCV cure . Platelet count fully normalised 5 weeks following treatment initiation and remained within normal range thereafter. The patient went through his 12 weeks course of sofosbuvir-ledipasvir with a good tolerance, without any specific adverse event reported.