An otherwise healthy five-year-old white boy presented for a routine kindergarten eye exam with a noticeably ptotic right eyelid. His uncorrected visual acuity was 20/40 OD and 20/200 OS. His refractive error was +5.50 + 0.75 × 105 (20/25) OD and +7.25 + 0.50 × 128 (20/80) OS. He was orthotropic with full extraocular movements and 80 seconds of arc of stereoacuity.
His mother stated that since the age of three, he has had episodic right upper eyelid swelling. These episodes occurred about every two to three months and lasted about two to seven days with spontaneous resolution. Fever and flu-like prodromal symptoms were noted before most episodes. The right eyelid became red, completely swollen, and tender to touch . There was no associated swelling of the face or tongue. No vision changes or other associated signs or symptoms were evident during these episodes. He denied any history of trauma, and his family history revealed only a maternal aunt with rheumatoid arthritis.
On physical exam, he had 2mm right ptosis with full, redundant crepe-like skin and visible subcutaneous telangiectatic vessels . He had good levator function at 12 mm. The left eyelid was unremarkable. Conjunctiva and periorbital tissue including the lacrimal glands were normal in both sides without any palpable mass. Valsalva produced a mild redness of the right eye and lid.
Initially, the child was treated for preseptal cellulitis with oral and topical antibiotics. Recurrent exacerbations continued and began involving the left eyelid as well . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbits revealed soft tissue swelling but no focal mass. Hematologic and thyroid lab work-ups were normal. C1-inhibitor deficiency was not tested. Short courses of prednisone with a quick taper helped with resolution of these exacerbations . Given the recurrent nature of eyelid inflammation resulting in thin crepe-like skin and ptosis, a diagnosis of blepharochalasis was made.
The patient is now 10 years old and has three to four exacerbations per year; in the seventh year after onset, he only had one episode. In his stable phase, he has ptosis on the right with a marginal reflex distance of 0. His refractive amblyopia in the left eye resolved with spectacles, likely facilitated by the ptosis of the opposite lid.