This is a retrospective review of clinical data of a patient with hypotrichosis followed at University Magna Graecia of Catanzaro at the Department of Ophthalmology.
An 11-year-old boy was referred to our Department for bilateral maculopathy of unknown origin. The child was born at 37th week by caesarean section, being the second born from unrelated parents. After the delivery, the child presented alopecia, roundish facies, hypotrichosis with light lanugo hairs , sparse eyelashes, hypotelorism, small hands, atopic dermatitis. Ocular history was unremarkable until the age of 4 years when ophthalmological examination revealed an history of Stargardt-like maculopathy, parents reported that the onset of visual impairment occurred at the age of 8 years and that the child did not have history of amblyopia. Upon presentation, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.3 logMAR in right eye (RE) and 1 logMAR in left eye (LE). Nystagmus was not observed. The patient also had photophobia, decrease in color vision evaluated with the Farnsworth D-15 test, decrease in contrast sensitivity at eye chart REX (Reading Explorer) test and an increase in glare sensitivity investigated with Berkeley glare test.
Stereoscopic acuity with Lang II sterotest measured 400″. Fundus photograph (Nidek MP-1, microperimeter and retinography) of RE showed several alterations of RPE with accentuation of the axial reflex (bull’s eye maculopathy). B-scan Spectral domain Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) imaging (Zeiss Cirrus 5000-HD-OCT) showed backscattering phenomena with several alterations of RPE and photoreceptor layer. Fundus photo of LE revealed a circular pigmented area of chorioretinal atrophy while OCT showed phenomena of back-scattering with hyperreflective lesion beneath the neuroepithelium . OCT-A (Zeiss Cirrus 5000-HD-OCT) 3X3 mm of superficial and deep plexuses revealed capillary rarefaction in both eyes. Instead OCT-A in choriocapillary plexus revealed capillary rarefaction in RE and a loss of choriocapillaris flow under the atrophic patches in LE. Moreover, in correspondence of the hyperreflective lesion (visualized on B-scan OCT in LE) OCT-A shows a pathologic neovascular network, likely the result of a fibrovascular membrane . Multifocal electroretinograms (MfERGs) were performed on Visual Evoked Response Imaging System Science 6.0.5d5 unit according to International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision 2012 Standards . The MfERG responses were divided into 6 concentric rings around the fovea from ring 1 (0°) to ring 6 (19.20°). Functional alterations were found in the 4th concentric ring (12.22°) of the central retina but not in the others .
In Fig. , we show the electroretinogram (ERG) results (Retimax, CSO, version 7.0.5). The scotopic 0.01 ERG showed a reduction in the amplitude of the b-wave in both eyes. The combined rod- and cone dark-adapted standard 3.0 flash ERG showed a negative ERG in both eyes with a reduction in the b-wave amplitude. The light-adapted single flash cone 3.0 ERG was normal in both eyes.
In order to clarify the suspicion of HJMD, after a detailed explanation of the condition and the signature of informed consent for diagnostic procedures, the child and both parents underwent genetic testing. The analysis of all CDH3 exons with flanking intronic sequences detected in the child two variants, both in an apparent heterozygous state: the first one was a c.160 + 1G > A variant located at the first base in intron 2; the second one was a c.661C > T (p.R221X) variant, located at exon 6, already described to be causative for HJMD . As expected, both parents resulted to be heterozygous healthy carriers of a single variation: the mother was positive for the c.160 + 1G > A variant while the father carried on the mutation.