A sixty year old Asian nonalcoholic female presented in Surgery Clinic with chief complaints of pain abdomen off and on since 6–7 months which was non-radiating. Patient also had loss of weight and appetite since 4 months. She also complained of on and off joint pain involving distal joints for last ten years, often relieved by NSAIDS. There were no associated risk factors or diseases like ulcerative colitis. Physical examination showed scleral icterus and abdominal examination revealed slight deep tenderness in epigastrium. Lab investigations revealed CA 19.9–110 U/ml, CEA- 1.5 ng/ml, Total bilirubin- 12.2mg/dl, Direct- 7.6 mg/dl, Indirect- 4.6 mg/dl, Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)-132 IU/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)-216 IU/L.
Ultrasonography abdomen showed an ill-defined hypoechoic mass lesion in head of pancreas measuring 3.1 cm × 2.7 cm with mildly dilated main pancreatic duct (MPD). CT Abdomen revealed an ill-defined hypodense mass lesion in pancreas causing bilobar IHBR dilatation and mild MPD dilatation with peripancreatic lymphadenopathy . Few lymph nodes seen at portahepatis, around pancreatic head (7–9mm), and along right common iliac vessels.
Depending upon clinical, biochemical and imaging profile a pre-operative diagnosis of malignancy head of pancreas was considered. Pre-operative tissue diagnosis was not made. Patient underwent explorative laparotomy and Whipple procedure was performed. Specimen sent for histopathological examination (HPE) comprised of part of stomach, duodenum, head of pancreas and part of jejunum. Cut-section of head of pancreas showed a circumscribed grey white, scirrhous area measuring 3.2 cm × 2.5cm × 2.0 cm. Hepatic, choledochal and mesenteric lymph nodes were also received separately.
Haematoxylin & eosin stained sections from the grey white firm looking areas revealed intense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate and fibrosis with collagenisation causing destruction of acinar cells and compression of ductules (a and b). The normal pancreatic parenchyma was nearly replaced by chronic fibroinflammatory reaction. The normal ductules were positive for Cyto-keratin (CK) (c) and Masson's Trichome stain was used to delineate areas of fibrosis (d). Entire specimen including lymph nodes was negative for malignancy. Based on extensive fibroinflammatory reaction resulting in obstruction of biliary ductular system and obstructive jaundice, possibility of autoimmune pancreatitis was suggested and serum IgG4 levels were advised post surgery. S.IgG4 levels were elevated to 334 mg/dl (normal range 11–157 mg/dl). Final diagnosis of Autoimmune pancreatitis was made. Patient was put on prednisone 40 mg/day for 4 weeks, and showed complete improvement, this was followed by gradual tapering of steroids. But unfortunately, after 6 months she was admitted again with complaints of chest pain and breathlessness. She had developed pleural effusion and ascites (owing to polyserositis which is also a complication of autoimmune disorders). Multiple pleural and peritoneal taps had to be performed over a period of next 8–10 days but patient's condition deteriorated and she expired about 20 days after admission due to polyserositis. This case is reported in line with the SCARE criteria .