A 49-year-old white woman affected by Crohn’s disease who recently underwent a left hemicolectomy with enterostomy, was treated for septic shock resulting from intestinal perforation. Her height was 150 cm, weight 130 kg, and she had a body mass index (BMI) of 57 which is class III obesity.
Her clinical characteristics included sleepiness, 90% oxygen saturation, a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 100%, cyanotic and cold limbs, hypothermia, and a large abdomen that compromised lung ventilation and perfusion of the splanchnic organs. Her most severe symptoms included the following:Her blood pressure was 50/30 mmHg and her heart rate was 140 beats per minute (bpm) with many ventricular triplets. She was also anuric. Blood gas analysis showed acidosis with the following values: a pH of 7.10, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 60 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) 50 mmHg, base excess (BE) −10, bicarbonate (HCO3) 15 mmol/L, lactate 15 mmol/L, potassium ion (K+) 2.3 mEq/L, sodium ion (NA+) 120 mEq/L, central venous saturation of oxygen (ScvO2) 45%, and venous-to-arterial difference of carbon dioxide (delta pCO2) 15. Laboratory tests showed the following: leucocytosis, anemia, thrombocytopenia, procalcitonin 70 ng/mL, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 250 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 180 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 350 U/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 150 mg/dL, creatinine 2.3 mg/dL, IL-6 300 pg/mL, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) 200 pg/mL. Echocardiography showed widespread hypokinesia, an ejection fraction of 25%, and diastolic dysfunction with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 10 mm. Her lungs were wet and had an interstitial pattern with moderate bilateral pleural effusion. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen showed pneumoperitoneum with free fluid in her abdomen and particulate matter that extended between the intestinal loops for approximately 30 to 40 cm.
Due to the severity of the situation, she was prepared for an emergency laparotomy and underwent a treatment known as “early goal-directed therapy”.
After fluid resuscitation with 30 mL/kg of crystalloid and antibiotic administration for abdominal sepsis with Merrem (meropenem) 2 g + tigecycline 100 mg + caspofungin 70 mg, we performed external heating and fluid infusions without obtaining the target MAP. Owing to the failure to respond to the fluid load challenge, we started NE infusion at 0.05 mcg/kg per minute, increasing the dosage until it reached 1 mcg/kg per minute; despite the increased dosage, good peripheral perfusion was not achieved.
Then, we induced rapid sequence anesthesia (succinylcholine 100 mg + fentanyl 100 mcg + midazolam 7 mg) to allow intubation, and anesthesia was maintained with 0.1 mcg/kg per minute of remifentanil and 0.2 mg/kg of sevoflurane and cisatracurium. Protective mechanical ventilation was set to 6 mL/kg tidal volume (VT), with a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 8. Intraoperative hemodynamic monitoring via an EV1000 (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California, USA) indicated cardiac index (CI), stroke volume variation (SVV), stroke volume index (SVI), and systemic vascular resistance index (SVRI) values of 1.2, 17, 20, and 400, respectively. NE infusion was increased to a maximum value of 2.5 mcg/kg per minute without obtaining a MAP > 65 mmHg. Hence, we added VP, starting with 0.02 units/minute and increasing to a dose of 0.4 units/minute. In addition, we administered hydrocortisone in an initial load of 1 g and then via an infusion of 0.2 mg/kg per hour.
During the surgery, a perforation was found 80 cm from the ileocecal valve ileum, with an abscess and multiple adhesion areas of fecal material between the bowel loops. A bowel resection was performed with a latero-lateral anastomosis and viscerolysis. After 2 hours, our patient had a MAP ≥ 65 mmHg, an ScvO2 ≥ 75 mmHg, a reduction of arterial lactate, restoration of adequate hemodynamic properties, and improved cardiac output, stroke volume, and SVV, as well as a gradual reduction of noradrenaline after 4 hours.
At the end of surgery, she received a stable VP dose of 0.04 U/minute; continued hemodynamic monitoring showed improvements in the CI to 2.3, SVV to 12, SVI to 30, and SVRI to 750. In our Intensive care unit (ICU), she exhibited a significant reduction in inflammatory cytokine levels, including a reduction in IL-6 to 50 pg/mL and a reduction in TNF-α to 75 pg/ mL. She was weaned from vasoactive therapy at 12 hours; we performed continuous hydrocortisone infusion for 24 hours with a gradual reduction of the dose over the following 5 days until suspension of the therapy.
One week after surgery, she was weaned from ventilation and moved to our Surgery department. At 28 days, she was discharged. She underwent monthly follow-up evaluations, which showed remission of the inflammatory disease and the absence of infectious or cardiovascular complications.