A 38-year-old woman presented with mild intention tremor of her hands that had developed at the age of 22. This symptom had been slowly progressive and had been accompanied with speech impediments characterized by a slow rate of speech and a flat voice since the age of 37. The patient complained of mild memory decline, mild tinnitus in both ears, and occasional dizziness. From a young age, she had experienced poor vision in both eyes, which had gradually worsened. She had a history of hyperthyroidism and had been disease free before the onset of neurologic symptoms. The patient was born of a consanguineous union. The family diagram is presented in Fig. c.
A neurological examination indicated scanning speech, horizontal nystagmus in both eyes, cerebellar ataxia and postural tremor in the upper limbs at a frequency of approximately 8 Hz. Bilateral prolonged latency and a slightly reduced amplitude of the P100 wave in the visual evoked potential and central injury in the brainstem auditory evoked potentials were detected. The visual acuity was 0.15 in the right eye and 0.10 in the left eye, which was not corrected by eyeglasses. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) indicated macular atrophy, especially in the outer segment layer. Fundus fluorescence angiography (FFA) showed strong macular fluorescence changes, indicating pigment epithelium atrophy, and spots inside that were lacking fluorescence, indicating choroidal capillary atrophy. Thyroid-stimulating hormone and parathyroid hormone levels were slightly elevated. Examinations of cognitive function and motor and somatosensory evoked potentials were normal.
Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed confluent white matter abnormalities with hypointense T1-weighted and hyperintense T2-weighted signals, with the symmetrical involvement of the internal capsules, cerebral peduncles, and middle cerebellar peduncles . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed hyperintensity in the pathological areas, with no restrictions on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map. No enhanced lesion was found on the post-gadolinium T1-WI sequence. The brain atrophy was unremarkable. Brain DTI images were acquired and compared to those from three gender- and age- (less than 5 years apart) matched healthy controls. Decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) values were found in almost all regions with white matter hyperintensity (WMHI), as well as in specific structures of normal-appearing white and gray matter [see Additional file ]. A reduced fiber number (FN) was detected in areas with obvious FA reductions, when compared with that in the controls [see Additional file ]. The findings also revealed decreased axial diffusivity (AD) in the optic nerves, and increased radial diffusivity (RD) in the middle cerebellar peduncles and cerebral peduncles of the patient. On diffusion tensor tractography (DTT), the white matter tracts of interest were visibly thinner than those in the controls, as illustrated in Fig. e.
Whole-exome sequencing revealed a novel homozygous c.2257C > T (p.Arg753Ter) mutation in exon 20 of the CLCN2 gene, which was a nonsense mutation that altered the 753rd Arg in the encoding protein and generated a stop codon . This change was not reported in any genetic database. Homology modelling suggested the disruption of cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) domain by this variant , which was considered to be pathogenic. The patient’s mother was a heterozygous carrier of this mutation.