A 12-year-old girl was admitted to a general hospital, in one of the western cities of Mazandaran province, with chief complaints of muscle atonia, and foam coming from the mouth for 20 s following fever and transient left hemiparesis. Ten minutes later, she agitated and presented generalized tonic-clonic movements lasting for 15 min and decreased consciousness following urinary incontinence. During this episode, she didn’t have foam coming from her mouth. She was intubated immediately and transferred to the PICU (Pediatric intensive care unit) of a tertiary hospital, in Sari, Mazandaran province. She had been visited by a general physician due to fever (T = 38.5 oc), vomiting (digested food particles and non-bloody), diplopia and headache one week before hospitalization and received symptomatic treatment. With relative recovery, the signs and symptoms aggravated the night before hospital admission. Her family reported unintentional weight loss accompanying anorexia and weakness from two months ago, but additional imaging was not performed.
Medical history and physical examination were as follows: The initial vital signs were blood pressure: 105/70 mmHg, the pulse rate: 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate: 22 per minute, axillary temperature: 37.4 oc and SPO2: 98% (intubated). Skin: Negative in terms of petechia, purpura and ecchymosis. Eyes: pale conjunctiva. Extremities: 1 + deep tendon reflexes. The tone and power of muscle were normal and there were not any signs of cerebellar or basal ganglion involvement. Lymph node: No lymphadenopathy. Chest and lung: No chest deformity, she was intubated, and symmetric lung sounds. Abdomen: No distention and organomegaly. No sign and symptom of increased intracranial pressure. She had no history of contact with Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients, contaminated water, rice field and trauma. She had fainted in her childhood period following excessive activity (medical follow-up showed cardiac chamber defect) and improved spontaneously when she was 3 years old. She completed all doses of recommended childhood vaccines but did not receive the COVID-19 vaccine. She had a drug allergy to Cefixime and penicillin and a food allergy to eggplant. Initially, her family did not report a positive family history of TB, but after the final diagnosis, they declared that her uncle died following TB 3 years ago.
Para-clinical investigations: The result of COVID-19 Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and galactomannan level was negative. Also, the levels of HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) antibody, Venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL), CD4 (cluster of differentiation 4), CD19 and Complement hemolysis (CH50) were normal. The echocardiography showed mild Tricuspid valve regurgitation and mild pulmonary valve insufficiency. Also, there was no pulmonary hypertension. Based on the possible COVID-19 bilateral involvement in chest X-ray and lung CT scan, Pro-BNP, D-dimer and troponin levels were requested. Only the D-dimer level was high. It was 1710. The lumbar puncture (LP) was done on the first day of the PICU admission. The Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis results are presented in Table . Although, the girl had no signs and symptoms of meningitis including Brudzinski’s and Kernig’s signs, there was CSF involvement. CSF analysis showed increased levels of protein and WBC. The patient had not the coughing or sputum, so the gastric aspirate culture PCR (three times) had been done and the result was positive for miliary TB. Findings of the chest X-ray , lung CT scan and brain MRI were suggestive of caseating tuberculomas. Finally, the miliary TB was diagnosed based on brain MRI, positive gastric aspirate culture and also two organs involvement. AP chest x-ray demonstrates wide spread tiny nodular opacities distributed throughout both lungs. The PPD test were normal.
A pediatric infectious diseases specialist prescribed rifampin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, isoniazid and vitamin B6 (For prevention of the side effect of isoniazid) based on the miliary TB evidence in MRI. The anti-tuberculosis medication dosage was adjusted due to elevated AST and ALT levels 10 days later. So, the rifampin and isoniazid were discontinued and in the follow-up due to the normal levels of AST and ALT, the rifampin and isoniazid were added to the medication regimen. At the time of discharge, approximately one month later, the gastric aspiration result was negative. She was discharged in stable condition with fixed-dose combination anti-TB medication (III), acid folic and vitamin B6 tablets daily. On her follow-up, AST and ALT levels were normal. Also, her medication changed to two-drug formulations. The girl had been follow-up for at least one year and the MRI finding and gastric aspirate on follow-up were normal.