A 45-years old woman was referred to the cardiovascular surgery department of our hospital complaining about dyspnea, orthopnea, cough, chest pain and peripheral edema for three weeks. She had a history of chronic renal failure and has been on dialysis for 6 months prior to her hospitalization. Patient underwent 2 times temporary hemodialysis catheterizations due to failure of her radio-cephalic fistula caused by hypotension. First hemodialysis catheter was removed 5 weeks before admission due to hemodialysis catheter infection, with blood culture being positive for (MRSA). She responded well to medical treatment. She also had a history of hypertension for 2 years but had no history of previous surgery.
On examination, her vital signs were as follows: pulse 111beats/min, blood pressure 70/40 mmHg, afebrile with body temperature 37.0 °C, respiratory rate 20/min and oxygen saturation on room air was 90%. On auscultation, there were distant heart sounds, elevated jugular venous pressure and bilateral lower limb edema.
Laboratory findings showed leukocytosis 11.0 × 109/L with neutrophils predominance 75%, hemoglobin 9.2g/dL, elevated high sensitive C-reactive protein level of 97 mg/dl, creatinine 9.8 mg/dl, blood urea 180 mg/dl. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with low voltage complexes and chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly (. A). Transthoracic echocardiography suggested massive anterior pericardial collection with right ventricular diastolic collapse and Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan suggested anterior massive localized pericardial collection just similar to that of pericardial cyst (. B).
Considering the possibility of massive pericardial cyst, urgent surgical intervention was considered. The operation was performed by cardiovascular surgery specialist. A median sternotomy was made, followed by opening of the pericardium; a localized abscess of around 600ml was exposed and drained from the anterior aspect of the heart, and partial pericardiectomy was performed (. C). Culture of the pus yielded growth of and pathological examination of the pericardial specimen showed non-specific inflammation. Linezolid was started according to bacterial sensitivity and patient stayed at the hospital for 10 days. She made a good postoperative recovery. She completed additional 2 weeks of antibiotic treatment. After five weeks, she came for follow up and chest x-ray showed complete recovery (. D). This case has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .