A 58-year-old man with a chronic tumefaction of the left foot was referred due to suspicion of mycetoma. The patient was a restaurant-worker, originally from Algeria who was inhabited in France since 2001, with regular travel to his homeland but not to the known classical endemic areas. According to the patient, he was living in a rural region in Kabylie (north-east of Algeria) and suffered from left foot tumefaction for 5 years. He was initially hospitalized in 2017, in a health center in Paris. The initial medical check-up was performed including imaging, microbiological and histopathological examinations. The clinical diagnosis was made by a classical triad of tumefaction (32 cm perimeter of left foot comparing to 26 cm for right foot), presence of multiple sinuses, and emission of white grains. Staphylococcus aureus, and an anaerobic Gram-positive bacillus-like bacterium similar to Actinomyces sp., were identified, using classical microbiological culture with no species-specific identification. Significant infiltration of periosseous soft tissues and an osteolytic aspect of 2nd and 4th metatarsal with multiple geodes were observed by radiology and MRI. Echography did not reveal superficial thrombophlebitis in association with this tumefaction. Therapy was initialized, using amoxicillin (6 g/day for 4 months) as the first-line therapeutic choice during initial hospitalization, in 2017. Due to no favorable evolution, his treatment was left incomplete.
Eighteen months later, the patient was referred with the same problem to Avicenne Hospital (Bobigny, France), for accurate identification of causative agent(s) and re-initiating an adapted treatment. Clinical diagnosis revealed 3 cm enlargement in tumefaction circumference, presence of 11 sinuses in plantar, 10 sinuses on the topside of the foot, and emission of white grains . Direct microscopic examination of crushed grains showed neither mycelial nor actinomycete filaments. A deep tissue biopsy was performed for histopathological examination and the sinuses secretions including the grains were used for microbiological cultures and molecular analysis. The histopathological assessment showed pseudofilamentous Gram-positive bacteria , necrotic debris, granulomatous and polymorphic inflammatory infiltrates, confirming an actinomycetoma . Cultures on Loewenstein-Jensen, Sabouraud-chloramphenicol-gentamycin, and blood agar were negative after 3 months of incubation at 30 °C. The imaging assessments were performed again, confirming the extensive lesions of the initial assessment .
Bacterial DNA in the grains isolated from the patient was extracted using bio-robot EZ1 and then subjected to a conventional PCR, targeting the 16S-rDNA gene with fD1 (fwd: AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG) and rp2 (rvs: ACGGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT) primers . Obtained bilateral sequences were edited, aligned using BLAST, and identified as Actinomadura madurae, based on ≥99% identity with GenBank sequence (NR026343) and then deposited in GenBank with accession number NZ148818. In order to evaluate intraspecific variability, phylogenetic relationships, and polymorphisms within Actinomadura species, an inferred phylogenetic tree of A. madurae (identified in this study) together with GenBank sequences, was constructed based on the Neighbor-Joining method with bootstrap values, determined by 1000 replicates. This tree showed high congruence with the 16S-rDNA tree, since all taxa were concordantly clustered into the same species’ group .
For treatment, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (800/160 mg) was prescribed twice a day for 3 months with an expected duration of 1 year. Complete Blood Count (CBC) was routinely verified to ensure no overdose toxicity. Three months later, 2 cm reduction in left foot circumference was observed. Consequently, the treatment was continued until complete healing.