The patient was an 86-year-old man with a history of atrial fibrillation; he had been taking warfarin. The patient was referred to the department because bilateral CSDHs were found on the computed tomography (CT) scan, which was performed as an examination of his unsteadiness. The head CT showed bilateral convex lenticular hematomas with relatively high density but no calcification . The blood tests showed mild glucose intolerance with an HbA1c of 6.8%, but no other abnormalities were noted. Warfarin was stopped and bilateral perforator drainage was performed. The bilateral hematomas showed almost no leakage of fluid, even after incision of the hematoma outer membrane, and the operation was completed after cleaning the hematoma cavity as much as possible through perforation and placing a drainage tube in the hematoma cavity . A postoperative CT scan showed that most of the hematoma remained, although a little organizing hematoma had been removed. The patient’s clinical symptoms improved and he was discharged home after restarting warfarin.
Two months after discharge from the hospital, the patient presented with a complaint of slight fever and headache that persisted for several days. The blood test performed at that time showed a mild elevation of serum C-reactive protein at 4.73 mg/dL. Although the CSDH had not increased significantly since the last time , there was a compression of the brain parenchyma, so a craniotomy was proposed to remove the hematoma. The patient was admitted to the hospital for a detailed examination of his fever. Blood tests on admission showed leukocytes 5700, C-reactive protein 4.67 mg/dL, procalcitonin 0.03 ng/mL, and βDglucan 9.0 pg/mL. Although there were no findings to actively suspect systemic bacterial infection, infection was not found on the CT of the patient’s body, and the reason for the elevated C-reactive protein was unknown. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed high signal in diffusion-weighted imaging around the outer membrane of both bilateral hematomas , so the possibility of infectious OSDH was considered at this time, and craniotomy under general anesthesia was planned for the right-sided hematoma , which had greater hematoma volume. Warfarin was replaced with heparin during the perioperative period.
The intraoperative findings showed that the dura was incised and a yellow hematoma outer membrane was evident. The hematoma was hard and organizing and was removed completely. The entire hematoma inner membrane was exposed. There were several areas of microscopic bleeding from the border between the outer and inner membrane, and the entire area was completely cauterized to hemostasis. Although an infectious hematoma was suspected, the inner membrane was preserved due to the fear of spreading the bacteria to the brain surface, and a risk of brain parenchymal damage. The hematoma was examined for culture, and Propionibacterium acnes were detected, leading to the diagnosis of infectious OSDH. The patient was treated with ampicillin/sulbactam from the postoperative period. Two weeks after surgery, a CT scan showed recurrence of the right hematoma . It was believed that if the left hematoma was also an infectious hematoma, a craniotomy would be necessary to reduce the number of bacteria, but in consideration of the recurrence of the right hematoma, it was decided to perform MMA embolization.
The MMA embolization revealed that the left external carotid artery imaging showed the vascular foci feeding the hematoma [: white arrows], mainly in the parietal region, and embolization with 20% NBCA was performed [: black arrows]. The right external carotid artery selective imaging showed no abnormal vessels reaching the hematoma due to the postoperative craniotomy , but the remaining MMA branch was embolized with 20% NBCA . During the operation, the surgeons were careful to avoid dangerous anastomosis to recurrent meningeal artery.
The day after embolization, a craniotomy was performed for the left hematoma and drainage for the right hematoma under general anesthesia. The findings of the left craniotomy were the same as those of the right craniotomy: yellow outer membrane , hard hematoma , and complete exposure of the inner membrane after removal of hematoma . There was almost no microscopic bleeding from the inner membrane compared with the right side, probably due to the MMA embolization, so hemostasis was easy. Brown liquid hematoma was drained from the right recurrent hematoma. On this occasion, both the right and left side’s hematomas were cultured too, but no bacteria were detected. He was treated with intravenous ampicillin/ sulbactam for 7 days postoperatively, followed by 1 week of oral amoxicillin. The patient was discharged with a postoperative course and is being followed up in an outpatient clinic. The course of imaging findings after surgery is shown in . The CT scan just after surgery shows a drain tube inserted into the right hematoma cavity .We are taking CT scans of his head 1 week , 1 month , and six months after the surgery.
Six months after the surgery, the hematoma had almost disappeared on CT imaging .