A 14-year-old boy presented to us with an initial history of fall from height, puncture wound and deformity of the left upper arm. He was taken to local healers who used some sort of wooden splint for the deformity. After approximately 1 month’s time, the patient started having complains of recurring fever and discharge from old wound site with extrusion of small bits of bone. He was taken to a hospital for the same complaints, where after a thorough debridement of proximal humerus, antibiotic impregnated bone cement block and multiple beads were kept in situ. His second surgery for bone cement removal and definitive procedure was scheduled after 6 weeks.
Due to lack of proper understanding regarding the condition and failure to recognize the need of second definitive procedure after the surgery, parents never took the patient back to that hospital. Child was asymptomatic for about a year when he started developing intermittent fever that was relieved by anti-pyretics and tepid-sponging. Over a period of 15 days, the patient developed gradually progressive swelling of the right arm which was caused discomfort in his day–to-day activities. Ultimately, when the patient presented to us at Government Medical College and Hospital, Aurangabad, he had excruciating pain, high-grade fever, and a large tense swelling of the left proximal arm with complete restriction of movement at shoulder joint. The rest of the distal joint functions were normal. No neurovascular deficit was observed.
Laboratory studies revealed total leukocyte count of >20,000 cells/mm3 (hyper-leukocytosis) with 77% neutrophils. His hemoglobin levels were low and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein levels were quite high. His liver and renal function tests were within normal limits. X-ray of the left humerus was done which revealed a massive soft-tissue swelling, a large cement bone-block, and multiple bone cement beads. The proximal segment showed patchy sclerotic and lytic patches with areas of resorbed deformed head .
The patient was taken up for emergency incision and drainage procedure. 1.2 L of purulent greenish fluid was drained out. Fluid was sent for culture sensitivity. Drainage was followed by a thorough debridement and serial wash with removal of all cement particles. The humeral head was deemed viable and thoroughly debrided until paprika sign was positive. After preliminary fixation with intramedullary Rush nail (3.5 mm), wound was kept open and packed adequately . No post-operative neurovascular deficit was observed. Patient’s general condition improved, pain and discomfort were greatly relieved and at post-operative day 3, leukocyte count dropped to 12,000.
Daily dressing and local debridement of the open wound were done for 2 weeks under mild sedation and analgesia. The patient was started on intravenous Ceftriaxone 1gm twice a day immediately postoperatively, awaiting culture reports. Pus culture came positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa sensitive to Piperacillin-Tazobactam, Vancomycin, Meropenem, and Ciprofloxacin. Parenteral treatment with Piperacillin-Tazobactam (Beta-Lactam) 4.5 g 8 hourly and Amikacin (Aminoglycoside) 500 mg 12 hourly combination was continued for 14 days. After the intravenous therapy, the patient was started on oral Ciprofloxacin 500 mg BD regimen for another 6 weeks. As the wound condition improved, counts dropped further to 6000, ESR normalized . Throughout the postoperative period, the patient was started on grip strengthening exercises and passive elbow joint range of motion exercises as tolerated.
At 6 weeks, when there was no radiological, clinical, and laboratory sign of active infection, the patient was taken for 2nd surgery where, through the previous wound tract, bioabsorbable bone cement substitute antibiotic carrier made of calcium sulfate (STIMULAN, Biocomposites, USA) mixed with Vancomycin and Tobramycin was used in conjunction with cancellous bone graft from iliac crest. Bone edges were refreshed after removing the previously placed rush pin. A thorough intramedullary serial wash was given. A new rush nail (4.5 mm) was introduced in proximal to distal direction. The calcium sulfate beads were prepared after mixing with the antibiotics. Beads were placed at the site of bone gap along with cancellous iliac crest bone graft chips along the nail. Adequate closure was done as much as possible as patient and relatives refused to undergo additional soft-tissue flap surgery. The arm was placed in a splint post operatively. The patient was started on hand and grip strengthening exercises and passive elbow range of motion as pain permitted immediately the next day. As the patient’s wound conditions improved, shoulder passive exercises were started after around 7 days. Grip strengthening exercises were continued and taught to the patient. The patient was gradually started on active shoulder motion from 12 weeks onward. The passive and active abduction was 0–45°, adduction was 0–10°, forward flexion was 0–90°, extension was from 0 to 5°, and internal and external rotation was about 5° at last follow-up (32 weeks). The patient was able to have full range in elbow and rest of the joints with some restriction to overhead activities.
Post-operative X-ray showed well-placed beads along the length of nail in the defect (, ). A follow-up radiograph at 12 weeks postoperatively showed complete absorption of the calcium sulfate beads and new bone formation along the site of defect . The nail was removed after 20 weeks and at 32 weeks that the bone showed excellent healing .