A 32-year-old male patient with a medical history of hepatitis without poisoning presented to our hospital because of untreated mild fever (not exceeding 38.5 °C) for 5 days and blood urine. Moreover, the patient developed epilepsy accompanied by unconsciousness. Upon hospitalization, he was depressed. His vital signs including blood pressure, heart rate, and oxygen saturation were normal. Neurological examination revealed a mild stiffness in the neck and gastrocnemius pain. Besides, a positive Babinskin sign was detected, and no other abnormal findings were identified. Routine blood examination showed extremely high Mb (12,000 g/L, normal < 140 g/L) and CK (197,159 U/L, normal 38-174 U/L), low GFR (glomerular filtration rate) demonstrated impaired renal function (26 ml/min, normal 90-120 ml/min). White blood cells, CRP (C-reactive protein), ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate), hepatic function were moderately elevated. Other indices including the ANCA/GBM, tumor markers and thyroid function, blood sugar, electrolyte, and sexually transmitted diseases (including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)) were within normal range. Further, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed elevated protein levels (0.92 g/L, normal 0.15–0.45 g/L) and mildly increased leukocytes (12.9*10 ~ 6/L, normal < 8*10 ~ 6/L), indicating a high possibility of viral encephalitis infection. The left temporal lobe, hippocampus, and insula were swollen and exhibited a high T2 signal as observed on the MRI image . Considering the MRI findings and his clinical manifestation, this study tested for the presence of HSV pathogen in the CSF. As expected, the HSV-1 gene sequence was detected via DNA sequencing of pathogenic microorganisms. Notably, HSV-2 and other common causes of rhabdomyolysis such as varicella-zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human herpesvirus 6, enterovirus, dengue, Zika, West Nile, H1N1 or scrub typhus infection were not detected via the Metagenome Next Generation Sequencing (mNGS). Besides, based on the sequencing results, other bacteria, fungi, parasites, and mycobacterium were negative. Furthermore, serum CMV, enterovirus, and coxsackievirus were negative (Supplementary material and ). As a result, herpes simplex encephalitis infection was confirmed. Based on these findings, the patient was eventually diagnosed with rhabdomyolysis, acute renal failure, and epilepsy due to HSV infection. During 3 weeks of hospitalization, the patient was antivirally treated with 300 mg acyclovir at intervals of every 8 h a day, antiepileptic management with 300 mg oxcarbazepine, and 500 mg sodium valproate simultaneously administered twice a day. Also, the patient was administered with 10 mg dexamethasone to manage inflammation. Due to the extremely high content of Mb and CK, 1000 ml saline and a single hemodialysis sustained for 8 h were used as rehydration therapy . A complete remission was achieved after 3 weeks of treatment. After discharge, the patient was placed on continuous orally antiviral (acyclovir, 100 mg, three times a day) and antiepileptic drugs (sodium valproate, 500 mg, twice a day) for 4 weeks, after which he returned for a follow-up visit. MRI images taken at follow-up revealed significant improvement of intracranial lesions and the viral PCR using the CSF sample was negative for HSV-1 and HSV-2.