A 65-year-old Japanese man who had a past medical history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and no remarkable family medical history reported seeing intermittent pastel-colored flashing lights in his lower right-side visual field. Two weeks later, the flashing lights increased in frequency and appeared every 15–30 minutes for approximately 3 minutes at each occurrence. Consequently, the patient visited our hospital.
On neurological examination, in addition to intermittent flashing lights, our patient also had lower right-side quadrantanopsia. No other abnormal neurological findings were found. On physical examination, his height and body weight were 164.3 cm and 68.1 kg, respectively. He had no abnormal physical findings and his blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature were 132/78 mmHg, 72/min, and 36.4 °C, respectively. On laboratory analysis, his blood glucose level was 370 mg/dL (normal value: 70–109 mg/dL), HbA1c was 11.4 % (normal value: 4.3–5.8 %), and serum osmolarity was 326 mOsm/L (normal value: 275–290 mOsm/L). No ketones were detected in his urine. A cerebrospinal fluid examination was within normal limits. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan demonstrated subcortical hypointensity in the left occipital lobe in gradient-echo T2-weighted MRI (T2-MRI) and T2*-MRI, and slight cortical hyperintensity in the adjacent area in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI showed no enhancement of the areas. Single-photon emission computed tomography with I123-N-isopropyl-iodoamphetamine (IMP-SPECT) revealed hyperperfusion in the left dominant occipital lobe . Electroencephalography (EEG) was performed during intermittent periods, showing decreased alpha waves in the left occipital lobe, but no ictal discharge .
Consequently, we initially diagnosed NKH, although he had not been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (DM), and considered that occipital lobe seizures were associated with NKH. Subsequently, we started intensive insulin therapy, vildagliptin (100 mg/day), and rehydration to control blood sugar. As his blood glucose became stable, his intermittent pastel-colored flashing lights lessened and disappeared 3 days after initiation of treatment. His quadrant hemianopia gradually improved, and completely resolved 2 weeks after treatment. A follow-up brain MRI scan, performed 75 days after the first MRI, showed disappearance of subcortical T2 and T2* hypointensity, and DWI cortical hyperintensity . His HbA1c improved to 6.6 % 3 months after initiation of treatment, and was stable for more than 2 years under treatment of vildagliptin (100 mg/day) and metformin (750 mg/day). He had no recurrence of intermittent pastel-colored flashing lights and quadrant hemianopsia for more than 2 years.