A 53-year-old male presenting with paroxysmal headache was admitted to our hospital. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an oval tumor located at suprasellar region, neighboring to BA . Three dimensional-reconstructed image from preoperative MRI showed that the BA and its branches were normal . The patient was diagnosed as meningioma based on the preoperative MRI. Surgical removal of tumor was performed via endoscopic endonasal approach. He developed CSF rhinorrhea 17 days after operation and endoscopic repair was timely conducted the next day.
On the second day after repair operation, he developed fever and neck rigidity. The lumbar puncture showed an opening pressure as high as 33 cm H2O, glucose of CSF was 0.36 mg/dL, protein of CSF was 213 mg/dl, and white blood cell count was 19223*10^6 cells/L with 81% polymorphonuclear granulocyte. Intracranial infection was diagnosed based on the laboratory report and clinical symptoms. Whereas, the CSF bacterial culture result was negative. Meropenem and vacocin vancomycin were both intravenously and intrathecally used for anti-inflammatory treatment. The intracranial infection got significant improvement after 2 weeks of anti-inflammatory therapy.
At the 15th day after the first repair operation, CSF rhinorrhea was confirmed to continue and once again, endoscopic repair for CSF leak was performed. BA and its branches were exposed during the second repair operation and no abnormity was shown, nevertheless a lot of infectious floccules surrounding the trunk of BA were clearly revealed . During the whole surgery, BA was not touched by any surgical instruments, so traumatic injury was avoided. Whereafter, intracranial infection was completely healed but the patient still developed headache and gradually aggravated consciousness disturbance. The patient developed sudden severe headache and loss of consciousness 12 days after the second repair operation. Brain computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed hydrocephalus and SAH predominantly at prepontine cistern . Physical examination showed the dilation of left pupil and disappearance of light reaction. Urgent tracheal intubation and ventricle puncture and drainage were performed. Twenty-four hours later, the right pupil also dilated and lost the light reaction. Brain CT rechecked showed SAH was aggravated .
Digital substraction angiography (DSA) showed a large fusiform aneurysm at BA . It was believed the aneurysm was formed by spread of contiguous infection into arterial wall. DSA revealed remarkable dilatation and tortuosity of BA, which gave rise to some aneurismal secondary cysts. Moreover, original sites of bilateral superior cerebellar artery (SCA) and posterior cerebral artery (PCA) were also involved. Coupled with the state of his endangerment (Hunt-Hess grade 5) and infectious environment, both open surgery and interventional therapy were impossible and only the conservative anti-inflammatory treatment was continued. Ultimately, the aneurysm did not disappear and he died from repeating SAH 17 days later.
We adhered to CARE guidelines/methodology.