The patient, a 57-year-old Asian man, was referred to our hospital in February 2016 for treatment of CPLN metastases from liver cancer. In July 2011 he had undergone liver transplantation at a local hospital and had been on antirejection drugs since then. In 2013, at a follow-up review, his serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) level was seen to be persistently elevated, and the patient was treated with oral sorafenib targeted therapy for 1 year. However, the response was poor, and multiple targeted drugs had been administered since then. In February 2016, a follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed an enlarged right cardiophrenic lymph node. A positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination showed an active nodule between the heart and the diaphragm suggestive of lymph node metastases, involving the parietal pericardium . The patient was then referred to our hospital for further treatment.
A CT examination at our hospital revealed an enlarged, 2.3 × 1.7 × 1.8 cm, right CPLN, consistent with local metastasis . A CT-guided percutaneous lymph node biopsy was performed, and histologic examination confirmed metastasis. Our patient was unwilling to undergo surgery and requested minimally invasive treatment. We explained the options, and our patient chose to undergo cryoablation.
Our patient was fasted for 6 hours before the procedure. The procedure was carried out under CT guidance (SOMATOM Definition 64 AS; Siemens Medical Solutions, Forchheim, Germany), using an argon and helium gas-based system (Endocare, Irvine, CA, USA), two 1.47-mm cryoprobes (Endocare), and a thermal sensor. With our patient supine, the right side of his chest wall was selected as the puncture site and the right cardiophrenic angle as the target tumor area. The skin at the puncture site was anesthetized with 2% lidocaine 5 mL plus 0.75% bupivacaine 5 mL. An 18-gauge needle was inserted into the pericardial cavity under CT guidance. Subsequently, 10 mL of 0.9% saline solution was injected to identify if the tip of needle had entered into the pericardium. Once this was established, about 200 mL of 0.9% saline was injected so that the tumor was well revealed and a safe puncture path was available . Next, with CT guidance and continuous close monitoring of vital signs, two 1.47-mm cryoprobes were carefully inserted into the target node in the right cardiophrenic angle . Ablation was performed with two 7-minute freezing cycles, with freezing temperature of −130 °C to −150 °C, followed by 3 minutes of thawing. CT was used to visualize the size of the ice ball during the procedure and to confirm that the ice ball had reached sufficient size (3.5 × 3 × 2.8 cm), with a margin of 5 mm beyond the CPLN metastases. The cryoprobes were removed after rewarming. The saline injected into the pericardial cavity was aspirated, the needle withdrawn, and the puncture point was bandaged. His vital signs remained stable throughout the procedure. The total intraoperative blood loss was 2 mL.
No minor or major complications were noted during or after the procedure. A follow-up CT scan performed 3 days after cryoablation showed a 3.5-cm-diameter ablated zone in the right cardiophrenic angle.
A follow-up CT scan 1 month later showed a 3.5 × 1.8 × 1.7 cm ablated zone, with no evidence of recurrence . Six months later, a follow-up PET/CT examination showed no evidence of recurrence .