A 45-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital in October 2020 because of a lump in the left ankle for 20 years and enlarging over the last 2 years. From the appearance of the lump to the subsequent 18 years, there were no significant changes. However, the left ankle lump enlarged rapidly about 40 cm in diameter and then developed skin ulceration with apparent purulent discharge 2 years ago.
At the age of 7, the patient accidentally found several soybean-sized soft lumps in two feet without pain and dysfunction, which was not paid attention to at that time. The patient developed multiple lumps in his limbs in the next few years. When the patient was 19 years old, he was finally diagnosed with MS for the extremities with multiple angiomatosis and enchondromas and underwent resection surgery in our hospital. However, the symptoms reoccurred at the original resection site only 2 years later and resection surgery again. Confusingly, reoccurrence happened soon after the second resection surgery.
After the patient was admitted in 2020, the physical examination showed multiple angiomatoses and enchondromas in the extremities , and a giant lump of about 35 cm × 30 cm × 30 cm in the left ankle, with local skin ulceration and evident purulent secretion discharge . There was a big lump on the right scapula without tenderness or percussion pain .
X-ray examination of both hands revealed changes in bone morphology and density of both hands, including spherical expansive bone destruction in the right thumb and multiple phleboliths in the hands and wrists . In addition, we found bone density and morphological changes in the left ilium and left femur , the flexion deformity of the left knee joint, and multiple venous stones around the left knee joint . Moreover, X-ray examination showed local spherical expansive bone destruction with multiple calcifications at the left tarsal, multiple chondromatosis with bone deformity, and multiple hemangiomas . In addition, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on the patient’s left femur to determine the amputation plane . We found that the endogenous chondroma has involved the whole length of the left femur without chondrosarcoma; multiple patchy and nodular abnormal signals were observed in the left femur bone marrow cavity with low T1WI and high STIR signals. MRI examination also showed the swelling and exudation of the soft tissue around the femur surrounding soft tissue.
The patient was confirmed as having chondrosarcoma by biopsy prior to surgery. Although there were no typical appearances of MRI that demonstrated sarcoma metastasis, the patient’s knee has become stiff and nonfunctional. Therefore, the patient eventually underwent above-the-knee amputation. The tumor edge was saved 23 cm from the tibial tubercle. Therefore, surgical margins greater than 23 cm from the tumor meet the treatment criteria for wide excision. During the operation, clear fluid flowed out of the marrow cavity of the femur, and muscle edema was observed. Regrettably, the aspirator accidentally removed the liquid, leaving no specimen left. The surgical incision was sutured after intraoperative pathology confirmed the negative surgical margins. Most conventional chondrosarcomas have low metastatic potential and are both radiation and chemotherapy resistant, so the patient did not receive radiotherapy and chemotherapy after surgery.
The resected specimen is shown in the supplementary material , and the tumors were apparent in Fig. S1B. The chondrosarcoma of the left ankle was assessed as grades 1–2 by pathological diagnosis. Multiple cavernous hemangiomas with thrombosis were in the left lower limb . Enchondroma was observed in the tibia. The cells were loose, with less atypia . Besides, chondrosarcoma invades surrounding soft tissues, and necrosis was seen in some areas . Chondrosarcoma cells with prominent atypia and visible nuclear fission .
DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood and chondrosarcoma tissue and performed exome sequencing. Genomic DNA from FFPE tumor samples and paired blood samples were extracted by QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue KIT and QIAamp DNA Blood Midi KIT (Qiagen, Dusseldorf, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions, respectively. The QIAseq FX DNA Library UDI Kit (Qiagen, Dusseldorf, Germany) was used to generate indexed whole genome libraries from 50-ng genomic DNA according to handbook protocols. Hybridization capture was performed using the IDT xGen Exome Research Panel v1.0 (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Finally, whole exome libraries were quantified by qPCR using the QIAseq Library Quant Assay Kit on a QIAquant 384 instrument (Qiagen, Dusseldorf, Germany). Paired-end sequencing (2 × 150 bp) was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencing instrument (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Then, the data were mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh37/hg19) using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) . Picard was used to removing duplicated sequence reads. The Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) HaplotypeCaller and MuTect were applied to identify candidate germline and somatic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), respectively. SNV annotation was performed using ANNOVAR , and somatic copy number alterations were identified using CNVkit . Somatic structural variations were detected using DELLY .
Finally, germline mutations of the tumor susceptibility gene were not discovered. However, a somatic missense mutation was identified in IDH1 gene compared with germline DNA variants (nucleotide variant: NM_005896.4: c.394 C > T, amino acid variant: NP_005887.2: p.Arg132Cys, rsID:rs121913499), which the mutation ratio was 14.71%. It has been recorded as pathogenic and likely pathogenic in ClinVar (Variation ID: 375,891). The frequency of this locus in normal East Asian populations has not been reported. Thus, IDH1 R132C, in our case classified as pathogenic.
We have followed up with the patient for 15 months, the wound is healing as well, and no obvious recurrence was observed at present . Hemangiomas and chondroma in other sites had no progress. In addition, the patient has been fitted with a prosthesis and can walk on the ground.