A 30-year-old male presented to our clinic with inability to extend all fingers at the metacarpophalangeal joints of the left hand. One year prior to his presentation, he was involved in a car accident and was treated at a local hospital. The medical report indicated that the injury involved the dorsal aspect of the hand, wrist and forearm. There was degloving of the skin without skin loss. However, there was extensor tendon loss of all fingers extending from the proximal one third of zone 6 to zone 8 (including the musculotendinous junctions). Other than debridement, nothing was done to the extensor tendons; and the skin was closed primarily. On examination, there was no active extension at the metacarpophalangeal joints. There was no stiffness with full passive extension at the metacarpophalangeal joints. There were no deficits in active wrist extension/ finger flexion. The overlying skin was scarred but was thought to be adequate for soft tissue coverage. Two-staged extensor tendon reconstruction was planned. However, clinical examination showed the absence of palmaris longus tendon bilaterally. Ultrasound examination also showed the absence of plantaris tendon bilaterally. The patient was counselled regarding choices of the other sources of tendon grafts including: multiple toe extensors, “split” tensor fascia lata, and “split” flexor carpi radialis. The latter option was chosen and surgery was planned. In the first stage, exploration confirmed the presence of extensor tendon defects from the proximal one third of zone 6 to zone 8; including the musculotendinous junctions . Four silicone rods were inserted. The rods were sutured distally to the remnants of the extensor tendons at the dorsum of the hand. All 4 rods were left free (un-sutured) in the distal forearm . the patient resumed passive exercises of the metacarpophalangeal joints post-operatively to prevent stiffness. The second stage was done five months later . The flexor carpi ulnaris tendon was cut near its insertion and was then transferred to the dorso-ulnar aspect of the forearm. The tendon of flexor carpi radialis was harvested as a tendon graft. The tendon graft was split distally in 4 slips on the operating table. The proximal tendon repair was done first between the transferred flexor carpi ulnaris tendon and the tendon graft using multiple figure-of-eight 3/0 polypropylene sutures. The splits of the flexor carpi radialis tendon graft were sutured to the proximal ends of the silicone rods. Each rod was then pulled out from the distal end; thereby introducing each slip into its corresponding pseudo-sheath induced by the rod. Each slip was then weaved through the corresponding remnant of the extensor tendon; and suturing was done using 4/0 polypropylene sutures . In order to adjust tension of the repair, the wrist was positioned in 30° of extension. Tightening of the distal tendon repair was then done so that the metacarpophalangeal joints were 20° short of the full extension. A plaster cast was applied to the hand and the wrist to protect the repair. The cast was removed at 5 weeks and physiotherapy exercises were started. There were no post-operative complications. At final follow up (1 year later), full active wrist extension/ finger flexion was maintained . Full active extension of the fingers at the metacarpophalangeal joints was demonstrated with slight wrist flexion . As expected, active wrist flexion was limited to 20° because of the harvesting of the both wrist flexors . Power grip was 83% of the contra-lateral hand. The patient was satisfied with the result and resumed his original job as a manual worker without any reported difficulties.