An 80-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of an accidental fall into a street ditch when he was riding a bike. The patient was alert and oriented, and his vital signs were stable: heart rate of 90 beats/min, blood pressure of 142/68 mmHg, and SpO2 of 96% (room air). A chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan showed left 5th, 7th, 8th, and 9th rib fractures; fractures of the left scapula and L1 transverse process; a hemothorax; and a biconvex extrapleural hematoma measuring 9.1 cm in diameter in the posterior chest wall . Neither extravasation nor active bleeding of the intercostal artery or vessels around the scapula was detected. The patient had a past history of acute coronary syndrome 5 years previously, which was treated with coronary stent implantation followed by medical treatment with aspirin and prasugrel hydrochloride. An echocardiogram demonstrated normal to mildly decreased left ventricular systolic function. He also had been on insulin for diabetes. Regarding his present admission, a total volume of 1000 ml of bloody pleural effusion was drained immediately after the placement of a chest tube. Fortunately, the volume of intrathoracic hemorrhage gradually decreased, and the patient was managed conservatively with a transfusion. The chest tube was removed 5 days later when the amount of drainage decreased to less than 200 ml/day. The extrapleural hematoma, however, still remained in the posterior chest wall as visualized on a chest X-ray . The pleural effusion did not increase remarkably on X-ray after removal of the chest tube. Thus, we anticipated the spontaneous resolution of the extrapleural hematoma and pleural effusion because the patient had maintained a stable condition in terms of his vital signs and respiratory status, so he was transferred to a neighboring hospital for rehabilitation 27 days after the episode of trauma. However, he developed dyspnea due to the accumulation of a left pleural effusion 53 days after the episode trauma . A chest tube was placed again to drain a large amount of serous effusion, which contained neutrophils without bacterial infection. A chest CT acquired after placement of the chest tube showed a residual extrapleural hematoma and multiloculated pleural effusions on the diaphragm . Thus, we considered that the effusion might have been influenced by an inflammatory reaction due to the residual extrapleural hematoma. At 57 days after the episode of trauma, we underwent thoracoscopic evacuation of the hematoma through a 5-cm mini-thoracotomy in the eighth intercostal space along the posterior axillary line with an incision for thoracoscopy in the sixth intercostal space along the anterior axillary line. The reason that we used a mini-thoracotomy was to prepare for any difficulties we might encounter during the operation because we expected the hematoma to be rigid or organized and therefore not only evacuation but also debridement to be required.
We found thick parietal pleura in the overall thoracic space and a large pleural bulge in the posterior chest wall due to the extrapleural hematoma . We dissected the thick dorsal parietal pleura to evacuate the hematoma and irrigate the space . There was no active hemorrhage in the extrapleural space during surgery. We placed chest tubes in both the thoracic space and the extrapleural space. The chest tubes were successfully removed on the 7th postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. The patient has had no recurrence of pleuritis for 6 months.