A 74-year-old Japanese woman who had type C HCC (Child Pugh score: Class A) referred to our hospital due to a RV tumour diagnosed at a general hospital. The patient exhibited general fatigue with New York Heart Association functional class III. A systolic murmur (Levine grade 3/6) was heard at the left sternal border. There were no jugular vein distention and peripheral oedema. An electrocardiogram presented inverted T wave in leads V1–3. Echocardiography, computed tomography with contrast media, and gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large solid tumour (42 × 21 mm) involving the right ventricle and the root of the pulmonary trunk . Primary tumours were found in the liver , but the tumours did not infiltrate the inferior vena cava. At first, because the tumour was suspected to be a thrombus or a primary tumour, anticoagulation therapy was administered for 10 days. However, the mass rapidly grew to a size of 50 × 25 mm, and the tricuspid regurgitation pressure gradient increased from 48 to 70 mmHg. We decided to surgically resect the mass in order to prevent collapse of RV outflow.
After a median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass was established as usual with cannulation of the ascending aorta and the superior and inferior vena cava. When the incision was made in the right atrium, a large, soft, dark-red tumour was observed in the RV cavity. Because the tumour had invaded the RV free wall, papillary muscles, and tricuspid valve , it was resected along with the RV free wall, chorda tendineae, and valve . The tricuspid valve was replaced with a bioprosthetic valve (Mosaic valve, 27 mm; Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), and cryoablation was performed at the site of tumour resection.
Haematoxylin and eosin staining showed nuclear enlargement, anisonucleosis, and a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, which indicated that the tumour was malignant . Immunohistochemistry stains revealed positivity of the ZEB1 . Also, p53 gene staining revealed a mutation pattern , and tests for K18 and K19 yielded positive results. The tumour was diagnosed as a poorly differentiated HCC metastasis induced by EMT.
On postoperative Day 7, echocardiography showed no residual or recurrent tumour in the right ventricle . Chemotherapy could not be performed because liver failure progressed after the surgery. The patient was discharged from our hospital to the previous referring hospital on postoperative Day 47. However, 53 days after the surgery, recurrence of the tumour in the right ventricle (25 × 35 mm) was confirmed . Finally, the patient died due to HCC on postoperative Day 67.