A 32-year-old female, Brazilian, presented with diffuse pain, predominantly in the upper and lower limbs and back. These symptoms had begun during pregnancy but did not compromise it, and fetal development was normal. The disease developed slowly and progressively, limiting her mobility 2 years after pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a femoral neck fracture. Orthopedic surgery was performed. Due to the continuing pain, other specialists, including a neurologist and an endocrinologist, were consulted. She was diagnosed with fibromyalgia and osteoporosis. Rheumatological laboratory examination showed hypophosphatemia and normal level of 1,25(OH)2D .
In the right nasopharynx, somatostatin analog scintigraphy revealed an asymmetric increase in radiopharmaceutical concentration . Furthermore, otolaryngological evaluation was requested. The patient reported episodes of occasional epistaxis during childhood and a recurrence along with a progressively right nasal obstruction. Nasofibroscopy showed a reddish lesion occupying the right nasal cavity from sphenoethmoidal recess . Computed tomography showed an expansive contrast-enhancing polypoid lesion originating at confluence between nasal cavity roof, sphenoethmoidal recess, and right posterior ethmoid cell, measuring 1.5 × 2.0 × 5.1 cm .
Endoscopic resection of tumor was performed with right maxillary, sphenoid, frontal, and ethmoid sinusotomy. Surgery occurred without complications. After surgery, the patient was administered antibiotics and nasal irrigation with saline solution, and did not exhibit nasal symptoms. Anatomopathological examination revealed fine-caliber ectatic vessels associated with elongated and spindle-shaped cells, arranged in diffuse beams and permeated . The immunohistochemistry report was conclusive for glomangioma, with positive results in CD34, and smooth muscle actin (SMA) . Clinical improvement was observed during physical rehabilitation. There was an increase in serum phosphorus levels. Patient’s follow-up included clinical evaluation, nasal endoscopy, and laboratory tests. Two years after surgery, no signs of local tumor recurrence or hypophosphatemia clinical manifestation was observed. Clinical and treatment events are represented in a timeline .