A 29-year-old male with shunted congenital hydrocephalus of unknown etiology with previous revisions in infancy and as a young child initially presented to the neurosurgery clinic with worsening headaches and complaints of blurred vision for more than 18 months. Computerized tomography (CT) of the head demonstrated a slight increase in his ventricular size; physical evaluation noted mild chronic papilledema and reduced visual acuity in his left eye, which was baseline following a car accident a few years earlier. He had a right parietal VPS in place; shunt series X-rays showed no shunt disconnections. In addition, abdominal X-rays demonstrated a retained peritoneal distal catheter from his previous shunt revision operations. Given the concerns for shunt failure, he underwent shunt exploration and revision for management. During the shunt revision surgery, the valve was found to be nonfunctional and was replaced; the retained peritoneal distal catheter was also removed laparoscopically by the general surgery team. His initial postoperative course was uncomplicated, and he was discharged on postoperative day 1 with decrease in his headaches and improvement in his subjective complaint of blurry vision.
He again presented 17 months later with continual headaches, decrease in vision, and increased ventricular size. This time he was noted to have acute papilledema and worsened visual acuity in his right eye. Given the concern regarding the age of the ventricular and distal catheter in his right parietal system, which had been placed at 4 months of age, it was determined that the placement of a new shunt system would be the best clinical option. He underwent another VPS revision with placement of a new right frontal VPS shunt and a new distal peritoneal catheter placed laparoscopically by the general surgery team . His initial postoperative course was uncomplicated, and the patient's headaches decreased, however, he did experience a lasting deficit in his visual acuity. Two months postoperatively, he presented to the emergency room with complaints of an object intermittently protruding from his rectum. At this initial emergency room evaluation, his rectal exam was unremarkable; on shunt series X-rays, the distal catheter was within the peritoneal cavity . The patient was subsequently discharged without neurosurgical consultation.
One month later, he presented with continued complaints of an object intermittently protruding from his rectum. During the emergency room evaluation, a neurosurgical consultation was obtained and the rectal exam revealed that the distal peritoneal catheter was protruding through his anus. X-rays corroborated the physical exam ; CT imaging clearly revealed the distal peritoneal catheter within the large colon and rectum . On examination, the patient had no signs of peritonitis or meningitis, and he described no abdominal pain, feeding concerns, fevers, worsening headaches, or blurry vision.