The patient provided written informed consent for publication of this case report and the associated images.
A 76-year-old male patient sustained injuries that included a comminuted left humerus midshaft fracture and a thermal contact abrasion with full thickness burns and degloving of the left shoulder, upper arm, and extensor surface of the lower arm and hand. His past medical history was significant for obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and gastroesophageal reflux disease.
The patient immediately underwent an open reduction and internal fixation of the left humerus, followed by burn wound excision and application of allograft to the left upper extremity. Pain intolerance with dressing changes and opioid-associated delirium prompted an Acute Pain Service (APS) consultation. Accordingly, APS performed an ultrasound-guided, left supraclavicular CPNB (B Braun Contiplex Needle, B-Braun Medical Inc., USA) using 20 ml of 0.5% bupivacaine followed by a 10 ml/h continuous infusion of 0.125% bupivacaine through an electronic infusion pump (CADD Solis infusion system, Smiths Medical, USA). Analgesia dramatically improved, and symptoms of delirium abated in parallel to reduced opioid consumption . Prior to each of the remaining 7 surgeries performed under general anesthesia, APS bolused the supraclavicular CPNB with 20 ml of 0.5% bupivacaine.
Thereafter, the patient underwent a below elbow amputation on hospital day (HD) 15. The supraclavicular CPNB was utilized as the primary anesthetic along with intravenous propofol sedation and replaced on HD 17. Amputation formalization occurred on HD 23, and APS carried out routine exchange of the supraclavicular CPNB catheter on HD 17 and HD 24 to reduce the potential risk for catheter site infection.
The patient then underwent a burn wound excision of the left arm and received an extensive split thickness skin graft (1,140 cm2) from both thighs on HD 30. For donor site analgesia and to further mitigate opioid-induced delirium, APS performed an ultrasound-guided bilateral Lateral, Intermediate, and Medial femoral cutaneous nerves (LIM) CPNB intraoperatively using a total of 40 ml of 0.375% bupivacaine. The novel LIM CPNB technique was performed by directing the needle caudally and medially above the fascia iliaca along the lateral border of the sartorius muscle. The sartorius muscle serves as an anatomical landmark as the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve enters the thigh lateral to the sartorius muscle near the LIM block insertion site. The intermediate and medial cutaneous branches of the femoral nerve respectively supply anterior and medial cutaneous thigh sensation and pierce the fascia iliaca just lateral to the sartorius muscle distally. Hydrodissection with local anesthetic allows the needle to advance easily in the correct plane just above the fascia iliaca. Ultrasound and anatomy images describe the nerve block procedure and relevant sonoanatomy (–) .
For the next 5 days, APS continuously infused a total of 8 ml/hr of 0.125% bupivacaine through a second electronic infusion pump utilizing a catheter tubing splitter (6 inch Bifurcated Blue Stripe Extension, ICU medical, USA) to the LIM blocks. On HD 35, APS held the supraclavicular and LIM block infusions to evaluate for remaining underlying pain. After confirming adequate analgesia without requirements for opioids, APS removed all three CPNB catheters without complication or evidence of infection.