A 61-year-old Japanese man with a performance status of 1 due to chest pain was referred to our hospital. He reported a persistent fever for approximately one month. The results of a computed tomography (CT) scan revealed diffuse extensive right pleural thickening with small nodular lesions . Our patient was a social drinker with a smoking history of 40 pack-years as well as a history of asbestos exposure for approximately five years.
To confirm the diagnosis of MPM, a video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy was performed, which revealed tumor invasion of the ipsilateral chest wall muscles. Although the tumor markers for malignant mesothelioma, such as cytokeratin fragment (CYFRA) and tissue polypeptide antigen (TPA), were within normal limits, the hyaluronic acid concentration in the right pleural effusion was 55,000ng/mL, which was suggestive of MPM . Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the specimen revealed disarrayed proliferation of large, spindle-shaped tumor cells with fibrous stroma . Immunohistochemistry testing was positive for epithelial membrane antigen, calretinin, vimentin, and cytokeratin 5/6. In contrast, staining results for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), tissue-specific transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), S-100, and CD34 were negative. These histopathologic findings were consistent with the diagnosis of MPM (sarcomatoid type). On the basis of these clinical examinations, the tumor was diagnosed as being T3N0M0 stage III MPM according to the Union for International Cancer Control guidelines.
Our patient was eligible for surgery; however, he refused any invasive therapies such as surgery and radiotherapy. Therefore, we proposed systemic chemotherapy with hyperthermia, which was used by our institution at that time for unresectable lung cancers with or without malignant pleural effusion [,]. Our patient agreed to this treatment strategy; he provided his written informed consent after a comprehensive discussion regarding the nature of his illness and standard therapeutic options, including surgery and combined modality therapy. Three weeks after the biopsy, systemic chemotherapy with hyperthermia was administered once a week. The chemotherapy regimen included cisplatin 60mg/m2 (100mg/body) on day one and irinotecan 60mg/m2 (100mg/body) on days one, eight, and 15. Hyperthermia was performed using a radiofrequency (RF)-capacitive heating apparatus (Thermotron-RF 8; Yamamoto Vinita Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan) once a week (on days one, eight, and 15) for approximately 60 minutes immediately after irinotecan administration. The electrodes measured 30cm in diameter and were placed in front of and behind our patient to heat the entire thoracic cavity. A pair of overlay boluses were used to prevent any edge effect and for cooling the surface of the body. Thermosimulation revealed that the nodular lesions were approximately 42.5°C and the right pleural thickening >40°C.
Shortly before initiating the second chemotherapy course, a month after the first treatment cycle, a CT scan revealed that the pleural thickening had disappeared . The right pleural effusion was drained only once during biopsy, and pleural effusion had not increased thereafter. Consequently, our patient underwent three sessions of hyperthermia and a single course of chemotherapy without any severe complications. He was subsequently followed-up by CT scan and 18F-fluorodeoxy-glucose-positron emission tomography (18FDG-PET), performed six years after the end of treatment; the results revealed no evidence of recurrence or metastasis . Our patient has been disease free for more than seven years without any complications.