A 70-year-old man was referred to the S. Anna University Hospital in Ferrara (Italy) for a left upper quadrant abdominal mass incidentally discovered on a contrast-enhanced CT of the chest performed to investigate a 15-mm right pulmonary nodule.
The patient was asymptomatic, his past medical history was positive for essential hypertension, and physical examination was unremarkable.
CT scan showed a homogeneous 83-mm left adrenal lesion with an average density of 45 HU; rare peripheral dot-like calcifications were also observed . The right adrenal gland was normal. Due to high-density values of the left adrenal lesion excluding classic low-density adrenal adenoma, an abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination was subsequently performed. MRI with chemical shift imaging showed absence of signal intensity decrease in out-of-phase compared with in-phase images, restriction of intralesional molecular water diffusion in Diffusion Weighted Imaging with high-intensity intralesional areas both in T1 and in T2 and T2 fat-saturated weighted images suggesting areas of intralesional subacute hemorrhage . After intravenous contrast medium administration of gadoteric acid (DOTAREM©, GUERBET S.p.A., Genova, Italy) at 0.1 mmol/kg, a thin capsular rim of early enhancement with slow heterogeneous centripetal enhancement was observed .
Biochemical tests ruled out any endocrine dysfunction (plasma renin 20,5 μU/ml, plasma aldosterone 7,6 ng/dl, urinary adrenaline 4.59 μg /24 h; urinary noradrenaline 43.35 pg/24 h, urinary metanephrine 120.75 μg/24 h, urine normetanephrine 250.25 μg/24 h). A subsequent iodine 123 metaiodobenzylguanidine whole body scintiscan single-photon emission computed tomography-CT (I123-MIBG-SPECT-CT) ruled out the presence of a pheocromocitoma.
Due to the non-specific radiological findings and the size of the lesion, a surgical resection was then elected to establish the final diagnosis. The patient underwent a left adrenalectomy trough a left subcostal incision. Intraoperatively, the mass appeared encapsulated and hypervascularised. No evidence of hepatic as well as other peritoneal lesions was present. The operation was straightforward and the postoperative course was uneventful, with the patient discharged home on postoperative day six.
The pathological examination revealed a large lesion of 90 mm × 65 mm × 70 mm with spongy appearance due to large vascular spaces. Histologically, the lesion showed a conglomerate of widely open vascular lumina lined by endothelial cells and separated by thick nearly acellular fibrous septa . The final diagnosis of cavernous hemangioma was then made.
A portion of the tissues was obtained at time of surgery and a primary culture was obtained, as described previously . Cells were then incubated without or with 5 μM mitotane (an adrenolitic drug), 50 nM doxorubicin (a cytotoxic drug) or with 1–10 μM sunitinib (a VEGF inhibitor) and cell viability was assessed after 48 h, as previously described . As shown in Figure , doxorubicin (− 18%; p < 0.05 vs. control), but not mitotane, was capable of reducing primary culture cell viability. Similarly, sunitinib significantly reduced cell viability both at 1 and at 10 μM (− 16% and − 27%, respectively; p < 0.01 vs. control).
At 53-month follow-up the patient is doing well and has no evidence of recurrence. However, he underwent a laparoscopic prosthetic repair of incisional, umbilical and left inguinal hernias 20 months following the adrenalectomy.