A 50-year-old male patient was transferred to our hospital with a chief complaint of ‘repeated head and neck discomfort for over 1 month and aggravation for 5 days’. In detail, the patient showed head and neck tightness and discomfort more than 1 month before, accompanied by progressive persistent oppressive pain of the whole head. Five days ago, the patient developed an aggravated headache, accompanied by nausea and vomiting several times, abnormal behavior (mistaking night as early morning), vague speech, weak voice, and unstable walking. The patient had an intermittent occurrence of ‘caries and broken teeth’ 2–3 years ago and showed ‘stroke and hypertension’ 1 year ago. In addition, the patient raised chickens and ducks at home.
On the first day after admission, the patient had an abnormal body temperature of 38.2 °C (Day 1) and a deterioration in the level of consciousness. Examination of the nervous system showed drowsiness, whispering words, unwillingness to cooperate with the physical examination, equal and round bilateral pupils (3 mm in diameter) that were reactive to light, unwillingness to cooperate with the examination of limb muscle strength, deep and superficial sensibilities with a rough measurement result of grade 5, relatively poor stability of finger-to-nose test and heel-knee-tibia test, unwillingness to cooperate with the test for Romberg’s sign, negative pathological signs, stiff neck and four transverse finger breadths of the chin-sternum straight distance. The patient's head computed tomography(CT) showed bilateral cerebellar lesions and hydrocephalus . Plain and enhanced magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) of the head showed abnormal signals in the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres and left basal ganglia-lateral capsule . Meanwhile, to exclude malignancy-related immunocompromising conditions, tumor markers test, and chest/abdomen/pelvis CT were performed. All tumor markers were detected negative, which included CEA, AFP, CA153, CA199, PSA, CA72-4, CYFRA211, NSE, and SCC. Based on the patient's chest CT scan, a small amount of pneumonia was detected in the lower sections of both lungs . However, the sputum culture results showed negative bacterial infection, including actinomycetes. Abdomen/pelvis CT indicated no infection in the abdominal cavity. The serological test also showed negative results for HIV, RPR, HBsAg, hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc), hepatitis B e antibody (anti-HBe), and HBe antigen. Thus, the patient received the ceftriaxone empirical therapy and blood culture at first.
However, the patient still had a recurrent fever, and the maximum body temperature was 39 °C, considering the possibility of intracranial infection. Therefore, lumbar puncture was performed based on mannitol dehydration to prevent cerebral hernia, with intracranial pressure of 115 mmH2O. Routine examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed a white blood cell count of 0.62 × 109/L, lymphocyte count of 85%, qualitative protein test result of 1 + , and activated monocyte percentage of 10%. Biochemical examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed a protein level of 1371 mg/L without abnormality in glucose and chloride levels. Cryptococcus was undetected. There was no abnormality in the general bacterial smear, tuberculosis smear, and cerebrospinal fluid cytology. To make a definitive diagnosis, we collected cerebrospinal fluid for pathogenic metagenomics sequencing.
In the process of waiting for the pathogenic metagenomics sequencing results of cerebrospinal fluid, blood culture (Day 8) was positive for actinomyces odontolyticus, considering the possibility of actinomyces odontolyticus sepsis and intracranial actinomyces odontolyticus infection. Thus, penicillin treatment and continuous mannitol dehydration to reduce intracranial pressure was provided. The patient body temperature gradually dropped to normal levels(36.5 °C), but no improvement in symptoms of other intracranial infections.
During penicillin treatment, the gene examination of pathogenic microorganisms in the cerebrospinal fluid showed positive cryptococcus neoformans, suggesting that the intracranial lesion would be ‘cryptococcal meningoencephalitis’ (Day 21). To further confirm the diagnosis, the patient underwent a re-examination of the lumbar puncture, with intracranial pressure of 220 mmH2O. A routine cerebrospinal fluid examination showed a white blood cell count of 1.04 × 109/L, lymphocyte count of 76%, and qualitative protein test result 1 + . Biochemical examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed a protein of 1798 mg/L, chloride level of 118.9 mmol/L, and glucose level of 1.98 mmol/L. But, cryptococcus was still undetected. There was also no abnormality on the general bacterial smear, tuberculosis smear, and cerebrospinal fluid cytology. Therefore, we re-examined the genome sequencing of pathogenic microorganisms, and the result still showed cryptococcus neoformans (positive). The serum cryptococcal antigen test kit (Kangtai Biotechnology Co., LTD, China) was used for cryptococcal antigen detection. This kit employs the double antibody sandwich method and includes negative and positive reference products as controls. The detection result showed (serum + cerebrospinal fluid) cryptococcal capsular polysaccharide antigen detection was positive (1: 80). Accordingly, ‘cryptococcal meningoencephalitis complicated with actinomyces odontolyticus sepsis’ was confirmed. For treatment, the patient was supplied with combined anti-infection therapy using ‘high-dose penicillin, liposome-encapsulated amphotericin B, and fluconazole.’ Subsequently, the patient did not develop fever again, with significant alleviation of headache. After 2 weeks, the patient was re-examined with a lumbar puncture (intracranial pressure of 155 mmH2O; routine examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed white cell count of 0.53 × 109/L, lymphocyte count of 100%; biochemical examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed protein level of 1472 mg/L, chloride level of 121.7 mmol/L, and glucose level of 2.34 mmol/L), suggesting a reduction in cell count and protein. Moreover, a re-examination of plain and enhanced head MRI revealed a partial reduction of the intracranial abnormal enhanced focus . The patient's medication status, temperature changes, and cerebrospinal fluid test index changes are shown in Fig. .