This 17-year-old male is the first child of nonconsanguineous healthy parents. His younger sister is healthy. He was born after a pregnancy complicated by rubeola infection: at birth anophthalmia of the right eye was detected and brain imaging showed a congenital arachnoid cyst in the left temporal lobe. Familial history revealed a father's 1st cousin diagnosed with MS in adulthood. When 14-year-old, the patient complained a decline in school performance and a loss of strength of the inferior limbs. A year later, he was admitted to a Neurology Unit due to sudden visual loss (3/10 in the left eye) and the subacute emergence of a spastic paraparesis. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple subcortical and periventricular white matter lesions suggesting the diagnosis of MS. The treatment with steroid improved visual acuity (8/10), but it was ineffective on lower limb spasticity. Subsequently, a treatment with interferon 1-b was started. On follow-up, a brain MRI showed a complete vanishing of the white matter lesions. However, at the age of 16, he suffered from a sudden episode of lethargy, loss of ambulation, bilateral upper limb dystonia and urinary incontinence. Brain and spinal MRI were normal. A partial spontaneous recovery was observed during the following weeks. A comprehensive clinical evaluation revealed a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and proteinuria. A few months later, on examination he showed spastic paraparesis, pale optic disc, and large-amplitude horizontal left beating nystagmus. A further metabolic work-up revealed high Hcy (162 μmol/L; normal 4.7–11.3 μmol/L) and low methionine (23 μmol/L; normal 26–38 μmol/L) plasmatic levels and a marked increase of urinary MMA (1075 mmol/mol creatinine; normal 0.4–23 mmol/mol creatinine). Molecular analysis of MMACHC gene (NM_015506) revealed a heterozygous variant in exon 4 (c.482G > A; p.Arg161Gln), inherited from his father. The lack of other pathogenetic variants on the MMACHC gene prompted us to sequence the PRDX1 gene (NM_001202431) that revealed a c.515-1G > T splicing variant, inherited from the mother, and confirmed the diagnosis of cobalamin disorder type C .
The treatment with betaine (6 g/day), carnitine (6 g/day), hydroxy-cobalamin (5000 μg on alternate days), and folinic acid (15 mg/day) resulted in a remarkable lowering of plasma Hcy (27 μmol/L) and urine MMA (47 mmol/mol creatinine) as well as in an improvement of spastic paresis with restoration of autonomous gait. Unexpectedly, at the age of 17, he complained an acute loss of strength and paresthesia in the right arm. A brain and spinal MRI showed asymmetrical and multifocal cerebral white matter lesions, some of them with an open-ring enhancement, and a C2-C3 medullary lesion . Oligoclonal bands were detected in CSF and HLA-study showed DRB1*13–15 haplotype. The diagnosis of relapsing-remitting MS was definitively made in comorbidity with cblC defect. The patient has received treatment with natalizumab for 10 months in addition to the specific treatment for cblC. During the follow-up we observed no relapses nor novel lesions at MRI and no progression of cardiac nor renal dysfunctions. Written informed consent of patient and his parents was obtained.