The patient was a 59-year-old Japanese man who noted a corneal opacity in his right eye in October, 2009. However, he did not seek treatment for the opacity for about two months. He visited a private ophthalmological clinic on December 11, 2009, because his right eye felt irritated and his vision had decreased. The patient was a farm worker, but did not use entomopathogenic fungi as a biological control agent. He had no systemic diseases and no signs or symptoms of immunosuppression during the clinical course. He was diagnosed with infectious keratitis and was treated with topical gatifloxacin and erythromycin eye ointment for two weeks. Because the signs and symptoms did not improve, he was referred to the Ehime University Hospital on December 28, 2009.
On the initial examination, his best-corrected visual acuity was 20/500 OD and 20/16 OS. Slit-lamp examination of the right eye showed a grayish stromal infiltrate with a dry texture and indistinct margins (Figure A). Examination of the cornea with in vivo confocal microscopy (HRT II-RCM; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) showed a mass of branching and interlocking white lines in the area of the infiltrate suggesting filamentous fungus keratitis (Figure A). Microscopic examination of corneal scrapings showed filamentous fungal hyphal fragments (Figure B).
Treatment was begun with oral voriconazole (400 mg/day) p.o., topical 0.1% voriconazole hourly, and natamycin eye ointment 5 times/day. Because the lesion did not respond despite the intensive antifungal therapy, the isolate from the corneal scrapings was sent to the First Laboratory in Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba University for identification and to determine the minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) to different antifungal drugs (Table ).
The corneal scrapings grew fungal colonies on Sabouraud dextrose agar and white colonies on potato dextrose agar (Figure A). Microscopic examination of the culture media stained with lactophenol cotton blue showed conidia in distinctive blue spore balls composed of a cluster of conidiogenous cells. The conidiogenous cells were short and ovoid and terminated in a narrow apical extension or rachis. The rachis was elongated after each conidium resulting in a long zig-zag extension. These features are characteristic of B. bassiana (Figure B).
The isolate was confirmed to be B. bassiana by DNA sequencing at the First Laboratory in Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba University. The MIC of natamycin was determined to be 1 μg/ml by the modified agar plate dilution method at the Department of Infection Control, Osaka University Hospital
[–].
After receiving the MIC results, the natamycin eye ointment (5 times/day) was changed to topical 0.1% micafungin (hourly) along with topical 0.1% voriconazole. During the next 3 months, surgical debridement was also performed 3 times and the infectious lesion slowly improved. Finally, the infectious lesion healed but with mild scar formation (Figure C). His best-corrected visual acuity in his right eye improved to only 20/100 because of the corneal opacity and irregular astigmatism due to the surgical debridement.
To try to determine the cause of the slow clinical course and poor response to antifungal agents, the isolate was grown on Sabouraud dextrose agar at 25°C, 35°C, and 37°C for up to 7 days at the Clinical Laboratory of Ehime University Hospital as described in detail
. The isolate grew very slowly, and no determination could be made at 5 days when most filamentous fungi would have already grown colonies. At 7 days, the isolate grew small white colonies at 25°C, and very small colonies at 35°C and 37°C (Figure ).