A 23-year-old previously healthy male was transferred to our hospital after the onset of diaphoresis, generalized weakness, and inability to rise from bed. He endorsed 35 kg of weight loss over the prior 3 months and having had a high-carbohydrate meal the evening prior to presentation. The patient was not on medications prior to presentation and denied palpitations, heat intolerance, tremor, dyspnoea, oedema, anxiety, vision change, and change in bowel habit prior to presentation.
On exam, he was in moderate distress with a heart rate of 152 b.p.m., blood pressure of 89/56 mmHg, respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 98% on room air, and temperature of 37.8°C. The patient had an otherwise unremarkable cardiovascular examination, including the absence of abnormal heart sounds, jugular venous distention, and lower extremity oedema. His lungs were clear to auscultation. The patient had moist mucous membranes and an enlarged thyroid but no evidence of exophthalmos, tremor, or ophthalmoplegia. He was found to have generalized weakness, predominantly in the lower extremities. Laboratory studies were notable for a potassium of 1.9 mEq/L (normal 3.7–5.2 mEq/L), an undetectable thyroid-stimulating hormone, and free T4 of 3.2 ng/dL (normal 0.6–1.2 ng/dL). Initial ECG demonstrated sinus tachycardia with prolonged QT interval (QTc 652 ms) and minimal ST-elevations in V1–V3 (, top panel). He was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU).
His weakness improved following potassium repletion and fluid resuscitation, but his tachycardia persisted. A second ECG was obtained and notable for anteroseptal (V1–V4) ST-elevations and resolution of QT prolongation (QTc 401 ms) (, bottom panel). He denied chest pain or pressure. Troponin-I was elevated to 7.97 ng/mL (normal <0.04 ng/mL), trending upwards to 18.98 ng/mL.
Treatment was initiated with aspirin, ticagrelor, and unfractionated heparin infusion. He was unable to acutely tolerate beta-blockade due to hypotension. Urgent echocardiogram revealed a severely dilated left ventricle [left ventricular end-diastolic volume index (LVEDVi) 114 mL/m2] with severely reduced systolic function [ejection fraction (EF) 23%] and global hypokinesis. No focal wall-motion abnormalities were present.
Following initiation of propylthiouracil, potassium iodine solution, and stress-dosed steroids, his tachycardia and ST-elevations improved. Computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography 2 days after presentation demonstrated no evidence of coronary artery atherosclerosis or stenosis. Additionally, cine cardiac CT images of the heart showed normal left ventricular systolic function (, Videos S). Aspirin, ticagrelor, and heparin were stopped at this time due to a low concern for type I MI. Thyrotropin receptor antibodies returned positive, consistent with Graves’ disease. Ultrasound of the thyroid gland showed thyromegaly (right lobe volume 32 cc, left lobe volume 26 cc) with heterogenous parenchyma and increased vascularity, also consistent with Graves’ disease. Prior to discharge, the patient endorsed improved but persistent fatigue and dyspnoea with exertion. He continued to be free of chest pain and remained normotensive throughout the remainder of his hospital stay. The patient was discharged on methimazole in addition to guideline-directed medical therapy for heart failure, including lisinopril 2.5 mg daily and metoprolol succinate 25 mg daily. Up-titration of his lisinopril and metoprolol dosages were limited by borderline-low blood pressures. He appeared euvolemic throughout the hospitalization, so diuretics were not initiated. Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists were not prescribed upon discharge due to borderline hypotension, as well.
At 2-month follow-up, the patient’s left ventricle remained severely dilated (LVEDVi 126 mL/m2) but with recovered systolic function (EF 65%) . He had returned to normal activities without functional limitations. He was initially continued on lisinopril and metoprolol, but both were eventually discontinued over the course of several months given the patient’s recovered left ventricular systolic function and successful treatment of his hyperthyroidism. He remained on methimazole and was clinically euthyroid on follow-up visits.