A 50-year-old Aboriginal male was admitted electively for a diagnostic work-up of the right anterior mediastinal mass-like tissue detected on imaging associated with an 8-month history of constitutional symptoms, including weight loss and fevers in addition to dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain, and itchy skin lumps before admission. The patient’s past medical history included nicotine and cannabis dependency, iron deficiency anaemia, intermittent skin lesions, and COVID-19 infection.
Before admission, he had undergone extensive investigations with no definite diagnosis of the mediastinal mass. These include thoracotomy and core biopsy of the mediastinal mass, which showed findings consistent with neither malignancy nor infection but mixed inflammatory infiltrates. On the serial PET scans, there was evidence of progression of the mediastinal mass with involvement of the pericardium. .
A TTE performed 3 months before admission to investigate the pericardial involvement revealed soft tissue density involving the mediastinum and pericardial space with mild features of constrictive physiology. A subsequent cardiac MRI demonstrated some features suggestive of chronic pericarditis . Interestingly no mediastinal mass was detected. However, this revealed that the mediastinal changes, rather than a mass, may be secondary to chronic inflammation and fibrosis.
Despite treatment of pericarditis with colchicine and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, the patient’s symptoms progressed with pleuritic chest pain, dyspnoea, fatigue, and fevers with persistence of the anterior mediastinal mass-like collection, warranting further investigation for a definite diagnosis.
At that stage, the differential diagnoses for the mediastinal mass were malignancy, tuberculosis (TB), and IgG4 disease. His blood tests showed mildly elevated lipase of 76 U/L in addition to the cholestatic pattern of liver enzyme derangement, including an elevated alkaline phosphatase level of 415 U/L. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed hepatic congestion likely secondary to pericardial disease. There was no evidence of IgG4-related disease in the abdomen.
On examination, the height and weight were 175.4 cm and 68.20 kg, respectively. The blood pressure was 123/86 mmHg. The heart rate was 83 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. There was finger clubbing present. No palpable lymph nodes were found. The cardiovascular examination revealed an elevated jugular venous pulse above the angle of the jaw. There were loud dual heart sounds with an added sound consistent with a pericardial knock. No peripheral oedema was noticed. Respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. There was a 4 cm, red cutaneous lesion on the left buttock. The electrocardiogram showed non-specific T wave inversion in the inferolateral leads.
Given the diagnostic dilemma, he was electively admitted for a left-sided video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) guided pericardial and pleural biopsy that showed mild fibrosis and chronic inflammation. There was neither evidence of acute or granulomatous inflammation nor malignancy. Microbiology was negative for infective causes. In addition, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage of the right middle lobe was not consistent with infective or malignant causes. The left buttock subcutaneous lesion was biopsied and reported as incipient abscess formation with Splendore Hoeppli phenomenon . There were Gram-positive and Grocott-positive filamentous bacteria together with some apparent coccoid forms, suggestive of Actinomyces species , with 16S rRNA gene sequencing confirming the diagnosis of actinomycosis.
Inpatient echocardiogram showed worsening pericardial infiltrate, pericardial effusion, and features of severe constrictive physiology with significant myocardial tethering of the pericardium (see , ). There was respirophasic variation in mitral and hepatic vein flow, annulus reversus, and marked septal bounce. Subsequently, left and right heart catheter studies confirmed constrictive physiology with elevated right ventricular end-diastolic pressure (RVEDP) ∼20 mmHG (greater than 50% of right ventriclular systolic pressure) and equalization of the left ventricle and right ventricle pressure. No significant coronary artery disease was identified .
Given the evidence of actinomycosis from the left buttock lesion, following liaising with the infectious disease team, the patient was commenced on intravenous Benzylpenicillin 1.8 gr QID (four times a day) for 2 weeks, with the plan to step down on oral Amoxicillin 500 mg three times per day and to continue for 1 year. In addition, high-dose prednisolone (1 mg/kg or 70 mg/day) was started to prevent the development of chronic CP with a tapering dose, along with Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia prophylaxis. His symptoms of chest pain and exercise tolerance improved rapidly from being breathless and walking 20–30 metres to being pain-free and able to walk about 200 metres on discharge.
Six weeks post-discharge, his clinical symptoms improved markedly, including chest pain and exercise tolerance, and he could walk up to a kilometre.
C-reactive protein levels normalized from 53 mg/L to 5 mg/L. A repeat echocardiogram showed improved constrictive physiology with steroid therapy, although some evidence of pericardial inflammation still persisted. The patient was continued on prednisolone 5 mg daily and colchicine for 3 months before both ceased. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient remained symptom-free and able to walk 4 km without stopping. The echocardiogram demonstrated normal left ventricular function, no effusion, and minimal tethering of the myocardium, consistent with substantial improvement from presentation (see , ).
A CT chest showed significant anterior mediastinal inflammatory mass resolution with some residual parenchymal scarring.