A 52-year-old merchant, with a history of an episode of severe acute pancreatitis of biliary origin 2 months before admission, consulted for 3 weeks of cough, chest pain in the right hemithorax and fever, he had no family history of illness, drugs or alcohol consumption. Physical examination revealed absent respiratory sounds in the right base and fine rales in both lung fields. Chest tomography revealed a right pleural collection with a hydro-aerial level of 16 × 11 × 10 cm associated with passive atelectasis of the lower lobe, communicated through the diaphragmatic hiatus with peripancreatic collections in the head and tail of the pancreas (, ).
The patient was taken to right posterolateral thoracotomy due to suspicion of pulmonary abscess by a senior Thoracic Surgeon and a third year General Surgery resident, finding a pleural collection of 300 cc, disruption in the lung parenchyma in the posterior basal segment of approximately 1 × 1 cm and disruption in the posterior costodiaphragmatic recess of 1 cm with evidence of pancreatic tissue. An anterior and a posterior chest tubes were left in the chest cavity; postoperative pain was managed with thoracic epidural blockade by the anesthesiologist with adequate pain control. The amylase level in the pleural fluid was greater than 24,000 I/U, confirming the suspicion of a pancreaticopleural fistula, and the pathology report of the tissue sample taken in surgery showed steatonecrosis without the presence of viable pancreatic tissue.
An endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was carried out for medical management of the fistula, finding a disruption of the distal portion of the main pancreatic duct with extravasation of the contrast medium, a papillotomy was performed, and a 5 cm × 5 Fr pancreatic plastic stent was placed. The patient was put on treatment with octreotide, but it was stopped on the third day due to adverse effects (nausea, vomiting and headache). As the patient presented progressive decrease of drainages volumes through closed thoracostomy tubes, the anterior chest tube was removed, and he was discharged to home care in a temporary shelter with the posterior tube due to the long-distance living place of the patient from a medical center
The patient was re-admitted on the 27th postoperative day due to abdominal pain and purulent drainage through the chest tube. A superinfected pancreatic necrosis was suspected, and the patient underwent a CT-guided percutaneous drainage with placement of a retroperitoneal pig-tail drain, isolating a multi-sensitive Enterococus faecalis in the culture obtained of the pancreatic necrosis. A new ERCP was done without finding the pancreatic stent or disruption of the main pancreatic duct, but there was an extravasation of the contrast medium in the distal portion of the tail of the pancreas, it was decided not to place a new stent given the distal location of the fistula with the permeable pancreatic duct.
Given the superinfection of the pancreatic necrosis and the persistence of the pancreaticopleural fistula, the attending junior General Surgeon and a third year General Surgery resident decided to perform a second surgery to manage bothcomplications of pancreatitis, choosing a resective and minimally invasive surgery: a left video-assisted retroperitoneal pancreatic necrosectomy. The patient was in anti-Trendelemburg position with de wrist rotate 30° to the right, the anatomical landmarks were marked to help delimiting between the abdominal cavity and the retroperitoneal space .
Then, a 5 cm transverse incision between the anterior and the mild axillary lines was done, 2 cm below the twelfth left rib; then the subcutaneous tissue was dissected, and the muscular plane of the abdominal wall was cut separately, first the external oblique, second the internal oblique, and finally the transversus abdominis was cut carefully, so as not to enter the peritoneal cavity inadvertently. Next, a tunnel was created with digital dissection to enter the retroperitoneal cavity was done; the retroperitoneal pig-tail drain was identified, and it served as a guide to locate the superinfected necrosis .
The tunnel was dilatated and a 12 mm trocar was introduced and the carbon dioxide insufflated up to 15 mmHg, a 30° laparoscopic lens was introduced finding necrotic pancreatic tissue with scarce purulent collection around it, debridement was done by blunt dissection with forester forceps and irrigation; two closed drains (Johnson & Johnson Blake drain) of 19 Fr were left in the pancreatic cell (, )
The patient presented an adequate postoperative evolution without fever, pain or oral intake intolerance. An abdominal tomography was performed 3 weeks after the necrosectomy with complete resolution of the peripancreatic collections and the pancreaticopleural fistula, so the right chest tube and the Blake drains were removed. A laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed by the attending junior general surgeon 3 weeks after the pancreatic necrosectomy without complications and 5 weeks of antibiotic treatment with ampicillin-sulbactam were completed due to superinfection of pancreatic necrosis. Patient follow-up was done by telephone to ensure adherence because of transportation difficulties for the patient, at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year, without evidencing any complication.
The patient was satisfied with the definitive surgical treatment for both pathologies since he has not required additional trips to health care centers and has been able to continue with his work and daily activities without limitations.