We present the case of a 65-year-old male, former smoker with no other medical history, and a first-degree family history of sudden cardiac death and arrhythmias without a clear diagnosis. He was admitted to the Emergency Department hypotensive and tachypnoeic (BP 103/61 mmHg, HR 170 b.p.m., SpO2 94%), and his physical exam showed pulmonary crackles and lower limb lividness. He had increased venous lactate levels (6.6 mmol/L) and atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response refractory to medical treatment (i.v. amiodarone).
An urgent computed tomography allowed us to rule out acute pulmonary embolism (PE) but revealed the presence of a large thrombus in the right atrium (RA) extending to the superior vena cava, which was confirmed by a transthoracic echocardiogram along with severe biventricular dysfunction but no pericardial effusion nor valvulopathies (. , ).
Within the following hour, the patient experienced multiorgan failure (glomerular filtration rate 25 mL/min/1.73 m2, prothrombin activity 21%, INR 3.26, ALT 4346 U/L, and AST 7826 U/L) and was started on mechanical ventilation, renal replacement treatment (RRT), and inotropes and vasopressor agents. However, a haemodynamically unstable tachycardia, refractory to medical treatment, aggravated his clinical status. The patient’s laboratory test results and their corresponding normal ranges can be found in the (see , ). Given the high risk of thrombus dislodgement, we had to dismiss procedures such as electrical cardioversion or circulatory support with veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) system—with the added risk of obstruction of the venous cannulae of the ECMO that the latter option presented. Thus, we considered performing emergent percutaneous thrombectomy and examined all potential strategies: Indigo System’s (Penumbra, Inc., CA) largest catheter at that time was 8 Fr, which was not big enough for the size of the thrombus, the FlowTriever System (Inari Medical, CA) had a wider range of catheter sizes, however, it would not be available on time and there was also a potential risk of atrial suction and wall perforation. Finally, the AngioVac system (AngioDynamics, Inc.; New York) was not available at our centre.
While studying alternative strategies, the patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly with severe haemodynamic instability (INTERMACS I). Considering that his chances of survival were extremely low at this point, we decided to perform directional thrombectomy (see , ): through a 14 Fr right femoral vein introducer, a 0.035″ J Wire and a 14 Fr deflectable sheath (Occlutech Int, Sweden) were advanced to the inferior vena cava-RA junction under fluoroscopy and transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance. The deflectable sheath was directed towards the thrombus and connected to a 50 mL Luer-lock syringe to perform manual aspirations. However, as the system kept clogging, we had to pull it out to remove the thrombus manually. Following a second run of manual aspiration, local tirofiban was administered at half its weight-corresponding dose and a final aspiration was performed, achieving complete extraction of the thrombus .
Once the absence of thrombus in both the right and left chambers was confirmed, VA-ECMO was implanted through a 25 Fr right femoral vein and 17 Fr right femoral artery vascular access, adding a distal perfusion cannula to avoid distal ischaemia.
Immediately after starting circulatory support inotropes could be reduced and peripheral lactate levels started to decrease. Levosimendan infusion was administered to facilitate support withdrawal. At Day +4, his neurological response was normal, VA-ECMO could be withdrawn at Day +5 with significant improvement on left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 35–40%) and complete recovery of right ventricular function. Then, progressive weaning of inotropes, RRT, and mechanical ventilation was achieved, and he was discharged from the Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit (CICU) at Day +12. At Day +16, biventricular function was normal (see , ) and study was completed, as usual, with a cardiac MRI, revealing signs of myocarditis (patchy and multifocal fibrosis in an intramyocardial distribution without oedema and restored ventricular function). Additionally, a complete haematology exam including coagulation tests was performed, with findings compatible with acute liver injury. Full haematology study can be found in the (see , ).
Even though the patient had tested positive for COVID-19 at Day +24 (which had been negative during his whole hospitalization), he experienced a favourable recovery with conventional analgesics and could be discharged from the hospital at Day +30 with no neurological deficits, signs of heart failure, renal impairment, vascular complications, or any other sequelae. At 1-year follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic, under oral anticoagulation and antihypertensive treatment with hydrochlorothiazide. A new cardiac MRI showed persistent patchy and multifocal intramyocardial fibrosis with normal biventricular function.