A 44-year-old man presented with a history of non-specific symptoms of right upper abdominal pain for 6 years. Abdominal ultrasound (US) revealed a cystic mass containing low level internal echoes and sonic shadowing. Computed tomography (CT) revealed, in the axial and coronal views, a cystic mass with curvilinear calcifications extending from segment six of the right hepatic lobe into the right lower quadrant, consistent with the morphological characteristics of an echinococcal hydatid cyst . The patient was employed as a hunt assistant and was exposed to dogs and foxes and their faeces. Serodiagnostic results for echinococcal antigens and antibodies were within normal limits. A surgical resection of the cyst by pericystectomy was planned and systemic albendazole therapy was started prior to cyst evacuation. Four weeks after systemic albendazole therapy, an exploratory laparotomy via a right subcostal incision with extension in the midline was performed.
During exploration of the abdominal cavity the cystic mass, which measured 17.5 cm in length and 4.5 cm in diameter, was identified as a cystic antecaecal appendix with a smooth serosal surface involving the base of the appendix . Due to the involvement of the appendiceal base and the risk of perforation, we decided against a classical appendectomy, which is recommended in uncomplicated mucocele of the appendix, and performed an ileocaecal resection with ileoascendostomy. Intra-operatively, no peritoneal tumour implants or ascites were conspicuous. Pathological examination revealed a mucinous cystadenoma with a partly flat and villous growth pattern, staining positively with periodic acid Schiff. The nuclei were hyperchromatic with low-grade atypia and single mitotic figures. Dystrophic calcifications were seen in areas with epithelial denudation and extended extravasated mucin . The patient's postoperative course was uneventful and annual colonoscopy and ultrasound as follow-up were recommended because of the potential of metachronic cancer and the development of pseudomyxoma peritonei.