A 42-year-old otherwise healthy woman was admitted to our hospital with numerous crusted, denuted and flaccid vesiculobullous lesions over her chest, abdomen, legs, toes and forehead . Vesicles were also observed on the buccal mucosa and palate. The clinical diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris was confirmed by biopsy. Histological findings included interface dermatitis, apoptotic keratinocytes and focal areas of suprabasal acantholysis. Therapeutic management consisted of successive cycles of 50 mg/day of prednisone. Medical treatment provided only transient relief of symptoms and temporary reduction in clinical manifestations and on interruption of systemic steroid the lesions reccured.
Three months later while facing a persistent pemphigus, a chest x-ray was done and a retrosternal tumor was noted . CT scans and MRI of the chest revealed a homogeneous anterior mediastinal mass consistent with a thymic tumor but with no lymph node involvement . In order to perform preoperative staging of the tumor, the patient underwent CT scans of brain, abdomen and a bone scan. All were normal. An autoimmune laboratory profile proved that desmoglein-1 (anti-DSG-1) antibodies were normal while the desmoglein-3 (anti-DSG-3) titer reached twice the normal.
At operation through a median sternotomy, a solid intrathymic capsulated mass was found and a thymectomy was performed. Definitive pathologic examination found a tumor measuring 6 × 5 × 5 cm occupying the inferior part of the thymus gland consisting of spindle cells populated by varying numbers of lymphocytes with rounder epithelial cells . No capsular involvement was noted (Type A non invasive thymoma according to World Health Organization classification).
The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged home after 10 days Postoperatively anti-DSG-1 and anti-DSG-3 showed a transient increase. At the outpatient visit four weeks later both desmoglein antibodies showed a significant decrease associated with almost complete resolution of the cutaneous lesions. Twelve months later she is still disease free and with no need of steroids.