A 65-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with swelling, pain, and deformity of both knee joints caused by a car accident. The patient had undergone successful bilateral TKA at the hospital 5 years before admission and had an uneventful postoperative course. On admission, her physical examination was notable for swelling and deformity at the distal end of both thighs. An open wound of 3 cm on the left lateral thigh was accompanied by active bleeding. There was local tenderness, palpable bone friction, abnormal movement, and normal sensation and movement at the distal end of both lower limbs. Radiographs revealed a comminuted fracture of both distal femurs, with the fracture line either close to or partially distal to the anterior flange edge of the femoral prosthesis, especially on the left side (, , ). The clinical impression was distal femur periprosthetic fracture (DFPF; bilateral, Rorabeck II B) and distal femur open fracture (left, Gustilo II) after TKA. Debridement and suture of the left side was performed in the emergency department 6 h after the injury and was admitted to the hospital for further treatment. Then distal tibial traction stabilized the fracture, Intravenous infusion of piperacillin-sulbactam for 2 weeks to prevent infection. After the examination, the right fracture was first treated with ORIF with double-locking plates and iliac bone grafting. Two weeks later, after the left wound had healed, the same operation was performed. We adopted the original incision approach and extended it proximally to expose the fracture site. The degree of fracture comminution was severe, a massive free bone fragment was found in the fracture site, and the right side was more severe than the left. Although the fracture line had extended the anterior flange edge of the femoral prosthesis, both prostheses were stable . The fixations were stable despite the shortage of distal bone stock. The range of motion was 90°–0° intraoperatively, and the fracture alignment was satisfactory postoperatively (, ).
Postoperative bilateral wounds healed uneventfully. We did not apply a brace. Within 6 months postoperatively, the range of knee flexion was increased using functional exercise in bed. Monthly x-rays were taken to monitor fracture healing, and teriparatide was given subcutaneously for 1 year. At 7 months postoperatively (, ), shockwave therapy was regularly performed for 16 months due to poor callus growth at the fractured sites of bilateral fractures (more evident on the right side). At 9 months postoperatively, callus formation began on the left side ; however, healing on the right side was not evident . Computed tomography revealed no apparent callus formation between the bone fragments one year after surgery . The patient was hospitalized again for autologous marrow injection at the fracture site. We performed a puncture from the posterior superior iliac spine, extracted about 40 ml of bone marrow blood, and then injected it into the nonunion site of the fracture under fluoroscopy. The left lower limb was partially weight-bearing under the protection of double crutches, while the right lower limb remained non-weight-bearing. An x-ray revealed callus formation on the right side 21 months after surgery , indicating partial weight-bearing. At 34 months postoperatively, films revealed healing , and the patient could walk normally without the walker. At 47 months postoperatively, the range of motion on the left was 75–5–0°; on the right, it was 80–5–0°. The hospital of special surgery (HSS) score was 70 on the left and 76 on the right.