A 58-year-old female Caucasian patient, complaining of increasing fatigue and severe dyspnea, was admitted to the emergency department of Ospedale di Circolo & Fondazione Macchi, in May 2020 for acute cardiac failure with peripheral edema, ascites, pleural, and pericardial effusion. Echocardiography findings were highly suggestive for precapillary pulmonary hypertension: severe right chambers dilation, D-shaped left ventricle, severe tricuspid regurgitation, high velocity of tricuspid regurgitation with pulmonary pressure estimated at 100 mmHg, dilated and not collapsing inferior vena cava, and pericardial effusion. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest excluded pulmonary embolism; high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) ruled out parenchymal diseases and mediastinal lymphadenopathy; capillaroscopy documented a scleroderma pattern; antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-centromere antibodies (ACA), and anti-mitochondrial antibodies tested positive; HIV serology tested negative; hepatic echo-Doppler ruled out portopulmonary hypertension. Diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was not tested because of severe hypoxemia.
Right heart catheterization (RCAT) documented a mean pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 58 mmHg, cardiac index (CI) of 1.9 L/min/m2, right atrial pressure (RAP) of 8 mmHg, pulmonary capillary pressure (PCP) of 8 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 16 Woods units (WU). A diagnosis of limited variant systemic sclerosis with severe PAH was made. Laboratory tests showed a monoclonal spike of IgG-λ. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (34 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (34 U/L) and bilirubin levels (1 mg/dL) tested within normal ranges. N-terminal-pro hormone brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) tested positive for possible heart failure (4534 ng/L). Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease was ruled out as a cause of PAH by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Continuous intravenous treatment with epoprostenol was proposed but refused by the patient, who was therefore treated with a high dose of furosemide before starting a specific oral therapy for PAH. At first, suspecting PVOD, sildenafil 20 mg BID was prescribed and titrated to 20 mg TID over 1 month, without reported adverse effects. After this, macitentan was prescribed at 10 mg OD. After 1 month, a significant increase in AST (485 U/L) and ALT (451 U/L) levels was found on routine analyses. Macitentan therapy was therefore suspended, with a gradual decrease in levels of transaminases. Liver ultrasound and complete viral serology showed no signs of specific diseases.
After suspending macitentan administration, the patient’s clinical condition worsened and sildenafil was replaced with tadalafil 20 mg OD, which was then titrated to 40 mg OD. In February 2021, with normalization of levels of transaminases, selexipag therapy was introduced with slow titration. After 2 months, at the dose of 800 mcg BID with selexipag, AST and ALT levels were increased (201 and 232 U/L). Selexipag therapy was suspended, and RCAT was performed, resulting in the following: mean PAP of 62 mmHg, CI of 2.6 L/min/m2, RAP of 6 mmHg, and PVR of 12.7 WU. The implant of a subcutaneous pump for treprostinil infusion was proposed but refused by the patient. In May 2021, with normalization of levels of transaminases and after a pharmacogenetics consultation, ambrisentan was prescribed (5 mg/die) in association with tadalafil (40 mg/die).
After the last RCAT (PAP 42 mmHg, CI 3.5 l/min/mq, RAP 6 mmHg, PVR 7.7 UW), the patient started triple therapy, adding inhaled iloprost. To date, good control of PHA symptoms has been achieved in the patient, without signs of liver injury .
Genotyping of the patient (by real-time polymerase chain reaction using TaqMan probes) for SNPs associated with macitentan, ambrisentan, or selexipag metabolism found a genetic profile associated with a phenotype of poor metabolizer for both CYP2C8 and CYP2C9, key enzymes for both macitentan and selexipag elimination, and intermediate metabolism phenotype for UGT1A9, the key enzyme for ambrisentan metabolism .