A 64-year-old man presented to our hospital with abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) scan to investigate the cause of abdominal pain incidentally revealed multiple lung nodules. He had no history of malignant tumors. Thoracoabdominal CT revealed a solid tumor in the middle lobe of the right lung measuring 30 mm in diameter and multiple bilateral lung nodules less than 5 mm in size . Primary lung cancer or multiple lung metastases from a malignant tumor originating in another organ was suspected. Because the lesions were difficult to access via a transbronchial approach, core needle biopsy of the tumor in the middle lobe of the right lung was performed via thoracoscopy. Histopathological examination revealed atypical cells with intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions that formed papillary structures . In addition, immunohistochemical examination showed positive staining for thyroglobulin (Tg), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and PAX8, but negative staining for Napsin A . Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a metastasis of PTC.
Subsequently, the patient was closely examined for a primary lesion in the thyroid gland. Physical examination showed no palpable nodule on the neck. Although Tg antibody was positive, the serum Tg level was not elevated. Thyroid peroxidase antibody was negative [2.1 IU/mL (≤ 5.2)]. . Ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic nodule with an indistinct border measuring 0.9 × 0.5 cm in the right lobe of the thyroid gland . Multiple lung nodules showed strong uptake on 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), but no uptake was detected in the thyroid gland tumor . As fine needle aspiration cytology from the thyroid nodule demonstrated atypical cells with intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions and grooved nuclei, the nodule was diagnosed as PTC. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with PTMC with multiple lung metastases and underwent total thyroidectomy with central neck lymph node dissection.
Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed that the thyroid tumor in the right lobe was PTC 0.7 × 0.3 cm in size (pT1a) with metastases to the paratracheal lymph nodes (pN1a). Histopathological findings of the tumor in the right lobe and metastatic lymph nodes were consistent with those observed in the lung tumor . Extrathyroid extension to the perithyroid soft tissue was detected (pEx1). Extranodal extension of the metastatic lymph nodes was not detected. The histopathological stage was Stage IVB . Three months after the operation, the patient received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy after withdrawal of thyroid hormone therapy for three weeks. A total of 3700 MBq (100 mCi) of RAI was administered for the initial therapy, and then 131-I scintigraphy was performed eight days later. In 131-I scintigraphy following the first RAI therapy, an accumulation of 131-I was observed in the thyroid bed alone. However, in the 131-I scintigraphy following the second and third therapies a strong 131-I accumulation was observed in the metastatic lesion in the right lung with the same amount of RAI . The patient’s serum Tg level under TSH suppression did not change considerably when compared with that before the RAI treatment . He has been well with no signs of progression in the lung and other organs 25 months after the operation.