A 31-year-old Asian woman presented to our hospital with abdominal pain in her right lower quadrant. She had no fever, nausea, vomiting, anorexia or unusual vaginal discharge. Her menstruation cycle was regular, her volume of menstrual fluid was normal and she had no dysmenorrhea. She had no history of pregnancy. Her last menstrual period was four days prior to presentation. She had a history of a benign ovarian cyst, uterine leiomyoma and endometriosis. She had undergone a laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy six years previously and a laparoscopic uterine myomectomy one year previously. She had been intermittently taking oral contraceptive pills since her most recent post-operative period.
She exhibited tenderness at McBurney’s point, but her abdomen was soft and flat. Her vaginal examination and pelvic sonography revealed no abnormal findings. Her white blood cell count was 4280/mm3 with 57.0% segmented neutrophils, and her C-reactive protein level was 0.1mg/dL. Her urine analysis and abdominal X-rays showed no significant findings. Her abdominopelvic computed tomography scan demonstrated a 1.2cm-sized nodule at the appendiceal tip, but no other abnormal findings. We suspected acute appendicitis and performed an exploratory laparoscopy. Her appendix was enlarged at the tip portion. Also noted were blood-colored fluid collections in her pelvic cavity and bilateral ovarian cysts . Also observed on the pelvic peritoneum were several small whitish firm solid nodules, ranging from 0.5 to 1.0cm in size . We performed a laparoscopic appendectomy and obtained specimens of the peritoneal nodules for biopsy.
Macroscopically, her appendix was 4.0×0.5cm in size and exhibited an enlarged tip. The appendiceal serosa was mildly inflamed. A histological examination revealed foci of ectopic endometrial glands and stroma, embedded in fibrous stroma, with patchy aggregates of exuberant hemosiderin-laden histiocytes in the subserosal area and the muscularis propria of the appendiceal tip portion, confirming a diagnosis of appendiceal endometriosis . No suppuration, abscess formation or neoplasms were seen in the appendectomy specimen. The peritoneal excisional biopsy specimens were characterized by two circumscribed, but nonencapsulated, solid nodules, comprising of interlacing bundles of a fascicular proliferation of bland-looking, spindle-shaped, mature, smooth muscle cells , which were diffusely strongly immunoreactive for desmin . These peritoneal tumors exhibited no histological features of malignancy, with absence of any tumor cell coagulation necrosis, mitotic activity or nuclear atypia. As a result, they were diagnosed as LPD.
She had an uneventful clinical course and was discharged from our hospital on post-operative day five. She was followed up on for one year post-operatively, and no complications or abnormalities were observed. Her follow-up period is currently ongoing.