Thirty-year-old female, pregnant for 12 weeks. The couple is in good health and denies any family history of genetic diseases or close relatives having children. Working as a freelancer, with a history of non-toxic contact during pregnancy and taking teratogenic drugs, without taking additional folic acid. The fetal ultrasonography revealed multiple anomalies. These included the absence of the left upper limb, an unclear display of the right orbit, a visible maxillary space, and a round, echoless appearance measuring 4 mm in diameter in the middle of the forehead. Additionally, the sac wall exhibited a significant echo. The possibility of a frontal meningocele or a proboscis-like nose was considered. The woman was admitted to the hospital to have her pregnancy terminated, where she delivered a male fetus measuring 9 cm in length and 0.3 cm in plantar length. The fetus had a missing left upper limb, a protrusion on the left frontal area, a missing right eye, and a cleft lip. There was a milky white sac on the forehead with a diameter of 5 mm. Transparent, membrane-like tissue connected it to a longitudinal strip of tissue in the middle of the forehead. The white cyst was pathologically examined and diagnosed as a mature cystic teratoma. The fetal tissue was analyzed using a low-density microarray, and no clinically significant chromosome microdeletions or microduplications were detected. The conclusion was MLA after missing limbs, absence of eyes, and cleft lip were input into the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database. The case was diagnosed with fetal MLA and an interfrontal teratoma. The pregnant woman naturally became pregnant again one year after induced abortion, and the results of Down’s screening during early pregnancy were normal. No abnormalities were found during routine prenatal examinations. After 28 weeks of prenatal examination in our hospital, the newborn was delivered abroad and healthy.
This study was approved by the ethics committee with the patient’s consent and signed an informed consent form.