A 47-year-old man visited our hospital due to 1-month history of miction pain and back pain. Digital rectal examination revealed a goose-egg-sized, elastic, and hard prostate. Abdominal CT revealed a huge prostate mass with a volume of 220 mL extending to the left retroperitoneum . Serum sIL-2R, lactate dehydrogenase, and neuron-specific enolase levels were abnormally high (2896 U/mL, 833 U/L, and 42.6 ng/mL, respectively), whereas the patient's PSA level was normal at 1.065 ng/mL. HIV antigen and antibody tests were positive. A western blot test confirmed a positive HIV diagnosis. The patient was a man who had sex with men, but this was the first indication of HIV infection and he had no subjective symptoms such as fever. No cytopenia was observed (white blood cell, 6700/μL; hemoglobin, 12.9 g/dL; platelet, 29.1 × 104/μL). Laboratory examination revealed HIV-1 RNA of 1.9 × 105 copies/mL and CD4+ count of 58/μL.
Based on imaging findings and blood tests, we suspected malignant lymphoma of the prostate or atypical prostate cancer, such as small cell carcinoma. The patient underwent prostate biopsy 3 days after the first visit, and was diagnosed with DLBCL based on the following histopathological findings: a diffuse proliferation of large lymphoid cells was observed using hematoxylin and eosin staining , and immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for CD20 . The Ki-67 proliferation index was more than 80% . Epstein–Barr virus-encoded RNAs in situ hybridization was negative.
Two weeks after diagnosis, the patient complained of increasing back pain and abdominal pain. Whole-body CT was performed, which revealed rapid growth of lymphoma in the prostate and left retroperitoneum and development of left hydronephrosis and a colovesical fistula. Head and spine MRI revealed no intracranial or intraspinal lesions, respectively. The patient underwent left ureteral stenting and urethral catheterization. Serum sIL-2R level increased to 4383 U/mL. R-CHOP was administered as systemic chemotherapy immediately, and lesions of lymphoma had almost disappeared after two courses. Serum sIL-2R level decreased to 1161 U/mL. Tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine and dolutegravir were administered for HIV infection, resulting in undetectable HIV-1 RNA after 4 months. The patient had frequent febrile urinary tract infections during myelosuppression due to colovesical fistulas, but colostomy could not be performed because of prolonged low CD4 levels.
After three courses of R-CHOP, CT showed re-enlargement of lymphoma in the prostate and right common iliac region. Serum sIL-2R level re-increased to 1883 U/mL. R-ESHAP was administered 6 months after the diagnosis; however, after two courses, CT showed further enlargement of lymphoma in the prostate and right common iliac region and splenomegaly, and serum sIL-2R level increased to 2765 U/mL. Seven months after diagnosis, one course of R-GCD was administered. Eight months after the diagnosis, the patient was brought to the emergency room with impaired consciousness. Head CT revealed swelling, edema, and sulcal narrowing in the cerebral cortex, suggesting DLBCL infiltration of the central nervous system (CNS). In addition, abdominal CT showed invasion of the pelvic lesion into the sigmoid colon and rectum. He died 9 months after the diagnosis.