A 66-year-old woman consulted a hospital due both to a large tumor in her left breast and presumed spinal metastasis-induced lower limb paresthesia. Core needle biopsy to the breast tumor showed atypical cells growing in a papillary fashion in the mucous lake, leading to the diagnosis of breast mucinous carcinoma. The tumor showed high estrogen receptor positivity, i.e., Allred score of 8, low growing potential, i.e., Ki-labeling index of 10%, and human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 negativity. Onset of the paresthesia and the bleeding from the left breast cancer forced the attending physicians to treat the patient with tumorectomy of the intradural extramedullary tumor, 50 Gy radiotherapy to the left breast cancer, and systemic therapy using letrozole and palbociclib. Based on the request of the patient’s family, the patient was further referred to our hospital for the treatment of her metastatic breast cancer. At her first visit to our hospital, we found no paresthesia, no bleeding from the breast cancer, and total necrosis of the left breast with bacterial culture-proven Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infection . Removal of the necrotic breast tissue resulted in direct exposure of the left ribs and intercostal muscles , markedly deteriorating quality of life of the patient due to the onset of severe chest pain. Computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral multiple lung metastases . The largest pulmonary nodule seemed to infiltrate the right pulmonary hilum. We, therefore, judged the lung metastases to be life-threatening and converted the systemic therapy from letrozole plus palbociclib to bevacizumab plus paclitaxel, fortunately leading to marked regression of the lung metastases . Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infection continued even after the upfront therapies, i.e., removal of the necrotic left breast followed by bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy, in our hospital. After confirming marked regression of the multiple lung metastases, to improve quality of life of the patient, we decided to cover the exposed ribs and intercostal muscles with LD-MC flap for chest pain control and wound management. Although we did not perform a bacterial culture test just before surgery, we judged that Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infection continued to some extent on the rib periosteum and intercostal muscle surface based on local macroscopic findings. Before operation we obtained full informed consent about possible total flap loss because no reports had been made at that time concerning the MC flap grafting to the overtly infected recipient site. To cover the skin defect, spindly shaped skin island, 22 × 6 cm in size, on the back was harvested with the LD muscle and was moved onto the skin defect area after resecting the exposed left 4th rib and removing the two swollen axillary lymph nodes . LD-MC flap grafting to the skin defect brought about immediate, i.e., when the patient became fully conscious after awaking from anesthesia, pain relief to the patient. The patient had required oral morphine and loxoprofen for pain control before surgery, but no longer needed pain relievers after surgery. Pathological evaluation of the sampled axillary lymph nodes showed no viable cancer cells in the mucous lakes widely prevailing in the nodes. Skin island showed no problems for 4 days just after the operation but thereafter gradually turned out to be edematous to ill-colored in the distal part, i.e., approximately 1/5 area, of the flap skin . The patient eventually developed partial skin necrosis of the LD-MC flap and required 11 months for complete wound healing under conservative wound management . The patient has been well on fulvestrant and palbociclib therapy for 14 months after palliative chest wall covering surgery with no progression of the lung metastases.