A 35-year-old woman, gravida 2 para 1, with no significant medical history presented with vertigo at around 11 weeks of pregnancy and gradually became unable to walk. At 15 weeks of gestation, she was diagnosed with vestibular disorder by a local otolaryngologist. She was hospitalized and treated with steroids, but her symptoms did not improve. When she was 30 weeks and 4 days pregnant, her symptoms worsened and she could not walk. She was then referred to our institute for further evaluation and treatment.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 5.6 cm cystic lesion with a mural nodule in the right cerebellar hemisphere and the lesion blocked cerebrospinal fluid drainage from the fourth ventricle and brainstem, resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus [-].
After obtaining the patient’s consent, a multidisciplinary team consisting of obstetricians and neurosurgeons decided to perform resection of the intracranial lesion following delivery of the fetus by emergency cesarean section in view of the symptoms of increased intracranial pressure. The patient underwent tumor resection through a suboccipital small craniotomy in the three-quarter position following external ventricular drainage. Indocyanine green video angiography showed the location of a vascular nodule thorough the dura and the mural nodule was identified directly underneath. Following cyst decompression and tumor resection without resecting cystic capsule, it was confirmed that the cerebellum had become slack and pulsation was observed [-]. The surgery was completed without any problems. Histopathological examination of the specimen confirmed hemangioblastoma .
The patient recovered from general anesthesia and was extubated the next day. Postoperatively, the patient continued to experience dizziness and general malaise, but her symptoms resolved spontaneously with continued symptomatic treatment with oral medication. Postoperative brain MRI revealed that the tumor had been removed with no obvious residual tumor and the hydrocephalus had improved [-]. The patient and neonate’s general condition was confirmed to be stable and she was discharged home on the 16th day of her hospitalization without any neurological deficit and with the newborn in good condition at discharge. As for the mother, postoperative imaging studies confirmed the absence of other cerebrospinal hemangiomas, retinal hemangiomas, renal cell carcinoma, adrenal tumors, and pancreatic tumors, which were negative for Von HippelLindau disease. As for the fetus, the child was not subjected to an aggressive systemic examination because he was only 2 weeks old at the discharge. At her follow-up examination 3 months postoperatively, there was no recurrence of symptoms, hydrocephalus, or tumor regrowth.