A 12-year-old girl presented with a 4-month history of recurring epigastric pain. The pain worsened when she was hungry and improved after eating. She appeared to have clinical signs of anemia with paleness but an overall stable condition.
The initial complete blood count (CBC) test revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia (Hgb 8.8 g/dL, MCV 70 fL, MCH 23.4 pg). Iron studies indicated significantly low serum iron (2.13 μg/dL) and ferritin levels (4.51 ng/mL), suggesting iron deficiency anemia. Based on these suggesting gastric disease findings, the child underwent an upper gastrointestinal endoscopic exam with the following results: esophagus, duodenal bulb: normal mucosa, gastric body: infiltrating, indurated lesions originating beneath the mucosal layer at the cardia region, occupying nearly 2/3 of the cardia. The surface shows shallow ulcers and there was blood clot at the ulcer base. The stomach contains a small amount of blackish blood .
Four biopsy samples were taken for histology and IHC. The result of the Campylobacter-like organism (CLO) test was negative. Additionally, there is no detection of H. pylori in 4 gastric biopsy samples.
The gastric endoscopic biopsy sample consists of 4 small fragments: 2 fragments showed inflammatory mucosal lining changes, with excessive proliferation of lymphocytes. The other 2 exhibit images of a tumor in the connective tissue, consisting of medium-sized cells with basophilic nuclei and scant cytoplasm. The tumor cells appear uniform with distinct nuclei and scattered areas of necrosis. The tumor cells have invaded into the muscularis mucosae, submucosal tissue, and glands. There is increased vascularity, and in some areas, there are signs of cellular enlargement and death of cells . IHC results were as follows: CD20: positive LCA: positive Ki67: positive (10%) CD21, CD35, CD23, CD10, CD5, CD3, CKAE1/AE3, MUM1, Bcl6, CD5 and cyclin D1: negative. The result concluded gastric MALT lymphoma .
The bilateral bone marrow biopsies were normal. Whole-body CT scan: stomach: thickened lesions were detected in the antrum region. The thickened wall is approximately 21 mm in height and extends over a segment of about 71 mm. This area has a slight contrast uptake and is not uniform. No other abnormalities relevant to other organs were found . CEA: 0.306 ng/mL, CA19-9: 4.37 U/mL, liver and renal function, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), electrolytes were normal. We do not have resources to check the presence of trisomy 3, a BCL10 gene mutation, and/or t(11;18), which may identify people less likely to benefit from therapy directed at H. pylori. According to Lugano staging system for gastrointestinal lymphomas , along with the negative result of Helicobacter test, the patient was diagnosed with stage I Helicobacter pylori-negative gastric MALT lymphoma.
We commenced treatment according to treatment algorithm for localized gastric MZL (European Society for Medical Oncology – ESMO) . We administered Helicobacter pylori eradication therapy regardless of the Helicobacter pylori status, including a combination of metronidazole, amoxicillin, bismuth, and PPI for 4 weeks. Additionally, oral iron therapy was initiated at a dosage of 5 mg/kg of elemental iron per day.
Two weeks after the therapy, the abdominal pain was completely relieved, with improved lips and mucosa coloration, and could perform regular activities. The hemoglobin level raised to 10.6 g/dL, although the Fe/ferritin levels were still low (3.81 μg/dL and 9.03 ng/mL). The gastroscopy revealed mildly rigid lesions in the antrum. These signs indicated a clinical and endoscopic response. We continue iron therapy afterward targeting the ideal level of Hb, serum iron, ferritin level and monitor the patient closely. After the next 3 weeks, the patient underwent endoscopy with result of high-grade glandular dysplasia.
After the next 1 month, the abdominal pain recurred but with reduced intensity compared to the initial time. The patient received treatment with Phosphalugel at home before being readmitted to the hospital for a follow-up examination. Endoscopy revealed a sizable ulcer #4 cm on the body, extending close to the pylorus, exhibiting a whitish pseudomembrane, swollen edges, and a tendency to bleed. Histopathology and IHC illustrated MALT lymphoma. We evaluated the child’s failure with initial treatment and decided on radiation therapy.
Involved site radiotherapy with the low dose of 30 Gy in 15 fractions was used for definitive treatment. There was no side effect found. Treatment response to radiotherapy was assessed at 1 and every 3 months by follow-up EGDs.
Endoscopy of the stomach after finishing irradiation therapy 1 and 3 months and 6 months: There were small scars with slight constriction near the pylorus and no signs of bleeding with negative CLO test result . The patient will have a follow-up at intervals of 3 months. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).