A 57-year-old Caucasian man with a seven-year history of hepatitis B virus infection was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of a GB polyp. The abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed the presence of a well-defined polypoid mass of approximately 12 × 8 mm in his GB fossa . No evidence of biliary dilatation was noted, and there was no ascites. No image of stones was documented .
On examination, there was no pertinent medical or surgical history, and our patient was asymptomatic and showed no evidence of jaundice. An abdominal examination revealed no tenderness or abnormal mass. The results of laboratory assessments (complete blood count and serum chemistry panel) on admission were normal. On the basis of these data, a pre-operative diagnosis of a single polypoid lesion of the GB (PLG) of larger than 1 cm was made and a laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed.
On gross inspection, the GB measured 6 cm and no evidence of stones in our patient's lumen was found. However, a polypoid, yellowish lesion, measuring 11 × 8 mm, was found between the body and the neck of his GB. Histologically, his tumor was composed of monomorphic cells containing small, round nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. His cells were organized in small nodular, trabecular, or acinar structures surrounded by a richly vascularized stroma but showed no mitotic structures . Immunohistochemical studies revealed that his cells were negative for cytokeratin, vimentin, and CD-31 and CD-34 . His staining results were positive for tumor cell granules of synaptophysin and chromogranin A (CgA) . Histologically, his GB lesion presented as an NET, and the final diagnosis of "typical carcinoid" was made.
Post-operatively, our patient underwent a total body computed tomography (CT) scan and bone scintigraphy and the results were normal. The results of his 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy, which is used to detect cells with somatostatin receptors, were also normal. His blood levels of glucagon, serotonin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, somatostatin, and gastrin were normal, as were his 24-hour urinary levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and CgA. After an uneventful recovery, our patient was discharged in good condition, and he is disease-free 45 months after surgical treatment.