A 71-year-old female presented with general fatigue, leg oedema and impaired glucose tolerance. Her medical history included Graves’ disease, colon polyp, sarcoidosis and uveitis following glucocorticoid treatment. Upon hospitalisation, she exhibited weight gain, central obesity, moon facies, proximal muscle weakness and elevated ACTH (192.9 pg/mL, normal range, 7.2–63.3 pg/mL), cortisol (73.1 μg/dL; normal range, 6.4–21.0 μg/dL) and 24-h UFC levels (6160 μg/day; normal range, 11.2–80.3 μg/day). Normal diurnal variation of cortisol was lost. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed an empty sella with no pituitary adenoma. Chest computed tomography (CT) identified a solid tumour of 26.6 mm × 22.9 mm × 30.0 mm in size with a cavity in the upper lobe of the left lung . There was no adrenal gland enlargement. Vanillylmandelic acid (7.9 ng/mL; normal range, 3.3–8.6 ng/mL) and homovanillic acid (10.5 ng/mL; normal range, 4.4–15.1 ng/mL) levels were not elevated. Tumour makers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, CA 125, cytokeratin-19 fragments (CYFRA 21-1), sialyl Lewis X (SLX), squamous cell carcinoma antigen, pro-gastrin-releasing peptide and neuron-specific enolase, were not significantly elevated.
To differentiate between Cushing disease and EAS, an overnight 8-mg dexamethasone suppression test was performed. ACTH and cortisol levels were 184.8 pg/mL and 76.5 μg/dL, respectively, before the administration of dexamethasone. ACTH and cortisol levels 12 h after suppression with 8-mg dexamethasone were 176.7 pg/mL and 67.2 μg/dL, respectively. Lack of suppression of ACTH and cortisol by 8-mg dexamethasone is consistent with that with EAS. A corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation test revealed a blunted response of ACTH (basal ACTH, 204.6 pg/mL; highest ACTH level during the 120-min stimulation test, 214.0 pg/mL). According to these findings, the patient was diagnosed with EAS due to a lung lesion. MTP treatment was started to reduce cortisol production on the first day of hospitalisation (day 1).
On day 3, because cortisol levels fell below the normal range (2.8 μg/dL), hydrocortisone treatment was started for supplementation. On the same day, the patient developed pneumonia and pleural effusion. C-reactive protein and beta-d-glucan levels were elevated to 23.85 and 69.6 mg/dL (normal range for beta-D-glucan, 0–20 mg/dL), respectively, whereas the patient’s white blood cell count was normal (8300/μL). Imipenem/cilastatin (1 g/day, days 3–12) and caspofungin acetate (50 mg/day, days 5–20) were administered as antimicrobial and antifungal treatments, respectively.
On day 14, CT detected enlargement of the lung tumour to a 5-cm-diameter mass (Additional file : Figure S1). Along with enlargement of the lung tumour, ACTH levels increased to 358.5 pg/mL, with no elevation of cortisol due to MTP treatment. Therefore, the nodular lesion was considered an ACTH-producing tumour. Surprisingly, on day 19, her serum ACTH level decreased to 62.4 pg/mL, concurrently with the decline of the serum cortisol content. On day 39, serum ACTH levels were temporarily elevated to 376.3 pg/mL; however, the levels returned to the normal range. Gallium scintigraphy (67Ga-citrate) revealed a positive signal in the same location as the lung lesion .
Brush cytology using bronchoscopy showed only few neutrophils, dust cells, ciliated columnar cells, and squamous cells, and no malignant findings were found. Second, CT-guide biopsy was performed. Histological examination showed organising pneumonia-like reaction, thickening alveolar wall due to fibrosis, and accumulating histiocytes in the alveoli. Malignant findings were not found even at this time. Fungus were not found by Periodic acid-Schiff and Grocott staining. Subsequently, we tried CT-guided lung biopsy. However, the specimen did not include the lung tissue and only included pleura and muscles of the chest wall.
Surgical treatment was considered, but ACTH levels remained normal (28.6–48.2 pg/mL) together with suppressed cortisol, regression of the lung nodule and disappearance of the pleural effusion. No tumour cells were revealed by bronchoscopy and CT-guided lung biopsy. Hypokalaemia and hyperglycaemia were also improved. Therefore, surgery was cancelled. She was discharged 6 weeks after admission. Six months after admission, CT revealed a small residual lesion in the lungs and somatostatin scintigraphy (111In-Pentetreotide) identified no accumulation of the positive signal . She had good intervention adherence and tolerability with no adverse or unanticipated events. We have carefully observed the patient for the recurrence of CS.