We describe a 43 year old African American male who presented with a generalized rash of sudden onset, with intense pruritus and umbilicated vesiculopustules over the entire body. The patient had been treated for previously diagnosed psoriasis with methotrexate and prednisone. The eruption continued to spread for 7-10 days and was associated with high temperature, malaise, and lymphadenopathy. Two punch biopsies were taken, with one placed into Michel's transport medium (Newcomer Supply Laboratories, Middleton, Wisconsin, USA) and the second into 10% buffered formalin.
Tissue examination demonstrated multilevel blistering of the epidermis, with some re-epithelialization of the blister base also present . Isolated areas of the epidermis displayed suprabasal blistering. In addition, focal areas of the epidermis displayed ballooning of keratinocytes, with margination of cell chromatin present and occasional multinucleated cells seen. Eosinophilic inclusions were noted within selected keratinocytes. Within the blister lumen, numerous neutrophils and occasional eosinophils were present. No evidence of a neoplastic process was seen. The dermis displayed a mild, superficial, perivascular infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes and occasional neutrophils and eosinophils.
For DIF, four micron thick skin cryosections were prefixed in paraformaldehyde, rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 6.8) and incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) in a solubilization buffer (PBS with 0.5% Triton X-100), and then rinsed. After blocking with PBS including 0.01%-Tween 20 (polysorbate 20) and 0.5% bovine serum albumin, the sections were incubated with antisera for one hour. We used FITC-conjugated rabbit antisera against fibrinogen and albumin at a 1:40 dilution. We also utilized FITC-conjugated rabbit anti-human IgG (gamma chain) and IgA (alpha chain) antisera (both 1:20 dilutions) and FITC conjugated rabbit anti-human IgM (Mu-chain) antiserum, all purchased from Dako (Carpinteria, California, USA). We also used goat anti-human IgE (epsilon-chain) antiserum, conjugated anti-junctional adhesion molecule (JAM-A) antibody (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA) (recognizing type I transmembrane glycoproteins of the immunoglobulin superfamily localized within tight junctions). As a secondary antibody, we utilized Texas red-conjugated sheep anti-mouse IgG (H & L) antiserum (Rockland Immunochemicals, Inc., Gilbertsville, Pennsylvania, USA) at 1:100 dilution. We used mouse anti-ezrin antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor; 647 (Invitrogen). We also used Cy3 conjugated anti-human glial fibrillary acidic protein(GFAP) (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA).Finally, the sections were examined with a Nikon Eclipse 50i microscope (Tokyo, Japan) using a Xenon arc light (XBO 75W) as the light source and a plane achromatic (PL Apo) × 40/0.80 dry objective. The fluorescent staining was graded as follows: - (negative), ± (doubtful), + (weak), ++ (moderate), and +++ (bright). In , we show several DIF findings, including positive staining for JAM-A in the area of the blister. In addition, we demonstrate strong staining with ezrin and positive intercellular staining (ICS) between the basal keratinocytes, simultaneously with staining against the basement membrane zone (BMZ) of the skin.
To study correlation of the herpes virus infection with our JAM-A and ezrin DIF data, we performed IHC utilizing a Dako dual endogenous peroxidase blockage system, with the addition of an Envision dual link. We followed Dako technical instructions for staining. We applied 3, 3 diaminobenzidine (DAB) as an IHC chromogen, and counterstained with hematoxylin. We tested for varizella zoster antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, California, USA), as well as for herpes virus 1 and 2(both from Dako). Immunoblotting and ELISA were performed as previously described.
highlights our IHC results, including the compartmentalization of vimentin around several skin appendices where the DIF autoreactivty was detected. The degree of compartmentalization of vimentin by IHC parallels the deposition of immunoglobulins, complement and other immunosurfactants (such as fibrinogen) by DIF.