A 4-year-old previously healthy boy presented with a 3-week history of progressive gait
difficulties. He was observed to have gait incoordination for a few days before he started
complaining of neck and lower extremity pain. On the day of presentation, he was unable to
move his legs upon awakening. There was no history of bladder or bowel dysfunction. Family
members confirmed that he had not been recently ill or received any recent vaccinations. On
examination, he was alert and oriented. He did not have any cranial nerve deficits. He had
full upper extremity strength with the exception of mild bilateral grip weakness. He did not
have any antigravity movements in the lower extremities. His sensory examination was
remarkable for minimal withdrawal to pain bilaterally, increased tone in the left lower
extremity, a right hemisensory deficit (to light touch) up to second thoracic dermatomes,
and diminished pain sensation in both lower extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were 3+ at
quadriceps, and sustained clonus was noted at the left ankle along with bilaterally positive
Babinski reflex. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neuroaxis showed an abnormal
appearance of the cervical and thoracic spinal cord with expansion and irregular areas of
enhancement . Initial MRI
brain was unremarkable . Routine serum and cerebrospinal fluid studies were performed to look for
infectious, autoimmune, inflammatory, and neoplastic etiologies. Routine cerebrospinal fluid
studies showed a WBC count of 20/μL (66% lymphocyte), 1 RBC, glucose of 30 mg/dL, and
protein of 5875 mg/dL. Infectious workup (including HSV, HHV6, enterovirus, EBV, mycoplasma,
Bartonella polymerase chain reactions, and screening tests for tuberculosis) was
unremarkable. Autoimmune (ANA, anticardiolipin, antiphospholipids) and central nervous
system inflammatory workup (MS profile, AQ4 Ab, ACE level ) were also unrevealing.
Cerebrospinal fluid flow cytometry did not show abnormal cells. Given the difficulty in
determining an exact onset of symptoms and that apparent abruptness of loss of function, a
biopsy was deferred, and on hospital day 2, the patient was started on high-dose intravenous
methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg/d) which was continued for a total of 7 days. On the third day
of admission, the patient developed respiratory failure requiring intubation and mechanical
ventilation along with further progression of muscle weakness in upper extremities. Given
the lack of response to treatment, a thoracic cord biopsy was performed (hospital day 4).
Preliminary pathological examination was indeterminate, requiring consultation with outside
pathologists and taking several weeks for a definitive diagnosis. Therefore, the patient was
started on a steroid taper, received intravenous immunoglobulin, and underwent plasma
exchange without significant improvement, due to a remote possibility of the lesion being
autoimmune. After several weeks, the pathology specimen examination revealed the diagnosis
of diffuse midline glioma (World Health Organization [WHO] grade IV; ). Radiation and chemotherapy with temozolomide
and bevacizumab (Avastin) were initiated. Subsequently, the child regained some upper
extremity muscle power (coinciding with some improvement in spinal imaging showed in ), but still remained profoundly
weak in his lower extremities. The patient also required a tracheostomy to maintain the
airway but died within 4 months after diagnosis as a result of intracranial spread of this
metastatic disease .