A 36-year-old healthy man developed fever and right cervical lymphadenopathy. Laboratory analysis showed elevated white blood count (10,390/mm3 with 33% neutrophil, 51% lymphocyte, and 12% atypical lymphocytes), elevated liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase, 193 U/l; alanine transaminase, 413 U/l). Serological studies indicated primary EBV infection (EBV viral capsid antigen [VCA] IgM, positive at 1:40; EBV VCA IgG, positive at 1:160, EBV nuclear antigen IgG, negative). Serologic testing for human immunodeficiency virus antibody was negative. Based on these clinical features, the patient was diagnosed with IM due to primary EBV infection. However, 8 days after onset, the patient developed paresthesia of bilateral lower extremities and urinary retention, which were exacerbated over the next few days. The patient was alert and oriented but had a high fever of 38.5 °C. Neurological examination revealed normal cranial nerves and no weakness in limbs; however, unstable gait with hyperreflexia, sensory disturbance in the entire area below the T7 level, and dysuria that required urethral catheterization were present. Laboratory analysis showed normal white blood count and decreasing liver enzyme levels. Antinuclear and SS-A antibody levels were within normal limits. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed pleocytosis (76/mm3), protein concentration of 104.3 mg/dl, IgG index of 0.61, the absence of oligoclonal IgG bands. In addition, IgG and IgM antibodies to EBV VCA and polymerase chain reaction for EBV DNA were negative in the CSF. These findings excluded the direct presence of EBV in the CNS. Additionally, polymerase chain reaction for herpes simplex virus 1, herpes simplex virus 2, and varicella-zoster virus DNA were negative in the CSF. IgG and IgM antibodies to cytomegalovirus were negative in the CSF. These findings excluded viral myelitis. Spinal MRI showed a T2-hyperintense lesion predominantly in the central gray matter extending from C2 to C6 . Brain MRI showed a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery-hyperintense lesion in the left posterior limb of the internal capsule . Nerve conduction studies of the left upper and lower extremities showed normal motor and sensory function. Cell-based immunoassays revealed positivity for anti-MOG antibody with a titer of 1:1024 and negativity for anti-AQP4 antibody . Therefore, the patient was started on immunosuppressive therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) for 3 consecutive days, followed by oral betamethasone (2 mg/day). The gadolinium-enhanced spinal MRI after the start of therapy revealed slight gadolinium enhancement of the conus medullaris surface . However, shortly after IVMP initiation, his symptoms demonstrated significant improvement, and urethral catheter was removed 9 days after the start of IVMP. His sensory disturbance and gait instability was completely resolved 2 weeks after IVMP initiation. Oral betamethasone was tapered following IVMP, and he was discharged without any symptoms or sequelae. Follow-up MRI 1 month after IVMP showed reduction in all CNS lesions. Anti-MOG antibody titer at the 6-month follow-up was negative. No symptomatic recurrence was observed during follow-up evaluation at 11 months after onset. Clinical course, the CSF and MRI findings, and the response to immunosuppressive therapy were most consistent with the diagnosis of anti-MOG antibody-positive ADEM [, ].