We report the case of a 35 year-old female who presented in January 2013 with a single painless, erythematous, central ulcerated, nodular lesion with a diameter of approximately 2 cm on her left forearm (Figure a). The patient has a Moroccan family background, but was born and grew up in Germany, and moved in 2006 to the region of Granada in Spain. Within the same year a cutaneous lesion started to appear as an erythematous spot which developed over the following seven years to the current presentation in the absence of systemic symptoms such as fever, weight loss or fatigue. Various topical treatments were without significant effect, swab cultures from the ulcer showed only bacteria of the normal skin flora. We could confirm the diagnosis of OWCL from a small biopsy sample by positive smears (Figure b), and histology revealed large amounts of leishmania amastigotes in subepidermal histiocytes and extensive lymphocyte and plasma cell inflammation (Figure c and d). PCR diagnostic showed a restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) pattern of L. donovani/L. infantum complex in an in-house assay
. Further differentiation was performed at a German reference center (Dr. Gabriele Schönian, Institute of Microbiology and Hygiene, Humboldt University, Charité, Berlin) using microsatellite-PCR (Marker LIST7039) confirming L. infantum as the causative pathogen. Systemic involvement or visceral leishmaniasis was excluded by negative serological markers (ELISA, IFT, immunoblot) using L. infantum as antigen, absence of systemic clinical symptoms including absence of lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly in ultrasound diagnostic. Concomitant disease or immunosuppression were excluded by laboratory parameters including normal values for haematology, clinical organ chemistry, plasma protein and quantitative immunoglobulin levels, normal absolute and relative values in lymphocyte phenotyping for T-cell, B-cell and NK cell populations, negative serological testing for HIV, syphilis, hepatitis B and C. No other skin lesions were present, sandfly exposure and family history of similar lesions was not obtained. Although, the patient regularly travelled to Morocco the infection was probably acquired in Spain since the last travel to Morocco had been more than 1 year before onset
After a thorough discussion with the patient about therapeutic alternatives such as cryotherapy, topical antimony therapy, or systemic chemotherapy, it was decided to perform a total excision of the lesion in local anaesthesia, taking into consideration its small size and long duration as well as an imminent business trip of the patient. Follow-up visits after 11 months showed complete healing with a minimal residual scar.