A 71-year-old obese man (body mass index, 25.1) was admitted to Nippon Medical School Hospital for the treatment of sigmoid colon cancer (cT3, N0, stage IIa: JSCCR classification, ninth edition). He had no history of abdominal surgery. He underwent multi-port conventional laparoscopic sigmoidectomy with a transection of the root of inferior mesenteric artery (D3). Most dissecting procedures were performed with monopolar electrocautery. Regardless of abundant visceral fat, omentum was relatively thin and partially transparent without any adhesion to the abdominal wall and adjacent organs. No obvious omental damage was observed during the mobilization and the take-down of splenic flexure was not required for tension-free anastomosis using a double stapling technique. Mesocolic defect was not repaired; however, any omental hiatus was not visualized at the end of the surgery. The operation time was 221 min and the estimated blood loss was 7 ml. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 8 without any abnormality in laboratory data.
He visited our emergency outpatient unit because of abdominal pain and nausea on postoperative day 12. His vital signs were not abnormal, such as 36.7 °C of body temperature, 159/80 mm/Hg of blood pressure, 77 beats per minute of heart rate, 18 breath per minute of respiratory rate, and 99% of oxygen saturation with pulse oximetry at room air. Physical examination revealed a distended abdomen with periumbilical pain without rebound tenderness. Laboratory investigation showed an increased white blood cell count (14,900/mm3) and LDH (247 U/L) and normal levels of C-reactive protein (0.03 mg/dl) and creatinine (1.05 mg/dl). A simple abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a closed loop and mesenteric edema of the small intestine with ascites, which strongly indicated strangulated bowel obstruction . We decided to move to an immediate surgery based on this CT and physical findings without contrast enhancement.
An emergency operation with a midline incision revealed internal herniation of nonviable small bowel through an omental defect with hemorrhagic ascites . The omental defect was approximately 3 cm in diameter. The incarcerated small bowel was released by dividing the omentum. A 50-cm-long section of incarcerated small bowel approximately 150 cm proximal to the ileocolic junction was resected and reconstructed with functional end-to-end anastomosis because the ischemic change was irreversible after the reduction. We resected the part of the omentum that had formed the defect. The patient’s postoperative progress was good, white blood cell count and LDH improved gradually after the surgery, and they were normal levels on postoperative day 3. He was discharged on postoperative day 8. At the 17-month follow-up consultation, the patient had no complaints, and his intestinal transit had been re-established.