The 23-year-old Caucasian male patient, with advanced lumbar scoliosis of J-shaped convexity toward the left (toward the ureter with stone) and paraplegia, presented with high fever and disordered general status. Inspection found the patient was pale and tired, and physical examination found left costa-vertebral and left abdominal sensitivity. Family history was unremarkable.
At the first visit, height and weight of the patient were 165 cm and 74 kg, respectively. Blood pressure was 117/84 mmHg, heart rate was 95 beats/minute, and body temperature was 38.3 °C. The patient had no history of smoking or drinking. On physical examination, he had a lower-extremity developmental and neurological defect that prevented him from walking. He had used ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day before presenting to us.
The patient first had routine biochemical blood and urine analyses, including WBC, CRP, creatinine, urine analysis, and urine culture/antibiogram, and urinary USG and non-contrast full abdominal tomography were requested for imaging. CRP and WBC values were high (320 g/L, 17 × 103, respectively). Urine analysis revealed microscopic hematuria with red blood cells (RBC) 10–15/high-power field (hpf) and microscopic leukocyturia with white blood cells (WBC) 20–25/hpf.
Blood creatinine, liver functions, and other biochemical tests showed no problem. Urinary system ultrasonography and noncontrast full abdominal tomography identified a 15 × 8 mm2 stone in the left upper ureter and linked grade 2 hydronephrosis. Firstly, we wished to insert a DJ stent under general anesthesia with the aim of providing urinary drainage for the left kidney. However, the guide wire could not progress past the lower ureter (probably due to tortuosity), so the patient was turned to prone position in the same session (the interval from costal margin to CIAS was very narrow), and the posterior lower calyx of the kidney was entered with 18G needle through this narrow interval accompanied by ultrasound and a 14F percutaneous nephrostomy catheter was inserted . A sample of material coming from the nephrostomy was sent for culture-antibiogram tests. From these, Escherichia coli proliferated. As a result of the culture antibiogram, the multidrug-resistant bacterial agent was sensitive to the carbapenem group, and 1 g meropenem treatment 3 times a day was given in the hospital for a total of 10 days. After appropriate antibiotic treatment, nephrostomy and bladder urine were identified to be free of biological agents. Then, after receiving patient consent, RIRS was planned with a flexible ureterorenoscope. The patient was administered general anesthesia and then placed in dorsal lithotomy position. The bladder was reached with a 7.5 rigid ureterorenoscope, and a guide wire was sent into the right ureter. The lower tip of the ureter was dilated with the rigid ureterorenoscope. As the access sheath could not progress above the guide wire, the kidney was reached directly with the flexible ureterorenoscope. The stone was at the upper tip of the ureter and was fragmented with Ho:YAG laser (1 J power, 10 Hz frequency). At the end of the procedure, a DJ stent was inserted. The nephrostomy catheter was removed. The procedure was ended. There were no complications in the peri- or postoperative period. He stayed in the hospital for two nights and one day postoperatively. He was discharged on the second postoperative day. The patient had the DJ stent removed at the end of the fourth week. No problem was observed in the left kidney at 1, 3, and 6 months after DJ stent removal.