A 63-year-old man with a history of hypertension presented with a moderate headache lasting 1 week. Fifteen years ago, he had a mild headache and had a computed tomography (CT) of the brain at another hospital and it was evaluated as normal. This time, CT of the brain revealed a high-density mass and surrounding well-defined low density area in the left frontal lobe . In addition, edema formation was found in the surrounding brain parenchyma of the high-density mass. CT angiography (CTA) revealed a partially contrasted aneurysm with an intraluminal thrombus arising from the left distal anterior cerebral artery and three-dimensional (3D)-CTA revealed a lobulated large aneurysm . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also revealed the homogeneous signal change in the left frontal lobe surrounding the aneurysm, as shown by hyperintensity on T2 weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image stronger than the PAE. A part of the surrounding signal change and the aneurysm presented low intensity on T2 star (T2*)-weighted image . The major axis of the aneurysm including the thrombotic part was about 20 mm . MR angiography also revealed a large lobulated aneurysm . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and 3D-DSA revealed two saccular aneurysms located at the genu portion of the bilateral anterior cerebral artery (ACA) with domes pressed together [-], one with a diameter of 14 mm arising from the left ACA and the other of 5mm arising from the right ACA with blebs. Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal (clear and colorless, three mononuclear cells per microliter, 47 mg/dL protein). He agreed to undergo an operation clipping both aneurysms to prevent rupture.
Coronal incision and bifrontal craniotomy were made and to dissect the interhemispheric fissure. First, the proximal arteries of bilateral ACA were secured in case of unexpected rupture. Second, an attempt was made to separate the aneurysms, but the complete separation could not be achieved because the aneurysms were tightly adhered and the risk of rupture was assumed to be very high. Most of the left thrombosed aneurysm buried in the frontal lobe and a thin brain parenchyma attached around the neck was incised, a slight yellowish serous fluid was drained . There was no hematoma component and deposition of hemosiderin was observed surrounding brain parenchyma. By draining the serous fluid, the space for inserting clips was secured. There were no findings abnormal thinning and suggestive of rupture in the aneurysm wall that could be observed. Clips were applied to each aneurysm along the visual axis of the surgical field, and the large aneurysm on the left was a broad neck, so multiple clips were applied in parallel . Finally, obliteration of the aneurysms and patency of the parent arteries and the branches were confirmed by venous infusion of the indocyanine green . Biochemical examination of the serous fluid revealed elevated protein levels (115 mg/dL).
The postoperative course was uneventful. His headache was improved the day after the surgery, and CT scans revealed disappearance of perianeurysmal signal changes except for the PAE . Postoperative DSA and 3D-DSA revealed obliteration of both aneurysms [-]. He was discharged with no neurological deficit 10 days after the surgery. A follow-up MRI performed 6 months after the operation showed improvement of the PAE [ and ].