A 74-year-old retired Caucasian man sustained a large contusion at the base of his skull as a result of a fall at home. He presented with head trauma at 2:30 PM at his local acute care hospital in Canada (level III/IV trauma center serving a catchment population of approximately 120,000 people). The patient was taking several medications, including rosuvastatin calcium for cholesterol, hydrochlorothiazide for blood pressure and dual anti-platelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel for previous transient ischemic attacks.
The patient was triaged at 4:00 PM, and a neck collar was applied. He was moved to an emergency room bed at 4:29 PM. At 4:50 PM, he was seen by the emergency room physician. Upon admission, he was alert and responsive, and his vital signs (body temperature, 35.5°C; heart rate, 77 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; blood pressure, 149/96 mmHg; oxygen saturation, 95%) were stable. A neurological assessment revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 15/15. His pupils were equal, round and reactive to light. In his extremities, strength, reflexes and sensation were normal and symmetrical. He had no pronator drift, no abnormal cerebellar signs and no abnormal Babinski reflex.
Given the mechanism of his injury, history of amnesia, emesis and clopidogrel use, a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the patient’s head was ordered at 4:55 PM. A large, subcutaneous hematoma extending from the posterior parietal occipital region to the upper neck was noted. He had a right-sided subdural hematoma extending from the occipital through to the frontal lobe and superoinferiorly from the convexity down to the temporal lobe region. He had an acute hemorrhage along the falx and tentorium and a crescenteric focus of hemorrhage in the left frontal and anterior parietal region extending inferiorly to the temporal region. Minimal effacement of the sulci and lateral ventricle on the right side were noted. His basal cisterns were maintained, and no evidence of blood was found in the suprasellar or quadrigeminal plate cistern. No definite parenchymal hematoma was identified. The radiologist made a diagnosis of acute subdural hematoma on the basis of the CT scan at 5:00 PM. The attending physician requested an immediate transfer to the neurosurgical service at the nearby tertiary trauma center (level I/II), situated 30 minutes away. The neurosurgical resident on call at the trauma center initially refused the transfer until he had time to review the CT images. The patient’s condition slowly deteriorated while awaiting treatment, and he became unconscious at 7:45 PM that evening. He was unresponsive, his pupils did not react to light and he had no response to pain. He was given mannitol to his lower intracerebral pressure, and he was intubated. He was approved for transfer at 8:34 PM. The patient was seen by the consultant neurosurgeon at 9:30 PM, but surgery (craniotomy) was deemed not viable, given the patient’s age and the fact that his pupils were now fixed and dilated (GCS score 3/15).
The patient was taken off life support at 1:00 AM the next morning, and he died approximately 15 minutes later. The autopsy report from the medical examiner stated that the patient’s cause of death was trauma as a result of a fall at home. The neuropathological findings were as follows: subdural hemorrhage, predominately right-sided with marked right-to-left midline shift; subfalcine and transtentorial herniation; intracerebral white matter hemorrhage, bilateral; and Duret (secondary) hemorrhages, extensive, upper brainstem, diencephalic and pons.
The patient’s family made a formal complaint to an independent medical review panel. The panel’s decision was that “[t]he patient’s care was prudent, timely and professional.” The family was told that there was no process for them to appeal.