A 4-year-old girl was the third of three siblings born to healthy and unrelated parents. Her 8-year-old and 5-year-old sisters were unaffected. She was born by vaginal delivery after an uneventful pregnancy. Her parents initially became concerned when she could not crawl on her hands and knees or stand unassisted by 17 months of age. She could lift her head by 4 months, roll over by 6 months, sit up unsupported by 10 months, crawl on her belly by 11 months, stand with assistance by 18 months, and walk with assistance by 22 months. She could not walk independently until now. A neurological examination at 17 months of age revealed slight muscle weakness in the distal lower extremities and exaggerated deep tendon reflexes in the lower limbs. She started rehabilitation therapy at that point. At 2 years and 3 months, she presented a scissor gait when walking with assistance. At 2 years and 5 months, truncal ataxia was detected. She was intellectually normal, and no nystagmus, intention tremor, dysmetria, or speech impairment was detected. At 3 years and 3 months, the Kyoto Scale of Psychological Development (KSPD) test revealed no cognitive developmental delay, with the following scores: Postural-Motor functions, 26; Cognitive-Adaptive functions, 96; and Language-Social functions, 81. A nerve conduction study revealed nothing abnormal. Metabolic and routine blood investigations were unremarkable.
At 3 years and 5 months, she had an unprovoked epileptic seizure with forced rightward eye deviation. Although acute symptomatic seizures did not occur after that seizure, nonsymptomatic electroencephalogram (EEG) abnormalities with centroparietal spikes were repeatedly recorded. Epilepsy was diagnosed, and she was started on levetiracetam, which she continues to take. The abnormal EEG wave disappeared after antiepileptic treatment, and has been seizure-free ever since.
The motor symptoms of the patient progressed slowly, and her gait became increasingly slow and spastic over time. On neurological examination at age 4, she presented slight paresis, increased muscle reflexes, and increased muscle tone and stiffness in all four limbs. Knee and ankle clonus and bilateral Babinski signs were detected. Truncal ataxia, intention tremor, and a staggering gait were also detected. There were no speech or eye movement abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine performed at ages 2, 3, and 4 revealed no abnormalities.
We carried out whole-exome sequencing of genomic DNA from the patient. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. Exome capture was performed with a SureSelect Human All Exon V6 + UTR (89 Mb) Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Paired-end sequencing was carried out on a HiSeq2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) using a HiSeq SBS Kit V4 (Illumina), which generated 100-bp reads. The reference databases utilized included hg38 (GRCh38) , HGMD , gnomAD , and dbSNP . We examined variants of 250 genes known to be responsible for or associated with spinocerebellar ataxia, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, or HSP (Additional file ). Through this analysis, we identified a heterozygous missense mutation (c.1496G > A, p.Arg499His) in exon 13 of the SPAST gene in the patient and ruled out the possibility of other causative genes. We then examined exon 13 of the SPAST gene in the patient as well as the patient’s father , mother , and younger sister by Sanger sequencing. On Sanger sequencing, we reconfirmed the p.R499H mutation in exon 13 of the SPAST gene, which was in a heterozygous state in the patient . On the other hand, the patient’s parents and younger sister did not have the mutation . In this family, the patient harbored a mutation that was absent in her parents and her healthy sibling. Her oldest sister was also healthy. These observations suggest that the mutation occurred de novo in the patient.