A 65-year-old woman, referred by family physician, to emergency with a 5-day history of constipation, important abdominal distension, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. Her last bowel movement had been 2 days ago. There was no significant past medical history or abdominal surgery. She had no family pathological, toxic or social history. On examination, his vital signs were: temperature 37.3 °C, pulse 107/minute, respiratory rate 25/minute, and blood pressure 110/60 mmHg. An abdominal examination revealed a massive distension of his abdomen without signs of peritonitis. His abdomen was tympanic to percussion. There were no umbilical or groin hernias. A digital rectal examination demonstrated an empty rectum. At this stage, the diagnosis of a strangulated large bowel obstruction was considered. An abdominal X-ray revealed a large bowel obstruction with two levels of fluid and a “U-shaped” loop in the right upper abdomen . An abdominal CT scan showed a “U-shaped” loop of dilated colon (, ). Correlating the clinical and imaging, the diagnosis of colonic obstruction by volvulus was the top of differential. The difficulty was to specify the incriminated colon segment. After optimization of his general condition with a Naso-Gastric tube suction and intravenous fluids resuscitation, a decision was taken to proceed with an emergency laparotomy, under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. Performed by an assistant professor, a 5th year and a 4th year surgical resident. Preoperative prophylactic antibiotics were administered. Intraoperative findings were of a dilated transverse colon volvulus twisted in a 360° clockwise direction on its mesentery. The point of twist was found in the right upper quadrant. The bowel was without signs of necrosis. The patient underwent transverse colectomy with Bouilly-Volkmann colostomy type. The postoperative course was uneventful: improvement of the general condition of the patient, colostomy was functional in the second post-operative day. He received proton pomp inhibitors (OMEPRAZOL 40 mg, one injection/day) and prophylactic heparin therapy (ENOXAPARIN SODIUM 0,4 ml = 40mg, one injection/day) and was discharged from the hospital four days later. A restoration of colonic continuity was performed 4 weeks after, which took place without complications. The patient was seen in two follow-up visits at 2 weeks and 4 weeks post-surgery with a satisfied recovery. He regained his normal activity.