A 12-month-old Japanese male was referred to the pediatrics department of our hospital because he was unable to sit independently. At the initial examination, the 12-month-old could hold his head up but could not maintain a sitting posture. Macrocephaly was not noted. He had no history of perinatal abnormalities. Birth weight was 3058g, height 49cm, and head circumference 34.5cm. There was no family history of neurological disorder.
Brain computed tomography (CT) showed areas of low attenuation with frontal white matter preponderance, cyst formation near the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle, and cerebral atrophy predominant in the frontal lobes . T2-weighted images demonstrated symmetrical high-intensity areas in the white matter of both frontal lobes and deep gray matter, cyst formation in the white matter, and cerebral atrophy . T2-weighted images also showed slight abnormalities in the medulla oblongata . Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images showed contrast enhancement of the peri-cystic area and caudate nucleus region bilaterally .
These findings suggested infantile leukodystrophy, and other diseases in the differential diagnosis including Alexander disease, megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC), van der Knaap disease, Canavan disease, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, and metachromatic leukodystrophy. Alexander disease or MLC were strongly suspected, as these types of infantile leukodystrophy involve cyst formation. Alexander disease was diagnosed by gene examination, and Murakami et al. already reported by the mutation of the GFAP gene in this case: the patient had a heterozygous deletion of genomic sequence 1247-1249GGG>GG in exon 8 of the GFAP gene .
This case was followed with the best supportive care and careful rehabilitation for almost 5 years after the onset of the disease. His general condition was stable. The second MRI was performed at 4 years of age after his spastic quadriplegia began to slowly progress. Significant volume loss in bilateral white matter and deep gray matter as a cause of enlargement of the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle was recognized from T2-weighted images . Furthermore, a periventricular rim of high signal intensity on T1-weighted images and low signal intensity on T2-weighted images was apparent , and high intensity lesions on T2-weighted images became more apparent in the medulla oblongata .
When the patient presented with sudden dyspnea and dysphagia at 5 years 4 months of age, emergency MRI was performed and found a further advance in the following: White matter abnormalities in the frontal lobe, volume loss in bilateral white matter and deep gray matter, and brain stem abnormalities since initial MRI images . Mild elevation of apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values was noted at affected sites .