A 58-year-old Caucasian man presented at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery with a left-sided painless cervical mass that he first recognized about 8 weeks ago as well as a persistent throat irritation. A conservative treatment with proton-pump inhibitors over 4 weeks initiated by his family doctor could not remove his symptoms. He neither reported on night-sweat, weight loss or fever nor did he have any trouble with swallowing and breathing. Pre-existing medical conditions included hypertension treated with valsartan, spondylarthrosis of the lumbar spine and a bilateral gonarthrosis. The patient reported a smoking history of 40 pack-years and occasional alcohol consumption.
A blood sample for laboratory analysis including CRP, parameters for kidney and liver dysfunction, electrolytes, and differential blood count showed no conspicuous findings. In the clinical otolaryngological examination we found an irregularly shaped tumor arising from the posterior part of the left vestibular fold with a diameter of about 10 mm and a reduced mobility of the left vocal cord. Ultrasonography of the neck showed three roundly-shaped lymph nodes with a diameter up to 1.4 mm in the left supraclavicular region. All three nodes had an irregular structure with a lack of a clear vascular hilum resulting in a cN2b neck status.
With the clinical diagnosis of a cT2 cN2b cM0 supraglottic laryngeal cancer we indicated a CT scan of the head, neck, thorax, and abdomen that showed not only the aforementioned laryngeal mass on the left side with moderate contrast enhancement but also markedly enlarged mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes on both sides . A whole-body 18-FDG-PET-CT-scan confirmed the suspected diagnosis of supraglottic laryngeal cancer and intrathoracic lymph node metastases with significant tracer uptake, respectively. Though the mediastinal und hilar lymph nodes were highly suspicious of being metastases no primary tumor could be detected in conventional CT-scan or PET-CT. Accordingly, a diagnostic panendoscopy was performed with a biopsy of the supraglottic tumor as well as a transbronchial biopsy of a representative left hilar lymph node. Histopathological examination of the laryngeal biopsy showed a moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma positive for p40 and CK5/6 and negative for p16 . Three separate rounds of anti-PD-L1 immunohistochemistry using the antibody clones “SP142”, “22C3”, and “28–8” were performed, resulting in a tumor proportion score (TPS) of 0% and a combined positivity score (CPS) of 0 for the laryngeal cancer . Transbronchial biopsy revealed the diagnosis of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with some signet-ring type cells and a specific signaling with the anti-pan-cytokeratin cocktail AE1/3 and antibodies to TTF-1. The lesion was completely non-reactive with antibodies to napsinA, p40 and CDX-2. It had a TPS of < 1% and a CPS of 10 . As in non-squamous NSCLC, druggable genetic alterations include EGFR mutations (target of EGFR TKI e.g. Osimertinib, Afatinib), ALK translocations (target of ALK inhibitors e.g. Alectinib, Brigatinib), and ROS1 translocations (target of ROS1 inhibitors e.g. Crizotinib, Entrectinib) further molecular testing was performed. Here, neither mutations in BRAF exons 11 and 15 and EGFR exons 18–21 nor ALK or ROS1 gene rearrangements and/or translocations were found.
Taken together, two separate malignant tumors were diagnosed: a supraglottic laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (cT2 cN2b cM0; ICD-O: 8170/3) and a synchronous pulmonary adenocarcinoma (cTx cN3 cM0; ICD-O: 8140/3). After discussion of the case in an interdisciplinary tumor board, a transoral CO2 laser resection of the supraglottic laryngeal cancer was recommended followed by a systemic treatment of the lung adenocarcinoma according to the KEYNOTE-186 protocol postoperatively, which represents the first-line treatment for non-squamous NSCLC with a PD-L1 TPS < 50% . However, the patient refused any kind of surgical or radiotherapeutic treatment of his laryngeal cancer after a detailed discussion of the diagnostic findings and only gave his consent for the systemic therapy regimen that was indicated for the lung adenocarcinoma. A possible benefit of the lung cancer treatment on the laryngeal cancer was not discussed due to a lack of evidence in this therapeutic setting. Accordingly, we decided to start therapy with the KEYNOTE-186 protocol under regular endoscopic controls of the laryngeal tumor. After the patient received pembrolizumab (200 mg), carboplatin (AUC 5 mg/ml/min), and pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) every 3 weeks for 4 cycles, another PET-CT-scan was indicated for restaging .
Images showed a complete remission of the laryngeal cancer with no residual tracer uptake, which was consistent with our endoscopic findings, and a partial remission of the intrathoracic lymph nodes with size reduction in all nodes.
Treatment was continued with a maintenance therapy consisting of pembrolizumab (200 mg) and pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) every 3 weeks. Meanwhile, the patient received 21 cycles of maintenance therapy with an enduring complete remission of his laryngeal cancer and stable disease of mediastinal and hilar metastases. After 5 cycles of maintenance therapy, another diagnostic panendoscopy with an incisional biopsy of the former laryngeal tumor region was performed and confirmed the diagnosis of a complete remission with no detection of vital tumor cells. The patient did not show any therapy-related adverse events or side-effects over the whole treatment period.
This retrospective case study was in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The patient gave his informed consent for publication of clinical data and images.