A 72-year-old woman presented to the outpatient department of our hospital complaining of a painless mass in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen.
The patient’s symptoms began 10 mo prior and had worsened in the last 1 mo. She denied any changes in bowel habits. She was systemically well, with a good appetite and no fever.
The patient had a history of obesity, hypertension, coronary heart disease, and poorly controlled type 2 diabetes. She had been diagnosed with MGUS 1 year prior. Regular medications included ramipril, amlodipine, aspirin, and gliclazide. Her surgical history included percutaneous coronary intervention in 2009 and laparoscopic radical resection for rectal cancer approximately 6 years and 4 mo prior to her present admission. Postoperative histopathological examination revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum with direct invasion to the deep muscular layer of the intestinal wall. All surgical margins were free of disease, and four lymph nodes were retrieved and found to be non-malignant. The pathological staging was pT3N0M0 stage II, according to American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient received seven cycles of chemotherapy (capecitabine 3000 mg/d) after surgery with curative intent. She was followed up and free of cancer recurrence at 56 mo after surgery.
The patient was afebrile (36.3 °C). Her body mass index (BMI) was 30 kg/m2, and her blood pressure and pulse were 127/88 mmHg and 80 beats per min, respectively. Abdominal examination at presentation revealed a smooth abdomen with a clinically palpable solid mass (approximately 4 cm in diameter) under a laparotomy scar in the left lower quadrant. No obvious tenderness, skin redness, swelling, or increased skin temperature was observed around the mass. Abdominal auscultation revealed normal bowel sounds.
Serum levels of glycosylated hemoglobin [8.9%, normal range (NR): 4%–6%], triglycerides (6.79 mmoL/L, NR: 0.9-1.7 mmoL/L), and glucose (12.6 mmoL/L, NR: 4.1-6.0 mmoL/L) were elevated. Hemoglobin levels (114 g/L, NR: 115-150 g/L) were decreased. Serum immunofixation electrophoresis revealed the presence of M-protein (11%, NR: 0%) and elevation of monoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) lambda (2.36 g/L, NR: 0.9-2.1 g/L). Other laboratory tests were within NR. The laboratory data were not either indicative of acute inflammation (white blood cell count of 5400 cells/μL; neutrophil bands of 66%, serum C-reactive protein level of 0.7 mg/dL) or tumor recurrence (carcinoembryonic antigen level of 2.8 ng/mL).
Ultrasonography of the left lower quadrant of the abdominal wall demonstrated a relatively well-demarcated, oval-shaped mass with mixed echogenicity (relatively more hypoechoic) and dimensions of 4.8 cm × 2.2 cm. Blood flow signals were seen in the hypoechoic area. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed a low-density mass with rim enhancement adjacent to the rectus abdominisin the lower abdominal wall , and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET)/CT revealed high uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 6.0 . Colonoscopy showed no cancer recurrence. These findings suggested the possibility of either delayed abscess formation or abdominal wall recurrence of rectal cancer with central necrosis.