In January 2021, a 59-year-old man presented to a different hospital complaining of abdominal pain and bloody stools. A colonoscopy was performed, and an ulcerative lesion was found in the sigmoid colon. He was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis (UC) and hospitalized. High-dose intravenous steroid therapy with prednisolone (80 mg/day) was initiated. However, 2 weeks after the initiation of prednisolone, exacerbation of the ulcerative lesions from the ascending to the sigmoid colon was found on colonoscopy. Consequently, tacrolimus (4 mg/day) was added, and the prednisone was tapered off week by week . Two weeks after the initiation of tacrolimus, a further exacerbation of the ulcerative lesion was observed on colonoscopy. On abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans, marked dilatation of the transverse colon was noted; thus, a diagnosis of toxic megacolon was made. Around this time, a nosocomial cluster of SARS-CoV-2 cases occurred at that hospital. The patient was found to have been in close contact with an infected person. However, the patient’s SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was negative. Subsequently, he was transferred to our hospital for emergency surgery.
On arrival, he was conscious and alert, with a blood pressure of 132/93 mmHg, a heart rate of 104 beats/min, a temperature of 36.2 °C, a respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min, and peripheral oxygen saturation of 98% in ambient air. No cardiovascular or respiratory abnormalities were observed. The abdomen was distended but soft, with no signs of peritoneal irritation. The SARS-CoV-2 antigen test was negative. Laboratory tests reported a white blood cell count of 15,000/μL, C-reactive protein level of 12.6 mg/dL, hemoglobin of level 7.9 mg/dL, platelet count of 31.6 × 104/μL, total bilirubin level of 1.8 mg/dL, aspartate transaminase level of 13 IU/L, alanine transaminase level of 19 IU/L, urea level of 19 mg/dL, serum creatinine level of 0.74 mg/dL, and lactate level of 19 mmol/L. Abdominal radiography and contrast-enhanced CT imaging revealed dilatation of the transverse colon, with a bowel diameter of 80 mm . A chest CT scan showed peripheral ground-glass opacities (GGO) in the right upper lung field . Based on the patient’s history of SARS-CoV-2 exposure and clinical characteristics typical of pneumonia, it was determined that the patient was infected with SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, the treatment plan was to schedule the surgery after stabilizing the respiratory symptoms. Treatment for UC continued with prednisone (5 mg/day) and tacrolimus (4 mg/day). Chest CT scans the following day showed new GGO in the right upper lobe, enlargement of the existing GGO, and thickening of the interlobular and intralobular septal walls . However, the patient’s SARS-CoV-2 PCR test was still negative. On the third hospital day, the patient was found to have persistent bleeding, liver dysfunction, and jaundice, which rendered conservative treatment ineffective. A multidisciplinary conference was held, and emergency surgery was scheduled. The patient underwent a subtotal colectomy and ileostomy, and a rectal mucous fistula was created. Intraoperatively, contaminated ascites was observed, and the intestinal tract was markedly dilated and fragile. Histopathological examination revealed ulceration and disruption of the glandular ducts, and infiltration by inflammatory cells, mainly lymphocytes, into the intrinsic mucosal layer extending up to the submucosal layer, with particularly severe inflammation of the superficial layer . Postoperatively, the patient was placed on mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit. On postoperative day (POD) 1, he was extubated owing to improved respiratory parameters. Post-surgery, tacrolimus was discontinued. On POD 2, he was transferred to the infectious ward PCR testing was not performed postoperatively, and the patient was followed up with CT imaging to confirm that there was no exacerbation of pulmonary findings, and isolation was lifted after 14 days. Prednisone (5 mg/day) was administered until POD 3 and then discontinued. On POD 77, the patient was discharged. Eight months post-surgery, the patient underwent a rectal resection, ileorectal anastomosis (ileal J-pouch), and ileal covering stoma, and at 13 months postoperatively, the patient underwent ileal covering stoma closure.