A 53 years old male was brought to the emergency room due to the loss of consciousness with right-side weakness. Based on information provided by his wife, he experienced sudden dizziness, nausea, and vomiting while chatting with her approximately 2–3 hours prior to admission. Subsequently, the patient became confused and had difficulty comprehending words. Eventually, his loss of consciousness prompted his wife to bring him to the emergency room. As per information provided by his wife, the patient had taken two tablets of sildenafil (100 mg) two hours before experiencing these symptoms. He had a history of unprescribed regular sildenafil usage for one year prior. The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, migraine headaches or pre-existing cardiovascular or cerebrovascular diseases. Additionally, the patient has history of intense cigarette smoking habit for the past 12 years with an approximate consumption rate of one pack per day; there was no report of drug addiction either by him or within the family history (eg, cocaine usage). The patient’s height measured at 1.79 meters and he weighed 82 kg with according to the Body mass index (BMI) 23kg/m2. He also had no familial background related to cerebral arteriovenous malformation, cerebral aneurysms or intracranial hemorrhage.
Upon presentation, the patient’s neurological examination and vital signs were as follows: blood pressure measured 130/85, heart rate was 104 beats per minute, and temperature was 37.1 degrees Celsius. The Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) indicated a level of consciousness of 10 with Eye 2, Verbal 4 and motor 4, on neurological examination, there was only right-side hemiparesis. The Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale for motor assessment was estimated grade 2 although the patient was uncooperative. Laboratory tests did not reveal any significant findings as the platelet count, and coagulation factors appeared normal . A brain non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of an acute hemorrhage in the left thalamus with ventricular extension . Furthermore, a head CT angiography ruled out any vascular anomalies ( and ). The diagnosis of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) secondary to sildenafil use with cigarette smoking was made by excluding other potential causes based on the patient’s medical history and investigations. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, nasogastric tube was inserted for feeding and started treatment of mannitol (20%) 102g and Dexamethasone 8 mg for three times a day as anti-edema treatment along with intravenous fluids, antibiotics and proton pump inhibitors. After spending three days in the ICU, the patient showed signs of clinical and neurological improvement with GCS (14/15). The patient was transferred to the inpatient ward for further follow-up and physiotherapy. Eventually, after two more days at the ward, the patients became physical and neurological improved. He was discharged with a plan for further follow-up and physiotherapy. Finally, after three weeks of discharge, the right-side weakness was improved.