A 63-year-old Chinese male with bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy was diagnosed with EBV-positive DLBCL through a right cervical lymph node biopsy 40 months ago. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed CD3 (–), CD19 (+), CD20 (+), CD30 (+), CD5 (–), CD10 (-), BCL2 (+), BCL6 (-), MUM1 (+), PAX5 (+), C-MYC (-), ALK (-) and Ki-67 (+, 80%). In situ hybridization for EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER) was confirmed to be positive and EBV DNA was detectable in blood serum with a level of 5.44×106 copies/ml. The patient underwent 7 courses of chemotherapies without any response, including 2 courses of R-CHOP, one course of R-GDP, 3 courses of R2-MINE, and one course of R2-DHAP. Then the patient was referred to our center and was recruited into a clinical trial of CD19 CAR-T cell therapy with a costimulatory 4-1BB endodomain (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT02644655). The positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) before CAR-T cell therapy revealed multiple lymphoma lesions with increased 18F-FDG metabolism . CT scan showed no obvious pulmonary infection before CAR-T cell therapy .
The patient received lymphodepleting chemotherapy with fludarabine (30 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2) for 3 days (day −5 to −3). Subsequently, a total of 1.26×108 CD19 CAR-T cells (2×106 cells per kilogram) was infused on day 0. During the CAR-T cell therapy, the patient received sulfamethoxazole tablets (SMZ) for infection prevention. After CAR-T cell infusion, the patient developed grade 1 CRS and grade 4 neutropenia with fever 3 days later. According to the American society for transplantation and cellular therapy guidelines, piperacillin tazobactam and fluconazole were used in combination as anti-infective therapy with supportive care. One week later, all these symptoms resolved. PET-CT examination 3 months after CAR-T cell therapy showed regression of all lesions and complete metabolic remission was achieved . Notably, serum EBV DNA was also undetectable.
However, at 4 weeks after CAR-T cell therapy, the CT scan showed mild bilateral lung diffuse lesions without any symptoms or signs , so no treatment was given. 16 weeks after CAR-T cell therapy, the patient developed prolonged hypoxemia without fever. The CT scan confirmed interstitial pneumonitis with a small amount of pleural effusion , which progressed one week later . Influenza virus, COVID-19 and cytomegalovirus infection were excluded through epidemiologic features and laboratory tests. Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid examination also failed to capture any abnormalities. PCR examination confirmed the existence of CAR construct DNA copies in peripheral blood. IFN-γ and IL-17a level was increased before the development of pneumonitis, while the IL-6 level and lymphocyte count were significantly increased at the diagnosis of the pneumonitis . The proportion of CAR-T cells re-amplificated, the subtype of CAR-T cells turned from CD8+ T cells back to CD4+ T cells, and the ratio of central memory T cells increased continually at the diagnosis of the pneumonitis . Given the time onset and all evidences, CRS was excluded and the diagnosis of immunotherapy-associated interstitial pneumonitis after CAR-T cell therapy was made. Therefore, no tocilizumab was given. To avoid any potential negative effects on CAR-T cells, glucocorticoid administration was not given, although this was considered the preferred treatment for interstitial pneumonitis. Finally, intravenous immunoglobulin of 10 grams daily with intravenous levofloxacin was given with careful supportive treatment. Fortunately, the patient recovered from dyspnea 1 week later and the CT scan showed absorption of lesions . At present, the patient is still in remission without interstitial pneumonitis 3 years after CAR-T cell therapy.
This study was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, China (the number of approvals: SAHZ-2018–036). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s family for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.