A 32-year-old female (height 175 cm, weight 97 kg) presented to the emergency room of our hospital with a seizure. The patient reported that she was a hepatitis B virus carrier, and had undergone a cesarean section with epidural anesthesia 2 weeks ago. The epidural puncture was conducted using an 18-gauge needle in the lumbar space between the 2nd and 3rd vertebrae. Unfortunately, the initial puncture was unsuccessful, and the subsequent puncture accidentally breached the dural membrane, resulting in the leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The next day, the patient experienced postdural puncture headache (PDPH), which worsened on sitting but improved on lying down. Despite medical recommendations, the patient and their family declined epidural blood patching (EBP) as a treatment option. Hence, after 9 days of conservative treatment involving bed rest and fluid rehydration, the headache subsided, and the patient was discharged. The first day of readmission, a neurological examination revealed no notable abnormalities. Computed tomography revealed the presence of edema in the left parietal cortex, potentially indicating intracranial hypotension syndrome (IHS). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) confirmed the CVST along with left parietal vein infarction . Laboratory tests indicated an elevated D-dimer level of 1,700 ng/ml (normal range: 0–500 ng/ml), while the prothrombin time (INR) (0.92) and activated partial thromboplastin time (30.10 s) were within normal limit. No other notable laboratory findings were present. The imaging findings presence of a syndrome characterized by decreased cranial pressure. Consequently, on the second day of hospitalization, a local anesthesia was administered to extract 15 ml of autologous blood for conducting epidural blood patch (EBP) therapy. Following EBP therapy, the patient reported a decrease in daytime headaches but an exacerbation of symptoms during nighttime. Three days after admission, MRI revealed improved post-treatment cranial pressure . Nevertheless, the patient’s headache persisted despite anticoagulant therapy. Four days after admission, the left and right optic nerve sheath diameters (ONSDs) were 6.0 and 6.2 mm, respectively .
Thirteen days after admission, the patient exhibited additional symptoms of blurred vision and a circumscribed dark shadow in the right eye. A fundus examination revealed the presence of papilledema and fundus hemorrhage . The possibility of intracranial hypertension could not be ruled out. Consequently, the intensity of dehydration treatment and the anticoagulation regimen were adjusted, following which, the patient experienced improvement in visual papilledema, resolution of the fundus bleeding, and restored vision. Subsequently, the patient was discharged after a hospital stay of 49 days.