A 78-year-old Caucasian man was admitted because of acute kidney injury to our hospital. His medical history was remarkable for acromegaly diagnosed 25 years ago that was first treated with radiotherapy. Due to a residual secretion of growth hormone he was then treated with octreotide for 10 years (10 mg every six weeks) with an adequate control of his insulin-like growth factor −1 (IGF-1) level. His medical history also revealed weight loss of 15 kg in the last four months without fever, dysuria, diarrhea or other symptoms.
Several months prior to admission, he was treated with sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim and ciprofloxacin for a urinary tract infection. This treatment was followed by a partially regressive acute kidney injury that was attributed to immuno-allergic nephritis. No further investigations were undertaken at that time. His residual renal function was estimated to be 50 ml/minute/1.73 m2 according to the MRDR4 system.
During the weeks preceding admission a urinary culture yielded a multiresistant Enterobacteria which resulted in multiple successive antibiotic treatments (penicillin and two cephalosporins) over a period of five weeks. A rise in creatinine level was noted following these treatments. He was hospitalized for investigation of an acute kidney injury.
Upon hospital admission he was afebrile. His blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg and pulse rate was 72 per minute. His physical examination was unremarkable and there was no skin rash or lymphadenopathy
Laboratory studies were notable for a creatinine level of 4.9 mg/dL with conserved diuresis, resulting in stage F acute kidney injury according to the RIFLE (risk, injury, failure, loss, and end stage kidney disease (>three months))classification, a HCO3 level of 18.9 mM (22 to 29 mM), a phosphorus level of 6.59 mg/dL (normal 2.5 to 8.5 mg/dL) and a calcium level of 8.8 mg/dL (normal 8.5 to 10.5 mg/dL). He also had mild anemia. His leukocyte count was normal without eosinophilia. Urine dipstick showed traces of protein and hemoglobin. Immunologic tests were unremarkable and viral serologies were negative. Microscopic urine examination displayed four red cells M/L and 123 white cells with 3% of eosinophils. Urine cultures were positive for penicillin resistant citrobacter koseri. Abdominal ultrasound showed multiple cortical cysts of the left kidney, no pyelocaliceal dilatation and the presence of multiple gallstones.
A renal biopsy was performed. Glomeruli displayed no abnormalities. Examination of the tubulointerstitial space revealed diffuse tubular atrophy with epithelial cell desquamation and necrosis as well as the presence of numerous intratubular and intracytoplasmic oxalate crystals presenting birefringrence under polarized light . Chronic interstitial nephritis characterized by an infiltration of lymphocytes and histiocytes was also seen. Immunofluoresence studies were negative. Infrared analysis of the biopsy confirmed the presence of whewellite, a rare form of crystallization of monohydrated calcium oxalate.
When asked again, the patient reported no history of vitamin C supplementation or excessive oxalate intake, no history of urinary tract stones and no relevant familial disease. During his hospital stay, no diarrhea was noted.
A complete urinary collection displayed elevated urinary oxalate excretion, with a low citrate level . Primary hyperoxaluria was excluded as the urinary dosage of glycolate and l-glyceric acid were negative.
A diagnosis of oxalate nephropathy with tubulointerstitial fibrosis secondary to enteric hyperoxaluria caused by octretotide and multiple antibiotic therapies was made.
Hydration was undertaken and octreotide therapy was stopped. Oral calcium and citrate supplementation were prescribed. Creatinine levels slowly decreased and he was discharged with a nephrologic follow up. The evolution of his condition was slowly favorable . A new urinary collection performed 10 months after withdrawal of octreotide therapy showed normal urinary oxalate excretion.