A 77-year-old male with a medical history of asthma and pacemaker insertion due to Brugada syndrome presented to our hospital with renal dysfunction. Blood tests showed renal dysfunction (creatinine: 1.15 mg/dL, eGFR: 47.9 mg/dL) and high levels of inflammation (C-reactive protein: 19.08 mg/dL), and urine tests showed proteinuria. As screening CT revealed a mass in the right kidney, contrast-enhanced CT was additionally performed. A 71 mm mass in the lower portion of the right kidney, a mass on Gerota's fascia, interaortocaval lymphadenopathy, and IVCTT (Neves classification level II) were revealed . Percutaneous needle biopsy for the renal mass was highly suspicious for PRCC type 2 , which led to a diagnosis of PRCC with Gerota's fascia metastatic lesion and IVCTT.
The patient's Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group PS was Grade 1, and his International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium risk was poor, given his anemia, hypercalcemia, thrombocytosis, and time from diagnosis to systemic therapy. Nivo-Cabo was selected for primary treatment, considering the demonstration of PRCC. 4 weeks after treatment was commenced, his renal function was impaired (creatinine: 2.68 mg/dL, eGFR: 19.0 mg/dL). As the cause was suspected to be cabozantinib, the drug was suspended until the patient's renal function improved, which it failed to do. Recognizing that his renal function might be further impaired with the restart of cabozantinib, we decided to restart with an 80% dose to prolong overall survival 12 weeks after the start date. Plain CT 24 weeks after the start date showed that all lesions had regressed and IVCTT was not visible, thereby exhibiting a partial response as per the new Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. However, additional ultrasonography showed IVCTT within the renal vein .
Given that his PS was good and all lesions had regressed enough to resect more completely and safely, radical nephrectomy, tumor thrombectomy, and retroperitoneal lymph node dissection were performed after a 3-week drug holiday. The duration of pre-operative Nivo-Cabo treatment was 6 months. All lesions were resected completely but were accompanied by adhesions, especially IVCTT. As intraoperative ultrasonography to determine the resection margin showed tumor thrombus within the renal vein, it was resected along with the IVC wall by the side-clamp technique. However, the IVC wall was harder than normal, possibly indicating viable malignant cell infiltration to the IVC wall. Therefore, we additionally resected the IVC wall and performed intraoperative rapid pathological examination, which showed a negative margin. Reconstruction of the IVC with a patch was not performed as over 70% diameter was left. The resected specimens grossly showed that although the renal mass had disappeared, the denatured tumor thrombus remained within the renal vein. However, no viable malignant cells were identified histopathologically in the specimens , suggesting the CR of mPRCC with IVCTT to Nivo-Cabo. Although Nivo-Cabo was discontinued postoperatively, there has been no recurrence for 9 months.