A 79-year-old woman presented with a 2-mo history of pain and a 1-mo history of skin ulceration on her right forearm. The pain was exacerbated by limb movement.
Two months previously, the patient attended a local hospital and underwent X-rays which showed osteolytic lesions involving the mid-lower part of the right ulna with an internal fixation device for an olecranon fracture that had healed. The patient did not receive any specific treatment. One month ago, a skin ulcer appeared with purulent exudation, which was about the size of a soybean. The patient was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
Two years ago, she underwent surgery due to a fracture of the right ulna olecranon in a local hospital, soon after the wound healed well and limb function recovered to nearly normal level until onset of the present disease.
The patient was a farmer with normal physique. Her medical history showed no immune abnormalities or long-term use of steroids. She also denied personal and family history of hepatitis B, tuberculosis or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, diabetes or hypertension, respiratory, cardiovascular or neuropsychiatric diseases.
The patient’s vital signs were normal and stable. No abnormalities in the lung or central nervous system were found on physical examination. At the mid-lower part of the right forearm a 3 cm × 2 cm chronic wound was observed with granulation tissue and purulent discharge, and a sinus deep into the bony surface of the ulna was noted .
Laboratory examinations showed a normal white blood cell count, but an increased percentage of neutrophils (80.6%), slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (66 mm) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (74.26 mg/L) levels.
The patient’s chest X-ray was normal. Radiographs of the right forearm revealed multiple irregular and different sized osteolytic lesions with little periosteal reaction around the diaphyseal bone at the mid-distal shaft of the ulna; however, the internal fixation of the proximal segment of the ulna showed no signs of loosening . A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated the largest osteolytic lesion in the mid-distal portion of the right ulna, measuring 2.9 cm × 1.2 cm × 4.2 cm .