A 13-year-old African boy, in the company of his father, presented to the out-patients department at our facility with an inability to move the right side of his face for one week. Our patient's history was that he was well until 13 days prior to this presentation, when he developed a sore throat that resolved after two days. Two days after the sore throat resolved, during supper, it was noted that he would rest his head on his hands at the table, unlike his usual self. The next day, our patient woke up and reported that his face was feeling 'funny'. Later during that day, the father observed that his son's face was skewed and that he could no longer pronounce words properly.
Our teenage patient was taken to a medical facility where a course of amoxicillin was prescribed, and he was then referred to our hospital where aciclovir-prednisone was prescribed by the doctor on call (aciclovir 200 mg three times per day and prednisone 20 mg once daily, both orally for five days); the medication was commenced within two days of prescription. According to our patient's hospital records, the working diagnosis was Bell's palsy.
After commencement of aciclovir-prednisone, while at home, our patient had headache, malaise, altered taste, vomiting after food, a ringing sound in his right ear as well as earache and ear itchiness. Additionally, he developed numerous fluid-filled pimples on his right ear, prompting him to seek further medical care several days later when the pimples were already starting to heal .
On presentation, he denied headache, vomiting, earache, ever having a hot body or impaired hearing, but he admitted to feeling nauseous and having occasional itchiness of the right ear. He had never been admitted to the hospital for any reason previously, and his growth and development were normal according to his father. His parents and sibling currently have no known health problems.
Our patient weighed 36 kg. A physical examination revealed a right-sided lower motor neuron facial nerve palsy, healing rash on the right pinna , and loss of taste on approximately the right anterior half of the tongue. His facial nerve paralysis was grade IV (moderately severe dysfunction), using the House-Brackmann facial nerve grading system (ranging from I to VI, with I indicating normal function and VI indicating total paralysis). The rest of the examination was unremarkable (otoscopy was not performed). On direct questioning, our patient admitted having had chicken pox about three months previously; he had no prior vaccination against varicella zoster virus. Based on the history and physical examination, Ramsay Hunt syndrome was diagnosed. The diagnosis of Ramsay Hunt syndrome was explained to our patient and his father, advice on eye care was given and a referral for physiotherapy was made.
Our patient was lost to follow-up until 11 months after the onset of illness; at this time, his facial nerve function was normal (House-Brackmann grade I). An otoscopic examination was unremarkable. Our patient had apparently made a full recovery about one month from the beginning of sickness and had adhered to the suggested eye care and physiotherapy.