A 15-year-old boy was hospitalized with complaints of unaccountable right migraine for 7 months. There was a mass with tenderness behind his right ear. Before admission, the patient was diagnosed with lymphadenitis based on needle biopsy of the mass in another hospital, and the patient's headache was temporarily relieved with anti-inflammatory treatment. However, the mass gradually increased, his headache continued, and he eventually visited the Neurosurgery Department of our hospital for treatment. The examination revealed a hard swelling of 2 cm with tenderness behind the right ear. No pulse and no sound could be heard through auscultation. The skin on the surface of the swelling was normal without ulceration or redness. Except for the headache and mass behind the right ear, he had no other symptoms. The patient had a normal body temperature, clear mind, and normal muscle tone; pathological reflex was not elicited. No obvious nodules were observed on the skin of other parts of his body. Haematological and biochemical examinations revealed alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 7 U/L (9–50), aspartate aminotransferase(AST)of 12 U/L (15–40), and basophil percentage (BASO%) of 1.2% (0–1.0); coagulation indicators were in the normal range. The patient had undergone surgery of his left hand due to trauma.
A CT scan revealed a cystic solid mass in the right temporo-occipital region , approximately 7.37 cm × 6.48 cm in size, with smooth margins and calcification. The internal density was uneven, with mainly cystic components. The outer plate of the skull had become thinner and bulged outward. Regarding MRI, the main body of the lesion showed hypointensity on T1-weighted images and hyperintensity on T2-weighted images; the edges were hypointense on T1-weighted images. The edge and trabecular aspect of the lesion showed significant contrast enhancement, though the solid part was uneven and slightly enhanced . Imaging differential diagnosis included haemangiopericytoma and skull-derived tumour. Further examination was recommended to rule out schwannoma or parasitic infection.
As the imaging picture could not reveal the nature of the mass clearly and the patient had clinical symptoms of headache, he underwent tumour resection and conducted postoperative pathological examination. During the operation, it was found that the tumour was located in the epidural area and originated from the bone at the root of the mastoid. Part of the temporal bone and bone at the root of the mastoid had been destroyed by the tumour, and the tumour had formed on the outside of the skull; it was approximately 8 cm × 8 cm in size and had a flesh-red capsule. The bone around the tumour was small honeycomb-shaped, accompanied by a large amount of oozing blood, and the texture was tough. The blood supply was very rich. The brain tissue was compressed and displaced inward. When the capsule of the tumour was cut, it could be seen that the tumour was cystic and solid. The solid part was grey-yellow, whereas the cystic component was grey-white and gelatinous. The tumour was completely removed .
Under microscopy, a large number of histiocytes, foam-like and containing lipids, were surrounded by fibrocytes and lymphocytes. In the background of myxoedema, the fibrocytes were short-spindle-shaped; nuclear divisions were rare . Immunohistochemical results were as follows: CD163 ( +) , CD68 ( +) , CD3 (scattered +), CD20 (scattered +), Ki-67 (approximately 3% +) , CDla (-), S-100 (-), CD207 (Langerin) (-), GFAP (-), PCK[AE1/AE3] (-), EMA ( +), p40 (-), P63 (-), Olig-2 (-). The diagnosis was xanthogranuloma.
The patient did not receive any chemotherapy or radiotherapy, and the postoperative prognosis was good, without obvious complications. Skull repair surgery was performed nine months later. During the 19-month follow-up period, the patient had no obvious headache and showed no obvious signs of recurrence on imaging examination.