A 35-year-old woman presented with history of weakness, metrorrhagia and exertional dyspnea was referred to hematology department. Lab tests revealed leukocytosis (27.7 × 109 /L), anemia (hemoglobin:9.2 g/dl), and thrombocytopenia (56 × 109/L). Peripheral blood smear showed abnormal monocytic cells with significant number of blast (50%) that suggestive of acute leukemia. A diagnosis of AML-M4 was made based on bone marrow aspiration, as acute leukemia with differentiation along both myeloid and monocytic lines were observed and also flow-cytometry result. The chemotherapy consisting of Cytarabine and Daunorubicin was initiated immediately after the diagnosis.
Five days after initiation of chemotherapy, she also complained of sudden painless paracentral visual field defect and photopsia in her right eye. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits. Slit lamp biomicroscopy of the anterior segment was unremarkable. Fundus findings revealed multiple hemorrhages with white or pale center (Roth’s spots) around the optic disk and vascular arcades in both eyes. OCT demonstrated hyper-reflectivity of the outer nuclear layer (ONL) and outer plexiform layer (OPL) associated with attenuation of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) nasal to the fovea of the right eye . Outer retina segmentation en-face OCT revealed hyperreflective patch . These findings did not involve the fovea. They were compatible with the diagnosis of AMN.
Nine days after AMN diagnosis, dyspnea, malaise, and cough was gradually initiated. Although the lungs were clear in the CT scan performed at the admission, the CT scan after deterioration of the systemic status of the patient showed multilobar peripheral ground glass haziness and patchy consolidation foci . Based on the positive result of nasopharyngeal reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) and leukopenia (0.5 × 109 /L), the diagnosis of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was confirmed. The patient deceased after 6 days because of severe pneumonia.