A 48-year-old, gravida 4, para 2 woman presented for evaluation of a left adnexal mass. She reported being diagnosed by imaging with a left ovarian MCT approximately 8 years prior. She recently developed sharp lower abdominal pain and abnormal uterine bleeding. Pelvic imaging including a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large mixed solid and cystic mass in the anterior pelvis measuring 10 cm × 7.2 cm × 6.0 cm with small fat nodules within the cystic component of the mass, suggestive of a left adnexal teratoma. The patient’s medical history was notable for asthma and diabetes mellitus. Her surgical history was notable only for a prior laparoscopic bilateral tubal ligation. Family history was significant for a paternal grandmother with ovarian cancer.
The patient underwent examination demonstrating mild fullness and tenderness in the right adnexa. She had an office endometrial biopsy due to abnormal uterine bleeding, which demonstrated benign secretory endometrium. The patient underwent a laparoscopic left salpingo-oophorectomy and right salpingectomy. Intra-operative evaluation demonstrated that the left adnexa was replaced by a complex cystic mass with an irregular surface. The cyst was removed intact in an endocatch bag with no evidence of rupture.
Histopathologic examination of the left ovary and fallopian tube revealed PTC arising in a struma ovarii. The PTC showed prominent papillary architecture with epithelium composed of cuboidal cells, which exhibited cellular crowding and nuclear overlap. Occasional nuclei showed optically clear cytoplasm, while others had nuclear grooves . Of note, the struma ovarii made up the bulk of the tumour and consisted of colloid-filled acini lined by a single layer of flat-to-low cuboidal cells like those seen in normal thyroid tissue . However, other teratomatous elements were also identified, including mature bone, cartilage, adipose tissue, squamous epithelium and hair follicles . Microscopic evaluation of the submitted tissue also revealed a small carcinoid tumour measuring 0.3 cm. Immunohistochemistry was performed and showed that the carcinoid tumour was positive for the neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin and chromogranin A , while negative for TTF-1 and CK7. The adjacent struma ovarii was positive for TTF-1 and CK7. The right fallopian tube showed benign paratubal cysts.
After multidisciplinary discussion at both endocrinology and gynaecologic oncology tumour boards, the patient was advised to undergo thyroid/neck sonogram and laboratory tests. The latter would include thyroid function tests as well as an assessment of serum thyroglobulin and chromogranin A levels. Ultrasound revealed punctate 1–2 mm colloid cysts in the left thyroid gland but was otherwise unremarkable. The patient had elevated serum thyroglobulin of 59.4 ng/mL; all other lab values were within normal limits. Given that the patient had no evidence of carcinoid syndrome, no biomarkers (serotonin, catecholamines and histamine) were sent. Follow-up sonogram demonstrated a right ovarian mass and the patient was recommended hysterectomy and right oophorectomy. The patient underwent hysterectomy and right oophorectomy without issue, and all pathology was negative for malignancy. The patient has been disease-free for 6 months and is planned for close surveillance.