The proband is a boy and he is the only child born from a 36 year old father and a 27 year old mother. The parents were healthy and unrelated; paternal family history was negative for genetic diseases, while in the maternal family, eight members were affected by retinitis pigmentosa with an autosomal dominant pattern of transmission. Prenatal ultrasonographic evaluation gave normal results in fetal growth and morphology. No prenatal invasive genetic test was performed.
The child was born by natural delivery after a 40 week gestation plus 5 days. Birth weight was 3420 g (25°- 50° centile for gestational age), length at birth was 52 cm, (between 50°- 75° centile), occipito-frontal circumference (OCF) was 35.5 cm (50°- 75° centile), APGAR score was 9/10. In neonatal period, the child presented hyperpyrexia (blood, urine and cerebrospinal fluid microbiological analyses were all negative) and greater than 10% weight loss, which regressed with adequate nutrition. Episodes of bronchospasm and tirage, repeated episodes of cyanosis and desaturation resolved spontaneously shortly before discharge (at one month of age). During childhood his height growth was at the lower limit. He did not show any major malformation, besides submucous cleft palate. Brain MRI scan did not show any structural anomalies.
He had mild myopia and his hearing was normal. He did not show any significant medical complications.
At the age of 12 years and 1 month his weight was 41.6 kg (25°-50° percentile), his height was 134.2 cm (<3° percentile) and his OFC was 53 cm (50° percentile). His Body Mass Index (BMI) was 23 (75°-90° percentile). Facial dysmorphic features included long face, high nasal bridge, short and smooth philtrum, micrognathia. He had small hands and nasal speech.
Endocrinological analysis (IGF-1 dosage and growth hormone stimulation test with arginine) showed results consistent with isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency. A further brain MRI scan, carried out when he was twelve, revealed a small pituitary gland. GH treatment has been advised and the patient has just started this therapy.
Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
At birth, karyotype on peripheral blood lymphocytes was requested because of mild hypotonia and minor dysmorphic features.
Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed an interstitial deletion on chromosome 11 from bands 11q13.5 to 11q21 . The parents’ karyotypes were both normal and the analysis was extended to 100 metaphases to rule out 11q deletion mosaicism. At the age of twelve, a comparative genomic hybridization array (Array-CGH) was performed using a CGH + SNP 4 × 180 K microarray kit (Agilent Technologies). The microarray contained 110,172 probes with a median probe spacing of 25.3 Kb (5 KB in International Standards for Cytogenomic Arrays Consortium, ISCA) and 59,647 SNP (UCSC hg19, ). Array-CGH was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent Technologies) and allowed the identification of a more distal deletion of 17,2 Mb in size: from 11q14.3 to 11q22.3 (from nt 92,434,272 to nt 109,584,301)(555 probes with median Log2ratio value of −1.04). In the same region, 337 SNP probes showed a single allele . No additional pathogenetic Copy Number Variations (CNVs) were detected. The molecular karyotype, defined following the International System of Chromosome Nomenclature 2013, was: arr 11q14.3q22.3(92,434,272-109,584,301)x1.
At 1 month of age, the proband’s neurological examination showed no major dysfunctions; clinical observation according to Prechtl´s Method on the Qualitative Assessment of General Movements showed a pattern characterized by Poor Repertoire. His motor milestones were not significantly delayed: control of the head at 4 months, sitting without support at 8 months, hands and knees crawling at 11 months, standing with assistance at 13 months, walking alone at 24 months.
Parents reported vocalization, babbling and the first word “mamma” being uttered at one year of age. “Mamma” remained the only word used to name everything word until 19 months of age. After a period of hospitalization following an accidental fall which caused clavicle fracture and a second spell in hospital due to gastroenteritis, the child presented an arrest in speech and psychomotor competencies. These aspects were inscribed in a global regression of communicational and relational capacities.
Speech development between 20 and 36 months was characterized by: aphonia, amimia, pseudo- articulatory movements, reduced opening of the labial rima. Moreover, the child showed a poor communicative intent even at a non verbal level.
At 3 years he was a clumsy, passive and withdrawn child, not interested in playing. Therefore, at 3 years of age a psychomotor treatment with attention to relational aspects was introduced twice a week.
During the first year of rehabilitation, the proband reduced his more passive traits becoming more and more purposeful, actively responsive and assertive. Communicative intention emerged together with the increasing awareness of his speech difficulties.
There was a large discrepancy between the verbal comprehension (discrete) and expressive skills: he used gestures associated with vocalization to indicate, to formulate questions, to express disappointment or excitement. Then, speech therapy sessions began twice a week at the age of 4.
The proband showed a deficit of phonetic and non-phonetic phonation. Later, rhinolalia and rhinophonia, and a deficit in coordination and in phonological memory were observed. Consequently, a double diagnosis of specific expressive language disorder and of childhood apraxia of speech was formulated.
At 5 years, after one year of speech therapy, he achieved a quite complete phonetic repertoire, vocabulary increase with risk threshold for semantic errors, and emerging narrative skills. While he showed an adequate lexical comprehension, morphosyntactic comprehension was delayed of one year and communication was supported by mimics and gestures. At the same time, he developed social skills, showing more relational and playing capacities with peers and adults.
At age 6, verbal speech was sufficiently intelligible despite the persistence of hypotonic and uncoordinated glosso-velo-pharyngeal muscles.
His cognitive development, as measured by WIPPSI Scale, was in the lower limits of the normal range, with a discrepancy between verbal (VIQ) and performance (PIQ) scores (VIQ =85; PIQ =96; Full Scale IQ = 89) .
At the age of 8, the proband presented an impairment in the ability of naming objects and in lexical retrieval with the help of phonemic cues. On using the Italian version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test , comprehension was almost adequate (Language quotient = 82).
Morphosyntactic comprehension using the Rustioni Metz test showed a delay of about 2 years. The verbal short term memory span was 3 (inadequate).
Moreover, learning difficulties in the presence of a cognitive development at the lower limit of the normal range emerged. In particular, reading comprehension, measured using the MT battery of tests , was inadequate (correct answers: 6/10), in the absence of dyslexia and dysorthography, as measured with the Dyslexia and Orthographic coding test . Therefore, the logopedic rehabilitation continued until the child was 9 years old, with the aim to improve oral and written language comprehension. In the meantime, his writing and reading abilities supported him in planning the phonological string in speech.
Afterwards, counselling to parents and teachers, together with neuropsychiatric follow up continued until today with longitudinal controls (twelve years). We considered highly important to support parents and teachers in finding a harmonious global development which could take into account not only the educational aspects, but also the emotional and relational sides.
We were able to observe a global improvement in cognitive abilities (as illustrated in Figure D, where WISC III at 9 and 11 years of age are compared) .
Currently the child shows good skills at school in the application of the learned mechanisms, but he has more difficulties when logic skills and problem solving abilities are required. However, he is able to evaluate his work and adopt compensatory strategies in order to overcome his difficulties. He is competitive with his schoolmates, comparing their tests results and scores. He shows a good personal and social independence and participates in curricular and extracurricular activities with peers.