A 64-year-old man presented to our department with a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and septoplasty conducted 6 years previously. He had presented with epistaxis to the primary health care emergency center multiple times over 3 years. Multiple anterior nasal packing at different times helped control the epistaxis initially. Thereafter, the patient presented to our emergency department in a tertiary facility with active epistaxis. Transnasal flexible scope showed left posterior nasal septal mass with active oozing from the mass, which was managed by a merocele nasal pack and surgicel absorbable hemostat to stop the bleeding . Computed tomography (CT) of the paranasal sinuses without contrast reported a well-defined soft tissue density lesion without any calcification in the left nasal cavity, which was adherent to the septum causing medial displacement of the nasal septum, superior lateral displacement of the left middle nasal turbinate, and lateral deviation of the left uncinate process narrowing the left ostiomeatal complex. The lesion measured 1.95 × 1.51 cm in maximum. Other associated CT findings included a mild mucosal thickening noted in the nasal cavity along the nasal septum. The nasal septum appeared deviated towards the right with bony spur formation. Minimal mucosal thickening was noted in the bilateral maxillary sinuses. Soft tissue opacification of the left frontal sinus and frontoethmoidal recess were noted. Minimal mucosal thickening was noted in the bilateral ethmoid air cells . Based on the recorded history, physical examination, and CT findings, the patient was considered for endoscopic septal mass excision under general anesthesia planned to be performed by a specialist and a senior resident under the supervision of a consultant. For surgical excision, a Killian incision was performed anterior to the mass. Upon dissection of the flap, adhesions due to the previous surgery were noticed. Using a Colorado tip, a wide local excision was performed, and the specimen was sent for tissue sampling . Intraoperatively, the septum was not involved by the mass; thereby, refuting the initial CT scan assessment. The patient was sent to recovery postoperatively without any packing. Histopathologic examination revealed spindle cell lesions that are most likely compatible with a sinonasal GPC. Immunohistochemistry reported tumor cells that are positive for smooth muscle actin and β-catenin (nuclear staining) and focally positive for CD34 . The patient was seen 2 weeks postoperatively and then 6 weeks later, with no bleeding history during that period. Upon reexamination, incrustations were noted all over the surgical site and debrided . The patient is under regular close follow-up with no signs of recurrence to date.