A 15-month-old female child presented with high-grade fever and progressive bilateral leg weakness with difficulty in balance for 2 weeks. There was no history of trauma, and the birth history was unremarkable. The patient was the first child of consanguineous parents.
On clinical examination, power in the left lower limb was 3/5 and 4/5 in the right lower limb. Examination of the back revealed a very small, abnormal tuft of hair in the midline in the mid lumbar region suggesting the presence of occult spinal dysraphism . Thorough examination of the tuft of hair did not reveal any apparent sinus opening.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and full spine was carried out which revealed the presence of two Type 1 SCM in the thoracolumbar regions. The malformation started as a Type 1 SCM from T4 to T6, separated by a bony spur. The two hemicords then entered the same dural sheath but before uniting into a single, normal spinal cord, divided into another Type 1 SCM from T9 to T11, separated by another bony spur. The two hemicords then fused into a single dural sheath before continuing as a single spinal cord from T12 onward . The MRI also showed a DST at L1 and an epidural abscess from T12 to L3 level . Preoperative workup revealed C-reactive protein (CRP) of 2.8. The child was also evaluated for other anomalies, and computed tomography scan of kidney, ureter, and bladder revealed a duplicate collecting system with two separate renal pelvises and ureters in the right kidney.
The child underwent surgery through a limited exposure, incorporating the tuft of hair. Upon dissecting the lumbar fascia, a thick-walled, pearly white, elongated sinus tract was soon visible . The tract was traced to the dura, where it fused onto it, communicating directly with the intradural space. The entire tract was excised, including the attached dura of the thecal sac, which was then primarily repaired. The extradural space showed extensive purulent collection along with long (2–3 cm) strands of thick hairs and sebaceous material. The extradural space was further explored through one level laminectomy and was extensively irrigated until the irrigant appeared clear and no further hairs could be delivered. The DST and dermoid cyst were distant from either of the SCM. Samples were sent for culture, sensitivity, and histopathological analysis. No attempts were made to relieve the SCM at this stage.
Culture from the pus showed growth of Staphylococcus aureus which was also resistant to all beta-lactams. Histopathology revealed a sinus tract with collagenous tissue without any lining, along with separate keratin flakes and a small bony chip. The cystic lesion showed skin tissue lined by keratinizing squamous epithelium. The lumen had keratin flakes and a granular layer was seen. Focally, hair follicles were also present. However, no other germ cell component was seen. The features favored those of a dermoid cyst. The child made an uneventful postoperative recovery and was kept on broad-spectrum antibiotics which were then changed to specific Gram-positive coverage, extending to a full 2 weeks of administration. No new neurological deficits were noted, and she was subsequently discharged. At subsequent follow-ups, the child regained full function in both the lower limbs.
Upon completion of her antibiotic course and normalization of CRP, she was readmitted 4 weeks later for elective repair of her multilevel SCM. Both malformations were approached through a single linear midline incision, and after respective laminectomies, the bony spurs at each level were individually drilled and removed. The operative findings correlated with the MRI interpretation and in between the two Type 1 SCM, there existed a single dural sheath. The canal was spacious and no attempts were made to reconstruct the two dural sheaths into one, at either level. The child once again made an uneventful recovery.