The female patient was diagnosed as uterus didelphys at 28 years old when she was doing the transvaginal ultra-sound because of long-term abnormal uterine bleeding as 10–15 days/30 days. The gynecological physical and imaging examination confirmed the diagnosis as “double uterus, double cervix, double vagina”. She was operated hysteroscopy with endometrial polyp removal and segmental curettage in October 2018 for the first time. During the operation, it was found that there was a single polyp in the right cavity and multiple polyps in the left cavity. Postoperative paraffin pathology and immunohistochemistry showed that there was endometrial complex atypical hyperplasia and focal carcinoma (moderately differentiated endometrioid carcinoma) in the left cavity. IHC: ER 90% strong positive, PR 90% strong positive, p53+, Pax8+++, PTEN-, p16-, Ki67 10–30%. No lesion was found in the right uterine endometrium. The patient of childbearing age required conservative treatment which was taking oral megestrol acetate after surgery. In March 2019, hysteroscopy and curettage were reexamined. The postoperative pathology reported that there was mucinous metaplasia of endometrial glands in the left uterine cavity which can be explained because of the medication.
After the operation, the patient continued to take megestrol acetate. In June 2019, the hysteroscopy and segmental curettage were reexamined. Postoperative pathology showed that the endometrium of left uterus was moderately differentiated endometrioid carcinoma. With strong needs for child-bearing, our patient continuously chose to take megestrol acetate and reviewed hysteroscopy and curettage again in October 2019. Postoperative pathology result of left uterine endometrium was still in accordance with endometrioid carcinoma (moderately differentiated). Doctors recommended surgical treatment due to the unsatisfied outcome of conservative drug treatment. However, the patient refused and continued to take megestrol acetate for outpatient follow-up. Things changed in April 2020 when the pelvic enhanced MRI of our patient showed abnormal enhancement of left endometrium which was more obvious than before. In May 2020, she finally underwent the abdominal surgery with the left uterus and left fallopian tube resection. There were two spindle shaped uterus and accessories in bilateral iliac fossa. During the surgery, we opened the left ureteral tunnel, pushed down the bladder to 3 cm below the external orifice of the cervix and blocked the left uterine artery above it. The left utero-sacral ligament was cut and sewed 2 cm beside the uterus. The vaginal septum was cut open. We removed the left uterus along the space between the two cervixes. The left uterine endometrium was thick and crisp according to the postoperatively dissected specimen. The pathological findings were consistent with moderately differentiated endometrioid carcinoma with changes after treatment in the left uterus. The molecular and gene detection of the specimen showed that it may belong to the molecular type of MMR deficiency type which belongs to sporadic endometrial carcinoma and does not belong to Lynch syndrome.
The patient recovered well after operation. Combined with postoperative pathology, the patient was diagnosed as stage IA of moderately differentiated endometrial carcinoma in the left uterus. No abnormalities were found in the postoperative reexamination during which she has been trying to get pregnant in fertility center.