A 40-year-old man presented to us with progressive anogenital warts associated with foul-smelling discharge and fever. It was initially small in size and confined to the penile foreskin; however, over the past three years, it grew considerably. The sheer size of the anogenital warts made it impossible for him to ambulate or maintain perineal hygiene. He had been diagnosed with HIV for the past three years and was on HAART on presentation. His CD4+ count was 159 cells/uL and HIV RNA was 38 copies/mL upon presentation.
On examination, he was febrile with a strong malodorous stench emitted from his anogenital warts. The exophytic warty excrescence had infiltrated the entire external genitalia making his penis, scrotum and external urethral meatus indiscernible . Posteriorly, warts invaded his entire gluteal and sacral region, and a vague anal opening could be perceived based on faecal soiling over that region . He denied any lower urinary symptoms but admitted for faecal incontinence. He was started on broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics, and he was brought to operating theatre for excision of GCA. Serial excision of the GCA was performed as each time, we encountered torrential bleeding from the warts (estimated blood loss was 1.5 L–2.5 L), and we had to stop the surgery. A transverse defunctioning colostomy was performed as well to prevent faecal wound contamination. Daily dressings were performed for the wounds to allow secondary healing.
We were able to reduce the size of the GCA considerably, and only a small area of warts was left behind over his scrotal skin (, ). After a multidisciplinary meeting, we decided to reserve reconstructive surgery for recurrence, and further excision was not performed. The patient recovered well with oral nutritional support, dressings and physiotherapy, and he was able to ambulate upon discharge. The histopathology of the specimen showed features suggestive of GCA with extensive koilocytes and was negative for p16 immunostaining.
At the last evaluation, he was well and able to maintain his perineal hygiene. The GCA did not progress significantly, and there were no signs of infection. He was comfortable with his present state and did not wish for further surgical intervention.