Twenty one-year-old female presented to her primary care physician in June 2020 with complaints of diffuse joint pain with particular focus of hip and knee pain. She also reported low grade fever and mild diarrhea. Work up was done at that time including ANA, RF, ASO titer, Ferritin, all of which were normal. There were mild elevations of acute phase reactants, specifically ESR 31 mm/h (0–20 mm/h) and CRP 13 mg/L (0–10 mg/L).
Due to nonconclusive work-up and persistent symptoms, patient was referred to Rheumatology in September 2020. Her primary complaints at first visit were back pain that was worse in the morning and stiffness in the back and knees lasting several hours. Upon further questioning, she reported symptoms where worse at rest and improved with activity. She did not have fever, upper respiratory symptoms or diarrhea at that time. On exam, she had sacroiliac joint tenderness on the left side and left knee had mild effusion and joint tenderness. Based on presentation, she was felt to have early inflammatory arthropathy, likely reactive as she had diarrheal illness several weeks before presentation. A course of NSAID was given with minimal improvement.
Over the next few weeks, her symptoms worsened and in December 2020, returned to clinic with severe back pain limiting mobility and function. Stiffness in the morning reported to last up to 4 h. Pertinent positives on exam was consistent with limited mobility in lumbar spine as well as tenderness in the bilateral SI joints.
Based on new findings, HLA B27 was checked and was negative. Imaging was obtained of SI joints that demonstrated Grade II sclerosis, which was felt to be abnormal for her age. Based on abnormality on X-ray , magnetic resonance images were obtained at that time that demonstrated bone marrow edema bilaterally on T2 STIR imaging, left greater than right and erosions of the SI joint on left on T1 weighted imaging .
Accordingly, she was diagnosed with non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis based on clinical presentation and imaging criteria and absence of clear findings on plain film to meet NY criteria for Ankylosing Spondylitis. She was subsequently started on a TNF-alpha inhibitor, certolizumab and had impressive improvement in both function and pain within 2 weeks.
Due to concern about the rapidity of symptom progress, further history was elicited regarding her preceding infection after diagnosis was established. Initially, she had reported diarrhea and low grade fever but upon further questioning, she reported loss of taste at that time as well as fatigue and malaise. She had not been tested for SARS-CoV-2 as part of her initial work up. However, given the history of those symptoms, SARS-CoV-2 antibody semi quantitative testing was done on January 8, 2021 and found to be high positive, 175 units/ml (normal range <0.8 unit/ml), which was an indication of old infection and natural immunity as patient had not received SARS-CoV-2 vaccine.