A seven-year-old Caucasian male presented with multiple wart-like lesions in the plantar aspect of both foot after KT.
The patient had received a pre-emptive first living unrelated donor KT with bilateral native nephrectomies one month prior to the onset of the skin warts. He sustained early loss of renal allograft secondary to transplant renal artery thrombosis. Transplant kidney biopsy showed coagulative necrosis and he was transitioned to chronic hemodialysis until receiving a second deceased donor KT two months later with excellent allograft function. Induction immunosuppression (IS) for both first and second KT consisted of three doses of 1.5 mg/kg/dose ThymoglobulinR with steroid. Low dose tacrolimus and MMF were continued after the first failed KT. The first allograft was removed during the second KT. Maintenance IS for second KT consisted of tacrolimus, MMF and steroid. Serum trough tacrolimus level was maintained at the goal range.
The past medical history consisted of end stage renal disease secondary to posterior urethral valve. He however did not require dialysis given stable electrolytes and normal urine output. He had been immunized fully as per the routine childhood immunization schedule.
The patient’s personal and family history was otherwise unremarkable.
Physical examination of the patient showed normal vital signs and examination except for the abdomen with scar marks from prior surgeries and positive skin findings. Skin examination showed multiple verrucous papules and plaques on the anterior aspect of the plantar surface of foot bilaterally , and some papular lesions in the left thumb. There were no warts seen in the genital region or the oropharynx region. The warts were extremely painful and would wake him throughout the night. The patient had difficulty ambulating and had to be carried to the clinic visits.
Complete blood count was normal. Renal allograft function remained stable after second KT with serum creatinine of 0.5-0.6 mg/dL. C-reactive protein was normal. Serum trough tacrolimus level was at the goal of 9-11 ng/mL in the first month post KT, then 8-10 ng/mL in the second month, followed by 6-8 ng/mL from three to six months post KT. Urinalysis showed no proteinuria, hematuria or urinary tract infections. Given cytomegalovirus (CMV) mismatch, he received oral valganciclovir for six months post-KT. CMV, Epstein-Barr virus and BK virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR)s were all negative until six months post KT. HPV genotyping of the warts was not done.
Chest X-ray was negative for pneumonia or other viral processes. Renal allograft sonogram was normal.