A 28-year old female presented in our center suffering from a long term of recurrent abdominal pain. The chronic recurrent postprandial pain started six years ago.
The daily pain localized in the epigastric region, the pain wakes her up in the night and she had no complete relieve on analgesics. No nausea, vomiting or weight loss were recorded. Moreover, no diarrhea or constipation were detected. No previous history for medical or family conditions. Only She had an appendectomy ten years ago and two cesareans, and cholecystectomy five years ago.
Three upper endoscopies showed normal findings with almost six months between one and another. She has a previous diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome to explain her recurrent abdominal pain.
At admission, abdominal examination, laboratory tests and ultrasound were within normal limits. Multi slice computed tomography (MsCT) revealed a 3.5 cm heterogeneous mass in the tail of pancreas with stenosis up to 40% in the celiac trunk with 45° of angulation .
The diagnosed of DS was probable, and a surgical intervention was proposed to resolve the celiac trunk compression and to resect the pancreatic tumor. Abdominal exploration was performed via midline incision; a 3.5 cm mass in the tail of the pancreas was detected with no metastasis or ascites. Distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed. Liberation of the celiac trunk was accomplished by cutting the median arcuate ligament .
The patients discharged from the hospital three days after surgery in good situation. Follow up after showed a complete relieve for her pain.
The pathology result showed neuroendocrine tumor in the tail of pancreas.
A well-demarcated mass in the pancreatic tail, measures 3cm in the greatest dimension, composed of proliferation of sheets and nests of medium and large cells with eosinophilic and finely granular cytoplasm, nuclei are round with salt and pepper chromatin. Atypical and bizarre cell present with prominent mitotic figures and tumor necrosis. Rich vascular network in the stroma, with fibrotic areas.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed that neuron specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin and CD56 were positive (diffuse), negative chromogranin, focal cytokeratins (CK) and the KI67 was high index (20%). Finally, Diagnosis is a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor, Grade 3 .