A 77-year-old Chinese male presented to a urology clinic with a complaint of obstruction during urination for 5 mo.
In July 2017, a 77-year-old male patient was admitted to a hospital in Guangzhou after experiencing trouble urinating for 4 mo. The patient was found to have prostatic hyperplasia. He underwent transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) at this point. His total PSA (TPSA) level was 6.78 ng/mL. Multiple bladder masses were discovered during surgery, and an electrosurgical biopsy of the bladder mass was performed. The pathology results revealed prostate adenocarcinoma with bladder invasion and localized necrosis. Bone metastasis was taken into consideration when radionuclide bone emission computed tomography (ECT) revealed aberrant bone metabolism in both the pubic and sciatic bones. He was diagnosed with prostate adenocarcinoma with a pathological stage of T4N0M1b and a Gleason score of 4 + 4 = 8. On postoperative Day 5, the patient was started on ADT with a regimen of goserelin acetate and bicalutamide. At postoperative week 6, the TPSA level was 34.38 ng/mL, and testosterone (T) was less than 0.09 nmol/L. The patient was kept on ADT for 4 mo.
The patient denied any history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, malaria, hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, mental illness, surgery, trauma, blood transfusion, or food or drug allergy.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.3 °C; blood pressure, 123/72 mmHg; heart rate, 80 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. No enlarged lymph nodes were palpable throughout the body. Finger examination of the prostate revealed uneven prostate, hard texture, the disappearance of the central sulcus, no tenderness, no nodules palpable, no swelling in the rectum, and no blood staining in the finger sleeve.
In October 2017, the TPSA level dropped to 0.003 ng/mL, and the T level dropped to 0.09 nmol/L.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed PCA with bladder metastasis, and the bilateral seminal vesicle glands were poorly visualized .