A 55-year-old Japanese woman had developed right-lateral chest and back pain 2 months prior to admission to our hospital. Thirteen years previously, she had undergone concurrent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and total hysterectomy for right ovarian tumor in other institution. She had no past history of other neoplasms. Physical examination revealed deep-tendon hyperreflexia in the lower extremities but no muscle weakness. Blood tests were unremarkable apart from a high serum concentration of cancer antigen 125 (134 U/mL; cutoff value, 35 U/mL). On fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) was 6.6 in the right paraspinal region at the level of Th12 and 8.8 in the right thyroid lobe; however, fine-needle aspiration cytology of the latter yielded no evidence of malignancy. CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an irregular mass in the right arch of Th12 vertebral bone that protruded into the spinal canal through the intervertebral foramen and was infiltrating surrounding soft tissue, the whole mass being of 35 × 78 × 36 mm . No primary tumor was detected in other organs or the abdominal or pleural cavities. Pathological examination of a CT-guided needle biopsy of the paraspinal lesion demonstrated papillary proliferation of epithelial cells with blunt nuclear atypia against a fibrotic background with psammomatous calcification . Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for paired box 8 (PAX8) (Roche Diagnostics; Basel, Switzerland), estrogen receptor (ER) (Roche Diagnostics), and Wilms’ tumor 1 (WT1) (Roche Diagnostics), but negative for thyroglobulin (Nichirei; Tokyo, Japan) , thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) (Roche Diagnostics), progesterone receptor (Roche Diagnostics), S100 protein (Roche Diagnostics), and calretinin (Roche Diagnostics). Staining for P53 (Roche Diagnostics) showed a non-mutational “wild type” pattern . Because the lesion was suspected of being a metastatic neoplasm from the previous ovarian tumor, we obtained the relevant clinicopathologic and operative records and found that our patient had had a 13- × 11- × 9-cm cystic tumor that did not involve the ovarian surface . Peritoneal cytology was negative; however, the tumor had been ruptured intraoperatively. Lymph-node biopsy was not performed during the original surgery. The six slides available for microscopic review in retrospect, which included all the 6 sections (1 on each slide) submitted for the previous diagnosis of the primary tumor, showed cuboidal to columnar epithelium with minimal cytologic atypia proliferating in hierarchical branches with no invasive features, micropapillary components, or peritoneal implants , the diagnosis being conventional Stage IC1 SBT/APST according to the current World Health Organization (WHO) and International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 2014 classifications. All the above-listed immunochemistry markers were identical in the previous ovarian tumor and the present paraspinal neoplasm, except for Ki-67 (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, CA, USA), which had labeling indices of 1 and 5%, respectively. It was therefore concluded that the paraspinal lesion was a bone metastasis of transformed LGSC originating from the previous SBT/APST in the right ovary. The patient underwent radiotherapy (30 Gray in 10 fractions) for the paraspinal lesion, which relieved her pain, followed by chemotherapy treatment with paclitaxel and carboplatin plus bevacizumab. She remains alive with right-sided pleural effusion and suspected metastases in the Th3 and Th4 vertebrae 168 months after the initial surgery.
Neither the primary nor metastatic tumor harbored KRAS mutation (codon 12, 13, 59, 61, 117, or 146) according to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a reverse sequence-specific oligonucleotide methodology (LSI Medience; Tokyo, Japan), nor BRAF V600E mutation according to real-time PCR (LSI Medience).