A 78-year-old male presented to our hospital with a recent history of acute decompensated heart failure due to severe MR, based on long-standing ischaemic heart disease which had been treated by coronary bypass and implantable cardioverter defibrillator for secondary prevention. At presentation, an auscultatory examination revealed a holosystolic murmur of a grade IV/VI was audible at the left fifth mid-clavicular line with radiation to the left axilla. No peripheral oedema was documented. The exertional dyspnoea was graded in New York Heart Association functional Class II. Six-minute walk distance was 403 m. N-terminal pro brain-type natriuretic peptide was 990 ng/L (normal < 486 ng/L). The prescribed medication was torasemide 20 mg, bisoprolol 10 mg, and amlodipine 10 mg and dabigatran 150 mg.
Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated an A2 segment pseudo-prolapse with an eccentric MR jet to the posterior direction, which appeared to result from mitral annular enlargement due to left atrial dilatation (volume 49 mL/m2) with the anteroposterior diameter of 38 mm, but no relevant LV cavity enlargement with the end-diastolic diameter of 52 mm and the ejection fraction of 64% . As a result, the coaptation angle of both leaflets increased to 148°, where the angles between the mitral annular plane and leaflets reduced to 21° as to the anterior leaflet, comparing the posterior leaflet with 28°, in absence of relevant apical leaflet tethering (coaptation depth 6 mm) . A three-dimensional colour Doppler echocardiography revealed a large MR orifice area of 0.78 cm2 with the width of 17 mm .
Due to a prohibitive risk for redo surgery, the local multidisciplinary heart team decided to treat the patient using TMVr. In consideration of pathoanatomy of MV and a regurgitation width of 17 mm, we selected the PASCAL® Transcatheter Valve Repair System (Edwards Life Scientific, Irvine, CA, USA). The PASCAL was placed successfully between segments A2 and P2 . The target posterior leaflet showed a thick basal part of 12.1 mm and a thin distal part of 4.7 mm with a total of 16.8 mm. The clasped length was 9.1 mm . After PASCAL release, the MR severity was reduced to mild ; however, an acute SLDA occurred 2 min later . The posterior leaflet was shortened to 12.3 mm , and the device was moving back and forth instable, while the residual MR remained unchanged because the large-profile device worked like as a central spacer for the coaptation defect . The mean transmitral gradient was 2 mmHg after PASCAL implantation. Due to the limited MV orifice area for a second PASCAL device with device width of 10 mm, we decided to stabilize the PASCAL device and both leaflets by a MitraClip XTR® (Abbott Vascular Structural Heart, Menlo Park, CA) with a device width of 4 mm. After exchanging the guide catheters, the leaflets adjacent to the PASCAL device were captured by the MitraClip XTR , in which the residual length of the posterior leaflet was 5.5 mm after closing the clip . The PASCAL device was stabilized (, , Video S) and the residual MR remained mild with a mean transmitral gradient of 3 mmHg . The patient was successfully discharged 2 days after the procedure with mild MR, stable devices implanted and no post-procedural mitral stenosis with the mean gradient of 4.7 mmHg.