Written informed consent for publication of this case report was obtained from the patient, and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.
A 44-year-old woman presented with arthralgia in the right wrist and complained of having difficulty in doing housework. Physical examination revealed a hot and swollen right wrist with tenderness and limited movement. No pustule was seen. Blood analysis showed erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 97 mm/h [reference range, 0–20 mm/h] and augmented hypersensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) 5.50 mg/L [reference range, 0–3.00 mg/L]. Her past medical history was unremarkable. Her father developed osteoarthralgia as well as pustules on the palms of his hands and soles of his feet when he was a youth; the pustules disappeared spontaneously 10 years previously, but osteoarthralgia persisted.
The patient suffered from recurrent painless pustules on the palms of her hands and soles of her feet for 5 years before this admission. Palmoplantar pustulosis was diagnosed. Six months before this admission, she noticed pain in her anterior chest wall and right wrist. ESR and hsCRP were 19 mm/h and 3.80 mg/L, respectively. Complete blood count, liver, and renal function were all within the normal ranges. Rheumatoid factor (RF), antinuclear antibody (ANA), and human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27) measurements were negative. Whole-body bone scintigraphy (WBBS) using 99Tc-MDP revealed multiple lesions with increased tracer accumulation in the bilateral sternoclavicular joints, bilateral first anterior ribs, and right wrist . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right wrist showed synovial inflammation, synovial hypertrophy, and joint effusion . A diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome was made according to the criteria proposed by Kahn and Khan.[ Treatment with NSAIDs, methotrexate (MTX) (10 mg/wk), and Tripterygium wilfordii hook f (TwHF) (20 mg 3 times/d) was initiated. Pain in the anterior chest wall and pustules remitted, but the symptoms involving the right wrist remained.
On admission, one intramuscular injection of glucocorticoids (Diprospan, 1 mL) provided transient relief of arthralgia. A combination of MTX (10 mg/wk), TwHF (20 mg 3 times/d), and hydroxychloroquine (0.2 g twice/d) was initiated.
Seven months later, symptoms in the right wrist recurred. ESR and hsCRP were 29 mm/h and 13.59 mg/L, respectively. Biologics were considered. The TNF inhibitor etanercept was administered at 50 mg/wk for 2 weeks in combination with MTX (10 mg/wk). Nevertheless, expectative remission of symptoms, serum inflammatory parameters, and imaging findings did not appear . The dosage, frequency, and duration of different treatments after diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome are further illustrated in Figure .
Therefore, in combination with MTX treatment, oral administration of tofacitinib, a small-molecule inhibitor of JAKs, was tentatively initiated at 5 mg twice daily. After 4 weeks of using tofacitinib, the patient reported marked improvement of symptoms and being competent in completing housework. The patient's score on the visual analogue scale (VAS) decreased . ESR and hsCRP, IL-6 and TNFα levels decreased to nearly normal ranges . After 12 weeks of using tofacitinib, MRI of the right wrist demonstrated amelioration . No adverse effects, such as infection, anemia, or leukopenia, were noticed.