A 9-year-old Chinese girl was admitted to our unit due to episodic fainting attacks associated with sweatiness and decreased consciousness persisting for a year with aggravation for the previous 1 month. Hypoglycemia with a serum glucose level of 2–3 mmol/L was confirmed when the symptoms appeared and was resolved with intravenous glucose infusion. The fasting plasma blood-glucose level (FBG) was 1.84 mmol/L, insulin level was 8.2 mU/L, and insulin/glucose ratio was 4.46. An abdominal dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a tumor at the tail of the pancreas . There were no abnormal findings on ultrasonography of the thyroid gland and adrenal gland. Considering the case history, laboratory data, and imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed with insulinoma in the tail of the pancreas, and robot-assisted, spleen-preserving laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy was planned.
The patient was given a 5% glucose intravenous infusion constantly and slowly to prevent hypoglycemia. The robot was placed at the head of the patient. The assistant surgeon was positioned between the patient’s legs, and the surgical nurse stood at the right side of the patient. The patient’s blood glucose level was monitored and kept above 3.4 mmol/L throughout the whole procedure.
The pneumoperitoneum pressure was 12 mmHg. A total of four trocars were used. The first trocar (10 cm) was inserted 5 cm below the umbilicus. The other three trocars were introduced under laparoscopic watch into the left anterior axillary line at the umbilical level (8 mm), the right anterior axillary line 2 cm below umbilical level (8 mm), and the left midclavicular line 3 cm below the umbilical level (12 mm; Fig. ).
The surgical procedure was performed as follows: After the gastrocolic ligament was dissected with an ultrasound knife, the posterior gastric wall was sutured to the round ligament of the liver with 4-0 prolene in order to expose the pancreas. Then, the gastrocolic ligament and splenocolic ligament were dissected to move the splenic flexure of the colon away from the surgical field. A hard tumor was seen at the tail of the pancreas, with a diameter of 2 cm, purplish color, and a clear margin . Laparoscopic ultrasonography showed main pancreatic duct involvement, and no other pancreatic lesion was found. The spleen vein was seen embedded with the pancreatic parenchyma; both the surgeon and assistant separated them carefully, patiently, and gently. Then, the pancreatic capsule was dissected along the lower edge of the pancreas with a hook knife, and the splenic vessels were separated and divided from the pancreatic cyst to avoid bleeding caused by adherence . After complete isolation of the tail of the pancreas from the spleen, the ECHELON endoscopic linear stapler (EC 60A, Johnson & Johnson, OH, USA) was used to transect 1 cm proximal to the tumor . The antecedent 4-0 prolene in the posterior gastric wall was cut, and a suction drain was placed through the lesser sac to the transected pancreas. Fast–frozen pathology indicated a neuroendocrine pancreatic tumor, or insulinoma, considering the clinical symptoms. The total operating time was 155 min, in which the pneumoperitoneum time was 120 min with an estimated blood loss of 10 ml.
The urinary catheter was removed on day 1. The gastrointestinal decompression was successfully removed on day 3. The drain was clean and removed on day 7 . The patient was given solid food on day 7 and discharged to home on day 8 after abdominal MRI showed no abnormalities. Her FBG was kept above 3.4 mmol/L pre-operatively, 12 mmol/L after removal of the tumor, and 9 mmol/L after the surgery.
The post-operative pathology results indicated a neuroendocrine tumor in the pancreas tail, 2 × 2 × 1.2 cm, mitosis count 3/10 HPF, IHC: Ki-67 (+10%), CgA (+), Syn (3+), SSTR2 (−), CK (+), CD56 (+), SSTR3 (+), SSTR1 (+), β-catenin (+), CD117 (-), and Grade 2, with local nerve involvement.