A 41-year-old woman was referred to our department with cystic lesions in both lungs. She underwent left adnexectomy + partial omentectomy + para-aortic lymphadenectomy for a left ovarian tumor at the age of 37 at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of our hospital. She was asymptomatic. The pathological findings were MBOT with a microinvasion. 3 years after the initial surgery, chest computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple cystic lesions in both lungs, with the cysts increasing in size and the cyst walls thickening over time.
She had no specific family history, was a social drinker with no smoking history, and took potassium gluconate and heavy magnesium oxide. A plain chest CT revealed multiple cystic lesions in both lungs . After 1-year follow-up, the cysts were enlarging and their walls thickening . Blood tests showed no abnormalities in complete blood count, serum chemistries, or coagulation studies. The concentrations of tumor markers, which were carcinoma embryonic antigen, cancer antigen 19-9, cancer antigen 125, pro-gastrin-releasing peptide, cytokeratin fragment, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor, were within normal limits. Autoantibody tests were negative; therefore, connective tissue disorders were ruled out. No laboratory findings indicated tuberculosis or other infectious diseases that could cause cystic lesions. Positron emission tomography-CT showed slight fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation in the cyst wall. Since the diagnosis was not confirmed by imaging, blood tests, or culture tests, we performed a lung biopsy. Considering the risk of pneumothorax and the possibility of intrapleural seeding, we conducted lung biopsy via thoracoscopy in place of a bronchscopic or a percutaneous biopsy.
We performed a complete video-assisted 3-port thoracic surgery. The maximum diameter of the port was 3 cm, and we palpated the tumor by inserting a finger through this port. The tumor was an intrapulmonary cystic nodule with a slightly yellowish tone of the visceral pleura . We performed a partial resection of the lesion in the left lower lobe, which is where the tumor borders were more easily recognizable.
Histopathologically, the cyst was a multilocular lesion with a septum, and there was a hemorrhage within the cyst. As regards the primary focus, the cyst was coated with mucus-filled epithelium, and its cavity was filled with liquid. Although nuclear atypia and cellular stacking were observed, no infiltration was observed. Tumors were found within the cystic structures, and two distinct histological structures were observed within the tumor. One area had poor atypical glandular epithelium with abundant intracytoplasmic mucus that proliferated as forming papillary and tubular structures , and the other had fibrous stroma covered with mucus-bearing epithelium forming a septum . Various immunostains were negative for thyroid transcription factor-1, which is positive in lung adenocarcinoma . On the contrary, paired box 8 staining, which is specific to the female genitalia, was positive . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with pulmonary metastases of an MBOT.
We recommended 6 courses of paclitaxel and carboplatin, but the patient refused them, so we followed the patient with CT. On imaging, the cystic lesion tended to enlarge, but no enlarged lymph nodes suggested metastasis nor distant metastasis. 1 year after video-assisted thoracic surgery, the patient was still asymptomatic and visits our outpatient clinic.