Our patient was a 50-year-old Caucasian man with a history of a progressively worsening painful right hip for the last five years. His work and sports activities were limited due to the hip pain. His limping became more apparent over the last year, and the pain forced him to stop walking after five minutes.
A physical examination revealed pain with rotation at 90° of flexion. Flexion beyond 100° was not possible. Internal rotation was limited to 20°. External rotation was not impaired. An anterior impingement test was positive.
Radiographs unveiled a cam deformity at the anterosuperior side of the femoral head and mild degenerative changes on the acetabular side (see Figures and ). The α angle was 60° (>55° is regarded abnormal and suspicious for a cam lesion ). The CE angle of 28° was within the normal range, and not larger than the cut-off point of 35° for a pincer type. An additional MRI scan did not reveal any labrum or cartilage pathology, or loose bodies. We agreed to perform an arthroscopy and shave the femoral head-neck junction if a cam lesion was found. During arthroscopy the suspected cam lesion was seen on the anterosuperior side of the femoral neck; additionally, we saw an intact labrum and mild degenerative changes of the cartilage of the anterolateral part of the acetabulum (Outerbridge classification I-II) . The cam lesion was shaved off.
The arthroscopic correction was only marginally successful, as pain persisted 12 weeks after surgery. A minimal improvement in daily work and walking distance was seen. Using a regular CT scan we assessed whether a sufficient portion of the cam protrusion had been shaved off. This seemed to be the case on the regular, static CT images. Subsequently, it was decided to simulate the ROM of our patient in order to gain insight in the kinematics of the joint. Using Articulis (Clinical Graphics, Delft, The Netherlands), a system for the simulation of bone-determined ROM, the CT scan of the hip joint was analyzed. Articulis uses a collision detection algorithm and a kinematic model to describe the ROM of spherical joints such as the hip joint .
According to the simulations the risk of impingement was small in flexion and abduction separately. However, 45° of this combined motion was predicted to lead to impingement (see Figure ). Internal rotation at 90° of flexion was limited to 15°, compared to 35° (±12°) in healthy hip joints as found by Tannast et al. .
We agreed upon a second arthroscopy of the affected hip. During this procedure, the remaining osseous rim on the femoral head was shaved off. At six months after this procedure, our patient is almost pain free and has regained a pain-free functional ROM. His limp has resolved and he can walk pain free. Informed consent for a CT scan was obtained to evaluate the last operation. This scan was analyzed using Articulis, and showed that bone-determined ROM had improved (see Figures and ).