A 9-month-old boy first presented for a neurodevelopmental pediatric evaluation due to significant self-biting of the tongue, lower lip, and fingertips. Patient first began to develop signs of self-harm approximately at 5 months when abrasions to the tongue were noted by the pediatric dentist. The child was born to a gravida 3, para 1 mother; there was one prior miscarriage. Fetal movement was normal through the pregnancy, and the baby was born by spontaneous vaginal delivery at 39 weeks. He did not have any other major neonatal complications. During this visit, the patient was found to have notable global developmental delays and had significant hypotonia of the lower extremities. Patient was able to roll over from prone to supine position at 6 months. The patient also had delays in language and fine motor development and was unresponsive to painful stimuli (lack of response to blood obtained from toe). Lastly, the patient exhibited poor weight gain due to poor oral feeding. Laboratory work at this visit eliminated the possibility of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was unremarkable.
2nd neurodevelopmental evaluation at 12 months old, revealed the patient continued to exhibit global developmental delays and neuromotor abnormalities (hypotonia and hyporeflexia). His self-biting progressed to causing visible tissue injury to his fingertips and his poor feeding persisted. Whole exome sequencing was performed after this visit and revealed a mutation in the SCN11 gene. At 16 months of age the patient began nasogastric feedings due to poor weight gain in frequent spitting up of food. A G-tube was placed in later weeks due to chronic malnutrition and inability to tolerate oral feedings.
Patient’s first orthopaedic visit occurred at 17 months of age and revealed he can now sit independently but cannot pull to stand or walk yet. His physical exam revealed full range of motion of the shoulders, elbows, wrists and hands with normal alignment and stability. Muscle tone and reflexes were intact in the upper extremities. His lower extremities show equal leg lengths and symmetric abduction to a peroneal angle of 150°. Hip rotation shows internal rotation to 30° and external rotation to 50°. There was diffuse hypotonia in both lower extremities. A discussion was had at the time to defer bracing until the child can walk to prevent any impedance to his motor development. At the age of 25 months, the patient returned with normal mobility, except at the hip where he showed increased flexion contracture. At approximately 4 years of age, the patient was able to walk 10 steps independently with a 50° flexion contracture at both hips. Follow up at 4.5 years old revealed little improvement in hip flexion contracture despite persistent stretching by the patient’s physical therapist and mother since the patient was 25 months old.
Computed tomography of the hip at 4.5 years old demonstrated well-formed acetabulum anteriorly with minor deficits posteriorly, confirming a soft issue contracture . Operative treatment to release contracture of both hips was discussed with family since nonoperative management did not prevent progression of the patient’s contractures. Patient underwent surgery at approximately 4 years and 9 months of age. Intraoperatively, a hip arthrogram was first performed to assess the overall contour of the hip, femoral head, and acetabulum anatomy. During soft tissue dissection the sartorius, tensor fascia lata and rectus femoris were found to be excessively tight. Bilateral sartorius and rectus femoris tenotomies were performed in addition to the recession of bilateral iliopsoas muscles. Partial release of bilateral tensor fascia lata was also performed with anterior hip capsule release and reconstruction of both hips to allow the hips to achieve a neutral position. He was maintained for 6 weeks in short leg casts connected with a bar to lock the hips in internal rotation to reduce risk of anterior dislocation of hips. Approximately 2 months post-op he was able to stand longer and straighter than prior to surgery. Radiographs of the hips at this visit revealed signs of HO around the right femur, left acetabulum, and left femur. However, over the course of months he developed a diminishing walking ability. Repeat imagining approximately 6 months post-operatively demonstrated heterotopic ossification around the right femur, left acetabulum and left femur that later bridged from the left pelvis to femur (-).
The patients last presented 14 months post-op with acutely elevated inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate [43 mm/h] and C-reactive protein [8 mg/L]) as well as a left hip swelling. An MRI revealed an effusion in his left hip. At this visit his range of motion of the right hip was flexion from 60° to 80°. Left hip was fused at 70° of flexion. An aspiration of his left hip was later negative for infection. The aspiration was complicated by the overly heterotopic ossification as well as new periosteal bone formation appreciated intra-operatively using fluoroscopic imaging. Patient consent was obtained prior to production of this case report.