The patient was a 53-year-old Chinese male employed as a goldminer. He presented to our hospital with complaints of uninduced vision loss, redness, and irritation in the left eye for 4 months, which had aggravated in the past week. He denied any history of systemic disease, ocular trauma, or surgery. Prior to visiting our hospital, he was diagnosed with herpes simplex keratitis (HSK) at a local hospital and received topical antiviral and glucocorticoid therapy. The initial examination revealed a visual acuity of hand motion (HM)/10 cm and an intraocular pressure of 11 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye showed mixed hyperemia, and a large area of irregular matrix turbidity infiltration and irregular defects of the epithelium were observed in the cornea with a 1.5 mm hypopyon . Confocal microscopy showed a large number of inflammatory cells infiltrating the stroma. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed that the corneal stroma was infiltrated and opaque, and a large number of exudates were attached to the endothelium . Corneal scrapings were examined with Gram staining and Potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet film, but the test result was negative. The right eye was normal. The patient was suspected to have HSK combined with bacterial infection and was treated with ganciclovir, gatifloxacin, and tobramycin eye drops. After 3 days of treatment, the patient showed no improvement, and tobramycin and dexamethasone eye drops were administered. After the addition of glucocorticoids, inflammation in the anterior chamber was alleviated, but the corneal lesions continued to expand . To further identify the pathogen, we used a corneal scraper for high-throughput sequencing. The results identified M. haemophilus, with 17,608 sequences with a relative abundance of 97.8%. The patient was diagnosed with M. haemophilus keratitis, received systemic amikacin with a dosage of 750 mg / day, topical 2% amikacin eye drops once per hour, rifampicin eye drops once per hour, and moxifloxacin eye drops 4 times a day, and underwent therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty (TPK). The cornea collected from the operation was analyzed by Ziehl-Neelsen staining, and a large number of mycobacteria were observed . Two months after surgery, the patient’s visual acuity recovered to 0.4 . However, 3 months after the operation, the patient returned to the clinic complaining of redness and swelling in the left eye for nearly 4 days. A slit-lamp examination showed that the corneal graft was transparent, and the corneal epithelial defect at the recipient bed was at the 4 o’clock position. The temporal bulbar conjunctiva was hyperemic and edematous, and white pus was observed locally . A conjunctival M. haemophilus infection was suspected. On the following days, the patient deteriorated rapidly, with caseous necrosis of the conjunctiva that rapidly expanded . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) revealed conjunctival edema and thickening . Debridement was performed in the area of conjunctival necrosis, and acid-fast staining of the specimens revealed a large number of mycobacteria. Histopathological examination of the infected conjunctival tissue showed granulomatous findings. High-throughput sequencing confirmed M. haemophilus infection (sequence 135,965, relative abundance 99.58%). Systemic examination revealed no infection in other parts of the body, and laboratory results for anti-HIV, VDRL, TPHA, IgG, IgM, IgA, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and Toxoplasma serotry were all negative. The patient received systemic rifampin (600 mg / day), moxifloxacin (400 mg / day), clarithromycin (750 mg / day), and amikacin (750 mg / day) in addition to topical 2% amikacin (once per hour), moxifloxacin (4 times a day), and rifampicin (once per hour). Systemic dose had been maintained at the original dose, topical dose has been changed to once every 2 h after one month of use, and changed to four times a day after three months, and then maintenance treatment. One month later, the patient’s original conjunctival ulcer was repaired, but abscesses in the inferior and temporal subconjunctiva developed, and a nodule appeared on the outer skin of the lower eyelid . After three months of treatment, the conjunctival abscess and skin nodule resolved, and the corneal stroma remained transparent despite the development of a large defect in the conjunctival and corneal epithelia . After 7 months of treatment, the patient’s condition was controlled, the corneal graft was mostly transparent, the visual acuity was 0.3, the conjunctival lesions subsided, and a small scar and mild lower eyelid inversion trichiasis remained . Systemic antibiotic therapy was continued for 10 months, with no relapse one year after discontinuation.