During a summer rainstorm, a 50-year-old Caucasian man riding a bicycle in the forested area around the city of Trieste, Italy, was struck by lightning, resulting in immediate CA, as reported by bystanders. Basic life support was not initiated by the lay bystanders, but was initiated only a few minutes later by a physician hiking nearby and subsequently continued by the medical emergency system personnel who arrived at the scene 15 min after the event. The presenting rhythm was asystole, with a downtime before return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) of 16 minutes. After ROSC, the patient remained unconscious with a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 3, non-reactive mydriatic pupils, and stable blood pressure and oxygenation values once intubated. During the secondary examination at hospital admission, a cutaneous lesion in the occipital area was noted, described as singed hair with a dominant burning smell, linear in shape, with a small round black eschar, presumably compatible with the first contact with lightning .
The presence of burnt plastic at the level of the occipital slot of the helmet was consistent with the hypothesis of the eschar being the first contact with lightning. Similar erythematous cutaneous lesions with singed hair were found at the suprapubic level, probably the output area in proximity to the metal core of the bicycle frame through the saddle .
In addition, the right tympanic membrane was perforated. Ophthalmological assessment was negative. Total body computed tomography (CT) scan showed a modest right apical and temporal subarachnoid hemorrhage, millimeter-sized petechial hemorrhages in the cortical-subcortical junction of the fronto-parietal lobes, and slight signs of initial edema . An abundant hemoperitoneum associated with a bleeding hepatic angioma, was present.
The patient underwent immediate damage control surgery, with abdominal packaging to control the bleeding, and then was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU). Laboratory tests on blood samples revealed elevated biomarkers of myocardial and hepatic injury (high-sensitivity troponin I, 90,879 ng/L; creatine kinase, 1131 U/L; aspartate and alanine transaminases, 361 and 421 U/L, respectively; blood lactate, 11.36 mmol/L). The electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus tachycardia with minimal nonspecific ST elevation in the inferior leads, and cardiac ultrasonography showed normokinetic ventricles; no further cardiology investigations were undertaken at that time. Owing to the prolonged time to admission, target controlled temperature management was not established, and the subsequent appearance of fever (from day 2 after ICU admission, mean central body temperature of 38.2 °C with only one peak at 38.8 °C) was managed with ice packs, a short period of diclofenac infusion, and then acetaminophen on demand. No prophylactic therapy against vasospasm or brain edema was initiated since serum hyperosmolality was persistently elevated (319 mOsm/L). Following surgery, the patient remained in cardiogenic shock with profound hemodynamic instability and lactic metabolic acidosis. Increasingly higher norepinephrine doses were needed to support arterial pressure, peaking 0.95 mcg/kg/min on day 2. On day 3, after adequate goal-direct volume expansion, terlipressin infusion was added to the treatment regimen (peaking at 1.28 mcg/kg/h). Cardiac function was restored to normal, as demonstrated by a further ultrasound assessment. Acute kidney injury due to rhabdomyolysis (noted at admission to the ICU by the elevated levels of serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and serum creatine kinase [1131 U]) and oliguria were managed with volume expansion with crystalloids, urine alkalinization with sodium bicarbonate boluses, and diuretics. A brain CT scan was repeated on day 2, revealing a further reduction of the cortico-subcortical differentiation bilaterally in the frontal-parietal and temporo-occipital areas compatible with anoxic edema, a marked flattening of the cortical convolutions, and the obliteration of the supratentorial peri-encephalic liquor spaces, also at the level of basal cisterns. On day 3, sedation was interrupted to allow for neuroprognostication. A neurological clinical assessment revealed a persisting GCS of 3 and the absence of pupillary and corneal reflexes. Somatosensory evoked potentials demonstrated bilateral absence of the cortical somatosensory N20-potential (ERB- and N13-potential were present) and the electroencephalogram (EEG) recorded minimal cerebral electrical activity with very low voltages. On day 4, hemodynamic stability was obtained, allowing for tapering of vasopressor support, and the fever ceased. On day 5, the patient remained unconscious with a GCS of 3 and only a weak cough reflex and respiratory drive. A new EEG revealed an isoelectric trace. A cerebral CT angiography revealed a regular opacification of the arterial circulation with normal venous drainage. Direct scanning highlighted further reduced cortical-subcortical differentiation and marked flattening of brain convolution .
The patient died on day 10. A post-mortem evaluation revealed signs of multi-organ hypoperfusion, with effects on subendocardial and transmural cardiomyocytes. Cerebral sections confirmed the CT findings of petechiae and subarachnoid hemorrhage previously located along the electrical current and as a result of direct damage to brain vasculature. Brain tissue softening and edema were associated with the direct effects of electrical passage. The cerebral parenchyma sections revealed an abundant, non-selective loss of neurons . We collected detailed medical information from the patient’s relatives, but nothing in his medical history could be related to any previous neurological or cognitive disturbances.