An 80-year-old Swedish-born Caucasian man was referred to us from a private neurologist with a diagnosis of possible ALS six months ago. His mother died from ALS in her 80s, but no other relatives are known to have had this disease. Until recently our patient had been physically active, including participation in marathon running and cross-country skiing. Two years ago he had experienced a cardiac arrest but was successfully resuscitated. Aside from that, he had been in good health. About one year ago he started to experience a progressive weakness of his right hand and arm. During the same period, cognitive deterioration and personality changes appeared.
A neurophysiologic investigation including nerve conduction studies (NCS) and EMG were performed prior to his first hospital visit, including all four extremities, proximally and distally. The NCS showed normal sensory and motor conduction velocities. The EMG showed spontaneous denervation activity, fasciculations and neurogenic motor unit aberrations including polyphasia and reduced interference within all examined muscles (arms and legs, both proximal and distal). The conclusion of the neurophysiologist was that of a general motor neuron disease. The neurological examination showed a profound weakness of the right hand, a slight weakness of the left hand, and muscle atrophies in the hands, arms and shoulders. Fasciculations were widely spread over arms, shoulders, thorax and legs. The deep tendon reflexes were normal and both plantar reflexes reacted normal. The pain and touch sensations were normal. An MRI scan of the spinal canal showed no pathologic lesions of the spinal cord.
A routine analysis of the CSF was normal with regard to cell count and protein concentration, and there were no signs of ongoing inflammation. The serum and CSF antibody titers for Borrelia bacteria were normal. Routine blood sample results were normal (complete blood count, clinical biochemistry tests including liver, kidney and muscle, thyroid function tests, and electrolytes).
After receiving the results of these investigations, our patient and his wife were informed about the diagnosis of ALS, which was based on the following evidence: (1) clinical signs of lower motor neuron involvement in three regions (arms, thorax, and legs); (2) signs of upper motor neuron involvement (preservation of deep tendon reflexes (arms and legs); (3) electromyographic signs of denervation, fasciculations and polyphasia within all examined muscles, (4) absence of neuroimaging pathology; and (5) absence of evidence of other diseases.
According to the El Escorial Criteria a ‘clinically probable ALS’ was suggested (evidence of upper motor neuron involvement was demonstrated in two regions).
An experienced neurologist performed the lumbar puncture with our patient in a sitting position. The skin in the lumbar region was washed with sterile cotton swabs before the puncture. A fine disposable needle of Quincke type, Becton, Dickinson and Company; 0.7 × 75mm (BD AB, Stockholm, Sweden) was used. The needle was inserted in the vertebral L3 to L4 inter-space and one trial was sufficient for CSF to flow. The very first two drops (100μL) of CSF were allowed to drip directly onto a polycarbonate filter, which was immediately vacuum dried by a special bedside pump and gold plated for microscopic examination. The following 200μL were collected straight in a sterile test tube for immediate FACS analysis of cell-derived microparticles (MP) in the fresh CSF. In summary, we tested the first 100μL of CSF with SEM followed by 200μL CSF for FACS, then 100μL of a second fraction of CSF for SEM, again followed by 200μL of CSF for FACS.
The collection of CSF from healthy subjects was part of an ongoing study approved by the Regional Ethics Committee in Stockholm (no. 2009/1221-32) and conducted in accordance with the latest Helsinki Protocol. Our patient and all control subjects consented orally and in writing to participate in the study.
For controls 200μL of the first 0.6mL fresh CSF aliquot and 200μL of the following 12mL of fresh CSF were allowed to drip directly on the surface of a polycarbonate filter (Nuclepore, Inc., Pleasanton, CA, USA) with 0.6μm pores. The polycarbonate filters were specially prepared by GP Plastic AB (Gislaved, Sweden) and supplied by Sempore AB (Stockholm, Sweden). The filter was fitted to an airtight device designed with flow channels, which allowed CSF particles to stream to the center of the filter when vacuum suction was applied from below. The pores of the filters were 0.6μm, ensuring that all particles with larger diameter stayed on the filter (see Figure ). All remaining structures in the CSF were thus concentrated in the center of the filter during drying by vacuum suction. When the filters were completely dried after about two minutes of vacuum suction, they were subsequently coated in a JEOL JFC-1200 Fine Coater (JEOL Tokyo, Japan) for two minutes with ionized gold to a thickness of 40Å. The first and the second fractions of CSF were handled in a similar way in preparation for SEM, and all 17 healthy control subject samples were treated in a similar way to the sample from our patient.
The SEM method used in the study has earlier detected human immunodeficiency virus in CSF . The total area of each filter with a diameter of 1cm was examined using a SEM microscope (Philips High Resolution SEM 515, Philips Electronic Instruments, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). The peripheral area outside the center was mostly free of structures. Two SEM images of the central areas of the filters were enlarged (×500 and × 2000).
The CSF samples were analyzed fresh within an hour of collection. A total of 20μL of the sample was incubated for 20 minutes in the dark with phalloidin-Alexa-660 (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK), lactadherin-FITC (Haematologic Technologies Inc., Vermont, USA), CD42a-PE (BD, New Jersey, USA), CD144-APC (AH diagnostics Ltd., Stockholm, Sweden) and CD45-PC7 (Beckman Coulter, Inc. Brea, California, USA). MPs were measured on a Beckman Coulter Gallios™ flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Inc. Brea, California, USA). The MP-gate was determined using megamix beads (BioCytex, Marseille, France), which is a mix of three beads with diameters of 0.5μm, 0.9μm and 3μm, respectively. MPs were defined as particles less than 1.0μm in size, negative to phalloidin (in order to exclude cell membrane fragments ) and positive to lactadherin (which binds to phosphatidylserine). Later the MPs were sorted into particles positive for CD42a (platelet origin), CD144 (endothelial origin) or CD45 (leukocyte origin). Conjugate isotype-matched immunoglobulin (IgG1-FITC, IgG1-PE, IgG1-APC and IgG1-PC7) with no reactivity against human antigens was used as a negative control to define the background noise in the cytometry analysis. The results are presented as number of events in 45 seconds in the MP-gate during 45 seconds of measurement.
The results of the two complementary methods, FACS and SEM, were available within two hours of the lumbar punctures (Figure ). Our patient’s samples displayed more than 100 times the number of microparticles in CSF, measured as events of phosphatidylserine (PS)-positive MPs compared to the CSF samples from four healthy controls (Table , Figure ). Most cell-derived MPs in CSF were positive for CD45 and thus of leukocyte origin (leukoctye-derived microparticles; LMPs). Our patient had almost 400 times more LMPs in his CSF than the four healthy control subjects had in theirs. The platelet (CD42a)-derived and endothelial cell-derived (CD144) MPs were low and within similar ranges as the healthy control subjects. The number of PS-MP and LMP in the first fraction of CSF was about 50% higher than the MP events in the second CSF fraction (Figure , Table ). The scanning electron microscopic evaluations of CSF of our patient showed many spherical particles compared to no particles seen in the CSF from the 14 healthy control subjects, 10 of whom were matched for age to our patient and used only for the SEM analysis (Figure ).