A 53-year-old woman was referred by her optometrist after a routine appointment to our glaucoma clinic (Department of Ophthalmology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK) due to superonasal visual field (VF) loss in both eyes and family history of glaucoma. She was asymptomatic and has not experienced any change in her visual acuity during the last years. The patient had undergone uncomplicated bilateral ICL implantation (Visian ICMV4, −14 diopters, 13.2 mm) 13 years ago to manage her high myopia (−10 diopters in both eyes). Both her mother and grandmother had been diagnosed with open angle glaucoma in the past, while her past medical history was unremarkable.
Upon presentation, uncorrected visual acuity and IOP were 6/6 and 18 mm Hg, respectively, in both eyes. The central corneal thickness of her right eye and left eye (LE) was 526 μm and 528 μm, respectively. VF testing with computerized automated perimetry (Humphrey 24–2 threshold white-on-white test, using the SITA-Fast algorithm with a size III stimulus) showed early superonasal VF loss in both eyes (right eye had a mean deviation of −2.92 dB with borderline glaucoma hemifield test, while the LE had a mean deviation of −2.78 dB with abnormal glaucoma hemifield test), with low test reliability of the LE due to high percentage of fixation loses (shown in ). Retinal nerve fiber layer thickness measured by optical coherence tomography (Spectralis® OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) was borderline decreased in the inferotemporal segment of the LE (shown in ).
Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed in both eyes pigment deposition on the corneal endothelium and on the anterior surface of the ICL, patent superior iridectomies, iris transillumination defects and iris vaulting at the areas of contact with the ICL (shown in , ). These signs have not been present in her previous appointments at her community optometrist. Fundoscopy also revealed signs consistent with high myopia like tilted optic discs with peripapillary atrophy (shown in ) without any glaucomatous optic nerve damage. Additionally, gonioscopy showed open angles bilaterally with grade 4+ pigmentation of the trabecular meshwork (shown in ). Given these signs, the diagnosis of pigment dispersion syndrome secondary to ICL implantation was made, and we decided to monitor the patient closely. During the next visits (seven and 10 months after her first appointment) IOP was well controlled, while no changes were noted in the VF testing, optic nerve examination and pigment dispersion (shown in ). The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).