A 60-year-old man was referred for elective coronary angiography. His past medical history was remarkable for coronary artery disease. At the age of 53, he was admitted for typical angina and underwent coronary angiography which revealed >90% narrowing in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery segment. No significant narrowing was detected in the other coronary vessels. Following diagnostic coronary angiography surgical LIMA grafting to the LAD was successfully performed. Surgical report described no technical difficulties in the harvesting or anastomosis creation. In 2015, the patient reported recurrent angina. His treadmill exercise test was interpreted as positive in view of exercise related chest pain and 2 mm horizontal ST depression in the left precordial leads. No additional testing for ischaemia or computed tomography (CT) angiography was performed prior to catheterization. The patient underwent diagnostic catheterization via left radial artery. Selective angiography revealed a blind vessel thought to be an occluded LIMA ; Native coronary angiography showed total LAD occlusion as well as patent left circumflex and right coronary arteries. Since the LIMA graft was thought to be occluded, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was undertaken to address the occluded native LAD. Once antegrade flow in the LAD was restored, retrograde filling of a vessel corresponding to the previously grafted LIMA was also detected . Additional angiography showed a patent LIMA originating from the distal segment of the LSCA, corresponding to the vessel in which retrograde filling was seen . Finally, non-selective LSCA angiography showed two LIMAs—the rudimentary one originating from the proximal LSCA segment and the normal one having an unusually distal origin (, Video S4). On subsequent review, it has been noted that selective angiography of the proximal (‘occluded’) LIMA also shows non-selective opacification of the second LIMA, originating from the distal LSCA segment and directed towards the heart with metallic clips along its course. The appearance of the first LIMA was not consistent with an atrophied bypass conduit and no haemostatic clips were appreciated along its course (, Video S1). A 2-year course of double antiplatelet treatment was recommended on discharge in view of competitive flow which may jeopardize the LIMA graft. We also recommended performing an isotopic scan or dobutamine stress echocardiography to exclude anterior wall ischaemia approximately 6 months after the procedure.