A 58-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a 10-mo history of pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Pulmonary sarcoidosis was first discovered accidentally during a chest computed tomography (CT) scan 10 mo prior. Chest CT examination revealed tiny nodules in both lungs; the largest nodule measured 4.6 mm. No symptoms such as cough and expectoration, chest pain, dyspnea, fever, night sweats, fatigue, or anorexia were present. Upon further follow-up and clinical evaluations, enhanced chest CT findings in the hospital’s outpatient department indicated the presence of multiple ground glass nodules in both lungs . These nodules were predicted to be high-risk nodules by artificial intelligence.
She had a previous history of breast nodules and thyroid nodules, which were not indicative of a history of diseases such as tuberculosis and diabetes.
The patient denied having a family history of malignant tumors. The patient had no smoking or drinking history.
No obvious abnormalities were found after a cardiopulmonary examination.
No obvious abnormality was found in the blood routine examination results, liver and kidney function, or electrolyte and serum tumor markers (lung cancer marker combination: carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen-199, squamous cell carcinoma associated antigen, neuron-specific enolase, and cytokeratin-19 fragment).
Pulmonary function was uneventful, forced vital capacity (FVC) was 2.27 L, and forced expiratory volume (FEV1) was 2.23 L or 78.41% of the predicted value. The enhanced chest CT findings showed that the bilateral lung markings were enhanced. Density shadows of nodular soft tissues were found in the lower lobe of the left lung near the hilum; the density was uniform. No calcifications were present. The diameter of the nodule was about 12 mm. The nodule had clear boundaries. The enhanced scan showed obvious and uniform enhancement. Scattered ground glass nodules were present in both lungs, especially in the right lung. The diameter of the larger nodule was about 9 mm; enhanced scanning showed no obvious enhancement. The trachea and bronchus were unobstructed, and no clear enlarged lymph nodes were present in both the hila and mediastinum. No obvious thickening of bilateral pleura and no effusion in pleural cavity were observed.