An 85-year-old woman with no significant past medical history, including colon cancer but urethral caruncle two years ago presented at our office because of painless gross hematuria.
Physical examination showed no remarkable findings. Laboratory abnormalities were no pyuria but microscopic hematuria and mild anemia.
Initial ultrasonography examination (US) revealed a mass, 15 mm in diameter, on the right bladder wall. Subsequent cystoscopic examination detected two papillary tumors in the bladder. This confirmed that the bigger one was same size as that on US on the right upper wall with a peduncle. The second was 9 mm with some micro satellite tumors on the left wall. Both of them were typical papillary tumors morphologically .
An enhanced computed tomographic (CT) scan of the bladder showed two masses. Larger one measuring 16 mm was in the right wall and the other was 9 mm mass in the left bladder wall, with enhancement. Moreover, no other masses or no enlarged lymph nodes were seen except for the bladder.
On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), T2-weighted images revealed a solid, low intensity mass measuring 15 mm and the mass could be limited to the right bladder wall without muscle invasion. No urachal remnant was confirmed in a sagittal section. For the 9 mm mass, MRI revealed that it was limited to the left bladder wall and was also without muscle invasion.
At this point, we could diagnose multiple non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. Cold punch biopsy was performed at cystoscopic examination. We performed a biopsy only in the right side tumor. The histology confirmed it to be a villous adenoma. According to this result, a colonoscopy examination was then performed and no neoplastic lesion was found. TUR was performed after preoperative examinations. Each tumor was resected and diagnosed, respectively.
Histopathology confirmed that the resected tumor on the right wall was a villous adenoma, and the left one was urothelial carcinoma (T1, high grade). Histologically, the former consisted of tall columnar epithelium which formed a villous pattern with vessels and stroma consisting of hypo connective tissues, few nuclear atypia, and few mitotic figures. The urothelial tumor consisted predominantly of papillary growth which formed the structure of the gland . Immunostaining for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20 and Ki-67 confirmed that in villous adenoma, for CK20 the staining was positive, Ki-67 was less than 30%, while CK7 was negative. In distinct contrast, there was very strong positive staining for both cytokeratins moreover, the staining for Ki-67 was quite strong at approximately 70% in urothelial carcinoma.
These findings supported a diagnosis of villous adenoma and urothelial carcinoma arising in the bladder. On first follow up on the cystoscopic examination, which was held 3 months later, small papillary tumors were found in the trigone. Based on this finding, TUR was performed for the recurring lesion. The recurring tumor was diagnosed as urothelial carcinoma pathologically. She received adjuvant intravesical immunotherapy with BCG. After BCG therapy, she has been followed by cystoscopic examination for every three months. At the last follow-up, 24 months after surgery, no local recurrences were detected.