The patient is a 31 years-old man with bipolar disorder (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-IV criteria). The patient had a previous psychiatric history of depression and delusions 3 years before but the diagnosis of bipolar disorder was not evoked. It was the third relapse for the patient and two previous hospitalizations have been conducted in Congo. The patient was treated by haloperdidol before. There was no history of substance abuse. Native of Congo, he was admitted in a psychiatric ward for a manic episode with agitation, irritability, logorrhea, aggressive behaviour and delusions (persecutive, mystic and megalomaniac) (Young Mania Rating Scale, YMRS=43). The excitation and insomnia escalate to become dangerous, including physical violence needing physical restraint and seclusion. Pharmacological agents used to treat agitation including benzodiazepines, first- and second-generation antipsychotic drugs, and mood stabilizers showed no efficacy in spite of good compliance. The patient received clonazepam (8 mg) for several weeks with loxapine (400 mg) then cyamemazine (400 mg/day) and aripiprazole (25 mg) then olanzapine. Amisulpride was conducted at 1200 mg/ day for several weeks. Finally, valproic acid was administrated at 1250 mg/per day for several weeks. Neurological and somatic examination of the patient was normal. The MRI of brain was normal. Biological testing including routine blood counting and urine examination were normal with exception of a systemic hypereosinophilia which furhter lead to the diagnosis of a filariasis bancrofti infection using an immunodiagnosic method. However, we did not find any filariasis symptoms in our patient. A bi-therapy of anthelmintics including an association of ivermectin and albendazole was conducted. Two weeks after the initiation of anti-filariasis treatment, a successful improvement was observed with clear reduction of agitation and aggressive behaviours (YMRS=9) that could not be attributed to a modification of psychotropic treatments (modification of dosages), filarial encephalopathy or acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (absence of confusion, poor memory, incoordination, speech problems, lethargy, irritability, confusion ataxia, seizures and demyelinisation of the white matter). Euthymia was obtained simultaneously with the elimination of the parasite (according to immunodiagnosis status).