A 9-year-old male Labrador Retriever was referred to the Yamaguchi University Animal Medical Center with a progressing non-ambulatory tetraparesis. Pelvic ataxia was present 12 days before referral, followed by dysuria and tetraparesis 9 days before referral. On presentation, the dog showed aggressive behavior with panting with stretching thoracic limbs and no movement in either pelvic limb. Physical parameters were within normal limits, except for a body temperature of 39.9°C. On palpitation of the cervical spine, hyperesthesia was detected. The dorsal part was not examined because of the dog’s aggressive behavior. The flexor withdrawal reflexes were normal for both thoracic and pelvic limbs. On neurological examination, a lesion was localized to the C1–C5 spinal cord segments, but C6–T2 segments could not be excluded because of progressive tetraparesis from the pelvic limbs to the thoracic limbs.
A complete blood cell count revealed neutrophilia with left shift (304.3 × 102/μl; reference range: 19.25–146.25 × 102 /μl) and monocytosis (47.4 × 102/μl; reference range: 3.0–10.0 × 102/μl). The chemistry profile detected high creatine phosphokinase (263 IU/l; reference range: 49–166 IU/l) and high C-reactive protein (2.9 mg/dl; reference range: <1.0 mg/dl). Other comprehensive metabolic panels showed normal results. Thoracic radiographs detected bone lysis of the T7 spinous process and an approximately 1 cm high signal-intensity ring-shaped lesion in the lung . Urinalysis and fecal examination did not reveal any significant changes. Differential diagnoses included inflammation caused by systemic mycosis and/or bacterial infection and neoplasia.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were conducted under general anesthesia. CT images revealed bone lysis of spinous processes of T7 and T8. Enhanced media detected homogenous contrast around the spinous processes and vertebral body of T7 . A ring-shaped lesion surrounding the soft tissue of the lung fields was detected as the same as an X-ray in the right cranial lobe . On the T1-weighted MRI, strong homogenous contrast enhancement highlighted post-contrast sequences at the lesion of T7 spinous process. A slight enhancement was observed in the middle of the vertebral body of T7 . On T2-weighted MRI, the spinous processes of T6 to T8 were hyperintense, and the lesion infiltrated into the vertebral body of T7 and spinal cord . Specific abnormalities were not detected for the cervical part by either CT or MRI. With examinations on the first day, neither infection nor neoplasm could be identified. The dog was hospitalized at the owner’s request. Antibiotics, including Vibramycin (7 mg/kg BID, p.o) and clarithromycin (8.9 mg/kg BID, p.o), were given during the hospitalization.
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection, and the biopsy of T7 were performed under anesthesia 5 days following referral. Bronchoscopy showed a polyp with small capillary vessels, but sputum was not detected. The polyp was taken for pathological examination. With BAL, neither tumor cells nor bacteria were detected. White blood cells in the CSF obtained from the cerebellomedullary cistern were 17 /μl (normal reference range <5 /μl). CSF specific gravity was 1.006 (normal reference range: 1.005–1.007). A biopsy of T7 was performed by making an incision from the dorsal side. Necrotic tissue was located between the spinous process and muscle. These tissues were taken with forceps. Histology of the polyp showed hydropic degeneration, but neither neoplasia nor inflammation was observed. For T7, no neoplasm or bacterial, fungal lesion was observed, but fibrous and necrotic tissue growth was seen. No organisms were found by histopathology, including hematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, Ziehl–Neelsen, and Gram staining. The dog was euthanatized at the owner’s request on the next examination day. No bacteria (anaerobic or anaerobic) or fungus were detected from the blood and urine taken during the first visitation.
During the necropsy of the right lung lobe, multiple white-yellowish masses (up to 5 cm in diameter) were found, and the cranial lobe had a yellowish ring-shaped lesion (2.7 × 3.5 × 1.5 cm, with a 1.0-cm normal area in the center). No pus leaked from the cut surface of the lung. The pulmonary hilar lymph node was mildly enlarged. T7 spinous process became fragile. On the right side of the T7 spinous process, a yellowish mass (3 cm in diameter) was attached. Although the surface of the spinal cord was normal, dark brown spots and small cavitation were scattered in the transverse section of the T1–12 spinal cord.
Histopathological examination revealed diffuse and invasive growth of large oval neoplastic cells in pulmonary lesions. The large neoplastic cells had an abundant, occasionally vacuolated cytoplasm . The mitotic index was 12 in 10 high-power fields. The frequent observation of giant nuclei indicated severe atypia. CD3-positive T lymphocytes infiltrated around the tumor cells. Immunohistochemically, large neoplastic cells were positive for ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1), a highly sensitive marker of histiocytic cells . Numerous Ki67-positive proliferating cells were found, and Ki67 index was 20.6% . Histopathology revealed tumor tissue of the same origin in the T7 spinous process and pulmonary hilar lymph node mass lesion. In addition, diffuse necrosis was found through the thoracic cord (T1–T13). The perivascular proliferation of tumor cells was found in the remaining thoracic spinal cord tissue , and these round cells contained Iba1-positive histiocytic tumor cells. Based on these findings, we diagnosed HS in the lung and its metastasis to the pulmonary hilar lymph node, T7, and thoracic spinal cord, which had lymphocytic infiltration.