A 60-year-old woman with a history of rheumatoid arthritis, hypothyroidism, and asthma presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of severe pain and swelling in her left upper extremity starting a day prior. She had visited the ED two days earlier with complaints of abdominal pain. At the first ED visit, intravenous (IV) access was unsuccessfully attempted multiple times in her left upper extremity to draw blood for laboratory tests and IV fluid administration. IV access was established in her other arm without difficulty, and she was discharged home after the initial work-up revealed no abnormal findings. However, during the second emergency department visit (two days after first visit), she was diagnosed with an expanding hematoma in her left arm, impending compartment syndrome, and a possible arterial injury. Therefore, surgical exploration, fasciotomy, and evacuation of a large hematoma were performed. She did not have any arterial injury. In the postoperative period she continued to have significant bleeding from her surgical wound; and her hemoglobin dropped from 12 g/dl to 5.2 g/dl. Her aPTT was elevated and platelet count was within normal limits. Another urgent surgical exploration under general anesthesia was warranted. During the second surgery, another large hematoma was evacuated and there was persistent blood oozing from the brachioradialis muscle, which did not stop with coagulation, direct pressure, epinephrine-soaked gauzes, thrombin spray, or hemostatic dressings. Four units of packed red blood cells (PRBC) and four units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were transfused until the bleeding was controlled. Hematology consult was obtained immediately, and extensive work up revealed FVIII activity < 1% of normal, FVIII inhibitor 13.4 Bethesda Units (BU) per ml, as well as an aPTT of 97 sec without correction by normal plasma. All other coagulation studies were within normal limits. After the diagnosis of acquired hemophilia A (AHA), Factor VIII anti-inhibitor coagulant complex FEIBA® 75 U/kg (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Westlake Village, CA) was administered every twelve hours as well as methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg once daily. She did not have any other bleeding episodes, but her factor VIII inhibitor levels continued to rise two weeks after initiation of FEIBA® and corticosteroid. Therefore, FEIBA® was discontinued safely, cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/day) followed by rituximab (375 mg/m2) was added to her regimen until factor VIII inhibitor levels started to decline seven days after initiation of rituximab. She had no further bleeding episodes and her hospitalization course was otherwise uneventful.