A 65-year-old man with no past medical history presented to our hospital with general fatigue and loss of appetite. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 145/119 mm Hg; heart rate, 138 bpm; body temperature, 35.7°C; respiratory rate, 14 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 98% on room air on arrival. Physical examination demonstrated tachycardia with regular rhythm and no signs of cardiac congestion such as jugular vein distension or lower leg oedema. Heart auscultation revealed no murmurs or ventricular gallop. Initial laboratory evaluation revealed hyponatremia (Na: 121 mmol/L; normal, 135–145 mmol/L), an elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level at 0.374 ng/mL (normal, <0.013 ng/mL), an NT-proBNP level of 13 604 pg/mL (normal, <125 pg/mL), elevated liver enzyme levels (aspartate aminotransferase: 1391 U/L, normal, 5–37 U/L; alanine aminotransferase: 2092 U/L, normal, 6–43 U/L), and a C-reactive protein level of 3.98 mg/dL (normal <0.3 mg/dL).
Chest radiography showed cardiac dilatation and no active lung lesions. On admission, revealed ventricular tachycardia (VT) . Cardioversion was performed and subsequent electrocardiography showed a first-degree atrioventricular block with a right bundle branch block, and transthoracic echocardiography revealed left ventricular dilatation (end-diastolic dimension, 68 mm) with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 25% . Left ventricular hypertrophy was not observed.
After cardioversion, the patient’s vital signs improved gradually, and his symptoms resolved. Oral medication, including amiodarone, renin-angiotensin system inhibitors, and beta blockers, was administered gradually. Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis . Although endomyocardial biopsy was performed from the right ventricle, histological findings were non-specific. As we suspected non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy, including dilated cardiomyopathy or CS, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging and 18F-FDG PET were performed as further investigations. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed increased transmural late gadolinium enhancement extending from the basal anteroseptal and inferoseptal areas to the anteroapex and inferoapex of the left ventricle . 18F-FDG PET showed abnormal heterogeneous FDG uptake in the left ventricle without significant uptake in the right ventricle .
According to the results of these investigations, the patient was diagnosed with CS based on the Japanese Circulation Society 2016 Guideline on Diagnosis and Treatment of Cardiac Sarcoidosis. He underwent a transvenous implantable cardioverter defibrillator implantation, after which corticosteroid therapy was commenced at a starting dose of 30 mg/day. The prescribed medications at discharge comprised carvedilol (12.5 mg), enalapril (2.5 mg), spironolactone (25 mg), and amiodarone (200 mg). During the 6-week admission, corticosteroid therapy was tapered, with a dose of 20 mg prescribed at discharge.
After corticosteroid therapy was tapered to a maintenance dose of 10 mg/day during outpatient follow-up, the patient had an uneventful clinical course without any symptoms. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed no significant change in structure (left ventricular end-diastolic dimension: 66 mm) or function (LVEF: 24%). A year after discharge, symptomatic VT recurred and 18F-FDG PET revealed increased FDG uptake from the cardiac basal anteroseptal region to the apex of the left ventricle without significant uptake in the right ventricle . Initially, corticosteroid therapy was gradually up-titrated to a dose of 20 mg/day over a 1-month period. However, 2 months after corticosteroid therapy was up-titrated, the patient reported general fatigue, and 18F-FDG PET was performed, showing increased FDG uptake . His LVEF remained unchanged (25%).
As the patient was now considered steroid refractory, second-line treatment was introduced with methotrexate 6 mg per os weekly without changing the dose of the corticosteroid and heart failure medications, including carvedilol (17.5 mg/day), sacubitril/valsartan (100 mg/day), eplerenone (50 mg/day), dapagliflozin (10 mg/day), and azosemide (15 mg/day). At 1 month follow-up, although transthoracic echocardiography showed that the LVEF remained unchanged, 18F-FDG PET demonstrated a remarkable reduction in myocardial uptake . The patient's laboratory tests revealed normal levels of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T, NT-proBNP, and C-reactive protein. His clinical course was uneventful with no reported symptoms or arrythmia for the following 8 months.