A 25-year-old man was admitted because of the subacute onset of vertigo, nausea, and vomiting for 2 weeks with slurred speech and unsteady gait for 1 week. He denied symptoms of previous infectious diseases. His past medical and family history was unremarkable. In the clinic, the patient was alert but unable to walk without help. Neurological examination demonstrated dysarthria, bilateral horizontal nystagmus, moderate limb dysmetria, and gait ataxia with a scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia (SARA) score of 20. The modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score on admission was 4. Initial brain MRI was performed and showed hyperintensities in the vermis and bilateral cerebellar hemispheres on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) without enhancement . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study revealed an elevated opening pressure of 200 mmH2O, mild pleocytosis (white blood cell count 50/ul, 88% lymphocytes; reference range: 0–8/ul), elevated protein level (0.63 g/L; reference range: 0.1–0.45 g/L) and increased CSF IgG index (74.7 mg/L; reference range: 10–40 mg/L). Oligoclonal bands (OCB) were negative. Peripheral blood cell counts, electrolytes, liver and kidney functions, and levels of lactate, ammonia, and vitamins B1 and B12 were all normal. Screening for viral and bacterial infections, tumors, and thyroid diseases was negative. The further laboratory workup of autoantibodies was notable for positive serum Homer-3 antibodies with a titer of 1:100, whereas the CSF sample was negative by using the indirect immunofluorescence technique (IIFT) employing transfected HEK293 cells . Serum and CSF paraneoplastic antibodies (anti-Hu, Yo, Ri, Ma1/2, CV2, Tr, SOX1, Zic4, and amphiphysin), autoimmune encephalitis antibodies (anti-NMDAR, AMPAR, LGI1, GABAB, GAD65, CASPR2, IgLON5, DPPX, GlyR1, DRD2, and mGluR5) and serological markers specific for collagen diseases (antinuclear, anti-DNA, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) were either negative or in the normal range. Diagnosis of autoimmune cerebellar ataxia was made, and he was given intravenous methylprednisolone 1,000 mg for 3 days, followed by 500 mg for 3 days, and taped to oral prednisone 70 mg per day. However, no clinical improvement but a dysarthria deterioration was observed. His slurred speech could hardly be understood then with a score of 22 on SARA and a score of 4 on mRS. Moreover, he further developed psychiatric symptoms including difficulties with emotional control and impaired communication. Given these reasons, three circles of plasma exchanges (2,000 ml each time) were carried out at intervals of 2 to 3 days with significant improvement of psychiatric symptoms and slurred speech. And the patient could gradually walk alone. He was discharged with oral prednisone on a chronic basis and followed up at a local hospital. A score of 14.5 on SARA and a score of 1 on mRS were registered then.
However, 5 months later, the patient was admitted to our hospital again as he had severe head intention tremors and weakness in lower limbs for a month while he was currently on a daily dose of 30 mg of prednisone. He also complained of deterioration of slurred speech and gait instability. On neurological examination, he could barely stand with a SARA score of 28 and an mRS score of 4. CSF analysis revealed an increased protein level of 0.96 g/L. Repeated screening for neoplasia has been negative. Remarkably, repeated cerebral MRI indicated obvious cerebellar atrophy and worsened cerebellar lesions with gadolinium enhancement . He received high-dose intravenous corticosteroids and cycles of plasma exchange with no response. Thus, an intravenous infusion of rituximab was subsequently administered. Progressive clinical improvement was noticed with near resolution of head intention tremor and weakness of lower limbs 6 weeks after rituximab. However, the gait instability was unchanged. After 5 months of follow-up, the patient was stable but remained profoundly disabled with an mRS score of 4 and a SARA score of 18 as he still required help when walking. The case report timeline is presented in .