A 70-year-old male was admitted to our hospital for “abdominal pain, abdominal distension for 1 month, and no exhaustion or defecation for 4 days” as the chief complaint on April 10, 2017. He had no fever, nausea or vomiting.
The physical examination revealed abdominal distension , full abdominal tenderness and weak bowel sounds (1 beat/min). The following laboratory data were observed: WBC: 9.02 × 109/L, NET%: 78.90%, and CEA: > 60.00 μg/L. No obvious electrolyte, coagulation or liver biochemistry abnormalities were noted.
A CT scan of the abdomen revealed peritoneal effusion and bowel dilatation . The admitting diagnoses that were investigated were acute intestinal obstruction and abdominal effusion. On the first day, a transabdominal ultrasound-guided biopsy was performed, and a characteristic yellow jelly-like mucus containing microscopic mesothelial cells, fibrous tissue and lymphocytes with mild atypia was extracted . Therefore, PMP was suspected.
Operation: Because the patient complained of increasing abdominal distension and his abdominal pressure reached 35 mmHg, he underwent an emergency exploratory laparotomy. A significant amount of yellow, jelly-like mucus (approximately 5000 mL) was found during the operation . Numerous metastases were noted on the omentum and mesenteric root. After removing the mucus, we identified a hard mass measuring 10 cm × 15 cm with an unclear boundary and an abundant blood supply on the ileocecal junction . After carefully separating the appendix, the gangrenous rupture of the ileocecal tumour was observed, and the appendiceal lumen was interlinked with the abdomen. The patient’s small intestine and colon were expanded, but the colon’s expansion was more obvious, corresponding to low intestinal obstruction . Considering that explanations other than paralytic intestinal obstruction caused by the significant accumulation of intraperitoneal mucus might be plausible, we further explored the pelvic cavity. A hard mass measuring 4 × 5 cm with an unclear boundary infiltrating the rectal muscle layer was identified in the upper rectum . The peritoneal cancer index (PCI) was estimated intraoperatively, and the aggregative score of 13 abdominopelvic regions reached 20. We performed cytoreductive surgery (CRS), enterolysis, intestinal decompression and special tumour treatment to remove the lesions and relieve the obstruction as much as possible. Although some residual cancer remained, there was no nodule larger than 2.5 mm in diameter. Thus, we performed CC1 cytoreduction on the patient. Radical resection of the rectal carcinoma was also performed because the patient had PMP accompanied by rectal cancer.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 15.
The postoperative histological pathologic diagnoses were appendiceal mucinous neoplasm, rectal cancer and PMP. The rectal cancer was a medium differentiated adenocarcinoma, approximately 50% of which was a mucinous adenocarcinoma. Serosa invasion, intestinal ulcerations and perineural invasion were noted, but vascular invasion was not observed . In the appendiceal mass, a crowded glandular epithelium with mild nuclear abnormalities, including the pseudo-layer arrangement, was noted. The tumour was LAMN . Moreover, numerous cavities containing mucus were observed in the fibrous tissue . The immunohistochemical staining of the rectal tumour revealed the following: PTEN (++), ERRCC1 (++), VEGF (++), TS (−), EGFR (++), HER2 (0), PMS2 (+), MLH1 (++), MSH2 (+++), MSH6 (+++), and MGMT (+) .
Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) was not performed during the surgery because of disagreement among the patient’s family members. We strongly recommended that the patient receives chemotherapy or radiotherapy after surgery. However, to date, the patient did not receive these treatments due to economic difficulties. At the 1-year follow-up visit, no tumour recurrence was discovered by CT.