A 40 kg 9-year-old non-Indigenous Australian female was scheduled for an elective removal of a large right anterior deltoid keloid scar. Her medical history was significant for mild asthma. She had no known allergies, no past surgical or anesthetic history, and no significant family medical history, including no previous general anesthetics in either parent. Medications included regular inhaled fluticasone and salmeterol, with intermittent inhaled salbutamol as required for breakthrough asthma symptoms. She was normally a well and very active child. In the days leading up to her scheduled procedure, she had an intermittent dry cough with no exercise limitation, dyspnea, or fevers. Her preoperative physical examination demonstrated a mild intermittent wheeze in the right anterior basal lung field that resolved with salbutamol administration. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. The decision to proceed with general anesthesia was based on a thorough assessment, consideration of all factors, and shared decision making with the family. Two factors leading to a general, rather than regional, anesthesia technique were the size of the lesion (with possibility of local anesthetic toxicity) and a previous traumatic experience when she had direct infiltration of intralesional corticosteroid previously.
The patient received no other premedication and was cooperative with preoxygenation prior to an intravenous induction. She received 50 mg of intravenous propofol and 50 μg of intravenous fentanyl for induction, and was effectively manually ventilated with a circle system during the apneic period. A first-generation laryngeal mask airway (LMA) device was inserted without difficulty with an initial pressure control mode of ventilation. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane, oxygen, and air (FiO2 0.50), with continuous monitoring of end-tidal capnography, oxygen saturation, heart, and noninvasive blood pressure.
The surgical procedure took 30 minutes in the supine position and was uncomplicated. During the maintenance phase of anesthesia, there were no periods of hemodynamic instability, hypoxia, hypercarbia, muscle rigidity, impaired ventilation, or hyperthermia. There were also no obvious abnormalities seen on continuous cardiac telemetry.
On emergence from anesthesia, 100 mg of intravenous propofol was given following cessation of sevoflurane to facilitate removal of her LMA under deep anesthesia. The patient subsequently became very difficult to ventilate with high airway pressures, hypoxia, and poor air movement with reduced chest expansion. As an emergency maneuver, her anesthesia was deepened with a further 100 mg of propofol and ongoing manual ventilation attempted with sevoflurane 8% on high flows of 100% oxygen. As this did not improve her ventilation or oxygenation, 50 mg of intravenous suxamethonium was administered with a rapid improvement in ventilation, oxygenation, and airway pressures. Given the rapidity of the situation, the differentials included laryngospasm or bronchospasm with interventions treating both possibilities. Upon recovery of oxygen saturation, chest auscultation demonstrated widespread wheeze initially, treated with in-line salbutamol, which was titrated to effect. She received approximately 1500 μg of inhaled salbutamol over a 15-minute period. She was supported with positive pressure mask ventilation until safe emergence from anesthesia, then transferred to the pediatric postoperative care unit.
Forty-five minutes later in the recovery bay, once completely awake, the patient described right neck pain and lower back pain that prompted a medical review by the anesthetic team. She had a benign cervical spine and musculoskeletal examination, with no red flags. At this stage, reassurance was provided.
Two hours later, in the discharge lounge, nursing staff noted an abnormal gait of the patient as she attempted to mobilize to the toilet. On further questioning, the patient was unable to walk unaided and needed full support to stand. A repeat medical review was requested, whereby she was found to have profound proximal lower limb muscle weakness, left lateral thigh pain, and right medial leg pain. She had reduced knee reflexes bilaterally and a broad-based unsteady gait. Her sensory function, upper limb examination, and cranial nerve examination were completely unremarkable.
To exclude salbutamol-induced hypokalemia as a possible cause of acute weakness, a venous blood gas was ordered, revealing a mild hypokalemia of 3.3 mmol/L. Having excluded this as a cause, the working diagnosis was suxamethonium-induced myalgia. She was kept for prolonged observation for 3 hours, until her symptoms improved. On discharge, she was able to mobilize unaided. She was provided with strict return precautions if her symptoms deteriorated.
The following day, her proximal muscle weakness had returned to involve all four limbs with associated tenderness. She was brought into the emergency department, needing assistance to mobilize. Urgent blood tests revealed a creatinine kinase (CK) of 22,679 units/L, suggestive of rhabdomyolysis. Her renal function, electrolytes, and urinalysis were normal. She was admitted for observation with conservative management and resolution of her CK levels over a 4-day period. She had a gradual return to full muscle strength and function over a period of 4 weeks.
An anesthetic alert letter was created, addressed to anesthetic, pediatric, and primary care teams to manage this patient as malignant-hyperthermia (MH) susceptible until evidence suggested otherwise as sole rhabdomyolysis may reflect a spectrum of this disorder. Given the age of the patient, a muscle biopsy (gold standard test) to definitely identify MH susceptibility was not performed. Genetic tests were used as an alternative, and detected the following:
Gene: RYR1
Genomic location (hg19): chr19:38979901G>A
Variant: c.5632G>A
Zygosity: heterozygous
Classification: 3c—a genetic variant of uncertain significance (VUS) with low clinical relevance.
As is the case with genetic testing, this variant may become clinically significant if other cases are found in the future.