A 21-year-old Iranian woman with dichorionic–diamniotic spontaneous twin pregnancy presented to our obstetric emergency department complaining of severe headache on 6 April 2021. She was in the eighth week of gestation and had a history of previous uncomplicated term pregnancy and an early first-trimester abortion. Her body mass index (BMI) was 21.4 kg/m2, and she was suffering from unilateral right-sided pulsatile and throbbing occipital headache radiating to her ipsilateral half of the face since a week before her referral. Her headache intensity had increased since its onset, and simple analgesics had not been effective. She had no history of prepregnancy headache, and her only complaint during pregnancy was mild-to-moderate nausea and infrequent vomiting.
The patient had visited her obstetrician 2 days before presenting to the emergency department. The obstetrician had requested a nasopharyngeal COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test with suspicion of COVID-19 infection due to the COVID-19 pandemic condition, despite lack of its other common signs and symptoms. However the result was negative. Upon her arrival, she was afebrile, in stable hemodynamic condition, and completely conscious. Neurological examination did not reveal any abnormal finding. Because of suspected cerebrovascular events, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) of the brain. On the brain MRI, a large parenchymal hematoma was observed in the right temporal lobe with peripheral white matter edema and 2 mm of midline shift. On the MRV, right transverse and sigmoid dural sinuses were engorged on the T2-weighted images and showed diffuse filling defects compatible with cerebral vein thrombosis (CVT).
There was thrombosis involving the right inferior anastomotic vein (Labbé vein), too. Small patchy areas of filling defects in the superior sagittal and left transverse and sigmoid sinuses were also seen in favor of partial thrombosis. Fortunately, deep cerebral veins seemed to be intact. However, the straight sinus was partially obliterated . Hence, full anticoagulation began with enoxaparin 1 mg/kg, and levetiracetam 500 mg twice a day was added for seizure prophylaxis. In addition, acetaminophen 500 mg every 6 hours was administered for pain control. The next day, her headache severity was obviously decreased; no new-onset focal neurological deficit was found, but she experienced a sore throat and flu-like symptoms. Since she had been in touch with a COVID-19-infected person recently, we repeated the nasopharyngeal PCR test despite her first negative test result .
Surprisingly, her PCR test result returned positive. Hence, we began remdesivir 200 mg intravenously, then 100 mg daily plus dexamethasone 8 mg intravenously twice daily. To confirm COVID-associated CVT, all the inherited and acquired thrombophilia (prothrombin gene mutations, methyl-tetrahydrofolate reductase mutations, anti-thrombin III deficiency, factor V Leiden, protein S and C level, and antiphospholipid antibodies) were checked, and no abnormalities were found. Our patient showed a gradual decrease in her white blood cell (WBC) count and platelet (Plt) count on serial complete blood counts (CBCs) during her first 4 days of admission, while her peripheral blood smear did not show any abnormalities . All the viral hepatitis tests (hepatitis A, B, and C) were negative, and no organomegaly or lymphadenopathy was evident on ultrasound imaging. Her blood group was O-negative, and direct and indirect Coombs test as well as Coombs–Wright test were also negative. Thus, the most probable reason for bicytopenia was COVID-19 infection or drug-induced adverse effects. Subsequently, we discontinued levetiracetam. Since then, WBC and Plt count began to rise. Our patient never complained of dyspnea, and her peripheral blood pulse oximetry always showed O2 saturation above 98%. The patient was discharged to home 6 days after her hospital stay without any complications; both fetuses had normal fetal cardiac activity, and no retroplacental hematoma was evident on ultrasonography. The patient had biweekly prenatal and monthly neurological visits during the first and second trimesters, followed by weekly visits in the third trimester. She underwent an uncomplicated cesarean section due to a cephalic-breech presentation twin pregnancy at 38 weeks of gestation, and both healthy newborns and the mother were discharged 72 hours postpartum. Full anticoagulation was continued according to neurological consultation for 6 weeks, then all thrombophilia tests were rechecked; as no abnormality was found, anticoagulation was discontinued.