A 23-year-old Caucasian female with past medical history of papillary thyroid cancer status post-complete thyroidectomy in total remission, iron deficiency anaemia, and Class 2 obesity [body mass index (BMI) 38.7 kg/m2] presented to an out of network hospital with 1 day history of abdominal pain and diarrhoea, worsening dyspnoea on exertion, bilateral lower extremity oedema, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, and orthopnoea. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was notable for left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 10–15%, she was treated with diuretics and later discharged on guideline-directed medical therapy. Her symptoms progressively got worse for which she was transferred to the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center to be managed by the heart failure team.
On examination, she had a jugular venous pressure of ∼10 cm of water, clear lung sounds, Grade II systolic murmur best heard in the left upper sternal border, right upper quadrant tenderness to deep palpation, and 2+ bilateral lower extremity pitting oedema. Clinical assessment of decompensated heart failure corresponding to Class C. Laboratory studies showed a beta natriuretic peptide of 1687 pg/mL (normal high <100), unremarkable serum electrolytes, electrocardiogram (ECG), and troponin I, remaining blood work is summarized in Table Right heart catheterization (RHC) was initially attempted in the right brachial vein, but access could not be established due to an obstruction, therefore, left brachial vein was used to complete the procedure. Pressure findings from RHC were right atrium 26 mmHg, right ventricle 46/13 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 35 mmHg, pulmonary artery 47/33 mmHg, cardiac output 3.36 L/min, and cardiac index 1.59 L/min/m2. Coronary angiography was not performed to absence of ischaemic findings (normal ECG and Troponin I) and high normal creatinine. Bilateral upper extremity venous Dopplers demonstrated bilateral superficial venous thrombosis with acute left brachial vein thrombus, immediately following which, hypercoagulability panel was drawn and started on intravenous anticoagulation with heparin. A repeat TTE showed a left ventricular (LV) diastolic diameter of 6.1 cm, LV systolic diameter of 5.7 cm, sever hypokinesia was noted in entire anterior wall, septum, apex, mid and distal lateral, inferior and posterior wall; in addition to unchanged LVEF, left ventricular apical thrombus and Grade II diastolic dysfunction.
She deteriorated rapidly exhibiting hypotension (89/44 mmHg), increased lactate level of 3.4 mMol/L (0.5–1.6), symptoms corresponding to New York Heart Association function Class IV while on 4 L of oxygen. Milrinone infusion (0.375 μg/kg/min) was started, and the decision was made to proceed with HeartWare® LVAD (HeartWare, Inc., FL, USA) implantation as a BTT. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiogram again demonstrated an apical thrombus . A circular ventriculotomy at the apex was performed, and the thrombus was extracted while taking care to preserve inherent trabecular architecture . Pathological analysis of the excised apical myocardium demonstrated endomyocardial fibrosis, EMH cells which stained positive for erythroid and myeloid series, and also haematopoietic cells were noted in the apical thrombus . In the post-operative period, due to a persistent altered level of consciousness a computed tomography (CT) of the brain was done which showed the presence of right thalamic infarct. In retrospect, the patient reported an episode of left arm weakness which had resolved 1 week before current hospitalization. A CT-guided bone marrow biopsy from the right iliac crest showed normal trilineage haematopoiesis and markedly reduced iron staining. Flowcytometry and cytogenetic studies were normal. She was transitioned to oral warfarin for long-term anticoagulation [goal international normalized ratio (INR) 2.0–3.0] and discharged in stable condition.
Three months post-implant, she developed a driveline exit site infection for which she received vancomycin and underwent incision and drainage, during which an 8 cm pocket of infected haematoma was noted. Wound cultures grew Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA); accordingly, her antibiotic regimen was tailored. Due to multiple readmissions with driveline exit site infection and bacteraemia from MSSA, she was placed on cefadroxil for long-term antibiotic prophylaxis. Twenty-six months since LVAD implantation, she remains fairly active and Status 7 (due to BMI) on the transplant list without further thrombotic events.