A 14-year-old male came to the outpatient department with swelling over the right knee, with an inability to bear weight following a fall while running on the ground. He also gives a history of anterior knee pain before the trauma ongoing since 4 months. On physical examination, he was noted to have an effusion over the affected knee with tenderness over the patella and tibial tuberosity . Radiographs obtained demonstrated patella alta and a tibial tuberosity avulsion fracture. He was placed in a long knee brace for immediate management. Further investigations were done, where the magnetic resonance imaging reported an associated inferior pole non-bony tendinous avulsion fracture ( and ). The patient was scheduled for surgery the next day.
Intraoperative exploration revealed an osteochondral fracture of lateral patellar facet size 10mm, complete avulsion of the patella tendon from the tibial tubercle with longitudinal split in the patellar tendon along with inferior pole of patella avulsion fracture. Repair of the proximal avulsion was performed using transosseous sutures on the anterior patellar cortex . The longitudinal patellar tendon rupture was sutured by the Krakow method . Once the two injuries were fixed, the tibial tuberosity avulsion was then secured with a combination of transosseous suture tape and a knotless anchor by double row fixation with the knee in complete extension position . Medial and lateral retinaculum tears were sutured back. There was no laxity of the tendon intraoperatively. Closure was done. A diagrammatic representation has been shown below .
Postoperatively, X-rays were done and the patient was placed in a long knee brace and rehabilitated with a gradual increase in knee range of motion by 30° of flexion every week with nil weight-bearing walk for the initial 4 weeks following surgery. The Insall–Salvati Index of both knees was compared and found to be almost the same, suggesting there is no more patella alta postoperatively . Follow-up at 6 weeks after surgery displayed radiological improvement. Full range of motion had been achieved at 12 weeks follow-up .