A 48-year-old male presented to the emergency department after experiencing 3 days of worsening headaches and blurry vision. Physical examination revealed an inferior field hemianopsia and a large firm protuberance in the posterior occiput without any overlying skin abnormality. He was a nonsmoker with no history of cancer, and a screening computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no evidence of malignancy. Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography (MRI/MRA) of his brain demonstrated an 11 × 5-cm mass that extended both supra- and infratentorially and into the bilateral parietal and occipital lobes, the superior sagittal sinus, the torcula, and the proximal transverse sinuses . There was transosseous extension through the calvaria into the posterior scalp and dermis. Cerebral angiography revealed lack of flow through portions of the superior sagittal sinus, torcula, and proximal transverse sinuses . Deep venous drainage proceeded via an occipital sinus and cortical venous drainage via enlarged veins of Labbé . The tumor was hypervascular, with its major arterial supply from meningeal branches of the external carotid arteries (ECAs) and the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries . Prior to surgery, the ECA tumor feeding vessels were embolized with coils and polyvinyl alcohol particles . Our differential diagnosis included hemangiopericytoma, meningioma, sarcoma, and occult malignancy.
A small open biopsy of the abnormal scalp and involved occipital bone was performed as an initial procedure to obtain a tissue diagnosis. Pathological analysis revealed meningioma, World Health Organization (WHO) Grade I. For definitive treatment, the patient was positioned prone using a Mayfield 3-pin head holder. Using image-guided stereotaxy, we planned a wide-excision scalp resection and craniectomy with sinus exploration to allow for complete tumor removal. The scalp was excised en bloc in a circular fashion with a wide margin, and intraoperative frozen pathological diagnosis confirmed that the scalp margins were free of tumor. The underlying calvaria was grossly abnormal—alternately hyperostotic with areas of soft tumor infiltration. The superior sagittal sinus, torcula, and transverse sinuses were outlined stereotactically, and multiple burr holes were placed along the sinuses and the periphery of the planned bone flap, which encompassed portions of both the supra- and infratentorial compartments. Craniectomy was performed using a high-speed drill with burrs and footplate.
The dura was opened over the bilateral parietal and occipital lobes. The tumor was dissected from the underlying brain using standard microsurgical technique . Clear brain invasion was noted throughout with parasitized dilated cortical vessels, which were preserved since they drained into veins of Labbé. We then followed the tumor to where it abutted the normal-appearing section of superior sagittal sinus. The proximal normal sinus was ligated with a 3-0 Vicryl suture, and the sinus and falx were incised down to the straight sinus, which was not invaded and was preserved. We continued our resection to the torcula and left transverse sinus, both of which were extensively invaded and occluded. The involved walls were ligated and incised, and the tentorium was resected along with the tumor bulk. The right transverse sinus was not invaded. The remaining right transverse and straight sinus walls were repaired primarily using 6-0 Prolene sutures. Inspection of the surgical field revealed no gross tumor. Reconstruction was performed using a sutured Alloderm duroplasty and titanium mesh cranioplasty. The plastic surgery team then repositioned the patient to a lateral decubitus position and performed a left latissimus dorsi free flap for soft tissue coverage. The thoracodorsal artery was anastomosed to the left superficial temporal artery using 8-0 nylon suture, and the thoracodorsal vein was anastomosed to the superficial temporal vein using a 2-mm venous coupler. The muscle was inset over closed suction drains and then covered with a split thickness skin graft . Last, a halo vest was applied to prevent pressure to the flap during the postoperative period.
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. Initially, he experienced surgery-related visual disturbances with diminished visual acuity, which gradually improved during inpatient rehabilitation. Final pathological diagnosis from the gross total resection was also meningioma, WHO Grade I. The halo vest was continued for 6 weeks. At his 6-month follow-up appointment, the patient was able to read a newspaper with reading glasses, but his preoperative inferior hemianopsia remained stable. A minor revision of scalp reconstruction was performed to remove a lateral dog-ear deformity, but otherwise, he healed without complication. Routine follow-up MRI at 18 months demonstrated no evidence of recurrence or regrowth .