A 56-year-old man presented with upper abdominal pain, jaundice of the skin and sclera, itching, and an unexplained weight loss of about 15 pounds in 1 year. He was afebrile and had no nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or other discomforts. Physical examination revealed upper abdominal tenderness and a palpable mass. Laboratory studies showed an elevated CA 19–9 level of 136.75 U/mL (upper limit of the normal range: 37 U/mL). He had a medical history of tuberculosis and hypertension, which had been well controlled with medications. An abdominal computer tomography (CT) scan revealed an 8 × 7 × 5- cm solid mass in the gallbladder, which had infiltrated the hilar bile duct, adjacent liver parenchyma, and duodenum . The patient underwent hepato-pancreaticoduodenectomy combined with portal vein reconstruction 3 weeks after percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization.
Grossly, a hard 8 × 6 × 6-cm solid mass occupied the neck and body of the gallbladder in continuity with the mucosal surface of the fundus . The mass had perforated the serosa of the gallbladder wall, with direct invasion into the adjacent organs including the liver (with a size of 10 × 9 × 8 cm) , duodenum (invading the whole layer of the duodenal wall and forming a 3-cm in diameter nodule, protruding into the duodenal lumen) , and the serosa of the stomach. The cut surface of the mass in the gallbladder was gray-white, relatively soft, and showed apparent hemorrhage in the liver portion . A focal papillary tumor was present in the neck of the gallbladder .
Histologically, the tumor was characterized by two different architectural patterns . The first pattern was a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma , which corresponded to the papillary tumor on gross findings and occupied < 5% of the entire tumor. This component was mainly confined to the local mucosal layer but had partially invaded the muscle layer of the gallbladder. The second pattern, which was the predominant component, was composed of pleomorphic mononuclear cells or poorly cohesive spindle-shaped cells with diffuse distribution . The cells were densely packed and had eosinophilic cytoplasms, irregular nuclear shapes, coarse chromatins, numerous abnormal mitoses, and occasional hemosiderin deposits. Some mononuclear cells showed anaplasia with bizarre nuclei . Some spindle cells had broad cytoplasms and elongated nuclei that resembled rhabdomyosarcoma cells . Notably, the density of the spindle-shaped cells increased in areas distant from the tubular pattern. The spindle-cell density was greatest in the invasive portions of the tumor in the liver, duodenum, and stomach; it was accompanied by focal hemorrhage and necrosis. The two patterns were continuous, with a transition zone between them . The tubular component was strongly positive for the epithelial markers AE1/AE3 , CK7 and CEA. The cells in the undifferentiated component were weakly diffusely positive for AE1/AE3 in the transition zone, weakly focally positive for AE1/AE3 in distant areas, and strongly diffusely positive for vimentin ; they were consistently negative for neurocrine markers (SYN, CGA) and sarcoma-differentiated markers, including SMA, desmin, MyoD1, S100, DOG1, CD117, and CD31. The cells in both components were negative for P53. The proliferative index of Ki67 was higher in the undifferentiated component (40%) than in the tubular component (20%). In addition, osteoclast-like giant cells were occasionally dispersed among the tumor cells, and contained 5–30 uniform small ovoid nuclei in the center, with no anaplasia and mitosis. The osteoclast-like giant cells were positive for vimentin and the macrophage marker CD68 . Based on these findings, we made a pathological diagnosis of an undifferentiated carcinoma.
Tumor DNA from the undifferentiated and tubular components was tested for 448 cancer-related genes. Each component contained a minimum of 70% of tumor cells. Analyses of single nucleotide variant (SNV), insertion or deletion (INDEL), gene fusion, and copy number variation (CNV) were performed by next-generation sequencing (NGS) with NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using a custom-designed panel (Amoy Diagnostics, Xiamen, China). The panel covered all exons and selected introns of 448 cancer-related genes. As a result, four somatic mutations (TP53 c.880G > T: p.E294*; TERT c.-124C > T [promoter mutation]; ARID2 c.2278C > T: p.Q760*; and CDH1 c.1477G > A: p.V493M) and three amplifications (CCND1, FGF19, and MET) were detected in the undifferentiated component. In contrast to these findings, the tubular component contained 102 somatic mutations (see Additional file ) and one amplification, which included the four mutations and one amplification (CCND1) also found in the undifferentiated component. The details of shared gene mutations are listed in Table . In addition, the tumor mutation burden (TMB) was calculated as the total number of non-synonymous somatic mutations per megabase (MB) of genome. This patient had a TMB of 3.45 muts/Mb in the undifferentiated carcinoma and a considerably higher TMB of 87.07 muts/Mb in the adenocarcinoma.
The patient died of tumor recurrence in the residual liver and peritoneum 2 months after the surgery without adjuvant treatment.