A 29 years old man was admitted to the emergency department with a sudden onset of paralysis. He had gone to bed and slept at 15:30 with no symptoms and awoke in the evening unable to move his upper or lower extremities. The weakness was bilateral, and also involved proximal muscles of shoulders and hips. He had no dysphagia and shortness of breath. He could talk and move his neck. Before he went to the bed, he had eaten a high carbohydrate meal. He denied fever, recent diarrhea, chest pain, and a history of strenuous exercise. Before this episode, the patient was experiencing bilateral cramp-like leg pain for 1 month, but he had not sought medical advice. He had no past history of any chronic disease, or a family history of such episodes.
On examination, the patient was conscious, alert, and oriented to time, place, and person. His blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg, heart rate of 75 beats per minute, the temperature of 36.5 degrees centigrade, respiratory rate 36 breaths per minute, and sp02 96% in room air. He had no jaundice, conjunctival hemorrhage, photophobia, palpable mass on his neck or lymphadenopathy. There was no lower limb edema. The lung and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. Neurological examination showed reduced muscle power in all four limbs to 1/5, his cranial nerves were intact, and there was no bladder or bowel dysfunction.
His initial investigations showed marked hypokalemia at 1.8 mEq/L (reference range 3.5–4.5) . Electrocardiography showed T wave inversion, ST depression and prominent U waves.
We started an intravenous infusion of potassium chloride at 10 mEq/L/hr. After 6 h of potassium replacement, he regained his distal muscle movement when his serum potassium was 2.4 mEq/L. His neurological symptoms completely resolved after 12 h of potassium supplementation, when his potassium was 4.24 mEq/L.
To determine the cause of his hypokalaemic paralysis, we checked his thyroid function tests, which showed biochemical thyrotoxicosis with fully suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) with elevated total T3 and total T4 levels . His anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies were negative, TSH-receptor antibodies were not checked. Thyroid ultrasound revealed increased thyroid size, with hypervascular parenchymal echogenicity.
The next day, the patient was stable, and we discharged him with methimazole 30 mg/day, with a follow-up in the outpatient clinic.