A 39-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our nephropathy department with weight loss for the previous 1 year and edema for 40 days in April 2018. His appetite was poor and his consumption of meat was reduced. Edema was observed in both lower extremities. He was diagnosed at a local hospital with hypoproteinemia and proteinuria, and was prescribed cephalosporin and a diuretic, but there was no obvious improvement. He had no history of kidney disease, no history of other systemic or genetic diseases and had no psychosocial history. During the course of the disease, he experienced occasional flustering and bloating. His daily urine volume was about 600 ml. His weight had dropped 10–15 kg during the previous year. Physical examination showed that his blood pressure was 99/68 mmHg, he had a bulging abdomen, and he had severe edema in his lower extremities. Other results of physical examinations were within normal limits.
Laboratory parameters at the time of kidney biopsy are shown in . His serum creatinine was 95.3 μmol/L and serum albumin was 13.1 g/L. The daily urine protein excretion was 8.01 g/24 h, the daily urinary secretion of κ light chain was 90.10 mg/24 h, and λ light chain was 141.10 mg/24 h. The serum free-κ and free-λ chains were 27.10 mg/L and 145.00 mg/L, respectively. An electrocardiogram indicated low and inverted T waves. The chest computed tomography (CT) showed bronchitis, slight inflammation of the lungs, slight enlargement of the mediastinal and right hilar lymph nodes, coronary calcification, and ascites. Urinary color Doppler ultrasound suggested enhanced echogenicity of the renal cortex and ascites, and that the maximum depth in the dark region of the lower abdomen was 100 mm. Color Doppler echocardiography showed that there were no obvious abnormalities in cardiac structure and blood flow. No obvious abnormalities were found in other laboratory indicators (see for details). Hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis antibody were negative.
Renal biopsy was performed on May 2, 2018. Light microscopy showed 38 glomeruli, one was spherical sclerosis, whereas in the remaining glomeruli, there was small amounts of erythrophilin deposition under the epithelial cells . The glomeruli had diffused mesangial broadening, and an eosinophilic homogeneous non-structural substance was found to be deposited diffusely in mesangial areas and capillary walls . The basement membrane thickened segmentally, but there were no absence of spike formation and no eyelash structure in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) . Large numbers of lymphocytes and macrophages were found to have infiltrated in renal interstitium focally, accompanied by slight fibrosis. Small amounts of eosinophilic homogeneous non-structural deposits were observed in the interstitium and in some arteriole walls, with slight thickening of some arterioles . Congo red staining showed that the glomeruli, partial arteriole wall and local interstitium were positive . Pathological apple-green birefringence was produced under cross-polarized light . Immunohistochemistry showed positive expression fine granular deposition of PLA2R along the capillary walls . It also showed positivity for λ and slight positivity for κ. Immunohistochemical staining of paraffin sections showed that amyloid-associated protein (AA) was negative in the mesangial area of the glomeruli and arteriolar wall, as well as in the focal renal interstitium ( is the positive control). Immunofluorescence showed granular deposition along the glomerular capillary wall with very strongly positive for IgG , strongly positive for IgM, slightly positive for IgA, and negative for C3, C4, C1q, and fibrinogen. The small arteries, glomerular mesangial area, and capillary walls were strongly positive for λ , with κ deposits observed along the glomerular capillary walls . Immunofluorescence of IgG subtypes in paraffin sections showed that IgG1 weak positive , IgG2 and IgG3 negative , IgG4 positive deposit in the GBM . Electron microscopy indicated that massive electron dense deposition in the glomerular subepithelial and GBM, and extensive fusion of epithelial podocytes . It also showed the absence of cellular broadening in the GBM and the mesangial area of the glomeruli, along with disorderly deposits of fibrous material . The renal interstitium had the same characteristic deposition of fibrous material .
Based on the clinical indicators and pathological findings, this patient was finally diagnosed with NS, with the pathology type being IMN with AL type amyloid nephropathy. The patient also had hyperuricemia, peritoneal effusion, and hypothyroidism. The chest CT showed slight inflammatory changes, but the patient had no respiratory tract infection symptoms, and the infection-related indicators were normal. Therefore, we considered the patient did not have infection or chronic inflammation. The patient had hypotension, but no palpitation. Examination revealed sinus rhythm and normal cardiac structure and blood flow. Therefore, we considered the hypotension might be related to amyloidosis. The patient had a large amount of ascites, but the liver function of the patient was normal. Hypoproteinemia caused by NS can cause edema, and the decrease in daily urine volume will aggravate it. Therefore, we believed that the cause of ascites was leakage due to hypoproteinemia caused by NS.
Treatment was primarily aimed at preventing the complications of NS. While hospitalized, the patient was treated with statins to control blood lipid concentrations, aspirin as an anticoagulant, and intermittent intravenous supplementation of human serum albumin and diuretics to promote urination and reduce edema. He was also treated with thyroxine to improve his thyroid gland hypofunction. The patient was advised to go to the Hematology Department for further bone marrow biopsy and to determine the treatment plan for amyloidosis, but he refused for financial reasons. After discharge on May 5, 2018, the patient was not regularly followed up in our hospital, and was lost to follow-up.