The patient was a 33-year-old woman with nothing of note in her medical history. Two weeks before admission, the patient’s 5-year-old son had a fever of approximately 38 °C and pharyngeal pain. The child was diagnosed with an acute upper respiratory tract infection, and his symptoms improved within a few days. Several days before our patient’s admission, she began experiencing pharyngeal pain. On the day she went for emergency outpatient care, the patient had begun experiencing fever with chills and acute episodes of low back pain. During examination, her consciousness was clear, blood pressure was 115/85 mmHg, heart rate was regular at 110 beats/minute, body temperature was 39.5 °C, and respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute. Her head, neck, and throat were normal. Cardiac and respiratory sounds were normal. Abdominal examination was normal. Spinal pain upon percussion was limited to the 4th and 5th lumbar vertebrae. Neurological examination was normal. Laboratory findings from the first visit were as follows: leukocyte, 2350/μL; neutrophil, 1557/μL; lymphocyte, 416/μL; C-reactive protein (CRP), 0.76 mg/dL; procalcitonin, ≤0.05 ng/mL; aspartate aminotransferase, 21 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 17 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 109 U/L; creatine phosphokinase (CK), 115 U/L. All other laboratory values were within normal range. Urinalysis results were normal. The acute episodes of lumbar pain were accompanied by high fever. Therefore, acute purulent spondylitis and discitis were suspected. Hospitalization was recommended, but the patient refused. Therefore, she was placed under closely monitored outpatient care. Loxoprofen was administered internally as an antipyretic analgesic. Two blood culture sets were negative, as was a urine culture. Another blood test showed that leukocyte levels were low and CRP levels had peaked from the first examination. Abdominal and pelvic CT performed on disease day 2 showed no abnormalities . Spinal MRI, which greatly contributes to prompt diagnosis of acute purulent spondylitis and discitis in comparison to CT , was performed on disease day 7, and results suggested no signs of acute purulent spondylitis or discitis . Her fever persisted at 38 °C or higher, but resolved on disease day 6. The low back pain would become particularly worse with movement. The pain made it difficult for the patient to get up, and hindered her daily life. However, the pain had mostly disappeared by disease day 8. Paired serum samples from disease days 4 and 15 exhibited a significant increase in coxsackievirus B3–neutralizing antibodies . Based on this disease course, we diagnosed the patient as having epidemic myalgia. The patient made an uneventful recovery without any residual symptoms 6 months after this acute episode.