A 70-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with 4 days of gradually worsening ascending lower extremity weakness. Three weeks prior to presentation, she was seen at the same ED for complaints of fever and cough. At that time she was diagnosed with COVID-19 via a nasal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) specimen and advised to maintain self-isolation. Her respiratory symptoms resolved within a week, at which point she developed bilateral calf pain with associated paresthesias. Over the course of a few days the distribution of the paresthesias progressed from her feet to her trunk, at which point she was no longer able to stand. This weakness prompted her repeat visit to the hospital. Her medical history was significant for stage I breast cancer, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), osteoporosis, and hypothyroidism. Her home medications included anastrozole, benzonatate, famotidine, levothyroxine, and apixaban for prophylactic anticoagulation in a COVID-19 patient. She denied ever smoking or drinking alcohol. She was retired, lived with her husband, and denied any known sick contacts or international travel.
On presentation, the patient was hypertensive (177/100 mmHg), afebrile (97.8 °F), and breathing comfortably (18 breaths per minute; oxygen saturation 98% on room air), with normal heart rate (78 beats per minute). Weight upon admission was 65 kg. Physical examination revealed an elderly woman, no toxicity, in no acute distress, without tachypnea or use of accessory muscles. Pulmonary auscultation revealed clear lungs bilaterally. Neurological examination revealed bilateral lower extremity weakness (strength 3/5), mute reflexes, stocking-glove sensory loss to pinprick and cold up to above the knees and elbows, and decreased vibratory sensation in the fingers and medial malleolus with intact proprioception.
Initial laboratory results demonstrated a neutrophil-predominant leukocytosis with elevated inflammatory markers.
Chest X-ray and head computed tomography were unremarkable. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed only mild small vessel ischemic disease of the white matter, with no significant focal lesions. PCR of her nasopharyngeal swab was positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) .
Based on the clinical and laboratory findings, a preliminary diagnosis of GBS was made and the patient was started on daily intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration at a dose of 0.4 g/kg on the day of admission. Lumbar puncture was not performed due to the heavy burden of the pandemic and lack of resources at the time. Diagnosis of Guillain-Barré, however, was clinically supported by the rapid progression of symptoms, mute deep tendon reflexes, and bilateral presentation. Soon after her first dose of IVIG, the patient developed dysphagia with respiratory distress and hypoxia requiring oxygen supplementation (presumably due to the worsening of her underlying GBS and intolerance of oral secretions, given no evidence of volume overload or allergic response). She was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Based on institutional protocols at the time, she was also treated with hydroxychloroquine (800 mg oral loading dose followed by 400 mg daily for a total of 5 days), doxycycline (100 mg every 12 hours by mouth for 10 days), and enoxaparin (40 mg daily subcutaneous injection).
The patient remained intubated for the duration of her IVIG treatment, with one unsuccessful extubation. She completed five IVIG treatments and was transferred to an acute rehabilitation facility after successful ventilator liberation. At that time the patient's dysphagia had improved, but sensory and motor deficits persisted and were likely exacerbated by deconditioning from the ICU stay. Following 4 weeks of intense physical therapy, the patient was able to walk with assistance without supplemental oxygen. Neurological exam revealed improvement in strength to 4/5 in all extremities. Dysphagia improved. She was eventually discharged home with a home health aid, oral anticoagulation (given emerging findings of hypercoagulability in COVID-19 patients), and outpatient follow-up.