A 19-year-old male referral from Mahenge District Hospital presented to the emergency department at Saint Francis Referral Hospital with a penetrated arrow lodged in his neck from an attack by cattle raiders 10 h prior with no other injury reported. Reported history of blood loss from injury site which was controlled via compression but otherwise no history of continuous active bleeding, no difficulty speaking, no dysphagia, no change in voice nor difficulty in breathing. He otherwise had no drug allergies, no significant family history of disease, no prior surgeries and did not smoke or drink alcohol. He was initially taken to the nearest primary health centre whereby they carefully cut off the stump of the arrow, dressed the wound and referred to our centre for further management.
On examination he was alert, oriented, not pale, not cyanosed with stable vitals. He had an arrow impacted into the right sided lateral aspect of the anterior triangle of his neck. The entry point was lateral to the cricoid cartilage corresponding to the axial plane of C6 vertebra hence concluded as a zone II PNI . There was no active bleeding from puncture site, no gross neck swelling, no hoarseness in voice, no bleeding from mouth or nose, no bubbling from injury site, no stridor nor respiratory distress and no features of neurological deficit. On palpation there was tenderness around injury site but no crepitus felt, no emphysema with carotid pulses palpable and intact range of motion and power of the right upper limb. Rest of systemic examinations were normal.
Was planned for a CT angiography of the neck however not carried out due to financial constraints hence an anteroposterior and lateral x-ray revealed an arrow lodged in the neck with the arrow head appearing to travel lateral and posterior to the sixth cervical vertebrae. Bedside doppler ultrasound performed by the consultant emergency physician estimated the depth of the penetration to be around 8 cm and the arrow situated 5 mm lateral to the internal jugular vein and 1 cm lateral to the common carotid artery . He was reviewed by a consultant general surgeon, due to lack of availability of a vascular and head and neck surgeon, and was prepared for emergent neck exploration and arrow removal under general anaesthesia while receiving preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis, analgesia, tetanus prophylaxis and 2 units of standby cross matched blood prepared.
Procedure was carried out by 2 consultant general surgeons with a general surgery resident and intraoperatively the incision was extended laterally from the arrow entry point so as to avoid the medial vital vascular structures seen on ultrasound. Dissection was carried out until the arrow tip and fangs of the arrow head were exposed and removed gently . Findings revealed the arrow to have traversed through the sternocleidomastoid muscle and directing laterally into the posterior triangle with no obvious injury to a neurovascular bundle, the trachea or oesophagus. The sternocleidomastoid muscle was repaired, wound site irrigated with warm saline and closure with sterile dressing placed.
Post operatively was placed on intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once daily, pain management (intravenous paracetamol 1 g 8 hourly and intramuscular tramadol 100 mg 8hourly), and close monitoring as per postoperative hospital protocols. Day 1 postoperative only complained of mild pain at incision site but could tolerated feeds, speak and talk without difficulty and on examination had stable vitals, a clean wound with no central neurological deficit nor impaired use of the right upper limb. Was observed for another 24 h which was uneventful and was then discharged on oral analgesia (diclofenac 50 mg 8 hourly with pantoprazole 40 mg daily prophylaxis), antibiotics (cefixime 200 mg 12 hourly) and counselled on warning signs. Subsequent follow up visits to the surgical outpatient clinic were uneventful with no complications and has resumed his normal daily life routine.