A 54-year-old male presents with severe restrictive lung disease from sclerodermatous GVHD following matched sibling myeloablative allogenic stem cell transplant for Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia (CML) in 2001. This was conducted prior to subsidised tyrosine kinase inhibitors being available in Australia to patients with CML in chronic phase. He remained in remission following his allograft.
His other general medical history included obstructive sleep apnea on home CPAP, hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux, and osteoporosis. Pre-operative transthoracic echocardiogram was notable for mild-to-moderate impairment of left ventricular systolic function without significant valvular abnormalities. His medications at time of surgery are summarized in .
He developed grade 2–3 skin, gastrointestinal and hepatic acute GVHD which settled with high dose steroids and cyclosporin. Despite continued immunosuppression, he developed chronic extensive GVHD from approximately twelve months post-transplant, initially involving his liver, followed by inflammatory immune myositis, mono-neuritis multiplex, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, with left phrenic nerve palsy and left hemidiaphragm paralysis. Sclerodermatous skin involvement was first noted three and a half years post-transplant.
Immunosuppressive therapies included steroids, cyclosporin, sirolimus, tacrolimus, rituximab, and romidepsin, with monthly intravenous gammaglobulin. He was managed with psoralen-ultraviolet A (PUVA) photochemotherapy, and due to ongoing deterioration, was subsequently commenced on extra-corporeal photopheresis, on twice monthly maintenance therapy prior to surgery.
Despite these treatments, he experienced symptomatic and clinical deterioration, with declining lung function tests, difficulty swallowing, weight loss and abdominal pain due to the constriction of his sclerodermatous GVHD. In the 18 months prior to surgery, he had 6 separate hospital admissions for acute-on-chronic respiratory failure in the setting of his interstitial pulmonary GVHD and CO2 retention; 3 of these admissions required high dependency unit (HDU) for non-invasive ventilation (NIV). Formal lung function tests performed 3.5 months pre-operatively were consistent with severe restrictive lung disease, with FEV1 0.86 L (23 % predicted), FVC 1.14 L (23 % predicted), and FEV1/FVC of 75 %.
He was referred to a Burns Unit, for consideration of skin and soft tissue release with split skin grafting, to possibly improve his restrictive lung disease. Although there was no clear precedent to this treatment, the patient was willing to undergo this surgery as his quality of his life had become severely limited by his disease, particularly in the preceding twelve months.
He underwent elective surgery on the 15th of October 2012 carried out by the senior author. He had an uncomplicated peri-operative stay, including a planned 24 h in intensive care post-operatively, intubated and ventilated. He was noted to a have a grade III larynx requiring two-operator intubation with video-laryngoscope support and a fibre-optic scope.
At the time of surgery, he was noted to have widespread abnormal soft tissue (A) with extensive thick scarring (fascial-like bands) from the skin surface extending deep to his intercostal muscles. The pattern of escharotomy was anterior chest subcostal margin and mid-axillary . The escharotomies were released from skin to deep facia, exposing serratus anterior, intercostals, external oblique and rectus muscles, using scalpel and diathermy. Foam rolled into a cylinder with Acticoat [Smith & Nephew] stapled on was used to deliver some compression on the vertical walls of the wound (B/C). Due to the location of the escharotomies, no postoperative splinting was feasible, and standard chest physiotherapy was performed. A sample of this tissue was sent for histopathology, reported as non-specific scar tissue and fibrosis. On table, he had a tidal volume increase of 100 mL, from 360 to 460 mL (PEEP 6cmH2O, Peak Airway pressure 21cmH2O). His chest transverse measurement (from midaxillary line) increased from 45 to 49 cm, and his abdominal girth increased from 48 to 58 cm (C).
Post-operatively, the patient described a subjective improvement in exercise tolerance and was able to return to enjoying lawn bowls. His informal spirometry improved significantly, from an FEV1 of 0.68 L, and FVC of 0.83 L pre-operatively, to 0.99 L and 1.25 L respectively post-operatively. Unfortunately, he did not undergo formal lung function testing immediately prior to surgery to allow for comparison. 9 months post-operatively, his lung function on spirometry had continued to regress, with an FEV1 of 0.7 L and FVC of 0.9 L, which was marginally better than his spirometry 4 months pre-operatively .
The patient requested further skin release, and in May 2013 underwent an inferior transverse (supra-pubic) and longitudinal (meeting existing mid-axillary graft) abdominal skin release and split skin grafting . His abdominal expansion increased 10 cm transversely and 4 cm longitudinally, with an immediate tidal volume increase of 50 mL. Informal spirometry showed a modest and transient improvement in FEV1 and FVC, from 0.64 L and 0.65 L pre-operatively, to 0.7 L and 1.0 L respectively post-operatively . His spirometry results appeared to subsequently stabilise, although he was commenced on methotrexate in March 2014, which may potentially confound the benefits of his surgeries.
In support for the benefit surgical release, in his 9 admissions to hospital post-surgery, he did not require HDU for NIV, which is in contrast to the 18 months prior to his surgery where 3 out of 6 admissions required NIV. However, there was a clear downward trend of his lung diffusing capacity over time, reflecting the clear progression of his interstitial lung disease and the resulting decrease in function. The patient unfortunately passed away in December 2015, following a sudden cardiac arrest. An autopsy was not carried out and his death was presumed due to progression of his disease.