A 76-year-old Caucasian male patient with no comorbidities living in Brazil was diagnosed in 2017 with a superficial spreading melanoma on his trunk, Clark level IV, Breslow 5.0 mm, with 3.6 mitoses/mm2, ulcerated, resected with involved margins. Initial 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (18F-FDG PET-CT) scan showed no signs of distant disease. A wide lesion excision of the primary was performed, and sentinel lymph node biopsy confirmed the presence of nodal micrometastasis (01/01), hence with a pT4b pN1a M0 initial stage (stage IIIC-AJCC 8th edition). The decision was made to proceed with adjuvant treatment with nivolumab 3 mg/kg administered every 14 days for 12 months. No clinically relevant adverse events were reported during this period.
Two months following nivolumab completion, the patient presented with weakness, inappetence, daily fever (38.0 ℃), night sweats, weight loss, diffuse petechiae, and splenomegaly. He denied any recent travels, new drug usage, or contact with symptomatic individuals. Initial investigation revealed anemia (8.5 g/dl), thrombocytopenia (68.000/m3), hypofibrinogenemia (138 mg/dl), and hyperferritinemia (20.406 µg/l). PET-CT detected intense 18F-FDG uptake in the spleen and in the cervical, supraclavicular, mediastinal, and abdominal lymph nodes . Bone marrow aspiration indicated a hypercellular marrow with no other alterations. The patient started dexamethasone and intravenous immunoglobulin because of HLH diagnosis (five of eight criteria for this syndrome fulfilled).
No infection was identified after upfront extensive laboratory workup and cultures. Due to the increased 18F-FDG uptake (SUVmax 14.8) in an infracarinal lymph node, a core biopsy was performed, having metastatic melanoma, hematologic malignancy, or even rheumatologic granulomatous disorders (sarcoidosis) as differential diagnoses. However, epithelioid cell granuloma with central coagulation necrosis was observed in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining , and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) was identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Treatment for ganglionar TB with daily oral combination of rifampicin (R) 600 mg, isoniazid (H) 300 mg, pyrazinamide (Z) 1600 mg, and ethambutol (E) 1100 mg was started. The patient received the RHZE regimen for 2 months, followed by 4 months of RH doublet, completing a 6 months of antituberculous therapy. The patient’s clinical status improved significantly, with findings suggestive of HLH remission. The patient has been on clinical follow-up for 40 months, and no melanoma recurrence was detected.