A 39 year old lady was referred to our breast unit with a one week history of a lump in the lateral aspect of the right breast. On examination, a generalized hardness was felt in the right breast together with central retraction of the nipple.
Mammography revealed malignant microcalcification affecting the whole breast with core biopsy proving high grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
Following discussion at the multi disciplinary meeting, she underwent a mastectomy and axillary sampling together with an immediate latissimus dorsi (LD) reconstruction flap. Post-operative recovery was unremarkable and the cosmetic result was good.
Histology of the breast revealed 120 mm of high grade DCIS of mixed comedo and solid type. Two separate foci of invasive ductal carcinoma (Grade 1 and Grade 2) were identified. The margins were clear of tumour by 1.3 mm (in-situ disease) and 5.8 mm (invasive component). No evidence of Paget's disease was documented at this time. The axillary sample was negative for tumour.
As the tumour demonstrated strong Estrogen/Progesterone positivity, Mrs K.S was started on postoperative Tamoxifen treatment but this was discontinued within 6 months due to adverse side effects. On her second post-operative visit, a small erythematous skin lesion was noted on the superio-medial aspect of the flap adjacent to the scar .
A punch biopsy was obtained which revealed foci of atypical cells within the epidermis with Pagetoid spread. Immunostaining showed positivity for CAM 5.2, CEA and EMA, consistent with. Paget's disease.
A wide local excision of the lesion was performed and the specimen was sent for a histological second opinion. This showed acanthosis, hyperkeratosis with focal parakeratosis and extensive replacement of the epidermis by pleomorphic epithelial cells with marked pagetoid pattern . Tumour cells extended into adjacent hair follicles and immunohistochemistry confirmed features of Paget's disease.
The differential diagnosis was between that of Paget's disease of the breast (although there was no underlying breast tissue or nipple and it was not seen in the original mastectomy specimen) and extra-mammary Paget's disease of the skin.
Because of the past history of breast carcinoma, a diagnosis of Paget's disease of the breast was made.