A 46-year-old man was transferred to the doctor (Prof. Xingtao Zhou) of our refractive surgery center after negligent refractive surgery. Only a portion of the preoperative information and intraoperative parameters were available. Preoperative ophthalmic examinations were normal, with the exception of hyperopia with astigmatism and amblyopia. Uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) was 20/125 for both eyes. Manifest refraction was OD: + 7.25 diopters sphere (DS)/− 1.25 diopters cylinder (DC) × 10° with corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) of 20/40, OS: + 7.75 DS/− 1.25 DC × 5° with CDVA of 20/50. The right eye was the dominant eye and the additional power for near reading was + 0.25 D. Corneal tomography was evaluated by a Scheimpflug camera (Pentacam; Oculus, Wetzlar, Germany). The respective preoperative central corneal thickness (CCT) and mean keratometry readings were 523 μm and 41.3 D in the right eye, whereas they were 517 μm and 41.4 D in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal in both eyes.
The patient complained of vision fatigue at both far and near distances, and he was scheduled for bilateral femtosecond laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (FS-LASIK) to treat hyperopia and astigmatism. The flap creation was first performed on the patient’s right eye using the VisuaMax femtosecond laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Jena, Germany). Then, a SMILE procedure to treat myopic astigmatism (refractive correction: -8.50 DS/− 1.50 DC × 175°) was mistakenly performed on the patient’s left eye with the same system, due to medical negligence. The attempted lenticule thickness was 134 μm, with cap thickness of 110 μm and optical zone of 6.1 mm. A 90° single side cut with a length of 2 mm was created in the superior position. When the patient was transferred to the excimer laser platform for stromal ablation on his right eye, the erroneous operation in the left eye was quickly recognized. Subsequently, stromal ablation for hyperopia and astigmatism were performed in the patient’s right eye, comprising an uneventful FS-LASIK procedure. The extracted lenticule of the left eye was temporarily maintained in balanced salt solution (BSS), and the patient was immediately transferred to the Dr. Zhou.
The extracted lenticule of the left eye was re-implanted in situ within 2 h. A lamellar dissector was inserted to gently release the pocket adhesions. The refractive lenticule was grasped with a forceps and partially folded, then inserted into the pocket gradually through the small incision. Thereafter, the lamellar dissector was used to spread the lenticule; each edge of the lenticule was carefully flattened and smoothened with a spatula. To remove the striae, the cap was hydrostretched with sponge swabs soaked in BBS. Each step of the treatment was carefully evaluated and adjusted to enable proper positioning of the refractive lenticule. However, the surgeon inserted the lenticule without knowledge of the anterior or posterior surface, and without correctly aligning the axis of astigmatism, because there was no mark on the lenticule.
The patient was followed up at 1 day, 3 weeks, 3 months, and 8 months postoperatively. On the first day after surgery, both eyes displayed mild edema under slit-lamp observation. Corneal topography assessments revealed CCT of 520 μm and mean keratometry (K) value of 45.1 D in the left eye . Anterior optical coherence tomography (OCT) (RTVue, Optovue, Fremont, CA, USA) examination demonstrated that the re-implanted lenticule in the left eye was well attached to the stromal bed with visible demarcation lines . No displacement or striae were observed. At 8 months after lenticule in situ implantation, the refraction had remained stable since 3 months and indicated reduction of hyperopia compared with preoperative level (+ 5.00 DS/− 1.25 DC × 100°) with a stable CDVA of 20/50. The lenticule remained smoothly spread in the interface and identifiable with visible demarcation lines that showed partial hyper-reflection . The CCT was 502 μm and mean keratometry value was 43.8 D .
Due to contact lens and glasses intolerance, poor visual acuity, and severe anisometropia, the patient asked for retreatment. After the risks, benefits, and alternatives had been explained and the patient had provided informed consent, he underwent standard FS-LASIK on the left eye to correct hyperopia and astigmatism 8 months after lenticule re-implantation. A small treatment suction cone was applied. The flap had a diameter of 7.9 mm, thickness of 90 μm, standard 90° hinges, and 90° side cut angles. Refractive correction was + 5.0 DS/− 0.75 DC × 100° with attempted ablation thickness of 90 μm, optical zone of 6.5 mm, and transition zone of 1.5 mm with blend to 8 mm. A MEL 80 excimer laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec) was used for stromal ablation with a pulse energy of 185 nJ, followed by flap reposition. A silicone hydrogel contact lens was applied as a bandage, in order to avoid postoperative flap displacement or microdistortion, then removed the next day.
At postoperative day 1, the cornea exhibited mild edema and the lenticule was spread smoothly on the stromal bed with decreased peripheral thickness . Corneal topography assessments revealed a CCT of 477 μm and mean keratometry value of 51.3 D. The UDVA, manifest refraction, CDVA, mean keratometry, CCT, and corneal volume (as measured by Pentacam) before operation, after refractive lenticule re-implantation, and after LASIK are displayed in Table . Figures and show the patient’s assessments over the postoperative course. During 2 years of follow-up, the cornea was transparent with no flap striae, inflammation, epithelial ingrowth, or diffuse lamellar keratitis under slit-lamp examination. Corneal tomography showed no signs of ectasia. The UDVA, manifest refraction, and CDVA at the last visit were 20/63, − 0.75 DS/− 0.25 DC × 165°, and 20/50 in the left eye, whereas they were 20/40, + 0.5 DS/− 0.5 DC × 150°, and 20/32 in the right eye. The patient gained binocular uncorrected distance visual acuity of 20/40 and near visual acuity of 20/50, achieving improved satisfaction.