A 63-year-old man, without relevant past medical history, was referred to undergo an abdominal computed tomography scan (CT), due to a diffuse mild abdominal pain. The patient describes that the pain hadn’t any specific feature, not aggravating or alleviating from some specific factors, it appeared one time each week, it wasn’t invalidating and it disappeared without adoption of any medications. No fever, vomiting, diarrhea or weight loss were present. CT images showed a lesion sized 7 cm of diameter of the body–tail of the pancreas . An Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS) showed a vascularized hypoechoic lesion with exophytic growth in the body of the pancreas. A fine needle aspiration (FNA) was performed, showing the presence of epithelial cells, without atypia (category II according the Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology Guidelines) . One month after, a new EUS with FNA was repeated, but the results was inconclusive (category I according the Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology Guidelines) . In both endoscopic examinations, a dosage of intra-cystic glucose, CA 19.9 and CEA was not performed. A magnetic resonance (MRI) was performed, confirming the expansive solid lesion, with multiple septa inside, strictly adherent to the jejunum . Laboratory tests were normal, as well as Ca 19.9 value. After these investigations, we had two diagnostic theories: (1) a pancreatic SCA, considering the presence multiple septa delimitating small cystic spaces, even if the typical central scar was missing; (2) a pancreatic NET, due to the presence of a solid lesion highly vascularized. In order to discriminate these two disease, 2 months after, a 68Ga-DOTA_peptide PET-CT was performed, revealing a pathological uptake of the pancreatic lesion (SUV max 9.6; mean 7.1) . A diagnosis of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour was established, with consequently indication to surgery . A distal splenopancreatectomy and cholecystectomy with laparoscopic approach was performed: intraoperatively, we confirmed the presence of a large solid mass, hyper-vascularized, strictly adherent to mesocolon. The lesion was extremely attached to splenic vessel and near to the spleen: for these reasons, was not possible to performed a distal pancreatectomy spleen preserving. Post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on post-operative day (POD) . Final histopathological report was diagnostic for microcystic CSA: the cysts were lined by a single layer of uniform, cuboidal, epithelial cells with clear cytoplasm (due to abundant glycogen, demonstrated at histochemical analysis by the positivity for Periodic Acid-Schiff (PAS) and negativity for PAS-diastase) and central oval hyperchromatic nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli; the central scar and radiating septa was composed of hyalinised collagen . Immunohistochemical analysis (IHC) revealed for the cystic lesion negativity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin and vimentin .