A 10-year-old girl was referred to the Children’s Hospital of Fudan University because of polydipsia and polyuria. She was born to non-consanguineous healthy parents of Chinese Han ethnicity and good socioeconomic status. She was the only child of the family, and there was no family history of FS. Newborn hearing screening failed. There was no history of birth defects. She was not receiving any medication and did not take alcohol or smoke tobacco. She was in Grade 4 of primary school and was not good at studying.
At 3 months of age, she presented with jaundice, hepatomegaly (3.5 cm below the costal margin), and splenomegaly (4 cm below the costal margin). She was admitted to our hospital. Laboratory findings revealed: elevation of direct bilirubin (DB), that is, total bilirubin (TB) 66.1 μmol/L (normal range, 0–6 μmol/L) and DB 61.4 μmol/L (normal range, 5.1–17.6 μmol/L); and almost normal transaminases, that is, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 24 IU/L (normal range, 0–40 IU/L) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 46 IU/L (normal range, 0–40 IU/L)). Laboratory tests for hepatotropic viruses were negative. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography excluded bile duct obstruction. After treatment with ursodiol, the jaundice resolved gradually. During the follow-up years, her liver functions were normal. Hypoglycemia was initially noticed during hospitalization, and fasting blood glucose ranged from 1.4 to 2.8 mmol/l. Prior to this, there was no record of a hypoglycemic episode. At the time of hypoglycemia (blood glucose 1.4 mmol/l), an inappropriate glycemic response to glucagon (increase of 4.3 mmol/l) was consistent with excess insulin action, confirming hyperinsulinism. Frequent feeding combined with intravenously administered glucose (6–7 mg/kg per minute) was required to maintain normoglycemia. She was discharged from the nursery with stable glucose levels (4.3–6.5 mmol/l) on the condition of frequent feeds. At 1 year of age, she experienced an episode of hypoglycemia, and the symptoms resolved after feeding. Subsequently, no symptoms of hypoglycemia appeared again.
Short stature was noticed (height and weight were below the third percentile) by routine physical examination at the age of 5. Laboratory investigations revealed proteinuria and glycosuria, mild acidosis, and hypophosphatemic rickets. Prior to this, she had recurrent urinary tract infections, suggesting an earlier onset of abnormal urine. Based on the clinical impression of FS, she was treated with calcitriol, phosphorus, and potassium citrate. Over the ensuing years, sodium citrate and other medications were used to maintain acid-base balance, but there was no improvement in her short stature, and her serum creatinine remained elevated by age 10.
At 10 years of age, she was admitted to our clinic because of symptoms of FS and elevated serum creatinine: 75 μmol/L (normal range, 21–65 μmol/L). On this admission, her height was 126.5 cm (below the third percentile) and her weight was 28 kg (25th percentile). Laboratory investigations revealed: renal glycosuria in the absence of hyperglycemia; proteinuria with a urinary protein to creatinine ratio (pro/Cr) of 2.17 (normal range, 0–0.2); hypercalciuria with a urinary calcium to creatinine ratio (U-Ca/Cr) of 0.31 (normal range, < 0.21); and hypouricemia with 66 μmol/L (normal range, 90–420 μmol/l). Fasting glucose and post-prandial glucose were normal. No known cause for FS was identified. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 55.7 ml/minute/1.73 m2 measured by 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepentacetate (DTPA) renal dynamic imaging. Renal ultrasonography showed nephrocalcinosis . A radiological examination showed complete recovery of rickets. Pure tone audiometry revealed a bilateral hearing loss of more than 50 dB. Because of multisystem involvement, she underwent whole exome sequencing and mutational analysis, revealing a heterozygous p.R63W mutation in the HNF4A gene. Both parents tested negative for the mutation. No genes associated with deafness phenotypes were found.