A 67-year-old man presented for evaluation of acute-onset hemoptysis. He had a cough and mild dyspnea for the past 7 years. He had a 40 pack-year history of smoking and no occupational exposure. Type 2 diabetes was diagnosed > 13 years ago. High-resolution computer tomography (HRCT) demonstrated a definite usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern with extensive traction bronchiectasis and peripheral honeycombing which were bibasilar-predominant . Based on the clinical and radiological features, the patient was diagnosed with IPF. Thoracic HRCT also revealed a non-enhancing nodular opacity in the right upper lobe, suggesting pulmonary tuberculosis, and a 25-mm contrast-enhancing nodule in the right lower lobe . A neoplasm was demonstrated in the sub-segmental posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe with bronchoscopy . The tumor was biopsied and the patient was pathologically diagnosed with pulmonary squamous lung cancer . Both Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) and a cytological examination assay were negative from the bronchoalveolar (BAL) sample of the right upper lobe. Because there was no evidence of metastatic cancer, the patient was clinically staged as T1cN0M0.
Considering treatments for lung cancer such as surgery or radiation might potentially induce acute exacerbations and even increase the risk of death, the patient was finally treated with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2, days 1 and 8) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2, day 1) every 3 weeks, for 6 cycles since January 2017. One month later, after the first cycle of chemotherapy in February 2017, both CT scan and bronchoscopy showed that the pulmonary solitary nodule in the right lower lobe had disappeared entirely . After 6 cycles, maintenance chemotherapy with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2, days 1 and 8) was given alone every 3 months for 3 cycles. Subsequently, the tumor was no longer detectable until December 2019 and stable IPF was achieved . Despite complete regression of lung cancer in the right lower lobe, a follow-up chest CT scan also revealed an increase in the size of the nodule in the right upper lobe . Finally, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) was cultured and the GeneXpert MTB assay was positive from the bronchoalveolar (BAL) sample of the right upper lobe submitted in January 2019, and he was confirmed to have active pulmonary TB. Once a diagnosis of TB was made, the patient was started on the first-line anti-TB treatment regimen (2HRZE/4HR) for 6 months. With treatment, the nodule in the right upper lobe decreased in size.