A 93-year-old female presented to the ED with complaints of two episodes of black, tarry stool over the previous 24 hours that turned lime-green in color when it contacted the water in the toilet bowl. She expressed personal concern for GI hemorrhage, as she had a similar episode of melena one year prior and was subsequently found to have a gastric ulcer thought to be secondary to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use. The ulcer was treated with endoscopic ablation and the patient had been symptom free since that time. Further past medical history included hypertension and stage III chronic kidney disease. Her only home medications included a daily multivitamin and an omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplement.
A detailed history obtained in the ED revealed that she had eaten a fast-food hamburger and frozen beverage the evening prior to the onset of her perceived melanotic stool. Further questioning revealed that the hamburger bun and beverage were both dyed black in color as a promotional event by the fast-food restaurant in celebration of Halloween. She denied ongoing NSAID use that had seemingly contributed to her previously mild upper GI bleed (UGIB).
The patient was hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 132/79 millimeters of mercury, a heart rate of 74 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. She denied abdominal discomfort. Serology testing showed a chronic and otherwise stable hemoglobin of 11.0 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 11.5–15.5 g/dL), a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 17 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (8–28 mg/dL), a creatinine of 1.8 mg/dL (0.5–1.5 mg/dL), and a BUN to creatinine ratio of 9.4.
Digital rectal exam done in the ED revealed a bright, lime-green stool without obvious evidence of melena or hematochezia. A guaiac FOBT (gFOBT) was performed. Despite the grossly bright, lime-green appearance of the specimen, this turned dark green to black in color with a blue hue when developer was introduced. Appearance of occult blood in stool specimens is considered when a blue coloration is appreciated on the indicator card. However, given the duration of the patient’s symptoms, the absence of acute anemia, the lack of observed melena on digital rectal exam, and the history of recent ingestion of artificially dyed food, a false positive gFOBT was considered.
A shared decision-making discussion on inpatient observation vs close outpatient follow-up was done with the gastroenterologist, the emergency physician, and the patient. Given the absence of melena on digital rectal exam, a stable hemoglobin level near her baseline, and patient preference, she was felt to be reasonable for close outpatient follow-up. Further, she had a calculated Glasgow-Blatchford Bleeding Score of 1, which would suggest a predicted survivability without intervention at a sensitivity of 98.6%. Following a four-hour observation period, she remained asymptomatic and without observed melena. The patient was discharged home with close outpatient follow-up the next day.
A repeat hemoglobin level obtained 12 hours after ED discharge was unchanged at 11.2 g/dL. A one-year follow-up of the patient’s medical record from her primary physician showed no return visits to the ED, and no diagnostic or therapeutic colonoscopy had been performed. Her hemoglobin levels remained stable within her baseline range of 11.0 to 12.3 g/dL in the one-year period since ED discharge.