A 54-year-old man presented with gross hematuria. He neither had a history of surgery nor a family history of PCa. He was diagnosed with PCa (PSA level 140 ng/mL, Gleason score 4 + 5, cT3bN0M0). After neoadjuvant 6-month ADT, a total dose of 78 Gy was administered to the prostate and the seminal vesicles as IMRT. His PSA level reached nadir at <0.008 ng/mL 3 months after the initiation of IMRT and increased slowly thereafter. Biochemical recurrence occurred 5 years after the IMRT. Imaging studies revealed no metastasis and observation was continued. Six years after the IMRT, a plain CT scan revealed clinical recurrence with a solitary metastatic lesion in the left external iliac area . No bone metastasis was detected by bone scintigraphy. We planned external beam radiotherapy to the metastatic lesion after ADT. One month after the initiation of degarelix acetate, the PSA level rapidly elevated from 3.6 to 14.7 ng/mL, even though serum testosterone decreased to a castrate level. CT revealed enlargement of the lesion . The patient’s disease status was determined as CRPC with rapid progression. We altered the treatment plan to include the resection of the lesion for histopathologic diagnosis. We performed a laparoscopic metastasectomy.
The metastatic lesion was a cystic mass , and the intracystic tissue was adenocarcinoma . Histopathological examination revealed no neuroendocrine features. The PSA level of intracystic fluid was 45 250 ng/mL. There was no lymphoid tissue in the metastatic lesion. The cyst wall was lined with ciliated cuboidal epithelium containing lipofuscin in the cytoplasm . Immunohistochemistry revealed that intracystic tissue was diffusely positive for PSA, NKX 3.1 (NKX 3.1 expression is predominantly localized to prostate epithelium), and AR, which was compatible with the metastasis of PCa. In contrast, the epithelium of the cyst wall was negative for PSA and NKX 3.1 and was positive for AR, which confirms that the cyst wall was not derived from the prostate but the seminal vesicle or vas deferens . Thus pathological diagnosis was metastasis of PCa surrounded by the epithelium of the seminal vesicle or vas deferens.
The patient’s PSA level reached 35 ng/mL prior to surgery and decreased to 0.2 ng/mL 3 months post-surgery. His PSA level remained at the nadir under normal serum testosterone level and no metastasis appeared for 3 years without additional treatment.