A 53-y-old male patient with no previous significant comorbidities presented to the hospital with a history of fever and generalised body ache that persisted for a few days. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was positive for COVID-19, for which the patient started to receive treatment. On the third day of treatment, the patient noticed bruising and bleeding, mainly in the oral cavity, with the formation of blood clots inside the mouth. Laboratory investigation and complete blood picture (CBP) was performed, which revealed severe thrombocytopaenia with a count of almost zero. The patient was then treated for thrombocytopaenia to prevent fatal bleeding. Our case has been reported in line with THE SCARE 2020 criteria . The clinical examination and all procedures were performed and supervised by two professors of internal medicine. The patient was fit and not receiving any regular medications. The family history was negative in respect to the disorder of the patient. The psychological history was negative. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.
On September 26, 2020, the patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 via real-time PCR (RT-PCR) using nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs. His CBP results indicated severe thrombocytopaenia with a platelet count of 2/mm3, or almost zero, 2 d after testing positive. Thrombocytopaenia persisted for another 4 d. On October 3, 2020, there was a dramatic increase in the platelet count, reaching 28,000/mm3, and by October 12th, it reached 89,000/mm3.
The absolute neutrophil count in the first laboratory findings was normal. A significant rise was noticed on the fifth day after the COVID-19 test and continued until October 12, 2020. Lymphocytic counts tended to fluctuate between normal, low, and high. On the other hand, the white blood cell count was high on the fifth day post-COVID-19 test and remained the same. Haemoglobin levels tended to be in the lower normal range.
On the fourth day post-COVID-19 test, the patient's laboratory findings showed normal D-dimer (330) partial thromboplastin time (29 s), international normalised ratio (1.0), S. creatinine (1.1), and alanine aminotransferase levels (43). While lactate dehydrogenase (618), S. ferritin (1722), and c-reactive protein (29.6) levels were high. The Coombs test was negative, and he had an (A-negative) blood type (see , ).
The patient received treatment for COVID-19 after confirmation. This consisted of acetaminophen, levofloxacin tablets, and favipiravir. After the diagnosis of thrombocytopaenia, he was placed on a course of prednisone 1 mg/kg/day (70 mg) and frequent doses of intravenous platelet transfusion as rescue therapy to prevent fatal bleeding.
After several days of severe thrombocytopaenia and a platelet count <50r/mm3, the patient showed a good response to the treatment, with a gradual rise in the platelet count. On the 16th day after testing positive, his platelet count reached 89,000/mm3, which was considered moderate thrombocytopaenia. The patient completely recovered from the bleeding tendency and manifestations. With an outpatient follow-up for 1 month, the patient was asymptomatic when he returned and CBP was completely normal.