A 20 year old gravida 1, para 0, female of Salvadoran descent was referred to nephrology for deteriorating kidney function and the nephrotic syndrome at 22 weeks gestational age (GA). Past medical history included a diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis at age 12 treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) with resolution of symptoms into adulthood without therapy. The patient also endorsed pre-conception use of intranasal cocaine and cigarettes with no use (documented on urine drug screen) post conception. Medication use included prenatal vitamins, diclectin and acetaminophen. The patient reported a family history of rheumatoid arthritis diagnosed in her mother and maternal grandmother.
At presentation the patient’s serum creatinine was 177 μmol/L compared to a previous creatinine of 82 μmol/L three months earlier and a pre-pregnancy value of 56 μmol/L. She endorsed progressive lower limb edema beginning in early pregnancy. A history of tea coloured urine, epistaxis and sinus pressure was elicited. She did not have hemoptysis or rash but endorsed arthralgias in her shoulders, wrists, distal interphalangeal joints and ankles.
On examination her blood pressure was 116/60 mmHg. Relevant examination findings included pitting edema to the knees bilaterally. There were no active joints or rash.
24-h urine for protein yielded 9.81 g with > 100 RBC/hpf seen on microscopy. Urine albumin to creatinine ratio was 450 mg/mmol. Urine drug screen was negative for cocaine. Serum albumin was 20 g/L, antinuclear antibody 1:80, double stranded DNA negative, extractable nuclear antigen negative, C3, C4, normal and rheumatoid factor, cyclic citrullinated peptide negative, C-reactive protein 13 (normal < 10). HIV, Hepatitis B and C serology were negative. ANCA serology was positive with MPO antibody tire of 107.7 Antibody Index (AI) (normal < 20).
Renal ultrasound revealed structurally normal kidneys. Obstetrical ultrasound revealed mild intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Chest x-ray was unremarkable.
Renal biopsy was performed urgently with a diagnosis of pauci immune glomerulonephritis. Three of 14 glomeruli on light microscopy contained cellular crescents, 4 glomeruli fibrous crescents, 1 globally sclerosed. Up to six glomeruli contained segmental sclerosis with only five to 10 % interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy.
The patient was counselled regarding the maternal and fetal risks associated with her diagnosis and her therapeutic options including termination and elected to continue with the pregnancy. In particular, the risk of progression of renal impairment and potential requirement of dialysis during pregnancy were discussed, in addition to the high risk of preeclampsia and preterm labour if the pregnancy was continued. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone 1 g IV daily × 3 followed by oral prednisone 70 mg daily dosed by ideal weight and then Rituximab 650 mg IV weekly for four weeks. No infusion reactions to Rituximab were noted. The patient developed diffuse striae distensae which may have been a result of the high dose prednisone in the context of pregnancy and weight gain. Serum creatinine continued to rise throughout pregnancy to 250 μmol/L, despite a reduction in proteinuria to a urine albumin creatinine ratio of 125 mg/mmol and improvement in symptoms. At 27 weeks GA, the patient became hypertensive necessitating use of labetalol therapy. She was initiated on erythropoietin for anemia. The patient developed thrombocytopenia which was felt to be immune mediated in nature with a nadir of 64. Repeat obstetrical ultrasounds revealed normalization of fetal growth.
Delivery occurred at 29 weeks GA via caesarean section for worsening maternal headache and visual disturbance concerning for preeclampsia and worsening renal function with serum creatinine of 275 μmol/L. Maternal CD19+ cells were depleted at time of delivery. Neonatal birth weight was 1010 g and the neonate spent 10 weeks in the neonatal intensive care unit before discharge in healthy condition. Neonatal CD19+ cell levels were depleted at birth with associated transient lymphopenia without infectious complications. After delivery, the patient’s creatinine rose to a value of 375 μmol/L (eGFR 14 ml/min) at 11 weeks post partum. Prednisone was tapered slowly to 10 mg daily and the patient was initiated on azathioprine maintenance therapy four months after Rituximab induction and titrated up to a dose of 2 mg/kg/day. At the time of maintenance therapy initiation, the MPO titer was 5.8 Units (normal < 1).