A 50-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital because of left limb weakness and slurred speech for 2 h. Physical examination showed normal consciousness, gaze palsy, left central facial and glossal palsy, hypoesthesia of the left limbs, and Babinski (+). The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score at admission was 13. The patient had a history of diabetes and smoking. He underwent no regular physical examination and did not receive any antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs. Furthermore, he underwent non-contrast head CT (NCCT), computed tomography angiography (CTA), and CT perfusion (CTP). CTA of the head and neck showed a membrane-like structure in the posterior wall of the right common carotid artery and complete occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA). The patient then received 0.6 mg/kg intravenous thrombolysis bridging mechanical thrombectomy (MT). Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a shelf-like filling defect in the carotid bulb, consistent with a CaW and complete right MCA occlusion . Immediate MT was followed by retrieval of one red thrombus. DSA revealed that blood vessels were not reoccluded, and the MCA system achieved eTICI3 reperfusion .
After the mechanical embolus retrieval, 40 mg of enoxaparin sodium was subcutaneously administered twice daily for anticoagulation for 10 days, followed by oral administration of rivaroxaban (15 mg/day) for the next 20 days, and before 3 days of carotid endarterectomy (CEA), clopidogrel (75 mg/day) was orally administered for antiplatelet combined anticoagulant therapy. Since MT completion, oral treatment with atorvastatin (40 mg/day) was started. When the patient underwent carotid endarterectomy, which exhibited thrombus formation where the web protruded, despite anticoagulant combined antiplatelet therapy. We obtained a thrombus from the rostral CaW aspect after CEA.
The retrieved thrombi were immediately fixed in 10% paraformaldehyde and submitted to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) histological staining . According to H&E staining, histological quantification of each component was performed using the Orbit Imaging Analysis Software following the standard operating procedure .
The histopathologic qualitative analysis of the clots from various sites in this patient showed a particular appearance. That of the embolized thrombus corresponded to a mixed thrombus with a smooth surface of red blood cells (RBCs) compatible with fibrin composition , while the in situ thrombus had a “white” clot appearance with an abundant fibrin/platelet apparent surface. RBC components comprised nearly half of the embolized thrombus but were rare in the in situ thrombus. Although the clot included a small number of white blood cells, they accounted for a larger proportion in the in situ thrombus than that in the embolized thrombus. Quantitative thrombus composition analysis of the embolized clot yielded 46.03% fibrin/platelet, 48.12% RBCs, and 5.85% white blood cells; the thrombus in situ yielded 68.0% fibrin, 17.2% RBCs, and 14.8% white blood cells .