A 32-year-old woman presented at the ophthalmology clinic with chief complaints of floater and painless gradual decreased visual acuity in her right eye from 5 days earlier. There was no previous history of ocular surgery, trauma, systemic disease, and medication. There was a medical history of ESWL for a 12-mm right renal pelvis stone 1 week prior to her presentation. Pre- and post-operative urine culture was negative, and urine analysis was normal. In clinical examination, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the right eye decreased to line 20/40 of the Snellen chart. Left eye BCVA was 20/20. Intraocular pressure of both eyes was 15 mm/Hg. Right eye slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival injection and + 1 cell in the anterior chamber. Also, fundus examination showed clear media with + 3 vitritis and an elevated white ball-like lesion with 1 disc diameter size, on para-fovea with fluffy border. The right eye macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) displayed a hyper-reflective lesion in the vitreomacular interface . There was no remarkable sign in the examination of the left eye. Diagnostic vitreous tap was performed, and the sample was sent for smear and culture. The smear of the vitreous sample with Giemsa stain showed multiple fungal spores with budding yeast and fungal pseudo-hypha and leukocyte infiltration . Cultures of the vitreous sample after 7 days were positive for Candida albicans.
The patient was admitted to the hospital; then, intravitreal injection of amphotericin-B (5 μg/0.5 ml) was performed and topical atropine 1% Q6hr, topical prednisolone acetate 1% Q4hr, topical ciprofloxacin 0.3% Q6hr, intravenous amphotericin-B 1 mg/kg/day, and oral fluconazole 100 mg Q12hr were started. Systemic workup including ANA, ANCA (P, C), AMA, VDRL, FT-ABS, Toxoplasma IgM and IgG, HBs Ag, HBc Ab, HCV Ab, HIV Ab, serology for Borrelia and Bartonella, Mantoux and interferon-γ test were all negative. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, CBC and platelet, fasting blood glucose, AST and ALT, BUN, creatinine, ACE, IgG, IgM, and IgA level were within the normal limit. Peripheral blood smear, para-nasal sinus, and chest X-ray were normal.
After 72 h of treatment, BCVA improves to line 20/30 of the Snellen chart. The lesion size became smaller, and borders became clear and sharp. The patient was discharged, and treatment continued with oral fluconazole 100 mg Q12. After 6 weeks of initial treatment, the right eye BCVA was 20/20. The infiltrative lesion completely disappeared in fundus examination but a trace of vitritis was apparent. No signs of scar formation and traction of the retina were observable. The macular OCT revealed mild cellular debris in the site of the primary lesion . There was no recurrence in a 2-year follow-up.