A 62-year-old man who had systemic sclerosis presented with cough and dyspnea on exertion. Lung function test showed an expiratory flow limitation and chest computed tomography showed diffuse thickness from the trachea to the bronchiole . No other tests showed abnormal findings and the level of C-reactive protein was normal. To evaluate further, bronchoscopy was performed and the endoscopic findings showed disappearance of the cartilaginous rings of the trachea and edematous changes of the tracheal membrane . Endobronchial ultrasonography (EBUS) showed thickening in the fourth-marginal echo layer, which suggested inflammation in the cartilage . However, the tracheal biopsy showed no specific findings. Therefore, surgical biopsies from the trachea were obtained under general anesthesia. The histological examination showed inflammatory cell infiltration with destruction of the cartilage , and these inflammatory cells consisted of CD3-positive T-lymphocytes, CD20-positive B-lymphocytes and CD68-positive macrophages . In addition, there were no findings of vasculitis, granuloma or amyloid by Congo red staining (data not shown). The serum level of anti-type II collagen antibody, which is known to be elevated in RPC patients , was also elevated to a concentration of 98 EU/ml, while it is generally less than 25 EU/ml in normal subjects. At that time, the patient did not have auricular or nasal symptoms. However, we performed a biopsy from the left external ear because a previous report demonstrated the diagnostic usefulness of ear biopsy even if there are no auricular symptoms . Nevertheless, the histological examination did not show any inflammatory changes in the auricular cartilage (data not shown). Finally, we diagnosed him as localized tracheobronchial RPC.
To clarify the hypothesis that autoimmunity against matrilin-1 is involved in the pathogenesis of localized tracheobronchial RPC, we evaluated the expression level of matrilin-1 in tracheal and auricular specimens from this patient. We performed immunohistochemical staining of the tracheal and auricular tissues using antibodies against matrilin-1 (dilution: 1/100, Clone # 828806, R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN) after antigen retrieval by autoclaving the slides. As we expected, immunohistochemical staining with anti-matrilin-1 antibody showed that matrilin-1 immunoreactivity was detected mainly in the boundary region of cartilage in the tracheal , but not in the auricular cartilage .