A 64-year-old female was admitted with progressive exertional dyspnea and angina pectoris for six months. No relevant medical history, including smoking, trauma, tumor or surgery, has been reported. The electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with ST-segment non-significant change. The myoglobin, creatine kinase-MB and troponin I were within normal range while N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide levels was 2133 pg/ml. Coronary angiography (CAG) (Supplementary Video ) showed persist swirling of contrast within a large aneurysmal left-coronary sinus of Valsalva and left anterior descending artery was retrogradely perfused by the right coronary artery . The stenosis of left coronary artery cannot be determined during CAG. Further echocardiography and coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA) were performed. Transthoracic echocardiography showed both left-coronary and non-coronary SVAs. The left-coronary SVAs was giant (6.4 × 4.5 cm in diameter) and was close to the left atrium and main pulmonary artery . The non-coronary SVA was 2.8 × 1.8 cm in diameter . No intracardiac shunting or obvious wall motion abnormality was observed. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 54%. CCTA showed a giant left-coronary SVA about 6 × 5 cm in diameter as well as a non-coronary SVA about 2 × 1.8 cm in diameter . The contrast media filling in left-coronary sinus was significantly damaged which suggested blood flow stasis . The left coronary artery was originated above the SVA and the right coronary artery was originated from right-coronary sinus of Valsalva . The left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery (LCX) were stretched and compressed by the SVA .
Cardiac surgery was performed by using standard cardiopulmonary bypass with ascending aorta and bicaval cannulation via median sternotomy. Intraoperative findings confirmed the diagnosis of giant unruptured left-coronary SVA. LAD and LCX were severely displaced and compressed by the SVA. Because the entire left sinus of Valsalva was severely dilated and no clearly boundary of its neck could be defined, SVA closure with bovine epicardial patch plus left coronary artery bypass were considered difficult. The Bentall procedure was finally performed using a handmade composite graft of 23 mm Medtronic Hancock II bioprosthetic valve and 28 mm Terumo artificial vessel. Moreover, the orifice of left coronary artery was closed by ligation and continuous suture, and then the proximal LAD was bypassed by using a great saphenous vein. The LCX could also be perfused by the retrograde blood flow from the great saphenous vein graft and was not bypassed concomitantly. The operation went smoothly and the heart re-beat automatically. The early postoperatively course was uneventful as the patient spent two days in cardiac care unit and recovered to daily activity on postoperative day (POD) 7. However, the patient developed deep sternal wound infection on POD 10. Simple debridement was useless, and the patient received Gao’s procedure (pectoralis major muscle turnover flap reconstruction) on POD 17 and finally discharged home on POD 33 with good wound healing. The patient was followed up for 5 years. The CCTA at postoperative year 5 showed normal morphology of aortic root and patent vein graft without SVA recurrence .