A 56-year-old postmenopausal woman presented with a left-sided breast mass for which she consulted a nearby physician. She underwent mammography and breast ultrasonography and was referred to our department for suspected breast cancer.
She harbored a 2-cm well-defined and mobile elastic hard mass in the lower outer quadrant of the left breast. The axillary lymph nodes were not palpable.
In the middle and outer areas of the left breast, a 2-cm micro-lobulated high-density mass was observed on mammography . Polymorphic calcifications were found within the tumor.
A 1.3 × 1.0 × 1.1-cm irregular hypoechoic mass with angular margin was found in the lower outer quadrant of the left breast on breast ultrasonography . Many calcifications were observed within the tumor.
A 1.9 × 1.8 × 1.7-cm irregular tumor was observed in the lower outer quadrant of the left breast, which was well imaged in the early phase and washed out in the late phase on magnetic resonance imaging . The internal enhancement characteristics were heterogeneous.
These tests showed that the tumor was likely malignant; therefore, she underwent core needle biopsy (16G). Fibrosis was observed in 4 of 4 specimens, and duct components and squamous epithelium-like cells were partially observed in 2 specimens. Spindle cells were also observed, but the mitosis rate and nuclear grade were very low, and AE1/AE3 were immunohistologically negative. It was very difficult to ascertain whether the lesions were reactive or neoplastic.
Because these imaging findings strongly suggested that the tumor was malignant, she underwent vacuum-assisted biopsy (10G). However, the pathological findings only revealed inflammatory cell infiltration and a high level of fibrosis. Fibrosis was observed in 6 of 7 specimens, and duct components were partially observed in 2 specimens; however, there were no malignant findings; therefore, we decided to conduct careful follow-up.
After 3 months, she underwent a repeat breast ultrasonography, which revealed that the mass had grown to 1.8 × 1.7 × 1.5 cm. She underwent a repeat core needle biopsy (16G).
Proliferation of fibroblast-like spindle cells and partial agglomeration of squamous-like cells with low-grade atypical nuclei were observed . These findings were observed in 6 of 6 specimens.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) antibody markers (cytokeratin (CK)5/6 and AE1/AE3) were positive in spindle cells and squamous cells . The other antibody markers (CK14, p63, and p40) were also positive in these cells. CAM5.2 was partially positive in the squamous cells, but negative in the spindle cells.
Spindle cells were mainly proliferating, and epithelial components were partially aggregated; therefore, we suspected that this tumor was FLMCa, but the amount of tissue was insufficient to establish a definitive diagnosis. To confirm the diagnosis, lumpectomy with a 1.0-cm margin was performed.
The cut surface of the lumpectomy specimen revealed a firm, white, nodular tumor measuring 2.0 × 2.0 × 1.5 cm with infiltrative borders. We found low-grade and slightly atypical spindle cells and partly atypical spindle cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma . IHC antibody markers (α-SMA and CK5/6) were positive in spindle cells and squamous cells . The other antibody markers (CK14, p63, and p40) were also positive in these cells. Based on these pathological findings, we diagnosed FLMCa. The tumor invasive size was 2.3 cm (pT2). The tumor cells were negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), and HER2. The Ki-67 labeling index was 12% in the tumor cells. The margins on the edge of the nipple side and anterior side were “ink on tumor”. She then underwent a mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy. No invasive lesions were present, but lobular carcinoma in situ was widely present in the surgical specimen. The sentinel lymph node biopsy results were negative.
After the surgery, she received adjuvant chemotherapy (docetaxel + cyclophosphamide; TC). In the second cycle, she developed allergic symptoms. Therefore, she could not continue the TC, and received 3 cycles of another type of chemotherapy (epirubicin + cyclophosphamide; EC). At 3 years and 8 months of follow-up, no recurrent or metastatic lesions were identified in her body.