A 4-year-old white boy was brought by his parents to the emergency department of our hospital with complaints of diffuse cervical swelling and chest pain. His history was significant only for nonsevere coughing episodes before his nighttime rest; the child’s parents denied any recent fever, weight loss, pains, trauma, bronchial asthma, and sick contacts. An examination revealed tachypnea, shallow breathing, decreased breath sounds especially on the left posterior field, and palpable subcutaneous emphysema with crepitus on both sides of his neck. The child was dyspnoeic but not cyanotic, while his oxygen saturation progressively decreased. Chest radiography (CXR) displayed cervical subcutaneous emphysema, signs of pneumomediastinum, a hyperinflated right lung, and triangular atelectasis of the lower lobe of his left lung behind his heart . A computed tomography (CT) scan of his thorax confirmed and better depicted the CXR findings , revealed the presence of pneumopericardium, pneumorrhachis and pneumothorax, air in the retropharyngeal and paraesophageal spaces , and showed a 8 mm longitudinal laceration in the right posterolateral wall of his lower trachea , 19 mm above the carina, associated with a nearly total obstructive atelectasis of the lower lobe of his left lung without detectable foreign bodies . The air collections were considered to have originated from the tear in the tracheal membrane. Because his symptoms worsened, the child was intubated, given intravenous fluids and vasopressors to control the hypotension, and was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit of another institution. He underwent an emergency bronchoscopy, which confirmed the tracheal injury and disclosed abundant thick secretions with a large mucous plug blocking the lower lobe bronchial lumens of his left lung. Soon after the aspiration of fluids and the removal of the mucous plug, the child’s pulmonary gas exchange and respiratory rate improved, and his left lung expansion increased. There were neither underlying endobronchial lesions nor infections. The child was managed with conservative treatment consisting of 5 days of intubation and administration of intravenous corticosteroids, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and inhaled bronchodilators. Daily physical and CXR examinations revealed rapid absorption of the subcutaneous emphysema and air collections, and gradual resolution of the atelectasis . The child was discharged from the pediatric hospital 35 days after admission, and his follow-up was planned at that institution.