A 16-year-old female with a past medical history significant for asthma was referred to the pediatric pulmonology clinic by her pediatrician for persistent cough and wheezing following COVID-19 infection. Her COVID-19 infection consisted of mild upper respiratory symptoms with anosmia and was diagnosed via PCR.
Approximately 1 week after recovering from COVID-19, she developed wheezing and a prominent, non-productive cough. She was initially treated by her pediatrician with albuterol which helped her wheezing but not her cough. A chest x-ray at that time was normal. Over the next month, her symptoms progressed to include sinus pain, serosanguinous ear drainage, and a sensation of fullness in her ears. Her pediatrician treated her with courses of azithromycin, cefdinir, and doxycycline. The antibiotics did not resolve her symptoms and she was trialed on a 5-day course of prednisone (60 mg daily). She saw otolaryngology who diagnosed her with chronic bilateral serous otitis media and recommended tympanostomy tube placement. She underwent tympanostomy tube placement with some relief in her symptoms but reported ongoing bilateral hearing loss. She had a CT scan following tympanostomy tube placement that showed bilateral opacified mastoid air cells consistent with chronic inflammation.
When she presented to pediatric pulmonology 6 weeks after the onset of her symptoms, she was still wheezing and had a daily paroxysmal cough with occasional post-tussive emesis. She also reported chest tightness and difficulty breathing. She had a chest x-ray which showed patchy airspace disease of the upper lungs, concerning for a multifocal infectious or inflammatory process. Her symptoms suggested an exacerbation of asthma for which she was prescribed another 5-day course of prednisone (40 mg twice daily), albuterol, and she was started on inhaled corticosteroids in combination with a long-acting beta agonist. Her symptoms improved initially but returned as soon as she stopped taking systemic corticosteroids. Over the next 5 weeks, the patient’s cough became productive of green sputum with worsening wheezing that was no longer responsive to bronchodilators. She was treated with a 28-day course of cefdinir for protracted bacterial bronchitis. When she returned for follow up three months later, she continued to complain of cough and wheezing with new onset myalgias. She underwent pulmonary function testing which showed moderate post-bronchodilation small airway obstruction.
Chest x-ray revealed perihilar and bilateral upper lobe consolidations that represented a significant progression from her previous x-ray 3 months prior. High resolution chest CT demonstrated extensive multifocal pulmonary nodules and regions of consolidation with multiple areas of cavitation and central bronchiectasis with diffuse bronchial wall thickening as well as reactive mediastinal and hilar adenopathy . CT findings were concerning for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis or chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. However, the patient underwent aspergillus antibody studies which were negative. (1–3) Beta-D-Glucan (Fungitell) assay was negative. No IFN-gamma response to M tuberculosis antigens was detected (Quantiferon assay). Induced sputum culture was negative for bacteria, fungal organisms, and acid-fast bacilli. Other laboratory parameters were notable for elevated inflammatory markers with a C-reactive protein of 12 mg/L (0.0–10.0 mg/L) and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 30 mm/h (0.0–20.0 mm/h). Her ANCA screen was positive: her C-ANCA was positive with a titer of 1:40 (< 1:20). P-ANCA was negative. Proteinase 3 antibody (anti-PR3) was positive with an antibody index (AI) of 1.4 (0.0–0.9 AI). Antinuclear antibody (ANA) screen was positive with a titer of 1:40 in a speckled pattern. Anticardiolipin antibodies, myeloperoxidase antibodies and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies were negative. Beta 2 Glycoprotein 1 IgM and IgG were negative; Complement C3 was 165 mg/dL (88–193 mg/dL) and Complement C4 was 23 mg/dL (15–57 mg/dL). A complete blood count (CBC) was notable for a white blood cell count (WBC) of 11.3 × 10^9/L (3.5–11.0 × 10^9/L), hemoglobin of 13.5 g/dL (11.4–15.4 g/dL), hematocrit of 41.6% (34.2–46.2%), platelet count of 464 × 10^9/L (150–400 × 10^9/L). Serum creatinine and urinalysis were normal. Initial pulmonary function testing revealed a moderate obstructive pattern. She was referred to pediatric rheumatology for concern of systemic vasculitis.
When she presented to pediatric rheumatology clinic, her review of systems was noteworthy for a 45-pound weight loss; intermittent conjunctivitis; sinus congestion, purulent nasal discharge, bilateral hearing loss, ear drainage, sinus headaches, recurrent nosebleeds; cough, wheezing and shortness of breath; progressively worsening bilateral arthralgias in her knees, feet and elbows that improved with activity; intermittent rashes, and sun sensitivity.
She underwent lung tissue biopsy which showed non-specific findings with focal areas of parenchymal atelectasis as well as scattered intra-alveolar macrophages. There was no evidence of acute or granulomatous inflammation or vasculitis identified in the biopsied specimen. There were no yeast or fungal elements seen.
Our patient’s clinical presentation and positive serology is most consistent with GPA. To induce remission, she was started on rituximab infusions which she tolerated well. She completed a glucocorticoid taper and was started on mycophenolate mofetil as maintenance therapy. At her most recent follow up, she reported a marked improvement in her symptoms although she continues to have bilateral conductive hearing loss necessitating hearing aids. Repeat CT imaging showed an overall improvement in the extent of previously seen multifocal consolidation, nodularity, and cavitation in her lungs . She demonstrated significant improvement in her pulmonary function tests , and her ANCA and PR3 antibodies have remained negative to date.