A 71-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our hospital under the general medical team in July 2007 with a 15-month history of recurrent cellulitis over the right maxillary region of his face. There were no obvious aetiological factors apart from stable tablet-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus. Wound swabs for microscopy, culture and sensitivity were repeatedly negative and there was no history of trauma or underlying dermatological disease. The patient had suffered from a dental abscess involving the right upper quadrant molars, but this was noted only 13 months following his initial presentation in 2006; tooth extractions performed with a view to curing his facial cellulitis had limited effect on this. Multiple courses of broad-spectrum oral and intravenous antibiotics had been ineffective in treating the cellulitis. Two computed tomography (CT) scans of the paranasal sinuses performed in February and July 2007 had ruled out sinusitis as an underlying cause. The patient had declined to have a skin biopsy.
Several days after admission, the patient developed an abscess over the right maxillary region and began complaining of a foul taste in his mouth from the discharging abscess. It was at this point that a discharging fistula between the right nasolabial fold and the right buccal sulcus was diagnosed clinically. Following reviews by clinicians in the areas of dermatology, microbiology, ENT (ear nose and throat) and maxillofacial surgery, the significance of this patient's nicorandil treatment (30 mg twice daily) initiated 4 years previously, was recognised. His drug history also included spironolactone, isosorbide mononitrate, warfarin, gliclazide, bisoprolol, paroxetine and furosemide. On direct questioning, the patient admitted to having experienced small oral ulcers involving his tongue 6 months preceding his admission, although he had not sought medical advice as they had not been particularly troubling. On this occasion, he had no oral ulcers.
On discussion with the cardiologists, the patient was put on a 4-week long tapering regimen of nicorandil resulting in complete withdrawal of nicorandil therapy. There was some clinical improvement noted at 2 weeks into this reducing regime and a month after his nicorandil therapy had ceased, his fistula had healed and the cellulitis disappeared completely for the first time in 15 months.
A retrospective review of his imaging confirmed a fistula in the right maxillary region on the CT scan performed in February 2007. The patient had not complained of any symptoms suggestive of a fistula at this point. However, retrospective questioning revealed that he had had symptoms of a 'foul taste' in his mouth during this time, which he had initially attributed to the dental abscess.
In addition, investigation of the patient's case notes revealed that he had had a persistent peri-anal fistula over a period of 1 year from 2004 to 2005. This low anal fistula was initially laid open surgically in 2004. However, this procedure was complicated by poor wound healing and abscess formation requiring two further surgical procedures over the next year. The fistula finally healed in mid-2005, corresponding to a coincidental nicorandil dose reduction from a total daily dose of 60 mg to 30 mg during the preceding month.