A 54-year old woman with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) secondary to polycystic kidney disease who was on continuous cycling PD (CCPD) was admitted to hospital with a polycystic liver infection. Her CCPD prescription had been as follows: six cycles involving a total dialysate volume of 11,800 mL over 9 h plus one daytime exchange. All of the dialysate bags consisted of a Dianeal 1.5 % dextrose solution containing a calcium concentration of 1.25 mmol/L. A peritoneal equilibration test performed before hospital admission indicated a 24-h urine output of 1697 mL and a Kt/V of 2.72. For the past year, she had complained of progressive pain and immobility of the hips, with scant soft tissue calcium deposits seen on x-rays 1 year before admission. In hospital, she was found to have new small, palpable, and firm masses around her hips and cervical spine. She had been taking the vitamin D analogue alfacalcidol for years at a dose of 1.25 mcg orally daily, and was not on a phosphate binder. She had elevated serum calcium, phosphate and PTH levels . Her calcitriol level was low at 26 pmol/L. A whole-body positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan with fluorodeoxyglucose before her hospitalization illustrated widespread tumoral calcinosis, mainly around the large joints. Her alfacalcidol was suspended and she was put on a low-calcium and -phosphate diet before being admitted to hospital for treatment of her infected liver cysts.
Two months after the first PET-CT scan, a repeat PET-CT scan while in-hospital indicated progression of her tumoral calcinosis . For that reason, she was switched from PD to daily hemodialysis (HD). Her HD prescription involved 4-h sessions at a maximum blood pump speed with the following dialysate: sodium 138 mmol/L, potassium 4 mmol/L, calcium 1.25 mmol/L, and bicarbonate 28 mmol/L. Follow-up PET-CT scans one and 2 months later demonstrated significant improvement in her tumoral calcinosis accompanied by a marked rise in serum calcium and a precipitous decrease in her chronically elevated PTH . She was continued on daily HD after discharge from hospital following a 2-month admission. Two months later, these biochemical changes reversed with resolution of her tumoral calcinosis, as evidenced by the disappearance of the calcified masses on palpation and on PET-CT . She was then maintained on HD five times per week as she awaited an upcoming kidney transplant.