A 77-year-old Asian man with no significant medical history presented with mild and intermittent left trepopnea (shortness of breath while lying on the left side), and palpitations since nearly 2 months. He had no syncope or fainting episodes, also no fever, arthralgias, weight loss, or fatigue. His main risk factors were tobacco smoking, age, and a sedentary lifestyle. There was no relevant medical family history. He was not on any long-term medications, except occasional analgesics for headaches. Physical examination revealed regular heart sounds, with no abdominal distension or lower legs edema. EKG showed atrial tachycardia with an average ventricular rate of 60 bpm . Chest X-rays showed normal lung parenchyma, with enlarged right lower curve suggestive of right atrial enlargement. Laboratory results (C-reactive protein, complete blood count, hemoglobin level (13 g/dL), and serum interleukin-6 level (7 pg/mL)) were normal.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) using a Philips iE33 ultrasound system revealed a large spheroid mass in the right atrium, measuring 86 × 63 mm, with a smooth edge. The mass occupied most of the right atrium; there was mild functional tricuspid flow obstruction, slightly reduced left ventricular systolic function, and normal inferior vena cava size. There were difficulties in assessing pulmonary artery pressure due to the patient’s dyspnea while lying on the left side (left trepopnea) and limited sonographic signal . No stalk was observed, and three-dimensional echo imaging was unavailable. Figure A shows blood flow around the mass, while Fig. B reveals mild functional tricuspid functional stenosis caused by the obstructive effect of the mass; image acquirement while in dorsal supine or right decubitus positions to evaluate flow changes was difficult owing to poor sonographic signal. The patient declined transesophageal echocardiography. Cardiac tomography revealed a mass in the right atrium with a 9.3 cm diameter, smooth edges, along with microcalcifications and without invasion of the surrounding tissues . Coronary angiogram results indicated normal coronary arteries.
After discussion with the patient, surgical removal of the mass was performed via median sternotomy. The resected mass had a short and small pedicle attached to the right atrial free wall; it had a spheroid shape with smooth edges, measuring approximately 8.5 cm in diameter . No tissue invasion was observed. Histologic analysis confirmed the myxoma nature of the mass, with lipidic cells and scant eosinophilic cytoplasm embedded in a vascular myxoid stroma. There was minimal calcification and central tumor necrosis, with absence of interleukin-6 expression on immunohistochemical study. Following the surgery, the patient became asymptomatic with restored normal sinus rhythm. He was discharged a few days later.