A 47-year-old man, post-seizure, sustained muscle contractions leading to his left shoulder injury. The patient was employed as a housekeeper. At the time of the seizure, he had been admitted to the ER of another hospital, where he had been discharged with the diagnosis of “left shoulder contusion.” The patient was admitted to our clinic 2 years after the trauma, complaining of severe pain and functional limitations of the left shoulder. On physical examination, the patient showed functional limitation of the shoulder motion on all planes, in particular: adduction 10°, abduction 20°, flexion 30°, extension 10°, internal rotation 30°, and external rotation 0°. At palpation, the shoulder was painful. The patient was neurovascular intact.
X-ray and CT scans were carried out, showing posterior shoulder dislocation with an osteocartilaginous lesion about 40% of the humeral head surface, localized on its anteromedial edge, representing a reverse Hill-Sachs lesion; type I according to Randelli’s classification ( & ). MRI was done to evaluate associated rotator cuff injury muscle atrophy and cartilage damage . The joint was not reducible with close methods, and after a radiological evaluation, the patient was scheduled for surgery. Considering the age of the patient, his high functional demand, and the extension of the lesion, we decided to perform an iliac crest autograft reconstruction. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia, with the patient placed in a beach chair position. A standard deltopectoral approach was used with the release of the upper pectoralis major tendon insertion to improve the exposure of the surgical field.
After finding and isolating the anterior humeral circumflex artery and vein, the subscapularis tendon was exposed and cut through 1 cm medial from its insertion. After detaching the subscapularis muscle from the lesser tuberosity, as the long head of the biceps brachii (LHB) tendon tended to dislocate from the bicipital groove, we decided to do a biceps tenotomy. We removed all the fibrosis and adhesion around the humeral head, and then the posteriorly dislocated locked humeral head was gently reduced with the aid of a Schanz pin inserted in the lateral aspect of the humeral shaft used as a joystick and spikes. Subsequently, a large, 40% reverse Hill-Sachs lesion and reverse bankart was exposed (, ). The fresh iliac crest autograft was then carefully prepared aside to obtain an anatomical restoration of the head anatomy . The size-matched autograft was prepared, press-fit into the humeral defect, and fixed with two 4.0 mm lag screws . The screws were countersinked to prevent glenoid erosion. Still, the shoulder joint was unstable due to a reverse Bankart defect. The posterior glenoid defect was exposed using the posterior approach of the shoulder with superficial dissection between the deltoid and infraspinatus and deep dissection between the infraspinatus and teres minor. Recurrent posterior translation was fixed via posterior approach using one 4.0mm lag screw, and the defect was filled again with fresh iliac autograft . The rotator cuff was repaired using a No. 5 ethibond suture. Post op Xray was taken . Post-op shoulder arm immobilizer in the neutral rotation was given for 4 weeks. After it, passive range of motion Physiotherapy was done for 4 weeks, followed by active physiotherapy, and a rotator cuff strengthening protocol was initiated. We did Xray and range of movement assessment at week 2,4,6 and 12 (, ) . Functionally, the patient was very satisfied with the improved range of motion and strength and was able to join his work, which he could not do for the past 2 years due to this injury.