A 24-year-old Japanese male presented to the Gastroenterology Department of our hospital with diarrhea and hematochezia.
The patient was diagnosed with UC in 2015. At the onset, the disease was localized to the entire colon, and the patient was initially treated with mesalazine (3600 mg/d) for one year. In 2016, following a relapse, he was hospitalized. He then presented with anemia (hemoglobin 4 g/L) and thrombocytopenia (platelet count 5 × 104/μL). Further examinations, including bone marrow puncture, led to a diagnosis of concurrence of UC and ITP. The patient then started on prednisolone (30 mg/d) and achieved clinical and endoscopic remission for UC. However, since ITP was resistant to steroid and immunoglobulin treatments, he started oral cyclosporine and achieved remission for ITP. Thereafter, the patient maintained overall good health on oral mesalazine, prednisolone (5 mg/d), and cyclosporin (150 mg/d). His history was unremarkable. His family history was negative for hematological disease or inflammatory bowel disease.
In April 2019, the patient experienced a flare of UC characterized by six bowel movements/day of liquid and bloody stool and abdominal pain. The partial Mayo index score was 7, indicating severe disease. Laboratory exams revealed anemia but not thrombocytopenia . After the exclusion of intestinal infections, oral cyclosporine initially changed to a continuous infusion of cyclosporine to control the blood concentration strictly. The patient reported little clinical benefit. He then started tofacitinib and achieved clinical remission . The patient underwent colonoscopy in September 2019, which showed endoscopic remission . Prednisolone was stopped, and the patient has maintained remission in UC and ITP for over one year on mesalazine and tofacitinib.
Past history is unremarkable except for UC and ITP.
Personal and family history is unremarkable.
The patient did not have a fever. Physical examination showed slight tenderness in the left lower abdomen.
Laboratory exams revealed anemia but not thrombocytopenia .
To further analyze the molecular mechanism underlying tofacitinib therapy, whole transcriptomic sequencing was performed for inflamed rectal mucosae obtained before and after the initiation of JAK inhibitor (Supplementary Material). Compared with the gene expression before tofacitinib treatment, the top 10 downregulated genes during tofacitinib treatment were REG1A, REG1B, REG3A, SPINK4, DUOXA2, TNIP3, DEFB4A, SAA2, CXCL5, and CXCL1. In contrast, the top 10 upregulated genes after the initiation of tofacitinib treatment were HMGCS2, AQP8, SLC6A19, MT1H, UGT2A3, CLDN8, MT1M, SLC51A, PRKG2, and MT1G.