A 52-year-old Japanese man with no significant prior medical history and unknown smoking habits was referred to a urologist for investigation of hematuria, and was diagnosed as having urinary bladder cancer after further examination. He underwent three sessions of transurethral resection of the bladder tumor and intra-vesical instillation therapy (doxorubicin and cacillus Calmette-Guerin) and was then placed under observation. During the follow-up period no abdominal symptoms were observed, and an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the incidental finding of dissection of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). Our patient was then referred to our hospital.
His physical examination findings on admission were height of 176cm, weight of 64.5kg, blood pressure of 111/69mmHg, and pulse rate of 70bpm. Our patient had no fever and no other abnormal physical findings such as abdominal symptoms. His blood biochemistry test results were also normal. A contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan revealed an arterial aneurysm and a dissection located approximately 1.5 and 5cm distal to the ostium of the SMA . A false lumen of the artery was partially occluded by a thrombus. Distal to this occlusion, the arterial wall was irregularly shaped with both narrow and wide sections. The inferior mesenteric artery was also observed to have an irregular arterial wall. The renal artery also showed dissection, with an occluded false lumen; an ipsilateral renal infarction was observed as well.
On the basis of good CT contrast enhancement of the artery distal to the dissected portion and the absence of increased inflammatory parameters or clinical symptoms, our patient was prescribed oral aspirin and placed under observation. After two months, a follow-up CT scan revealed an enlargement of the pancreatic tail adjacent to the splenic artery . In view of the absence of clinical symptoms or elevated levels of pancreatic enzymes, our patient was again placed under observation. Follow-up was carried out using three-dimensional CT scans, which showed re-expansion of the true lumen, gradual improvement of the arterial wall irregularities, and reduction of the renal infarction and pancreatic enlargement . These changes continued to improve to almost normal over the following 15 months . No findings suggestive of a recurrence of the disorder have been observed in our patient in the three years after his initial presentation.