Our patient was a 74-year-old Japanese man who had been diagnosed with a left renal mass and no evidence of metastasis 11 years before presentation to our hospital. Left radical nephrectomy was performed. The histology of the renal tumor showed clear cell RCC, Fuhrman nuclear grade 2, which was classified as pathological stage T2bN0M0 according to TMN classification. Multiple pulmonary metastases were discovered 10 months after surgery. The patient was stratified as intermediate risk according to the MSKCC criteria. Although immunotherapy (interleukin-2 plus interferon) was started, disease progression was observed on a follow-up computed tomographic (CT) scan 6 months later .
Therefore, the patient was included in a phase II clinical trial and was started on treatment with oral sorafenib (Nexavar®; Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Whippany, NJ, USA) 800 mg/day 16 months after surgery. Three months after the initiation of sorafenib, a CT scan showed 19.3 % regression based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. Then, after 1 year, 70.1 % regression was observed . At this time, as grade 2 fatigue and grade 1 aspiration pneumonia emerged, the dose was reduced to 400 mg/day. In addition, the patient twice had acute myocardial infarctions, one 4 years and one 5 years after initiation of sorafenib. Because general fatigue and weakness occurred, sorafenib treatment was stopped 5.5 years after initiation.
Progression of pulmonary metastases was observed 8 months after sorafenib treatment was stopped . Although we were reluctant to use a molecular targeted agent, we decided to prescribe sorafenib according to the strong wish of the patient. Treatment with sorafenib was restarted at 200 mg/day. Because this dose was well-tolerated without adverse events, sorafenib was increased to 400 mg/day 5 months after had been restarted. The patient experienced grade 2 fatigue 7.5 years after initiation of sorafenib. Therefore, the schedule was changed to 3 days of treatment and 1 day of rest. The patient has continued sorafenib on this schedule without disease progression or severe adverse events .