A case of a 23-year-old male presented with weakness in the right upper limb due to brachial plexus injury involving C5, C6, and C7 roots because of motor bike accident. He was treated for lower end humerus fracture with plating after the same accident. MRI of brachial plexus and CT scan of cervical spine showed meningocele and displaced fracture of spinous and transverse process of C7-D1 on the right side. We planned for exploration of brachial plexus and distal nerve transfers.
On supraclavicular exploration of roots of brachial plexus, the meningocele was ruptured and clear fluid drained out . The cyst was closed with non-absorbable sutures and distal nerve transfers (spinal accessary nerve to suprascapular nerve and ulnar nerve fascicle to biceps branch of musculocutaneous nerve) were performed to complete the surgery. As clear fluid drained through the cyst which was located near spinal roots and apex of lung, it was necessary to distinguish whether it is communicating from lung or cerebrospinal fluid. The hemo-glucose test (HGT) was performed with the fluid to confirm whether it was cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or pleural fluid. The HGT of CSF is usually <25 mg/dl than blood HGT. As the difference was <10 mg/dl than blood value, the diagnosis of CSF was not confirmed.
On post-operative day 1, the patient started getting orthostatic headache, nausea, and hypotension and there was more than 500 cc of clear fluid drainage from operative site. Conservative treatment in the form of higher antibiotics, IV fluids was started and head low position was given.
MRI of spine and neck was repeated and revealed lateral meningocele at C6-C7 and C7-T1 in subarachnoid space communicating with paravertebral space (, ).
As suggested by neurologist, beta-2-transferrin level was done with the fluid which is more specific test to prove CSF . The test confirmed to be CSF. On post-operative day 2, the drainage was more than 1 L and symptoms of CSF leak worsened.
We discussed two options with patient. One was to reexplore the neck and close the cyst again or as per neurosurgeon’s suggestion to consider lumbar puncture to drain the fluid away from its source.
Finally, anesthetist did a lumbar puncture and kept an indwelling drain in subarachnoid space L3-L4 level and fluid started draining from there.
From post-procedure day 2 of lumbar puncture, the neck drainage started reducing and patient improved symptomatically. Drain was removed after 5 days and the patient was discharged after 1 week.