An 88-year-old Thai woman experienced acute vertical-oblique binocular diplopia, 10 days prior to presentation at our clinic. Three days later, she developed complete ptosis of the right eye, which eliminated her diplopia and was accompanied by mild retro-orbital pain on the right side. She denied history of previous trauma or febrile illness and did not notice any fluctuations in her symptoms. Her past medical history was significant for moderately controlled hypertension.
Ophthalmic examination revealed a best corrected visual acuity of 20/25 in both eyes. Color vision test results were unremarkable. Goldmann visual field testing revealed left superior homonymous quadrantanopia . The right eye demonstrated complete ptosis and marked limitation of ocular motility in all directions . Furthermore, incyclotorsion of the right eye was not observed when infraduction was attempted. Right pupil measured 5 mm and responded sluggishly to light; in contrast, left pupil measured 3 mm and exhibited a brisk response to light. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect. Intraocular pressure, anterior segment, and dilated fundal examinations of both eyes were unremarkable. Neither proptosis, nor orbital bruit, was observed. Systemic neurological examination was significant for hypesthesia of the areas supplied by the ophthalmic (V1) and maxillary (V2) branches of the right trigeminal nerve.
Blood tests, including complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and coagulation, were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) of the brain revealed bilateral partially thrombosed giant CCAs, measuring 2.7 × 2.3 × 2.7 cm and 2.3 × 2.6 × 1.9 cm on the right and left sides, respectively . Additionally, dual vascular supply of the right posterior cerebral artery (PCA) was revealed; one supply arose from the P1 segment, while the other arose from the prominent right posterior communicating artery (PCOM) . No other concomitant aneurysms were detected outside of the cavernous carotid artery. No significant stenosis was noted in the vertebrobasilar arterial system. MRI of the brain also showed a subacute right occipital lobe infarction . Neither dilatation of superior ophthalmic veins, nor congestion of orbital contents, was observed.
In order to exclude a cardioembolic source, electrocardiogram and echocardiography were performed; these revealed normal results.
Diagnosis consisted of bilateral giant CCAs with concurrent subacute right occipital lobe infarction. Endovascular intervention was not performed, given the advanced age of the patient. Thus, daily aspirin was conservatively initiated to prevent further thromboembolic cerebral infarction.
Seven months later, the patient reported significant improvement of her symptoms. Retro-orbital pain on the right side was less prominent. Ptosis and limited ocular motility of the right eye were less visible . Both pupils were symmetric and responded well to light. Furthermore, equal sensation was reported on both sides in the areas supplied by the V1 and V2 branches of the trigeminal nerves. Compared with the size and extent of thrombosis on initial imaging findings, follow-up MRI and MRA of the brain revealed stable bilateral giant CCAs.