A 6-year-old boy suffered from progressive deterioration of vision bilaterally during the previous 2 years. His past ophthalmic history included poor vision since early childhood and motor development delays (holding head up at 6–7 months old, walking at 1.5 years old). The patient was diagnosed with micropenis in the pediatric outpatient clinic. Both of his parents were emmetropic without any visual or systemic medical disorders. No other family history was noted. Whole Exome Sequencing was conducted on the patient and their parents, with chromosomal karyotype analysis being exclusively performed on the patient. No significant abnormalities were observed in the parents’ results.
Physical examination revealed tall stature (127 cm) compared to the normal value of 117.4 ± 5.0 for 6-year-old boys in Han . The patient is present with craniofacial dysmorphology characterized by ocular hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, and epicanthic folds. Sparse hair was observed in the occipital region. Cycloplegic refraction revealed Bilateral high myopia and astigmatism (RE: -9.75DS/-3.50DC*177°, LE: -12.50DS/-3.50DC*12°). Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was LogMAR 0.4 (Snellen 20/50) in the right eye and LogMAR 0.54 (Snellen 20/70) in the left, respectively. Anterior segment was unremarkable. Vitreous Liquification and tessellated fundus were noted. The optic disc was surrounded by a ring of chorioretinal atrophy. In addition, multiple thin emanating vessels and posterior staphyloma centered with the optic disc were observed. .
Grade 3 macular hypoplasia, in detail, absence of foveal pit, extrusion of the inner retina layer and lengthening of the outer segment, was noted . Choroidal atrophy and staphyloma were noted in both eyes. Subfoveal choroidal thickness was 40 μm in the right eye and 38 μm in the left eye. Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) showed increased vessel density with reduction of the foveal avascular zone . Axial lengths were 28.88 mm (OD) and 29.59 mm (OS). Significant reduced amplitudes were observed on light-adapted electroretinography (ERG) and light-adapted 30 Hz ERG bilaterally .
Karyotype analysis were performed in accordance with the ISCN 2016, revealed an abnormal karyotype with two X chromosomes and two Y chromosomes in all cell lines consistent with 48, XXYY syndrome.
The ocular phenotype and systemic presentations were not consistent with other causes of foveal hypoplasia and high myopia, such as optic nerve hypoplasia, familial exudative vitreoretinopathy, stickler syndrome, retinopathy of prematurity, and albinism.