This study presents a 52-year-old middle-eastern male patient with a huge slow-growing chest wall mass located on the right chest wall. His past medical and surgical history was unremarkable and he had no known allergies albeit he was a smoker. The patient's vital signs were all within the normal range (blood pressure 110/75 mmHg, pulse rate 76 bpm, respiratory rate 17 rpm, temperature 37.3 °C, blood oxygen saturation 95 %). Except for the large firm chest wall mass located on the right chest wall, his physical examination was unremarkable. Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) displayed a giant intramedullary lesion with a ground-glass center and thickening of the cortex arising from the posterolateral aspect of the right fourth to seventh ribs measuring 38 cm in diameter. The pulmonary function test (PFT) of the patient, who was a smoker, revealed the following: FEV1, 55 %; FVC, 53 %; FEV1/FVC 0.79; FEF25–75: 47 %. A 3-dimensional reconstruction of the CT scan was performed and in the size and the extension of the lesion can be seen. A solid lesion, which destroyed the fourth to seventh ribs with axial dimensions of approximately 36 × 18 cm was detected in the CT scan. The previous pathology report was inconclusive and reported a spindle cell lesion. The patient was discussed with a multidisciplinary tumor board including thoracic surgeons and oncologists then they agreed upon a surgical excision to diagnose and treat the patient. Anesthesia was induced and the patient was intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube. The patient was put in the left lateral decubitus position. Thoracotomy was initiated by an elliptical incision. The thorax was opened with a right lateral thoracotomy. Thereafter, we observed a mass measuring about 36 × 18 × 11 cm in dimensions adhering to the fourth to seventh ribs. It had adhesion neither to the lung nor the heart. The tumor was resected and for safe margins, the third and eighth ribs were also resected . The defect size was 40 × 25 cm in diameter. The defect was reconstructed with a prolene mesh patch and bone cement. The mesh was then covered with pectoralis major pedicled flap. A thoracic tube was placed in the apex of the lung. The patient was monitored in the ICU for two days and then was transferred to the thoracic surgery ward on the third day. The thoracic tube, discharging no fluids, was removed on the fourth day. Finally, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the sixth day. The patient was followed up periodically. The final pathology report stated: “a tumor composed of spindle cells without pleomorphism or mitotic figures with intervening branching and anastomosing bone trabeculae”. Bone trabeculae were woven without a prominent osteoblastic rim. Furthermore, the margins were tumor-free . On the follow-up, after 30 days, the patient's condition was excellent. He had no complaints and his wounds had healed. The post operation CT scan release expanded lung and normal chest wall .