A 43-year-old Caucasian male started experiencing progressive dorsalgia, including nocturnal pain, and progressive resistance to analgesic therapy. He had previoulsy undergone lumbar spine surgery 21 years ago for MPE of cauda equina. A subtotal resection of the tumor was done and postoperative radiotherapy was performed with follow-up scans showing no evidence of residual lesion or any new lesion in the spinal cord. He reported no motor, numbness, bowel, or bladder dysfunction. The patient’s actual neurological examination was normal with no pyramidal or cauda equina compression signs. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging studies showed an intramedullary lesion with expansive features extending from D5 to D10. The lesion had a cranial cystic and a caudal solid component. After the injection of gadolinium, there was an intense homogenous enhancement of the solid component and several small pachymeningeal lesions throughout the dorsal region and filum terminale. MR studies of the brain and cervical spine showed no abnormality [ and ]. The patient underwent surgical resection under intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring, including somatosensory evoked potentials and motor evoked potentials. Bilateral D8 and D9 laminectomies were done, and a large, vascularized tumor was encountered intramedullary. We performed a subtotal resection of the solid component because the patient presented a decrease of motor evoked potentials during tumor resection .
Histologically, the lesion was composed of cells with medium- sized, oval nuclei with finely granular chromatin and occasional intranuclear pseudoinclusions. Also well defined eosinophilic cytoplasm with microcystic inclusions and basophilic myxoid material under Alcian-Blue staining. There were frequent hyalinized vessels. No mitotic activity, necrosis, or vascular proliferation was observed. Neoplastic cells expressed glial fibrillary acidic protein and were negative for cytokeratin AE1/ AE3 and EMA. Ki-67 proliferation index was inferior to 2%. A diagnosis of MPE was made (2016 WHO grade I).
The patient did not experience any new postoperative neurological deficits after surgery and he had an uneventful postoperative course. Adjuvant radiotherapy was planned after surgery.