A 6-year-old male student presented to our outpatient clinic with swelling over the left scapular region for 3 months, which was insidious in onset and gradually progressing. There was no history of pain, trauma, fever, swelling elsewhere in the body, or decreased range of motion. There was no functional limitation. The past and birth history were insignificant. There was no history of similar illness in family members. He was not allergic to medication he had taken. His developmental milestones were comparable with his peer group. He was immunized as per his age.
On examination, there was a single swelling of approximately 3 × 3 × 2 cm3 over medial border of the left scapula. Overlying skin was normal. It was hard in consistency with well-defined margin and irregular surface. It was non-tender, immobile, arising from underlying bone, and non-adherent to skin. It was non-fluctuant and non-compressible. Pseudo-winging of scapula was present as shown in with wall test because there was no tenderness, neurological examination was within normal limit, and range of movement in cervical spine along with extremity was normal. His activity of daily living was not affected.
There were no signs of compression of nerves, vessels, or lymphatic system. No lymph nodes were palpable. Distal neurovascular status was within normal limit. There was no audible or palpable crepitus. Range of movement of the shoulder and cervical spine was normal.
The patient was referred with an anteroposterior view radiograph and a computed tomography (CT) scan. No further radiological workup was attempted in view of radiation exposure. The CT scan demonstrated a well-corticated bony excrescence arising from ventral surface of the left lower part of body of scapula near inferior angle suggestive of exostosis .
A working diagnosis of VSO was made. Excision of lesion was principally done for mechanical reasons and secondarily for pathologic assessment. It was done under general anesthesia with patient in prone position. Shoulder was rotated internally, which helped lift medial border of scapula.
A 5 cm incision was given along inferomedial border. A muscle splitting approach of trapezius and rhomboid was used. En bloc excision of VSO was done. To prevent complications, meticulous dissection was done and hemostasis was obtained. It was removed as a single block to prevent seeding. No remnants were left. Sessile VSO of 3 × 3 × 1 cm3 was sent for histopathological assessment. The tumor was hard. It was composed of bone covered by a thick cartilage cap, as shown in and . Thorough irrigation was done and the wound was closed in standard fashion. The surgery was over in 45 min.
He was given prophylactic intravenous ceftriaxone two doses post-surgery. The child was given arm sling for a week. Range of movement exercises of shoulder joint was started then. Wound inspection in post-operative day 4 and 8 was clean. Suture removal was done in the 14th day of the procedure. The child had an uneventful post-operative period.
Histopathological evaluation stated that it was a tumor with a cartilage cap composed of chondrocytes in a growth plate-like pattern with an overlying fibrous perichondral and underlying fragments of trabeculae bone and bone marrow elements consistent with diagnosis of osteochondroma . The cartilage cap was 0.3 cm thick on histopathological assessment.
He has been free of symptoms. He has full and painless range of movements and the complete disappearance of pseudo-winging . There are not any signs of recurrence so far. It has been 20 months after en bloc excision. Our plan is to follow up till skeletal maturity.