A 27-year-old male patient with CD was transferred to our tertiary referral center with acute mechanical ileus due to fibrostenosis in the ileum. The patient, who was cachectic on presentation, had been first diagnosed with CD at the age of 21 and had been under treatment with Azathioprine for many years. In the past, whenever he presented with symptoms referred to ileal stenosis, the therapy was temporarily supplemented with Prednisone. Follow-up examinations or colonoscopies were not offered to the patient before. Magnetic resonance tomography showed fibrostenosis in the ileum with pre-stenotic dilatation (8 cm in diameter) of the small bowel. We performed a laparoscopic ileal segment resection with side-to-side ileo–ileal isoperistaltic (Kono-S) anastomosis and protective ileostomy. Protective ileostomy was created because of the reduced nutritional status and prior therapy with high dose prednisone before transfer. On postoperative day two the patient presented with severe bleeding from the ileostomy, excessive vomiting, and abdominal pain. He was tachycardic and hypotonic and repeated blood gas analysis showed a decrease in hemoglobin. The clinical examination revealed a palpable periumbilical tender mass. Abdominal ultrasound showed an intussusception with the typical “target sign” [, , ]. Based on the severe symptoms and imaging findings the patient was immediately taken to the operating room. An emergency laparotomy revealed an already ischemic jejuno–jejunal intussusception, beginning from the ligament of Treitz, approximately 80 cm in length . Manual reduction was performed and bowel perfusion almost entirely recovered, except for a bowel segment 20 cm distal of the ligament of Treitz. This segment was necrotic over a length of 30 cm and had to be resected. Due to the unstable general condition of the patient, we decided for a damage control concept and left blind bowel ends after resection of the necrotic loop, so that the patient could be stabilized in the intensive care unit. After 24 h, an end jejunostomy was then created. One week after intussusception, continuity could be restored with side-to-side jejuno–jejunostomy. The further postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient could be discharged and received regular follow-up examinations in our outpatient clinic. After seven months, ileostomy reversal surgery was performed without any complications. Postoperatively the patient was put on anti-TNF-alpha therapy as medical prophylaxis and remains asymptomatic with no recurrence six months after ileostomy reversal.