A 67-year-old man complaining of reduced visual acuity in the left eye was referred to our institution. He had a history of diabetes mellitus. His visual acuity was 20/40 in the left eye, and panretinal photocoagulation had been performed for diabetic retinopathy in both eyes. He had a mild nuclear cataract (grade 1 Emery-Little classification), but no other abnormal findings were found in the anterior segment. Fundus examination revealed cystoid macular edema in the left eye with incomplete posterior vitreous detachment. Spectral domain OCT showed a thickened posterior vitreous membrane and obvious macular traction.
A 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy combined with phacoemulsification cataract surgery was performed to remove the macular traction. After sub-Tenon's anesthesia of 2% xylocaine, two corneal side ports (located at 9 and 2 o'clock) and a 2.4-mm transconjunctival sclerocorneal incision (10 o'clock) were made. A continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis of 5.5 mm was completed via an ophthalmic viscosurgical device (OPEGAN Hi®; Seikagaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), followed by hydrodelineation and hydrodissection. Phacoemulsification and aspiration were performed using a CONSTELLATION® Vision System (Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, Tex., USA), and a three-piece hydrophobic acrylic intraocular lens (Avansee; Kowa, Tokyo, Japan) was implanted in the capsular bag. When hydro-sealing was performed at the temporal side of the corneal incision with a balanced salt solution, striae rapidly spread in the cornea. The faint Descemet's fold with hazy corneal stroma was formed . Although the change did not diminish until the end of the surgery, visibility of the fundus was sufficient to accomplish vitrectomy with inner limiting membrane peeling.
On postoperative day 1, Descemet's fold and stromal edema were still observed. SS-OCT (DRI OCT-1; Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) B-scan images visualize the center of the cornea and reveal a wavy Descemet's membrane and an endothelium layer that might correspond to Descemet's folds . These layers did not seem thickened. Moreover, pairs of hypo- and hyper-reflective narrow lesions running from the wavy Descemet's membrane to almost half of the thickness of the whole cornea were observed. En face OCT images were generated by using built-in software (Enview; Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) to investigate the three-dimensional structure of these findings . To obtain a stack of images parallel to the corneal surface, the flattening function, which was originally developed for automatic correction of the concavity of the posterior pole, was employed. In this study, flattening was performed at the level of the anterior corneal surface, which was mistaken for the inner limiting membrane by the software. En face OCT images displayed a white grid, which corresponded to the wavy folds at the level of Descemet's membrane . This is considered identical to Descemet's fold. Intriguingly, the same grid formation was detected in the corneal stroma, which corresponded to hyporeflective narrow lesions in the B-scans . These grids could be detected in the en face OCT images from the level of Descemet's membrane to half of the thickness of the whole cornea but not in the anterior half of the cornea. On postoperative day 36, these findings were detectable, but not remarkable.