A 25-year-old man was referred to the dermatology department with extensive skin folding on his forehead and face, along with a gyrus-like scalp and depressed nasolabial folds. He also complained of bilateral joint pain, muscle soreness, and hyperhidrosis. These symptoms were first noted at 18 years of age. No other family members had a similar condition, and the patient had no history of trauma or fracture. He had been repeatedly operated on for facial purulent nodules at a local hospital, after which painful and pruritic skin tumors had formed. Informed consent for this evaluation was obtained from the patient.
On examination, the patient had different pronouncedly shaped keloids on his forehead and face, among the largest being 7 cm × 2 cm in size located on the forehead (a). In addition, the skin folds in the scalp were gyrus-like (b). The development of the patient’s skin folds had been insidious and progressive. Clubbing of his fingers and toes (c–e) was observed. The patient had swollen ankles. Moreover, he had seborrhea and profuse sweating in his axillae, hands, and feet accompanied by muscle soreness.
Examination of the patient’s cardiovascular, respiratory, urinary, and gastrointestinal systems revealed no significant abnormalities. Laboratory analyses of blood routine tests, electrolytes, thyroid function, liver function, renal function, blood sugar, parathyroid hormone, and adrenocorticotrophic hormone were normal. Radiographic investigations were performed to search for skeletal abnormalities. X-rays revealed thickening of the bone, indicating increased cortical bone formation in all four limbs. Moreover, there was a cystic region in the distal left ulna (f–h).
Based on the existing data from history, examination, and investigation, the patient was diagnosed with complete primary PDP and facial keloid scars. After diagnoses and exclusion of relevant surgical contraindications, the patient underwent skin dermabrasion on his face and forehead. After satisfactory general anesthesia, iodine was applied to disinfect the patient’s forehead and face, and sterile drapes were placed. The forehead and the sides of the face were anesthetized via tumescent anesthesia with lidocaine solution containing 1:100,000 epinephrine.
A 1 cm × 0.5 cm–long fusiform incision was made at the skin junction between the forehead and scalp with a No. 10 circular blade up to the subcutaneous fat layer. Then, we sent the tissue for pathological biopsy, and the wound was closed with intermittent suture using a No. 1 silk tread. A No. 10 bard-parker scalpel blade was used to cut the raised skin lesions on the forehead and on both sides of the face until the wound was covered with normal skin. Subsequently, the bleeding was stopped with electrocoagulation hemostasis.
The patient’s face was disinfected with povidone iodine a second time and treated with a carbon dioxide lattice laser with a minimum energy of 100 mJ, a coverage rate of 2.89%, and a spot size of 15 mm × 15 mm; this process was repeated 4 times and followed by multipoint injections of a mixture composed of 3 mL 2% lidocaine, 1 mL Diprosan and 1 mL fluorouracil and a mixture containing 10 mL normal saline and 100 units botulinum toxin type A, administered separately with a 1 mL syringe.
Tranilast was taken orally three times a day at a dose of 0.1 g, isotretinoin capsules were taken orally once a day at a dose of 30 mg, and spirolactone was taken two times a day at a dose of 20 mg postoperatively. The patient was satisfied with the postoperative outcome. Subsequently, he was injected with botulinum toxin type A once every 6 months .
Microscopic evaluation of the excised skin revealed hyperkeratosis of the epidermis and neutrophilic abscess. Dermal vasculature, lymphoid tissue cells, plasma cells, neutrophilic leukocytes, and fibrous tissue hyperplasia were observed. Scars had formed. Some blood vessels were perpendicular to the epidermis .