A 35-year-old man with no remarkable medical history presented to the emergency department with a 3 month history of a dry cough, intermittent nightly fevers, a 25 pound unintentional weight loss and drenching night sweats. He reported no atypical or unexpected exposures surrounding or preceding symptom onset, specifically reporting no animal or insect bites, travel history or new sexual contacts. He also reported no family history of any malignancies.
On presentation he was tachycardic to 105, but afebrile with normal respirations and pulse oximetry. His exam was remarkable for a grade 3 holosystolic murmur audible at the apex and a grade 2/4 diastolic murmur best heard at the upper sternum. Initial laboratory results were remarkable with a white blood cell count of 5.7×103 µl−1 (normal: 4.2–9.2×103 µl−1) with a mild neutrophilia of 73.2 % (normal: 43.0–68.8 %), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate >120 mm h−1 (normal: <30 mm h−1) and a C-reactive protein level of 9.06 mg dl−1 (normal: 0.00–0.49 mg dl−1).
A transthoracic echocardiogram was first obtained, which revealed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction, a previously unknown bicuspid aortic valve and probable mitral valve vegetation. A transoesophageal echocardiogram was subsequently performed, which demonstrated severe aortic valve regurgitation with a perforation of the non-coronary cusp associated with an 8 mm, thin, filamentous mobile structure consistent with a vegetation . Furthermore, the anterior mitral valve leaflet was perforated at the location of the intervalvular fibrosa with evidence of moderate regurgitation through this defect. A brain magnetic resonance image was obtained to assess for any embolic phenomenon, and was remarkable for bilateral cerebral and cerebellar microbleeds consistent with probable embolic complications from endocarditis, with evidence of active oedema and enhancement of the lesions in the left frontoparietal lobe.
Upon admission, he was empirically started on treatment for endocarditis with 2 g of ceftriaxone every 24 h and 1 g of vancomycin every 12 h. Three sets of blood cultures were drawn prior to his first dose of antibiotics, and all aerobic bottles (total of three) were positive for species within 72 h. Conventional multiplex PCR was performed with the BioFire Blood Culture Identification panel run on the BioFire Torch Platform (Biofire), and was positive for . Further testing with MALDI – TOF MS [BD Bruker MALDI Biotyper, version 3.2, CA library version 10 (claim 6)], from single colonies that were sub-cultured from chocolate agar plates (Remel, Cat#R01302), identified . Whole genome sequencing (MiSeq benchtop sequencer, reagent kit v3) revealed this isolate demonstrated >95 % intra-species sequence identity with H. sputorum, confirming identification. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing demonstrated susceptibility to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, levofloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The isolate was submitted to the NCBI GenBank, with the accession number SAMN29768393.
Based on these results, the patient was then narrowed to monotherapy with ceftriaxone, and approximately 2 weeks later, he successfully underwent surgical bioprosthetic aortic and mitral valve replacements with aorto-mitral curtain reconstruction, with no intra- or postoperative complications. Four weeks after his valve replacement, he had a complication with his peripherally inserted central catheter line, requiring removal, and started on oral levofloxacin and completed a total 6 week course of antibiotics after valve replacement without any further complications. He continued to remain clinically well at his follow-up appointments, with a postoperative repeat echocardiogram showing a normal ejection fraction and appropriately functioning mechanical valves.