A 53-year-old Chinese premenopausal woman, who had hypertension and diabetes mellitus under treatment, visited our hospital urology out-patient department (OPD) for intermittent recurrent right flank pain that had lasted for several years. She had not experienced hematuria. She denied any surgical history including gynecological operations. She had ever visited another clinic and was informed that she had bilateral renal stones. She had been treated for acute pyelonephritis.
At our urologic OPD, she appeared ill and had a mild fever. A physical examination revealed bilateral costovertebral angle tenderness. A urine analysis presented glycosuria (4+), pyuria [20 white blood cells (WBC) per high power field and WBC esterase of 2+, or 250 Leu/μL], and bacteriuria (1+). The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 16 mg/dL and the serum creatinine level was 1.2 mg/dL. An abdomen kidneys, ureters and bladder (KUB) X-ray showed bilateral renal stones. A bedside ultrasonogram showed a contracted right kidney in addition to bilateral stones. She was admitted under the impression of acute-on-chronic pyelonephritis of the right kidney.
Systemic antibiotic therapy with cephradine was initiated. An abdomen to pelvic computerized tomography (CT) scan with contrast showed an abscess formation in the right kidney with invasion to the right psoas muscle. Compared with the left kidney, the right kidney was contracted and scarred. Several rounded, low-density areas surrounded by an enhanced rim of contrast and renal stones were noted .
CT-guided pig-tail insertion was performed for drainage of the perinephric abscess. Both the blood and pus cultures grew Citrobacter koseri. The antibiotic was shifted to flomoxef sodium according to culture and sensitivity reports. The Tc-99m DTPA renal scintigraphy for glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimation revealed that the GFRs of the right and left kidneys were 13.56 and 53.91 mL/min, respectively. The total scaled GFR was 71.03 mL/min. Therefore, she received a right nephrectomy 3 days after drainage. Intraoperative findings were an atrophic right kidney with a perirenal abscess and severe adhesion of the right kidney to the inferior vena cava and duodenum.
The resected right kidney was 8.0 cm long, 4.0 cm wide and 5.0 cm thick. The weight was 120 g. The bisected surface revealed irregular erythematous patchy lesions that blurred the corticomedullary junction . There was also an abscess cavity with pus invading perirenal fat. Endometriosis of the right kidney was diagnosed histologically by the presence of endometrial glands and stromal tissue within the renal parenchyma with a few foci of microcalcification. Stromal cells and epithelial cells were focally positive for estrogen (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR) immunostains. Tubules within and adjacent to the endometrial tissue showed epithelial atrophy, luminal dilatation and thyroidization. Some of them were surrounded by lymphoid follicles . Glomeruli were relatively spared. One area showed xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis (XPN) characterized by granulocytes in the center surrounded by sheets of lipid-laden macrophages mixed with lymphocytes and plasma cells . No endometrial elements were observed in the area of XPN.
Postoperatively, the patient recovered without any complications. She completed a 10-day course of intravenous flomoxef sodium. She was then discharged from the hospital with oral ceftibuten for 7 days. No other foci of endometriosis were identified apart from the right kidney by CT scan. The patient was symptom-free at the first week and first month follow-up visits.