A patient presented with recurrent metastatic bladder cancer (metastatic urothelial carcinoma, mUC), which demonstrated positive PD-L1 expression and high TMB.
A 74-year-old male patient, with a history of high-grade urothelial carcinoma of the bladder, was initially presented to our hospital in August 2017 due to gross hematuria and dysuria. Recurrence of bladder cancer was declared by computed tomography (CT) imaging. The patient was subjected to radical cystectomy and lysis of pelvic adhesions. The pathological evaluation of the tumor sample indicated infiltrating high-grade urothelial carcinoma of the bladder which invaded the entire layer and surrounding adipose tissue . Two months after surgery, the patient had pain in the right pubic bone while magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed recurrence of stage IV bladder cancer with bone metastases.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
Vital signs and general inspection included the head, neck, anterior torso, posterior torso, anterior chest, abdomen, male genitalia, gait, station, coordination. Our clinical consideration was the recurrence of bladder cancer.
Routine blood tests, routine urine tests and urinary sediment examination, routine fecal tests and occult blood tests, blood biochemistry, immune indexes, infection indexes immunohistochemistry (IHC) test, routine blood test genetic mutation profiling, and TMB evaluation were performed.
The plasma sample of the patient was subjected to genetic mutation profiling and TMB evaluation through next-generation sequencing (NGS) with a panel consisting of 520 cancer-related genes (Burning Rock Biotech, Guangzhou, China). The sequencing identified a total of 19 somatic mutations, including PIK3CA (p.Glu545Lys) andARID1A (p.Ser1948fs) mutations, and RAF1 amplification (CN = 3.6). The TMB level was 19.8 mutations per Mb. Furthermore, IHC on tissue samples indicated positive PD-L1 protein expression with a tumor proportion score (TPS) of 20%.
CT imaging and MRI were performed. In September 2019, the reexamination of abdominal CT identified multiple newly appeared swollen retroperitoneal lymph nodes in which the largest node had a diameter of about 1.7 cm . After three treatment cycles, the patient achieved a PR as the repeated CT scan on December 20, 2019 showed a 53% decrease in the target lesion . Then, the patient continued camrelizumab (200 mg, D0, q3w) and gemcitabine (1 g, D1, D8, q3w) and maintained the PR .