The patients was male, Caucasian, and 53 years old. There were numerous incidences of severe mental illness in his family. His intellectual level was within the normal range; basic education, but no training or education as skilled worker or to a higher level. He had no significant somatic illness nor brain damage or other injuries. His alcohol consumption was within acceptable levels in the population and no use of illegal drugs was reported. This patient had symptom onset of severe mental illness in young adulthood; paranoid psychotic symptoms, auditory hallucinations, episodes with aggressive behaviour, dysfunction in activities of daily living. He was diagnosed with schizophrenia, paranoid type, chronic form, chronic phase (F20.0 in the ICD-10), although in periods affective symptoms of depression were present as well.
In the first registration period the patient was treated with perphenazine decanoate 216 mg im/14th day, and in addition received chlorprotixene 100 mg and valproate 1200 mg daily. Drug monitoring revealed a trough serum level of perphenazine of 22 nmol/L, well above the recommended reference range of 1 to 6 nmol/L. Serum valproate was 467 nmol/L.
In the second registration period the antipsychotic medication was switched into risperidone (Risperdal Consta®), a long-acting intramuscular formulation. Drug monitoring of risperidone (s-risperidone + 9-OH risperidone) revealed a trough serum level of 114 nmol/L, serum level within the recommended reference range. Genotyping revealed that the patient was a CYP2D6 slow metabolizer (CYP2D6*4/CYP2D6*4).
The fMRI image acquisitions were done both during treatment with FGA, and again at follow-up ~6 months after the patient had been switched to a SGA. Cognitive function was examined using a mental arithmetic and working memory task where the patient had to add two-and-two successive numbers presented visually in LCD goggles, and press a response button placed on the chest whenever the sum of the numbers seen in the goggles was 10 [Figure ]. fMRI was performed with a 1.5 T Siemens Vision Plus scanner equipped with 25 mT/m gradients. Initial scanning of anatomy was done with a T1W 3D FLASH pulse sequence. Thereafter, serial imaging with 100 BOLD sensitive echo planar (EPI pulse sequence) whole brain measurements were done during the task. Each EPI volume measurement consisted of 40 axial slices which constituted an image volume (FA/TA/TE/FOV/matrix = 500/6 s/84 ms/230 mm/64×64). The in-plane pixel size was 3.44 × 3.44 mm, each slice with a thickness of 3.0 mm, thus creating nearly isotropic voxels. The first 10 image volumes were discarded prior to statistical analyses, to avoid artifacts due to stimulus novelty.
There were 3 ON and 3 OFF blocks during task performance, presented in a box-car design. The digit stimuli were the numbers “1” through “9”. There were 16 trials with digit stimuli presented during each ON block, thus the total number of trials was 48. Each digit stimulus was presented for 300 ms, with 2200 ms blank interstimulus intervals (ISIs) in between. Thus, the total ON blocks lasted 120 sec, with a total of 60 sec OFF blocks. The ON and OFF blocks were alternated within the run. The digit stimuli were presented with the Micro Electronic Laboratory (MEL2) software (Psychology Software Tools Inc.). The OFF blocks consisted of resting with no stimulus presentations. The patient viewed the digit stimuli in electronic goggles consisting of a LCD-screen (Magnetic Resonance Technology Inc.) that were connected to a PC outside the MR chamber, which contained the MEL software. A response button was placed on the participant’s chest that he was instructed to press according to the specific instructions for each run. The patient was instructed to “add each consecutive number seen in the goggles to the previous one, and press the button whenever the sum was 10”. There were 6 presentations where the sum was “10” among the 16 trials for each ON block. Thus, the total number of target presentations, across the three ON blocks, were 18. The fMRI set-up was repeated twice in two separate sessions, with the different medications, respectively.
The fMRI images were statistically analyzed using the SPM5 software . The data were first pre-processed, including realigning images, smoothing (8 mm) and normalizing to the standard MNI template and co-ordinate system, and then subjected to significance testing with t-tests.
Motor activity was monitored with an actigraph worn at the right wrist (Actiwatch, Cambridge Neurotechnology Ltd, England). The right wrist was chosen for the convenience of the participant. Previous studies have shown small differences between the right and left wrist. Total activity counts were recorded during one minute intervals. Motor activity was monitored on a 24 hour basis during two separate two week periods 6 months apart performed when the patient was on FGA (perphenazine), and later after switching to SGA (risperidone). The fMRI were performed in close proximity to these two periods.
Both medications were given as intramuscular depot injections to ensure adherence to treatment, and therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) were performed on both medications to ensure adequate dosage. All samples were analyzed by a LC/MSD method. Genotyping of CYP2D6 was also performed to evaluate the patient’s metabolic capacity.
Average activity per minute, the standard deviation (SD), the root mean square successive differences (RMSSD), the relation between RMSSD and SD (RMSSD/SD), and sample entropy were calculated for one continuous activity period each day, defined as the longest period containing not more than 9 consecutive minutes with zero activity. These are the same mathemathical methods used in our previous studies
[,]. Results are presented as mean ± SD for 21 periods during perphenazine treatment and 27 periods during risperidone treatment.
Sample entropy is a nonlinear measure, indicates the degree of regularity (complexity) of time series, and is the negative natural logarithm of an estimate of the conditional probability that subseries of a certain length (m) that match point-wise, within a tolerance (r), also match at the next point. For the present study m = 2 and r = 0.2 were chosen.
SPSS version 15.0 was used for the statistical analyses.
The results from the fMRI acquisition showed significant activations during the mental arithmetic task when analyzed separately for the two sessions (using an uncorrected significance threshold of p < .001), in the occipital lobe, right parietal lobule, and pre-central / SMA area, and in an extended area in the pre-motor areas in the frontal lobe (BA 4/6), and in the superior parietal lobule (BA7). The parietal activation for the mental arithmetic task would fit previous findings of parietal cortex activations for number calculations, in particular with a right-sided laterality effect. Figure shows the difference activation between session 1 (FGA) and 2 (SGA).
We also compared the activation in condition 2 (SGA) and condition 1 (FGA), by subtracting the images for the respective condition, using an uncorrected significance threshold of p < .01 due to loss of degrees of freedom. This showed remaining activations when subtracting images for condition 2 from images for condition 1 in the right inferior frontal/insula region, (BA 13) extending across the premotor cortex, in the superior parietal lobule (BA 7) and in the occipital lobe/lingual gyrus (BA 18). Increasing the significance threshold to p < .001 did not yield any significantly remaining effects for condition 1 compared to condition 2.
Results of the actigraph recordings are shown in Table . Mean daytime motor activity was not changed after switching of medication. The standard deviation was slightly, but not significantly, lower with risperidone than with perphenazine. The RMSSD however, was significantly reduced after switching to risperidone, and also the RMSSD/SD ratio.