The patient was a 9-year-old female (hospitalized in Bahrami Hospital, Tehran, Iran) diagnosed with pre-B cell lymphoblastic leukemia (BCR-ABL negative) who was on vincristine (weekly), daunorubicin (weekly), L-asparaginase (every other day), dexamethasone (3 times a day). At the end of the induction phase, the patient developed a sudden onset of chest pain, dyspnea, and tachypnea (respiratory rate: 55/min and O2 saturation of 80%) without fever (oral temperature: 37°C). Her respiratory distress worsened gradually. On physical examination, unilateral diminished breathing sounds on auscultation were recorded. Thus, a chest x-ray (posteroanterior view) was requested that revealed pneumothorax. Following surgical consultation, a chest tube was inserted for the patient by an expert surgeon. After the chest tube insertion, patient’s general condition improved and the oxygen saturation raised to more than 90% (respiratory rate: 60/min). However, she developed respiratory distress after a few hours. In the second chest x-ray, evidence such as mediastinal widening representing pneumopericardium was found .
Due to the high-risk medical condition, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Her general condition worsened and she developed hypotension (blood pressure: 70/55 mmHg). Upon a rising suspicion of bacteremia and sepsis in this situation, urine and sputum cultures were ordered for the patient which results came back negative for any bacterial growth. Although the cultures did not point to any clue of infection, intravenous meropenem (40mg/kg/day q8h; not to exceed 2gr), vancomycin (40mg/kg/day), and liposome amphotericin B (1mg/kg/day) were started for the patient.
After being transferred to the ICU, a third chest x-ray was performed and the diagnosis of pneumopericardium was confirmed. Also, the patient had marked skin crepitus bilaterally on the anterior chest wall. Considering her aggravating condition and the results of cardiology consultation on the pneumopericardium as well as the developing pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum, a pericardial window was opened by a heart surgeon Then after, a chest CT scan was performed to evaluate the result of the intervention .
Laboratory test results are shown in . According to , the patient’s white blood (WBC) cells and platelet counts increased from the beginning of symptoms until the last day. Other results such as prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) were normal or slightly elevated (non-significant). Also, lactate de-hydrogenase (LDH) was 552 U/l in day 2 which increased to 920 in last day. Despite the surgical intervention, the Macklin phenomenon was not preventable in this patient. Eventually, the patient expressed cardiopulmonary arrest on the third day and unfortunately expired with no identifiable cause.