A 58-year-old man with a complaint of “neck and shoulder pain” was admitted to the hospital. The patient developed neck and shoulder pain and discomfort, with no obvious cause, about 1 year before. This was accompanied by pain and discomfort of the right upper limb, and the symptoms were relieved after rest. The neck pain began to worsen 3 months before admission, accompanied by a radiating pain in the right upper limb, which spread from the right shoulder to all fingers of the right hand, via the upper arm and the posterolateral forearm. The pain was paroxysmal and aggravated when the neck posture changed or when lying down. At the same time, the patient felt numbness of fingers 1–5 of the right hand; however, the following were absent: the feeling of walking on cotton wool, sense of tightness in the chest and abdomen, walking instability, headache and dizziness, hoarseness, difficulty in swallowing, fever, and night sweats. The patient received acupuncture, physiotherapy, and traction in a local hospital, but none of these treatments led to any obvious improvement. The physical examination revealed no evident deformity of the neck, but there was paraspinous cervical tenderness and limitations to the flexion and extension of the cervical spine, and to the abduction of the right shoulder. The patient developed hyperalgesia and hypoesthesia of the lateral upper arm and forearm of the right upper limb and fingers 1–5 of the right hand. In both Spurling's and Eaten's tests, there was a positive sign on the right side and a negative sign on the left side. There was no obvious muscle atrophy, low tension in both upper limbs, and negative Hoffmann's signs on either side. No abnormality in the cervical spine was observed as shown on the preoperative radiographs . The preoperative computer tomography (CT) showed that the right neck of the C6–7 pedicle foramen was enlarged . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed abnormal signals in the right intervertebral foramina of the C6–7 segments, indicating a nerve root sleeve cyst . The patient was diagnosed with a cervical nerve root sleeve cyst of the right C7. After preoperative preparations, a surgical cystectomy with arthrectomy C6/7 right and screw internal fixation of the C6–7 was performed. The surgery proceeded smoothly without complications, such as spinal cord neurovascular injury, and the patient's symptoms disappeared quickly after surgery. The postoperative x-ray and CT scan images showed that the cervical spine was fixed well (–). The postoperative pathological results revealed a small amount of nerve fiber tissue in the cyst. There was no recurrence during the 2-year follow-up, and the right upper limb moved freely. Unfortunately, the patient was unwilling to undergo MRI re-examination; therefore, there were no more imaging data that could be presented.