A 32-year-old female with breast cancer presented with newly onset palpitation, chest pain and dyspnea shortly after initiation of Pembrolizumab. The patient was diagnosed with left-sided, triple negative breast cancer 1 year prior, for which she received 4 cycles of carboplatin/paclitaxel ending 7 months prior to the event. She then received 4 cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide ending 4 months prior, with the final 2 cycles including pembrolizumab as well. Her symptoms started about 6 weeks after initiation of pembrolizumab and gradually worsened. Initial ECG showed sinus rhythm with inferolateral T wave inversion but after admission she developed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and aberrancy on telemetry . Troponin I, CK and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) were elevated (Supplemental Fig. ). Due to concerns of myocardial infarction and acute heart failure, a coronary angiography was therefore performed, which showed normal coronary arteries. Echocardiogram showed left ventricular ejection function (LVEF) 40%, GLS -9.5%, severe RV dysfunction with TAPSE 0.6 cm, and wide-open tricuspid regurgitation. A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was subsequently obtained due to concerns of ICI-induced myocarditis, which revealed diffuse, hyper-enhancement of the RV and RA (with concurrent increased T2 signal) consistent with acute myocarditis primarily involving the right ventricle and right atrium with chamber dilation and severe dysfunction with measured right ventricular ejection fraction of 22% . The LVEF was 47% on CMR but there was no LV hyper-enhancement or scar noted , consistent with isolated RV myocarditis. The diagnosis of RV myocarditis was established as directed by current guidelines by exceedingly meeting the clinical diagnosis criteria with Troponin I elevation, plus one major criterion (CMR diagnostic for acute myocarditis as per modified Lake Louise criteria), and additional 2 minor criteria that are not required for diagnosis (clinical syndrome and decline in ventricular function). An endomyocardial biopsy was discussed but felt not indicated after multidisciplinary team discussion and shared decision making with the patient. The following work-ups were also done prior to or during the admission to rule out acute infectious myocarditis: the patient was negative for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR on presentation with two independent testings; She is negative for HIV which was tested before initiating ICI; There was no evidence of any other viral or bacterial infection in her inpatient infectious work-ups, including blood culture and respiratory viral panel, neither did she have any symptoms or signs of recent or active viral or bacterial infection; The patient was last vaccinated for Covid-19 about 8 months prior to the presentation.
The CMR also showed right atrial (RA) dilation with an appendage mural thrombus measured at 4.4 cm × 1.7 cm overlying the areas of RA wall edema. A computed tomography angiogram of the chest showed no evidence of pulmonary embolic disease. To be noted, the pre-chemotherapy echocardiogram 4 months prior showed LVEF of 65%, GLS -18.4%, normal right heart size and function.
In light of the acute RV myocarditis, ICI therapy was stopped immediately and high dose IV steroid therapy was initiated (IV 0.5-g Methylprednisolone daily for three days) followed by oral Prednisone at 60 mg daily tapering over 6 weeks. Therapeutic dose Apixaban was also started for anticoagulation. She was diuresed and her heart failure symptoms resolved with guideline directed medical therapy including beta-blockers, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and loop diuretics.
However, three months after initial presentation, the patient presented to emergency room with decompensated right heart failure and DKA despite compliance with medical therapy. BNP and Troponin I which trended down at 1-month follow-up were found re-elevated during this admission. A repeat cardiac MRI was then obtained which showed recurrent, isolated RV myocardial inflammation/edema without LV involvement and a normalized LVEF of 53% . This was accompanied by continued severe RV dilation and moderate right atrial dilation with persistent right atrial appendage thrombus despite anticoagulation therapy. High dose oral steroid therapy was started again with slow taper. At 6-month follow up, patient continued to have NY III heart failure symptoms including short of breath and lower extremity edema, and a follow-up CMR continued to show persistent right-sided myocarditis with resolution of right atrial thrombus. Due to refractory RV myocarditis, after risk/benefit discussion and patient consent, she was eventually treated with IV Abatacept at a dose of 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks for total of 3 doses, in addition to the prolonged steroid treatment. Abatacept is an investigative second-line immunosuppression regimen [, ], and the dosing we used was based upon prior case report and general dosing recommendation for rheumatoid arthritis treatment. At 9-month follow up, patient remains on chronic low dose Prednisone at 5 mg daily, and she had complete resolution of heart failure symptoms and is off standing diuretics currently. A most recent follow up echocardiogram 9 months after the initial event showed normal LV ejection fraction of 55–60%, GLS -15.8%, and normalized RV cavity size, recovered RV systolic function (TAPSE 1.7 cm) and improved tricuspid regurgitation to trace/mild. Biomarkers including BNP and Troponin I have almost normalized at 10-month follow up (supplemental Fig. ).