A 73-year-old man with myelodysplastic syndrome for 13 years was diagnosed with PNH 2 years ago based on hemolysis, a negative direct Coombs test, and PNH erythrocyte and granulocyte concentrations of 14.6% and 43.1%, respectively.
The patient presented to the emergency department of our hospital with chest pain, and electrocardiography (ECG) revealed an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) . Transthoracic echocardiography detected decreased wall motion in the inferior wall region. Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) showed contrast defects at the proximal site of the occluded right coronary artery (RCA) and the proximal site of the left circumflex artery (LCX) . Aspirin (200 mg) was administered in the emergency department, and clopidogrel 300 mg (Japanese loading dose) was added at the start of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). An everolimus-eluting stent (2.75 × 24 mm) was deployed from the distal RCA to the posterior descending artery . Heparin was injected to exceed 250 s of activated clotting time (ACT) during PCI, and a sufficiently dilated lumen without malapposition or edge dissection was confirmed using intravascular ultrasound (IVUS). The maintenance dose of DAPT was aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg daily. Continuous heparin was administered to treat thrombi from secondary lesions after PCI, and the heparin dose was gradually increased to 25,000 units/day based on activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). Two days later, the patient developed chest pain again, and ECG revealed AMI of the inferior wall ; therefore, an emergency CAG was performed. Despite resolution of the defect at the LCX , subacute ST occurred in the treated area of the RCA . Although the patient had a normal sinus rhythm and was not in shock when the stent thrombosis occurred, intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) was implanted to increase coronary blood flow to prevent new thrombus formation and because ST has a high mortality rate, followed by thrombus aspiration, and balloon dilatation were performed during the second PCI . As the final IVUS during the initial PCI confirmed that there was no issue with stent implantation, IVUS was not performed during PCI for stent thrombosis. Considering the possibility that the patient maybe a poor metabolizer of clopidogrel, clopidogrel was changed to prasugrel 3.75 mg daily (Japanese dose). However, the normal activity of the clopidogrel metabolizer CYP2C19 was confirmed more than 2 weeks later. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) antibodies were absent, and the change in platelet levels was not suspected to be due to HIT.
Two days after ST, IABP was discontinued, and continuous heparin was replaced with a direct oral coagulant (apixaban, at a dose of 5 mg twice daily) as a thrombotic treatment for PNH, and cardiac rehabilitation was continued. Although we planned to discontinue triple therapy during hospitalization, the patient was still on aspirin and prasugrel. Ten days after the ST, cranial magnetic resonance imaging was performed because of the development of diplopia. Hemorrhagic cerebral infarction of the left cerebellum in the territory of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery was diagnosed . After consultation with a neurologist, antithrombotic therapy was reduced from triple therapy to prasugrel alone, and computed tomography (CT) on the following day showed no obvious hematoma enlargement. However, 13 days after ST (3 days after the diagnosis of hemorrhagic cerebral infarction), the patient developed bradykinesia and underwent craniotomy hematoma removal because of an expanded hematoma observed on CT . Eighteen days after ST (5 days after craniotomy hematoma removal), antithrombotic therapy was restarted with aspirin alone because prasugrel had been discontinued owing to hematoma enlargement. The patient was discharged after rehabilitation and introduction of ravulizumab, a long-acting C5 inhibitor, for the treatment of PNH . Ravulizumab was administered at an initial dose of 2700 mg, followed by 3000 mg 2 weeks later, and 3000 mg every 8 weeks thereafter. Treatment with ravulizumab injection and aspirin monotherapy as an antithrombotic therapy was continued. No evidence of thrombosis, such as new myocardial infarction or cerebral infarction, was noted for more than 1 year.