A 46-year-old North African woman presented with a sudden loss of vision. She had a medical history of TTP diagnosed 8 years ago and a severe left amblyopia since childhood (unknown etiology).
Initial ophthalmologic examination found a visual acuity limited to hand movement in the right eye and light perception in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment and intraocular pressure were normal. Fundus examination showed an exudative retinal detachment of the posterior pole in the right eye, without uveitis or papillary edema . The retinal vessels were normal. In the left eye, fundus examination found chorioretinitis scars and optic atrophy. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) confirmed the exudative retinal detachment with intraretinal cysts in the right eye and choroidal atrophy in the left eye. Fluorescein and indocyanine angiography found a delayed choroidal perfusion .
At diagnosis, laboratory studies showed a thrombocytopenia with platelet count at 30,000/µl with a mild anemia; the hemoglobin level was 10 g/dl. The lactate dehydrogenase level was increased (2,961 IU/l). ADAMTS13 activity was undetectable (<5% of normal activity), with positive anti-ADAMTS13 antibodies. Serum creatinine and liver enzyme levels were normal. The β-hCG test was negative, and blood pressure was normal. She did not have neurologic or dermatologic symptoms.
Therefore, this exudative retinal detachment was supposed to be a complication of TTP. Plasma exchange treatment was performed (daily plasma exchange and additional treatment with corticoid starting 2 weeks after the beginning of the plasmapheresis). A few hours after the first plasmapheresis, the patient started to regain her sight, and 2 days after the first plasmapheresis, an improvement in visual acuity to 20/32 in the right eye was observed. Fundus and SD-OCT found a total disappearance of the exudative retinal detachment . However, ischemia sequels were present with pigmented retinal epithelium swelling .