The patient was a 29-year-old female G1P0 with a history of LQT3 diagnosed at age 13. Following recurrent syncopal episodes, she was diagnosed when genetic testing revealed an SCN5A Val 411 Met gain of function mutation . This genetic variant has been reported to be pathogenic in multiple unrelated people on Clinvar. Functional studies indicate this variant results in the hyperpolarizing shifts in both conductance-voltage, inactivation-voltage, and a two-fold increase in the late sustained sodium current indicating an increased number of open-activated sodium channels. At age 13, she was placed on Nadolol and had a Boston Scientific -Maple Grove, MN, USA) dual-chamber ICD with a Medtronic (Minneapolis, MN, USA) 6943 defibrillator lead and a Guidant 4469 right atrial pacing lead placed at due to multiple VT events in-hospital after syncopal events. The right atrial lead was eventually revised 11 years later with a Guidant 4472 right atrial pacing lead. Following implantation, she showed intermittent non-compliance with her Nadolol during adolescence causing 30 prior ICD shocks. She was placed on Midodrine at an outside hospital for episodes of recurrent orthostatic hypotension while on Nadolol. Both of her parents tested negative for the gene causing LQT3.
When she became pregnant with her first child at age 29, she discontinued Nadolol due to lack of recent events and her concern for intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Her electrocardiogram in shows her prolonged QTc at 488 ms while not on treatment. While watching a controversial call during the Kentucky Derby at 31 weeks and 5 days pregnant, she had sudden loss of consciousness followed by firing of her ICD, which she felt as she was falling. Workup at an outside hospital revealed post-shock device failure with the ICD resorting to a VVI pacing mode . No retrievable information of the arrhythmia could be obtained from the device or programmer though Boston Scientific was contacted. Given the abrupt episode during a moment of high adrenergic stimulation, it is felt that her syncope was cardiac and arrhythmic in origin with an appropriate device discharge. Her most recent device interrogation in clinic 3 months prior showed the device functioning well. After further discussion with the device manufacturer, it was felt that a short in the RV lead insulation that shorted back to the generator resulting in a catastrophic failure of the device. The device had then defaulted to its ‘Safety Mode’ VVI setting at a rate of 70 b.p.m., a setting infrequently encountered and usually only during catastrophic events. No further interrogation of the device could be conducted after it entered ‘Safety Mode’.
She was ultimately discharged with a Life-Vest (Zoll, Inc. Kelmsford, MA, USA), and started on Mexiletine 150 mg three times daily and Propranolol LA 60 mg daily. Trough levels of Mexiletine were monitored every 3–4 weeks and were adjusted as needed. Electrocardiograms were performed every 2 weeks to monitor QT segments that did not exceed 460 ms. There were no discharges of the Life-Vest. The patient was delivered by planned C-section to a baby girl at 36 weeks after preterm contractions. Her daughter did not meet the definition of IUGR or small for gestational age (weight <10th percentile).
At 8 weeks post-partum, the ICD device and leads were successfully extracted. A new Boston Scientific Dynagen D152 ICD system with one right atrial (Medtronic 5076-15) and one right ventricular lead (Boston Scientific 0672) were placed without complication at an outside hospital. Her extracted device was not returned to Boston Scientific for further diagnostic evaluation. She has continued to do well with medications, including the ability to perform basic non-contact exercises. Genetic testing of the daughter identified the heterozygous presence of the familial SCN5A variant, c.1231>A, which is predicted to result in amino acid substitution Val411Met; she was subsequently started on Propranolol .