The proband was a 31-year-old female with a negative family history, and she was the first child of a consanguineous marriage. Her parents were cousins. Her first neurological symptoms, which developed at the age of 24 years, were gait impairment. Stiffness in both lower limbs and gait difficulties led to frequent falls. The clinical symptoms of the proband in this study before pregnancy were actually lighter than her second sister. At the age of 25 years, the patient showed increased irritability, concentration disturbances and memory problems. At the age of 26 years, the patient showed mild dysarthria and dysphagia. These symptoms of this patient gradually worsened until she was pregnant at the age of 28 years, and her condition deteriorated rapidly. In just a few months, she showed a spastic-dystonic gait pattern, bilateral pes cavus, and inability to walk independently. Stiffness of upper extremities, generalized dystonia, and postural instability was also present. After the patient gave birth, her symptoms still did not improve and continued to worsen as progressively as during pregnancy. On admission in 2014, she was bedridden. Cognitive impairment, indifference, and urinary and fecal incontinence were also present. The neurological examination revealed speaking and swallowing disturbances, chorea in the upper limbs, brisk deep tendon reflexes, rigidity and spasticity of extremities, and bilateral Babinski sign positive. Ophthalmological investigation did not show retinopathy or optic atrophy. Laboratory tests including liver and kidney work, electrolytes, blood routine, myocardial markers, brain natural peptide (BNP), glycated hemoglobin, coagulation function, inflammatory indicators, homocysteine levels, tumor markers, immune function, the plasma levels of iron, ceruloplasmin, ferritin, transferrin and stool routine examination showed no obvious abnormalities. It was noted that when the proband was hospitalized, the examination revealed significant urinalysis abnormalities, occult blood, suspected positive urine protein, bacterial count > 1500/UL, which was thought to be related to her long-term urinary incontinence. The surface electromyography (EMG) showed normal CMAP amplitudes and distal motor latencies. The motor conduction velocities, sensitive neurograms, and needle EMG were completely normal. The Mini-Mental Status Exam (MMSE) score was 10/30, and the routine CSF studies were normal. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed moderate abnormalities. MRI of the proband and her second sister showed hyperintense streaking of the medial medullary lamina and mild cerebellar atrophy, which suggested MPAN .
Her sister was a 26-year-old female, the second child of these related parents. She developed the first symptoms, including limb stiffness, gait impairment, posture incoordination, and occasional falls at the age of 18 years. She also began to complain of weakness in the lower extremities with rest tremors. At the age of 21 years, difficulties in swallowing and drinking, concentration disturbances, slow reactions, poor memory, and learning problems have developed. Forced crying and forced laughing was also presented occasionally. At 23 years of age, she was referred for neurologic evaluation in 2014. On admission, the physical exam revealed dystonia of the upper extremities, postural instability, wide-based gait, spastic tetraparesis with hyperreflexia and positive Babinski sign. However, mental disorders and autonomic symptoms were not present during the course of the disease. Ophthalmological investigation, EMG examination, and routine CSF studies were normal. The EEG showed moderate abnormalities. The MMSE score was 12/30. MRI of the proband and her second sister showed hyperintense streaking of the medial medullary lamina and mild cerebellar atrophy, which suggested MPAN. All laboratory tests, including urinalysis, were normal.
Whole-exome sequencing revealed a homozygous mutation in the C19orf12 gene (exon 3: c.371T > G, p. Met124Arg) in the proband and the second sister, but not in the parents and the youngest sister . This missense mutation indicated the diagnosis of MPAN with autosomal recessive inheritance . The gene mutation site we found was located in the hot mutation location, and this mutation site was not reported in normal people, with a frequency of 0%. In addition, although the variant reported herein has not been previously reported, the substitution of methionine by other amino acids at the same site is confirmed to be a pathogenic missense mutation [, ]. According to the ACMG guidelines, the variants we found belong to the category “likely pathogenic variants” (PM1 + PM2 + PM5 + PP4) .
These two sisters were hospitalized again in 2017 because of the aggravation of symptoms. The proband had severe incontinence and edema of both lower limbs, and her second sister was unable to stand independently at that time. The proband and her second sister received levodopa and trihexyphenidyl to see if these therapies could provide benefit for the parkinsonism and dystonia, but there is no improvement of the symptoms after two weeks of treatment. Moreover, both of them developed obvious drowsiness. DFP, an iron chelator, was then experimentally prescribed to the proband and her second sister. The proband responded poorly to the iron removal treatment, and exhibited acute deterioration, including psychiatric disturbances and motor symptoms. She died from a severe pulmonary infection after two months of iron chelation therapy. The conditions of the second sister became stable after receiving the DFP treatment. She was followed up for four years, and at the latest follow-up (December 1, 2021), she reported that no new neurological deficit symptoms appeared after hospital discharge.