A 49-year-old right-handed female, chronic and heavy smoker, with high blood pressure who was admitted to medicine service with 3 weeks of progressive dizziness and gait imbalance confirmed on physical examination. Rest of her neurological examination was intact. A lumbar puncture was obtained, and then she was managed with a low dose of steroids, and acetazolamide for 2 weeks until obtaining cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) results. She continued to be symptomatic, and CSF results showed chorionic gonad beta-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (bHCG), carcinoembryonic antigen, and alpha-fetoprotein within normal limits.
The head computed tomography (CT) scan showed hyperdense pineal lesion. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a partially cystic pineal region mass of 1.8 cm of major diameter containing T1 hyperintense proteinaceous debris, and T1 isointense/T2 hyperintense enhancing mural nodule within the right lateral aspect of the lesion, no restricted diffusion, and increased signal on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR). The lesion splayed the internal cerebral veins laterally, and displaced tectum and superior colliculi inferiorly, producing a narrowing of aqueduct of Sylvius . In addition, small (0.7 mm) homogenous enhancing midline mass in posterior interhemispheric fissure was found (possible meningioma), and small interhemispheric lipoma.
Surgery was recommended due to worsening of gait imbalance, lack of improvement with steroids and acetazolamide, relatively large size of the lesion with mass effect on midbrain, and for diagnosis due to atypical imaging features. A right frontal external ventricular drain was placed in anticipation of possible postoperative hydrocephalus. The patient was placed in a semi-sitting position and midline suboccipital craniotomy was performed using burr holes above the transverse sinus exposing torcula. The dura was opened in a Y fashion, and 4-0 nylon suture were placed to retract transverse sinus and torcula superiorly. The favorable tentorial angle facilitated the supracerebellar infratentorial approach, using microsurgical techniques, stereotactic navigation and electrophysiology monitoring (somatosensory evoked potentials and brainstem auditory evoked potentials). The capsule of the tumor was solid, yellowish, and brown with thick and yellow gel-like internal component. The capsule was subtotally resected, leaving a small segment with tight adhesions to the right internal cerebral vein. After lesion resection, the anterior and superior aspect of the third ventricle was visualized. The dura was closed in a watertight fashion with 5-0 prolene and surgical glue using the surgical microscope.
The postoperative MRI showed gross total resection of the lesion and final pathology reported endodermal cyst . The diagnosis was based on histopathology findings with epithelial lining in the cyst wall varying from cuboidal to pseudostratified, composed with cells with prominent cilia and with immunohistochemistry with the presence of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive diastase resistant material, and negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein and S100.
The ventricular drain was kept clamped without any signs of hydrocephalus on postoperative images, removed on postoperative day 2, and discharged home on a postoperative day 4. No new deficits were encountered, and her gait imbalance improved significantly by 3 months follow-up.