A 65-year-old man with chronic renal failure due to membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis underwent CAPD. Seven months after starting CAPD, he developed dyspnea. A chest X-ray and computed tomography showed the right hydrothorax . PPC was suspected; for performing radioscintigraphy for diagnosis, 99mTc-macro-aggregated albumin (99mTc-MAA) was administered into the peritoneal cavity with dialysate, and 240 min later, a leakage point of the dialysate into the right pleural cavity was detected . Surgical repair for PPC was planned to resume CAPD. Under general anesthesia, the patient was intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube and positioned in a left lateral decubitus position. One 2-cm and three 3-cm skin incisions were made at the fourth, sixth, eighth, and ninth intercostal spaces on the posterior axillary lines, respectively . The latissimus dorsi muscle (LDM) was accessed and separated from the lower part to the upper along the muscle fiber, and the half of the muscle was eventually harvested as a pedicled LDM flap . A mini-thoracotomy was performed at the eighth intercostal space of the anterior axillary line and ninth intercostal space on the posterior axillary line, XXS-size wound retractors (Alexis® Wound Retractor, Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA) were placed at both places, and a 30°, 10-mm thoracoscope was inserted at the sixth intercostal space of the anterior axillary line. By carefully inspecting the diaphragm with the thoracoscope, the hole was detected at the right central tendon of the diaphragm . The lesion was closed with two 2–0 absorbable multifilament sutures (Polysorb®, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). For avoiding liver damage by suturing, the diaphragm was pulled sufficiently and then sutured. The central tendon around the reinforcement was covered with a sheet of absorbable polyglycolic-acid (PGA) sheet (Neoveil®, Gunze, Osaka, Japan) . For reinforcing the lesion, the harvested pedicled LDM flap was inserted from the ninth intercostal space of the posterior axillary line and allowed to reach the lesion of the diaphragm. The central tendon around the reinforcement was sprayed with fibrin glue (Beriplast P®, CSL Behring, King of Prussia, PA) . A 21-Fr silicone drain (silicone thoracic catheter®, NIPRO, Osaka) was inserted in the right pleural cavity, and a 15-Fr silicone drain (blake drain®, ETHICON, Somerville, NJ) was inserted in the subcutaneous. The chest silicone drain was removed on the fourth postoperative day, because the amount of pleural effusion decreased to less than 100 mL. The subcutaneous silicone drain was removed on the eighth postoperative day, because the amount of drainage decreased. The patient was discharged on the tenth postoperative day. The patient resumed CAPD 7 weeks later, and no recurrence of the right hydrothorax was observed for 14 months.