A 52-year-old Caucasian female with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) of unknown etiology since the age of 12 presented to our hospital for her third kidney transplant (KT) in March 2019. Her first KT in 1979, from a living related donor, was complicated by severe acute rejection and consequently need of nephrectomy on postoperative day 5. In 1988, she received a second KT, from a deceased donor. It failed after 27 years due to chronic renal allograft dysfunction, and she returned to regular hemodialysis (HD) after creation of a radio-cephalic fistula in 2015. Her past medical history included a bilateral oophorectomy in 1994, cholecystectomy for gallstone in 2002, and hypertension secondary to chronic renal disease. She did not have any previous history of arterial or venous thrombosis or any HD access thrombosis before the transplant. The patient received a KT from a deceased male donor whose cause of death was cerebral hemorrhage. At KT time the complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) crossmatch, T cell flow cytometry crossmatch (FCW) and donor-specific antibody (DSA) evaluated by single antigen test, were all negative. Donor was cytomegalovirus immunoglobulin-G negative, while recipient was positive. The total cold ischemia time was 12 hours 45 minutes. The right kidney was transplanted into the right iliac fossa. The donor renal artery was anastomosed to the recipient’s right external iliac artery, and the donor renal vein, together with a patch of donor vena cava, was anastomosed to the recipient’s right external iliac vein, both end-to-side. Lastly, the graft ureter was anastomosed to the urinary bladder of the recipient.
Induction immunosuppression included polyclonal antibody sera (Thymoglobulin, Genzyme, Amsterdam, Netherlands) followed by triple immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisolone. Immediate kidney reperfusion and urinary output were observed during the surgery. The early postoperative course was unremarkable with Doppler ultrasonography (US) of the allograft in the 1st postoperative day unveiling good global vascularization and resistive index (RI) of 0.71 – 0.77.
In the 2nd postoperative day, the patient presented a significant decrease in hemoglobin level (Hb 9 to Hb 5 g/dL) accompanied by symptomatic hypotension. Doppler US and pelvic computed tomography scan revealed a peri-graft blood collection with a diameter of 13 cm, with no other abnormalities . The patient was managed with conservative treatment, receiving two blood transfusions. Several hours later, the patient developed right proximal leg swelling accompanied by mild pain. Although hourly urine output remained stable, the affected thigh was much more swollen and a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) was suspected in the morning. After the diagnosis of extensive femoral common vein thrombosis, systemic anticoagulation was initiated using low-molecular-weight heparin (1 mg/kg/day). Laboratory evaluation for thrombophilic states including activated protein C resistance, functional protein C, functional protein S, functional anti-thrombin III, homocysteine, and lupus anticoagulant did not reveal any abnormalities.
Despite this complication, she had a progressive improvement of the renal function reaching a nadir of serum creatinine (sCr) 0.51 mg/dL. However, on postoperative day 5, sudden anuria established. Urgent Doppler US distinguished an enlarged renal vein filled with hypoechogenic content, without Doppler signal and an arterial reversed diastolic flow suggesting ARVT . The patient was immediately submitted to balloon catheter and aspiration venous thrombectomy, which was initially attempted through the right femoral vein, without guide-wire progression due to an organized thrombus. So, it was after what performed through the left femoral vein, documenting a DVT on the right external iliac vein which was probably caused by stenosis on the previous site of renal graft venous anastomosis. Initially, 2,500 IU of heparinized saline were infused, followed by balloon angioplasty until 10 atm, aspiration venous thrombectomy, and a new infusion of 5,000 IU of heparinized saline. Final venography showed patency of the left external iliac vein without filling of the graft’s renal vein. Continued perfusion of unfractionated heparin to maintain an activated partial thromboplastin time test (aPTT) of 70 – 110 seconds followed this procedure.
On the 1st day after balloon catheter and aspiration venous thrombectomy, the allograft Doppler US still showed features of renal vein thrombosis, despite signals of mild partial re-permeabilization of the right common femoral and external iliac vein. After the procedure, the patient experienced recurrent hemoglobin drop and multiple hematomas, requiring additional blood transfusions. HD had to be resumed due to hypervolemia and blood urea nitrogen retention (sCr 4.1 mg/dL and urea 105 mg/dL). On the 4th day post procedure, the patient remained anuric. Renal allograft nephrectomy was considered, given the hemorrhagic risks of maintaining anticoagulation and the unsuccessful results achieved so far. However, on this day, a new allograft Doppler US showed a short stretch of a segmental external branch of the renal vein with a weak Doppler signal despite extensive signs of renal vein thrombosis. These encouraging findings led the transplantation team to a “wait and see” approach. On the next day, urinary output was recovered and Doppler US confirmed re-permeabilization of the renal vein and segmental branches .
Unfractionated heparin perfusion was maintained for 13 days after balloon catheter and aspiration venous thrombectomy; subsequently, warfarin was used. The renal function gradually improved and reached a SCr of 0.66 mg/dL 26 days after the transplantation procedure. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient maintains long-term anticoagulation with warfarin, the same maintenance immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisolone and normal renal function with a SCr of 0.7 mg/dL (eGFR using CKD-EPI 100.1 mL/min/1.73m2) without any other complications.