A 16-year-old Afro-Caribbean woman was diagnosed as having APL and given ATRA. Three weeks later she presented to our emergency department with severe headache and visual loss. This was thought to be secondary to ATRA treatment. Serum analysis and diagnostic lumbar puncture (LP) were performed confirming the absence of other causes. ATRA was discontinued. Symptoms of increased intracranial pressure persisted despite discontinuation of the drug.
Intrathecal cytarabine was administered twice per week and a total of five cycles were given over a period of 18 days. The papilledema remained stable during this period. Dexamethasone was also given. Six lumbar punctures were performed over this 18-day period. The opening pressures ranged from 28cmH20 to 43cmH20. Between 30 and 50mL of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was drained on each occasion. Unfortunately headaches and visual loss persisted despite these interventions. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the brain on day 18 showed mildly reduced size ventricles with moderate effacement of cortical subarachnoid spaces. Secondary pseudotumor cerebri was diagnosed and our patient was transferred to a specialized neurosurgical unit for further care.
A lumbar drain was inserted under sedation at the L3/4 level for continuous drainage of CSF. A 20G needle was used with our patient lying in the fetal position and the bevel facing upwards to ensure accurate measurement of opening and closing pressures. The opening pressure was noted to be 37cmH20. Neuro-ophthalmological assessment confirmed swollen discs consistent with severe papilledema at the time of lumbar drain insertion. Our patient remained in bed rest for 11 days. The pressure setting on the lumbar drain was adjusted according to our patient’s signs and symptoms. Pressure settings ranged from 5cmH20 to 10cmH20 to ensure optimal CSF drainage. Pressures as high as 26cmH20 were observed during the lumbar drain phase. Daily neuro-ophthalmology review showed significant improvement in papilledema over the 11-day period for which the lumbar drain remained in situ. On the day of admission to the neurosurgical unit the visual acuity of our patient was recorded as CF1 (counting fingers at 1 foot distance) in the right eye and CF10 in the left eye. On day seven the visual acuity was recorded as 6/60 in the right eye and 6/24 in the left eye. On day 11, prior to removal, visual acuity was 6/18 in the right eye and 6/12 in the left eye. Visual field charts on day 11 are shown in Figure
. The marked improvement in papilledema and visual acuity over a short period is unusual and is discussed further in the discussion section. Gradual symptomatic improvement occurred over the first seven days. The drain was removed four days later when the pressure had stabilized at 12cmH20 level. After removal of the drain our patient experienced low-pressure headaches for three days. These were self-limiting and had disappeared two days prior to discharge. Our patient suffered no subsequent symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure and remained well at three-month follow-up.