The patient was a 77-year-old Caucasian male who presented with generalized weakness and decreased appetite associated with a weight loss of approximately 40 pounds in the last 2 months.
This patient had a medical history significant for essential hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia, and he presented with generalized weakness with decreased appetite associated with a weight loss of approximately 40 pounds in the prior 2 mo. He denied any abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea but noted that recently his urine had become dark and his skin had become yellowish in color.
The patient had a medical history significant for essential hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia.
He denied smoking tobacco, alcohol use, or any kind of illicit drug abuse. Family history was insignificant.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. The physical examination was significant for scleral and palmar icterus. No lymph nodes were palpable. The rest of the physical examination findings were benign.
Complete blood counts were normal. A comprehensive metabolic panel revealed a serum sodium level of 128 mmol/L, creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dL, and lipase level of 1904 U/L, which decreased to 755 U/L on the day of discharge. The hepatitis panel was negative. Liver function tests are shown in Table , and tumor markers are shown in Table .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed a polypoid, soft tissue mass at the level of the distal common bile duct (DCBD)/AoV measuring approximately 9 mm with resultant intra- and extrahepatic biliary dilatation . The CBD measured 15 mm in diameter, and cystic lesions measuring up to 1 cm were noted in the tail of the pancreas. There was a heterogeneously enhanced lobulated mass with punctate calcifications in the posterior pelvis likely originating from the serosal surface of the pelvic small bowel . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a polypoid mass again noted at the level of the DCBD/AoV. It measured approximately 2.3 cm × 2.0 cm × 1.7 cm with a slightly prominent pancreatic duct measuring 6 mm in diameter. Given his CT and MRCP findings, medical gastroenterology and general surgery experts were consulted. He underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which showed abnormal papillae with polypoid masses . Sphincterotomy and deep cannulation procedures were performed and confirmed by fluoroscopy. It showed CBD dilatation, and there was an abrupt cutoff at the distal aspect. The general surgery consultant recommended biopsy of the pelvic mass for probable metastatic disease. The patient underwent positron emission tomography (PET), which showed an endo-biliary stent in the region of the papilla, a 1.7 cm ampullary mass with intense fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity and an oval-shaped, well-defined FDG-avid lesion measuring approximately 6 cm × 3 cm , with a small punctate area of calcification present within the lesion located deep in the pelvis along the posterior margin of the small bowel loops. No FDG-avid lymph nodes were identified. No lytic or blastic FDG lesions were observed. Histopathology of the ampullary mass that was biopsied on endoscopy showed a tubulovillous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia .