A 58-year-old right hand-dominant gentleman presented to the author's outpatient pain clinic with a persistent severe low back pain and right lower extremity pain, numbness, tingling, and partial right foot drop which did not improve with conservative treatment and four back surgeries. The patient rated his pain as 10 out of 10 on an 11-point verbal pain rating scale. He described his pain as burning, sharp, shooting, stabbing, deep pain, increased by lifting, climbing, straining, sitting, walking, sneezing, and present even at rest. The patient had a history of uncontrolled insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with the last measured blood glucose value of 273 mg/dL and hemoglobin A1c (HA1C) of 9.3%. In addition, he had tinnitus, erectile dysfunction, hypercholesterolemia, history of chronic pain syndrome, and chronic narcotic dependency. The review of organ systems was not significant for other conditions.
Physical exam was notable for a positive straight right leg raise at 5°; there was significant neuropathy below the knees and below the ankles bilaterally. Allodynia was noted in the right L5 nerve root distribution and a right foot drop with 3/5 strength on dorsiflexion was identified. Back flexibility was limited due to pain in both flexion (35°), and extension (10°). Walk was feasible with mild limping presence, however, no walking-assist devices were used.
He previously sustained a work-related injury approximately 10 years ago that presented with low back pain and radiculopathy. Initially, he presented to his primary care physician with symptoms of right, more than left lower extremity numbness, tingling, and radicular pain which followed the pattern of the L5 and S1 nerve root distributions. At that time, the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lumbar spine showed a mild disk bulge at the L5–S1 level, and no other significant findings. The patient underwent conservative treatment modalities over the course of several years, including physical therapy (multiple 6–10 week courses), myriad local/epidural/facet injections, and lumbar medial branch radiofrequency nerve ablations (>100), and increasing doses of narcotic medications (Hydrocodone–Acetaminophen: Sometimes even up to 12 pills a day, Morphine sulfate and Hydromorphone); all with minimal sustained relief. His quality of life started to deteriorate, his marital, social, and work life were greatly suffering and he discontinued his employment as a technician.
Surgical spine intervention was advised by other spine specialists which led to four surgeries in different hospitals as followed chronologically below during a period of five years. The first surgery consisted of right L5 hemilaminectomy, right L5–S1 foraminotomy with decompression of the nerve roots and microdiscectomy. Despite the surgery, right leg pain persisted. Several months post-surgery, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the lumbar spine with contrast showed mild disc bulges at L5–S1, left neural foraminal narrowing at the L4–L5 and L5–S1 levels and right L5–S1 foraminal narrowing [Figure and ].
The second surgery was performed after an extensive history and imaging work-up during a 1-year follow-up. Surgery completed a revision of the right L5–S1 discectomy and foraminotomy. The right L5–S1 nerve root was decompressed from the scar tissue of his previous surgery seen on MRI [Figure and ].
The third surgery proceeded with an instrumented spinal fusion, which was based on left L5 laminar fracture, right L5 spondylolitic defect around the area of previous foraminotomy, and current L5 laminectomy. An instrumented fusion was accomplished using Legacy 5.5 rod system, allograft InFUSE (Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA) with a transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion approach (TLIF). Despite the surgery, the patient had persistent pain at the right, more than left lower extremity, and lower back pain. His pain was 10 out of 10 and his quality of life continued to deteriorate thereafter. The patient was educated regarding behavioral modification programs and coping mechanisms.
On subsequent follow-up imaging studies after the third spine surgery, exuberant bony formation [Figure and ] was found and narrowing of the L5–S1 right foramina with nerve root compression and probable arachnoiditis. The fourth surgery was scheduled to remove the right-sided exuberant foraminal bony formation at L5–S1. An optimal widening of the right foramina required a removal of ipsilateral screw and other right-side instrumented fusion hardware [Figure and ]. During a period of 5 years and four spine surgeries, the patient's condition worsened, despite all what was done, even following the final revision surgery.
The patient was referred to the author for a second opinion. Before proceeding with the spinal cord stimulator (SCS) trial, the patient was referred to his primary care physician for education on diet, lifestyle, and management of his high serum blood glucose. In addition, the pre-surgical psychiatric evaluation confirmed appropriate psychological aptitude for successful implantation of the SCS. Furthermore, the patient was slowly tapered down to a low dose of narcotic medications, until he was completely removed from his opioid treatment regimen, which was repeatedly confirmed with repeated urine toxicology screenings. A comprehensive study was performed with detailed evaluation of his previous images. Imaging studies revealed no cord compression or disc herniation. CT and MRI scans [Figure –] of the lumbosacral spine showed unilateral hardware at the left L5–S1; exuberant bony osteophyte formation with compressive elements occupying two-thirds of the right L5–S1 foramina; and impingement of the traversing nerve root; arachnoiditis, scarring, and postoperative changes.
The author's standard policy with neuromodulation therapy allows patients to explore options of all major neurostimulator manufactures (Boston Scientific, Medtronic, and St Jude Medical). The patient's preference was Medtronic's neurostimulator (Medtronic, INC, Minneapolis, MN, USA) that would permit future MRI utilization (Vectris SureScan MRI leads and SureScan MRI neurostimulator) and accommodate to changing body positions (RestoreSensor neurostimulator). A temporary trial using Medtronic percutaneous surgical leads was performed with proximal contacts at T9–T10. The trial was successful with an immediate pain reduction to 4 out of 10 from his baseline of 10 out of 10. Pleased with the trial outcome, the patient was implanted with the permanent double Medtronic Vectris SureScan MRI percutaneous leads at T8–T10 level, and connected to the IGP generator with a RestoreSensor SureScan MRI neurostimulator [Figure and ].
At the second year follow-up after neuromodulation therapy, the patient reported complete resolution of his low back pain and radicular symptoms with a consistent pain score of 0 out of 10. Furthermore, a complete restoration of motor, sensory, autonomic, and sphincteric function was observed using a continuous neurostimulator mode with a required 2-week generator recharge. The patient has been fully engaged in social activities as his mood and sleep have improved, and has reported an improvement of his marital relationship because erectile dysfunction has resolved. He has been weaned-off of all narcotics, neuropathic medications, and over the counter pain medications. Over the course of the neuromodulation therapy, he had not noted any fever, erythema, drainage, or swelling, and follow-up X-ray confirmed the placement of the leads without migration . He also reported an improved blood sugar control at less than 150 mg/dL on metformin alone and continues being monitored closely by his primary care physician.