This is a case of a 37-year-old, right-hand dominant, Malay man who presented to our Emergency Department 6 hours after he had fallen approximately 6 meters from a rambutan tree where his left arm hit the tree trunk on his way down to the ground. Post trauma, he complained of pain and swelling over his left antecubital fossa. There was no wound over his left upper limb. He had no history of trauma to his left upper limb and no significant past medical history. He did not take any medications. He was an army officer and had been an army officer for 16 years. Two years prior to the current accident, he was transferred to the administration unit of the Ministry of Defense. His job scope was mainly office work. He lived with his wife and three children in a small suburban home. He was an active tobacco smoker with a 20 pack year smoking history. Currently he smoked 10–15 cigarettes a day. He did not consume alcohol.
In our Emergency Department, his vital signs were stable with blood pressure 132/80, pulse rate 79/minute, and temperature 37 °C. A physical examination of his left upper limb revealed a tender, fluctuant swelling over the left antecubital fossa with slight limitation in his left elbow range of motion due to pain. There was ecchymosis over the lateral aspect of his left elbow joint but his left elbow was not deformed. His left radial pulse was feeble and his left ulnar pulse was not palpable. Capillary refill times of all fingers were more than 2 seconds. Sensation over left upper limb was normal. Doppler signal of brachial artery proximal to cubital fossa was triphasic, radial artery was monophasic, and ulnar artery was absent. Radiographs of his left elbow showed chip fracture over the left lateral epicondyle of the humerus . Subsequently an urgent computed tomography angiogram of his left upper limb was done which showed a segment of non-opacification of contrast at the distal left brachial artery measuring 3.3 cm with distal reconstitution of the left brachial artery by collaterals just before the bifurcation of the left brachial artery at the left elbow joint . The computed tomography scan also showed minor fractures of left lateral epicondyle and left radial head . Laboratory investigations (full blood count and renal function test) were all normal.
He was seen by general surgery and orthopedics teams. Our hospital did not have vascular expertise; hence, he was referred and transferred to a vascular surgeon in another hospital for surgery. He underwent emergency left brachial artery exploration surgery 15 hours after his fall. On intraoperative examination, his distal left brachial artery was contused. Therefore, a left brachial to brachial artery bypass was done using reversed saphenous vein graft. Intravenously administered antibiotics (cefuroxime 750 mg three times a day) were given before induction and for 3 days postoperatively. Postoperatively, Doppler signals of left radial and ulnar arteries had improved. He did not develop reperfusion syndrome requiring fasciotomy. The vascular repair was successful and he was discharged 4 days after surgery. On discharge, his bilateral radial pulses were symmetrical and strong. Fractures over left lateral epicondyle and left radial head were treated conservatively using a 90 degrees posterior splint for 2 weeks. The plan was to immobilize these fractures for a short duration followed by early range of motion exercises.
This patient was followed up in orthopedic and vascular out-patient clinics. Six weeks post trauma, his left elbow was noted to be dislocated in an out-patient clinic . Closed manipulative reduction was attempted but unsuccessful. His left elbow was still subluxed . There was probably soft tissue interposition in the left elbow joint. His left upper limb neurovascular examination was intact. He was counselled for surgery to reduce the elbow joint with vascular team standby. However, he was not keen for surgery at that time. At the last clinic follow-up around 6 months post trauma, his left elbow joint was still subluxed, his left triceps was shortened, and left elbow range of motion was reduced (extension 0 degrees, flexion 45 degrees, and pronation and supination normal). His radial pulses were strong and equal bilaterally. Functionally, he was able to cope with light duties. He used his left shoulder to compensate for the reduced range of motion of his left elbow. However, he was unable to carry weight > 2 kg using his left upper limb. He was still not keen for any surgical intervention to stabilize his elbow joint due to the risk of vascular graft thrombosis and injury.