A 51-year-old male had worked in the field with a lawn mower, and ten days later, there appeared to be an eschar due to an insect bite on the lower left abdomen (arrow, Fig. a). The patient went to the local hospital, and scrub typhus was considered. After 4 days of anti-infective treatment with doxycycline, the patient continued to have chills and fevers and then gradually developed swelling and pain in the left lower extremity. Four days later, he was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital. This patient had been in good health previously. On admission, his body temperature was 39.8 °C, pulse rate was 115 beats/min, respiratory rate was 25 breaths per minute, his SpO2 was 100% while he was receiving supplemental oxygen and blood pressure was120/83 mmHg. His abdomen was soft without tenderness. The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell (WBC), 39.32*109/L; D-dimer, 7.06 mg/L; and C-reactive protein, 67.45 mg/L. Computed tomography (CT) and X-ray examination of the abdomen revealed no significant abnormalities, but a metal foreign body was visible in the left thigh root . The patient’s left lower limb swelling and pain continued to worsen, but no attention was given. The patient was treated with moxifloxacin and cefoperazone sodium sulbactam sodium for anti-infection according to the diagnosis of scrub typhus. After three days, blood culture results showed the presence of bacteraemia. The matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) was used to confirm that the pathogen was Escherichia coli. And the result of the Weil–Felix agglutination test was negative. Further computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination of the lower limbs revealed soft tissue swelling and DVT in the left thigh, including gas in the common femoral vein and a metal artefact adjacent to the deep femoral artery. The metallic foreign body was significantly displaced downwards and backwards in the thigh, and it had gradually approached the femur. . However, at that time, the clinician did not read the CT images carefully and was unware of the existence of the metal body in the thigh. Magnetic resonance (MR) further confirmed muscle oedema, effusion infection, DVT, and a metal artefact adjacent to the deep femoral artery (4a, 4b as T1 sequences and 4c, 4d as T2 sequences, Fig. ). Further examination of the patient’s medical history revealed that when he was weeding with a lawn mower in the field three days before his fever, a metal foreign body from the grass flew into his left lower abdomen, resulting in an eschar on his left lower abdomen . At that time, the diagnosis became clear: STP and sepsis caused by a metal foreign body injected into the body from trauma. Due to the expansion and contraction activities of muscles, the foreign body migrated down the deep femoral vein space, which might cause further damage to the femoral vein and produce more thrombosis.
On the fifth day of hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the vascular surgery department, and surgery was planned. The vena cava filter was placed on the same day, followed by X-ray positioning with a C-arm machine under general anaesthesia intubation. A longitudinal incision was made on the medial side of the left thigh root. The muscle space was gradually dissociated, and oedema and adhesion of the surrounding tissues and inflammatory secretions around the femoral vein were found. The local vein wall was white. The femoral vein was dissected, the contents were found to be pus, and 1 ml was aspirated for culture (result: Escherichia coli). A Fogarty balloon catheter was used for thrombectomy, and a mixed septic thrombus approximately 16 cm in length was removed , but the metal foreign body could not be found. The vena cava filter was removed the next day. Imipenem cilastatin sodium was used to strengthen the anti-infection treatment, and anticoagulant therapy was continued. The patient’s WBCs gradually decreased to 7.33*109/L, and he was discharged 2 weeks after surgery. He continued to receive anticoagulant therapy and wore elastic socks on his lower limbs at home. During the six-month follow-up period, he had no fever, swelling or pain in the left lower extremity, and ultrasound showed that the femoral vein thrombosis was mostly absorbed. However, the metal foreign body continued to migrate deep into the medial side of the femur but did not cause further injury or infection. To date, the patient has been followed up for ten months and is in a stable condition.