A 46-year-old Kirghiz female was admitted with the previous diagnosis of seronegative arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. Various nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, prednisone, sulfasalazine, and two courses of anti-TNF alpha were prescribed earlier by her physician for symptomatic treatment.
At admission to our clinic, she presented with depressive symptoms and anxiety. She complained of weight loss (loss of 15 kg over a period of 1 to 2 months), diarrhea, weakness, and fatigue. She was severely cachexic with a significantly lower BMI (12.11 kg/m2). Physical examination revealed bilateral swelling of knee joints, skin rashes over the lower legs and the presence of pitting after applying pressure to pretibial areas. Movements of involved joints were painless and there was no definite restriction in the range of movements. The liver was palpated 1 cm below the costal margin in the right upper quadrant. Splenomegaly and enlargement of lymph nodes were not noticed.
Complete blood count at admission showed the following values: Hb: 11.2 g/dL, Hct: 32.6%, WBC: 7.500/mm3, Plt: 351.000/mm3. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 4 mm/h, and the level of C-reactive protein was 13.6 mg/L. The routine biochemical tests revealed hyponatremia (126,6 mmol/L, normal: 135-145), hypokalemia (2.59 mmol/L, normal: 3.5-5.5), low ionized calcium (3.18 mg/dL, normal: 4.2-5.4), magnesium (1.37 mg/dL, normal: 1.9-2.7) and phosphate concentrations (1.2 mg/dL, normal: 2.6-4.5), severe hypoproteinemia (4.78 g/dL, normal: 6.4-8.3), hypoalbuminemia (1.2 g/dL, normal: 3.5-5.5), elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase (298 U/L, normal: 38-155) and gammaglutamyl transpeptidase (127 U/L, normal: 7-32). The other biochemical results were within normal limits and routine urine examination was normal. The patient had a 24-hour urinary protein collection, which showed a 24-hour protein measurement of 67.50 mg. This was confirmed on a repeat sample. Thyroid function tests showed FT3 level of 0.62 pg/mL at the lower limit of the normal range (normal: 0.60-1.95), decreased FT4 level of 4.40 ng/dL (normal: 5.00-11.50) and normal TSH concentration of 1.14 μIU/mL (normal: 0.30-4.00). The concentrations of PTH (230 pg/mL, normal: 10-65) and 25-hydroxyvitamin D (4 ng/mL, normal: 10-40) were also measured. Electrophoresis of alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes revealed elevated levels of liver isoenzyme. To view the status of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function synachten test was performed, which excluded the possibility of adrenal insufficiency. The serological tests for various infectious agents (HBsAg, anti HBC, anti HIV 1+2, Treponemal tests, Brucella Ig G/M antibody levels, TORCH titers) were found to be negative. Ig G, A, M levels were within normal limits. AMA, c-ANCA, p-ANCA, anti-LKM-1 were not detected. She was found to have positive ANA in a titer of 1/80 with granular and homogeneous pattern. Positive IgA endomysial antibody (1/80 titer) and IgG antigliaden antibody (98.50 RU/ml) levels were also detected.
Radiographs of involved joints revealed no evidence of bony erosions, chondrocalcinosis or deformity. Findings on electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and chest radiograph, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography images were all normal. Abdominal ultrasonography displayed enlarged liver (155 mm in maximum cranial-caudal extent) and increased echogenicity of the liver parenchyma (Grade 1). On thoracoabdominopelvic computed tomographic examination multiple mesenteric lymph nodes, with a largest diameter of 18 × 10 mm, were detected. DEXA scan of the lumbar spine and right hip showed low bone mineral density (BMD) with a total T score of - 5.7 and 4.9, respectively.
To examine the upper part of the gastrointestinal system esophagogastroduodenoscopy was done, which revealed grade 1 esophagitis, hypotonic LES, gastritis, erosive bulbitis and hyperemia in the postbulbar duodenum. To confirm the initial diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease colonoscopy was performed. Findings other than nonspecific hyperemia of the ileal mucosa were not present. Multiple biopsies were obtained from both upper and lower gastrointestinal tract at the time of endoscopic evaluation. CD was histologically confirmed by duodenal biopsies, which revealed total villous atrophy of duodenal mucosa and regenerative hyperplasia. Increased cellularity of plasma cells and lymphocytes in the lamina propria and surface epithelium were observed. Histological examination of the excised tissue also revealed amorphous eosinophilic deposition in the lamina propria and in the wall of some vessels and glands, which was previously found typical for amyloid . However, congo-red and crystal violet staining prosedures and immunohistochemical studies showed no amyloid protein. Neither kappa nor lambda monoclonality was detected in lymphoplasmocytoid cells, immunohistochemically. Loose light-green staining of the deposition by trichrome staining was the unique positive finding . In the light of these findings, collagenous sprue due to long-standing celiac disease was the last diagnosis, histologically. Specimens obtained from terminal ileum revealed chronic inflammation and subtotal villous atrophy of ileal mucosa.
Our patient suffered from anorexia and poor oral intake. To increase caloric intake to gain weight total parenteral nutrition was administered by cyclic infusions. After several days diarrhea improved. She was asked to avoid taking gluten and her complaints abated and did not persist.