A 54 year old Italian man was admitted to the “Lazzaro Spallanzani” National Institute for Infectious Diseases of Rome because of fever, cutaneous lesions and sensory loss of peripheral nerves. He had worked in Venezuela for eleven years. A histological examination of a skin biopsy showed the presence of Mycobacterium leprae and the patient was diagnosed as borderline lepromatous (BL) leprosy complicated by erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL) reaction. His bacteriological index (total bacterial load) was 4.17+ (normal range 0-6+) and the morphological index (percentage of bacilli uniformly stained) 0.5%. He was treated with rifampicin monthly and minocycline and moxifloxacin daily. The ENL was recurrent and treated with oral prednisone (75 mg) and thalidomide. Sixteen months after starting therapy for Leprosy (and after about a year of steroid therapy), the patient started to complain of high fever (39°C) associated with erythema, swelling and pain of left thigh, and he was admitted to our hospital for the second time with suspicion of cellulitis. He referred that the symptoms had started about 7 days before admission, but he denied a history of local trauma or recreational drug abuse. Diabetes mellitus had been diagnosed two months before.
On physical examination, his vital signs were as follows: temperature 39°C, blood pressure 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate 95 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 15 breaths per minute. Laboratory examinations revealed: white blood cells (WBC) 14,500/μL (4,3-10,8) (87% neutrophils, 4.1% lymphocytes), haemoglobin 11 g/dL (12–18), platelets 234,000/μL (80,000 – 400,000), C-reactive protein (CRP) 32 mg/dL (0–0.16), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 82 mm/h (0–15). Chest X-ray was normal. Ultrasound examination and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the lower extremities revealed left thigh phlegmon . Ultrasound guided incision and drainage were performed at the bedside with leaking, copious amounts of pus. Samples were sent to the laboratory for Gram and acid -fast bacilli staining, cultures, and PCR amplification of bacterial DNA. Furthermore, more sets of blood cultures were performed.
Intravenous vancomycin and meropenem were started: 500 mg every six hours, and 1 g every 8 hours, respectively, and moxifloxacin and minocycline were stopped. Incision was repeated on hospital day 3 and vancomycin was replaced by daptomycin for the persistence of high fever; prednisone was reduced to 50 mg. After 96 hours of incubation, blood cultures and aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the sample were negative. On day 6, the patient had type 2 leprosy reaction and prednisone was again increased to 75 mg. Seven days after initiating daptomycin, an ultrasound examination showed the first decrease of both phlegmon volume and peripheral oedema.
On hospital day 15, the pathogen was identified as N. farcinica by 16S rRNA gene sequencing in the purulent fluid, whereas the cultures were negative. Amplified PCR products were purified and directly sequenced. Related DNA sequences were searched in GenBank by using the BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) server. The most closely related sequences belonged to Nocardia farcinica species. The further identity of the pathogen was also confirmed by sequencing a region of 16S rRNA gene of Nocardia with a PCR that used genus-specific primers . Sequence data of the amplified PCR products showed great identity (99%) to the species Nocardia farcinica
The patient was shifted to a therapy based on intravenous trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and imipenem for 1 month. A whole-body computed tomography (CT-scan) revealed no dissemination to other organs like the lung or brain. On hospital day 22, prednisone was stopped and the leprosy reaction was treated with clofazimine and thalidomide. After a month of therapy, MRI revealed a decreased amount of phlegmon without osteomyelitis of the left femur .
The patient was discharged after complete remission at day 51 with a prescription of oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, moxifloxacin, rifampicin monthly, clofazimine and thalidomide.
One month after discharge from the hospital the patient is in good clinical condition.