A 58-year-old male had a history of a fall 3 weeks ago. He presented with complaints of severe neck pain, throbbing headache, and tingling numbness involving all four extremities. The patient’s neurological examination revealed grade 4/5 power in bilateral shoulders (ASIA Grade D) and hyperreflexia involving all four extremities (i.e., grade 2 spasticity involving all limbs as per the Modified Ashworth Scale).
Lateral and open-mouth radiographs showed a posteriorly displaced type 2 odontoid fracture . The computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a posteriorly displaced odontoid fragment sitting in the spinal canal. There was displacement of the anterior C1 arch posterior to the axis vertebral body. The magnetic resonance scan showed the fragment compressing the spinal cord . The CT angiogram showed a dominant left vertebral artery; there was no evidence of any vascular injury.
Under general anesthesia, on Jackson’s table, a closed reduction was attempted in the supine position using Gardner–Well tongs/skull traction without neuromonitoring. After three unsuccessful attempts at reduction (10 kg, increased to 25 kg, followed by sustained traction for 30 s with flexion), the option of traction was abandoned.
With neuromonitoring and through a midline posterior approach, the atlantoaxial complex was exposed. Under fluoroscopy, bilateral lateral mass screws were initially passed in the C1 lateral masses. Rods were attached to the screws so that a forward thrust maneuver could be utilized during reduction. Under fluoroscopic control, a blunt and long periosteal elevator was passed underneath the C1 lateral mass to the anterior border of the C2 lateral mass on either side to correct the dislocation between C1 and C2 (i.e., using a cantilever mechanism). Simultaneously, guarded longitudinal traction was provided to correct the overriding at the fracture site. An anteriorly directed force was applied to the rods from the posterior aspect to push the posteriorly displaced fragment anteriorly; the reduction was confirmed under fluoroscopy. Next, bilateral pedicle screws were placed in C2 followed by a C1–C2 fusion .
The patient’s neck pain improved postsurgery and the patient’s neurological examination showed maintained grade 4/5 motor function in bilateral shoulders, and a reduced grade 2 spasticity (i.e., from the prior grade 4) in all four extremities as per the Modified Ashworth Scale. The patient was immobilized in a soft cervical collar for 3 months. At 1 year, the patient was neurologically intact except for residual grade 1 spasticity and hyperreflexia involving all four extremities. Radiographs and CT scans at 1 year showed healing at the fracture site and fusion across the C1–C2 joints [-].