A 63-year-old man presenting with a positive fecal occult blood test was diagnosed with middle rectal cancer by colonoscopy. He had a history of cerebral infarction and was taking an antiplatelet agent. Laboratory tests, including those for tumor markers, were approximately normal, and he was negative for markers of viral hepatitis. CT revealed synchronous multiple liver metastases, mainly in the right lobe . The patient was pathologically diagnosed with moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, classified as T3N1 in the TNM system. Because this patient had at least eight metastases in the liver, we decided to resect the primary lesion, by high anterior rectal resection in open sugery, followed by chemotherapy.
Following resection of the primary tumor, the patient was started on postoperative chemotherapy with XELOX plus bevacizumab. CT showed a partial response after seven cycles of chemotherapy. However, the patient experienced side effects, including nausea, general fatigue, peripheral neuropathy, and anemia. He wanted to stop the chemotherapy and undergo liver resection. MRI revealed seven metastases in the right lobe, one in segments 4 and 5, and one in segment 3. R0 resection therefore required right hepatectomy and partial resection of segment 3 . His liver function tests were almost normal, but his indocyanine green retention rate at 15 minutes (ICGR15) was 12.7%, which was thought to be slightly deteriorated because of the chemotherapy. CT volumetry revealed a very small left lobe of the liver. The projected FLR volume was 364 ml, 29% of total liver volume and 0.61% of the total body weight that was 59.6 kg. The FLR volume would therefore be insufficient following resection. PVE was considered but might not always have induced sufficient remnant liver hypertrophy. Moreover, the time required to wait after PVE, about 4 weeks, may have increased the risk of tumor progression, especially on the non-embolic side. Conventional two-stage hepatectomy with PVE or PVL was also considered, but the appoach requires at least 4 weeks for complete resection after FLR hypertrophy, which develops adhesions. Furthermore, the first stage operation may further stimulate tumor growth due to the increase of release of growth factors. We therefore decided to adopt the ALPPS approach.
In the first stage of the ALPPS, we made a J-shaped incision, and ultrasonography confirmed that there were no other lesions. After mobilization of the right lobe, the gall bladder was resected and the right hepatic artery, right portal vein, and right hepatic vein secured with vessel loops. The tumor in segment 3 was enucleated, and the liver parenchyma was partitioned almost along the Rex-Cantlie line so that all other tumors were on the resected side. Total inflow occlusion using the Pringle maneuver was performed during parenchymal transection. The right hepatic duct was separated and secured with a vessel loop, followed by ligation of the right portal vein. The resulting partitioned right lobe retained artery inflow, biliary outflow, and hepatic outflow, but had no portal vein inflow . We did not use an exclusion bag for the right lobe specimen. A Blake drain® was inserted into the cut surface of the liver through the right subphrenic space. Seprafilm®, a bioresorbable membrane that prevents adhesion, was placed around the detached liver surface and under the abdominal incision. The operation required 216 minutes, and estimated blood loss was 798 ml. The total duration of the Pringle maneuver was 35 minutes.
The patient was able to ingest foods on the next day. He experienced only mild fatigue, but gradually recovered. Liver function tests peaked one day after surgery, with total bilirubin concentration at 1.8 mg/dl, AST at 1415 IU/l, ALT at 871 IU/l, LDH at 1091 IU/l and PT-INR at 1.17, with all showing gradual improvement. A CT scan on postoperative day 6 showed sufficient FLR enlargement, from 364 ml to 573 ml, or from 0.61% to 0.96% of total body weight . Growth rate was 34.8 ml/day. The partitioned right lobe atrophy was not seen, increasing from 889 ml to 908 ml. The right portal vein was occluded in the root, but intrahepatic portal vein flow was unexpectedly found in an arterial phase because of arterioportal shunt formation in the right Glissonian peddicle. ICGR15 was 3.4% on the same day.
The patient’s general condition and remnant liver function were thought to be sufficient for completion of resection. The second stage of ALPPS surgery was therefore performed on postoperative day 7.
During the second stage operation, we made only a median incision. Although several adhesions were observed around the cut surface of the partitioned liver, all could be easily lysed. Both sides of the partitioned liver looked almost normal and viable. The vessels and the right hepatic duct secured during the first stage of ALPPS had been identified. The right portal vein and the right hepatic artery were ligated and cut. Then the right hepatic duct was divided with a stapler. The right hepatic vein was separated in the same way, followed by removal of the right hepatectomy specimen . The second stage operation required 52 minutes, and estimated blood loss was 160 ml. The patient required no blood transfusions during ALPPS.
Examination of the resected specimen showed multiple white solid nodules, of maximum size 27 × 25 mm. Some of the nodules were viable, and others were almost entirely necrotic because of preoperative chemotherapy. Macroscopic examination indicated the presence of hemorrhagic areas in some places. The multiple nodules were microscopically diagnosed as liver metastases from a known rectal adenocarcinoma . Histological examination showed zone 3 (centrilobular) necrosis, a finding not observed in the adjacent (segment 3) specimen . There was no evidence in this patient of sinusoidal dilatation caused by oxaliplatin-based chemotherapies.
The patient’s general condition improved markedly. Levels of transaminase and total bilirubin did not increase after the operation. Other laboratory tests showed nothing particularly abnormal . CT scans on postoperative day 7 showed greater FLR enlargement (from 573 ml to 643 ml), but the growth rate was slower than after the first stage operation (10 ml/day vs 34.8 ml/day). ICGR15 was 18.3% on postoperative day 14. This patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged home on postoperative day 21 after the second step. He now recieves adjuvant chemotherapy. He is free of tumor reccurence 5 months after ALPPS.