A 20-year-old Danish woman was referred with constant pain in the right proximal thigh that had progressed for 8 years. She had no other known medical conditions. Menarche was at age 13. There was no family history of sclerosing bone diseases. The limb pain was aggravated at night and was moderately relieved during physical activity and by cold baths. She was on daily analgesic medication with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, paracetamol, and weak opioid agonists, and she was on sick leave from her university studies at the time of referral due to her symptoms. She was using shoe inserts because of leg length discrepancy.
At age 11 she had consulted a rheumatologist because of hip joint pain. Guided by ultrasound a hip joint puncture was performed due to fluid gathering; serology was negative. After the puncture, the joint pain ceased.
Six months prior to referral to our clinic, she was involved in a traffic accident and hit by a car from the right at knee level. She was discharged from an emergency room (ER) with no suspected fracture and a radiological examination was not performed. She reported that there was significant worsening of the femoral pain after the traffic accident.
A clinical examination revealed no skin lesions, café au lait spots, or redness; there was no increased temperature or swelling in her right thigh. Leg length was unequal but within normality.
She was instructed to fill out a diary with daily registration of pain on an analog scale from zero to 10, where increasing values were equivalent to more intensive pain. Orally administered analgesics were required when the pain exceeded a score of 6 or more, and the score 10 was reserved for symptoms that kept our patient from falling asleep and that did not respond adequately to orally administered analgesics.
Magnetic resonance (MR) and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans revealed significant increased cortical thickness in the right femoral diaphysis that partially obliterated the medullary cavity . The surface of the sclerotic bone was uneven. A Tc99-bone scan showed a pathological increase in uptake in most of the right femoral shaft .
Biochemical bone markers were normal, including normal alkaline phosphatase.
Screening for the GNAS1 activating mutation R201 was negative in peripheral blood; as was mutation screening of the SQSTM1 gene, which has been reported to be mutated in Paget’s disease of bone.
A bone biopsy was performed and showed thickened bone springs with preserved lamellar structure and slightly accentuated cement lines. There was no fibrosis, inflammation, or increased alcian positivity, which would be suggestive of active osteomyelitis. There were no signs of malignancy or neoplasia.
A gynecological examination prior to referral had found a mild degree of polycystic ovaries (PCO) with normal androgen status. There were no endocrinopathies.
During the clinical investigation, four tentative diagnoses were raised: atypical fibrous dysplasia, Paget’s disease of bone, chronic non-infectious osteomyelitis, and melorheostosis. The young age of our patient, normal alkaline phosphatase, and sparing of the metaphysis of the affected bone made Paget’s disease of bone highly unlikely.
The cortical thickening is atypical for the diagnosis of fibrous dysplasia. The absence of café au lait spots, the normal age at menarche, the absence of other endocrine disorders, and the negative GNAS1 mutation examination weighed against a diagnosis of fibrous dysplasia. The long bones are a common location for chronic non-infectious osteomyelitis and this can present in childhood; however, the radiological appearance and bone histology did not provide support for this differential diagnosis. With special emphasis on the uneven surface of the affected bone on X-ray , the diagnosis of melorheostosis, which was fully compatible with the relatively unremarkable histology, was found to be the most plausible diagnosis. In addition, the normal bone chemistry is in keeping with melorheostosis although in polyostotic cases alkaline phosphatase can be increased .
The timeline for intervention and clinical outcome is presented in Fig. . Initially, zoledronic acid 5 mg was administered intravenously three times with 10-month and 12-month intervals; our patient had pain relief after the first administration, but a poor effect of the second and third injection. Using an analog pain scale she reported average pain of 9 prior to treatment, 6 after treatment with zoledronic acid, and 4 from 2 to 10 months after initiation of treatment with denosumab. Looking at the usage of pain medication, it went from daily dosage before treatment to 23% of days after treatment with zoledronic acid, and to no orally administered analgesics for 8 months following treatment with denosumab.
In October 2015, denosumab was chosen as the second line of treatment based on the hypothesis that the pain was caused by increased bone turnover. A dose of 60 mg was injected subcutaneously with some remission of pain that lasted for 6 weeks. At the same time as the pain relapsed, there was an increase in alkaline phosphatase, PINP, CTx, and osteocalcin in blood tests. Biochemistry before and during treatment is listed in Table . Based on these findings it was decided to shorten the interval between administrations to further strengthen control of a hypermetabolic state. The second dose of 60 mg was given after 8 weeks and this interval has been kept up to the present.
Biochemistry after treatment with both zoledronic acid and denosumab showed suppression of bone-type basic phosphatase, osteocalcin, collagen I, and procollagen I, with a relative increase in parathyroid hormone, and plasma ionized calcium within the normal range. The injections with denosumab were well tolerated with no adverse effects reported. During the whole treatment period, the injections were administered from our out-patient clinic without cancellations.
After the first three doses given 8 weeks apart, there was pain remission for 8 months; in this period our patient did not take any orally administered analgesics. At the latest follow-up in February 2018, she complained of a slight increase in pain and occasional use of paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
The treatment with denosumab was well tolerated with no side effects observed.
A Tc99-bone scan and computed tomography (CT) scan were performed in February 2017 and in February 2018, 5 and 17 months after the first injection with denosumab; the pathologically increased activity and cortical thickening were stationary.