The case is a 26-day-old term male neonate who was brought to the neonatal unit of the Dalhatu Araf Specialist Hospital by his maternal grandmother with complaints of high grade continuous fever, poor feeding and facial swelling which were noticed a day prior to presentation. The baby was said to have been delivered at home. Both the baby’s parents had died about a week earlier from a febrile illness spanning about 2 weeks and the grandmother initially admitted to having limited knowledge regarding the exact nature of their illness. The family had resided in a rural part of town and was of low socio-economic status.
On initial physical examination, the infant was fully conscious but febrile with an axillary temperature of 38 °C and weighed 2.8 kg. He was pale and had a left-sided pre-auricular lymphadenopathy with pustular rashes around his perineal area. He was not jaundiced and was not in respiratory distress. An initial diagnosis of late onset neonatal sepsis was made, and the patient was prescribed empirical antibiotics – intravenous cefotaxime (50 mg/kg, 12-hourly) and ampicillin/cloxacillin combination (50 mg/kg, 6-hourly). This was based on the local unit protocol for babies admitted from the community. His bedside random blood sugar check was normal (7.4 mmol/L) and a packed cell volume was 30%. His samples were sent for full blood count and blood culture .
About 14 h into admission, his fever peaked at 39.4 °C, and he subsequently experienced multiple convulsive episodes with profound irritability. He was later noticed to have developed a hyperemic conjunctiva with facial, neck and truncal petechiae. A timeline of his symptoms is detailed in Fig. . As a result of the progress of his symptoms, the admitting team considered the possibility of meningitis and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and suspected Lassa fever due to an existing outbreak in the state. Intravenous cefotaxime was then substituted with ceftriaxone (100 mg/kg/day) due to better cerebrospinal fluid penetration of the latter. He was also started on intravenous phenobarbitone for seizure control. On further direct questioning of his maternal grandmother, she revealed that the baby’s mother had died from a bleeding associated febrile illness around the time of delivery while his father also died few days before the mother’s demise from a similar illness. A blood sample was sent to the Nigerian Centre for Disease Control national reference laboratory in Abuja, located in a neighbouring state. The baby was isolated and transfused with fresh whole blood and stringent infection prevention protocol was activated. He subsequently developed shallow breathing and intermittent apnea and died about 31 h into admission despite active resuscitation. Virology report using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was made available 48 h after the baby’s demise and was positive for Lassa fever virus.
The epidemiology unit of the hospital commenced contact tracing and identified close contacts of the index case. All contacts (health workers and family members) were stratified into three risk category according to the National guideline on Lassa fever case management . Seven persons were categorized as high risk; two doctors, three nurses and two health attendants and they were all commenced on oral ribavirin for post-exposure prophylaxis using the Irrua regimen (100 m/kg in 2 divided doses on day 1, then 25 mg/kg/day on day 2 to 7, and 12.5 mg/kg on day 8 to 10) . Three out of the seven high risk contacts completed the seven-day therapy while the rest stopped the medication after day two to three of therapy due to experience of side effects. None of the ‘no risk’ and ‘low risk’ category developed symptoms during the 21 days of observation and none of the ‘high risk’ contact was positive for Lassa fever virus.