A 54 year-old Caucasian male without significant comorbidities was diagnosed with IgG kappa multiple myeloma in 2005. Initial treatment consisted of doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone followed by an autologous stem cell transplant (SCT) with melphalan 200 mg/m2 conditioning. He remained in remission for 2.5 years, at which time he relapsed and was treated with a series of doublet regimens followed by a second autologous SCT in 2011, with melphalan 200 mg/m2 conditioning. He relapsed 4 months after the second transplant and was treated with carfilzomib but quickly progressed. The patient eventually achieved a very good partial response with bendamustine and dexamethasone and underwent reduced intensity conditioning with fludarabine 30 mg/m2 on days − 6 to − 2 and melphalan 50 mg/m2 on days − 3 to − 2, followed by a 9/10 matched unrelated allogeneic SCT in November 2012. GVHD prophylaxis consisted of sirolimus and tacrolimus starting day − 3 as well as methotrexate on days + 1, 3, 6, and 11. On day + 27 post-transplant the patient developed acute kidney injury (creatinine of 2.6 mg/dL from a baseline of 0.7) that was attributed to calcineurin inhibitor toxicity. The patient was switched to mycophenolate mofetil and corticosteroids for GVHD prophylaxis, with normalization of kidney function. By day + 130 the patient was felt to be in at least very good partial remission based on negative serum protein immunofixation and 99.8% peripheral blood donor chimerism.
On day + 132, the patient returned to the hospital with diarrhea with scant blood. He underwent colonoscopy with biopsy. Histologic analysis demonstrated findings consistent with CMV colitis and GVHD: crypt apoptotic bodies, ulcerations, and CMV inclusions were noted. He was started on ganciclovir, and prednisone was increased from 60 mg daily to 60 mg twice daily. He was discharged 2 weeks later, at which time the platelet count had decreased from 93,000/μL on admission (normal 150,000–450,000/μL) to 29,000/μL. The thrombocytopenia was attributed to a combination of antiviral medication and CMV infection.
He returned to the hospital 1 week later (day + 146) with recurrence of profuse diarrhea with small amounts of blood and associated abdominal cramping. Diarrhea was attributed to worsening GVHD. He was restarted on tacrolimus but continued to have maroon-colored stool output. A colonoscopy was repeated and was notable grossly for pancolitis with scattered ulcerations, ileocecal valve ulceration, mild ileitis, anorectal junction ulcers, and internal hemorrhoids that were not bleeding. The pathology report again suggested CMV infection and GVHD (increased crypt apoptotic bodies, focal erosions, and a positive CMV immunostain). During that admission, a diagnosis of TMA was considered due to a persistently low hemoglobin of approximately 9 g/dL (normal 13–17 g/dL) and thrombocytopenia that persisted in 30,000–50,000/μL range. A peripheral smear at that time showed 2–4 schistocytes/HPF in the setting of a haptoglobin of 22 mg/dL (normal 36–195 mg/dL) and a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 731 U/L (normal < 260 U/L). Overall, the patient met 6 out of 7 of the TA-TMA criteria proposed by Cho et al. His tacrolimus was again discontinued, and he was maintained on a combination of sirolimus (goal level 5–7), mycophenolate mofetil, and steroids for GVHD treatment. At the time of discharge, his hemoglobin was 8.7 g/dL and platelets were 20,000/μL.
On day + 156 the patient returned to the hospital with multiple episodes of bright red blood per rectum. He had diffuse patchy ecchymoses on physical exam. The platelet count was 17,000/μL. A colonoscopy was repeated, and per visual inspection the GVHD was felt to be improved. Hemorrhoidal bleeding was suspected as the cause of the bleeding, and colorectal surgery was consulted. He underwent sclerotherapy for hemorrhoids prior to discharge.
On day + 188 TMA was again considered in the setting of an LDH of 1147 U/L. Sirolimus was discontinued. A peripheral blood smear, however, showed no schistocytes, and haptoglobin returned within low-normal range at 43 mg/dL. TMA was therefore felt to be unlikely. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, performed for another indication, revealed an unexpected finding of pneumatosis intestinalis involving the ascending and transverse colon. This finding was attributed to GVHD and CMV and, as the patient was felt to be relatively asymptomatic, no specific intervention was performed. Sirolimus was restarted given the concerning imaging findings and lack of strong evidence for TMA.
The patient was re-admitted on day + 211, this time with melenic stool. A tagged red blood cell scan identified the ascending colon as a source of bleeding. An angiogram with attempted embolization was unsuccessful due to inability to identify a bleeding vessel. Hemolysis labs were repeated given persistent cytopenias, including a hemoglobin of 7.1 g/dL and a platelet count of 37,000/μL. Haptoglobin was undetectable, and LDH was elevated at 1254 U/L. A repeat peripheral smear demonstrated a normocytic, normochromic anemia without increase in schistocytes. Sirolimus was again discontinued. The patient remained anemic and intermittently refractory to red blood cell transfusions, prompting two additional attempts at angiogram/embolization, neither of which successfully identified a bleeding vessel. A bone marrow biopsy was repeated and revealed a hypocellular marrow without evidence of myeloma relapse.
On day + 217 the patient was transferred to the medical ICU for high volume bloody stool output, a hemoglobin of 6.3, and lightheadedness. The INR was 1.0 with a PTT of 22. A wireless capsule endoscopy and a repeat tagged red blood cell scan were both unsuccessful at identifying a source of bleed. A colonoscopy with biopsy was repeated; 2 visible vessels were identified and clipped. Histologic analysis did not show evidence of persistent GVHD or CMV colitis. An EGD with biopsy revealed no abnormalities on histologic analysis. He was managed supportively with transfusions as needed but then began to develop confusion, agitation, and increasing anger. Psychiatry was consulted for delirium. LDH was 767 U/L, and the haptoglobin was low at < 35 mg/dL. Platelets were 47,000/μL, and the INR was 1.1. A peripheral smear was repeated and did not show schistocytes. An ADAMTS13 level was ordered given recurrent suspicion for TMA, and therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) was initiated empirically pending that result. The patient’s confusion was noted to improve following TPE, and he completed a total of 5 exchanges. LDH improved to 372 U/L. ADAMTS13 level ultimately returned at 60% (normal > 66%). Shortly thereafter, the patient developed copious hematochezia associated with a drop in hemoglobin from 8.9 to 6.9 g/dL. He was taken urgently to the operating room for visceral angiogram, which did not identify a bleeding vessel. An ileocolectomy was performed, but the patient suffered a cardiac arrest intra-operatively and expired shortly thereafter.
A post-mortem analysis of the resection specimen revealed TMA involving numerous arteries and arterioles in the ileal and colonic submucosa as well as few thrombosed arterioles in the muscularis propria and deep lamina propria of the mucosa . Rare thrombosed arterioles were identified in the appendix. The TMA in many of the vessels was active, characterized by endothelial cell swelling, endothelial cell detachment with intimal expansion by pale plasma protein material (“mucoid intimal edema”), and accumulation of fibrin and red cell fragments within expanded intimal zones and vascular lumina. A smaller number of arteries and arterioles showed features of persistent or chronic microangiopathic changes, such as concentric layers of new basement membrane material alternating with intimal edema well as focal presence of foam cells within artery intimal zones. All venous structures were patent without thrombosis. In areas of more severe TMA, there were foci of perivascular hemorrhage and deep ulceration extending into the superficial muscularis propria. Non-ulcerated mucosa showed architectural distortion and crypt regenerative features, consistent with previous injury. Additionally, there were areas of crypt dropout with replacement of mucosa by healing granulation tissue and an overlying layer of regenerative epithelium. Scattered CMV inclusions were visible within endothelial cells of the granulation tissue. However, there was no evidence of CMV infection by light microscopy or immunohistochemistry within endothelium of vessels affected by TMA. There was no significant increase in crypt apoptosis, arguing against GVHD.
A retrospective review of the patient’s previous colonic biopsies was performed. In addition to the initially reported findings, biopsies from days 146 and 217 showed subtle features of TMA ; these included rare thrombosed arterioles in the deep lamina propria and superficial submucosa surrounded by perivascular hemorrhage as well as few arterioles with subendothelial expansion by pale material accompanied by underlying layers of new basement membrane material.