In 2017 in the Department of Cardiac Surgery, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute (Milan, Italy), a 70-year-old man underwent coronary artery bypass graft and aortic valve replacement with bioprosthesis, needing extracorporeal circulation. His past medical history included hypertension and chronic kidney disease. In June 2021 he was hospitalized in our Infectious Diseases Unit for pyrexia from more than one month , weight loss and suspected PVE. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) had shown mobile vegetations on aortic bioprosthesis, that had not been confirmed at transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). During the hospitalization, TTE and TEE were repeated and did not confirm the diagnosis of PVE. However, total body Fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET) detected an accumulation of the tracer near the aortic bioprosthesis . Coronary computed tomography angiography and gadolinium-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance revealed a periprosthetic aortic abscess. Complete blood count showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, leucopenia and lymphopenia (with a lymphocyte nadir of 400 cells/µL, CD4+ T-cell count of 195 cells/µL, CD8+ T-cell count of 202 cells/µL and CD4+/CD8+ ratio of 0.97), and blood chemistry tests revealed an elevation in CRP and interleukin (IL)-6 concentrations (with peaks of 65.2 mg/L and 42.2 pg/mL, respectively), hypoalbuminemia and a reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate. Blood culture series and screening for blood-culture-negative infective endocarditis [including liquid (BD BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube 960 system; 2 sets) and solid (Lowenstein-Jensen; 2 sets) medium-based mycobacterial blood culture, Wright and Widal seroagglutination reaction, serology for Brucella, Coxiella burnetii, Bartonella henselae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila, urine-based antigen detection for Streptococcus pneumoniae and L. pneumophila, plasma-based antigen detection for Aspergillus and Cryptococcus, histology for Whipple disease and real-time polymerase chain reaction (rtPCR) for Tropheryma whipplei on multiple duodenal biopsies] were negative. We also performed screening for non-infective endocarditis (including tests for antinuclear, anticardiolipin, and anti-β2-glycoprotein1 antibodies and lupus anticoagulant), with a negative result. Because of the persistence of fever despite multiple antibiotic treatments , other causes of pyrexia were considered: screening for viral infections (including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 nasopharyngeal swab) was characterized only by a low-titer positivity of rtPCR for human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) on plasma samples. The patient had no lymphadenopathies, pleural, pericardial or peritoneal effusions and hepatomegaly, but only moderate splenomegaly and some purple cutaneous nodular lesions localized to both feet , observed for the first time at the third day of hospitalization. Therefore, these nodules were biopsied and both histological analysis and rtPCR for HHV8 were consistent with KS . Fourth generation HIV antigen/antibody combination assay was negative, letting us diagnose Classic KS. Histology and rtPCR for B. henselae on skin biopsies excluded also a possible case of bacillary angiomatosis. No lesions consistent with KS were revealed from esophagogastroduodenoscopy and HHV8 was not detected from duodenal biopsies . Even though HHV8 viremia was < 1000 copies/mL , clinical presentation and hemato-chemistry tests were consistent with KS inflammatory cytokine syndrome (KICS)-like manifestation. We performed bone marrow biopsy, which revealed a reduced T- and B-lymphocyte count and confirmed involvement by HHV8, and a naproxen test, with apyrexia for 5 days . Moreover, although in our Institute no cases of M. chimaera endocarditis following cardiothoracic surgery were reported, in light of the clinical presentation and the previous exposition to heater-cooler systems, mycobacterial urine (BD BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube 960 system and Lowenstein-Jensen medium), stool (BD BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube 960 system and Lowenstein-Jensen medium) and bone marrow (BacT/ALERT®3D automated culture system) cultures were executed, with isolation of M. chimaera from urine and bone marrow . According to European and international diagnostic criteria, we diagnosed a disseminated M. chimaera infection and oral antimycobacterial therapy was started, composed of a cornerstone with azithromycin 500 mg/day, ethambutol 1200 mg/day, and rifampicin 600 mg/day, plus moxifloxacin 400 mg/day, considering the multiorgan involvement . At day 7 from treatment initiation, the therapy was upgraded adding clofazimine 100 mg/day for persistence of fever . A multidisciplinary evaluation excluded indications to a cardiac surgical intervention, due to the absence of hemodynamic instability and prosthetic dysfunction, and given the high surgical risk. At day 34, with the result of susceptibility test, that showed M. chimaera susceptible to amikacin and clarithromycin, resistant to linezolid and moxifloxacin and with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 4 µg/mL for rifampicin and 16 µg/mL for ethambutol in absence of Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute clinical breakpoints, moxifloxacin was stopped . From week 7, the patient became apyretic , blood tests remained stable except for a further reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate (with the need to reduce ethambutol dosage to 1600 mg/2 days), and the cutaneous lesions did not expand. Oncologic evaluations at week 5, 26 and 40 excluded current indication to chemotherapy or other treatment for KS. At week 9 mycobacterial urine cultures became negative .