A 30-year-old Japanese man presented with a few years’ history of recurrent episodes of fever, abdominal pain and diarrhea that lasted for a few days and occurred a few times a year. At the time of an attack, he experienced abdominal pain spreading from the periumbilical area to the entire abdomen, a few episodes of watery diarrhea per day, and fever of approximately 38°C, all of which were alleviated within a few days by fasting and resting. He often visited a medical institution when the attacks occurred; however, each time, he was diagnosed as having acute enteritis. Between attacks, the patient was asymptomatic and had normal stools. When he noticed that the attacks had occurred once a month for 3 months in a row, he visited the medical institution again. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy performed at the institution did not reveal any significant abnormal findings. The patient was then referred to our hospital under the suspicion of a small intestinal disease.
At the first visit, the patient presented with a fever of approximately 38°C, abdominal pain, and a few episodes of watery diarrhea per day. As the results of the blood test at this visit, the findings of a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8,060/μL (neutrophil [Neut]: 72.1%), serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 14.64 mg/dL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 39 mm/hr suggested the presence of inflammation. He was admitted for detailed examination and treatment 1 week later. On admission, there was no fever, and the abdominal pain and diarrhea had resolved. A repeat blood test revealed a WBC count of 5,370/μL (Neut: 53.3%), serum CRP of 4.69 mg/dL, and ESR of 29 mm/hr, showing a trend towards reduction of the inflammatory markers. Thyroid function tests and serological tests for various autoantibodies also revealed no abnormal findings.As abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed wall thickening and increased density of the mesenteric adipose tissue in the upper small intestine , we suspected CD and performed oral double-balloon enteroscopy (DBE). Although mild mucosal edema was detected in the jejunum, neither erosions nor ulcers were observed on the mucosal surface . A biopsy specimen obtained from the edematous mucosa of the jejunum revealed partial and slight inflammatory cell infiltration and edematous changes. As a subsequently performed transanal DBE revealed no abnormal findings, CD was considered to be highly improbable.
We suspected FMF based on the clinical course and evaluated the Livneh criteria for FMF . Because the criteria were satisfied, oral administration of colchicine was initiated at a daily dose of 0.5 mg. Molecular analysis for FMF was done by sequencing of exon 1 and exons of 3–10 of familial Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene. The results of genetic analysis for the MEFV gene demonstrated a heterozygous mutation of M694I in exon 10. A definitive diagnosis of FMF was then made. The patient did not have any family history of the disease. Subsequently, although the attacks were not completely eliminated, their frequency markedly decreased. Only loose stools occurred for 2 to 3 days every 1 to 2 months, but there was no fever, abdominal pain, or increases of the inflammatory markers in the blood test. In order to achieve remission of the symptoms, an increase in the dose of colchicine was considered. However, because mild hepatic function impairment possibly caused by colchicine was noted, the treatment has been maintained at the initial dose. Approximately 1 year has elapsed since the initiation of the colchicine therapy, and the disease state remains stable.