A 74-year-old female was initially evaluated for a headache and right eye peripheral vision loss. MRI brain with and without contrast was performed, revealing a 5.5 cm heterogeneously T2 hyperintense lesion with thick irregular nodular enhancement in the left parietal-occipital region . The patient underwent a gross total resection of the mass that was diagnosed as GBM, IDH-wildtype, WHO grade IV, MGMT promoter methylation not detected. Fresh specimen in multiple sectors was processed for tumor culture. Following resection, she received hypofractionated concurrent chemoradiation with temozolomide followed by four cycles of adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ). Six months later, the patient developed multifocal GBM recurrence in the right temporal and frontal lobes, for which she underwent single fraction 18 Gy stereotactic radiosurgery to the right frontal lesion and five fractions of 2250 cGy to the right temporal lesion.
Three months following SRS, the patient began to experience falls associated with hip pain and difficulty walking. MRI of the right hip demonstrated a pathologic hip fracture, which was thought to be due to metastatic disease from an undiagnosed second primary cancer. The patient then developed altered mental status and right-sided upper motor neuron facial weakness. A full metastatic imaging work-up was performed, revealing a 3.9 cm left breast mass, multiple lytic lesions of the pelvic bones, and multiple pulmonary and hepatic nodules. Core biopsies were obtained from the left breast and the left pubic bone, both of which demonstrated metastatic GBM.
The patient’s mental status deteriorated as the right temporal recurrence rapidly progressed, and she underwent right temporal craniotomy for debulking of the tumor eleven months after her initial diagnosis of GBM . Histologically, this secondary tumor was identical to the primary. 2 × 105 freshly dissociated cells from the right temporal recurrence were orthotopically transplanted directly into the striatum of SCID mice with preserved microglial activity (IcrTac:ICR-Prkdc strain) to assess the cells’ ability to generate a patient-derived xenograft (PDX). Following surgery, the patient stabilized neurologically, but opted for palliative care and was transferred to hospice where she expired one month later.
While the patient was alive, consent was obtained for a rapid autopsy, which was ultimately performed within four hours of death. Gross and histological evaluation confirmed numerous GBM metastases. The extent of metastatic disease was widespread, including bilateral lungs, heart, liver, thyroid, left breast, small bowel, omentum, peritoneum, left pelvic bone, and hilar lymph nodes . Notably, there were extensive metastatic lesions involving the abdominal cavity.
The autopsy revealed residual GBM in the original site of occurrence (left occipital lobe). On histological examination of pre- and post-mortem samples, the metastases appeared identical to the primary tumor and temporal recurrence. All sites demonstrated the classic appearance of GBM on H&E staining, including nuclear atypia, microvascular proliferation, and pseudopalisading necrosis. Sarcomatous transformation was not identified on histological review of the tissue sections, and was confirmed absent by reticulin-staining performed on representative sections from occipital lobe, temporal lobe , left breast, heart, lung, liver, lymph nodes, and omentum.
To evaluate the molecular phenotype of the primary, recurrent, and metastatic lesions, two different next-generation-sequencing (NGS) panels were employed (see Additional file ). The Ion AmpliSeq Hotspot Cancer NGS Panel v2, covering 50 genes and 207 amplicons, was performed on all pre-mortem (left occipital brain primary, right temporal lobe recurrence, and left breast metastases) and select post-mortem (paratracheal lymph node and omentum) tissue specimens. The Ion Torrent Oncomine Comprehensive Assay v3, covering 161 cancer driver genes, was performed on the remaining post-mortem samples (left occipital lobe, right temporal lobe, left breast, lungs, and liver) collected during rapid autopsy.
The AmpliSeq panel revealed single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in PIK3CA, SMARCB1, BRAF, and TP53. Notably, five different SNVs were detected for TP53. There were differences in TP53 mutations between the primary tumor, metastases, and among the metastases themselves . The more comprehensive Oncomine panel revealed only one non-silent SNV common to all specimens: BRCA1 p.I571T. A large number of private mutations were detected in the temporal lobe recurrence, left breast, lung, and liver metastases. Among the extracranial metastatic sites, only the left breast, liver, and omentum specimens were found to share any mutations other than the one identified at BRCA1.
Cells cultured from the left occipital primary site at the time of initial diagnosis, and the right temporal site at the time of recurrence, expanded readily in serum-free conditions and were all found to harbor the BRCA1 p.I571T mutation (see Additional file ). Both mice, orthotopically xenotransplanted with cells from the temporal recurrence, developed fatal malignant gliomas after 5 weeks, confirming the tumor’s aggressive behavior in both human and rodents . Necropsy analysis of the lungs, intestines, liver, and spleen in these mice did not reveal the presence of any peripheral metastases as seen in the patient. Tumor cells from this aggressive GBM were isolated from the primary PDX and were subsequently propagated in culture and used to generate a reliable PDX model which forms within 3–4 weeks post implantation and, importantly, recapitulates both the rapid growth and the malignant infiltrative spread of human GBM. Mutational hotspot analysis of the PDX confirmed the presence BRCA1 p.I571T in all cells, and multiple inactivating mutations of ARID1A in a significant subpopulation. ARID1A mutations were also identified in the left breast autopsy specimen .
To investigate whether the relatively high number of SNVs in all secondary sites compared to the primary could have resulted from mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency, we performed a mutational spectrum analysis; results confirmed a high proportion of C:G to T:A transitions, which is typical of the mismatch repair deficiency described in the setting of temozolomide-treated recurrent GBM . The integrity of the mismatch repair pathway was evaluated using immunohistochemistry. All metastatic specimens exhibited positive staining for anti-MLH1, anti-MSH2, anti-MSH6, and anti-PMS2, indicating microsatellite stability (MSS). MSS was further confirmed with PCR of established microsatellite loci (see Additional file ). In addition, we evaluated DNA polymerase epsilon (POLE) using PCR, which showed no alterations at mutational hotspots within the coding region of the gene.