A 72-year-old man was referred to our hospital for a 10-day history of systemic edema. On admission, his blood pressure was 159/112 mmHg, heart rate was 97/min, and respiratory rate was 27/min. Echocardiography revealed a massive pericardial effusion. Pericardiocentesis yielded bloody pericardial fluid. An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an irregular mass located in the RA wall, and bilateral pulmonary nodules.
Emergency surgery was performed because the tumor was hemorrhaging into the pericardial cavity. To enable extensive resection, a cardiopulmonary bypass with aortic return and venous drainage via the femoral vein and extra-pericardial superior vena cava was started outside the pericardial cavity. The irregular and hemorrhaging tumor was located in the RA, superior vena cava (SVC), and inferior vena cava (IVC) (a). The RA free wall and proximal parts of SVC and IVC were excised (b). All tumors were excised macroscopically. After mobilization of the right-sided pericardium, we sutured it to the resected part in a pedicled manner using running polypropylene suture (c).
The pathological diagnosis was angiosarcoma. On the 2th postoperative day, he was extubated. On the 5th postoperative day, he resumed diet. On the 19th postoperative day, positron emission tomography showed local recurrence and spinal metastasis. Therefore, he started radiation therapy for each lesion. On the 39th postoperative day, chemotherapy with paclitaxel (80 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks) was initiated. He was discharged on the 75th postoperative day. During the follow-up period, he showed no symptoms of right heart failure. Echocardiography and enhanced CT scan showed a preserved reconstruction lumen . Despite chemotherapy, CT showed marked that lung and liver metastases had clearly worsened at 11 months after surgery. He died of multiple organ failure due to metastasis 12 months after surgery. On autopsy, the RA cavity and vena cava were not narrowed, no blood clot was seen, and pericardial calcification was mild.