A 91-year-old woman presented to the emergency room with a sudden, transient loss of consciousness following a sensation of lightheadedness. The patient had a documented medical history of hypertension, osteoporosis, and multiple degenerative changes in the lumbar spine that resulted in prolonged immobility and a sedentary lifestyle.
Initial vital signs of the patient showed hemodynamic instability, with a blood pressure of 77/63 mmHg, pulse rate of 58 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 29 beats per minute. The pulse oximeter indicated a saturation of 92% at 5 L/min of oxygen through a non-rebreather mask. The physical examination findings were unremarkable and showed no signs of mental impairment or neurological issues, as evidenced by a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E4M5V6. The initial chest radiography results revealed cardiomegaly and a prominent aortic knob but no other significant abnormalities. The 12-lead ECG recordings indicated CAVB and RBBB with a QRS duration of 124 ms and T-wave inversions in lead V1-V3 . The patient had no known history of underlying arrhythmias or cardiac problems related to acute changes in hemodynamic collapse.
Laboratory findings showed a hemoglobin level of 7.9 g/dl and a normal platelet count of 251,000/mm3. The results of the biochemical tests were as follows: sodium 138.1 mmol/L [reference range (RR): 135–145 mmol/L], potassium 4.1 mmol/L (RR: 3.3–5.1 mmol/L), total CO2 9 mmol/L (RR: 21–30 mmol/L), LDL-cholesterol 98 mg/dl (RR: 0–130 mg/dl), lactic acid 9.40 mmol/L (RR: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), and creatinine 1.26 mg/dl (RR: 0.5–0.9 mg/dl). The high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-TnT) level was 117 ng/L, surpassing the upper normal threshold of 14 ng/L. Markedly elevated fibrinogen degradation product (>120 ug/ml; RR: 0–2.01 ug/ml) and D-dimer (>20 ug/ml; RR: 0–0.5 ug/ml) heightened the clinical suspicion of acute PE.
Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed an enlarged right ventricle (RV) with multiple filling defects in the distal left main pulmonary artery that extended into both lobar and segmental pulmonary arteries of both lungs . Lower extremity ultrasonography revealed a low-density focal filling defect in the right calf vein, suggesting deep vein thrombosis.
A comprehensive two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography revealed an enlarged RV with a concomitant D-shaped left ventricle. The RV displayed qualitative dilatation with a diameter exceeding 41 mm at the base of the apical 4-chamber view. Additionally, the patient exhibited akinesia of the basal and mid-portion of the free wall, commonly known as McConnell's sign that is indicative of severe dysfunction . RV systolic dysfunction was documented as follows: a tricuspid lateral annular systolic velocity (RV S') of 0.06 m/s, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 10 mmHg, and fractional area change (FAC) of 27%. Mild tricuspid insufficiency was noted, accompanied by an estimated pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 54 mmHg.
Subsequently, the patient experienced progressive clinical deterioration with a blood pressure of 68/41 mmHg. She was resuscitated with intravenous fluid, norepinephrine administration was initiated, and catheter-directed thrombolysis was performed. Alteplase was infused at 1 mg/h per catheter for 6 h and the patient was continuously monitored in the intensive care unit. Nonetheless, the patient continued to report persistent chest discomfort and shortness of breath, along with wheezing, and demonstrated fluctuations in oxygen saturation within the range of 70%–80%. The ECG results still indicated CAVB with complete RBBB and RV dysfunction persisted as documented via echocardiography. Considering the persistent symptoms and remaining signs of high-risk acute PE even after thrombolytic therapy, we decided to insert a temporary transvenous pacemaker.
The following day, the ECG results of the patient showed a return to a normal sinus rhythm, and subsequent echocardiography showed markedly improved RV function: RV S' 0.10 m/s, TAPSE 17 mm, and FAC 46% . The estimated PAP was decreased to 35 mmHg. Within 72 h, her intrinsic sinus rhythm was fully restored, and the temporary pacemaker was removed. A subsequent ECG revealed the presence of a baseline left bundle branch block (LBBB) that had not been documented previously . The patient had gained enough mobility to ambulate independently by the time of discharge and has been undergoing anticoagulation therapy since that time.