A 62-year-old male, with past history of smoking and pleural tuberculosis treated with antibiotics and several therapeutic thoracocentesis for symptomatic relief, was referred to surgery consultation in a tertiary hospital for further evaluation of a hepatic cyst. There was no family health history of interest. The patient was completely asymptomatic, and the cyst was incidentally found on routine abdominal ultrasound. On diagnostic work-up, aspartate transferase, alanine transaminase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin and serological tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and alpha-fetoprotein) were unremarkable. Hepatotropic virus including hepatitis B, C and human immunodeficiency virus were excluded. The lesion was initially characterized with contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) that revealed a 3.3 cm solitary lesion with low attenuation and without contrast enhancement located in the segment IV of the liver .
A subsequent contrast enhanced abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a 4.3 cm hypodense subcapsular cyst in segment IVa without enhancement or diffusion restriction raising the diagnostic suspicion of a CHFC .
Despite the benign appearance and considering the diagnostic doubt the decision was made to proceed with surgical resection. Written and signed consent was obtained from the patient prior to the procedure. The surgery was performed by a senior hepatobilliary surgeon through a laparoscopic approach, which revealed a superficial hepatic cyst within segment IV, consistent with prior imaging .
A thin-walled with 3.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm cyst was removed via cyst enucleation without complications ( - ). The post-operative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on post-operative day 2. At 3-month outpatient follow-up the patient was completely asymptomatic and satisfied with surgical outcomes.
Histology of the surgical specimen revealed a well-circumscribed cyst measuring 3 × 2 × 1 cm with ciliated pseudostratified epithelium covered by subepithelial connective tissue, one smooth muscle layer and an outer fibrous capsule consistent with a CHFC .