A 55-year-old right-handed man presented to the emergency department with sudden-onset central chest pain while walking lasting 20 min and resolved spontaneously, followed by gradually worsening weakness of the right lower limb. He was able to drive and walk 1 h after the onset of symptoms. He also reported altered bowel habit, constipation, and difficulty passing urine over the previous 2 weeks.
He had a past medical history of hypertension well-controlled on a beta-blocker. He worked as a delivery driver and was an ex-smoker with a 30-pack/year history. He had no recent travel, vaccination, or unusual contact with animals. However, he reported an insect bite 6 months ago associated with an erythematous bullseye-like rash.
On admission, he was afebrile and had stable vital signs. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with T-wave inversion in leads aVL and V1. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examination was unremarkable. On neurological examination, he was alert and orientated. There was no cranial neuropathy. In the right lower limb, he had reduced tone and weakness, with hip and knee flexion 3/5, hip extension 3/5, knee extension 2/5, ankle dorsiflexion 3/5, and plantarflexion 2/5. Reflexes were absent in the right lower limb but otherwise normal elsewhere, and plantars were downgoing bilaterally. He had a normal sensory examination. There was no limb ataxia.
Over the next 24 h, he developed bilateral severe flaccid paresis of the lower limbs (right side: hip flexion 2/5, extension 3/5, abduction 3/5, adduction 3/5; knee flexion 2/5, extension 2/5, ankle dorsiflexion 1/5, and plantarflexion 2/5; left side: hip flexion 3/5, extension 4/5, abduction 3/5, adduction 3/5, knee flexion 3/5, extension 3/5, ankle dorsiflexion 4/5, and plantarflexion 4/5). He had bilaterally absent knee and ankle reflexes with upgoing plantar responses. The repeat sensory exam showed patchy impairment to pinprick sensation on the upper chest, and intact sensation of proprioception, light touch, and temperature. The bladder scan revealed urinary retention (410 ml post-void volume), and there was reduced anal tone with intact sensation.
Laboratory results on admission showed a normal complete blood count except for macrocytosis (106 fl). Liver and renal functions were in the normal range. C-reactive protein was normal (<5 mg/l), Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 18 mm/h. Troponin serial data and D-dimer were negative. Blood alcohol level was high (161 mg/dl). Lipid profile showed elevated LDL-cholesterol (4.9 mmol/l) and low HDL-cholesterol (1.3 mmol/l). Hematinics (including serum vitamin B12, folic acid level, and iron studies), thyroid function, hemoglobin A1c, and serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level were in the normal range. SARS-CoV-2 RNA from nasopharyngeal swab and serum anti-SARS-CoV2 IgG were negative.
Chest x-ray did not identify acute pathology. Computerized tomography (CT) of the brain showed mild cerebral atrophy and mild periventricular low density suggesting chronic microvascular disease. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and the whole spine with contrast revealed an abnormal, increased T2 signal in the anterior aspect of the spinal cord beginning at the T4 level and extending to the conus without associated edema or contrast enhancement (, ). The additional diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) of the spinal cord did not have a sufficient resolution.
The imaging findings were consistent with a longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) of potential autoimmune, paraneoplastic, or infective etiology. Anterior spinal cord infarction was also considered within the differential diagnoses given the MRI characteristics (hyperintense T2 signal localized to the anterior and central portion of the cord with butterfly shaped appearance) and the acute symptom onset with associating chest pain.
On the 3rd day of his admission, he was started on daily 1 g intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone, and he had a noticeable improvement of his muscle strength after the first dose. He finished a 3-day course of IV methylprednisolone. He was also commenced on daily oral 300 mg aspirin on the 4th day of the admission.
The repeat MRI of the whole spine on day 10 of his admission showed interval resolution of the T2 signal hyperintensity in the lower cord and conus.
CT of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis (CT-TAP) with contrast showed no abnormality; 24-h ECG, ambulatory blood pressure monitor (ABPM), and echocardiogram showed normal studies.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal leukocyte count (<5/ml), normal glucose (3.6 mmol/l, paired serum glucose 6.1 mmol/l), and elevated protein (0.8 g/L, normal range: 0.15–0.45 g/L). CSF oligoclonal band (OCB) with paired serum was negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays of the CSF sample for bacterial (Escherichia coli K1, Haemophilus influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria meningitis, beta-hemolytic Streptococcus Group B, and Streptococcus pneumoniae), viral (cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2, human herpesvirus 6, human parechovirus, and varicella zoster), and yeast (Cryptococcus) neoformans/gattii infections were negative.
Vasculitis and autoimmune tests (including antinuclear, ANA, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic, ANCA), cardiolipin, beta-2-glycoprotein, anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), aquaporin-4, anti- CASPR2, NMDA- receptor, and anti- Lgil antibodies) were negative. Serology for different infectious diseases (human immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2, syphilis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicella zoster) returned negative except for the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for Lyme C6 antibody, which showed a strong positive result (3.02, normal 0–0.9), but the confirmatory serology immunoblot result was negative. As there was a high clinical suspicion for possible Lyme neuroborreliosis, he was started on 2 g ceftriaxone intravenously twice daily on day 12 of his admission, and a CSF sample was sent for Lyme immunoblot testing. Later, this identified the presence of intrathecal immunoglobulin G (IgG) against two specific Borrelia antigens, p21 and VlsE. He finished a 21-day course of IV ceftriaxone. A paraneoplastic neuronal screen was also carried out and revealed the presence of the amphiphysin antibody. Other onconeural antibodies (anti-Hu, Yo, Ri, Ma2, CV2/CRMP, Zic-4, Sox-1, Tr, titin, and Recoverin) were negative. He underwent positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT), but it did not identify any occult neoplasm.
The patient improved with rehabilitation and was discharged to a rehabilitation facility after 1 month of hospital admission. He was able to mobilize with a walking frame under supervision with minimal residual right lower limb weakness in 4 weeks. After 6 weeks, he was able to walk unaided with a stick, and bowel and bladder functions were fully recovered .