A 33-year-old Indian female presented with loss of vision in the right eye for one month with associated headache and ocular pain, which increased with eye movement. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was hand motions close to the face in the right eye, and 20/20 in the left eye. Extraocular movements were full but painful. Relative afferent pupillary defect was noted in the right eye, and remaining anterior segment examination was within normal limits. Examination of the right fundus revealed a hyperemic and swollen optic disc with blurring of disc margins . The macula and the retinal periphery were unremarkable. Examination of the left eye showed no abnormality. Systemic evaluation results, including the results of detailed neurological examinations, were within normal limits.
B-scan ultrasonography of the right orbit showed elevation at the optic nerve head, the definitive nature of which could not be discerned. Contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbits demonstrated a swollen and tortuous right optic nerve with a well-defined T2 hyperintense cystic lesion with peripheral hypointensity in the optic nerve substance at the orbital apex [Figures and ]. Post gadolinium contrast sequences revealed diffuse optic nerve enhancement with peripheral rim enhancement of the lesion. The brain and left orbit appeared to be normal. Based on the MRI findings, and the high prevalence and endemicity of cysticercosis in the region, a diagnosis of optic nerve cysticercosis was made. Pattern visual evoked potential (VEP) showed prolonged implicit time and decreased amplitude of the P100 wave. Hemogram revealed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, but no eosinophilia. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test for cysticercosis was positive, which further confirmed the diagnosis.
The patient was started on a course of oral albendazole (15 mg/kg body weight in two divided doses) in combination with prednisolone (1 mg/kg body weight) for 4 weeks. BCVA showed a dramatic improvement to 20/30 in the right eye, which was associated with resolution of the disc edema . Oral steroids were tapered over the following month. An MRI scan taken 6 weeks after initiation of Albendazole revealed a complete resolution of the cyst . The clinical picture remained stable at 6-month follow up.