A 48-year-old female patient underwent her first work-up for possible liver disease 30 years ago. Based on findings of chronic active hepatitis in liver biopsy, autoimmune hepatitis was suspected, and treatment with prednisolone and azathioprine initiated. Seven years later, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a stricture in the common bile duct which was interpreted as possible extrahepatic PSC or tentatively an inborn anomaly of the common bile duct. After 20 years with fluctuating transaminases between 100 and 300 U/L and no recorded major clinical events, she developed general edema and thoracic spider nevi. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension with massive ascites. After an initial response to symptomatic treatment, she soon developed uncompensated liver failure with severe hepatic encephalopathy and was transferred to the national transplant unit for work-up and listing for liver transplantation. A few days later, an ABO-identical donor liver was available and LTX was performed with a duct-to-duct biliary anastomosis. The histopathological examination of the liver explant revealed cirrhosis and pathological changes typical for underlying PSC. Cholangiocarcinoma in situ was found in the common hepatic duct, the cystic duct, and the common bile duct, involving the resection margin. It was decided that the patient should be controlled with ERC with brush cytology from the duct-to-duct anastomosis after 6 months due to the histopathological findings. The brush cytology showed mild to moderate epithelial dysplasia in the common bile duct. After discussion in the multidisciplinary team, a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) was decided due to the risk of development of cholangiocarcinoma. Ten months after LTX, the procedure was performed. Because of a possible increased risk of anastomotic leak due to immunosuppression, an enteropancreatic anastomosis was avoided and the pancreatic duct was occluded. The surgical specimen showed intestinal metaplasia in the common bile duct, but no dysplasia or carcinoma. She was then followed according to standard post-liver transplantation follow-up regimen. The patient developed insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and received tuberculostatic treatment due to disseminated tuberculosis (pulmonary and meningeal), but the graft function remained good. At the 5-year post-transplantation control, recurrent PSC in the graft was diagnosed on liver biopsy. In addition, a 10 × 4 cm multicystic mass in the lower right abdominal quadrant was described on the routine abdominal ultrasound (US) exam. Upon reassessment, a CT scan of the abdomen performed before the Whipple procedure also showed a 10 × 5 cm multicystic mass in the same region. The lesion was asymptomatic, and based on imaging, the lesion was considered to be a benign gynecological cyst. Consequently, no further investigations were performed to establish the exact etiology. At 10 years of follow-up, the patient reported increasing abdominal distension, anorexia, weight loss, and fatigue for the past 6 to 8 months. Clinical examination revealed extensive sarcopenia, multiple spider nevi, and tense ascites. Biochemical tests showed an iron deficiency anemia with Hgb of 9.0 g/dL, moderately elevated liver function tests, inflammatory markers, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). Imaging, including liver and abdominal US, abdominal and thoracic CT, CT enterography, and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT unveiled liver graft fibrosis/cirrhosis with features of portal hypertension, massive low-attenuating heterogeneous ascites, a focal wall thickening in the middle part of the jejunum, multiple focal lesions in both lungs, a focal lesion in the thyroid gland, and the previously described cystic mass in the lower right abdominal quadrant. Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis revealed thick gelatinous ascites, which was culture negative. The ascites was rich in mucin, but without neoplastic cells on repeated cytology examinations. The provisional primary diagnosis of graft fibrosis-related portal hypertension with ascites could not be supported. Further extensive diagnostic work-up did not confirm tentative diagnoses such as gastrointestinal tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, mucinous tumors of the ovaries, or other causes of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Bearing in mind the differential diagnosis of PMP as a rare, but relevant tentative cause of mucinous ascites, re-evaluation of the contrast-enhanced CT scan raised the suspicion of PMP and that the cystic lesion actually represented a mucinous cystadenoma of the appendix .
The multidisciplinary team initially turned down cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (CRS-HIPEC) for the patient due to concerns of the magnitude of the disease with the risk of harming the graft during the procedure. However, after a renewed assessment, the patient was accepted for explorative laparotomy and potentially CRS-HIPEC. Perioperatively, the peritoneal cancer index (PCI) was estimated to 28 of 39 and it was found that CRS-HIPEC was technically doable and meaningful. The operation time was approximately 11 h. Surgery included removal of considerable amounts of mucinous masses, extensive peritonectomy including the right hemidiaphragm, part of the left hemidiaphragm and the pelvis, omentectomy, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, ileocaecal resection, splenectomy, and removal of the umbilicus. Minimal mucinous masses in relation to the piggyback anastomosis to the inferior caval vein were left due to safety reasons. HIPEC was then performed with mitomycin C for 90 min. The histopathological examination showed perforated low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm and wide-spread mucin without viable tumor cells in all abdominal specimens, compatible with PMP. Forty-two days after surgery, the patient was readmitted with urinary tract infection, anemia, high glucose levels, reversible kidney failure, weight loss, and malnutrition. She recovered on antibiotics and supportive treatment and received follow-up by nutritionists after discharge. Two months after surgery, she had started regaining weight and transplant control displayed satisfactory graft circulation and function .