A 3-year-old Caucasian male presented to an outside hospital with 2 weeks of progressively worsening trouble walking. He was initially prescribed azithromycin and prednisone at an outside clinic for a presumed infectious etiology; however, his gait instability continued to worsen. Two weeks before presentation he had an unwitnessed fall down a flight of stairs without acute injury. Pelvic X-rays showed no irregularities and CBC and blood chemistry were normal. Progression to complete inability to walk as well as areflexia in the lower extremities and new-onset urinary incontinence prompted further workup, for which the patient was then transferred to University of South Dakota Sanford Sioux Falls Hospital.
On arrival, the patient was noted to have significant weakness in his lower extremities bilaterally and was uncooperative with physical examination. Strength was 0 out of 5 in the left and 1 out of 5 in the right lower extremity. Deep tendon reflexes and sensation to light touch were absent bilaterally. The patient had no pertinent medical, family, or social history. He did not have any history suggestive of immunocompromised. Further workup included a normal CBC and CRP. An MRI of the brain, as well as the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine were completed under anesthesia and revealed a large soft tissue mass extending in the epidural space from T5 to T10 . The mass measured 2.8 × 5.2 × 4.2 cm and involved the body of T8. Epidural involvement of the soft tissue mass resulted in visible severe thecal sac stenosis from T7-T9. Cervical lymph node enlargement could also be seen at the level of C2. CT chest/abdomen was ordered at this time and showed the mass to be uniform in attenuation with mild diffuse enhancement. No calcifications were noted. These characteristics suggested malignancy; lymphoma was considered prominent in the differential diagnosis, although the location was uncommon.
Due to the rapidly progressive myelopathic course, the decision was made to perform an emergent decompression. The extension of the tumor to the anterior surface of the vertebral bodies made complete resection improbable, so we elected to remove only the posterior portions of the tumor to achieve acute symptomatic relief and obtain a histologic diagnosis, with a plan to address the remaining tumor after diagnosis was obtained. Complete T5-T9 laminectomies and a partial T10 laminectomy were carried out and the mass visualized as fatty-appearing homogenous tissue. The mass was also noted to protrude dorsally after removal of the bone tissue, suggesting compression before the procedure. Using microscopy, the lesion was subsequently dissected and removed from the dorsal aspect of the spinal cord dura and sent to pathology. Decompression of the cord was achieved. As planned, the lesion was not completely removed, as it occupied the anterior aspect of the spine as well as parts of the lateral canal. The procedure was well tolerated and without complication.
Histopathology revealed a prominent “starry sky” pattern, the classic description for marked apoptosis with large amounts of tingible body macrophages. High mitotic activity and foci of necrosis were present. Flow cytometry revealed the cells to express CD45, CD20, CD10, CD19, and CD38. CD34 and TdT were not expressed. The cells expressed high levels of c-MYC (80–90%). These findings indicated a high-grade B-cell lymphoma, strongly suggestive of Burkitt lymphoma (BL). Paraffin block confirmed c-MYC/IGH fusion through fluorescence in situ hybridization panel, further confirming the diagnosis.
Initial chemotherapy included intrathecal methotrexate and hydrocortisone. He is currently undergoing a regimen according to ANHL1131 with COP-R reduction phase including cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisolone, and rituximab. His course has been complicated by bacteremia and mucositis with perirectal ulceration, which delayed his chemotherapeutic schedule temporarily and required diverting colostomy; however, his clinical picture is overall improving. He has regained walking ability, lower extremity deep tendon reflexes, and sensation to light touch. He has continued to have some postoperative neuropathy of the lower extremities that is under control with gabapentin. Positron emission tomography 3 months post-op showed regression of the tumor compatible with response to chemotherapy. Repeat imaging 9 months post-op showed no evidence of residual tumor or metastasis. The patient is now 10 months post-op and has returned home after intensive inpatient physical therapy and social interventions.