A 20-year-old man visited our hospital due to a 6-month history of weakness and clumsiness in his right extremities. His past history was negative for perinatal problems. There was no relevant family history for neurodegenerative diseases. He did not exhibit any learning difficulties in university courses and denied a history of psychiatric illness. On physical examination, body asymmetry was not visually apparent across the whole body, and differences in opposite limb circumferences did not exceed 2 cm (10 cm below the elbow, right: 24 cm, left: 25 cm; 10 cm below the knee, right: 35 cm, left: 35 cm) . Dystonic postures of the proximal interphalangeal joints of the right hand were found when he outstretched both arms, with hyperextension of the thumb and flexion of the little finger. Neurological examination demonstrated subtle weakness of his right limbs with hyperreflexia and pathologic reflexes. Repetitive limb movements were slow with decremental responses in the right hand and foot. The right extremities showed mild rigidity without resting or postural tremor. His gait was characterized by decreased right arm swing, but his base and stride seemed normal (See Additional file ). His Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS)-Part III motor score was 8/108. Laboratory results were all within normal limits, including serum copper, ceruloplasmin, iron, ferritin, manganese, and 24-h urine copper levels. Assessment of cognitive function revealed normal (30/30 points on the Mini-Mental State Examination and 30/30 points on the Korean Version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed remarkable subcortical and brainstem hemiatrophy in the left basal ganglia, thalamus, midbrain, and pons . In addition, hypointense signals were observed on T2-weighted images and T2*-weighted (T2*W) gradient-echo (GRE) sequences in the left globus pallidus and substantia nigra. These lesions were isointense on computed tomography scans and T1-weighted images, and hypointense on diffusion-weighted imaging sequences . These findings were compatible with iron accumulation rather than calcification or haemorrhage. On the contrary, [18F] N-(3-fluoropropyl)-2β-carbon ethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl) nortropane (18F-FP-CIT) positron emission tomography (PET) scans revealed normal levels of dopamine transporters (DATs) in the bilateral basal ganglia . The levodopa response was poor, but the patient expressed subjective improvement of his motor function. After a year of treatment, he still presented with unilateral parkinsonism in his right limbs without disease progression to the opposite side. His 1-year follow-up UPDRS-Part III motor score was 7/108.