A 35-year-old housewife of the Tiv ethnic group in Nigeria was referred to our Ear, Nose and Throat clinic by family physicians with a 6-year history of a slowly progressive, painless left cheek swelling not preceded by trauma and not associated with fever, weight loss or any other otorhinolaryngological symptoms. Examination revealed a 6 cm by 6 cm non-tender doughy mass in the left cheek with no overlying skin changes. Slipping sign was not demonstrable and there was no bruit over this mass. The intra-oral mucosa over the mass appeared normal. A provisional diagnosis of buccal soft tissue lipoma was made with epidermoid cyst as a differential diagnosis.
Imaging using ultrasonography revealed a fairly well circumscribed echogenic mass in the left cheek measuring 1.67 cm by 1.23 cm with no evidence of neovascularization noted within. On this premise, the radiologist made an assessment of lipoma. A computerized tomographic scan was not done because the patient could not afford to pay for it. Other investigations performed included full blood count, serum urea and electrolyte, and urinalysis which were all within normal limits.
She was prepared for and had excision under general anesthesia via naso-endotracheal intubation. During surgery, the mass was approached intra-orally by a transverse 5 cm linear incision made in the mucous lining over it . The 4 cm by 4 cm irregular yellowish mass was carefully excised and the wound closed using a chromic 3/0 suture.
Microscopic examination of the excised soft tissue mass revealed sheets of mature adipocytes containing large clear cytoplasms and eccentric nuclei with inconspicuous vascularity and no evidence of cellular atypia or metaplasia . These features are consistent with a classical diagnosis of a lipoma.
Postoperatively, she was placed on ciprofloxacin, ibuprofen and vitamin C tablets with oral saline mouth wash after meals. She was discharged in good condition on the 5th postoperative day and has remained free of any symptoms for over 36 months of follow-up.