A 29-year-old woman complaining of bloody stool was referred to our hospital for evaluation and treatment. She was diagnosed with rectal cancer (Rb) with synchronous multiple liver (mainly in liver segments 2, 4a, 4b, 5, 6, and 7) and lung metastases . The patient initially underwent chemotherapy (FOLFOXIRI + bevacizumab, 15 courses), which she completed with a satisfactory response (downsizing and calcification). Finally, she was diagnosed with rectal cancer Rb (ycT4bN3H2M1bPul2, Stage IVb) and referred to our department for curative resection.
Based on imaging study findings, right trisectionectomy was necessary to achieve hepatic clearance . However, the FLR volume was calculated as only 19.2% (275 ml) of the total liver volume. Even though the patient’s liver function was normal, the indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICGR15) was 3.7%, showing that radical liver resection could not be safely performed because the planned FLR volume was insufficient.
Therefore, we decided to perform laparoscopic ALPPS to obtain sufficient and rapid hypertrophy, followed by concurrent open abdominoperineal resection. The hepatoduodenal ligament was dissected, and the right portal vein was identified . The anterior and posterior branches of the right portal vein were subsequently separated. Under in-flow occlusion using the Pringle maneuver, the liver parenchyma was transected along the right side of the umbilical portion in an incision manner from the bottom to the top. The Glisson’s capsule in S4 of the liver was dissected. The anterior and posterior branches of the right portal vein were ligated. Following the laparoscopic ALPPS procedure, open abdominoperineal resection was performed. Postoperative abdominal ultrasonography immediately after ALPPS showed complete disruption of right portal venous blood flow, and that left portal venous blood flow was maintained as planned .
Volumetric assessment using SYNAPSE VINCENT (Fujifilm Co Ltd, Japan) after the ALPPS showed that the ratio of FLR to total liver volume increased from 19.2 to 30.5% (399 ml) on postoperative day (POD) 7, to 32.1% (434 ml) on POD 12, and to 32.1% (434 ml) on POD 19. The FLR increase was slow, particularly after POD 7, and FLR did not attain the required volume for right trisectionectomy as radical liver resection. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) on POD 19 showed resumption of right portal venous blood flow via newly formed collateral vessels around the right Glissonean pedicle, which was considered to interfere with hypertrophy of the FLR and atrophy of the right hemiliver to be resected .
We attempted to induce further liver growth by blocking portal venous blood flow to the right lobe using portal vein embolization (PVE). Additional percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization (PTPE) of the anterior and posterior branches of the right portal vein was performed via the 7th and 9th intercostal spaces on POD 21 . Postoperative abdominal ultrasonography showed disruption of blood flow in the anterior and posterior branches of the portal vein. On POD 32, computed CT showed that the ratio of FLR to total liver volume had increased from 32.1 to 35.7% (474 ml), with an actual FLR volume increase of 40 ml . Rapid increase in FLR volume was obtained after rescue PTPE.
On the 35th day after the initial surgery, the patient underwent right trisectionectomy and partial resection of S2 as radical resection of liver metastases. Exploration revealed no ascites, no peritoneal implants, new adhesion under the liver, and obvious enlargement of the left lateral section. Due to extensive adhesion and small collateral blood vessels around the right Glissonean pedicle, exposure of the anterior and posterior branches of the right portal vein was difficult. The right Glissonean pedicle was divided using a linear stapler during an en bloc procedure. Subsequently, the right and middle hepatic veins were transected. Right trisectionectomy was accomplished through the remaining liver parenchymal transection along the surface of the inferior vena cava . Partial resection of S2 was subsequently performed. All surgical margins were free, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 13 without postoperative liver failure. Thereafter, the patient underwent a thoracoscopic right lung S3 sectional resection and is currently undergoing postoperative chemotherapy.