A 30-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room because of persistent abdominal pain in the right side, appeared some day before, during a shift work as agricultural laborer. An accurate medical history ascertained that she had an increased steady weight (109 kg; BMI = 40 Kg/m2), but she was in apparently good health also showing customary appetite and regular menses, before the appearance of pain. Physical examination revealed the presence of a large mass, palpable in hypogastric region and in right lower abdominal quadrant. Ultrasonography confirmed an abdominal mass adjacent to the right ovary. To better define the diagnosis, the physician required blood sampling for routine tests, gynecological counseling and an abdominal computer tomography (CT). The abdominal CT confirmed the presence of a mass measuring 10 x 6 cm, in the right ovary. The patient underwent right unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. In particular, an ovariian cyst (7, 3 x 3 cm) along with a portion of the fallopian tubes of 4 cm and the vermiform appendix were removed. Peritoneal washing and multiple peritoneal biopsies in nearby areas (Douglas, bladder, bilateral paracolic gutter, and diaphragm) were also performed. Histological examination revealed the presence of a follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (0.9 cm) harbored in a mature teratoma. The cancer was localized and the right ovary capsule was not infiltrated by the tumor. Based on Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 2002, classification tumor received a pT1a grading. Appendix showed the features of chronic follicular inflammation and the remaining tissues were disease-free. After surgery, functional examination of thyroid gland revealed serum iodothyronines levels in the normal range, thyroid ultrasonography showed a normal glandular volume with patchy echo-structure and, in the left thyroid lobe, the presence of a 23, 4 x 14 x 9 mm hypoechogenic nodular lesion. An ultrasound assisted fine needle aspiration of this thyroid lesion was performed and cytological examination showed the presence of dense colloid in particles and small groups of thyrocytes with notes of oxyphilic metaplasia and anisonucleosis; this sample was classified as follicular lesion with oxyphilic cells of undetermined significance (category III according to the Bethesda system, 2009) . So far, in presence of follicular lesion and for an appropriate follow-up of papillary carcinoma arising in struma ovarii, the patient underwent total thyroidectomy (, ). Histological examination revealed that the nodule examined in the left lobe was benign, but showed a papillary micro-carcinoma in the right lobe (diameter = 0.2 cm; pT1a) within a hyperplastic thyroid characterized by abundant oxyphil cells. The ablation of residual thyroid tissue was performed by a dose of 30 mCi of 131I according to Meas et al. . Whole body scan after therapeutic dose showed two focal areas of strong uptake in the anterior region of the neck, in right superior paramedian and left inferior paramedian areas, due to minimal glandular remnants; no area of uptake in the pelvis or elsewhere was notice. The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) value before radioiodine therapy was 64.8 mU/L and serum thyroglobulin (Tg) was 1.24 mg/dL, in the absence of anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (anti-TgAb). Levothyroxine treatment was started (1.6 μg/Kg/day) and thyroid hormones and TSH were evaluated after four months. Levothyroxine dose had been increased until an appropriate TSH value (0.24 mU/L) had reached at 1.92 μg/Kg/day. Six months after total thyroidectomy, patient underwent neck ultrasonography and Tg evaluation, which showed no evidence of recurrences. Patient is up to now in follow-up for both struma ovarii and differentiated thyroid cancer according to European Thyroid Association guidelines .