A 68-year-old man underwent CABG and bioprosthetic AVR without immediate peri-operative complications. One month post-operatively, he presented with dyspnoea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, and extensive oedema. His physical examination was notable for pitting oedema extending from the feet up to the abdomen, a markedly elevated jugular venous pressure and a positive Kussmaul’s sign. Auscultation of the chest demonstrated reduced air entry at the bases extending up to the mid zones. The heart sounds were dual with no appreciable murmurs.
His past medical history included multivessel coronary artery disease and severe aortic valve regurgitation. He was treated with CABG to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and posterior descending artery (PDA) as well as bioprosthetic AVR insertion. He also had paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and hypercholesterolaemia. He was a lifelong non-smoker. There was no prior history of impairment in left or right ventricular function including diastolic parameters. There was no history of pericarditis, myocarditis, autoimmune, or rheumatological conditions.
The patient’s clinical signs and symptoms were suggestive of acute decompensated biventricular failure. The differential diagnosis included acute left ventricular dysfunction although there was no clear precipitant for this identified from the patient’s clinical history. Other considerations included acute valvular pathology (although no murmur was identified on clinical exam), uncontrolled tachyarrhythmias (again there was no history of palpitations, pre-syncope, or syncope to support this), and pericardial/myocardial disease. Other diagnostic possibilities included superimposed pulmonary pathology such as pulmonary embolism or lower respiratory tract infection.
Chest roentgenogram demonstrated bilateral pleural effusions without evidence of pericardial calcification . A 12-lead electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with no abnormalities . N-Terminal pro hormone B-type Natriuretic Peptide (NTproBNP) was elevated at 3034 ng/L (normal <126 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated normal sized cardiac chambers, normal left ventricular systolic function, and normal function of the aortic bioprosthesis. There was no regional wall motion abnormality noted. Note was made of a bright, thickened pericardium, and a small pericardial effusion. Respirophasic septal motion (septal bounce) consistent with ventricular interdependence was also noted. The inferior vena cava was noted to be distended without collapse on inspiration. Mitral inflow velocities increased by >25% during expiration while tricuspid inflow velocities increased by more than 40% on inspiration .
Given the atypically rapid presentation, diagnostic certainty prior to referral for potential repeat sternotomy and pericardial decortication was deemed necessary. Invasive haemodynamic assessment was pursued to confirm the diagnosis of CP. Concurrent invasive coronary angiography was performed as an alternative to coronary CT to limit delays in clinical assessment due to the limited availability of coronary CT at our centre. Coronary angiography demonstrated severe native, multivessel coronary artery disease. The left internal mammary artery graft to the LAD was patent but the saphenous vein graft to the PDA was atretic. Ventriculography confirmed normal left ventricular systolic function with no appreciable gradient across the aortic valve on pigtail catheter pullback. Right heart catheterization with simultaneous left ventricular pressure measurements was performed. The following cardinal features of pericardial constriction were demonstrated :
Elevated mean right atrial pressure (17 mmHg) with rapid X and Y descents (the W or M sign) signifying rapid, early diastolic atrial emptying into an underfilled ventricle.
The square root sign in the right and left ventricular pressure waveforms indicating rapid early ventricular filling with a sudden plateau as the ventricles reach capacity within a stiff pericardium.
Equalization of left and right ventricular end-diastolic pressures reflective of a stiff, non-compliant pericardial sac.
Discordance in the left and right ventricular systolic pressures during the respiratory cycle indicating ventricular interdependence.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) demonstrated normal cardiac chamber size and respirophasic septal motion consistent with ventricular interdependence. Crescentic thickening (up to 24 mm) of the pericardium around the left ventricular wall was demonstrated but Phase Sensitive Inversion Recover (PSIR) confirmed that the true pericardium measured ∼8 mm with up to 16 mm of pericardial fluid identified around the left ventricle . Pericardial signal enhancement was noted in short time inversion recovery sequence as well as late gadolinium enhancement on PSIR sequence indicating active inflammation. The left atrium:right atrium volume ratio was normal suggesting acute rather than chronic CP.
The clinical, echocardiographic, and haemodynamic findings were suggestive of post-cardiotomy CP; a diagnosis made more likely by the demonstration of a markedly thickened pericardium on CMR. The presence of the atretic vein graft was suggestive of adequate competitive flow within the native vessel. The absence of regional wall motion abnormalities on echocardiography combined with a normal troponin and the absence of ischaemic ECG changes indicated that the syndrome of heart failure was unlikely to be due to myocardial ischaemia. Despite medical therapy with intravenous frusemide and colchicine, there was no improvement in the patient’s clinical condition. Our patient was referred for urgent surgical pericardiectomy after discussion at a multi-disciplinary heart team meeting. At surgery, extremely thickened pericardium, densely adherent to the heart over the right and left ventricles in particular was found. Decortication of the pericardium over the right side of the heart was technically challenging and caused tears to the pulmonary artery and right ventricle, which had to be meticulously sutured. The first operation lasted 8 h. A decision was made to stage pericardial decortication with completion pericardiectomy over the left ventricle (which had not been possible via sternotomy) via a left lateral thoracotomy approach. During the latter operation, extremely thickened pericardium was again found. The left lung was densely adherent to chest wall and pericardium, and injury to the lung occurred on entering chest (subsequently repaired). Unfortunately, the patient developed acute right ventricular dysfunction in the ensuing days, necessitating VA-ECMO support. Seven days after the second procedure, the patient developed multi-organ dysfunction with renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. His condition deteriorated further, and, after family discussion, active treatment was withdrawn. He passed away shortly afterwards.
Results from pericardial tissue, which was sampled during the patient’s procedure demonstrated dense fibrous tissue with fibroblastic activity suggestive of reactive pericarditis. There was no evidence of suppurative inflammation, granulomas, or malignancy to suggest an alternative aetiology of CP.