A 52-year-old female patient of Han nationality was admitted to hospital on December 18, 2020 due to the primary symptom of pain in the left eye and loss of vision for over 2 wk . The patient had felt pain in the left eye since the December 1, 2020 and experienced reduced levels of vision in this eye without any other predisposing factors or causes.
The patient went to a local hospital and was diagnosed with iridocyclitis of the left eye. The patient’s symptoms eased after the administration of semi-retrobulbar triamcinolone acetonide injections and hormone eyedrops. However, the symptoms subsequently reappeared with an intensified headache. The acupuncture department of the local hospital performed acupuncture and moxibustion treatment while blocking the trigeminal nerve branch. However, the patient’s conditions worsened, and she lost vision in her left eye. Computed X-ray tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations identified a space-occupying lesion in the left eye . Consequently, the patient was referred to our hospital for specialist treatment.
Hypertension.
There was no personal and family history.
Physical examination revealed that the visual acuity in the right eye was 0.6; the left eye was reactive to light and the skin on the left upper eyelid was bruised. We also observed conjunctival congestion, a transparent cornea, visible floating cells in the anterior chamber with a small amount of empyema below, mydriasis (5 mm), adhesion to the posterior anterior capsule, and a large number of pigment granules adhered onto the surface of the capsule, with a yellow and turbid lens . We were unable to visualize the fundus. There was slight conjunctival congestion in the right eye, a transparent cornea, a clear anterior chamber, a round pupil, positive optical feedback, high lens density, a visible flat retina in the fundus, and unseen light reflection in the central fovea.
None.
Ultrasonic biomicroscopy (UBM) examination revealed swelling of the iris root in both eyes, an expanded turbid anterior chamber in the left eye, shallow partial detachment of the ciliary body, and positive suprachoroidal effusion. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed closure of the left eye from 7 to 10 o’clock, along with edema and infiltration of cornea. Ultrasound revealed a normal optical axis in both eyes, vitreous opacity in the right eye, and vitreous turbidness in the left eye (potentially indicating hemorrhage). Ultrasound also revealed a choroidal lesion in the left eye. Color Doppler ultrasound revealed a normal optical axis in the left eye and a solid space-occupying lesion within the left eyeball. No valid data could be acquired from the corneal endothelium in the left eye .
Abdominal ultrasound further revealed a fatty liver and a frizzy gallbladder wall, although no abnormalities were detected in the spleen.
Eye CT (with enhancement) revealed slight enlargement as well as prolapse of the lacrimal gland in the left eye . Fusiform images showed a slightly higher density on the inner temporal side of the left eyeball when compared to the right eyeball. MRI examination revealed a thickened left eyelid, an enlarged and prolapsed lacrimal gland, a little oozing around the eyeball, and potential evidence for infectious disease. MRI also revealed a fusiform shadow of abnormal signals on the temporal side of the left eyeball, for which prolapse and hematoma of the choroid or retina were considered . Chest CT examinations revealed bronchiectasis and infection of both lungs, along with the formation of mucus plugs in the inferior lobe of the right lung .