A 43-year-old Caucasian male was referred to the nephrology clinic at Overton Brooks VAMC by his primary care practitioner, in November of 2002 for management of his chronic kidney disease. He was asymptomatic. His BP was well controlled at 115/83 mmHg. He was morbidly obese with a body mass index (BMI) of 46, chronic kidney disease stage 4 (MDRD GFR of 16 ml/min), non insulin dependant diabetes mellitus, hypertension, coronary artery disease status post stent placement and hyperlipidemia. His medications included nifedipine, fosinopril, atenolol, rosiglitazone, furosemide, simvastatin, aspirin, glyburide and calcium carbonate. Laboratory results: Serum creatinine 4.3 mg/dl, BUN 54 mg/dl, normal electrolytes, serum calcium 8.8 mg/dl, serum phosphorus 4.9 mg/dl, random urine protein 292 mg/dl, random urine creatinine 49 mg/dl, urine protein/creatinine ratio of 5.9, hemoglobin A1c 7% and hemoglobin 13.9 g/dl. Patient was educated about the course and prognosis of his kidney disease and advised diet and exercise for weight loss. He was referred for arterial-venous fistula placement for providing renal replacement therapy in future. Over the next 6 months the patient failed all conservative methods of weight loss including the use of orlistat. His morbid obesity posed a major contraindication for enrolling him for kidney transplantation. He agreed to the surgical therapy option for treating his obesity. He was referred for bariatric surgery in June 2003.
After the bariatric surgery in September 2003, he had lost 60 pounds at 6 months (BMI 37). He was able to discontinue all his oral hypoglycemic agents maintaining a hemoglobin A1c of 6.2% and required only one anti-hypertensive medication to achieve the recommended target blood pressure reading. His BUN and creatinine has remained at 22 mg/dl and 4.6 mg/dl respectively. The patient is being followed at regular intervals and over the course of the next eight months has lost an additional 30 pounds (BMI 32), a total weight loss of 90 pounds since the bariatric surgery. His serum creatinine has remained stable at 4 mg/dl, BUN 37 mg/dl, random urinary protein 99 mg/dl, random urinary creatinine 121 mg/dl, urine protein/creatinine ratio of 0.8 and hemoglobin A1c 5.1%. The inverse creatinine to time plot as shown in figure clearly demonstrates the stabilization of the renal function 15 months following his weight loss surgery. The patient was being evaluated for pre-emptive renal transplantation and because of his previous history of coronary artery disease he underwent a left heart catheterization study in March 2005. Unfortunately, despite all precautions he developed radio-contrast induced nephropathy and had to be initiated on renal replacement therapy. He currently remains on dialysis and is awaiting a renal transplantation, which would not have been possible without his weight loss.