The patient was a 15-year-old boy with SMID due to intractable epilepsy and with secondary tracheomalacia. The patient had undergone laryngotracheal separation 4 months before admission to prevent recurrent aspiration pneumonia. After developing a common cold, the patient required frequent sputum suctioning due to increased mucus production. Wheezing and retractive breathing became progressively prominent, cyanosis appeared, and the patient was transferred to our hospital. Bronchoscopy revealed flattened tracheal stenosis with intratracheal granulation. The patient required tracheal tubing at the stenosis site to stabilize the respiratory status. After the general condition was stabilized, we performed a detailed workup.
Chest radiograph showed scoliosis , and chest computed tomography (CT) images showed tracheal stenosis between the sternum, vertebral body, and innominate artery . Bronchoscopy revealed a flattened trachea 4–5 cm caudal to the tracheostomy site, tracheal mucosal ulcers, and pulsation of the innominate artery on the anterior wall of the trachea . Although cannula-free tracheostomy is preferred to prevent the progression of tracheal mucosal ulcers, a tracheostomy tube had to be placed to achieve adequate ventilation.
The following factors particularly complicated the patient condition: (1) the tracheal stenosis was partly caused by the hyperextension of the trachea due to the laryngotracheal separation; (2) the airway compression by the sternum, vertebral body, and innominate artery worsened the tracheal stenosis; (3) the tracheomalacia was exacerbated by edematous changes in the tracheal mucosa due to inflammation caused by the common cold and the frequent sputum suctioning; (4) the continuous placement of the tracheostomy tube caused ulcers of the tracheal mucosa; and (5) the innominate artery pulsation was observed on the anterior tracheal wall and thus the separation of the trachea and innominate artery is necessary. To manage these obstacles, we considered the following approaches: (1) manubrial removal to release tracheal compression by the bony thorax; (2) repositioning of the trachea to the right side of the innominate artery, creating a new permanent tracheal stoma on the anterior chest wall to release overtension and eliminate contact with the innominate artery; and (3) cannula-free management to prevent tracheal granulation. After this comprehensive consideration, we decided to perform an anterior mediastinum tracheostomy with tracheal repositioning.
Under endotracheal general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the thyroid position to produce cervical extension. The transverse incision following the supraclavicular line was constructed by extending laterally from the central tracheal stoma point to the infraclavicular fossae . The skin flap was elevated to each cranial and caudal side to expose the upper border of the clavicles and the sternum body. The sternocleidomastoid muscles were detached from the sternum and clavicles bilaterally, and the pectoral muscles were dissected on either side from the mid sternal line to expose the first and second rib cartilages and medial positions of the first and second intercostal muscles . The bilateral margins of the sternum in the second intercostal space were exposed, and the internal mammary vessels were dissected bilaterally. Using a bone saw, the manubrium was divided along the midline and transversely at the second intercostal muscle. We then dissected the clavicle heads and first and second rib cartilages (approximately 2 cm from the medial end of the sternum) bilaterally using a bone saw, thereby resolving the bony compression. The trachea was dissected circumferentially to its bifurcation while avoiding damage to the blood supply to the distal end. Anterior mediastinal tissues, such as the thymus, were divided centrally, and the innominate artery and ascending aorta were dissected from the surrounding tissue . Trachea was then repositioned to the right side of the aorta and innominate artery and wrapped with thymus to avoid direct touch to the aorta and innominate artery . The level of the mediastinal tracheostomy was determined, and the end of the distal trachea was gently moved upward in the mediastinum. To create the bipedicle anterior cutaneous flap, a lower incision was made from the right to the left anterior axillary lines beneath the breasts. The flap was moved upward , and the new tracheal stoma was created at a point along its midline . The cutaneous defect below the lower incision was covered using a free skin graft from the left thigh. The surgical time was 250 min, with an estimated blood loss of 43 mL.
Postoperatively, the patient had a supraclavicular wound infection that required only incisional drainage; however, he was discharged home 28 days after surgery without any additional complications. The patient is currently living at home with a 3-year follow-up period after surgery without a tracheal cannula , and the tracheal stenosis has been resolved .