A 30-year-old Caucasian man presented to the general surgical service at our institution complaining of pain and skin swelling over his chest for the last 12 to 24 hours. He gave a one-week history of having had an upper respiratory tract infection with purulent nasal discharge and frequent, forceful coughing episodes. He felt hot and sweaty but otherwise systemically well, with no history of any other medical problems or regular medications. On physical examination he was diagnosed with subcutaneous surgical emphysema bilaterally from below the mandible to approximately three inches below the clavicles. He had no cervical lymphadenopathy. Abdominal and cardiac examinations were unremarkable. He had normal oxygen saturation in room air and his chest was clear.
Laboratory tests showed a white cell count of 12.2 × 109/L (normal range 4 to 10 × 109/L), C-reactive protein was 8 g/dL (normal range < 5 g/dL) with urea, creatinine, sodium, potassium and liver enzymes all within normal limits. An ECG showed sinus rhythm with no tachycardia. Plain radiographs of his neck and chest, taken in the emergency department, demonstrated marked surgical emphysema with pneumomediastinum, as shown in Figure . There was no free air under his diaphragm.
He was admitted overnight and kept nil by mouth pending further investigation. He was given IV normal saline 1 litre every eight hours and started on IV antibiotics: cefuroxime (1.5 g three times per day) and metronidazole (500 mg three times per day). A water soluble contrast (Gastrograffin) swallow was performed the next day to detect a possible oesophageal perforation; however, no leak was found. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his neck and chest taken later that day showed extensive surgical emphysema in the pre-vertebral and pre-tracheal compartments of the neck in communication with pneumomediastinum, but the scan did not identify a perforated viscus or any fluid collections. Slices of this study are shown in Figure .
On day three he remained systemically well and was afebrile. An urgent review by the otolaryngology-head and neck surgeons was requested. Flexible nasoendoscopy showed bilateral infective sinusitis with thick post-nasal drip and a haemorrhagic vocal cord on the right with no associated pathological lesions seen. Nasal cleaning with saline washes was initiated four times daily along with topical steroid nasal spray twice daily. He tolerated sips of water followed by a build-up to solid food over the following 24 hours. He was discharged after a further 48 hours with two weeks of equivalent oral antibiotics (co-amoxiclav 625mg three times daily) and continued nasal washes. He will be followed up by the otolaryngology-head and neck service.