A 51-year-old female patient underwent left URSL 2 years ago. However, she lose follow-up before complete removal ureteral stent. Recently, she presented to the department of urology with left lumbar pain. She suffered from urgency and frequency of urination and without the history of other diseases and operation. Physical examination: Body mass index was 25.12 kg/m2, left renal percussive pain was positive. An abdominal radiograph showed that both end of ureter stent encrusted with the stone . Computed tomography (CT) examination reported that a single large stone, located in the renal pelvis and bladder, wrapped around the end of the stent tube, with a length of more than 2 cm . The CT Hounsfield Unit value of left intrarenal calculi was 645HU, and that of bladder calculi was 1150HU. Urinalysis testing revealed a red blood cell count of > 100/hp. and a white blood cell count of 120/hp. Urine bacterial culture suggested the presence of Escherichia coli. Other routine laboratory examinations were all within normal limits.
According to the results of urinary bacterial culture, the third generation cephalosporins was selected for anti-infection treatment for 5 days. Stent removal was attempted by ECIRS under general anesthesia. The patient was oriented in the prone-split leg position throughout the operation, and then we performed retrograde operation and PCNL . The operation was performed by two urologists at the same time, one performed PCNL, the other performed transurethral retrograde surgery. First, Surgeon 2 was performed nephroscope (f20, Wolf, Germany) combined with resectoscopes sheath (f26.5) to enter bladder, observed the stent encrustation and located the ureteral orifice. The distal end of the ureteral stent was highly encrusted, the diameter was about 2 cm. Pneumatic ballistic gravel (Electro Medical Systems, Swiss LithoClast® Maste, Nyon, Switzerland) entered into the bladder through nephroscopes , and the stone fragment was rushed out. The Surgeon 2 retrograde entered into the left ureteral orifice with a ureterscope (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany), and then entered the left renal pelvis along the stent tube and guide wire. The ureter was in good condition without stricture and damage, and there were no encrusted in the middle of stent tube. Under ultrasound guidance, surgeon 1 chose the left posterior axillary line under 12 ribs as the puncture position and established the nephroscope channel (f22). Meanwhile, surgeon 2 monitored the dilation and establishment of puncture channel with ureterscope to avoid kidney injury caused by too deep puncture channel . Surgeon 1 entered the renal pelvis with a nephroscope (f20, Wolf, Germany). Ultrasonic lithotripter (ultrasonic energy 80%, duty cycle 70%, Electro Medical Systems, Swiss LithoClast® Maste, Nyon, Switzerland) removed the stent encrustation in the renal pelvis, broke the stones into smaller fragments. The fragments were drawn from the channel with negative pressure (Additional file ). After removal of intrarenal calculi, the stent tube was removed completely by foreign body forceps through the channel. No residual stone was found in the renal pelvis and ureter . Finally, a new stent tube (f6, 28 cm, urovision) was placed into the ureter, and ECIRS was used to ensure the correct position of the stent tube. The total operation time was 74 min. There was no complication after the operation. No residual stone was found in postoperative reexamination imaging. The nephrostomy tube was removed five days after surgery. The ureteral stent was removed one month later. An analysis of the encrusting material indicated that it was a calcium phosphate calculus.