Our patient was a 69-year-old African American woman with a 72–pack-year smoking history who had originally been diagnosed with a 1.3-cm right lower lobe lung mass about 14 years earlier (clinical stage T1AN0M0 per the eighth edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer tumor, node, metastasis system). Her symptoms included cough, and the results of her physical examination were largely within normal limits, with the exception of obesity at the time of diagnosis. She underwent a computed tomography (CT)–guided biopsy of the right lower lobe mass, and pathology showed findings consistent with a carcinoid. The results of immunohistochemistry were positive for synaptophysin, Cam5.2, and AE1/AE3. Due to the limitations of the sample, the exact Ki-67 score could not be calculated, but there were rare scattered mitoses and no evidence of necrosis, favoring carcinoid tumor. Over time, she developed bilateral pulmonary nodules that were slowly growing, consistent with metastatic pulmonary typical carcinoid. Her disease had been well controlled with a long-acting formulation of octreotide acetate for 13 years. Surveillance imaging then demonstrated increased disease burden with enlargement of pulmonary nodules and a corresponding increase in chromogranin levels (15 ng/ml in 2015, 227 ng/ml in 2016, 335 ng/ml in 2017, and up to 678 ng/ml in 2019). Everolimus was subsequently initiated but was not tolerated secondary to gastrointestinal side effects despite multiple interruptions and dose reductions. Off-label use of lutetium Lu-177 dotatate was deemed unsuitable, given the patient’s stage IV chronic kidney disease. Everolimus was discontinued 2 months after initiation, and she was transitioned to lanreotide. However, CT performed 3 months after initiation of lanreotide demonstrated a further increase in an index LLL mass . She underwent video flexible bronchoscopy with endobronchial ultrasound and fiducial placement, which did not yield definitive visualization of an endobronchial lesion. The results of transbronchial needle aspiration, brush biopsies, and transbronchial biopsies were negative for malignancy; however, suspicion remained high for disease progression upon multidisciplinary review.
Given the anatomical location of the tumor, she was referred to the radiation oncology department, which recommended ablative radiation to a total dose of 4000 cGy in five fractions to the progressing LLL mass with treatments completed every other day to minimize toxicity. Lanreotide was continued during and after the completion of radiation therapy. Repeat imaging 3 months later demonstrated shrinkage of the LLL mass as well as a distant untreated left upper lobe (LUL) nodule. The LUL nodule was largely stable in size prior to radiation (1.4 cm, 1.4 cm, and 1.5 cm measured 10 months, 7 months, and 1 month prior to SBRT, respectively) and shrank to 0.5 cm after SBRT. The location of the LUL lesion was notably anterior and superior to the informal SBRT field used to treat the LLL tumor and received a mean fractional dose of 1.24 Gy, well below the conventional therapeutic dosage . As such, its regression cannot be ascribed to a classical radiotherapy exposure. She tolerated SBRT without any significant adverse events. Her chromogranin level 3 months after SBRT was 318 ng/ml. After radiation, the patient continued lanreotide without evidence of clinical disease progression. A follow-up imaging study has not been performed yet, owing to her other medical issues and the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.