A 29-year-old man with a history of intractable frontal lobe epilepsy was treated unsuccessfully with a variety of anti-epileptic drugs (AED), including valproic acid, oxcarbazepine, levetiracetam, clobazam, lacosamide, lamotrigine and zonisamide. Upon presentation, the patient was on brivaracetam 100 mg twice daily, topiramate 350 mg daily, and eslicarbazepine 800 mg daily. Because AEDs failed to control his seizures, he underwent subdural grid monitoring and resection of the inferior frontal gyrus and orbital frontal cortex. He was seizure-free for approximately 6 months but experienced seizure recurrence as frequently as seven episodes per month. The semiology of the seizures was consistent with his pre-resection epilepsy. Electroencephalography (EEG) demonstrated broad minor interictal discharges but a clear additional seizure focus was not obvious. The patient was offered VNS therapy for symptomatic relief. The patient underwent VNS placement without intra- or perioperative complications. The helical coil was placed in the correct orientation, the patient experienced typical laryngospasm and the impedance was within normal limits. The initial device settings can be seen in Table .
One week after stimulation was initiated, the patient began experiencing intermittent crushing substernal chest pain localized to the left lateral sternal border which radiated to the left arm, with associated numbness. The patient reported shortness of breath on exertion and also exhibited Levine’s sign (describing the pain with his fist clenched in front of his chest) on clinical evaluation. Symptoms only occurred upon VNS activation, resolved shortly after VNS deactivation, and did not occur when the device was turned off. His pain, however, was not constant or time locked to periods of stimulation, suggesting that stimulation alone was not sufficient to cause his pain or that it did so variably. Because the patient described angina pain so clearly with further suggestion of cardiac modulation manifest as dyspnea on exertion, the VNS was, therefore, inactivated pending further cardiac workup.
The patient reported that the pseudo-anginal pain was distinct from the typical laryngospasm associated with vagal stimulation which he also experienced but was tolerable. He had no known cardiac history or significant risk factors and was otherwise in excellent health. Given the severity of his symptoms we conducted a full cardiac workup. This included a 12-lead ECG, treadmill stress test echocardiography, and ambulatory ECG monitoring. The workup was negative except for an incomplete right bundle branch block found on ECG and present with or without VNS stimulation. This finding was not considered clinically relevant to the reported symptoms. Baseline ECG tracing can be seen in Fig. .
He subsequently underwent monitored re-activation of his VNS with continuous ECG monitoring in the cardiac laboratory. Stimulation reproduced the substernal chest pain. No new ECG abnormalities were observed either on 12 lead ECG or during an extended halter monitor evaluation. Due to the debilitating nature of the chest pain, the VNS system was removed per the patient’s request.