Twenty-nine-year-old pregnant woman in the 36th week of pregnancy was diagnosed with an abscess of the pilonidal sinus, so the incision and evacuation of the pus was performed under a short-acting intravenous anaesthesia. Following the surgical procedure, the pregnant woman underwent a gynaecological examination monitored by a team of obstetricians. The obstetric and ultrasound findings were normal. From the medical history, it was established that the pregnant woman had a congenital agenesis of her left kidney and her left Fallopian tube, and that she underwent a surgery for an inguinal hernia on the left side in her childhood. When the patient was 16, an adnexectomy on her right side was performed, and the diagnosis of unicornuate uterus was set during the surgical procedure. Her pregnancy is the result of an IVF procedure, has a normal course and is monitored on a regular basis. On the day when the incision was made, the pregnant woman was brought by an ambulance to the emergency maternity outpatient clinic due to abdominal pain. Upon admission, laboratory workup was performed; from the findings: E 4.4; Hb 112, Hct 0.348; L 16.1; T 204; CRP 3.6. A foetal bradycardia 60/min and free fluid in the abdominal cavity were determined by an ultrasound. Given the above, it was decided to complete the pregnancy by an emergency Caesarean section, so an alive premature female infant weighting 2510 g and 45 cm in length, Apgar score 4/7, was born by a breech extraction. During the surgical procedure, a surgeon was called due to abundant fresh bleeding from the upper portion of the abdomen. Because of the necessary exploration of the complete abdomen, the incision was extended to the median portion up to the xiphoid. Abdominal and pelvic organs were exposed, and venous bleeding was found in the hilum of the spleen. Haemostasis was established by placing sutures on venae gastricae breves. Following the surgery, due to the extensive nature of the surgery and according to the recommendation of the anaesthesiologist, the patient was moved to the Intensive Care Unit of the Clinic. During her stay at the Intensive Care Unit, the patient was haemodynamically stable and her respiratory status was stable; thus, the first day following the surgery she was moved to the Maternity Ward. Postoperative therapy: Fragmin 5.000 intravenous units subcutaneously, Methergin 3x1 amp iv., Zepilen 3x1 g for 3 days and Novocef 2 x 500 mg for 5 days. On three occasions, the patient was administered 100 ml of 20 % albumin and 2 doses of preparation of red blood cell concentrates. She was monitored by a team of surgeons, the wound from gluteus incision was dressed regularly. Abdominal ultrasound after the procedure was normal, and there was no free fluid in the abdomen. Subjectively, the patient did not feel any discomforts. The patient was discharged to home care on the 13th day following the caesarean section, with the recommendation of rest and diet rich in proteins. Th.: Novocef 2 x 500 mg and iron and vitamin C supplements. Follow-up examination by a gynaecologist in 2 months was recommended, as well as regular dressing of gluteus incision in accordance with the surgeon’s recommendation. Upon discharge from the hospital, abdominal wound was healing normally, and her gynaecological finding was normal. Histopathological finding of the placenta describes placenta of normal structure for gestation, of weight for 10th percentile, and in the region of the basal decidua bleeding areas can be found located around the blood vessels of the umbilical cord.