An 18-year-old man visited the previous hospital with a chief complaint of black stool and lightheadedness. He had a past medical history of surgery for a congenital skin tag on his buttock when he was 5 years and was noted to have congenital dysplasia of the sacrum. When he visited the hospital, severe anemia (hemoglobin level, 5.6 g/dL) was identified. Upper and lower endoscopy revealed erosions of the duodenal mucosa, and capsule endoscopy revealed a small amount of bleeding in the duodenum bulb. Finally, the angiography revealed duodenal AVM. There were no other lesions in the GI tract that could cause bleeding or anemia, and it was considered that a small amount of continuous bleeding from the duodenal AVM was the cause of the anemia. Thereafter, he was transferred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Upper GI endoscopy revealed mucosal color changes in the duodenal bulb . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a hyper-enhancing duodenal bulb wall, but no other enhancing lesions suspected as AVMs were detected in other areas of the body. Angio-CT findings suggested that the inflow vessel was the inferior pyloric artery (IPA) and superior duodenal artery (SDA), which branches off from the gastroduodenal artery .
Based on these findings, a subtotal stomach-preserving duodenal bulb resection preceded by IPA and SDA ligation to reduce bleeding during surgery was planned. In addition, intraoperative ICG angiography was planned to determine the final resection line. We prepared to perform pancreas-sparing duodenectomy if the resection line of the duodenum indicated by ICG angiography was anorectal to the duodenal minor papilla and pancreaticoduodenectomy if the resection line was over the duodenal papilla. Exploratory laparotomy via midline incision revealed an expanded right gastric vein, which was presumed to be the effect of the increased blood flow due to AVM. However, no abnormalities were observed in the duodenum. To determine the extent of resection, 12.5 mg of ICG (Daiichi Sankyo Co., Japan) was injected, and ICG imaging was performed using an infrared camera system (SPY-PHI portable handheld imager, Striker, USA). Intraoperative ICG angiography clearly demonstrated the lesion of the AVM, and this area was completely resected after IPA and SDA ligation, as planned preoperatively . The cut end of the duodenum was sutured and embedded. The anastomosis between the stomach and the jejunum was made by the anterior colonic route. In addition, the Brown anastomosis was added. The operation time was 221 min, and the estimated blood loss was 60 mL. No intraoperative blood transfusion was required. Pathological findings showed dense vascularity from the layers of the mucosa to the subserosa, which was confirmed as an AVM of the duodenum. In addition, extravascular leakage of red blood cells was observed in the subserosa, which was reasonable to consider as a source of GI bleeding . The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 11. At the 6-month follow-up, he was doing well and denied any signs of re-bleeding.