A previously healthy 45-year-old woman presented with dyspnea on exertion, anorexia, and marked weight loss (from 68 to 51 kg) within the preceding 4 months. She visited her primary care hospital several times and her initial complete blood count (CBC) revealed pancytopenia with a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 10.4 g/dL, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 2370 cells/mm3 (53% neutrophils, 21% lymphocytes, and 14% eosinophils), and a platelet count of 96,000 cells/mm3. Direct Coombs’ test (direct antiglobulin test) was positive (2+). Serum protein electrophoresis, immunofixation, and serum free light chain were all normal. Bone marrow examination revealed normocellular trilineage marrow with normal maturation and a slight to moderate increase in interstitial polytypic plasma cells suggestive of reactive plasmacytosis. She was diagnosed with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and was treated with prednisolone 30 mg/day for 2 weeks. The dose of prednisolone was then increased to 60 mg/day due to the progression of anemia. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) (80/400) at a dosage of 2 tablets 3 times/week was given for primary prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) since starting treatment with prednisolone. Further investigations were performed to investigate the secondary cause of AIHA such as hematologic malignancies particularly lymphoma. Therefore, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the whole abdomen was performed which revealed a matted lobulated soft tissue mass-like lesion (4.0 × 2.7 × 8.8 cm) at the paravertebral region (T6-T9), and no significant intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. She was then referred to our national tertiary referral center so that the identified lesion could be further investigated. Other reported complaints included a non-productive cough and fatigue for 2 weeks prior to referral. Her initial physical examination at our center revealed no fever, no dyspnea or tachypnea, and an oxygen saturation rate of 98% at room air. She was moderately pale, and had oral thrush at the buccal mucosa and pruritic papular eruption on both legs. Other examinations were unremarkable. Oral candidiasis was recognized. Initial CBC revealed pancytopenia with an Hb level of 8.9 g/dL (normal range, 12.0–14.9 g/dL), a WBC count of 2180 cells/mm3 (normal range, 4400–10,300 cells/mm3), with 68% neutrophils, 12% lymphocytes, and 5% eosinophils, and a platelet count of 106,000 cells/mm3 (normal range, 179,000–435,000 cells/mm3). Blood test for anti-HIV was positive with an initial cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4) count of 16 cells/L (3.49%) and HIV viral load of 304,000 copies/mL. Serum cryptococcal antigen test was negative. CT scan of the chest showed an enhancing soft tissue mass-like lesion (3.8 × 6.6 × 9.3 cm) at the right paravertebral region (T5-T10 level), and a 3.1 × 4.6 cm thick-walled cavity lesion at the left lower lung . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed after receiving TMP/SMX prophylaxis for 3 months. The results of BAL fluid analysis were, as follows: WBC count of 126 cells/mm3 (75% lymphocytes, 21% macrophage, and 3% neutrophils). BAL fluid cultures for bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungus were all negative. BAL immunofluorescence assay (IFA) for P. jirovecii was negative, and BAL cytology was negative for malignancy. A CT-guided biopsy of the paravertebral mass was performed and histopathology revealed granulomatous inflammation consisting of dense aggregates of epithelioid cells and macrophages, and scattered foci of pink foamy to granular materials amidst the granulomatous inflammation . Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) staining revealed some thin cystic-like structures that were observed to be morphologically consistent with P. jirovecii ascus-like cystic form . Cultures of paraspinal tissue for bacteria and mycobacteria were all negative. The serum BDG level was not tested as it is not available in our hospital and fungal culture for P. jirovecii was not performed due to the lack of a stable ex vivo culture system. Quantitative PCR targeted mitochondrial large subunit ribosomal RNA (mtLSU rRNA) was used for the detection of P. jirovecii in both BAL fluid and paraffin-embedded tissue of the paraspinal mass using the protocol as previously described [, ]. P. jirovecii was detected only in the paraspinal specimen. Conventional PCR targeted a partial mtLSU rRNA from the paraspinal mass was further performed as previously described and subjected to DNA sequencing to confirm the causative species. The DNA sequence from this patient was 100% identical to P. jirovecii (GenBank accession No. MW530527.1) and was submitted to GenBank under accession. A confirmed diagnosis of extrapulmonary P. jirovecii presenting as a paraspinal mass and P. jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) was established. The patient was treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) at dose of 15 mg/kg/day of TMP and 75 mg/kg/day of SMX for a total of 3 weeks, which was followed by continued secondary prophylaxis using the same medication. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) with dolutegravir (DTG)/tenofovir (TDF)/lamivudine (3TC) (50/300/300) was started and the prednisolone from the primary hospital was discontinued. The patient’s symptoms including non-productive cough, dyspnea on exertion, loss of appetite, and weight loss were dramatically improved after treatment, she had no cough, no anorexia or fatigue, and she gained 4 kg in body weight in one month. A CT scan of the chest performed at 2 months after starting treatment showed a decrease in the size of the paravertebral soft tissue mass and the left lower lung cavitary lesion . Her absolute CD4 count increased to 202 cells/mm3 (10.63%), and her HIV viral load became undetectable. She had no recurrent symptoms after a year of follow-up.