A 53-year-old woman came to our department for a chief complaint of right lumbar discomfort for 3 months. Two months ago, she received sclerotherapy for the renal cyst. No additional discomfort was claimed. B-ultrasonography of the local hospital indicated hydronephrosis and a lower pole cyst of the right kidney. Further contrast-enhanced CT examination was performed, which showed a lower pole cyst of the right kidney of approximately 78 mm × 86 mm in size and hydronephrosis of the right kidney with reduced renal parenchymal perfusion .
After careful preoperative preparation, laparoscopic unroofing of the renal cyst was performed with the agreement of the patient and her family. During the operation, we found a slight deposition of fat around the renal cyst and a thick renal cyst wall. After the excision of the renal cyst wall, we carefully observed and found few indications of a stiffening agent but a small amount of seepage in the base of the cyst, which is not attracted enough attention due to its small volume. However, a persistent urine leakage was observed immediately after surgery, with about 200 ml of drainage fluid per day (creatinine of drainage fluid: 832 umol/l). Then, we attempted to place a double-J ureteral stent and indwell a catheter. Simultaneously, a CT examination was performed, which indicated that the double-J ureteral stent was in place. In addition, from the CT scan, we found that the patient's original hydronephrosis decreased a lot. It is a pity that the patient's urine leakage did not improve in the following weeks.
According to the previous medical history, the intraoperative findings, the prolonged urine leakage, and decreased hydronephrosis in the second CT scan, it was agreed that the patient's preoperative diagnosis should be calyceal diverticulum. Theoretically, once the patient has prolonged urine leakage under this circumstance, open surgery should be carried out earlier because the neck of the calyceal diverticulum is covered with transitional cell epithelium , which makes it difficult to heal. However, the surgical treatment also has its disadvantages, such as more difficult surgery resulting from local adhesions in the surgical area and the high risk of collateral injury and bleeding. In addition, the cost of the patient’s treatment will increase accordingly. After weighing the advantages and disadvantages, the patient accepted our preset conservative protocol and provided informed consent. In addition, the conservative procedure was approved by the Ethics Committee of Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital. The core idea of our conservative treatment is to retain the drainage tube for more than 1 month, then clamp the drainage tube for 1 week, and finally remove it. It is noted that the patient's waist symptoms and body temperature should be mainly observed during the clamping period. If lumbar discomfort is obvious or if fever is present, the drainage tube should be opened immediately.
The patient was hospitalized again about 1 month later. She claimed that the amount of urine leakage remained at about 200 ml per day. Subsequently, the double-J ureteral stent was removed, and the drainage tube was clamped for 1 week. During this period, the lumbar symptoms of the patient were not obvious and the body temperature was normal. Further CT examination showed no obvious perirenal exudation . Then, the drainage tube was removed. Three days later, the patient was discharged.
Three weeks after removing the drainage tube, the patient returned to our clinic. Her incision was completely healed. A follow-up CT scan showed hydronephrosis of the right kidney without perirenal exudation, and the lower pole cyst of the right kidney shrank significantly .