A 22-year-old Iranian woman admitted to the emergency ward of Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Iran, with symptoms of ataxia, dysphasia, paresthesia, and acute numbness of her left upper extremity. She had not history of any serious and remarkable diseases. Four weeks before her current hospital admission, she received the first dose of AZD1222 Vaxzevria (AstraZeneca) COVID-19 vaccine, and her symptoms began three weeks later.
On examination, the patient was alert and oriented. Her temperature, O2 saturation, and respiratory rate were normal. But her systolic blood pressure was 180 mmHg. Initial blood tests revealed hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, normal range 120-160 g/dL, reticulocyte index 3.2% >2.5%) and a low platelet count (45×109/L, normal range 150–400×109/L). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was high (77 mm/hr, normal range 0-30 mm/hr) and D-dimer was mildly elevated (424 ng/mL). Also, the serum fibrinogen was within the normal range (235 mg/dL). Her peripheral blood smear (PBS) test showed 5-6 percent schistocytes. Thus, the PBS confirmed thrombocytopenia with microangiopathic hemolytic anemia characterized by schistocytes. Based on these early findings, aTTP with cerebral thrombosis was the initial diagnosis.
Further tests demonstrated an increase in the following parameters: total bilirubin (2.2 mg/dL, normal range 0.3-1.2 mg/dL; direct bilirubin 1.8 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (809 U/L, normal range 81–234 U/L), uric acid (9.5 mg/dL, normal range 2.7-7.3 mg/dL for adult female), and serum creatinine (6.8 mg/dL, normal range 0.59-1.04 mg/dL for adult female). Fluorescent antinuclear antibody (FANA) and lupus anticoagulant were both negative. Chest x-ray, cardiac echo, and renal sonography were regular. The nasopharyngeal swab RT-PCR testing for COVID-19 was negative.
Suspected of having a stroke based on the symptoms of her neurological disorder, a brain MRI was requested. Brain MRI (without gadolinium) reported multiple acute infarction areas in the left temporoparietal, right temporofrontal, and right parietal cortex . According to creatinine rise with thrombocytopenia and brain infarction along with hematuria and proteinuria, a kidney needle biopsy (KNB) was asked. The KNB reported glomerular changes like membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) with obliterated small arteries consistent with thrombotic microangiopathy .
The diagnosis of aTTP was later confirmed by ADAMTS13 activity assay and inhibitor profile. ADAMTS13 activity was 0.4% (<10 %) and ADAMTS13 inhibitor was positive (6.5), which is highly indicative of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. The platelet factor 4 (PF4)-heparin antibodies, which are found in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, were negative.
Treatment and Outcome
: The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of Shariati Hospital and treatment was started. During hospitalization, she underwent 22 times plasmapheresis with fresh frozen plasma along with 3 pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg/kg and rituximab in the first week and then prednisolone 60 mg daily. The procedures were well tolerated and increased the platelet count to 365×109/L. The platelet counts also remained within the normal range after cessation of plasmapheresis.
Due to the presence of neurological symptoms, the patient was examined by the neurology service once she was admitted to the hospital. After examination, the patient was prescribed aspirin and clopidogrel and was not required to receive a tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). Also, to manage the creatinine rise with proteinuria, three times of hemodialysis were performed for the patient which led to creatinine decline to 2 mg/dL. Four weeks after hospitalization, the patient was discharged on reduction dosage of oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg and aspirin for a month later.