The recipient was a 40-year-old Japanese man that was diagnosed with proteinuria during a previous medical examination at 28 years of age. However, he did not receive any form of treatment for this condition and had not received any kind of medical care until 38 years of age, when he sought treatment for severe fatigue and anorexia. Laboratory tests showed a serum creatinine (S-Cr) level of 1113.8 μmol/L and serum-UA (S-UA) level of 743.5 μmol/L. He was referred to the nephrology department of another hospital to receive hemodialysis. The etiology of his renal failure was unknown because a renal biopsy was not performed.
Two years later, he underwent kidney transplantation. The patient’s donor was his living sister, and the clinical course after transplantation was uneventful. Three weeks after kidney transplantation, his S-Cr was 100.7 μmol/L, and he had a slightly low S-UA (148.7 μmol/L; normal: 220–463.9 μmol/L) with a fractional excretion of UA (FEUA) of 20.8% (normal: < 10%). A physical examination of the patient did not reveal any abnormalities.
The donor was the patient’s 42-year-old sister. Before donation, her S-UA and FEUA levels were 101.1 μmol/L and 15.8%, respectively. Other clinical data were normal . There was no history of kidney stones, acute renal failure, and/or hypouricemia. Their father was alive and healthy, and his medical history did not indicate any kidney dysfunction, including urolithiasis and acute renal failure. However, their mother had two episodes of urolithiasis at 19 years of age.
Based on these findings, we suspected that the donor had RHUC. After obtaining the informed consent from both the donor and the recipient, we performed next-generation sequencing with a gene panel containing RHUC-associated genes on both of them, including SLC22A12, the most common causative gene of RHUC and SLC2A9 . We found a missense heterozygous G to A substitution in position 269 in the exon 1 (NM_144585.4:c.269G > A (p.Arg90His)) in the donor, but not in the recipient. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics variant classifications for this variant are shown in Supplemental Material .
The recipient had an excellent transplantation outcome: two years after the surgery, he had no major complications, including urolithiasis or exercise-induced acute renal failure. The recipient’s S-UA level was 231.9 and 226.0 μmol/L, 3 months and 1 year after transplantation, respectively. His S-Cr level did not significantly change from his levels 3 weeks after transplant, and was 96.3 and 93.7 μmol/L, 3 months and 1 year after transplantation, respectively. His FEUA decreased from 20.8% before the surgery, to 11.7 and 12.4%, 3 months and 1 year after transplantation, respectively. Therefore, we hypothesized the presence of donor-recipient chimerism in the tubular epithelium, played a role in the UA reabsorption process. FISH of the allograft biopsies taken 3-months and 1-year post-transplantation detected the presence of the Y chromosome in the tubular epithelium. The protocol of FISH is shown in Supplemental Material . Among the three biopsies, no evidence of T cell-mediated rejection, nor structural anomalies of the glomerulus, tubules, interstitium, and vessels were observed. Y chromosome-positive cells were detected mainly in the interstitium and some tubules in the graft. The interstitium typically contains white blood cells; given this, we concluded the Y chromosome-positive cells were white blood cells. Most tubular epithelial cells were of donor origin, but we also found chimeric cells . After the transplantation, the donor’s S-Cr increased to approximately 88.4 μmol/L, with an FEUA of approximately 20%. She did not have any complications following the kidney donation.