A 31-year-old Caucasian man with no significant medical history presented to our hospital with a three-week history of epigastric pain radiating to his back. The pain was associated with non-bloody diarrhea and a 16-pound weight loss. His physical examination showed that he had scleral icterus with yellowish discoloration of his skin and mucous membranes. An abdominal examination revealed epigastric tenderness without rebound. Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin 13.9 g/dL, white blood cell count 10.6/μL, serum lipase 109 U/L, serum amylase 10 U/L, total bilirubin 10.6 mg/dl (direct and indirect fractions 8 mg/dL and 2.6 mg/dL, respectively). His fasting blood glucose level was elevated (> 250 mg/dL) in multiple readings. His liver enzymes were elevated (aspartate aminotransferase 110 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 231 U/L and alkaline phosphatase 589 U/L). Tests for hepatitis A, B and C were negative. The tumor marker CA 19-9 level was elevated at 3282 U/mL.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a mass in the pancreatic head measuring 3.7 cm×3.2 cm abutting the portal vein. This finding was also seen in the endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). A fine-needle aspiration biopsy done at the time of EUS showed atypical ductal epithelial cells, which raised our clinical suspicions of adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) revealed mild narrowing of the distal common bile duct with proximal dilation and poor visualization of the pancreatic duct. After performing sphincterotomy, we placed a biliary stent, which led to significant improvement in the patient's symptoms and bilirubin level. He was also started on insulin therapy for his newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus. A presumptive diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was made by the referring physician. However, upon review by the medical oncology department, and because of his age, general condition and lack of family history of pancreatic cancer, the patient was referred to a tertiary care center for further evaluation. A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen was repeated and showed a sausage-shaped pancreas with delayed rim enhancement. His serum IgG4 level was elevated at 365 mg/dL. A flexible sigmoidoscopy revealed features suggestive of ulcerative colitis (UC).
On the basis of the clinical, laboratory and imaging findings, a definite diagnosis of AIP was made and the patient was started on prednisone 40 mg/day. After four weeks, his biliary stent was removed, as the narrowing of the biliary duct had resolved. The dose of prednisone was tapered and stopped after 12 weeks. His insulin therapy was also stopped, as his blood glucose level had returned to normal. The patient did not receive treatment for UC, as he was asymptomatic. He is currently doing well.