A 66-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux presented with two days of right-sided abdominal pain, chills, nausea, and emesis. He was tachycardic but afebrile and had significant right upper quadrant (RUQ) tenderness. Blood work revealed leukocytosis, an elevated lactate of 3.7, and elevated bilirubin of 2.0. CT-scan revealed gallbladder wall thickening and pericholecystic fluid, wall thickening and fat stranding of the duodenum and ascending colon, and a mesenteric soft tissue mass. He was resuscitated, placed on bowel rest, and started on intravenous ertapenem at a dose of 1 g daily. Over the next 36 hours, clinical improvement was observed and WBC and CRP started to normalize. Repeat CT-scan with oral and intravenous contrast showed improvement of the RUQ inflammatory process and revealed a diverticulum of the second portion of the duodenum-associated inflammatory changes and a large pseudoaneurysm of the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. The scan also delineated the previously noted soft tissue mass as a stable hematoma . Gastroenterology was consulted with a plan to perform endoscopic evaluation after clinical improvement and resolution of the hemorrhage. The patient further improved clinically and was discharged on a clear liquid diet and oral antibiotics. Repeat scan three days later demonstrated an interval increase in size of the pseudoaneurysm . He was asymptomatic, but due to the growth of the lesion, interventional radiology was consulted. During angiography, the celiac access was cannulated and the gastroduodenal artery was reached. Selective angiography demonstrated predominant inflow to the pseudoaneurysm from the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery. Therefore, the superior mesenteric artery was cannulated showing a replaced right hepatic artery. This artery hindered access to the branch feeding the pseudoaneurysm, and on multiple attempts, the guidewire could not be advanced. There was no active hemorrhage, and the patient remained hemodynamically stable. He was transferred to a specialized interventional radiology facility. On a first attempt again, the inflow to the pseudoaneurysm could not be accessed; however, during a second attempt two days later, occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm inflow was obtained. The patient recovered without any complication and was well at his six months of follow-up. He had no further episodes of duodenal diverticulitis. Interval endoscopy confirmed the presence of a large duodenal diverticulum without inflammation.