A 40-year-old woman was admitted to the department of surgery at the authors’ hospital with complaints of lower abdominal pain and diarrhea. She also exhibited fever and abdominal distension. She had no relevant surgical history and was being treated for endometriosis with low-dose estrogen progestin (LEP). Although her white blood cell count was normal, C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were extremely elevated (20.36 mg/dL). Abdominal ultrasonography revealed dilationand extensive fluid retention in the small intestine. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed appendiceal wall thickening with fecalith , edema in the cecum, dilation of the small intestine in the pelvis , and ascites around the liver. There was no abscess in the pelvis or constriction of the bowel. Vaginal cultures for gonorrhea and chlamydia were negative. Initial diagnosis was suspicious for paralytic ileus caused by pelvic peritonitis due to appendicitis rather than gynecological infection. Conservative treatment with antibiotics and an ileus tube were selected for two reasons. First, the probability of ileocecal resection was high due to cecum edema. Second, she was at high risk for thrombosis due to the use of LEP for endometriosis. Conservative treatment was highly effective. On day 9 of admission, CRP levels dramatically improved (0.73 mg/dL). The patient resumed a regular diet 5 days after the start of treatment and, thereafter, her clinical course was uneventful, and she was discharged 12 days after admission. Five days after discharge, she was re-examined and laboratory investigations performed at the outpatient clinic revealed normal CRP levels (0.04 mg/dL). On contrast-enhanced abdominal CT, which was performed 2 weeks after discharge, swelling in the appendix was improved, although the fecalith remained near the appendix root . There were no CT findings suggestive of malignancy. She underwent laparoscopic-assisted interval appendectomy without preoperative colonoscopy 2 months after starting treatment. The operative findings revealed no adhesion between the appendix and surrounding organs. An elastic mass was confirmed in the cecum near the root of the appendix. Accordingly, partial cecal resection was performed to excise the mass. The total duration of the operation was 73 min, and intraoperative blood loss was minimal. Macroscopically, a mass similar to a submucosal tumor was found in the cecum near the appendix root . The fecalith, measuring 12 mm in size, was detected in the submucosal layer . No appendiceal swelling was observed. Histopathologically, inflammation had spread around the fecalith, with no malignancy . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5.