We report the case of a 49-year-old Arabic Tunisian man without prior history of diabetes mellitus who presented with rapidly progressive renal failure. Her medical history was otherwise non-contributory. He denied the usage of any drugs.
On physical examination, he was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 120/70 mm Hg and a pulse of 100 beats/min without orthostatic changes. The chest test was normal and he had no murmurs or rubs. He had 4+ oedema of his lower extremities. His skin, scalp, oral mucosa, and genitals were free of rash or other lesions. The remainder of his physical examination was unremarkable.
His blood urea nitrogen level was 33.6 mmol/l and creatinine level was 613 µmol/l, where as electrolyte levels were normal. Glucose level was 5.1 mmol/l and uric acid was 755 µmol/l. Serum protein electrophoresis confirmed the presence of hypoalbuminemia (22.8 g/l), the total protein was 56 g/l and demonstrated polyclonal elevation of the gamma-globulins (13 g/l). The cholesterol was 4.1 µmol/l and triglycerides was 1.1 mmol/l. Liver function tests were normal. A 24-hour urine collection showed 4.74 g of protein. Urine microscopy showed the presence of red blood cells (70000/ml). Haemoglobin was 7.1 g/dl and hematocrit was 23%, white blood cell count was 8000/µl, and platelets were 325000/µl. coagulation study results were normal.
Serological evaluation included negative test results for hepatitis B and C, serum antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and anti-glomerular basement membrane. C3, C4 and CH50 were all in normal ranges. There was no evidence of dysproteinemia on serum or urine electrophoresis. Ultrasonography showed normal-sized kidneys with normal echogenicity.
Regarding the history, the renal function worsened rapidly from 321 to 613 µmol/l in few days. The urine was 3+ for protein and 2+ for hematuria. Our patient did not have a prior diagnosis of DM or other clinical or biological manifestations of other systemic disease which could be responsible for the nephropathy. These findings led to the diagnosis of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis and realization of renal biopsy.
The patient was diagnosed as having rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis and he underwent an ultrasonography-guided renal biopsy. Light microscopic examination demonstrated thickening of the glomerular capillary basement membranes with expansion of the mesangial area and hyalinosis of same afferent and efferent arterioles. Immunofluorescence did not show anything significant. Electronic microscopy was not performed. The renal biopsy specimen revealed nodular (Kimmelsteil-Wilson) glomerulosclerosis lesions characteristic of diabetes. Therefore, we complete investigation by fundoscopic ophthalmoscopy witch revealed grade 2 diabetic retinopathy.
After further evaluation, we don’t found classical progression factors of diabetic nephropathy. The patient has end-stage renal disease, so he actually was regular dialyzed in our department.