An otherwise healthy 45-year-old woman with known Lynch syndrome (germline mutation in MLH1) presented in 2014 with abdominal bloating. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 4 cm pancreatic body mass encasing the portal vein, splenomesenteric confluence, and common hepatic artery with enlarged periportal lymph nodes present. Biopsy revealed pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The patient was deemed to have unresectable disease and treated with FOLFIRINOX (5-fluorouracil, folinic acid, irinotecan, oxaliplatin) and FOLFIRI with stable disease burden and declining tumor markers . She also received stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) 3300 cGy in five fractions.
In 2015, CT scan revealed progression of disease, along with a rise in CA19-9 and clinical symptoms. The patient was enrolled in a clinical trial (NCT 02471846) of an anti-PD-L1 antibody in combination with an IDO1 inhibitor (navoximod). She demonstrated a partial response as defined by RECIST 1.1 criteria with declining tumor markers and prompt resolution of symptoms. In 2017, 22 months after beginning therapy, CT scan revealed an increasing left ovarian cystic mass. There were no other sites of progressive disease. The patient underwent a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, appendectomy, omentectomy and pelvic lymphadenopathy. Pathology was consistent with a metastasis from the pancreas involving the endometrium and left ovary. Thereafter, the patient continued with PD-1 blockade therapy off protocol with no further progressive disease.
Tumor mutation profile and burden were determined through MSK-IMPACT, a next generation sequencing assay of somatic mutations in key cancer genes . TMB was 50.2 mutations per megabase (mt/Mb) in the pretreatment sample and 21.1 mt/Mb in the acquired resistance sample ; both tumors were computationally consistent with microsatellite-instability high. Only the KRAS G12D and RNF43 G659Vfs*41 mutations were retained from the pre-treatment tumor in the treatment-resistant tumor. No copy number alterations were detected in either the pre-treatment or the acquired resistance tumor sample. There was no loss-of-function mutations or loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the HLA genes, B2M, PTEN, JAK1, JAK2, or TAP1.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the metastatic sample confirmed that the tumor was MMR-D, with loss of MLH1 and PMS2 expression . Histologically and immunophenotypically, the tumor exhibited features consistent with a metastasis of pancreatic origin including negative IHC staining for PAX8 , a marker typically associated with a Mullerian primary.
We were unable to assess immune cell infiltration with IHC in the pre-treatment tumor due to insufficient tissue. However, for the resected treatment-resistant metastasis, we found high levels of CD8+ T cells and PD-1 positive immune cells, with a moderate level of PD-L1 expression in both the immune cells and the tumor cells .