A 10-year-old boy presented to the outpatient department with right eye ptosis, restricted eye movements, and diplopia. It developed at 4 months of age and was acute in onset, but the mother notices it a few weeks later. Initially, it was mild but right eye ptosis progressively worsened over the past few years until the patient has difficulty opening the right eye. The patient had not progressively fatigability over the course of the day.
The consultant ophthalmologist noted no aggravating or relieving factors. Ptosis was associated with pain and tearing in the right eye periodically, as shown in . The patient was born full-term via normal vaginal delivery in the hospital. The patient prenatal and antenatal course was uncomplicated, and the mother took regular prenatal care. The patient is fully vaccinated, and his past medical and surgical history was not significant. The systemic review was unremarkable for any central nervous system (CNS), cardiovascular or systemic illness. Family history was significant for bilateral cataracts in paternal grandfather at the age of 65.
No Drug History or Allergies was reported was by the family.
Ophthalmological examination was done and findings have been shown in .
Initial laboratory investigation including complete blood count, C reactive protein, and blood random sugar was unremarkable, as shown in .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain has been ordered for intracranial anomalies reporting no obstructive lesion in the orbit and anterior cranial fossa as given in .
Further tests were ordered for hypercoagulability and systemic illness and the results have been shown in .
A high protein c level is not significant in the case of children. Despite the detailed history and laboratory workup, the exact cause of the disease remained unknown, and the condition has been labeled as idiopathic. Patching of the right eye has been done but the condition did not improve, patient family was interested in surgical procedures for the condition. The patient was operated on for ptosis through a sling procedure and the patient was called for follow-up after 2 and 4 weeks. As a low level of hemoglobin suggested mild anemia the patient was prescribed ferrous sulfate 8mg once daily for 4 months.
At 4 weeks follow up patient diplopia was relieved up to some extent and the patient was instructed for regular follow-up.
Our Case Report is in compliant with SCARE 2020 Guidelines . A complete SCARE 2020 checklist has been provided as a supplementary file.