A five-year-old Caucasian male was referred to us with a two-year history of blurry vision and headaches; he had previously been evaluated by two ophthalmologists who diagnosed LHON. Our initial exam was on 24 October 2016. On exam, BCVA with Cycloplegic refraction were OD = −0.75-0.25 × 120 = 20/100, and OS = −0.50-0.50 × 70 = 20/100. Stereopsis was 400 seconds of arc. No relative afferent pupillary defect was noted. Intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg in both eyes. Pachymetry were 520/520 in both eyes.
On fundus exam, he had 3-4+ optic disc pallor with 0.75 cupping. Macular OCT showed extensive macular thinning with normal structure . Ganglion cell layer (GCL) OCT revealed nearly complete GCL loss including central loss OU [Figures and ]. This GCL loss was responsible for macular thinning. Three-dimensional OCT of the optic disc showed optic atrophy and our Pattern 4 IIH, 75% specific for IICP . In Pattern 4 IIH, there remains a hint of temporal wings, secondary to cerebrospinal fluid in the temporal retina. The average nerve fiber layer (ANFL) were 66 microns OD and 54 microns OS. Using a technique we have previously described , we measured 400 microns of papilledema in the right eye and 560 microns in the left eye on OCT. Our routine optic neuropathy workup for adults was performed. Vitamin D level was low and treated while Vitamin B12 levels were normal (678). Tests for collagen vascular disease, parathyroid hormone and Lyme disease were negative. Genetic tests for mutations in the DNA of mitochondria that are associated with LHON, including MT-ND1, MT-ND4, MT-ND4L, and MT-ND6 genes, were sent to another laboratory. Interestingly, 85% of females and 50% of males with these mutated genes never show signs of LHON.
Brain MRI was considered normal by radiologist. However, in one axial cut, we interpreted more than 2 mm of CSF in the optic nerve near the globe [Figures and ] and a small hygroma, which is very unusual at a young age and may be a sign of increased ICP . With a tentative diagnosis of PTC, the patient was referred to a neurologist for a spinal tap. The opening intracranial pressure in lateral decubitus position was 180 mm-H2O (normal range in children is up to 210 mm-H2O).
Although this pressure was not considered high in recent reference intervals, other clinical signs were compatible with IIH, and there was no risk in initiating treatment with acetazolamide (125 mg PO QID). Two months later, the boy's headaches were completely absent and his BCVA had improved to 20/30 in each eye. At a four-month follow up, BCVA was stable at 20/30 per eye and stereopsis had improved to 80 seconds of arc. Repeat OCT of the macula showed consistent thinning as before . OCT of GCL showed improvement in GCL with a central opening, explaining the improved visual acuity in both eyes [Figures and ]. On optic nerve OCT, ANFL decreased to 40 microns OD and 44 microns OS .
Exactly one year later, VA and OCTs were stable, despite some increase in ANFL from the original improvement seen after four months of treatment, and some non-significant thickening of macula and thus increased GCL. Stereopsis improved to 50 seconds of arc. The patient remained on 125 mg Diamox (acetazolamide) PO QID.
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors have no conflict of interest in this article.