A 67-year-old male presented with complaints of a headache. The patient was a previous smoker and had a medical history of hypertension and dyslipidemia. Although no neurological deficit was apparent, a stroke event was suspected. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right unruptured DPICAAn. A lesion, which was suspected to be a nidus of an AVM, was also detected in the left upper cerebellar hemisphere. The lesion in the left cerebellar hemisphere revealed hypointensity on T2-star image, indicating past hemorrhage. We performed digital subtraction angiography (DSA) to examine the DPICAAn and the possible nidus in the left cerebellar hemisphere. The DPICAAn was located in the telovelotonsillar segment of the right PICA. While the left PICA was agenesis, the right PICA perfused the bilateral inferior cerebellar hemisphere . The lesion in the left upper cerebellar hemisphere was a nidus of the cerebellar AVM fed by the right PICA and the left superior cerebellar artery (SCA), draining to the transverse sinus through the tentorial sinus . The Spetzler–Martin classification was grade 1. Reconstructed three-dimensional computed tomography angiography and venography (CTAV) revealed that the nidus was located medially on the tentorial surface of the cerebellum, and the DPICAAn was located beneath the left biventral lobule near the fourth ventricle . Surgical treatment for the DPICAAn and the cerebellar AVM in the left cerebellar hemisphere was planned to avoid a hemorrhagic event.
The patient was placed in the prone position. We selected a linear midline skin incision and midline suboccipital approach. The left occipital artery (OA) was harvested when an OA–PICA bypass was required. After craniotomy, the dura of the cerebellar convexity was cut and retracted superiorly. With caudal retraction of the cerebellum, the nidus was easily detected. We coagulated and cut the feeders from the SCA and the PICA. Next, the nidus was removed after the drainers of the tentorial sinus were cut . Next, we opened the left uvulotonsillar space and exposed the right PICA from the cortical segment to the telovelotonsillar segment. In addition, the DPICAAn was exposed . We successfully performed neck clipping of the DPICAAn with 2 clips .
DSA performed 11 days postoperatively revealed the clipping of the DPICAAn and the disappearance of the cerebellar AVM . After 18 days of the operation, the patient was discharged from the hospital. No recurrence of the DPICAAn and cerebellar AVM was confirmed with MRI performed 1 year after surgery.