A 74 year-old Caucasian female never-smoker initially presented with a pleural effusion and was diagnosed with invasive adenocarcinoma following a pleural biopsy. The pleural biopsy performed revealed dense fibrous tissue with invasive adenocarcinoma with mucin production and associated psammomatous calcifications. The patient was initially treated with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab with good response, and she continued on maintenance bevacizumab for four years after diagnosis. Subsequently treatment was switched to pemetrexed but had to be stopped due to secondary fatigue and failure to thrive. Molecular (EGFR/ALK) testing was carried out on tissue procured from the initial right pleural biopsy. Using this sample with 35 % viable tumor tissue, the patient was found to be both EGFR wild-type and ALK-negative by FISH.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the patient had marginal progression of her right pleural rind along with slow progressive growth of right chest wall nodule. She also received palliative radiation to her right chest nodule at this time. In year six, a re-biopsy was carried out on the chest wall skin, and the results indicated the presence of a well differentiated adenocarcinoma, with mucinous features. Immunohistochemistry stains were positive for nuclear thyroid transcription factor-1 and negative for estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, which were consistent with a lung primary tumor. The tissue obtained was analyzed by NGS to identify potential actionable mutations. NGS testing results (Foundation Medicine, Inc., MA) indicated that the tumor was ALK-rearrangement positive for EIF2AK3-ALK fusion, and the patient received crizotinib treatment for 19 months. The patient responded well to crizotinib in the first 12 months of treatment , with significant interval decrease in the pleural based tumor, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and subcutaneous metastatic deposits. Continued decreases in the size of nodules associated with the right pleural-based tumor, mediastinal lymphadenopathy and subcutaneous metastatic deposits was seen, followed by stable disease until 16 months into treatment, when CT showed disease progression. This manifested as an increase in right diaphragmatic pleural-based masses, an increase in right lateral chest wall tumor, and an increase in subcarinal lymphadenopathy (from prior study). 18 months after the start of crizotinib treatment, another CT scan showed a significant response (this was the last CT scan while on crizotinib treatment), with significant interval decrease in size of diaphragmatic pleural-based masses and minimal interval decrease in pleural thickening as described above. Despite the patient’s overall pronounced response to crizotinib, the treatment was eventually discontinued due to disease progression and gastrointestinal adverse events of Grade 3 nausea and vomiting.
Treatment with orally administered ceritinib at a starting dose of 450 mg/day was initiated two months after crizotinib treatment ended. This ceritinib dose was administered with food; meals were generally relatively bland and small in size (taken three times a day), and red meat and spice-free. Ceritinib treatment is being well tolerated, and no gastrointestinal adverse events (nausea, vomiting, or related bowel problems) have been reported to date. Proactive treatment regimens have been reported as effective in the management of gastrointestinal AEs in patients taking ceritinib , but regimens of this type were not required for this patient, who was treated with ceritinib 450 mg/day with food, and are not currently considered necessary for her future treatment. Overall, the patient has reported suffering from minimal side effects with the exception of some bloating and rhinorrhea. The patient has also shown a good response to ceritinib, as demonstrated by CT scans , and treatment is currently ongoing. There was no central nervous system (CNS) involvement.