A 23-year-old female patient presented with lymphoedema of the right leg, in which she rapidly developed erysipelas with a fever up to 39.5°C. Laboratory testing at admission revealed a severe leucocytosis (18.62 × 109 g/L, reference: 4.0–9.0 × 109 g/L) with leftward shift, a high C-reactive protein (12.1 mg/dL, reference: <0.5 mg/dL), and increased procalcitonin (13.2 ng/mL, reference: <0.1 ng/mL).
The patient has been affected by the lymphoedema since birth. After having suffered from an infection in the right leg caused by a contaminated blister at the age of eight, she repeatedly evolved similar episodes of erysipelas since adolescence. The infections originated from her right groyne encroaching into the lower extremity and partially leading to severe and life-threatening septicaemia. There was also a distinct association between the onset of infection and the onset of her menstruation cycle. Additionally, she developed a deep vein thrombosis within the same leg at the age of 15. Her family history was unremarkable, especially in regard to inherited cardiovascular or lymphatic diseases.
With the use of intravenous penicillin (6 g ampicillin/3 g sulbactam per day), her fever defervesced and there was a rapid decline in her inflammatory markers over the next 5 days. After 1 week, clinical inspection showed the underlying enlargement of the right extremity due to the lymphoedema with no remaining sign of infection . Close inspection of the skin revealed multiple cutaneous capillary malformations of the fingers, right elbow, and right thigh . Because of the close association between the onset of infections and her menstruation endometriosis was suspected. However, clinical work-up including referral to the Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics for consultation and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging did not confirm the suspected diagnosis. Moreover, arteriovenous fistulae within the right lower extremity, pathognomonic for Parkes–Weber syndrome, were angiographically excluded. Absence of major lymphatics of the right leg with consecutively severely impaired and prolonged dermal lymphatic backflow could be visualized by Single-Photon-Emission-Computed-Tomography using Tc99m-Nanocoll as tracer. In contrast, the left leg demonstrated normal lymphatic drainage via the major lymph duct . The patient was discharged with a long-term prophylactic antibiotic therapy of phenoxymethylpenicillin (2 × 106 international units per day) as well as recommendation for decongestive lymphatic therapy and consequent skin care. Future autologous lymph node transplantation as a possible treatment option will be discussed with the patient at a dedicated surgical institution.
DNA analysis by next-generation sequencing identified the heterozygous frameshift variant c.2600delC, p.(Pro867Hisfs*4) in RASA1 (NM_002890.3) in DNA isolated from blood lymphocytes . The variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing in a buccal swap. Genetic testing of the patient’s parents was recommended but declined at that point in time. Since cerebral arteriovenous malformations were reported in patients with mutations in RASA1, vascular anomalies were excluded by magnetic resonance angiography.