A healthy 29-year-old G1P0 at 39w5d was admitted for labor induction secondary to decreased fetal movement and indeterminate fetal heart rate tracing. She has no past medical (significant for baseline anemia (hemoglobin of 9.0) during pregnancy) or surgical history. Her labor induction involved a single dosage of 25 mcg of Misoprostol per vagina followed by cervical Foley insertion with Oxytocin administration for approximately 30 hours. She underwent a primary cesarean delivery for Category II fetal heart rate tracing and arrest of dilation at 5 centimeters. The cesarean delivery was performed without complication.
On postoperative day one, the patient was febrile (38.8°C), hypotensive (80-95/40-55), and tachycardic (120-140). The patient was diagnosed with sepsis from endomyometritis and was started on intravenous ampicillin, gentamycin, and clindamycin. Sepsis workup included blood and urine cultures, laboratory studies, and chest x-ray. Laboratory studies indicated hemoglobin of 7.0 and she underwent a transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells with an appropriate rise to hemoglobin of 9.3. On postoperative day two the patient was hemodynamically stable but still remained febrile (T Max 39.3°C). The urine culture and blood cultures were positive for Escherichia coli. Infectious disease (ID) consultation recommended a new antibiotic regimen of intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam. Sensitivities of the organism demonstrated a multidrug resistant (MDR) Escherichia coli and the regimen was changed to intravenous meropenem. On postoperative day three, a transabdominal ultrasound showed no retained products of conception, a thin endometrial stripe, and no evidence of endometrial abscess. Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the Abdomen and Pelvis was performed later that day and demonstrated a 2.6 x 2.5 cm defect by the cesarean delivery hysterotomy below the fascia with fluid, small amount of complex abdominopelvic ascites with few gas bubbles. No urinary tract pathology was evident on imaging.
ID recommended additional oral metronidazole and heparin therapeutic anticoagulation for concerns of septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. The patient continued to be febrile the next 24 hours and repeat CT imaging demonstrated the 2.6 cm wound defect with a new abscess measuring 3.3 x 0.9 along the anterior aspect of the uterus and in the rectouterine space . The uterine endometrium appeared heterogeneous with one foci of gas. The oral metronidazole was discontinued and vancomycin was started. The patient continued to have fevers for the next 48 hours and was counseled for hysterectomy. The patient consented to the procedure and underwent an exploratory laparotomy, abdominal washout, total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, and Jackson Pratt drain placement on postoperative day nine after her initial primary cesarean section. Intraoperatively, there was purulent ascites with a severely necrotic uterus.
After the hysterectomy, the patient remained on meropenem and vancomycin. Cultures obtained from surgery grew primarily Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis. After the hysterectomy, the bacteremia resolved, but fevers continued through postoperative day five after hysterectomy. CT imaging performed showed two pelvic abscesses that were ultrasound-guided drained with pigtail placement. The patient remained afebrile with several consecutive negative blood cultures. The drain was removed and the patient was discharged on postoperative day eleven on Bactrim and Augmentin for one week. At her postoperative check, she was doing well and at her six-week visit she had healed completely.