The patient is a male in his 50s with C1–C4 tetraplegia from a motor vehicle accident in the 1980s. Similar to most persons with complete tetraplegia, he has a neurogenic bowel managed by a colostomy, a neurogenic bladder managed with a suprapubic catheter, and neuropathic pain. He also has had a chronic perineal wound for at least 10 years. His only other co-morbidity is diabetes mellitus, which was diagnosed more than 12 years ago and is controlled with metformin. His routine medications include oxybutynin, tizanidine, and senna. He developed an ITB pump infection requiring replacement in 2002 and again in 2010. He was reportedly bed-bound for about one year after each pump removal until the next pump could be implanted. His usual baclofen pump rate is 300.1 mcg/day. His spouse is his primary caregiver.
In 2018 on his third ITB pump, he was found to have skin erosion at the ITB pump site with no signs or symptoms of infection . He underwent explantation and re-implantation of the pump into a deeper fat pocket in the left lower quadrant. Intraoperatively, he was found to have cloudy fluid around the pump, and cultures grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, diphtheroids, and C. parapsilosis. Vancomycin powder was left behind in the pump pocket, and the patient was treated with 4 weeks of intravenous (IV) cefepime followed by ceftriaxone to cover for possible methicillin-susceptible staph aureus (MSSA) meningitis concurrently with 2 weeks of high-dose fluconazole for Candida infection and followed by trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for suppressive therapy.
In 2019, the patient was again treated with high-dose fluconazole for suspected Candida pump infection. Neurosurgery and Infectious Disease specialists monitored him with serial C-reactive protein (CRP) measurements. CRP level initially was 3.1 mg/dl and fluctuated to as high as 6.6 mg/dl for over 26 months. Fluoro-guided lumbar puncture was attempted to obtain cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) for culture but was unsuccessful due to the patient’s diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). In 2020, the pump was repositioned again due to concern for impending skin erosion since the pump appeared to be rising up against his skin . A swab of the pump pocket at that time revealed Candida metapsilosis, and the patient was treated with 2 months of fluconazole.
In 2021, the patient presented with fever, hypotension, leukocytosis, and elevated CRP (24.5 mg/dl). He had no mental status changes and no meningeal signs aside from a headache, which he reported as chronic. Blood cultures were positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae. Urinalysis was concerning for possible urinary tract infection (UTI). Interventional radiology (IR) was unable to perform lumbar puncture due to complicated anatomy from DISH.
The following radiological studies were done:Chest X-ray was negative. Computer tomography (CT) of the abdomen with contrastSubtle mild heterogeneity of the kidney enhancement left greater than right, which could indicate pyelonephritis. No discrete abscess. Mild bladder wall thickening, which is stable from prior exam. Gallbladder wall thickening with mild pericholecystic inflammatory stranding without definite gallstone. This is worsened in appearance when compared with a prior study in 2019, and cholecystitis cannot be excluded. Trace bilateral pleural effusions and trace perihepatic ascites. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brainNo acute intracranial findings or abnormal enhancement. No leptomeningeal enhancement. Mild diffuse dural enhancement without dural thickening similar to prior, nonspecific, and likely within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasoundDiffuse nonspecific gallbladder wall thickening measuring up to 7 mm. There is no additional sonographic evidence of cholecystitis. Gallbladder wall thickening may be related to hepatic adjacent disease or fluid status. Diffusely echogenic liver consistent with hepatic steatosis.
At this point, the differential diagnosis for bacteremia with Klebsiella pneumonia included:Intra-abdominal source, such as Klebsiella pneumonia, is known to translocate from the gut, biliary tree, and genitourinary tract. Cholecystitis—however, hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan resulted in normal gallbladder imaging. Pyelonephritis or complex UTI was considered given the recent treatment of UTI, but urine culture showed mixed flora. Perineal wound infection—wound culture grew low levels of mixed flora. Pump infection/meningitis—IR was unable to perform a fluoro-guided lumbar puncture.
As the lumbar puncture could not be completed, the decision was made to perform a side port study of the baclofen pump. Using ultrasound guidance, the pump pocket was evaluated, with no fluid collection observed. Using a 1.5-in. 25-gauge needle with sterile technique, the side port was accessed, and 20cc of CSF was withdrawn, which grew C. parapsilosis. The patient was started on induction therapy with both intravenous amphotericin B and oral flucytosine for six days, and the pump was removed after discussion with the patient and his neurosurgeon.
Ten months later, the patient was re-assessed for pump implantation since he continued to experience severe spasms despite being on oral baclofen, and the fourth pump was implanted without any complications. The patient remains without any symptoms or signs of pump infection since.