A 37-year-old white Arab woman with a past history of eight failed IVF cycles presented to our hospital because of inability to conceive for the last 8 years. She was in her normal state of health. She has a history of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism primary amenorrhea, with her menses observed only after Progyluton® (Bayer, Whippany, NJ, USA) administration. She also has a history of hypothyroidism, for which she is currently taking Euthyrox® 50 μg/day (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
The patient reported experiencing IVF treatment failure eight times consecutively with a history of recurrent implantation failures. Fresh embryo transfers had been used in all of the previous attempts, with no success. The first IVF attempted resulted in a blighted ovum requiring curettage (dilation and curettage).
Her spouse has also had a semen analysis done, which showed severe oligoasthenoteratospermia, with a sperm count of only 100,000/ml and motility of only 2%. Her family history was nonsignificant except for a history of hypertension in her father. She denied smoking and the use of alcohol or any illicit drug. On physical examination, she was found to have normal development of secondary sexual characteristics, including breast development and hair pattern. Results of her bimanual and rectovaginal examinations were unremarkable.
Results of the patient’s laboratory investigations are shown in Table . The patient’s past hormone profile is shown in Table .
Hysteroscopy was performed on the patient in July 2015 in India. This procedure revealed a normal uterine cavity with right ostia visualized with synechiae , whereas the left ostia were seen clearly. No intervention was done at that time.
On presentation at that facility, she was requested to undergo molecular genetic diagnostic (MTHFR C677T) gene mutation testing by real-time polymerase chain reaction, and the results revealed the patient to be heterozygous for MTHFR C677T gene mutation.
The patient underwent hystero contrast sonography (“HyCoSy”), which showed a normal uterine cavity with irregular filling in the right corner. To explore this ambiguous finding further, hysteroscopy was done in May 2016, which revealed dense adhesions in the right upper corner of the cavity in the fundal area and first-degree adhesions in the lower half of the uterus, which were subsequently removed with a dilator and scope on entry. The final diagnosis was infertility secondary to uterine factors and male factor. No cultural, linguistic, or financial challenges were faced during any phase of managing the patient.
The patient received one cycle of estradiol valerate and progesterone, and an IVF/ICSI cycle was initiated using an antagonist protocol with the drug Menopur® (Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Parsippany, NJ, USA) 400 IU/day, after which eight oocytes were retrieved. ICSI resulted in three grade 2 embryos, which were transferred on day 3. Luteal support was achieved via progesterone administered orally and vaginally, Clexane (Sanofi, Reading, UK) 40 U given subcutaneously along with prednisolone 5 mg twice daily, and aspirin 75 mg.
The patient was scheduled for follow-up 2 weeks after embryo transfer, and a β-human chorionic gonadotropin test was performed, the result of which became positive (value = 358). The patient was asked to continue prednisolone 5 mg, Clexane 40 U, aspirin 75 mg, and Duphaston (Abbott Healthcare Products, Weesp, The Netherlands). At a subsequent follow-up visit, obstetric ultrasound was performed, which showed twins with a positive fetal heart rate . Follow-up and delivery were performed at the same hospital at 36 weeks of gestation. Cesarean section was performed to deliver healthy female twins.
A timeline of the patient’s clinical course is provided in Table .