The patient first visited Hamamatsu University Hospital as a 7-year-old boy in January 1978 with a complaint of low visual acuity. He had previously been diagnosed with CSNB at the Department of Ophthalmology in Nagoya University Hospital at the age of 4 years. He complained of night blindness but had no family history of retinal disease.
On initial examination, the patient's best corrected decimal acuity was 0.5 in the right eye and 0.6 in the left eye. The refractive error was −6.0 D in the right eye and −5.25 D in the left eye. The anterior segments were normal, and no nystagmus or strabismus was found. The appearance of the fundus was essentially normal, except for myopic changes. The visual fields were normal on Goldmann perimetry. A dark adaptation curve from a Goldmann-Weekers adaptometer showed an absence of rod adaptation. The bright-flash, mixed rod-cone ERG elicited by a 20-J white flash stimulus after 20 min of dark adaptation showed a normal a-wave amplitude but a significantly reduced b-wave amplitude (a so-called “negative configuration”). The oscillatory potential was unremarkable . A diagnosis of CSNB was confirmed. The refractive error was corrected by glasses.
Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and funduscopy were monitored frequently. We performed a mixed rod-cone ERG each year under the same conditions as those at the initial evaluation until the patient reached the age of 26 years, when he stopped attending for follow-up. At the age of 34 years, the patient resumed attending the hospital. By this time, the instrument we used to perform the mixed rod-cone ERG had been replaced, so the ERG was performed under changed conditions, i.e., elicited by a 200 cd × s/m2 white flash stimulus after 20 min of dark adaptation. The various components of these waveforms were analysed.
By 10 years of age, BCVA had increased to 0.8 in the right eye and 0.9 in the left eye, and has remained unchanged thereafter . The myopia has progressed . The data for the various components of the mixed rod-cone ERG are shown in Figure –g. Although it was not possible to compare the data obtained using the different instruments, no changes could be seen in the amplitudes or implicit times of the a-wave and b-wave or in the b/a-wave ratio.
When the patient was 38 years of age, full-field ERGs were performed according to the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision protocol . The scotopic 0.01 ERG after 20 min of dark adaptation was non-recordable. However, the photopic 3.0 ERG and the 30-Hz flicker with a background light intensity of 25 cd/m2 after 10 min of light adaptation were within normal limits . On the basis of these ERG findings, we made a diagnosis of CSNB1.
The patient continues to be followed up as an outpatient at our hospital. BCVA is presently 0.8 in the right eye and 0.8 in the left eye. The refractive error is −14.5 D in the right eye and −14.75 D in the left eye. The fundus shows myopic changes but no atrophic changes . Visual fields are normal on Goldmann perimetry. Central retinal thickness and retinal lamination are normal on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography .
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient before the molecular genetic study. Genomic DNA was extracted from leucocytes in peripheral blood. Both exons of the NYX gene, including the coding regions and intron-exon boundaries, were amplified by PCR (polymerase chain reaction), and direct sequencing was performed. The PCR and sequencing procedures used have been described previously . The primer sequences are available on request. Nucleotide numbering reflects cDNA numbering with +1 corresponding to the A of the ATG translation initiation codon in the reference sequence NM_022567.2. Consequently, the patient was detected to have a novel hemizygous insertion mutation, c.1205_1206insT, p.(Glu404Argfs*89), in exon 2 of the NYX gene. This mutation did not appear in the public single nucleotide polymorphism databases (1,000 Genomes database , Exome Aggregation Consortium database , and Human Genetic Variation Database , all accessed on November 11, 2016).