A 16-year-old female presented with the left thigh swelling and pain for 3 months. There was a palpable mass deep to the quadriceps muscle on the medial side of the thigh, but no evidence of metastasis. Complete blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and renal function tests were normal. X-ray of the left femur showed an osteosclerotic tumor in the medial aspect of the middle third of the left femur . Open biopsy was done and histomorphologic evaluation of the sample revealed a tumor composed of pleomorphic spindle cells having a dense eosinophilic cytoplasm, marked nuclear atypia, and brisk mitotic activity. Areas of necrosis, deposition of thin, lace-like malignant osteoid, and chondroblastic differentiation were noted, features consistent with osteogenic sarcoma .
CT scan of the chest and abdomen was normal. The left femur showed a mass measuring 10x5x5 cm in the medial aspect of the mid-femur. The cortex of the femur was thickened, sclerotic and the adjacent periosteum was involved. This sclerosis and ossification extended medially into the adjacent soft tissues, including the vastus medialis muscle, giving a sunburst appearance. The femoral neurovascular bundle was not involved by the tumor. No skip lesions were evident in the femur on magnetic resource imaging scan.
Six cycles of pre-operative chemotherapy were given. The agents used were: cisplatin, doxorubicin, fosaprepitant, palonosetron, dexamethasone, mannitol, magnesium sulfate, and intravenous normal saline. Ensuing neutropenia was corrected with filgrastim. Neutropenic sepsis was treated using intravenous fluconazole, metronidazole, and augmentin. There was delay in initiating surgery and an additional two cycles of the same agents, keeping the cumulative doxorubicin dose to below 450 mg/m2.
Limb salvage surgery was elected as treatment of choice for this patient; using a free, frozen femur shaft autograft technique and stabilization with an intramedullary nail. Two separate operating rooms that were adjacent to each other were prepared for this procedure, one for the patient and the other for the preparation of the autograft. With the assistance of a vascular surgeon, an anteromedial incision was made on the left thigh extending from the groin to the distal third of the femur, along the course of the left femoral artery. The previous biopsy incision scar was included in this incision in an ellipsoid fashion approximately 4 cm wide. The femoral neurovascular bundle was isolated and the tumor was dissected circumferentially leaving a 1 cm cuff of normal muscle tissue attached to it. A chevron osteotomy was made four fingerbreadths from the proximal and distal soft-tissue margin of the tumor, thus freeing the femoral diaphysis plus the encompassing tumor, from the rest of the left thigh tissues .
The specimen was stripped of all soft tissues. The tumor was bony hard, measuring 16 cm by 8 cm by 8 cm. It was shaved off the diaphysis using an orthopedic power saw, allowing visualization of the original femur cortex. This autograft femur diaphysis was reamed, washed and the intramedullary canal irrigated with saline. It was dipped intermittently in liquid nitrogen over the first 5 min and then left in the liquid nitrogen for 15 min. The now frozen graft was placed in a sterile open container for 10 min at room temperature allowing it to thaw, followed by placing it in distilled water. The femur autograft measured approximately 32 cm long .
The femur autograft was replaced in the thigh, ensuring the chevron osteotomies fit well, and a locked intramedullary SIGN nail was placed . A vacuum drain was left in situ. The incision was closed in layers. Thigh compression using crepe bandage was applied on the left thigh for 6 weeks. Radiographs done at 12 months post-operation demonstrated healing of the osteotomy sites with maintained implant position and the patient has normal lower limb function(, , ).