The subject of this case study is a 16-year-old healthy Persian male patient without any past medical history who was referred for right hip pain that had been present for approximately 3 months. The pain initially appeared during physical activity and gradually became persistent. The pain was moderate in intensity and led to limited performance and limping .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on the patient. Given the patient’s pain and the existence of a lesion in their proximal femur, along with signal changes detected in their MRI, it was recommended that an initial biopsy be conducted for accurate diagnosis and effective management. The pathology report of the proximal femur specimen biopsy showed “fibromuscular and bony tissue involved by a neoplasm composed of large cystically dilated vessels with thin walls.” Finally, the diagnosis was reported as “cavernous hemangioma of bone.” The laboratory blood test was: calcium 2.48 mmol/L (normal range 2.2–2.7 mmol/L); phosphate 1.15 mmol/L (1.12–1.45 mmol/L); albumin 47 g/L (34–54 g/L); 25-OH-D3 level 52 mmol/L (52–72 nmol/L); C-reactive protein 2 mg/L (8–10 mg/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate 3 mm/hour (0–15 mm/hour); alkaline phosphatase = 75 unit/L (44–147 unit/L) and revealed normal bone metabolism.
Due to the patient’s pain, lack of evidence of primary bone sarcoma, and the extent of the lesion, prophylactic fixation with a cephalomedullary nail was performed on the patient. Following the surgery, the patient continued to experience pain and presented with severe pain at the hospital emergency room 1 month after the operation .
An X-ray revealed a fracture and bone destruction, necessitating curettage, structural fibula allograft, and fixation with a cephalomedullary nail . There was no evidence of infection or positive specimen culture.
At the patient’s next follow-up appointment, which occurred 2.5 months later, a decrease in bone density in the proximal femur and absorption of the allograft was observed . As a result of this osteolysis progression, a second incisional biopsy was performed on the patient. The pathology report showed “cavernous hemangioma and negative for malignancy.” On the basis of this diagnosis, the patient was deemed eligible for sclerotherapy treatment.
After approximately 18 months following the initial biopsy, the patient was referred to our center . There was no improvement in pain and the disease had progressed. Upon visiting our center, the patient had been experiencing severe pain and was wheelchair-bound and completely disabled. Skin examination revealed no abnormalities except for surgical incisions, and joint movements were limited due to pain. Laboratory tests such as inflammation tests and bone metabolic tests were normal.
After considering the patient’s age, laboratory test results, and the presence of lymphatic and vascular channel proliferation along with bone trabeculae, as well as the absence of cellular atypia in the histological review and other accompanying symptoms, a multidisciplinary team arrived at the conclusive diagnosis of Gorham–Stout disease (GSD). While non-surgical treatments are typically the preferred course of action for patients with GSD, the severity of the patient’s pain and impaired mobility necessitated a multidisciplinary approach to his care. After careful consideration and evaluation, the decision was made to proceed with surgical intervention. The surgical plan entailed a wide resection of the lesion and reconstruction utilizing a MUTARS® femoral system endoprosthesis.