An 18 year-old lady was admitted because of failure of stool passage for the last 2 months. She had experienced several episodes of partial bowel obstruction within the last years likewise. The patient had been coined to have Hirschsprung's disease after doing barium enema and colonoscopy since she was one year old. However, rectal biopsy was not performed for pathologic confirmation of the disease due to her parents' refusal. The patient was treated by various laxatives for constipation without any significant improvement with her defecation problem. There was no history of genitourinary problems or phacomatosis. None of the parents or her siblings had history of anorectal disease likewise.
Proctology examination revealed a ventrally located anus, and a round well-circumscribed compressible mass in retrorectal area. There was no evidence of saddle hyposthesia or sphincter problem in neurology examination.
Barium enema demonstrated an ectatic descending colon, with less prominent colonic haustrations. The ectatic segment tapered to a narrow ventrally displaced rectum . In Plain pelvic radiography a scimitar sacral defect could be seen, and computed tomography delineated scalloping of the right hemisacrum caused by a round homogenous hypodense presacral mass .
The patient planned for elective en-block resection of the mass. A midline posterior incision was made between the coccyx and the ventrally located anus but surprisingly a clear liquid resembling cerebrospinal fluid gushed out from the incision. Accordingly, the wound was closed, and the operation canceled for further evaluation and assessment.
Following a neurosurgery consultation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed one day after surgery which revealed an anterior sacral meningocele originated from the caudal thecal sac. The lesion had displaced rectum and anus to anterior. The tip of the conus medullaris was ended at the level of S1, connected to the thick tethered filum terminale .
During the planned surgery in the following week a sacral laminectoy was performed to obliterate the meningocle by ligating the neck of the lesion, and L5 laminectomy was done to release the tethered cord then after. The patient's bowel habits successfully returned to normal soon after the operation. The presacral mass disappeared expectedly, and the patient remained symptom-free after 1 year follow-up.