A 68-year-old woman presented to the hospital with a 6-month history of anemia coupled with a recent onset of poor appetite and vomiting for 10 days. She also had a history of lumbar disc herniation. Initial biochemical investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 8.0 g/dL, serum creatinine level of 2.21 mg/dL, and corrected calcium level of 2.74 mmol/L. Liver function was normal, but albumin level was 29.5 g/L (normal range: 40–55 g/L) and globulin level was 45 g/L (normal range: 20–40 g/L). Moreover, fecal occult blood testing was positive. Lung computed tomography demonstrated thickening of the esophageal wall and multiple enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. Abdominal sufficiency computed tomography demonstrated thickening of the gastric wall and gastric retention. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed congestion, swelling, roughness, and erosion of the middle and lower esophageal mucosa , mucosal nodular uplift with erosion in the gastric antrum, tube wall stiffness, and pyloric stenosis, suspecting gastric antrum cancer combined with incomplete obstruction . Endoscopic ultrasonography was not appropriate for this patient due to her poor overall condition as well as the large amount of retention in her stomach, which would adversely affect the results of the examination.
The patient’s clinical presentation and results of her evaluations first led us to suspect a diagnosis of gastric cancer. However, biopsies taken from the gastric antrum demonstrated mild chronic superficial gastritis, and biopsies taken from the esophagus demonstrated moderate-to-severe atypical hyperplasia of the squamous epithelium .
To clarify the diagnosis, the patient underwent a second EGD, which confirmed a large amount of food retained in the stomach. In addition, the mucosa of the gastric fundus, stomach body, gastric angular, and gastric antrum were all hyperemic and swollen, and a gastric antrum mucosal bulge with surface erosion was noted . Histopathological examination indicated an extensive deposition of hyaline amorphous eosinophilic extracellular material and mucosal biopsies from both the stomach and esophagus stained positive on Congo red staining . No evidence of gastric neoplasia was detected. A colonoscopy was not completed because of the patient’s poor general condition. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) level was 44.8 g/L (normal range: 6–16 g/L). Immunofixation and immunophenotyping of IgG and λ chain yielded positive results. X-ray revealed degeneration in both the sacroiliac and hip joints and a compression fracture in the first vertebra. Moreover, a bone marrow biopsy revealed that atypical clonal plasma cells accounted for 34% of the plasma cells . Based on these examination results, a definite diagnosis of gastric amyloidosis due to MM was confirmed. Regrettably, the patient died due to multiple organ failure before chemotherapy could be initiated. Earlier diagnosis of this patient’s underlying disease may have allowed chemotherapy to be initiated.