Six years and six months old boy with Down syndrome admitted to our pediatric neurology clinic due to loss of speech. He was born to a 32-year-old mother after an uncomplicated pregnancy by Cesarean section. His birth weight was 3000g, and he was hospitalized in the first 5 days of life due to breathing problems. He had no known heart disease nor thyroid problems. He started walking at the age of 2 years and the family declared that he was able to speak in sentences. He started to lose eye contact and a regression in his speech was realized 10 months ago which progressed slowly until he lost his speaking ability completely.
On physical examination, his weight was 17.2kg (50–75 p), height was 111.7cm (75 p), he had no goiter, and puberty was Tanner stage 1. Neurological examination revealed that he had no eye contact, no response when calling his name, stereotypic movements like putting hands together in midline, and shacking forwards and backward. A diagnosis of autism-spectrum disorder was considered based on his result on Gilliam autism evaluation scale (GARS-cut off 85 points).
Laboratory measurements revealed subclinical hypothyroidism with an elevated thyrotropin (TSH) and normal free thyroxine level (fT4), markedly elevated anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies, and normal anti-thyroglobulin antibodies . Other biochemical and hormonal measurements were found within normal ranges, except elevated cholesterol levels. His brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal, and electroencephalography (EEG) revealed rare spikes in the frontocentral area. Ultrasound of the thyroid was compatible with chronic thyroiditis. Hashimoto encephalitis was considered based on the findings and a treatment with glucocorticoid (deflazacort 1mg/kg/day) and thyroid hormone (l-thyroxine 25 µg/day) was started.
He was re-evaluated after 3 months of treatment. There was an increase in the duration time of eye contact, and the GARS score was 80. He started to express a few words, his ability to mimic and common attention reappeared. There was also a decrease in anti-TPO titers along with a normalization of TSH levels . Steroid treatment was continued as 1mg/kg for a further 3 months, and then tapered and discontinued after 12 months. At the end of the sixth-month treatment, we observed an incline in anti-TPO levels due to tapering of steroid treatment. No adverse effects have been noted during treatment.