A 58-year-old female presented with syncope at the Istanbul American hospital emergency department on September 21, 2012. Her symptoms, which were present for the past two days, included fatigue, diarrhea, swollen legs, and leg pain. The patient was conscious, sweaty, anxious, and pale. Her arterial blood pressure (ABP) was 80/40 mmHg, pulse rate was 118/minute with a regular rhythm, and her body temperature was 37.2 C. Heart sounds did not reveal any abnormality, the respiratory rate was slightly higher (28/minute), and pulmonary auscultation was normal. She complained of muscular pain during palpation of the leg muscles. She had bilateral lower limb edema. The laboratory analysis revealed high hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. A thorax computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal any abnormalities, and echocardiography revealed a hyperkinetic heart but there was no wall distress.
Two hours after her admission, the patient’s general condition deteriorated. Hypotension was augmented and anuria ensued. She was followed up at the ICU with intensive hydration. Enoxaparine sodium 40 mg sc BID and oral acetylsalicylic acid tablet 300 mg were started. Abdominal ultrasonography showed two gallstones of 2 cm in diameter and a left kidney stone of 1.5 cm in diameter. Urinalysis showed 20 - 30 leucocytes in every microscopic area. Intravenous Levofloxacin 500 mg/day was thus added to the treatment. Her urine culture showed 100.000 CFU Eschericia Coli, but a hemoculture and throat culture were negative. The initial laboratory tests are presented in . Protein electrophoresis showed only alpha-2 increase. On the second day, her blood pressure and pulse stabilized, and intravenous isotonic sodium therapy was continued. On day four, neuropathy in the limbs developed and electromyographic evaluation of lower extremities showed a bilateral axonal injury of the fibular nerve. Intravenous methyl-prednisolone, tramadol hydrochloride tablets, and alpha-lipoic-acid tablets were commenced. With intensive hydration therapy, antibiotic treatment, and neuropathy treatment, the general condition of the patient stabilized and she was able to walk 10 days after the onset of the symptoms. She was discharged on the 15th day with Alpha-lipoic acid tab 2 × 600 mg, terbutaline tab 5 mg/day, Teophylline tab 400 mg/day, and Tramadol hydrochlorur tab 150 mg/day. She is still being treated with IV Immunoglobulin therapy in the 27th month.