Our patient is a 12-year-old male who was initially being evaluated by optometry for headaches and progressive visual impairment over a 2-month period. On assessment of the patient’s vision, a diagnosis of bitemporal hemianopsia was made, prompting magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain and orbits. As demonstrated in , it revealed a sellar lesion with suprasellar extension exhibiting homogenous enhancement. At this time, a broad differential diagnosis was considered, including those typified by sellar lesions (including sarcoid, aneurysm, teratoma, craniopharyngioma, hypothalamic glioma, meningioma, metastasis, or optic nerve glioma).
On neurological examination, the patient was neurologically intact with the exception of bitemporal visual field loss. Visual acuity was noted to be 20/20 on the right and 20/100 on the left. Serum laboratory assessment for hormonal irregularities was unremarkable. The patient was also noted to have polydipsia without overt signs of diabetes insipidus (i.e., stable serum sodium levels and remaining euvolemic). He subsequently underwent transnasal transsphenoidal craniotomy for resection and decompression of the optic chiasm. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well and was subsequently discharged home without any evident complications, with plan for possible further surgery after pathology finalized.
Intraoperatively, the tumor was noted to be firm and fibrous. Complete resection was not feasible from the trans-nasal approach as the tumor was noted to be extremely adherent to surrounding structures. Frozen section pathology from the initial surgery was inconclusive. However, final pathology from this surgery was reported to be SFT/HPC, World Health Organization (WHO) Grade II.
On 3-month follow-up, imaging demonstrated progressive and enlarging lesion, as demonstrated in . Furthermore, the patient also complained of worsening vision in the left eye, with visual acuity now at 20/200. The remainder of cranial nerves were intact. At this time, the patient returned to the operating room for a left-sided orbitozygomatic craniotomy. Tumor was visualized in the suprasellar region and resected in a piecemeal fashion with the aid of an ultrasonic aspirator. The tumor has a similar consistency to the 1st time – firm and fibrous with regions of high vascularity. Microsurgical techniques were used to dissect the tumor capsule from all neural elements. The surgery proceeded without complications.
Postoperative imaging, as visualized in , demonstrated gross total resection (GTR) of the mass. This time, the patient’s postoperative course was complicated with the development of diabetes insipidus requiring desmopressin. The patient also had transient loss of vision in the left eye which returned to preoperative baseline before discharge from the hospital. demonstrates the pathology obtained from the patient; [-] displays the hematoxylin and eosin staining which demonstrates a mesenchymal neoplasm with moderate cellularity and nuclear pleomorphism. Tumor cells were noted to form into sheets and clusters with fibrous stroma, as well as abundant vasculature. Furthermore, staghorn appearance and additional strong positivity for CD34 was noted along endothelial cells with no definitive staining of tumor cells as well as strong nuclear staining for signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) , confirming the diagnosis of SFT/HPC. The final diagnosis of HPC was agreed on by outside consultation to the Children’s Hospital of Los Angeles, who reviewed the samples.