Patient 2 was a 13-year-old Caucasian boy who was referred to the HDCC in October 2014 for HD testing. Unlike patient 1, there were two known HD cases in patient 2’s family on the paternal side. Patient 2’s mother reported gradual development of involuntary chest and hip twitching during sleep, unsteady gait, distal limb rigidity, difficulties understanding the patient’s speech, and frequent throat clearing. Similarly to the first case, behavior changes, including separation from peers and family and problems with studying, were reported. The interview revealed an episode of short-term memory loss. Rigidity in movement and occasional hyperkinesis in the hands were observed during the patient’s neurological examination. The patient was alert and oriented to person, place, and time. His temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, blood oxygen level, and biochemical blood test results were normal.
With the informed consent of both the mother and the patient, genetic testing for HD was performed by PCR analysis. The results of diagnostic testing revealed a normal allele with 17 CAG repeats and an expanded and unstable polyglutamine-encoding allele with 69 CAG repeats in exon 1 of HTT. The patient was diagnosed with JHD.
The patient attended the HDCC three times for checkups and treatment. The patient reported progressive movement difficulties, particularly instability walking up and down stairs. The patient’s mother noticed his emotional state and cognitive abilities worsening. Teachers at his school said it had become hard to understand his writing. The patient was also experiencing difficulty in concentrating on his studies. He was becoming less interested in communicating with other people and mostly spent time playing computer games on his own. His mother reported him becoming more sensitive and impulsive. She noticed that having a visual schedule and discussing plans in advance helped them to avoid arguments at home. The patient was showing symptoms of an eating disorder due to dysphagia, and he gradually developed parkinsonism. In a 2019 evaluation, the patient’s IQ test result was at the mark of 50. Because of physical impairment, the patient needed constant support in everyday activities.
Compared with the first patient, this patient’s quality of life was mostly affected by motor symptoms of the disease. His pharmacological treatment included tiapride hydrochloride and the complex of levodopa, benserazide hydrochloride, and trihexyphenidyl, which was effective in reducing rigidity and helped the patient remain physically independent for extended periods.