A 27-year-old Caucasian woman with an unremarkable medical history was admitted to a local hospital because of 1 week of fever, lower back pain, and cough. Since her fifth day of disease, she had experienced severe headache, ear and eye pain, and yellowish eyes. Further complaints included nausea, vomiting, dark urine, and diarrhea with pale stools. The patient had no recent travel history but had mice as pets, and one had fallen ill with conjunctivitis 1.5 months prior to the onset of the patient’s symptoms. Because of the patient’s symptoms and relevant exposure, leptospirosis and meningitis were suspected, and she was transferred to the Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet.
On admission, the patient’s physical examination revealed neck stiffness, conjunctivitis, and icteric sclera. Her blood pressure was 113/65 mmHg, heart rate was 79 beats/minute, temperature was 38.1 °C, respiratory rate was 16 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% without oxygen supplementation. Her laboratory examination showed an elevated white blood cell count (WBC) of 12.3 × 109/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 198 mg/L, along with increased liver function test values (alanine aminotransferase 186 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 359 U/L, γ-glutamyl transferase 624 U/L, and bilirubin 50 U/L) and hypoalbuminemia of 27 g/L. The results of the patient’s abdominal ultrasound and chest radiography were both normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed elevated leukocytes at 213 cells/mm3 (56% polymorphonuclear cells), lactic acid at 2.7 mmol/L, glucose at 3.4 mmol/L, and protein at 0.55 g/L. The result of her CSF culture was negative. Her blood and urine were examined on day 7 of disease with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests that showed negative results for leptospirosis. However, the result of her microagglutination test (MAT) on day 11 of disease was positive and demonstrated strongest reactivity against Leptospira interrogans serovar sejroe with antibody titers of 3000, increasing to 10,000 on day 22 of disease. Conventional blood cultures were collected before the antibiotic treatment was initiated, but urine culture and lumbar puncture were done after 1 day of treatment. The patient was initially empirically treated with piperacillin-tazobactam and then briefly shifted to a bacterial meningitis regimen with ampicillin and ceftriaxone. Because of suspected leptospirosis, the patient was treated with 2 g of ceftriaxone intravenously for 7 days, and her condition improved. After 1 week of hospitalization, the patient was discharged without any sequelae. Figure illustrates the antibiotic treatment in relation to CRP level during 1 week of hospitalization.