A 42-year-old woman from India (Asian by ethnicity) without any known comorbidities developed gait and stance unsteadiness around 1 month prior to presenting to us. It was rapidly followed by development of tremulousness in both hands, particularly while reaching for a target. Her first medical contact was through an orthopedic surgeon when she suffered a fall at around 2 weeks after the onset of her illness. At that time, she was diagnosed was having a fracture of her right tibia and received plaster casting of her right leg. However, her neurological illness continued to go downhill as she developed intermittent abnormal twisted posturing of her right hand, suggestive of focal dystonia. Subsequently, she developed progressive deterioration of her cognitive function for around 2 weeks before coming to our care. Reduced attention span, impairment of short-term memory, behavioral abnormality, and language problems in the form of comprehension difficulty as well as irrelevant talking were the major features at the onset of her cognitive disturbance. On detailed questioning, her family members admitted to the presence of intermittent brief rapid involuntary jerks involving one limb at a time, suggestive of myoclonic jerks, which used to persist during sleep as well. Over the course of 3–4 days prior to admission, her higher mental function deteriorated severely enough amounting to akinetic mute state. There was no family history of similar illness. On neurological examination, she was found to have akinetic mute state, paratonia in both upper limbs and left lower limb, intermittent focal myoclonic jerks, and bilateral extensor plantar response. Keeping all these in mind, differential diagnoses were formulated: encephalopathy which might have been due to metabolic factors or an autoimmune process, or an infective pathology such as prion disease. She was investigated thoroughly; her blood count and metabolic parameters were within normal limits. Anti-thyroperoxidase (TPO) antibody in serum turned out to be negative. Anti-nuclear factor was also negative. CSF cytology and biochemical parameters were within normal limits and culture was negative. Tests for syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus, human herpes virus-6, C-reactive protein, folate, vitamin B12, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and homocysteine levels were all negative. Paraneoplastic markers in CSF also came to be negative. MRI of her brain revealed bilateral caudate nucleus and putaminal hyperintensity in T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence as well as in diffusion-weighted imaging . Restricted diffusion was also observed in multiple cortical areas, mostly in parieto-occipital and insular regions bilaterally (more on right side), resembling ribbon pattern. An EEG showed diffuse slowing of background activity with periodic sharp wave complexes along with intermittent triphasic waves . A diagnosis was provisionally established based on the positive result of 14-3-3 protein detection in CSF.
Once the diagnosis and prognosis were conveyed to our patient’s relatives, they decided to take her back to a local hospital for terminal care. The details of the follow-up, therefore, could not be obtained in this case.