A 2-year-old Syrian male baby was admitted to the pediatric hospital. He presented with failure to thrive and chronic diarrhea for 18 months, along with recurrent rectal prolapse for the last 6 months. The frequency of rectal prolapse was once a week on average and the frequency of diarrhea was ten times a day at the time of the introduction of complementary foods at the age of 6 months. The diarrhea was often watery, profuse, nonmucous, and nonbloody. The baby had a normal vaginal delivery with normal birth weight. He has two sisters and six brothers, and there is no family history for such cases, no history of infectious disease and the baby takes no medications. He was exclusively breastfed for the first 4 months, after which he started receiving mixed feeding, then complementary food was added at 6 months of age. He presented to different healthcare units multiple times with no signs of clinical improvement. Both ceasing maternal breastfeeding and switching milk formulas had no effect. The baby weighed 3 kg at birth. He was 8.5 kg at 6 months and 8.9 at 1 year old. Presenting at the age of 2, he weighed only 9 kg. His height, head circumference, and mid-upper arm circumference were 85, 45, and 12 cm, respectively. Upon physical examination, the baby was moderately active. He had pronounced pallor and pitting edema of the face and lower extremities. His skin was dry, and there were scaly areas on the mouth, commissures, abdomen, and trunk, but there was no erythema or diaper dermatitis. A prolapse of the rectal mucosa through the anal orifice was observed and was subsequently retracted manually. Motor development was normal but with a weak reaction, lethargy, and general weakness. Due to the presence of growth failure, persistent diarrhea, rectal prolapse, and accompanying skin changes, the baby was diagnosed with severe acute malnutrition .
The results of laboratory tests were as follows in Table .
After intravenous blood and albumin transfusion, albumin, total protein, and hemoglobin values improved as follows: albumin 2.9 g/dl, total protein 4.2 g/dl, and hemoglobin10 g/dl.
Peripheral blood smear showed 2+ hypochromia and +1 anisocytosis leaning toward microcytosis. Otherwise, there was no evidence of spherocytosis or other abnormal morphologies, and white blood cells appeared normal.
The baby was put on a nothing-by-mouth diet for 24 h with intravenous fluids while monitoring diarrhea, which persisted. In a stool test, the laboratory results were as follows in Table .
These results suggested the diarrhea was secretory because diarrhea persisted despite the absolute diet of food during the first 24 h which means it was not osmotic diarrhea but secretory which in turn drew the presence of inflammation in the mucous. Many differential diseases were put in mind such as Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, fibrosis cystic, intestinal infections as well as celiac disease. Stool culture, urine test, abdominal ultrasound, arterial blood gases, sweat electrolytes, triglycerides, cholesterol, serum sodium, and serum chloride were all normal. Meanwhile, zinc and iron were low, and binding capacity was high. Furthermore, immunochemistry tests revealed an elevated anti-DGP IgA at 75 U/ml, supporting a diagnosis of celiac disease. Biopsies were taken during an upper GI endoscopy and then sent to the pathology laboratory. The stomach showed preserved mucosa, no inflammatory infiltrates, and a negative Giemsa stain for Helicobacter pylori. The duodenum showed atrophic villi, one-third of their normal height. The crypts were hyperplastic. There was an increased count of interepithelial lymphocytes. Periodic acid–Schiff stain for specific pathogens was negative. Based on these results, a diagnosis of stage 3b celiac disease was confirmed according to the Marsh classification. The baby was put on a diet of free-lactose milk at the beginning due to the possibility of developing secondary lactose intolerance since babies with IBD have damaged villi and lactase deficiency. This diet was later adjusted to a gluten-free one, comprising alternative starches such as corn, soybeans, and rice, and supplements of iron, folic acid, calcium, and magnesium, as needed. The patient showed initial improvement, with weight increasing to 9.2 kg and height to 85 cm, while head circumference and mid-upper arm circumference remained at 45 and 12 cm, respectively. However, he was readmitted 1 month later due to persisting diarrhea and rectal prolapse. Furthermore, he also presented with lower GI bleeding. He then weighed 9.3 kg. In a stool test, white blood cells and red blood cells were markedly positive, but the culture was negative. A lower GI endoscopy was subsequently performed, and it showed punctate erosions less than 0.5 cm in the sigmoid and the rectum with redness of the mucous membrane . Several biopsies were taken from these erosions and then sent to the pathology laboratory. Colon biopsies showed an inflammatory infiltrate within the lamina propria containing some polymorphonuclear neutrophils, some of which were attacking glands with attempts to form diverticular abscesses. Some laboratory tests were performed as well (fecal calprotectin 200 μg/g, C-reactive protein was normal, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 30 mm/h). Based on the histopathological result, a diagnosis of IBD-unclassified was confirmed and since the very early onset of the disease, monogenic IBD is suspected but because of the bad economic situation in Syria due to the war, we cannot afford genetic tests to validate this diagnosis. Therefore, a conservative course of management for IBD was chosen, consisting mainly of putting the baby on a high-fiber diet including fruits and vegetables in addition to the celiac disease diet. In a follow-up after 2 months, the baby weighed 10 kg, did not have diarrhea, and experienced a rectal prolapse only once. In a follow-up after 3 months, occult blood was positive in a stool test, but hemoglobin was 11 g/dl. The baby weighed 10.8 kg and showed no signs of either diarrhea or rectal prolapse. In a follow-up after 4 months, tissue transglutaminase IgA and fecal calprotectin tests were 16 U/ml and 47 μg/mg, respectively. The baby weighed 12.7 kg, had no signs of rectal prolapse, and suffered from diarrhea and bloating only if the diet was discontinued.