A 62-year-old man, who complained of recurrent abscesses of the buttock, was referred to the Division of Colon, Rectum and Anus for treatment.
The patient had recurrent abscesses of the buttock for 3 years and had undergone incision and drainage at a local clinic. Although the abscess was resolved with treatment, it recurred. The patient had several abscess sites on the buttock, but no anal discharge, bloody stools, fever, chills, or weight loss were noted. He was otherwise healthy.
He had been taking anti-hypertensive medication and antiplatelet drugs for hypertension for 4 years. However, he had no significant past medical or surgical history. He had no history of anal diseases, such as anal fistulas, hemorrhoids, or perianal abscesses. He had no history of other skin diseases.
His vital signs were normal. He had several scars and nodules on the bilateral buttocks . Purulent discharge drained from one site on the left buttock. Other sites on the left buttock, which showed no drainage, were composed of granulation tissue. Several nodules with skin lesions on the right buttock were observed; however, the discharge was not purulent but serous. There were no lesions in the anus on digital rectal examination. The site of the skin nodule did not originate from the anus through physical examination. He had no symptoms indicative of other diseases. Finally, he was diagnosed with recurrent abscess due to HS at the first visit.
The laboratory test included complete blood count, liver function, kidney function, and electrolyte and coagulation profiles, which were within normal limits. Carcinoembryonic antigen and CA19-9 levels were 4.93 ng (normal range, 0-10 ng) and 39.69 U/mL (normal range, 0-37 U/mL), respectively.
He underwent pelvic computed tomography (CT) before the operation because of the prolonged duration of symptoms suggesting the possibility of undiagnosed disease. CT showed an approximately 10 cm in length of abscess in the subcutaneous tissue of the bilateral buttocks . There was no evidence of its relationship with the anus. After the first operation, he underwent gastroscopy, colonoscopy, transanal ultrasonography (TRUS), and positron emission tomography (PET) to determine the disease origin and condition, as he was diagnosed with mucinous adenocarcinoma. The results of all examinations other than PET were unremarkable. There was no evidence of anal fistula on TRUS. PET showed increased fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the abscess cavity, buttock, and perianal wall . It also showed increased fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the prostate, which suggested inflammation or malignancy. The patient was diagnosed with inflammation of the prostate based on prostate biopsy findings.
He had no significant personal or familial history. Moreover, there was no history of cancer in his family.