A 19-year-old female came to the Department of Oral Medicine at Universitas Padjadjaran Dental Hospital with a complaint of a rough, painful, and intermittent tongue that had persisted for a year. The patient reported that the condition occurred after the consumption of spicy foods. The condition solely affected her tongue, with no involvement of the skin or other parts of the oral mucosa. The patient identified spicy food as an aggravating factor, but there were no limiting factors. The patient was prescribed topical corticosteroids following a visit to the dentist. The complaint showed improvement after three days of medication. Without medication, issues usually resolve within a week. There were no preceding symptoms of fever or illness.
The patient has an oral health check-up with the dentist every six months, and the recent visit entailed scaling. A history of drug and food allergies has been denied. The patient reported a lifelong history of asthma but has never had a relapse. The patient has never been hospitalized in the last year. The patient’s mother confirmed complete immunization. The social profile reveals that the patient is an unmarried student with no pets. The patient seldom consumes fruits and vegetables, drinks 2 liters of water per day, refrains from smoking and alcohol, and has routine menstrual cycles.
The Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS)-21 test indicated normal levels of depression (2), anxiety (3), and stress (0) in the assessment of a negative emotional state. The physical examination revealed a good general status and compos mentis level of awareness. The patient has a weight of 50 kg and a height of 155 cm. The obtained vital signs were blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse 80 times/minute, respiration 20 times/minute, and temperature 36.5 oC.
The extra-oral examination showed a symmetrical face, non-anemic conjunctiva, non-icteric sclera, and dry lips . Additionally, palpable and painless lymph nodes were observed, along with a normal jaw joint. The intra-oral examination revealed red patches (depapillation) with a white border on the anterior two-thirds of the dorsal tongue extending to the right lateral of the tongue . The OHI-S (Oral Hygiene Index Simplified) score indicated a good oral hygiene status with a score of 1. The GTASI score was 12 (moderate), and the NRS score was 6 (moderate pain) on the first visit.
Physical examinations and routine hematological tests were conducted during the first visit. The blood test results revealed an elevated platelet count, indicating inflammation, and an increase in eosinophil count, signifying an allergic response. Therefore, the patient should conduct additional tests, such as total IgE and skin prick tests. The complete results of the blood test may be seen in .
The working diagnosis was geographic tongue due to an allergic reaction. The non-pharmacological management of the patient included an explanation that the tongue condition was benign. The patient was advised to avoid consuming spicy foods and to brush her teeth and tongue twice daily using a soft-bristled toothbrush, once in the morning after breakfast and once in the evening before bed. Furthermore, the patient was recommended to maintain a healthy lifestyle by consuming nutritious foods and ensuring sufficient sleep. We prescribed a mouthwash containing benzydamine hydrochloride to alleviate the sensation of burning on the tongue, with a recommended dosage of 10 mL three times daily. A follow-up appointment was set for the patient one week later.
One week later, the patient attended a follow-up appointment with the results of additional tests. The total IgE examination value was 698 IU/mL (standard value <100 IU/mL), and there was a positive skin prick test result for chili . The patient was also found to be allergic to house dust, cottonwood, animal fur, crabs, chicken meat, and tomatoes, according to the skin prick test results, along with chili.
A diagnosis of chili-induced GT was confirmed after further investigation. Following both subjective and objective examinations, the patient reported no complaints. The NRS score was 0 (no pain), and the GTASI score was 0.4 (mild). Supplementary extra-oral and intra-oral photos taken during the follow-up visit are presented in . The patient was currently advised to avoid consuming spicy foods, including chili, and other known allergens, while also refraining from mouthwashes containing benzydamine hydrochloride.