A Chinese girl aged 5 years and 6 mo presented to the Pediatric Department of our hospital complaining of short stature.
The girl was born at term as the only child of her parents. Her birth weight was 3400 g [0.58 standard deviation score (SDS)], and her length was 50 cm (0.1 SDS). Pregnancy, delivery, and the neonatal period were uncomplicated. At 2 mo of age, a developmental delay was found by regular physical examination. She received rehabilitation therapy for 4 mo intermittently. She started walking at 17 mo of age and spoke her first words at 12 mo. Her height was below the mean for age (less than the 3rd percentile). Ordinarily, she was quiet, short-tempered, and irritable.
Her past medical history was unremarkable except for developmental delay.
No specific personal history of disease was recorded. Her parents were healthy, with no significant family history. Her mother’s height was 160 cm, and his father’s height was 171 cm. The target height for the proband was 159.0 cm (-0.30 SDS).
Her height was 104.7 cm (-1.95 SDS). Her weight was 15.5 kg. Her head circumference was 57.9 cm (+0.3 SDS). Physical examination revealed mild dysmorphic features, including a long triangular face, frontal bossing, large and protruding ears, broad eyebrows, a high nasal bridge, a long philtrum, macrodontia of the central incisors, and brachydactyly. No significant hearing loss or palate abnormalities were found.
After two stimulation tests (arginine test and levodopa test), the peak GH responses to arginine and levodopa were 6.22 ng/mL and 5.40 ng/mL, respectively. The cut-off peak GH value for GH deficiency was ≤ 10 ng/mL. GH deficiency was confirmed. Serum GH level was measured using chemiluminescence assay (Cobas E170, Roche Diagnostics, Germany). The level of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) was 42.0 ng/mL. Serum IGF-1 were measured using chemiluminescence assay (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, USA). Other biochemical examinations, such as of thyroid function, sex hormones, adrenal function, and blood glucose, were normal.
Written informed consent for clinical whole-exome detection was obtained from her parents. Clinical whole-exome detection was offered by Sino-Science in Beijing, China.
Her bone age was 4.5 years. Bone age was estimated using the atlas of Greulinch-pyle. Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and echocardiography were normal.
She had a borderline intellectual disability with a total IQ of 79 (WISC-R).