A 38-year-old Gravida 3 lady at 36/6 weeks of gestation presented to our labor and delivery unit for a renal colic. Her prenatal course was unremarkable. She had no past surgical or medical history, but she was presenting acute pelvic pain, related to renal colic. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 115/68 mmHg, HR 73 bpm, respiratory rate 17 breaths per minute, and temperature 36.7 °C. Her physical exam was unremarkable. Maternal baseline ECG was normal. Baseline electrolytes and maternal thyroid panel were within normal limits. There was absense of fever and of blood and urine infection indexes. After ruling out threatening labor, fetal ultrasound showed grossly normal fetus with an estimated weight of 2,783 g and amniotic fluid index 14.6 cm. The anatomical survey including fetal cardiac evaluation was found to be within normal limits. The 4-chamber view of the heart was normal. No signs of hydrops fetalis were noted. Electronic fetal HR monitoring showed a sustained baseline fetal heart of 140 bpm with minimal to moderate variability, with absent accelerations or decelerations and not relevant uterine contractile activity. Middle cerebral artery Doppler ultrasonography was also within normal.
Spasmolytic therapy (Butylscopolamine) did not resolve colic pain. The following day, although her physical exam was unchanged, a plan was made for administration of betamethasone series for lung maturity and morphine for colic pain control. Immediately after morphine intravenous administration (0.1 mg/kg), electronic fetal HR monitoring showed a sudden sustained increase of baseline fetal heart from 140 bpm to over the upper range limits cardiotocography (CTG) registration (200 bpm). Fetal echo on M mode revealed a 1:1 atrial ventricular rate of 240 bpm consistent with SVT . Conversely, heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and temperature of the mother were substantially unchanged.
After 4 h fetal HR was sustained at 240 bpm. Since the fetus was at a reasonable maturity stage, immediate delivery was decided. A baby boy was delivered following a caesarean section, with a 2920 g birth weight, APGARs of 10 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, umbilical artery cord blood pH 7.37, BE-1.7. He was admitted to the regular nursery. Pre-ductal saturation was 99%. Mean blood pressure 38 mmHg. Tachycardia was noticed at birth 240 bpm, and the HR progressively decreased starting at 60 min after birth and reached normal levels during the following 3 h.
Postnatal adaptation was uneventful and exclusive breastfeeding was carried on. After a 2-days period of neonatal cardiac monitoring (including echocardiography) the mother and her baby were discharged home in stable condition. The neonate progressed well. His weight increased normally and there was no evidence of cardiac rhythm disturbance up to the 1-year follow-up as outpatient in the pediatric cardiology department.