An 85-year-old man was admitted with a 3-week history of projectile vomiting, decreased appetite and halitosis. He was otherwise independent and had no medical comorbidities. On examination, he was observed to be cachectic and malnourished, with moderate renal impairment: urea 15.8 mg/dl; creatinine 197 μmol/l; white blood cell count (WBC) 9.1 × 109/litre. A gastroscopy was performed, which diagnosed gastric outlet obstruction. Subsequent imaging by barium meal and computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a stricture in the second part of the duodenum due to a large fixed tumour, which was not considered amenable to curative surgical resection. As a result, the patient was scheduled for a palliative gastrojejunostomy.
During the surgical procedure, a multilumen right subclavian central venous catheter (CVC; Vygon, Cirencester, UK) was inserted by the anaesthetist with full aseptic precautions, using the Seldinger technique and under ultrasound guidance. No apparent difficulty in insertion or periprocedural complication was noted. Following confirmation of a satisfactory line position on plain chest radiography, the CVC was utilised for intravenous fluid infusion and supplemental postoperative parenteral nutrition.
The initial postoperative course was uneventful; however, on postoperative day 10, cellulitis was noticed around the insertion site of the catheter, which was still in situ. Accordingly, the CVC was removed and the tip sent for microbiological examination. The following day, the patient complained of severe pain in the left shoulder, with global painful limitation of left arm movements. Plain radiographs of the left shoulder joint were performed, demonstrating moderate osteoarthritic changes only.
Over postoperative days 12 and 13, the patient developed diarrhoea with intermittent pyrexia and raised inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 94 mm/hour, C-reactive protein 112 mg/l, WBC 21.3 × 109/litre). At this stage the cellulitis around the site of the previous CVC was noted to extend anteriorly over the sternum, and both peripheral blood cultures and the cultured CVC tip grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which was sensitive to vancomycin, gentamicin, rifampicin and tetracyclines, prompting treatment with intravenous vancomycin. A duplex ultrasound of the upper limb and neck veins was performed in order to exclude a subclavian venous thrombosis; however, an inflammatory mass was visualised over the sternum, with no apparent focal collection.
By day 15, pus was noted to be discharging from the CVC site, prompting a CT scan of the neck. This demonstrated a large inflammatory mass in the root of the neck extending into the superior mediastinum, with no evidence of abscess formation or any evidence of SCJ joint arthritis, either clinically or radiologically.
The patient received 2 weeks treatment with intravenous vancomycin (1 g daily) and oral rifampicin (600 mg daily) in accordance with local microbiology protocol. Regular monitoring of peak and trough serum vancomycin levels was performed to ensure therapeutic dosing. At the end of this period, the cellulitis had resolved and inflammatory markers were reduced; therefore, the patient was discharged.
Once home, the patient continued to experience severe neck and shoulder pains, prompting his general practitioner to refer him again to the hospital approximately 1 month later. Clinical examination revealed a recurrence of the inflammatory mass over the sternum . The patient also complained of ongoing excruciating neck and shoulder pain requiring high doses of parenteral opiates, and inflammatory markers were markedly elevated. A further CT scan was performed, which demonstrated bilateral destruction of the SCJs and a large effusion of the left SCJ consistent with septic arthritis .
Thereafter, the patient was transferred to the care of the orthopaedic surgeons, who, after discussion with the local thoracic surgical unit, performed open surgical debridement of the left SCJ and obtained samples for microbiological and histological analyses. These showed osteolytic bone consistent with a diagnosis of suppurative osteomyelitis, and microbiology samples revealed a heavy growth of MRSA consistent with the previous CVC sepsis (antibiotic sensitivities as described previously). The patient was treated in hospital for a further 4 weeks, with combined intravenous vancomycin and oral rifampicin, leading to complete clinical resolution of his symptoms, and he was discharged with a further 4 weeks of single-agent oral rifampicin. No subsequent treatment has been required.