A 17-month-old ex-premature boy with SGS, weighing 6.8 kg, was referred from another hospital for surgical repair of right inguinal hernia due to challenging airway management.
He was born prematurely at 24 weeks and 0 days of gestation, weighing 488 g. His trachea was intubated for 45 days after birth. When his trachea was re-intubated for 2 days for the treatment of retinopathy of prematurity on the 81st day after birth, extubation failed. He was kept intubated for a further 7 days, but SGS was not suspected at that time. After a second attempt of extubation, non-invasive ventilation was performed for 4 weeks before the patient was discharged to home with oxygen therapy of 0.25 L·min−1 by nasal cannula.
Surgery was initially scheduled at another hospital at the age of 16 months. During the induction of anesthesia, however, the anesthesiologists unsuccessfully attempted intubation with a 3.5-mm inner diameter uncuffed endotracheal tube (ETT) and a 3.0 mm inner diameter uncuffed ETT several times. A 2.5-mm ETT was successfully intubated, but the surgery was cancelled due to the unexpectedly narrow airway, which was a concern of SGS. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, and the ETT was removed the next day. Severe stridor and retraction were noted, so SGS was suspected for the first time. CT scan one week after extubation revealed 1.2-cm-long SGS and the narrowest diameter of 1.7 mm in the subglottic area . The patient was referred to our hospital for further management.
On admission, his percutaneous oxygen saturation was 98–100% on nasal cannula of 0.25 L·min−1 oxygen. He showed slight retraction, but there was no stridor on rest. When he cried, subcostal retraction worsened and slight stridor was auscultated around the neck. His respiratory status was much better than we had heard from the previous doctors. We presume that the previous hospital took the CT scan when there were remaining effects of tracheal intubation in the subglottic area. After transfer, we started inhaled steroids and there was gradual improvement of his condition.
Primary concerns regarding the patient at that time were repeated incarceration of inguinal hernia and respiratory distress. After discussion between the anesthesiologists and the surgical team, we concluded that rigid bronchoscopy (RBS) could wait and we developed three potential strategies to manage the patient . In Discussed Option #3 , the surgery could be performed under spinal anesthesia and sedation [, ], and then RBS maintaining spontaneous respiration could be performed on another day. This would mean intubation would be unnecessary, and there would be no invasion to the subglottic area at all. Due to the complexity of the patient’s medical history (ex-premature and repeated incarceration of inguinal hernia), the procedure could take longer, so epidural anesthesia was planned to be combined with spinal anesthesia .
After standard monitors were applied and a peripheral intravenous line was established, 0.01 mg·kg−1 of atropine was given and then dexmedetomidine was administrated at the rate of 0.8 mcg·kg−1·h−1 for 5 min and up to 1.2 mcg·kg−1·h−1 for 14 min before spinal tap. Spinal anesthesia was performed with a 25-gauge needle at L4/5 (0.15 ml·kg−1 of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine) in right lateral position and a caudal epidural catheter was inserted via the sacral hiatus without any difficulty under light sedation. Dexmedetomidine was continued between 0.4 and 1.2 mcg·kg−1·h−1, depending on the patient’s respiratory status and the depth of sedation until the end of surgery. Hemodynamic and respiratory statuses were stable, and the patient was appropriately sedated. Operators were satisfied with sufficient infant immobility to allow satisfactory completion of the operation. The operation time was 61 min, and the anesthesia time was 105 min. The postoperative course was uneventful. Six days after the hernia repair, RBS was performed under general anesthesia maintaining spontaneous respiration, using propofol, ketamine, and topical anesthesia to the larynx. Low-grade stenosis and some cysts were revealed in the subglottic area . Those lesions were considered to not require immediate further intervention except continued inhaled steroid treatment and long-term observation.