Sixty-one-year-old female was referred in June 2019 to our Gynecologic Oncology Centre for interval debulking surgery (IDS) after previous administration of 5 cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) for a primarily non-resectable left ovarian tumor FIGO (the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) classification stage IV (presence of liver metastases). After NAC (paclitaxel plus carboplatin) the computed tomography findings revealed a partial regression tumor response according to RECIST (The Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) criteria . The size of the primary ovarian tumor mass and peritoneal carcinomatosis was reduced. However, the intraparenchymatous liver metastases remained unchanged in number and size. In July 2019, the patient underwent optimal IDS with no visible residual disease at the end of surgery. The surgery consisted of a hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, resection of liver metastases and the diaphragm, total omentectomy, appendectomy and a resection of an umbilical metastasis. After the surgery, the patient received 3 additional cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (PTX/CBDCA), with the addition of bevacizumab from the second post-operative cycle for a period of 12 months. Recently, she underwent her 11th cycle of bevacizumab and is currently showing signs of complete clinical remission.
The left ovary was partly solid, partly cystic, and measured 35 × 30 × 20 mm. The left Fallopian tube was encased in adhesions together with the ovary. The uterus, right ovary, and the other fallopian tube were grossly normal. The omentum, measuring 450 × 180 × 10–90 mm, showed multiple small nodules (up to 10 mm in diameter) and one larger nodule (90 mm in diameter). The liver excision of 80 × 50 × 25 mm showed a few nodules up to 25 mm in the largest dimension.
Histologically, in the left ovary there were structures of a S-BTO with typical features . The examination also revealed that in close proximity to this tumor there were structures of invasive carcinoma, with mostly tubular, tubulocystic, and sporadically solid architecture. In the lumen of some of the tubular formations a dense eosinophilic material could be found . Tumor cells were medium in size, with predominantly vesicular nuclei with small nucleoli . Sporadic hobnail cells were present. The mitotic count was up to 4 mitoses /10 HPFs. The cytoplasm was predominantly eosinophilic. The structures of invasive carcinoma were present on the surface of the ovary and the serosa of the left fallopian tube. Metastases were found in the omentum and liver. The S-BTO was confined to the left ovary, without any sign of metastatic spread.
Immunohistochemically, the two tumor types showed different results. The S-BTO showed diffuse positivity for PAX8 and estrogen receptors. Progesterone receptors were expressed in approximately 50% of the S-BTO tumor cells. The structures of invasive carcinoma showed diffuse positivity for PAX8 . Up to 20% of the tumor cells were also positive for GATA3 . Most of the tumor cells (approximately 70%) also showed positiveTTF1 expression of variable intensity . Focally, there was a luminal positivity of CD10. The p53 showed a wild-type expression pattern. All of the other examined markers including WT1, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, HNF1B, calretinin, and inhibin were negative. Based on the morphology and the immunohistochemical profile, the invasive carcinoma was classified as an M-LAC.
The DNA from the FFPE samples was prepared and analyzed according to our standardized protocol . Libraries from the isolated DNA were prepared using the SeqCap custom hybridization probes (1020 kbp custom panel of 271 genes, NimbleGen, Roche) and sequenced by the NextSeq 500 instrument using the NextSeq 500/550 Mid Output Kit v2.5 (150 Cycles) separately on samples from the borderline tumor, invasive carcinoma, and liver metastasis. The results showed the clonal origin of all samples, which shared the same KRAS (NM_004985.3:c.34G > T, p.(G12C)) and PIK3CA (NM_006218.2:c.1633G > A,p.(E545K)) mutation. Moreover, in the sample from the primary invasive carcinoma and its liver metastasis, a likely pathogenic MYCN mutation (NM_005378.4:c.131C > T, p.(P44L) was found. In all samples, the deletion of exon 9–10 in the CHEK2 gene was also discovered, in concordance with the already known hereditary CHEK2 mutation carried by this patient.