A 17-year-old, previously healthy right-hand dominant male presented to the emergency department (ED) with pain, swelling, and numbness in his left hand. Three days prior to presentation, the patient had injured his left hand while playing football. He could not recall a specific incident leading to his hand injury such as a fall or tackle; rather he noticed pain and swelling in his hand following a football game, which continued to worsen in the following days. He was seen at an outside hospital where imaging was negative for fracture or dislocation. However, he continued to experience worsening pain, paresthesia, and swelling of his thumb and hand predominately located in the thenar compartment.
On physical exam, the patient had exquisite tenderness over the left thenar eminence and thumb with significant swelling in the thenar compartment, without any overlying erythema or open wounds. The patient had severely limited range of motion in the wrist as well as the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of the thumb secondary to severe pain. He was unable to oppose his thumb and any passive motion of the thumb caused significant pain. He also reported decreased sensation on the radial aspect of his left thumb. Sensation, capillary refill, strength, and range of motion were normal in digits two through five.
Radiographs were repeated in the ED, again revealing no bony injuries. Despite reassuring imaging, the patient’s clinical presentation, with tense swelling of the left thenar compartment, pain, decreased range of motion, and sensory deficit raised concern for compartment syndrome. Compartment pressures of the thenar compartment of the left hand were obtained using a Stryker needle with readings of 72 and 73 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), with a diastolic blood pressure of 80 mm Hg. A diagnosis of compartment syndrome was made, and the patient was taken to the operating room for emergent fasciotomy.
Prior to being transported to the operating room (OR), the patient’s bloodwork resulted, revealing pancytopenia with profound neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and leukopenia . He denied any known history of bleeding disorder, cancer, recent viral illness, or easy bruising or bleeding. In the OR, emergent fasciotomy of the thenar compartment of the left hand was performed. The surgical team decided to release only the thenar compartment due to bleeding risk and because the patient did not show any signs of compartment syndrome in the other hand compartments. The incision was primarily closed with loosely approximated sutures; we did not use negative pressure device or leave the wound open due to bleeding and infection risk given the patient’s pancytopenic state. Two units of platelets were transfused intraoperatively.
The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital for hematology/oncology workup of pancytopenia. Peripheral blood smear showed no abnormal white blood cells, reduced platelets, few giant platelets, and normal red blood cells without spherocytes. Bone marrow aspirate revealed blasts within normal range and slightly elevated monocytes. Viral workup was negative for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis A, B, and C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and parvovirus B19. Folate and vitamin B12 levels were within normal limits. Partial thromboplastin time was within normal limits and double-stranded DNA was negative, both reassuring for absence of lupus. Empiric treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin and dexamethasone was initiated for concern of underlying autoimmune process. A bone marrow biopsy was performed, which revealed hypercellular marrow with megakaryocytes and granulocytic left shift.
Ultimately, a diagnosis of Evans syndrome was made given the clinical presentation of concomitant autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). In this case the patient also presented with autoimmune neutropenia, a less common manifestation of Evans syndrome.
The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day five, with discharge labs revealing absolute neutrophil count of 810 units per liter (uL), platelets of 115,000/uL, hemoglobin 10.5 grams per deciliter, hematocrit 31.1%, and white blood cell count of 3,000/uL. He was seen for follow-up in the senior author’s office on postoperative day 14. At that time his incision was well healed; however, there was some residual stiffness of metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints, with continued numbness of the radial aspect of the thumb. The patient was discharged on a four-day course of dexamethasone. Upon follow-up with the hematology/oncology service, blood work did reveal persistent pancytopenia, and he was scheduled to begin rituximab infusions to manage his autoimmune pancytopenia.
In this case, the diagnosis of isolated thenar compartment syndrome was likely a blessing in disguise; the patient was instructed to refrain from contact sports due to his high risk of life-threatening bleeding, and he was given appropriate follow-up for his autoimmune pancytopenia.