A 32-year-old Japanese woman was referred to the Oral Surgery Clinic at the Fukuoka Dental College Hospital in Fukuoka, Japan for a painless swelling on the right mandibular gingiva. She did not have a family history of neurofibromatosis and had been aware of the lesion for approximately 8 years. Intraoral examination confirmed the presence of a pendunculated swelling on the posterior mandibular facial gingiva, which was located between the first and second molars . The excised specimen measured 2.0 × 1.0 × 0.8 cm, appeared yellowish-white in color, was relatively circumscribed but unencapsulated, and showed no evidence of hemorrhage or necrosis . Detailed examination of the patient revealed no evidence of café-au-lait spots, extraperineal cutaneous neurofibromas, or other stigmata associated with von Recklinghausen disease. After tumor excision, the patient has been on regular follow-up and has shown no recurrence or complications over the last 5 years.
Histologically, the lesion was found to be unencapsulated and showed diffuse, circumferential infiltration of the periosteal connective tissue surrounding the neurofibroma and was surfaced with stratified squamous epithelium. The tumor was composed of paucicellular and cell-rich areas . The paucicellular areas were composed of a uniform fine fibrillary collagen matrix containing either a few spindle-shaped fibroblasts or mast cells . Prominent vascular channels were noted in these areas. The cell-rich areas displayed sheet- or cord-like growth patterns of tumor cells that had either short fusiform or rounded shapes . These cells, although histologically identical to Schwann cells, showed no evidence of cytological atypia or mitotic figures. Numerous pale eosinophilic globules containing parallel slits were observed within the cellular sheets. The globules were composed of narrow elongated cells stacked in a lamellar arrangement, and were histologically identical to the tactile corpuscle-like Meissner bodies . The nuclei of the laminar cells were located at the periphery of the corpuscles or were arranged transverse to their long axes, along the lamellae. Histologically, the Meissner bodies were in contact with the neoplastic Schwann cells. To determine the immunohistochemical characteristics of the Meissner bodies observed in the tumor, immunoperoxidase staining of the specimen was performed using the Histofine Simple Stain Kit (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan), and the reaction products were visualized following exposure to diaminobenzidine. Antibodies to S-100 protein, calretinin, vimentin, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and Ki-67 (MIB-1) were obtained from DakoCytomation (Kyoto, Japan). Anti-CD34 antibody was purchased from Nichirei (Tokyo, Japan). Modified microwave antigen retrieval in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) was used for analyzing antibodies to calretinin, CD34, and Ki-67. The lamellar structures of the Meissner bodies were intensely immunoreactive to both S-100 protein and NSE . The Schwann cells observed in the cellular sheets reacted to both antibodies. A few single cells in the fibrous component were stained with S-100 protein or NSE. The Meissner bodies reacted positively to vimentin but to a lesser degree compared to that for S-100 protein or NSE . CD34-positive spindle cells were found around the Meissner bodies in the cellular sheets as well as in the clusters of Meissner bodies . The vascular endothelium of the fibrous component was also positive for CD34. All cells of the fibrous and cellular components were non-reactive to the other antibodies. Small clusters of S-100 protein-positive Meissner bodies were diffusely scattered throughout the periosteum . In addition, immunostaining with the nuclear proliferation marker Ki-67 (MIB-1) revealed approximately 1% positivity in the tumor cells.