The patient was a 54-year-old female who was hospitalized for 12 days infected with COVID-19. Her spiral lung and Sino-orbital computerized scan is showed in . The RT-PCR tests were positive twice while the levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) were high. Naproxen, lopinavir / ritonavir, acetaminophen interferon beta1a (12 million units every other day) and dexamethasone (8 mg for 12 days.) were administered for the patients, moreover, fluid and oxygen therapies were performed by a facial mask. She returned with a complaint of sore and red eyes three days after being discharged from one of the tertiary hospital in Tehran, Iran.
A number of examinations were performed in the emergency ward as the case was prone to mucormycosis. Fortunately, the patient had no underlying problems or any signs of diabetes. The computed tomography scans of the brain, paranasal and orbital sinuses, as well as the necessary tests were performed. She was transferred to the operation room after consultation with ENT specialists and was subjected to sinus endoscopy and functional endoscopic sinus surgery .
Phlegm specimens and nasal discharge were collected and sent for pathological assessments. The samples taken from the sinuses mucosa and bone tissue, Phlegm specimens and nasal discharge which was sent for pathological studies and stained with PAS, showed invasion of vascular and nervous tissue and broad, non-septate hyphae, which confirmed mucormycosis.
presents the test results for the patient. In the predisposing factors that could be the cause of mucormycosis in this patient, undiagnosed pre-diabetic conditions and dexamethasone use were found during the previous hospitalization.
Our treatment included radical surgery , frequent examinations of the sinuses and debridement, as well as Amphotericin B liposomal (7.5mg/kg), plasma glucose control and regular ophthalmologic examinations. After ensuring adequate surgical and pharmacological treatments, the intravenous treatment was changed to oral posaconazole (200mg /4 times daily) (overlapped for three days with injection).
After being discharged from the hospital, the patient went to the clinics for periodic examinations. There was no problem in favor of mucormycosis in the sinuses around the eye although the patient's left eye was not preserved which resulted in complete evacuation of the eye. Six month later, she referred to hospital with red eye complaint. She was admitted and more evaluations were done but no sign in favor of mucormycosis was detected.