An 85-year-old (Swiss-German) Caucasian woman, born and raised in Switzerland, presented to her family doctor with left hip pain and limitation of hip joint movement but no fever, weight loss, or night sweats. Her medical history included hypertension, hypothyroidism, and asthma. Her daily medication was valsartan, levothyroxine, and ciclesonide oral Inhalation. Her family history was uneventful. The widowed patient lived on her own; she did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. An MRI scan showed advanced degeneration of her lumbar spine and destruction of the left iliac joint with surrounding edema and a small collection of fluid ventral to the iliosacral joint (see Fig. ). Arthritis of her left sacroiliac joint was diagnosed. Despite numerous sacroiliac joint infiltrations and thermocoagulation of sensory nerves there was no long-lasting improvement. Her exacerbated lumbar pain led to repeated CT and MRI scans 9 months after the onset of the lumbar pain. Imaging showed progressive destruction of the sacroiliac joint and a 10 × 8 × 7 cm fluid collection in her left iliopsoas muscle .
She was in good health except for her persevering hip pain. An examination revealed normal vital signs and no fever. Sensations were normal in both lower limbs. Muscle strength was grade M5 throughout (Medical Research Council scale of muscle strength), and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Laboratory testing showed low hemoglobin (100 g/l, reference range 118–158 g/l), peripheral monocytosis with a normal leukocyte count, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 20 mg/l (reference < 5 mg/l). Her liver and kidney function were sufficient, the electrolytes were normal. No antibiotics were used before abscess drainage. After the abscess was drained surgically, her condition improved, and she remained afebrile. Blood cultures remained negative. A presumptive diagnosis of a pyogenic abscess secondary to a bacterial sacroiliitis after numerous infiltrations was made.
Seven biopsies from the pus-like fluid were collected and analyzed. Leukocytes were present in the Gram-stain smear; acid-fast bacilli could be visualized in auramine-rhodamine stain. The aerobic and anaerobic cultures showed no bacterial growth, neither did the enrichment cultures. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for TB was positive. Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex cultures were found to be positive. Drug susceptibility testing revealed a M. tuberculosis isolate fully susceptible to all first-line drugs. An X-ray film of her thorax was normal, and acid-fast bacteria staining of sputum was negative. Therefore, tuberculous sacroiliitis with secondary iliopsoas abscess was diagnosed and combination treatment with isoniazid (100 mg), rifampicin (240 mg), pyrazinamide (600 mg), and ethambutol (400 mg) was started. The potency of the therapy was increased over the following days (isoniazid (250 mg), rifampicin (600 mg), pyrazinamide (1500 mg), and ethambutol (1000 mg).
For further observation of the treatment and rehabilitation our patient was referred to a rehabilitation hospital where she developed a hypoactive delirium. After exclusion of all other causes the delirium had to be attributed to the antituberculous drugs. Laboratory testing showed persistent low hemoglobin (109 g/l) and a CRP level of 10 mg/l. Her liver enzymes were elevated: alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 183 U/l (reference range < 35 U/l) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 149 U/l (reference range < 35 U/l). Her kidney function and the electrolytes were normal. Despite discontinuation of pyrazinamide and ethambutol her hypoactive delirium did not resolve. Therefore her antituberculous treatment was discontinued and she started to improve. After a treatment interruption of 10 days an alternative treatment with rifampicin and moxifloxacin was started.
A control imaging 9 months after therapy initiation showed persistent destruction of her left iliac joint with regressed edema and fluid collections. Repeated laboratory tests showed normal leukocytes, CRP, and liver enzymes, only her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was still elevated (40 mm/hour, reference range < 12 mm/hour). Her condition showed continuous improvement; she now lives on her own with nursing assistance once a week. She has hardly any pain and she has no deficits in sensorimotor function. After a total of 12 months the antibacterial therapy with rifampicin and moxifloxacin was discontinued; a control MRI is planned.