We present the case of a woman aged 46 years suffering from arterial hypertension in treatment with nebivolol and lisinopril. She experienced severe anaphylaxis which awakened her from sleep during the night and required emergency medical treatment, tracheal intubation and hospitalization in intensive care unit. The clinical presentation included generalized urticaria, angioedema of lips, hands and feet, dyspnoea and oxygen desaturation (SpO2 49%), hypotension (blood pressure 70/30) and tachycardia (150 bpm), severe diarrhoea with hypoxemic acidosis and loss of consciousness. No acute serum tryptase measurement was performed in emergency room. Troponin elevation was observed and the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a ST segment depression in antero-lateral and inferior leads and specular elevation in aVR, suggestive of myocardial ischemia. The ECG returned normal a few hours later as well as troponin levels. . No abnormalities were detected in transthoracic cardiac echography. This condition defines the Kounis syndrome.
After discharge, the patient referred to our Allergy Unit. An epinephrine autoinjector was provided and the patient was trained on its use. On the basis of clinical history, a reaction to drugs was excluded. In the day of the reaction, the patient referred she ate at dinner meat and vegetables, the same food she ate in the following days with no problems, before referring to allergy unit. Noteworthy, the patient reported a skin lesion of the left leg of about 15 centimetres of diameter which occurred 6 weeks before, characterized by local oedema and erythema, suggestive of insect or tick bite. The allergological work up included skin prick test and specific Immunoglobulins E (s-IgEs) to common foods and latex and prick + prick test with pork and beef kidneys and livers. On the basis of clinical history and negative skin test and s-IgEs, drugs, latex and foods containing alpha-gal were ruled out as causes of the reaction. Basal serum tryptase was in normal range (8.63 ng/ml). Total IgE level was 672 kU/l. Measurement of Immunoglobulin G and M class of Borrelia burgdorferi and Rickettsia antibodies was assessed with negative result. To explore the possibility of A. reflexus bite, we showed to the patient pictures of the tick and asked for the presence of pigeons in the domestic environment. Actually, the patient was able to collect in the immediate environment of the house a dozen of alive soft ticks, which were recognized as A. reflexus by an entomologist .