A 52-year-old male patient was referred by the neurology department to the rehabilitation department because of a 6-mo history of left limping gait.
The abrupt onset of his symptom started after severe stress. Since then his symptom persisted but He didn’t complain any numbness or tingling sensation on the left lateral side of the lower leg and dorsum of the foot.
He had no history of any tumor, trauma, and other diseases.
He had no specific personal or family history of neurologic disease.
The Medical Research Council scale for weakness showed the normal grade. When we requested him to do dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of his ankle in the standing and seating positions, we didn’t see the any abnormality. However, we could see the DG during the gait. He had no lower back pain and the straight leg raise reached 80° on both sides. No specific finding occurred in the neurologic examination.
Laboratory finding, including a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, creatine kinase, lactic dehydrogenase, and liver function tests were within normal ranges.
We requested the nerve conduction studies with needle EMG. There were no evidences of common peroneal neuropathy and L5 radiculopathy in nerve conduction studies and needle EMG. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine showed no remarkable finding. In addition, lower leg MRI was conducted to rule out the muscle origin. There was no definite finding. MRI of brain was performed to rule out a central origin. There was no specific finding except a few tiny unidentified bright object in the both cerebral white matters. For further evaluation, a wireless surface EMG (Noraxon, TELEmyo DTS, USA) was performed. Gel-type, 20-mm diameter, Ag/AgCl alloy dual electrodes (Noraxon Dual EMG Electrode, USA) were attached to tibialis anterior (TA), medial gastrocnemius (GCM), and lateral GCM muscles of both sides (left and right) after cleaning the sites with alcohol to reduce skin impedance. The surface EMGs were amplified 500 times, sampled at 1.5 kHz and digitized using a 16-bit analogue to digital converter. Signals were filtered at a bandwidth of 10-500 Hz to eliminate noise recorded during the data collection process, and root mean square window of 50 ms was used for signal smoothing. Mean of each period was calculated during the test. At first he was told to walk on the spot from right foot during 13 s. EMG amplitude of left medial and lateral GCM muscles was larger than right medial and lateral GCM muscles. EMG amplitude was similar at the both TA muscles. When we analyzed EMG signals for each muscle during 13 s, there were EMG bursts of double-contraction in the left medial and lateral GCM muscles, while EMG analysis of right medial and lateral GCM muscles noted regular bursts of single contraction. EMG analysis of both TA muscles were shown in similar bursts . Secondly he was told to walk forward from right foot during 20 s. EMG amplitude of left medial and lateral GCM muscles was also larger than right medial and lateral GCM muscles. EMG amplitude of left TA muscle was slightly larger than the one of right TA muscle. EMG analysis of both GCM muscles were alike in that walking on the spot. The bursts of left TA muscle were slightly higher and more than the ones of right TA muscle .