A 45-year-old man presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a chief complaint of epigastric pain with radiation to the back.
The patient experienced persistent abdominal pain for two weeks, starting from UGI panendoscopic and colonoscopic procedures performed at our facility. The pain had persisted for 2 wk before he returned to our hospital for further examination.
The patient had a history of untreated hypertension and hyperlipidemia. He experienced immediate abdominal pain after endoscopic procedures performed during a voluntary health checkup and brought this to our attention while resting in the recovery room. Four hours later, plain abdominal standing X-ray was taken and an apparently normal small bowel ileus pattern without subphrenic free air was found . Consequently, the patient was treated conservatively using menthol packing of his abdomen and allowed to go home in Tai Tung, which was in the eastern part of Taiwan, about 5 h drive from our facility. During the following 2 wk, he experienced persistent abdominal symptoms and sought help from several local clinics/hospitals, where he received conservative treatments mainly for gastritis or enteritis. As the discomfort did not improve, the patient contacted us for help 14 d after the initial endoscopic procedures and was transferred to our emergency room (ER) for further management.
At the ER, the patient complained of persistent epigastric pain radiating to the back with abdominal distension for the past 2 wk, but appeared otherwise easy-looking. There was no fever or chillness, and his vital signs were normal. Physical examination of the abdomen revealed mild epigastric tenderness without any signs suggestive of peritonitis. Soft and mild distended abdomen was found while no muscle guarding or board-like abdomen was observed. Since mechanical hollow organ perforation and peritonitis were both ruled out after thorough examination of the patient, acute abdominal aortic dissection was suspected.
Laboratory examination performed at the ER included complete blood count and biochemistry examinations. All data were within normal limits.
After thorough physical and laboratory examinations upon returning to ER, the patient was subjected to contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen. Isolated spontaneous SMAD was revealed . The dissection began from just below the orifice of the superior mesenteric artery with intra-mural hematoma and without stenosis. Although the intra-mural hematoma compressed the true lumen, there was no suggestive signs of bowel ischemia, bowel thickening, or ascites.