An 11 years old obese Tanner 1 boy was referred for follow up of TM. The mother
noticed that the child's left testis was bigger than the right one from
toddlerhood.
The boy showed a normal for age stretched length buried penis. Both testes were
topical, right testis was normal for age. The left testis was clearly increased, with
a hard painless mass attaining the upper pole. Abdominal and inguinal examinations
were normal.
An US dated 18 months before his presentation reported DB TM and an augmented left
testis, presenting a heterogeneous 21x21x18mm upper pole nodule with posterior
acoustic shadowing and peripheral vessels. Right and left testes measured,
respectively, 25x17x15mm (3.3cm3) and 36x25x23mm (10.8cm3).
These findings were confirmed by two other US (6 months before and at his
presentation) . The tumor did not
grow during this extensive period of observation. Abdominal US, inguinal US and
thoracic radiographs were normal. αfetoprotein (αFP), human chorionic gonadotrophin
(βHCG) and lactate di-hydrogenase (LDH) blood levels were normal.
Considering the high probability for a benign tumor we opted to defer abdominal CT
and planned a partial left orchiectomy/excisional biopsy with frozen section. The
cord was exposed and atraumatically clamped, with a left inguinal excision. No local
hypothermia was used. The testis was exposed. A longitudinal anterior incision
throughout the adventitia and parenchyma was done, to expose the tumor, which located
deep into the upper pole. An encapsulated 20x18x21mm round nodule was easily
dissected out and sent to the pathologist. Frozen section diagnosed a dermoid tumor,
confirmed later on permanent sections. After histological diagnosis the cord was
released, the testis was reconstructed and fixed to the left hemiscrotum . Total cord clamping time was 35min.
The patient was released home 12 hours after surgery. There were no post-operative
complications. Routine biannual US follow up to address TM and to monitor testes
growth was planned.