An 81-year-old man had been diagnosed with early gastric cancer and had undergone gastrectomy with Billroth I construction at 60 years of age. Currently, he underwent upper-gastrointestinal endoscopy for anemia that revealed an irregular lesion in the remnant stomach, for which he was referred to our hospital for further examination. Endoscopy and upper-gastrointestinal tract examination revealed type 3 advanced gastric cancer in the upper body of the stomach and slightly invading the esophagus. . A biopsy specimen confirmed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (Her-2 negative). An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed the thickened gastric wall and two swollen PANs that were 70 mm and 30 mm in diameter, respectively . We diagnosed the patient with unresectable RGC (Borrmann type 3, cT4a, cN1, cH0, cP0, cM1 (LYM), cStage IV according to the 7th UICC guidelines) and administered SOX chemotherapy. We expected that the tumor would be down staged after chemotherapy. S-1 (100 mg/body/day) was orally administered twice daily for the first 2 weeks of a 3-week course. Oxaliplatin was administered as an intravenous infusion of 150 mg/body/day on day 1 of each course. The patient completed three treatment courses without severe adverse effects, although he experienced mild but tolerable weakness and could continue treatment. Upper-gastrointestinal endoscopy after chemotherapy demonstrated that the gastric lesion had disappeared, and a gastric ulcer scar could be observed. Additionally, the abdominal CT revealed a reduction in the size of the PAN to 60% of the original mass. PET-CT was performed and there were no distant metastases. We thought an R0 resection was possible and considered an indication for conversion surgery. Hence, 36 days after the administration of the last dose of chemotherapy, we planned to perform radical surgery. Laparotomy findings showed no peritoneal metastasis, and peritoneal lavage cytology revealed no cancer cells in the abdominal cavity; we performed total remnant gastrectomy and D2 lymphadenectomy as well as PAN dissection with Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The time taken for surgery was 459 min, and the total blood loss was 340 mL. On macroscopic observation, ulcer scars were observed in the remnant stomach . Microscopic examination revealed no tumor cells in the ulcer scar of the resected remnant stomach or in any of the lymph nodes including the PANs harvested from the surgical specimen. The therapeutic effect of SOX chemotherapy was grade 3, i.e., a complete response according to the Japanese guidelines on gastric cancer .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 24. Adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 was performed in the outpatient setting, and the patient has remained disease-free for 1 year after surgery.