The 39-year old, white female was first seen at our clinic at 34 gestational weeks. She was born with a complex anomaly including extrophy of the bladder, anteriorly located and abnormally formed external genitalia, musculoskeletal abnormalities of the pelvis (pubic diastasis) and an abdominal wall defect (omphalocele). Shortly after birth, she was operated by cystectomy and continent anal urinary diversion, which means, that her ureters where implanted into the rectum (Mainz Pouch II). She reported to be continent for urine and faeces over the intact sphincter ani, and did not have any history of frequent kidney infections at any point in her lifetime. The uterus and the cervix were of normal appearance, and at time of presentation, the woman had a closed abdominal wall with a vulva-like opening in her lower abdomen, over which she had regular menstruations as well as sexual intercourse. All further physical examinations (heart, lung, skeletal) were normal. She lived in a stable partnership (married) and had a regular job as a sales attendant at a gas station. The patient reported to smoke one cigarette per day. As a young girl she was told, that she could never become pregnant, and thus she did not use any form of contraception and also never went to see a gynecologist.
The present pregnancy was her first at 39 years of age, and was not detected until over 20 weeks. The local obstetrical team was unsure about delivery management, and thus she was referred to our tertiary care center at 34 weeks. At this point, the patient was healthy, and no anomalies were found in the fetus, and uterine and umbilical perfusions were normal. The fetus was, however, growth restricted (estimated weight below 3rd percentile). Lung maturity treatment was initiated with 2 × 12 mg betamethason, and it was planned to prolong pregnancy until 36 weeks. As mode of delivery a cesarean section over a midline laparatomy in the upper abdomen was planned, which was above the region of the previous operations. Here, the uterine wall could be well demonstrated on ultrasound a few centimeters behind the abdominal wall. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to localize the exact position of the ureters. There were no reports of the primary operations performed shortly after birth 39 years ago.
As the patient lived in some distance from our center, she was hospitalized at 35 weeks to wait for delivery. At this time, the cervix had prolapsed through the abdominal wall . Cervical length continued to be normal, and no signs of infection were seen.
Shortly after hospitalization, the patient started to show symptoms of beginning preeclampsia (increased blood pressure with a maximum of 170/100 an elevated sFlt-1:PlGF ratio of 260, rising to 365, but no proteinuria or clinical symptoms) and non-reassuring fetal heart rate tracing (variable decelerations). Treatment was started with methyldopa 3 × 250 mg per day. Apart from nulli-parity and advanced maternal age, the patient did not have any other risk factors for preeclampsia. But fetal growth restriction can be interpreted as an additional sign of dysfunctional placenta in this patient, although uterine perfusion was always normal. Cesarean section was performed at 35 + 2 weeks and a growth restricted, but otherwise healthy preterm girl was delivered with a birth weight of 1490 g (< 3rd percentile), Apgars of 8/10/10 and an umbilical cord artery pH of 7,21. The cesarean section was uncomplicated, and no major adhesions were found in the upper abdomen. A tubal ligation was performed, as the patient did not wish any further pregnancies. The postpartal maternal course was uncomplicated with normalizing blood pressure under continuous therapy with methyldopa (3 × 250 mg per day). The patient was discharged at day 6 post cesarean and advised to see an internal medicine specialist for re-evaluation of hypertension 6 weeks postpartum. Uterine prolapse was still present at this point. The baby was discharged from the intensive care unit 16 days after delivery. The mother was advised to have regular coloscopies at least every 5 years, if an initial coloscopy showed normal findings, as continent anal urinary diversion bears an increased risk of rectal carcinoma. As the patient lived about 2 h away from the perinatal center, she wished all follow-up care to be performed closer to her home. In preparation of this case reports, it was attempted to reach the patient, but she had moved and changed her telephone number, so no information over her further follow-up could be obtained.