A 72-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for treatment of perihilar cholangiocarcinoma. She had no comorbidities other than hypertension and hyperlipidemia. Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) demonstrated a 2 cm mass around the left hepatic duct with extensive vascular invasion. The lateral extension reached the confluence of the anterior and posterior branches of the bile duct, representing a Bismuth type IV tumor. The right hepatic artery was involved. The portal vein bifurcation was also involved with obstruction of the left portal vein . She underwent endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) to relieve jaundice, but subsequently developed cholangitis and was treated with antibiotic therapy based on the results of each culture . The ENBD tube remained in place until the day of surgery (37 days). Cultures of bile from the ENBD tube obtained at each instance of cholangitis revealed Klebsiella oxytoca, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae, Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus casseliflavus, Bacteroides fragilis, and C. perfringens . Given the tumor extension, patient’s general condition (performance status of 0), nutritional status (albumin, 3.8 g/dl), and liver function (indocyanine green clearance, 0.210 and 15-min retention rate, 4.3%), left hepatic trisectionectomy and caudate lobectomy with simultaneous resection of the portal vein and right hepatic artery were planned. Portal vein embolization was performed, and the subsequent remnant liver volume increased from 434 ml (41.9%) to 509 ml (47.5%). Five days prior to surgery, a decreased bile outflow from the ENBD tube and subsequent high fever were observed. We considered postponing the surgery, but since the fever was temporary, the decrease in the bile outflow was caused by the bending of the ENBD tube, and the outflow improved when the bending was released, and the blood tests on the day before surgery were generally within the acceptable range (WBC, 8010 μl; CRP: 1.99 mg/dl), we decided to proceed with the surgery as scheduled. The most recent preoperative bile cultures showed only Enterobacter cloacae. Therefore, CFPM was administered prophylactically, targeting this organism according to the infectious disease physician’s instructions. Surgery was performed with an operating time of 10 h 28 min and a blood loss of 2153 ml. . Her postoperative course was almost uneventful except for bile leakage with International Study Group of Liver Surgery grade B. C. perfringens was not detected by ascites and bile culture after surgery. Findings from blood tests 2 days before discharge were generally acceptable (WBC, 7640/μl; CRP, 2.65 mg/dl; albumin, 2.6 g/dl). She was discharged on postoperative day (POD) 35 . The tumor was pT4 N0 M0 pStage IIIB according to the UICC 8th guidelines .
Nineteen days after discharge (POD 54), she was readmitted due to acute-onset abdominal pain, massive hematuria, and high fever from the previous day. On arrival at the hospital, although her vital signs were stable, a laboratory examination showed a severe inflammatory reaction and hemolysis, which suggested disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) with an International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis DIC score of 7 . Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a liver abscess 70 mm in size in segment 6 , and ultrasonically guided drainage was performed immediately. The abscess was drained of 250 mL of air-filled pus. Multiple Gram-positive bacilli were detected in the pus. Two blood cultures showed Gram-positive bacilli and hemolysis. Based on the strong hemolytic findings, empiric antibiotic therapy (vancomycin: 750 mg/day, meropenem: 3 g/day) was started, targeting C. perfringens and β-hemolytic streptococci.
Four hours after her arrival, however, tachypnea and decreased oxygen saturation appeared. A laboratory examination showed significant hypoglycemia, progressive acidosis, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Five hours after her arrival, she presented with sudden cardiopulmonary arrest, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was started. Despite CPR being performed for one hour, she died six hours after her arrival.
At autopsy, an abscess 32 × 22 mm in size was observed in liver segment 6 . Microscopically, the abscess consisted of coagulation necrosis of liver cells with acute inflammatory cell infiltration and a cavity . Clusters of basophilic, Gram-positive large bacilli were observed in the necrotic debris in the cavity . C. perfringens was detected in the drainage fluid. No ischemic changes due to reconstructed vessel occlusion were observed in the remnant liver. There were no findings of anastomotic leakage at the hepaticojejunostomy. No abscesses were found in any other organs. In summary, the autopsy, along with the clinical, laboratory, and microbiological data, revealed serious C. perfringens infection characterized by liver abscesses, sepsis, and DIC.