A 40-year-old woman who first presented with complaints of decreased vision and metamorphopsia in her right eye was diagnosed with CO 9 years ago. At that time her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 12/20. Both eyes had normal anterior segments. Right fundus examination showed a geographic-shaped, yellowish-white choroidal lesion surrounding the optic disc in the right eye . B-scan ultrasonography of right eye revealed a typical dense echogenic plaque which causing acoustic shadowing behind . FFA and ICGA had no evidence of CNV except early hyperfluorescent choroidal filling pattern with late diffuse staining. Computerized tomography (CT) showed a hyperdense choroidal plaque with the same density as bone . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated serous retinal detachments at the initial examination .
There was no evidence of any subretinal neovascularization clinically and the patient maintained stable vision, so she was asked to come for regular follow-up.
Last year, after 8 years follow up, secondary CNV was found by angio-OCT at the temporal of CO. BCVA had decreased to 5/20. B-scan and CT didn’t demonstrate much different than before. Compared to 8 years ago, CO grew up in most margins and macular appeared schistose hemorrhage . A part of tumor on the inferior margin displayed decalcification and choroid atrophy. OCT revealed subretinal neovascularization with choriocapillaris atrophy. OCTA revealed superficial and deep subretinal neovascularization of CNV in CO not visualize with other imaging methods . Except CO, ICGA didn’t show the morphology and structure of secondary choroidal neovascularization as obvious as OCTA. .
Based on those findings, the patient was diagnosed with secondary CNV. The patient was administered 3 intravitreal ranibizumab injections at 1-month intervals. In follow-up examination at 3 months post-injections, visual acuity had improved to 18/20 and OCT showed regression of the subretinal fluid . The patient’s condition was stable during the 1-year follow-up period and no additional injections were required. OCTA also showed reduction in area of CNV .