A 61-year-old man with hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and chronic kidney disease underwent retroperitoneal right nephrectomy for a 6.5-cm renal mass. The histological diagnosis was clear cell carcinoma, G2 (Fuhrman), INFa, v1, ly0, eg, fc1, im0, rc-inf0, rp-inf1, s-inf1, pT3a with infiltration of the renal sinus. The progression of chronic kidney disease necessitated HD after nephrectomy. Nevertheless, 6 months later, he developed multiple bone metastases including the 5th, 6th, and 8th ribs, the 9th thoracic vertebra, and 2nd lumbar vertebra. Pazopanib was initiated at a half of the standard dose (400 mg/day) as first-treatment for metastatic RCC. Six months after the induction of pazopanib, rapid progression of bone metastasis was noted. As second-line treatment for metastatic RCC, nivolumab was started at the standard dose (3 mg/kg). On the 2nd day after the first administration of nivolumab, chest X-ray did not show any abnormal shadows in spite of fever and general fatigue. On the 5th day, he complained of discomfort on breathing and fatigue with oxygen desaturation. Chest CT on the 5th day demonstrated diffuse ground glass opacity in both lung fields, suggesting nivolumab-induced pneumonitis with the AIP/DAD pattern . Blood examination on the 5th day showed high levels of CRP, s-IL-2R, and SP-D, indicating interstitial lung disease . In addition, a normal WBC count and negative results in a sputum culture test for B-D glucan and Aspergillus antigen ruled out bacterial or atypical pneumonia. A normal level of anti-nuclear antibody and presence of ANCA antigens excluded connective tissue diseases. The bronchoscope was not conducted because the patient refused. The patient was diagnosed with PD-1 inhibitor-related IP. Intravenous corticosteroid therapy (methylprednisolone at 1 g/day for 3 days) with adjunctive antibiotics led to rapid recovery. On the 9th day, oral corticosteroid was started, and then slowly tapered. On the 22nd day, chest CT showed improved opacity , and the patient was discharged on the 24th day. After recovery from PD-1 inhibitor-related IP, the patient refused our recommendation of axitinib as third-line therapy and selected palliative treatment.