A 55-year-old male who was a farmer by occupation presented to the Neurology Outpatient Department (OPD) at the Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India, in September 2018, with complaints of weakness in all four limbs for the last 15 days. About 1 week prior to the onset of weakness, the patient gave a history of fever with flu-like symptoms that subsided on taking antipyretics. The patient also gave a history of a tingling sensation in the toes of both feet and the fingers of the left hand, followed by gradual weakness in all four limbs at the same time. A provisional diagnosis of GBS was made and the patient was admitted to the Neurology ward. After admission, a detailed history revealed that the patient was a diagnosed case of leprosy for which he had been taking multi-drug therapy (MDT) for the previous 6 months. He had noticed hypo-pigmented patches with loss of sensation on the left forearm about 8 months previously, for which he had been prescribed rifampicin, dapsone and clofazimine by a physician in his home town . After symptomatic management of the presenting complaints, the patient was sent to the Department of Microbiology for a consultation and six-site slit-skin sampling. The following six sites were sampled for microscopy for : skin lesions, earlobes, eyebrows, elbow, chin and back. The selected skin site was first cleaned with 70 % alcohol. The skin was then pinched up and raised between the thumb and index finger of the left hand to squeeze out blood from the body part and minimize bleeding. With the point of a sterile scalpel blade a 5 mm long and 2–3 mm deep incision was made to create a slit. The bottom and the sides of the slit were scraped to obtain sufficient material, which was then transferred to a clean new glass slide to obtain a uniform and thin smear with an average diameter of 5–7 mm . The smear was air-dried and fixed by passing the slide over the flame. Ziehl–Neelsen staining was performed for direct microscopic examination using 5 % sulphuric acid for decolourization . Initial screening of the slides under a 10× objective led to the incidental finding of sheathed structures resembling Mf on the smear made from ear lobules . In addition, short AFB were observed under the oil-immersion objective (100×). A tentative diagnosis of co-infection with asymptomatic filariasis and leprosy was made. After the patient was admitted, both thick and thin blood smears were made from blood samples collected at 10 pm. Microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained smears showed multiple sheathed Mf with an absence of nuclei at the tail tip . A diagnosis of asymptomatic filariasis caused by W. bancrofti was made and the patient was initiated on diethylcarbamazine (DEC) at a dose of 6 mg/kg/day in divided doses.