A Japanese boy was born at 30 weeks of gestation by elective cesarean section to a 31-year-old gravida 1 para 0 mother. He was born with an APGAR score of 4, 8 and 8 at 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively, weighing 1,490 g. He immediately breathed spontaneously but showed chest wall retraction. He was provided with a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) mask and was admitted to our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).
His first several days in the NICU were uneventful, and he could tolerate breast milk. On his 7th day of life, he presented with lethargy, bilious gastric residual, and bloody stool. His laboratory results revealed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (0.57 mg/dL) and white blood cell (WBC) count (10,630/μL). Chest and abdominal X-ray showed no abnormal signs. Considering the possibility of sepsis, treatment with intravenous ampicillin (200 mg/kg/day) and cefotaxime (200 mg/kg/day) was initiated. His bloody stool resolved quickly, and gastric residuals decreased and then disappeared. On his 8th day, enteral feeding was resumed. His general conditions were stable, his laboratory findings apparently improved, and we completed antibiotics treatment on his 12th day of life. He was tolerant of a feeding increase, and his growth was also stable. Ventilatory support (nasal CPAP and a high-flow nasal cannula) was required until the 15th day of his life.
However, from his 30th day, he presented with increasing apnea and vomiting. Contrast gastric X-ray performed on the 40th day revealed gastroesophageal reflux (GER). Treatment of GER was added by dividing enteral feeding and medication. Nevertheless, his quantity of stool gradually decreased, and physical examination showed worsening abdominal distention. Simultaneously, his CRP and WBC levels were slightly elevated up to his 40th day at 2.56 mg/dL and 20,380/μL, respectively. Intravenous cefazolin (100 mg/kg/day) was administered, followed by cefaclor p.o. Abdominal radiography on his 50th day showed a significantly distended intestine with gas , which urged us to perform contrast X-ray of the colon; the X-ray suggested stenosis of the ascending colon . In order to decompress the distended bowel, we tried to insert a tube through the narrowed colon resulting in failure. Therefore we decided to perform emergent exploratory laparotomy.
Intraoperative findings included viable loops of bowel, and the terminal ileum remarkably distended in the right lower quadrant . The appendix was adhered to the ascending colon by approximately 1 cm from the ileocecal junction and was found to be perforated at its root. This part of the colon was narrow and was not dilated by compression from the oral end, while the contents passed through smoothly. Ascites was slightly yellowish and was examined by a culture test, which turned out to be negative. No perforation in the colon or evident peritonitis was observed macroscopically. The ascending colon lesion including the appendix was resected by 3 cm, and then the ileum and remaining ascending colon were anastomosed end to end.
The pathological findings were as follows: The appendix was perforated at a 2.5-mm diameter 5 mm from the root . The mucosa showed lymphoid hypoplasia. Necrotic granulation tissue replaced the area around the perforation. Old hemorrhage, subtle calcification, and a few foreign body granulomas were found in the area; a finding that is compatible with several weeks of duration of the lesion . By contrast, reconstruction of the luminal layers by fibrosis, suggesting months’ delay, was not observed.
Mucosal erosion of 18 mm in diameter was located on the ascending colon 7 mm from the ileocecal valve in the severely stenotic area . The erosion was a mucosal defect replaced by necrotic granulation, limited within the lamina muscularis mucosae and submucosa. The submucosal granulation and fibrosis are compatible with several weeks of duration. .
Postoperative recovery was good. Enteral feeding was resumed on postoperative day (POD) 4. He was tolerant of full feeding on POD 10. After surgery, he did not develop apnea and his GER treatment was completed. On POD 28, he weighed 3,040 g at the time of his discharge to home. Furthermore, 4 months after discharge, he developed adherent ileus and required surgical detachment. Currently, he is generally well and his neurological development is within the normal range.