A 23-year-old male was admitted to the department of hematology because of elevated hemoglobin during routine check-up. Physical examination revealed digital clubbing, cyanosis of oral mucosa and extremities. Remarkable signs of laboratory work up included decreased O2 saturation on room air of about 85% and elevated hemoglobin of about 23.0 g/dl. Chest roentgenogram suggested remote infectious lesion in the left upper lobe and echocardiography showed no cardiac malformation. Additionally, the patient reported history of TB in his childhood and had been treated with standard anti-TB therapy for almost 1 year. Family members reported no history of repeated nosebleed, anemia or similar features mentioned above. The patient had been informed by his doctor that his clubbed fingers were sequela of chronic hypoxia caused by TB and the left pulmonary lesion was residual TB lesion after standard treatment. Bone marrow examination demonstrated non-specific erythroid hyperplasia. The initial diagnosis made by hematologist was polycythemia vera and hydroxyurea was applied. After several courses of treatment, the patient’s hemoglobin still kept high (22.5 g/dl) without obvious change and cardiothoracic consultation was scheduled. Considering the digital clubbing, cyanosis of oral mucosa and extremities, elevated hemoglobin, low O2 saturation and left pulmonary lesion, PAVMs were suspected. CT pulmonary angiography showed abnormal communications between the left upper pulmonary arteries and veins and PAVMs of left lingual lobe was confirmed . No extrapulmonary vascular malformations were detected.
Since PAVMs were diffuse but restricted to left upper lobe of lung, complete feeding arteries embolization was difficult and the patient finally received video assisted thoracoscopic left upper lobectomy. Intraoperatively, diffusely dilated and angiomatous vessels with hemorrhagic tendency were detected on the surface of left upper lobe . The left superior pulmonary vein, left upper lobe bronchus and left superior pulmonary artery were resected by endo-stapler, respectively. After left upper lobectomy, the O2 saturation immediately increased to 98%.
The histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of PAVMs. The patient was discharged home on the 5th postoperative day with hemoglobin level of 19.2 g/dl. Three months after surgery, the symptom of cyanosis relieved and hemoglobin was down to almost normal level of 14.9 g/dl. So far, the patient has been followed up for about 5 years without occurrence of cyanosis, dyspnea, decreased O2 saturation or increased hemoglobin level.