A 25-year-old female patient with bilateral corneal opacities presented to the Department of Ophthalmology University of Pecs. The patient was diagnosed with Hurler−Scheie syndrome (compound heterozygous mutation of NM_000203.1:c.134_145del and NM_000203.1:c.1421_1423del) at the age of 5 years. The first corneal manifestations (bilateral mild opacifications) were detected at age 7, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 OU (manifest refraction: +4.0D OU). Impaired respiratory functions, mitral valve disease, joint stiffness, atopic dermatitis, and mild hepatomegaly also developed during early and middle childhood. Cognitive and psychological functions were not impaired during the follow-up. She has been receiving enzyme replacement therapy laronidase (Aldurazyme®), a recombinant formulation of alpha-L-iduronidase since 17 years of age. There was no clear evidence of neutralizing antibodies against enzyme replacement therapy.
During her first ophthalmic examination at our institution, BCVA was 20/300 OD and 20/125 OS with a manifest refraction of +6.0D and +6.5D, respectively. Slit lamp examination revealed diffuse opacification of both corneas . Applanation tonometry showed elevated intraocular pressure (30 mmHg OD and 32mm Hg OS [normal value: 10−21 mmHg]). Ultrasound examination detected thickened sclera and a widened optic nerve . Electroretinogram (ERG) revealed abnormal rod and cone responses on both eyes. The patient underwent penetrating keratoplasty on both eyes and the corneas were sent for routine histological and electron microscopic evaluation. Histopathologic examination of the corneal button showed disorganized collagen fibers with heterogenous thickness and many granule-containing keratocytes with excessive cytoplasm . Electron microscopy revealed vacuole-containing basal epithelial cells. Stromal keratocytes contained numerous vacuoles, and collagen fibers were randomly arranged with inhomogeneous diameter in the outer two-third of the stroma; the inner one-third was not affected .
The postoperative course after corneal transplantation of the right eye was uneventful. Very short axial length (18.92 mm [normal value: 22−25 mm]), narrow anterior chamber (1.91 mm [normal value: 2.4−4.4 mm]), and endothelial trauma during surgery resulted in a more rapid endothelial decompensation after keratoplasty on the left eye. After keratoplasty, posterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Topcon 3D-2000 OCT, Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) showed accumulation of granular material in the retinal photoreceptor layer, a slightly elevated optic disc with blurred margins and choroidal folds . 96 months after keratoplasty, best corrected visual acuity was 20/50 OD and 20/200 secondary to graft failure OS. Slit lamp examination showed fine stromal refractile lines on the right cornea and stromal edema with loss of transparency on the left cornea. The patient underwent in vivo anterior segment imaging assessments. Essentially, in vivo confocal corneal microscopy (Heidelberg Retina Tomograph II Rostock Cornea Module; Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) showed that accumulation of hyperreflective material was involved in the full thickness of the corneal graft . Accumulated punctate deposits were observed in the basal epithelial cells and in the level of Bowman membrane, and hyperreflective extracellular material was seen throughout the stroma . Swept source high resolution anterior segment OCT (ANTERION; Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) demonstrated hyperreflective opacities superficial and deeper in the stroma which was consistent with recurrence of host disease in the graft . The pachymetry was 589 microns on the right eye, and there was no significant increase in central corneal thickness. There was no evidence of endothelial rejection and no keratic precipitates and anterior chamber reaction were detected. OCT biometry revealed 19.41 ± 0.008 mm and 18.92 ± 0.013 mm axial length in the right and left eye with a shallow anterior chamber (2.27 mm and 1.61 mm). The lens thickness was 4.38 and 4.33 mm.