A 23-year-old Caucasian gravida 2 para 0 (spontaneous abortion at 6 weeks of gestation one year before) with type 1 diabetes (first diagnosis 8 years ago, HbA1c 6% before pregnancy) on an intensified insulin regimen (basal NPH insulin: 16 IE- 0-8 IE and prandial injections using insulin lispro on an insulin-to-carb ratio of 1:1) presented with symptoms of nausea and vomiting in her first trimester. She underwent standard hyperemesis therapy with administration of intravenous fluids, vitamin B complex and antiemetics several times in different hospitals and antiemetic suppositories during outpatient treatment. At 23 weeks of gestation, she presented again with persistent severe vomiting and abdominal pain, severe ketonuria and glucosuria in a euglycaemic situation (blood glucose 8–9 mmol/l). Because of haematemesis, gastroscopy was performed, and reflux oesophagitis with an axial sliding hernia not requiring intervention was diagnosed. Gastroenterologists recommended high-dose proton pump inhibitors (PPI) only. In addition to adaptation of the insulin regimen, hyperemesis treatment was accelerated, and therapy with PPI was started with 40 mg pantoprazole twice a day, resulting in the improvement of nausea and the elimination of ketonuria. At discharge, she had recovered and was in good condition. Nevertheless, one week later, further hospitalization became necessary because of another episode of impressive haematemesis (but without relevant impact on Hb levels), abdominal pain, ketonuria and glucosuria. Antiemetic and infusion therapy were extended with only moderate effects. Ketonuria persisted, while blood sugar values remained within the target range. During the hospital stay, a third-trimester scan was performed and revealed a eutrophic foetus with normal sonoanatomy and echocardiography. Four days later, when abdominal pain and vomiting calmed, the patient discharged herself against medical advice, although ketonuria still persisted.
Three weeks later, at 27 weeks of gestation, the woman was transferred to our delivery room from a peripheral hospital due to persisting severe haematemesis. At arrival, she was in deteriorated general condition. Foetal status was checked immediately by ultrasound since no proper cardiotocography could be performed by the midwives upon admission. Foetal ultrasound revealed a foetal heart rate of approximately 110 bpm with an atypical arrhythmic pattern of the foetal heart, which was probably a sign of cardiac decompensation with lethal arrhythmias. Severe ketonuria and glucosuria were diagnosed when blood glucose was 8 mmol/l. At the referring hospital, which lacked an obstetric department, no cardiotocographic control of the foetus was performed. Furthermore, insulin delivery was stopped by the health care providers since the patient was starving for 24 h and oral food intake was not possible. We immediately started intravenous insulin therapy along with intravenous rehydration with normal saline. Approximately 30 min after initiating therapy, foetal monitoring revealed critical bradycardia of the foetus, which was confirmed by ultrasound. In that critical, unstable maternal metabolic condition, we decided against emergency c-section, and foetal demise in the course of euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis was diagnosed within a couple of minutes. Two hours after starting the therapy, the BGA still showed severe metabolic acidosis with signs of respiratory compensation (pH 7.25, BE − 16 mmol/l, HCO3–9.6 mmol/l, Lac 1.9 mmol/l, pCO2 2.97 kPa; Glc 13.2 mmol/l), thus confirming the diagnosis of severe euglycaemic DKA. After DKA had resolved, emergency gastroscopy was performed, PPI therapy was extended, and the induction of labour was started with misoprostol. Twenty-four hours later, the patient gave birth to a stillborn female (birth weight 1040 g; 68. percentile). She was dismissed two days later in a balanced metabolic condition.
Three years later, the same woman presented with her second pregnancy at the 15th week of gestation, again due to vomiting in acidotic condition. At that time, HbA1c was 7.2% under the intensified insulin regimen (insulin detemir 13 IE-0-10 IE and prandial injections using insulin lispro and an insulin-to-carb ratio of 1:1). With the negative outcome of the last pregnancy in mind, we were prepared to react immediately. An interdisciplinary team of obstetricians and diabetes specialists was put together to plan and implement the optimal management of the pregnancy. Management could be realized in an outpatient setting and pregnancy advanced.
After 27 weeks, the patient was admitted due to diabetic ketoacidosis. The blood gas analysis revealed a pH of 7.28, BE − 12.5 mmol/l, HCO3–13.0 mmol/l, pCO2 3.68 kPa, Lac 1.2 mmol/l. Concomitantly, foetal monitoring showed cardiotocography with the typical pattern for maternal ketoacidosis with loss of variation of foetal baseline and variable decelerations . The observed changes in the cardiotocography pattern immediately resolved upon treatment with ketoacidosis. To closely monitor the mother and foetus and avoid repeated critical metabolic situations, we decided to keep the patient hospitalized until delivery. Nevertheless, repetitive episodes of incipient metabolic derailment accompanied by vomiting occurred and could all be treated immediately and successfully. A psychological cotreatment was organized to explore whether self-induced vomiting or self-induced hypoglycaemia by overdosing insulin injections could be the reason for these repetitive clinical patterns, such an inpatient situation. However, the pregnant woman was not willing to cooperate, and this assumption could never be confirmed or excluded. Finally, we decided to have insulin injections exclusively executed by medical professionals, and the metabolic situation remained stable until 36 weeks of gestation.
At 36 weeks of gestation, we made an interdisciplinary decision to terminate the pregnancy because the patient was emotionally very distressed due to her history, and we feared another metabolic derangement. Labour was induced with prostaglandins in a stable glycaemic situation, and the patient gave birth to a healthy girl (weight: 2840 g, 48. percentile; height 48 cm, APGAR 7/8/9 pHa 7.09 and pHv 7.19). Because of mild respiratory problems and an initial blood sugar of 1.8 mmol/l, the girl was admitted to our neonatal intensive care unit for one night. The next day, the mother and daughter were happily reunited. Blood sugar levels of the mother remained stable under the intensified insulin regimen (insulin detemir 5–0-0-8 IE and insulin lispro according to an insulin-to-carb-ratio 0,5:1). Lactation started on time. The mother and child were discharged together five days after delivery, and both of them were in good and healthy condition.