An 89-year-old Japanese female was emergently admitted to the Department of Oral-Maxillofacial Surgery, Dentistry and Orthodontics at the University of Tokyo Hospital due to her high-grade fever and eyelid edema.
The initial examination showed a SpO2 of 97%, a high body temperature (39.0 °C) and a pulse rate of 96 beats per minute. Her level of consciousness was 0 (Japan Coma Scale) and her blood pressure was 156/87 mmHg. She had no dyspnea or stridor. Her blood test showed a high white blood cell count (53.7 × 103/μL, neutrophils were 82.9%). She showed anemia of chronic disease (Red Blood Cells 274 × 104/μL, Hemoglobin 6.9 g/dL) and thrombopenia (Platelet 4.9 × 104/μL), C-reactive protein was elevated at 8.72 mg/dL. She had noticed swelling on the left side of her face in the days before hospitalization. She had visited a dental clinic and was told to visit an oral surgery department as soon as possible. The size of the swelling on the left side of her face gradually increased and extended between the submandibular region and the left eyelid. She had not experienced any oral or maxillofacial trauma or symptoms prior to the appearance of the swelling. The patient had no maxillary sinusitis symptoms, such as nasal discharge or obstruction. The patient had no difficulties with oral ingestion. She presented swelling, redness and a heat sensation in her left eyelid, cheek, and wing of the nose. She presented tenderness of her left face, even though it was mild. No bloodshot reaction or restriction of movement was observed in her left eye. Painless, enlarged lymph nodes with mobility were found in the cervical region. An intraoral examination found no teeth in her oral cavity and a slight scratch of the mucosa on the left maxilla. Extra oral examination revealed facial asymmetry, with obvious swelling of the left cheek. The orthopantomography confirmed that she was edentulous. Computed tomography (CT) indicated that the soft tissue swelling widely extended to the left submandibular space . Contrast T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also indicated cellulitis from her left masticator space, the cortical layer on the inner side of the mandible body, and the submandibular space. It also showed an intense enhancing mass involving the left masticator space .
This patient had been diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) in 2011 and had been treated with platelet replacement therapy once a week ever since. As her other underlying diseases, she had osteoporosis and hypertension. Bisphosphonate (alendronate 35 mg) had been administrated for 5 years as a treatment for osteoporosis. For hypertension, she was taking antihypertensive drugs (calcium channel blocker and angiotensin II receptor blocker).
An intravenous (i.v.) antibiotic treatment, Tazobactam/Piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC, 2.25 g) every 6 h, was started . The culture test around the oral wound showed the presence of S. pyogenes and α-streptococci. The same bacteria as in the oral wound, S. pyogenes, was also detected in her venous blood sample. Denture-related sinusitis by fungal infection was suspected as the differential diagnosis because she had a full set of false teeth; however, she was negative for β-d-glucan and Aspergillus antigen. After recovery of general status of this patient, the intravenous antibiotic was changed to Levofloxacin (LVFX, 0.5 g) every 12 h starting 4 days from the date of hospitalization. The sequence of antibiotic therapy was effective, and the inflammation gradually decreased. The oral wound healed and the swelling decreased. No enlargement of the cervical lymph nodes was observed.
The wound of the left maxilla was checked at 8 days from the day of discharge, and we confirmed that the wound was clear and there were no aberrant symptoms.