A 40-year-old white woman presented with an approximately 1-hour history of acute chest pain, which developed while eating a snack chip She induced vomiting to relieve the pressure, perceived a “popping” noise, and developed acute chest and epigastric pain. There had been no history of hematemesis, hemoptysis, melena, or weight loss. She had experienced episodic dysphagia since childhood and was diagnosed as having EoE at age 29. She had adhered poorly to local corticosteroid treatment and six-food elimination diet. She had experienced two previous perforations following dilation, which were treated conservatively. Endoscopies had revealed multiple fibrotic strictures and marked luminal narrowing. Initial eosinophil quantitation is unknown, but biopsies 4 years prior to current presentation showed 16 eosinophils per high-power field. Other past medical history included hypertension and obesity. She had no history of alcoholism, tobacco abuse, or illicit drug use. See timeline, Fig. . On presentation, following the onset of acute chest and upper abdominal pain, she was afebrile, restless, hypotensive with blood pressure (BP) of 88/69 mmHg, and tachycardic with heart rate greater than 120 beats per minute (bpm). Initial chest, heart, and lung examinations were normal. She had mild epigastric tenderness. Laboratory studies revealed white cell count of 33.8 × 109/L with 90 neutrophils, hemoglobin of 14.3gm/dL, and creatinine 1.8 mg/dL (baseline creatinine 0.6 mg/dL). An esophagogram with Gastrografin (sodium diatrizoate and meglumine diatrizoate) showed a large tear in her esophagus at the gastroesophageal junction with leak of contrast within the left mediastinum. A chest X- ray revealed large left pleural effusion, with pneumomediastinum and an evident small pneumothorax. She developed respiratory distress requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. She underwent emergency left thoracotomy, intercostal muscle flap placement over esophageal perforation, covered esophageal stent (Boston Scientific; WallFlex™) placement, and decortication of her left lung. Computed tomography following surgery showed intact stent and residual contrast in her mediastinum. Pleural fluid cultures grew Enterobacter aerogenes and Candida, which were treated with appropriate antimicrobials. Her diet was slowly advanced and when she was able to swallow a liquid diet, she was discharged home on day 10. She was seen on follow-up in the clinic and was doing well.