We present the case of a 28-year-old female, who was referred to the Breast Unit of the University Hospital of Modena (Italy) in May 2020 with a 12-months history of enlargement of the left nipple with associated erythema, serohemorrhagic discharge, and pain in the left nipple region. Her past medical history was unremarkable. Positive family history of early-stage breast cancer was found in her mother, at the age of forty-eight. The patient had noticed the mass about 12 months before her consultation and during that interval the lesion had slowly increased in size, causing mild symptoms of pressure and discomfort.
On physical examination, the left nipple was enlarged and twice the size of the contralateral, a non-tender well circumscribed movable mass of approximately 10 mm was palpable, as shown in Fig. . Serous fluid discharge from a single orifice of the left nipple appeared with squeezing. Neither intraparenchymal breast masses nor axillary lymph nodes were palpable on clinical breast examination. Bilateral breast ultrasonography revealed an oval, well-demarcated hypoechoic lesion in the left nipple measuring 10 × 7 mm. No other abnormal ultrasonographic findings within the region behind the left nipple-areola complex or elsewhere within the left or right breast were detected.
On the fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) examination serous-haematic material with low to moderate cellularity within epithelial hyperplastic cellular nests and myoepithelial units was reported. This pattern was suggestive of a benign adenomatous process (C3 cytological classification) with no signs of atypia or malignancy . Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was not performed since it was considered technically unfeasible, due to the position and projection of the lesion, out the top of the nipple. Furthermore, the surgical team recommended excision, both to reach a certain histological diagnosis and for the dimension of the mass, which was rapidly growing and distorting the nipple profile. Full nipple excision was never offered as the first surgical option, because of the young age of the patient and the will to preserve both functional and aesthetic aspects of the nipple-areola complex.
The surgical indication was to perform the excision of the mass under local anesthesia, with preservation of the nipple. During the waiting period for the surgical procedure, the patient became pregnant. She has been referred once again to our Breast Unit for scheduled mammary ultrasonographic control in her sixth week of pregnancy. Taking into account the major risks of surgery during pregnancy, a multidisciplinary discussion was conducted, to consider whether to proceed with surgery or postpone it after pregnancy. Because of the volume and the position of the adenoma, the indication for surgical excision was confirmed, to allow regular lactation and breastfeeding immediately after giving birth and to avoid potential obstructive complications such as galactocele, breast abscess, or mastitis. The end of the first trimester was established as the ideal time for the procedure. The patient underwent surgery in her fifteenth week of pregnancy. The surgical excision of nipple adenoma was performed under local anesthesia with mepivacaine by an experienced breast surgeon. A nipple splitting enucleation technique was performed through a 1 cm trans-nipple longitudinal incision made down through the long axis of the nipple profile, to expose and radically enucleate the mass, as shown in Fig. and Additional File Surgical Videos (Additional file and Additional file ). Nipple reconstruction was obtained with non-absorbable interrupted sutures to restore the original shape. Although the tumor projection was out the top of the nipple, curative resection without total excision of the nipple was possible, and the left nipple was cosmetically and functionally preserved. Histopathologic evaluation by a breast expert pathologist revealed on gross examination a circumscribed gray nodule measuring 20 × 15 × 10 mm; the cut surface was grayish and friable. The microscopical evaluation showed a fibroepithelial benign lesion with a stromal component enriched with myoepithelial cells of the outer layer highlighted using antibodies against calponin and desmin. Lactiferous ducts appeared coated by typical ductal hyperplasia. The overlying epidermis was not directly involved by the adenoma and epidermal ulceration was not identified. Therefore, these findings were suggestive of nipple adenoma. The histology of the lesion with hematoxylin-eosin staining is showed in Fig. .
The postoperative course was uneventful. Outpatient monitoring showed a correct wound-healing process and a progressive reduction of the left nipple size. Figure shows post-operative results 2 months and 9 months after surgery. For regularly scheduled follow-ups we planned an annual clinical breast examination. The patient gave birth at the end of May 2021 and had a regular history of lactation and breastfeeding, which is still ongoing at present, 9 months after surgery. Moreover, the patient remains satisfied with the final aesthetic result.