A 50-year-old woman received open-heart aortic and mitral valvuloplasty due to severe rheumatic stenosis of the aortic and mitral valves 11 years ago (18 August 2009). She had no medical history except for rheumatic heart disease. Eventually, she received open-heart mechanical valve replacement (St. Jude Medical® Mechanical Heart Valve, 17 mm of the aortic valve and 25 mm of mitral valve) due to progressive severe stenosis of aortic and mitral valves (8 February 2017), and was discharged with warfarin. After discharge, she experienced side effects of warfarin including tingling sensation and numbness of legs, urticaria, skin rash, and nausea, and voluntarily stopped taking the medication. Her international normalized ratio (INR) value was measured at around 1.3 at outpatient clinic. We examined any alternative causes of the patient’s symptoms, but we did not find any cause of her symptoms except for warfarin. She gave up visiting the hospital from March 2017 and December 2018.
In December 2018, the patient returned to the emergency room due to ongoing chest pain. On physical examinations, there were no abnormal murmurs and neurologic deficits. Electrocardiography did not show typical findings of ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Patient’s cardiac rhythm was sinus. However, laboratory cardiac muscle enzyme levels were increased, with a creatine kinase-MB level of 191.4 ng/mL (reference ∼6.6 ng/mL) and a high sensitive troponin I level of 39 171 ng/L (reference ∼16.1 ng/L). INR level was measured as 1.16 (reference 0.87–1.2). So, we performed emergent coronary angiography and revealed a floating thrombus in the distal left circumflex artery ( and Video 1). We thought that the lesion was an embolic thrombus and performed continuous intravenous heparin and oral warfarin treatment. A follow-up coronary angiography 2 days later showed decreased thrombus burden ( and Video 2). We decided to continue anticoagulation with warfarin because coronary blood flow was good despite of remnant thrombus. Additionally, her chest pain was resolved after anticoagulation treatment with heparin and warfarin. Fortunately, transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography showed normal left ventricular systolic function without regional wall motion abnormality and no prosthetic valve thrombus or intracardiac thrombus. The patient was discharged from the hospital under warfarin 4.5 mg PO with INR of 2.3. However, she did not take warfarin consistently because of its side effects including tingling sensation and numbness of legs, urticaria, and skin rash. When she visited the outpatient clinic, her INR value was 1.2, and she strongly refused warfarin treatment. Given the patient’s non-compliance due to the side effects from warfarin, we prescribed apixaban 5 mg b.i.d. beginning in February 2019. After taking apixaban, she did not complain about previous side effects of warfarin furthermore.
In April 2020, the patient visited the emergency room again due to chest discomfort. Atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response was confirmed and persisted. We performed cardiac computed tomography to check for intracardiac thrombus and confirmed there were no thrombus in coronary arteries and no evidence of intracardiac thrombus or valvular thrombus ( and Video 3). Electrical cardioversion was performed with biphasic 150 J, and sinus rhythm was restored immediately . Dronedarone was prescribed to maintain sinus rhythm.
After discharge, the patient was compliant and continued with apixaban and dronedarone as reported through the outpatient clinic. We followed-up the patient every 3 months, and planned to check blood test including complete blood count and blood chemistry every 6 months and transthoracic echocardiography every 1 year. At July 2020, follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed well-functioning mechanical heart valves and no evidence of prosthetic valve thrombosis . Sinus rhythm was maintained, and there is no evidence of the development of major bleeding, stroke, or systemic embolism as of the time of this report (February 2021).