A 53-year-old Japanese man who had no past medical history moved to Fukushima Prefecture in April 2015 and lived in a workers' dormitory, taking up employment in decontamination work. Decontamination work is generally conducted under the following conditions: 8 hours of work per day, 5 days a week, with a 1-hour break per day. Decontamination work includes operations such as the removal of topsoil in mountainous areas and cleaning roads and roofs of residential buildings with high-pressure water, indicating frequent exposure to water and soil among the workers. During decontamination work, workers such as the current case are required to wear long-sleeved shirts, long pants, and paper masks to avoid external or internal radiation exposure. A considerable proportion of the decontamination workers are hired from other parts of Japan due to a severe shortage of workers in Fukushima, and almost all of these migrant workers live in workers' dormitories or shared houses, thereby sharing spaces with each other; our case experienced these same circumstances. Poor living conditions are reported to be a possible cause for the high burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) among the decontamination workers.
The patient visited our hospital with symptoms of fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and altered mental status, although with no respiratory manifestations, in October 2015. Laboratory tests revealed a hepatic dysfunction, elevated creatine kinase, and hyponatremia . Chest radiograph showed disseminated pulmonary infiltrates . He was diagnosed with bacterial pneumonia and admitted to our hospital. Despite initiation of administration of ampicillin-sulbactam, his symptoms did not improve.
Atypical pneumonia was suspected from the following factors: pneumonia without respiratory manifestations, altered mental status and inefficacy of antibiotic. A urinary antigen detection test was then conducted and he was finally diagnosed with LD. Although his antibiotic treatment was changed to levofloxacin, multiple organ failure led to his death at 5 days after admission.