A 75-year-old male presented to our department due to gross hematuria starting 9 months prior. Cystoscopy revealed a bladder tumor, and TURBT was performed. Histopathology revealed urothelial carcinoma, high-grade, G2, pTa, ly0, and v0. Intravesical BCG induction immunotherapy was performed once a week for a total of 8 weeks. For each administration, 80 mg of BCG Tokyo-172 strain was instilled into the bladder for 2 hours. During the courses, the patient had painful and frequent urination, and aseptic pyuria.
Eleven months after the last BCG instillation, occasional urination pain and aseptic pyuria had persisted. Cystoscopy revealed nodulous lesions at the left ureteral orifice. CT showed left hydronephrosis, and serum PSA was elevated at 12.98 ng/mL. Considering the possibility of recurrence of bladder cancer and development of prostate cancer, transurethral biopsy of the bladder mucosa, retrograde urography, ureteroscopy, and transperineal prostate biopsy were performed. Immediately after surgery, the patient developed high fever and we started antibiotic therapy; however, the patient's temperature did not decrease. A CT scan was performed on the postoperative day 4, but the cause of the fever was unknown . Blood tests showed elevated liver enzymes and pancytopenia. A CT scan on postoperative day 14 showed diffuse granular shadows in the lungs, suggesting miliary tuberculosis . Pathology showed no malignant findings in either the bladder or prostate. Bladder biopsied specimens showed caseating granuloma , and Ziehl–Neelsen staining revealed collection of acid-fast bacillus . The same findings were seen in the prostate.
On postoperative day 21, a urine PCR test revealed mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, which led to the diagnosis of miliary tuberculosis. We started treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and prednisolone. After the start of treatment, fever was resolved and liver enzymes improved. On postoperative day 54, M. bovis was identified by urine culture, and it was found that the infection was caused by BCG immunotherapy performed 1 year before the surgery. After 3 months of antituberculosis treatment, a urine PCR test of mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was negative. In addition, after 4 months of treatment, a CT scan showed improvement in diffuse granular shadows in the lung fields .