A 28 year old unmarried woman, gravida 0, para 0, was referred to the authors' hospital for a left ovarian cyst. An irregular papillary protuberant lesion was found in the luminal wall of a cyst that had swollen to a diameter of 10 cm. Thus, an ovarian malignancy was suspected and an abdominal left-sided salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The findings from the histopathological inspections revealed borderline serous papillary cystadenoma, while the cytodiagnosis of ascites revealed a class II classification. Considering the patient's age and the need for fertility preservation, it was decided to observe her progress instead of additional treatments. Two years after surgery, an enlargement in the remaining ovary was identified. An abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a multilocular cystic tumor, with a diameter of 9 cm and a solid part in the luminal wall of the cyst . A malignancy was suspected and it was decided to perform a right-sided salpingo-oophorectomy. As the patient already had undergone a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and would lose her fertility by further resection of the remaining ovary, the authors presented the cryopreservation of unfertilized oocytes to the patient, who was unmarried, as an option for fertility preservation. As both the patient and her parents desired fertility preservation, it was decided to conduct the cryopreservation of her unfertilized oocytes. As the oocyte retrieval would be attempted from an ovary that was affected by a malignancy, it was decided to conduct laparotomic oocyte retrieval during surgery, instead of conventional transvaginal retrieval, in order to reduce the risk of puncturing or rupturing the tumor. The risks of tumor rupture were explained to the patient and her family and consent to proceed was obtained. Furthermore, it was decided to use ultrasonography to avoid the tumor and to precisely puncture only the follicle to further reduce the risk of tumor rupture. The patient's anti-Müllerian hormone level before ovarian stimulation was 8.74. The date of oocyte retrieval was scheduled for the same day as surgery and ovarian stimulation was performed by using the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist long protocol . The total dose of gonadotrophin that was administered was 2925 IU. The controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) protocol that was chosen was determined with reference to a fixed stimulation regimen. The patient was prescribed 10,000 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) to trigger ovulation at 35 hours before the oocyte retrieval. Just before surgery, a culture medium (human tubal fluid medium) for oocytes was placed in an incubator that was set at 37°C and was transported from the incubation room to the operating room. By the time of the laparotomy, a partial rupture of the right ovarian tumor capsule and a small amount of light-yellow transparent ascites were observed. Prior to the right-sided salpingo-oophorectomy, ultrasound-guided oocyte retrieval was conducted by using a single-lumen ovum aspiration needle (20GA, Bloomington, Indiana, USA). The aspiration was performed manually by using a syringe. For the ultrasound, the ACUSON Freestyle (Siemens, Munich, Bavaria, Germany), a cableless ultrasound diagnostic imaging device, was used. The ultrasound probe was protected with a sterilized cover and the probe was brought into direct contact with the target ovary while checking the follicle within the part of the ovary that was thought to be healthy . Furthermore, immediately after the removal of the tumor from the right ovary, the remaining follicles were identified on the excised specimen by ultrasound and additional follicle punctures were performed. A total of 11 oocytes (11 before removal of the ovary and 0 after removal of the ovary) was retrieved. Ten of the oocytes were classified as being in metaphase MII and one was classified as being in the degeneration phase. The cumulus cells were cleaved by using hyaluronidase and then it was removed to confirm the meiosis stage 2 hours after the oocyte retrieval. The 10 mature oocytes were cryopreserved in the MII phase. The finding of the histopathological inspections revealed a borderline serous papillary cystadenoma, while a cytodiagnosis of ascites revealed a Class IV classification. There was no malignancy on histopathological inspection of the retrieved follicular fluid. Considering the pathology results, as well as those of a positron emission tomography (PET)–CT scan that was conducted 1 month after surgery and that revealed no abnormality, chemotherapy was chosen, rather than second-term surgery, with the consent of the patient and her family. She was referred for counseling with a reproductive endocrinologist to fully inform her about fertility preservation. Additionally, it was decided to prescribe her hormone replacement therapy, such as Kaufmann's treatment, until pregnancy was desired.