A 62-year-old male was brought to the Emergency unit with one episode of generalized seizures and altered sensorium. He had a prior history of seizure and loss of consciousness three years ago which was treated, elsewhere as focal leptomeningitis of right parieto-occipital region. He had no neurocutaneous markers. His GCS score was 14/15 (E4 V4 M6) with equal and reacting pupils, psychomotor slowing, left hemineglect and grade 4 power in the left upper and lower limbs. His serum electrolytes and blood glucose levels were normal. Computed tomography (CT) of brain showed hyperdense lesions in the parieto-occipital convexity subarachnoid space over the right cerebral hemisphere. CT angiography showed no abnormality .
Over a period of 48 h, his neurological status deteriorated. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) brain with gadolinium at 1.5 T (Philips Achieva, Best, The Netherlands) showed intense leptomeningeal enhancement in the right temporo-parieto-occipital region with a subtle T2W hyperintense signal in the underlying subcortical white matter without edema or infarct or mass effect.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed glucose of 75 mg/dL, proteins of 65 mg/dL and no abnormal cells were detected ruling out infection, granulomatous inflammation and meningeal carcinomatosis. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed spike and wave epileptic discharges over the right parieto-temporal hemisphere. Anticonvulsants were titrated till suppression of the epileptic discharges in EEG. His sensorium improved over a period of 72 h and he attained a GCS score of 15/15 with left hand grip weakness and impaired rapid alternating movements in the left upper limb. Ophthalmological examination showed no choroid angioma.
Digital subtraction cerebral four vessel angiography with bilateral external carotid injections showed hypertrophy of the cerebral arteries, arteriolo-capillary bed and venules in the right temporo-parieto-occipital territory associated with early arterio-capillary and venous opacification, suggesting leptomeningeal angiomatosis. There was no evidence of arteriovenous malformation or fistula.
He was discharged on anticonvulsants with a GCS score of 15/15, reduced attention span, visuospatial impairment, anosognosia, left hemineglect and minimal left-hand grip weakness. He was on regular follow-up for a period of two years, during this period he had intermittent episodes of focal motor seizures involving the left-hand requiring titration of doses of anticonvulsants. His cognitive functions remained status quo and persisted to have left hand grip weakness.
MRI brain with gadolinium at 1.5 T (Philips Achieva, Best, The Netherlands), done at six months, one-year and two years after the discharge from the hospital showed increase in the T2W hyperintense signal in the subcortical white matter and cortical atrophy with no changes in the pial enhancement.
MR perfusion imaging (T2*echo planar imaging) done at six months, one-year and two years follow-up showed reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF) and cerebral blood volume (CBV) in the right parieto-temporo-occipital cortical and subcortical regions compared with contralateral normal hemisphere and increased perfusion in the leptomeninges.
Multi-voxel Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) (TE = 144 ms) done at six months, one-year and two years follow-up from the subcortical white matter region with T2 hyperintense signal showed reduction in the NAA/Cr ratio in spectroscopy and preserved Cho/Cr ratio.