A 50-year-old Senegalese man was hospitalized for a 6-month history of dyspnea, fever and 7 kg weight loss. His past medical history was significant for a myocardial infarction 4 years earlier. No valvulopathy was reported. He testified to good living conditions in Senegal and denied homelessness and substantial alcohol use.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed major aortic and mitral regurgitations, aortic and mitral vegetation, a mitral chordal rupture, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (SPAP) at 60 mmHg and a left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45% with apical and septal akinesia . A coronary angiogram revealed no significant stenosis except for a left circumflex artery occlusion. Pre-operative tomodensitometry showed two disseminated septic emboli in the left cerebral cortex and in the left kidney. Initial blood cultures remained negative. Thus, an empiric antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin (12 g daily intravenously) and gentamicin (200 mg daily intravenously) was started. Aminoglycoside peak concentration was monitored daily and the dose adjusted. The hemodynamic pattern of the patient required bioprosthetic aortic and mitral valve replacement with a cardiopulmonary bypass 3 days after his admission.
On initial admission to the surgical intensive care unit, his hemodynamic status was stable with blood pressure at 130/60 mmHg with epinephrine 0.8 mg/hour and dobutamine 12 µg/kg/minute. Weaning from the mechanical ventilation was successful at the 6th postoperative hour. Progressively, a right ventricle failure appeared (right ventricle hypokinesia, SPAP of 45 mmHg at echocardiography) with renal and hepatic dysfunction (oliguria, blood urea nitrogen level of 10 mmol/L, creatinine level of 183 µmol/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) level of 20 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) level of 309 IU/L, bilirubin level of 40 mg/dL) and a troponin Ic level of 159 IU/L on the second postoperative day. Thereafter, cardiogenic shock was observed. Serial cardiac enzymes were consistent with major myocardial injury (troponin Ic >500 IU/L). Right heart catheterization confirmed myocardial dysfunction (pulmonary artery occlusion pressure 25 mmHg, cardiac index 1.5 L/min/m2). Thus, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with a cardio-pulmonary bypass was set up as a bridge to heart recovery. Despite circulatory support, inhaled nitric oxide and continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration, hemodynamic status remained precarious (blood pressure at 90/40 mmHg with epinephrine 3.5 mg/hour and dobutamine 10 µg/kg/minute). Echocardiography showed a LVEF of 35%, low left and right filling pressures, and good function of the prosthetic valves without any regurgitation.
During the following days, no heart recovery was observed. On the fourth day, hepatic function dramatically worsened with severe hypoglycemia, international normalized ratio of 0.18, ALAT level of 1440 IU/L, ASAT level of 2574 IU/L and a bilirubin level of 394 mg/dL. Serial transthoracic echocardiography showed a decrease in the LVEF at 25% and development of large vegetations attached to the prosthetic mitral valve . The patient died of refractory cardiac arrest on the 10th day.
During these 10 days, all blood cultures remained negative. Microbiologic examination of the excised valves showed no organism on Gram stain and no bacteriological growth. Microimmunofluorescence serologies performed on two samples of serum drawn on day 1 and on day 8 remained negative for Bartonella spp. (Immunoglobulin G titer <1:100), Coxiella spp., Chlamydia spp., Mycoplasma spp., Legionella spp. and Bosea vestrii. The Western immunoblotting profile suggested a Bartonella spp. endocarditis. On the mitral resected cardiac valve, a broad range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) targeting the 16S ribosomal RNA gene identified a Bartonella quintana endocarditis and species-specific PCR amplification targeting the 16S-23S ribosomal DNA intergenic spacer region gene of Bartonella quintana confirmed this diagnosis. Thirty days after admission to the surgical intensive care unit, Bartonella quintana grew in a blood culture. However, those results were obtained after the death of the patient. Permission for an autopsy was refused.