A 58-year-old woman found a lump on her left breast and was diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) by her previous doctor, who referred her to our department for further treatment. Fourteen years prior she had undergone curative surgery for contralateral right breast cancer at another hospital (IDC, triple negative, pT2N0M0). Postoperatively, she received six cycles of CEF (C: cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2, E: epirubicin 75 mg/m2, F: 5-fluorouracil: 500 mg/m2). She had a history of pyelonephritis. Her family history includes esophageal cancer in her father, cerebral infarction in her mother, and colon cancer in her grandfather.
At our hospital, she underwent left mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy for left breast cancer. The final pathological diagnosis was IDC, ER (−), PgR (+), HER2 (−), pT2N0M0 (stage IIA). After starting TC (docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide) as adjuvant chemotherapy, a rash appeared all over her body. A drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) was positive for docetaxel and palonosetron hydrochloride, so this chemotherapy was discontinued. Instead, she received dose-dense paclitaxel (ddPTX, 175 mg/m2 bi-weekly) therapy. Two days after the first course, pegfilgrastim (3.6 mg) was administered as a scheduled regimen. Eight days after the administration of pegfilgrastim, she developed high fever of 38 °C and took levofloxacin (LVFX). As the fever did not decrease within 3 days, the patient visited the emergency outpatient clinic (day 11 after pegfilgrastim administration). Figure shows the clinical course of the patient. Blood tests, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), and various culture tests (blood, urine and sputum) were performed, and an increased inflammatory response was observed with white blood cell (WBC) 22,600/μL (neutrophil: 93%) and CRP 13.7 mg/dL.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed wall thickening of the subclavian artery, suggesting the possibility of pegfilgrastim-induced aortitis . However, pyelonephritis could not be ruled out due to the observation of some poorly contrasted areas in the renal cortex. As a result, she was given an additional sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim combination, however, the fever did not abate and the patient returned to the outpatient clinic on day 15. At this point CRP had increased to 21.5 mg/dL, and following strong complaints of malaise and anorexia she was hospitalized that day. While blood and urine culture tests were negative, meropenem (MEPM) was given since an anaerobic bacterial infection could not be ruled out. At this point, the possibility of pegfilgrastim-induced aortitis was considered more likely than infection, and the patient was observed without steroids. Acetaminophen was used as needed during admission. On day 21 (7 days after admission) her fever abated, and blood tests showed improvement on day 23 (WBC 5600/μL and CRP 1.95 mg/dL). A contrast-enhanced CT scan was performed again on day 26, and an improvement of the subclavian artery wall thickening was confirmed .
Following discharge from hospital, the patient remains afebrile and is currently on weekly paclitaxel without the use of G-CSF.