T was a 9-year-old female who was referred to treatment by her pediatrician due to longstanding selective eating. As an infant and young toddler, T “ate everything.” However, around age two and half, T began to lose interest in some foods she had previously enjoyed and developed aversions to certain textures and tastes. By age three, her food restriction became “categorical”. For example, she would not eat fruit, soup that was not pureed completely smooth, or vegetables that were not pureed into a food she already liked. For several years, the family and pediatrician thought this was typical “picky eating” that she would “grow out of,” and the family largely accommodated it. Instead, T's dietary restriction worsened over time. Although her pediatrician felt T's weight and growth were unaffected, her limited food variety caused marked psychosocial distress and functional impairment (see ), suggesting a need for intervention.
T presented for FBT-ARFID with her mother, father, and younger brother (age 7). In the first session, the therapist used circular questioning, a strategy where families members are asked to comment on the statements made by previous family members to engage the family in crafting a narrative of the impact of ARFID on their family. T was unable to eat with her family given anxiety and disgust she felt around the foods they served. T's mother felt “tired of being a short order cook,” always preparing a second separate meal for T after she prepared a meal for the rest of the family. The family spent “enormous time and effort” obtaining and preparing food for T to take with her to school and to friends' homes so that she could participate in these activities without going hungry. The family expressed frustration regarding T's being “stubborn” and “unwilling” to consider new foods no matter the growing impact on herself and the family.
The therapist used this information to help the parents to externalize ARFID as an illness rather than blame T for her eating problems. To illustrate the seriousness of ARFID and emphasize the need to help T overcome the disorder, the therapist highlighted the multiple impacts of ARFID on the child and family including impacts on growth, pubertal development, and relationships. The therapist also provided psychoeducation regarding the processes by which ARFID is maintained and thus not likely to remit unless the family takes action. As the family's anxiety heightened, the therapist transitioned into charging the parents with the task of challenging ARFID and framing them as T's best hope for recovery. The therapist asked the family to complete an Always, Sometimes, Never list , a form used to classify foods into those the child will eat regularly (“Always”), those their child can eat but with difficulty (“Sometimes”), and those that would be very difficult for the child to eat but very helpful, important, or meaningful if the child were able to do so (“Never”).
In session 2, as instructed by the therapist, the family brought a meal to the session that included items from the Always, Sometimes, and Never categories. The parents chose sandwiches and explained that normally, T's sandwich would be different than everyone else's, but for this meal they prepared her the same sandwich as everyone else. This meant that the sandwich included an array of items across T's Always, Sometimes, and Never categories, and the sandwich itself was a Never item. The family also brought some of T's Always foods as a “backup” (pita bread, cheese). T's father explained that he assumed T would never really eat the sandwich they brought given “we've tried a million times before.” Therapist invited the family to try something different today and decide together what they'd like to see T eat in order to take a meaningful step toward challenging ARFID. Parents decided that they'd like her to have a bite of the sandwich; therapist coached parents to decide on a specific, observable amount they meant and invited them to work together to help her do so.
Initially, the father tried rationalizing with T about why it was important for her to eat, while the mother tried gently asking T to please eat it. Throughout these efforts, T sat with arms folded glaring angrily at her parents, then moved to sitting hunched on the floor under the table in protest. Therapist used T's behaviors to externalize the illness, helping the family see these regressive behaviors as clear signs they were challenging ARFID (rather than signs that T was being stubborn, manipulative, or immature). Therapist attempted to help parents identify strategies they were using that tend to be effective, recognize strategies they were using that were not working well, and try new strategies in their place. Specifically, therapist praised mother's strategy of keeping the food close to T and not letting her avoid it. Therapist also asked father whether reasoning with T tended to work (no) and asked mother whether asking T to eat usually worked (no); therapist then coached parents to clearly state to T the behavior they wanted to see (e.g., “please take a bite” or “you need to eat your sandwich”). After time passed without T budging, father unilaterally informed T that she could earn screen time if she ate what was expected of her. Therapist interrupted and coached parents to discuss and decide on this strategy together before introducing it to T; parents agreed that if T ate a bite, she would earn 15 minutes of iPad time when she got home that evening. T initially did not react, but mother persisted in repeating their behavioral expectation; therapist coached father to support his wife in increasing pressure against ARFID. Father also tried making T laugh and smile. After a few moments of giggling, T took the bite.
The remainder of Phase I sessions focused on helping the family gain momentum and a sense of agency in their ability to increase T's eating flexibility. Each session, the therapist used circular questioning to help the family learn from their previous week's efforts, reinforcing strategies they were using that were working well. The therapist used the Always, Sometimes, Never list to measure progress as well as help the family plan what foods they would like to help T eat next. The therapist also provided consultation regarding the use of behavioral strategies and asked specific questions to help the family make a concrete, pragmatic plan for making progress toward their goals each week. The family prioritized entrees typically prepared in their home, fruits, and vegetables. Toward this end, parents gradually increased the level of challenge of foods they presented T in increasing approximations of their ultimate goals. For example, given T would only eat vegetables that were completely pureed, the family gradually presented to her vegetables that were less and less pureed, via soups and smoothies. T's family chose to continue using contingency plans and found them effective. For example, they offered T a daily food challenge, completion of which earned her 15 minutes of screen time. Initially, T completed her challenges only after lengthy time periods and crying, but after parents instituted a time limit for the food challenge, T soon was able to complete them most days within 15 minutes. Throughout this phase, T's brother's involvement was limited but important; the therapist framed him as a vital support to T as parents took on the task of challenging ARFID. The family worked together to brainstorm and monitor ways in which T's brother was supporting her, from agreeing to color with her after a tough meal, to distracting her with jokes at the dinner table, to not interfering with his parents' efforts even when they evoked distress from T.
Once T's parents were feeling empowered and T had been able to consume new foods consistently, treatment moved to Phase 2. In this phase, focus shifted to helping T eat a wider variety of foods outside the specific context and strategy the family had found effective (at home, in the afternoon, as part of a daily contingency). For example, family wanted T to be able to eat at extended family gatherings and friends' houses. During this phase, T became a more willing participant in the sessions, giving her parents feedback about ideas they were considering and making requests for foods she would be more interested in trying. As such, one new strategy the family was able to use during this phase was involving T in food preparation and cooking; T found this fun, and being able to prepare her own food challenges and food for the family seemed to help her feel more excited about eating and “proud” of her accomplishments. The family completed treatment after 17 sessions across 6 months. At termination, T was able to regularly eat several vegetables in their original forms (not pureed), several dishes that were staples in the family's home, any soup (did not need to be blended), and three fruits. They added a total of 13 new foods to her Always list. Please see for objective measures of clinical improvement.