A 33- year old Indian gentleman, a staff nurse by occupation, presented with an episode of sudden but transient loss of conscious. He had been diagnosed with mild COVID-19 upper respiratory infection in the previous month and had completed a two week home isolation. He was riding on his bike with his wife as pillion when he felt uneasy and stopped by the side of the road. Shortly thereafter the wife witnessed that he lost consciousness and fell to the ground. She further revealed that though he regained consciousness a few minutes after the event, he appeared to remain confused until they arrived at a nearby hospital. He did not have either involuntary movements of limbs or bowel bladder incontinence during the episode. He had no known comorbidities and had no history of substance abuse or any relevant drug history. There was neither history of previous episodes of seizures (not even febrile seizures in childhood) nor a history of recent or past head trauma. On arrival to the hospital examination was noted with a Glasgow coma scale of 15/15, with no meningeal signs and no lateralizing neurological deficits. A right lateral tongue bite mark was noted. Patient was tested negative for COVID-19 on repeat testing.
On evaluation he was found to have a glucometer random blood sugar of 121 mg/dl, serum corrected calcium – 9.9 mg/dL, serum Magnesium – 1.9 mg/dL, ABG- no metabolic acidosis, sodium − 143 mmol/L, potassium-4.29 mmol/L, chloride- 102.8 mmol/L, Troponin I- 1.0 pg/mL, serum ferritin 144.3 ng/mL, haemoglobin 14.2 g%, total leucocyte counts 11,190 cells/mm3, platelet counts – 2.09 lakhs cells/mm3, D-dimer- 0.98 microgram/mL, CRP-8.40 mg/L, LDH-270 IU/L, renal and liver function tests – within normal limits. ECG – sinus tachycardia on arrival, repeat ECG showed normal sinus rhythm.
Neuroimaging was done with an initial computed tomography (CT) scan followed by an MRI but showed no abnormalities. EEG performed showed bilateral intermittent slowing..
The patient was initiated on Levetiracetam 1500 mg per day in three divided doses that is 500 mg three times daily, after discussion with the neurology team. He did not have any further episodes of seizures and was discharged. During the follow up he reported excessive drowsiness, and hence Levetiracetam was reduced to 1000 mg per day and he is since tolerating the same well, with no further seizures in the past three months.