A 67-year-old right-handed man presented with complete paralysis of the right upper and lower extremities (Medical Research Council [MRC]: 0/5) at the onset of a spontaneous ICH . At six weeks after ICH onset, he was admitted to the rehabilitation department of a university hospital after undergoing rehabilitation for three weeks at the previous university hospital. Brain MR images showed a hematoma in the left corona radiata and basal ganglia at six weeks after onset . He presented with severe weakness of the right upper and lower extremities with more severe weakness of proximal joint muscles than distal joint muscles (MRC: right shoulder abductor; 2−, finger extensors; 3+, hip flexor; 2+, ankle dorsiflexor; 3) . He was administered comprehensive rehabilitative therapy, which included neurotropic drugs (dopaminergic drug [pramipexole, amantadine, and levodopa] and antidepressant [venlafaxine]), movement therapy, and neuromuscular electrical stimulation of the affected shoulder abductor, finger extensor, and ankle dorsiflexor [,]. Movement therapy was conducted with a focus on improvement of right upper and lower extremity functions, and was conducted five times per week in our physical and occupational therapy department. Although the weakness of his right side recovered well for 10 weeks until 16 weeks after onset, he consistently showed more severe proximal weakness (right shoulder abductor; 3, finger extensor; 4, hip flexor; 3+, ankle dorsiflexor; 4). As a result, he was able to perform some fine motor activities using the right hand and to walk independently at 16 weeks after onset. The patient provided informed consent, and the study protocol was approved by our institutional review board.
DTI scanning was performed at six, 10 and 16 weeks after onset, using a multi-channel head coil on a 1.5-T Philips Gyroscan Intera (Philips, Best, Netherlands) with single-shot echo-planar imaging. For each of the 32 noncollinear diffusion-sensitizing gradients, we acquired 67 contiguous slices (matrix = 192 x 192, FOV = 240 mm, TR/TE = 10,726/76 ms, b = 1000 mm2s−1, NEX = 1, thickness = 2.5 mm). Three-dimensional reconstructions of fiber tracts were obtained using the DTI task card software (Philips Extended MR Work Space 2.6.3) (threshold fractional anisotropy = 0.15, angle = 27°) . The CRP was determined by selection of fibers passing through the seed and target regions of interest (ROI). A seed ROI was placed on the reticular formation of the medulla. The target ROI was placed on the midbrain tegmentum [,,].
On six-, 10- and 16-week DTTs, the CRPs in the right hemispheres originated from the premotor cortex and primary motor cortex, and descended through the known CRP pathway. By contrast, in the left (affected) hemisphere, the CRP showed severe narrowing with discontinuation of the fibers at the corona radiata on six-week DTT. On the other hand, the discontinued anterior fibers of the CRP were connected to the corpus callosum through the transcallosal fibers on 10-week DTT, and became thicker and connected to the right cerebral cortex via the corpus calllosum on 16-week DTT .
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was performed to demonstrate the recovery process of the corticospinal tract using a Magstim Novametrix 200 magnetic stimulator with a 9-cm mean diameter circular coil (Novametrix Inc). Cortical stimulation was performed with the coil held tangentially over the vertex. The left hemisphere was stimulated by a counterclockwise current and the right hemisphere was stimulated by a clockwise current. Motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) were obtained from both abductor pollicis brevis muscles in a relaxed state. The excitatory threshold (ET) was defined as the minimum stimulus required to elicit an MEP with a peak-to-peak amplitude of 50 μV or greater, in two out of four attempts. Stimulation intensity was set at the ET plus 20% of the maximum stimulator output. Each site was stimulated three times at intervals with a minimum of 10 seconds, from which the shortest latency and the average peak to peak amplitudes were adopted.
On the six-week TMS study, an MEP with low amplitude was evoked (latency: 21.7 msec, amplitude: 0.3 mV ET: 95%), and on the 10-week and 16-week TMS study, the amplitude was gradually increased (10 weeks - latency: 22.8 msec, amplitude: 0.8 mV, ET: 95%; 16 weeks - latency: 21.8 msec, amplitude: 2.4 mV, ET: 80%).