A 35-year-old pregnant woman was admitted to our clinic complaining of visual loss and metamorphopsia in her left eye of five days’ duration. Retinal detachment with macular hole had been diagnosed at another clinic. Her previous systemic and ocular history was unremarkable. On ophthalmic examination best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye with small refractive error. Examination of the anterior segment was unremarkable and there were no signs of intraocular inflammation in both eyes. Ophthalmoscopy revealed yellow-white round subfoveal exudation with a localised posterior serous detachment extending up to the inferior arcade in the left eye. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed serous elevation of the sensory retina in the macular area involving the fovea with central highly reflective sub-retinal material . Her right eye was normal.
Initially the patient refused fluorescein angiography (FA), despite being informed there was no risk to the fetus. One week later OCT showed resolution of subretinal fluid and an increase in hyper-reflective material . One month later, BCVA decreased to 20/250 and fibrinous exudates further increased, forming multiple dome-shaped-layered subretinal structures, masking further subretinal material. Moreover, large intraretinal cystoid spaces were detected at the foveal center on OCT . Color and red-free (RF) photographs, autofluorescence (AF) and near-infrared reflectance (NIR) images and OCT findings are shown in Fig. . FA and indocyanine green angiography (ICG) were performed and showed a large area of hypofluorescence due to the masking effect, associated with pooling and mild leakage of dye in the late phase of the angiogram . The table provides a summary of the multimodal imaging findings during the acute and final phases of the disease . Because of the pattern of leakage and the lumpy bumpy subretinal material on OCT, the possible presence of type 1 choroidal neovascularization (CNV) was discussed. However, given the absence of evidence of a vascular network on ICG, the absence of hard exudates or hemorrhages and the absence of irregular pigment epithelial detachments with hyper-reflective content compatible with the presence of neovascular tissue in any of the OCT volume scans, the diagnosis of CNV was then excluded.
Systemic investigation did not reveal any abnormality. At her initial visit to our clinic the patient was in the fifth month of pregnancy. Routine blood tests were normal, as were immunological exams, including complement fractions C3 and C4, rheumatoid factor, IgG, IgM, antinuclear antibodies, ENA, antiphospholipid antibodies. Serology tests for herpes simplex, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus, syphilis, rubella, Lyme disease, HIV, tubercolosis, toxoplasma were negative. The patient denied intake of any systemic or topical medication. Gynaecological evaluation did not show any evidence of obstetric complications.
The clinical features led us to a diagnosis of CSC in pregnancy. The pregnancy and the severity and extent of subretinal exudation ruled out therapy. The patient was evaluated by OCT monthly during pregnancy and quarterly postpartum. After delivery, CSC spontaneously resolved; however, despite the resolution of the subretinal fluid and the disappearance of subfoveal exudates, BCVA did not improve, due to the severe atrophic macular changes. Color photograph, RF, AF, NIR and OCT findings after delivery are shown in Fig. . OCT showed severely damaged outer retinal layers in the entire macular area, subfoveal fibrosis and persistent choroidal thickening in the left eye . The subfoveal choroidal thickness measured vertically from the outer border of the retinal pigment epithelium to the inner border of the sclera was 684 μm in the left eye, but 386 μm in the right eye . As Enhanced Depth Imaging-OCT software was not commercially available at the time of the patient’s presentation, inverted images were acquired and used to measure choroidal thickness. FA and ICG were performed and showed central hypofluorescence corresponding to the area of subretinal fibrosis due to the masking effect, surrounded by a large hyperfluorescent area corresponding to the outer retinal layers’s atrophy; mild pooling was observed in the late angiograms .
At the last FU, two years after delivery, visual acuity was stable in left eye with no recurrent episodes of CSC observed in this eye.