A 15-year-old-male with a history of mild atopic dermatitis, peanut, and tree nut allergy previously diagnosed via skin prick testing (SPT) by another Allergist. He was referred to a hospital-based allergy clinic for asthma management. In addition to dyspnea and wheeze, he suffered from symptoms of seasonal and perennial allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. Skin prick testing to ALK allergen extracts was positive to grass, ragweed, Botrytis cinerea, Cephalosporium gramineum, and Aureobasidium
pullulans with appropriate positive 1 mg/ml histamine and negative saline controls ; with positive testing defined as a wheal with largest diameter ≥ 3 mm larger than the negative control. He was prescribed ciclesonide nasal spray 50 mcg 1 spray twice daily to each nostril with proper technique reviewed.
Weeks following this assessment, the patient ingested a pizza with fresh mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus), and developed immediate throat pruritis and subjective throat tightness. He had ingested edible fungi previously without any issue or symptom. He was certain there was no cross-contamination with peanuts or tree nuts.
ImmunoCap serum specific IgE (from Phadia Laboratory Systems) were positive for Alternaria alternata (3.56 kU/l), Cladosporium herbarum (2.28 kU/l), and Penicillium notatum (19.45 kU/l); with a positive test defined as ≥ 0.35 kU/l. ImmunoCap serum specific IgE to whole mushroom (Agaricus hortensis) was negative with total IgE 764 kU/l .
Subsequent SPT to fresh mushroom was positive for portobello mushroom (5 mm wheal), white cremini mushroom (6 mm wheal), and brown cremini mushroom (4 mm wheal). It was also negative to canned mushroom with an appropriate positive 1 mg/ml histamine and negative saline controls . Given these results, the patient underwent a 5-step graded oral challenge to canned mushrooms to a cumulative 3 g of mushroom protein as defined by the ingredient label. He successfully tolerated the challenge without any oral pruritis or other systemic symptoms suggestive of anaphylaxis. The patient declined an oral challenge to raw mushrooms to fully confirm PFAS as he did not want to experience recurrent clinical symptoms. He was already equipped with an epinephrine autoinjector due to pre-existing allergies and was advised to avoid consumption of raw or undercooked mushrooms as a precautionary measure.