A 24-year-old woman presented with lower abdominal pain at 12 week’ gestation. Abdominal and bimanual pelvic examination revealed a relatively immovable, goose-egg-sized, solid mass in the left region of the uterine adnexa. On the transvaginal ultrasound, a solid mass (68 × 36 × 67 mm) with multiple small follicles was located in Douglas’ pouch . Abdominal pain gradually worsened, and by 14 weeks’ gestation the mass had grown to 99 × 61 × 60 mm. The mass was presumed as MOE or fibro-thecoma, but not able to deny malignant tumor. Pelvic MR imaging was performed on a 1.5-T whole-body MR scanner (Signa; General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wis), with patients in the supine position using a pelvic surface coil (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wis). MR imaging revealed a defined mass in Douglas’ pouch, which was presumed to be the left ovary. The mass appeared as a high-intensity region with peripherally displaced follicles on fat-suppressed T2-weighted MR images and as a homogenous low-intensity region on T1-weighted images . The ovary had a teardrop configuration and the vascular pedicle appeared twisted beside the enlarged ovary and uterus . The right ovary appeared normal. Tumor markers (CEA, CA125) were not elevated. Based on these imaging findings and laboratory results, we made a preoperative presumed diagnosis of MOE due to ovarian torsion. The abdominal pain continued and the mass grew bigger, therefore, exploratory laparotomy was performed 2 days later.
The vascular pedicle extending to the left ovary was rotated 360° and it was successfully untwisted. The left ovary had edematous components. No hemorrhage or necrosis was found. Macroscopically, the right ovary had no abnormal findings. Partial resection of the enlarged left ovary was done and the ovary was fixed to prevent future twisting. Histologically, an edematous and hypo-cellular ovarian stroma, together with preserved ovarian architecture with final diagnosis was MOE. Course of the pregnancy was uneventful.