The proband (III-1) is a girl aged 4 years and 5 months with congenital anal atresia, rectoperineal fistula, and chorioretinal coloboma. She came from a village located in the Zhejiang Province, China, and was the first child of a non-consanguineous couple. She was born to a 33-year-old mother G1P1 at 39 + 4 weeks by cesarean section due to hydramnios. Her birth weight was 2,850 g (19.3th percentile), birth length was 50.0 cm (67.5th percentile), head circumference was 34.0 cm (54.1th percentile), and Apgar scores were 9 at 1 min, 10 at 5 min, and 10 at 10 min. She was in the hospital with cyanosis at 1 month old, and echocardiography showed patent foramen ovale . Since 4 months of age, she was repeatedly in the hospital with pneumonia, and computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed pulmonary artery sling . In addition, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed delayed myelination . The proband had anoplasty at 6 months old, and recovered well. She sat at 9 months old and walked at 19 months old. At the age of 53 months, based on the proband’s performance on the Peabody Developmental Motor Scales (PDMS-II) and Gesell Development Scale (GDS), she had inadequate overall motor abilities and mild global developmental delay (for test results, see ). The difference between these two scores was not statistically significant, indicating that her fine and gross motor skills appeared to be approximately the same. Physical examination showed that her height was 98.1 cm (2.7th percentile), her weight was 15.1 kg (18.2th percentile) and her head circumference was 49.1 cm (35.1th percentile). She was found to have dysmorphic features, including short stature, moderate sensorineural hearing impairment, hypertelorism , hypotonia, and preauricular pits (, blue arrow). Additional features included epicanthus (, red arrow), mild facial asymmetry , and bilateral single transverse palmar creases.
The proband’s father (II-1) is 35 years old and had a low BMI, hypertelorism , anal atresia, preauricular pits , and skin tags (, green arrow). Additional features included epicanthus , upslanted palpebral fissure , severe facial asymmetry , scoliosis, mild intellectual disability, and nasal speech.