A 14-year-old girl came to our outpatient clinic with vision loss in both eyes for one year. She had previously been diagnosed with macular retinoschisis but had not been treated. Her visual acuity was checked when she first visited our hospital. Patient refraction was − 2.25/-1.50 × 155° in OD and − 2.50-/1.00 × 179° in OS. The best corrected visual acuity was 20/66 in OD and 20/100 in OS. On the SD-OCT scan, the OD presented a radial split in the fovea of the macular region with vitreomacular adhesion. The SD-OCT scan of the OS showed that the outer retina of the left eye (Henle fiber layer) was extensively split, and vitreous macular adhesion was mainly located between the macula and optic disc, which was also the area of neuroepithelial detachment . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA )showed macular split in both eyes. Based on fundus microscopy and imaging, a diagnosis of macular retinoschisis was made .
To further identify the patient’s aetiology and determine whether surgery was needed, blood samples were taken for genetic testing with the patient’s consent. The results of the genetic test returned a negative match for the X-linked retinoschisis (CXLR) genotype, enhanced S-cone syndrome and Goldman-Favre syndrome, and the patient said she had no previous history of eye problems. The patient’s visual acuity in the right eye decreased from 20/66 to 20/80, and in the left eye increased from 20/80 to 20/50 during the month of waiting for test results. An SD-OCT scan of the OS showed that vitreoretinal adhesion subsided, and the detached neuroepithelium appeared to reset, which may explain the improvement in Best Corrected Visual Acuity(BCVA) . However, the degree of neuroepithelial detachment in the macular area of the right eye was increased .
According to the results of the patient’s genetic test report and clinical manifestations, we believe that it is unlikely that this patient had CXLR. The presence of an optic disc pit was ruled out by a high-density raster pattern of enhanced depth imaging SD-OCT, and the patient denied previous use of niacin or taxane-derived therapy. Clinical examination ruled out pathological myopia, glaucoma, myopic traction macular disease, enhanced S-cone syndrome and other retinopathies, and the patient was diagnosed with SNIFR. Since the vitreous adhesion of the patient’s left eye was removed and the visual acuity was restored to some extent, we only performed vitrectomy to remove the vitreous adhesion of the right eye, where visual acuity loss occurred, in the hope of improving the patient’s vision. The patient’s consent was obtained at the same time.After surgery, the patient’s retina was reattached .The postoperative visual acuity of the patient was 20/66 in OD,20/33 in OS.