A 64 year old woman presented with small bowel obstruction and a pelvic mass. Her significant past history included a bilateral salpingo-oophrectomy with hysterectomy sixteen years ago which on retrospective investigation and tracking of medical records was attributed as surgery for an ovarian granulosa cell tumor. Imaging studies with an abdominal ultrasound showed the presence of a mass which was followed by a CT scan which showed the presence of a large, heterogenous, solid/cystic serosal based pelvic mass that was felt to be an extracolonic gastrointestinal stromal tumor . Positron emission tomography or colonoscopy was not undertaken. Recurrent ovarian carcinoma or a complicated pelvic abscess was also offered as a radiological differential diagnosis. She underwent an explorative laparotomy with en-bloc removal of the pelvic mass.
On gross examination, the segment of the colon with overlying fatty tissue and attached firm mass weighed 467 g. The colonic segment measured 25 cm in length and contained a neoplastic lesion measuring 12.0 × 12.0 × 12.0 cm in maximum dimensions. The bowel mucosa was tan colored, unremarkable and showed normal folding pattern overlying the predominantly serosal based neoplastic mass being pale tan in color to red-brown in color with several necrotic areas. Two components of tumor were not identified on gross though there were some streaks of 'orange' colored tissue in one adjacent region of the specimen .
Microscopically, the granulosa cell tumor was composed of fairly large monotonous cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei being predominantly oval. Many architectural patterns including diffuse, micro-follicular and cords of neoplastic cells were seen. The recurrence was predominantly seen along the peritoneal surface of the bowel and along the lateral pelvic wall. Isolated adenocarcinoma glandular cells were also identified fortuitously in some regions. Further sections showed the focus of the predominant growth of the typical dirty necrosis with glandular formation of a colonic adenocarcinoma to originate from a diverticular out pouching present within the serosal fat. Detailed sectioning confirmed the connection to the overlying colonic mucosa thus establishing the diverticular status of the bowel. The free "isolated" cells supported the view that the adenocarcinoma had perforated through the diverticulum and was present on the peritoneal surface. These "free tumor cells" though admixed with the granulosa cell tumor cells still respected their individual boundaries. Extensive co-existing diverticular disease of the sigmoid was also present. The adenocarcinoma component was moderately well-differentiated with the mucinous component representing less than 50% of the tumor and there was no evidence of a pre-existing polyp at the site of the carcinoma. The free serosal surface was involved by the ovarian granulosa cell tumor. Sampling of the subserosal fat showed evidence of irregular nodules keeping with venous invasion of an extramural variety along with perineural invasion both from the granulosa cell component. A small focus of giant cell granulomatous response was also observed in the serosal fat. The proximal and surgical margins of the lesion were free of tumor and no separate polyps were identified in the remainder of the bowel sampled. Twenty-one lymph nodes had been harvested from the specimen, of which, one was positive for the presence of metastatic colonic adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical studies clearly delineated the two components of the collision tumor even in the closely admixed zones on the serosal surface of the lesion. The adenocarcinoma cells were strongly positive to low molecular weight keratin, and CK20 , while CK7, vimentin, and S100 were negative. This immunohistochemical profile of CK20 being positive and CK7 being negative in the adenocarcinomatous component confirmed the histomorphological diagnosis of colonic adenocarcinoma. P53 antibodies were markedly over expressed in the majority of the adenocarcinoma cells. CA125 remained negative in these cells. Meanwhile, the granulosa cell tumor recurrence regions showed complete negativity to keratin antibodies (low molecular weight keratin, CK 7, CK 20), P53, and CA125. However, these cells were strongly positive to vimentin and inhibin with focal positivity with S100 antibodies. This immunohistochemical profile of CK7-, CK20-, inhibin+, vimentin+ confirmed the histomorphological diagnosis of granulosa cell tumor of the ovary. Table summarizes the dilution, clone and the type of the antibodies used in this case.
Thus, the final completed pathological analysis of the specimen revealed a primary colonic adenocarcinoma arising in a large sigmoid diverticulum coexisting with another tumor phenotype. The histomorphology and the results of immunohistochemistry, together with the retrieval of the sixteen year old records, confirmed the second neoplasm to be a recurrent ovarian granulosa cell tumor comprising 60% of the specimen. Though coexistent with the primary adenocarcinoma cells, the two tumor phenotypes respected each others boundaries with no diffuse intermingling or transition between the two. At three month postoperative follow-up she developed local recurrence of the granulosa cell tumor in the pelvis and lung metastases within six months confirmed pathologically by image guided fine needle aspiration biopsy. She declined adjuvant chemotherapy and died within a year's follow-up.