The 33-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital for two weeks of gait abnormalities and slurred speech, accompanied by nausea and vomiting.
Her past medical history was notable for a moderately differentiated (G2) pNET (Ki67 ratio of 15%) with pulmonary, hepatic and lymphogenic metastases, which was initially diagnosed ten months before presentation. She was treated with five cycles of 5-fluorouracil (FU) and streptozotocin until one month before presentation and was switched to long-acting octreotide right before the onset of her symptoms.
Neurologic examination revealed severe ataxia of stance and gait, dysarthria, head tremor, myoclonus of all extremities and the typical involuntary, high-frequency, chaotic multidirectional saccadic eye movements of opsoclonus. A clinical diagnosis of a complete opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome (OMS) was established. The modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at symptom onset was 4.
A contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain was unremarkable, without sign of brain or leptomeningeal metastasis. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed a pleocytosis of 12 leukocytes /µl (< 5 /µl) and an elevated lactate of 2.6 mmol/l (0.6–2.1 mmol/l). Four oligoclonal bands restricted to the CSF were detected (type 2). CSF cytology revealed a lymphocytic predominance without the detection of atypical cells. CSF culture and a multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for the detection of typical meningitis pathogens were negative. A comprehensive antibody panel with an immunofluorescence test (IFT) and a cell-based assay (CBA) (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) was negative for antineuronal and paraneoplastic antibodies (see Supplement for a complete list). Serum studies for HIV and hepatitis viruses were negative without evidence of active or prior infection. CT imaging of the chest and abdomen revealed a stable disease without any evidence for tumor progression.
The patient was treated with methylprednisolone (1.0 g) for five consecutive days, followed by a slow steroid taper. There was only minimal improvement in symptoms one week after steroid pulse therapy; thus, therapy was switched to plasmapheresis with an accompanying slow prednisolone taper, starting at 70 mg daily. The patient received a total of eight cycles of plasmapheresis, during which there was significant improvement in symptoms. Opsoclonus and tremor regressed completely after two weeks. She was able to sit unassisted but was not yet able to walk or stand on her own. Tumor therapy was switched to capecitabine and dacarbazine since the P-OMS was considered a clinical progression in the absence of clear radiological progression.
At her two-month follow-up, the patient continued to be clinically stable without a renewed worsening of symptoms. The patient continued to require assistance when walking due to ataxia but otherwise had complete regression of all other symptoms (mRS = 3). Maintenance therapy with IVIgs was initiated and given every four weeks. Four months after the onset of OMS, the patient had significant tumor progression under the existing immunotherapy, which, in addition to marked nausea and cholestasis, worsened her neurological symptoms. Plasmapheresis was re-initiated but stopped after five cycles at the patient's request due to her poor general condition. The patient underwent debulking surgery for general symptom control in a palliative setting (see Fig. for an overview of the course of the disease and the therapy that has been performed).