A 26-year-old woman presented with a normal developmental history. She had one younger sister. After graduating from high school, she went to college, and she studied in Australia and the U.S. during high school and college. After graduating from college, she worked irregularly at a part-time job.
At the age of 24 years, the patient had grandeur delusions and speech and behavior inconsistencies. Police found her behavior on the street, and she was then hospitalized. Initially, she was diagnosed with acute transient psychosis and, finally, bipolar I disorder with delusion by several psychiatrists based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Elevated or irritable mood, pressure to keep talking, flight of ideas, and increased goal-directed activity were also observed. Her symptoms improved after treatment with olanzapine (OLZ) 20 mg/day and Li 800 mg/day. Thereafter, due to symptom recurrence, OLZ was replaced with aripiprazole (ARP) 12 mg/day. Then, she recovered well and worked as a part-time Japanese language teacher. She had been taking the medication to keep her condition stable. After the ARP dosage decreased to 9 mg/day and the Li dosage decreased to 600 mg/day, she could maintain remission. During this remission period, the range of blood level of Li was 0.31–0.42 mEq/L.
After 1 year, she underwent jaw deformity surgery at our hospital. At that time, because physical condition might be unstable due to surgery, treatment with Li was discontinued to prevent adverse effects. However, after the surgery, her manic symptoms recurred. About a week after the surgery, she had an agitated behavior (wanted to wear a diaper and sat naked on the floor) and was, thus, referred to the psychiatry department. Depressive symptoms such as tearfulness and anxiety were also noted, and the condition was believed to be associated with mixed features of bipolar disorder. Therefore, she was admitted to the psychiatric ward 3 days after the consultation.
The patient was transported to the psychiatric ward via a wheelchair. She had poor gaze congruency, and she stared at a single point. She occasionally responded to questions by nodding but showed hyperactive attentional transference, as evidenced by saying the name of a color or character she saw without answering. She sometimes made delusional grandeur statements such as “I must become the prime minister.” The blood test showed no abnormality in liver and kidney functions. Any lesions were not observed on brain computed tomography scan revealed.
The ARP and Li dosages were gradually increased to 24 and 600 mg/day, respectively. On the 8th day, the patient received Li 600 mg, and her blood Li concentration was 0.27 mEq/L. However, the symptoms were still severe. She repeatedly exhibited strong psychomotor agitation and inconsistent behaviors. For example, she destroyed closets. Thus, she was placed in isolation, and the Li dose was increased to 800 mg. The patient’s Li concentrations were 0.69 mEq/L on day 21 and 0.67 mEq/L on day 51. ARP 24 mg was replaced with OLZ 20 mg. During this period, the patient’s clinical condition was unstable. She continued to exhibit violent behavior. For example, she walked around naked in the protection room, yelled, singed, cried suddenly, and kicked the door angrily. Furthermore, she refused to eat or take her medications on day 51. Thus, physical restraint was applied. Her tablets were crushed, suspended, and administered via the nasogastric tube. The Li dosage was increased to 1,000 mg/day. However, the Li concentration decreased to 0.43 mEq/L. Her manic symptoms slightly improved, and she agreed to take the medications by herself. Subsequently, the Li concentrations were 0.78 mEq/L on day 66 and 0.83 mEq/L on day 81. Progress and Li concentration was summarized in .
The patient’s symptoms improved. However, some signs remained. Valproic acid 1,000 mg/day was added to her treatment regimen. On the 110th day of hospitalization, she was discharged. Finally, her symptoms improved.
The drug was administered once a daily at around 6:30 p.m. for renal protection, and the blood sample was drawn at around 12:30 a.m. on the next day. Our suspension method was as follows: Li and Vonoprazan Fumarate had been crushed by a crushing machine. Movicol® Combination Powder LD is powder. Other drugs were crushed in mortar by hand using mortar sticks. We added crushed Li, Vonoprazan Fumarate, and Movicol® Powder in the same vessel. Then we poured water (room temperature, soft water) about 20 ml and stirred them for a short time. Then we sucked them in a syringe, shook it once, then promptly put the suspension into the nasogastric tube. The tube was 8Fr. The length from the nose wing to the tip was 55 cm. Each dosage of Li and concomitant drugs around the period of using the elemental diet (ED) tube is shown in . The blood tests performed before and after drug administration showed no evidence of dehydration. Yang mania Rating Scale (YMRS) score was 37/60 when she was admitted. It became worse 56/60 when physical restraint was needed. Then it improved to 1/60 when her symptoms were improved.