The patient was a 68-year-old man diagnosed with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) staged IIIB (T3N2M0) two years ago. The tumor was surgically removed. After surgery, the patient had completed six cycles of chemotherapy (two cycles of pemetrexed plus carboplatin and four courses of paclitaxel plus carboplatin). Pembrolizumab (Keytruda, 200 mg IV, once every 3 weeks) was initiated since the third course of chemotherapy. After 9 months of treatment, the cancer progressed to stage IVB (T4N2M1) with multiple metastases in both lungs confirmed by percutaneous pulmonary biopsy. Then, anlotinib (a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor, TKI) was started, with a prescribed dose of 10 mg orally daily, for 2 weeks on/1 week off. During the course of treatment, blood tests and urinalysis were performed before each chemotherapy and immunotherapy session.
After 19 cycles of pembrolizumab therapy, he abruptly presented with macroscopic hematuria, heavy lower-limb edema and oliguria with chest tightness and cough. Workup revealed a sharp rise in the serum creatinine (sCr) level to 1.82 mg/dL from the baseline level of 0.52 mg/dL and a nephrotic-range proteinuria (spot urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio [UPCR] 9.48 g/g). Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with acute kidney injury (AKI) and was immediately admitted to the nephrology department for further evaluation and treatment.
Upon admission, his blood pressure, pulse, and temperature were 155/80 mmHg, 83 beats per min, and 36.7 °C, respectively. Bilateral leg edema, chest tightness, cough, bloating, and nausea were noted. A skin rash with itch was found on his left arm. The urine output decreased to 300 mL/day. Felodipine retard tablets (5 mg daily) had been used for more than 10 years to control hypertension. He had no history of diabetes, autoimmune disorders, or kidney diseases. He had no history of taking proton-pump inhibitors, anticoagulants, antibiotics, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. He had not used contrast within 2 weeks. No evidence of kidney or urinary system tumor metastasis was noted.
Regarding laboratory tests, sCr level continued to increase and peaked at 6.13 mg/dL. Serum albumin decreased to 2.8 g/dL. Urinalysis was positive for protein (4 +) and red blood cells (120 cells/high-power field). Urine cultures were negative. Serum C3 and C4 levels were 0.558 (normal range, 0.785–1.52) g/L) and 0.123 (normal range, 0.145–0.360) g/L, respectively. The serum procalcitonin level was 0.65 (normal range, < 0.046) ng/mL. Anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-nuclear antibodies, or extractable nuclear antigens were all negative. No abnormity was found in the serum immunofixation electrophoresis. Ultrasonography revealed that both kidneys were normal and no evidence of kidney or urinary system tumor metastasis was noted. Computed tomography of the chest showed mild inflammation and scattered nodules. More detailed laboratory test results are summarized in Table .
A percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed. Light microscopy revealed a typical membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) accompanied by acute tubulointerstitial nephritis . Remarkable red cell casts were seen in tubular cavities . Most of the infiltrated lymphocytes were positive for CD8 . The immunofluorescence study showed moderate C3 deposits (2 +) in the mesangium and along the capillary loops, but no significant staining for IgG, IgA, IgM, kappa, lambda, C4, and C1q . Ultrastructural analysis showed subendothelial electron-dense immune deposits .
Given the clinical manifestation, laboratory examinations, and pathological findings, a diagnosis of C3GN combined with RBC cast nephropathy was made. After ruling out genetic factors or other secondary causes, we considered pembrolizumab as the cause of C3GN. Pembrolizumab was discontinued immediately, while prednisone 60 mg per day and hemodialysis were initiated. One dose of cyclophosphamide (400 mg, IV) was also administered. Combined with supportive treatments, chest tightness, edema and cough improved rapidly. Urine output increased to 600–800 mL/day. Gross hematuria disappeared, and urine red blood cells declined to 9 cells/high-power field. The spot UPCR declined to 3.19 g/g. Serum albumin increased to 3.6 g/dL and sCr level decreased gradually, reaching a nadir of 4.12 mg/dL but still required hemodialysis. The timeline of clinical manifestation and treatment process of the patient was summarized in Fig. . With a significant improvement, the patient was discharged from the hospital for outpatient dialysis. Unfortunately, he discontinued hemodialysis after discharge and died 2 weeks later.