The patient was a 51-year-old Caucasian woman with relapsed non-Hodgkin lymphoma treated four years earlier with an allogeneic stem cell transplant. Her lymphoma was in remission. Complications of her allogeneic transplant included a history of chronic extensive graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) involving the skin and dermal squamous cell carcinoma. Immunosuppression with cyclosporine had been discontinued two months earlier due to the development of squamous cell carcinoma and the absence of active GvHD. She had no history of smoking, alcohol, or drug abuse. She presented with fever and profound neutropenia; serial blood counts showed that the neutropenia had been present for more than a month . Her examination showed moderate cachexia, long-standing sclerodermatous changes and hyper-pigmentation of the skin consistent with quiescent GvHD, palpable 2.5 cm left cervical and submandibular adenopathy that was flurodeoxy glucose (FDG) avid on positron emission tomography/computerized tomography (PET/CT) scan. She had a non-focal neurological examination. A complete blood count showed a normal total leukocyte count (4,600/uL) with 2% granulocytes (48 neutrophils/uL) together with 84% lymphocytes and 14% monocytes. Red blood cells were 4.24 × 10E12/L, hemoglobin was 12.4 g/dL, hematocrit was 0.37, and the platelet count was 113 × 10E9/L. Medications included atenolol, topical clobetasol, Ditropan (oxybutynin), prophylactic voriconazole, prophylactic valganciclovir, Soriatane (acitretin), and Carac (fluorouracil) cream. Blood cultures showed a micrococcus species. Her iron level was 330 mcg/L with 20% saturation. Folate, vitamin B1, vitamin B12, copper, vitamin D levels, thyroid function tests, creatinine, bilirubin, liver enzymes and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were normal. Her blood zinc level was borderline low at 49 mcg/dL. Antineutrophil antibodies were absent (<1:10 titer). PCR tests for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein Barr virus (EBV) in the blood were negative, and had remained negative on prophylactic doses of valganciclovir following CMV reactivation five months earlier. Her vitamin B6 level was very low at 0.5 ng/mL (reference range 5 to 30 ng/mL). Serum IgG was polyclonally elevated at 3720 mg/dL as were blood T-cells (4580 cells/uL) and CD8+ T-cells (2836 cells/uL) with normal numbers of CD4+ T-cells, B-cells and natural killer (NK) cells.
Her fever resolved with a course of vancomycin, without identifying a site of infection. Histological examination of the marrow demonstrated marked hypocellularity without specific megaloblastic or myelodysplastic findings, metastatic cancer, or features to suggest immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Cytogenetic analysis showed 100% donor (male) cells without any clonotypic abnormalities. Biopsy of a cervical lymph node showed poorly differentiated carcinoma, consistent with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. Valganciclovir, voriconazole, and Soriatane (acitretin) were discontinued (as potential causes of neutropenia) and prophylactic fluconazole and acyclovir were started. Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF; 300 ug subcutaneously every other day) was administered for four doses in mid February 2010 without any improvement in her neutropenia. Following daily supplementation with 150 mg Vitamin B6, blood B6 levels normalized concomitant with resolution of the neutropenia . Following correction of the B6 deficiency and neutropenia, the cervical adenopathy completely regressed by clinical examination and became scintographically negative by PET/CT.