The proband was a one-year-old male patient. His nonconsanguineous parents and his elder sister were also included in this study. The patient underwent thorough physical examinations and other tests, including blood gas analysis, blood ammonia testing, plasma acylcarnitine profiling, urinary organic acid analysis, brainstem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) studies, and genetic testing. His family only underwent physical examination and genetic testing. The filter-paper dried blood spot sample was pretreated with a NeoBase Non-derivatized MS/MS Kit (PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Turku, Finland), and the acylcarnitine profile was analyzed by using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (Acquity TQD, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The urinary organic acids were analyzed by using gas chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (7890B/5977A, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Blood gas analysis was performed with an automated blood gas analyzer (Cobas B221, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). The BAEP was recorded by using a KeyPoint electromyogram device (Dantec Medical A/S, Skovlunde, Denmark). Written informed consent for data collection and publication was obtained from the parents. This study was approved by the Ethical Committee, Quanzhou Children’s Hospital of Fujian. The study was prepared in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations.
The proband, a Chinese Han boy, was first brought to the dermatology department at the age of 1 year with a skin rash around the periorbital and perioral areas; he was treated for eczema. Three weeks later, he was referred directly to the pediatric intensive care unit with serious tachypnea, moaning, and heart failure. The rash had expanded to the limbs, neck, and groin. Capillary blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis with pH 6.98, a base excess of − 26 mmol/L, bicarbonate level of 3.9 mmol/L, anion gap of 25.2 mmol/L, elevated lactate of 13.1 mmol/L (normal < 2 mmol/L), and elevated ammonia of 152.0 μmol/L (normal < 47 μmol/L). Biochemical laboratory results on the day of admission showed low ornithine (15.99 μmol/L; normal 42–325 μmol/L) and a plasma acylcarnitine profile with low free carnitine and large increases in C5-OH, C5-OH/C0, C5-OH/C8, C3/C2, and C3/C0. The urinary organic acid profile displayed excessive excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, acetylglycine, propionylglycine, 3-methylcrotonylglycine, methylcrotonylglycine, 3-hydroxybutyric acid, pyruvic acid, and lactic acid. Increases in the amounts of 2-keto-3-methyl-pentanoic acid and 2-keto-isocaproic acid suggested a metabolic disorder of the branched-chain amino acids. Based on the characteristic plasma acylcarnitine profile and urinary excretion pattern, the patient was presumptively diagnosed with MCD and treated immediately with biotin (20 mg bid). The skin rash was eliminated and the normal acid–base balance was restored 5 days later. Subsequently, the level of C5-OH decreased gradually and the urinary organic acid profile showed undetectable acetylglycine, propionylglycine, 3-methylcrotonylglycine, and methylcrotonylglycine .
During the acute episode, a BAEP study showed that the wave I latency and I–V interpeak latency intervals were all significantly prolonged. Additionally, the bilateral thresholds also increased: the left to 50 dbnhl and the right to 60 dbnhl. These results indicated that the patient’s bilateral hearing was impaired. The hearing impairment was predicted to be sensorineural. A cattle encephalon glycoside and ignotin injection was immediately administered. After biotin therapy for 43 days, the results of a repeat BAEP study showed that the bilateral thresholds had both decreased to 30 dbnhl, which indicated that the hearing damage had been reversed (see Fig. S).
Peripheral whole blood or dried blood spot samples were collected from the proband and his family members. Genomic DNA was extracted by using Qiagen Blood DNA Mini Kits (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and was stored at − 80 °C until further use. All exons and adjacent noncoding regions of abnormal C5-OH-related genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and subsequently screened via next-generation sequencing (NGS) with a NextSeq 500/550 Buffer Cartridge v2 Sequencing Kit on a high-throughput sequencing instrument (Nextseq 500, Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Sequence analyses were performed by using BWA, GATK, Annovar, etc.
Identified variants HLCS c.1522C > T, c.1006_1007delGA and BTD c.638_642delAACAC were validated by Sanger sequencing of samples from all family members. The HLCS exon 9 and exon 6 sequences were amplified by PCR using the following primers, respectively: forward 1, 5′-CTCACAGAAGCAGAACATTAT-3′ and reverse 1, 5′-GAAAACTCCGAGAGCACT-3′; forward 2, 5′-TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTTAGTGCTATCTTTCCCCTTC-3′ and reverse 2, 5′-CAGGAAACAGCTATGACCGATGATTTCCAAACCCG-3′. BTD exon 4 was amplified with the following primers: forward 3, 5′-TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTTTTAGTTGAGATGGGGTTT-3′ and reverse 3, 5′-CAGGAAACAGCTATGACCCTCCAGAGGGGTGTGTAT-3′. Sanger sequencing was performed with an ABI Prism 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), and the results were analyzed with DNASTAR software .
Genetic sequencing results reveal that the patient carries the maternal missense mutation c.1522C > T (p.Arg508Trp) in exon 9 of the HLCS gene, the novel paternal 2-bp deletion c. 1006_1007delGA (p.Glu336Thrfs*15) in exon 6 of the HLCS gene, and also the novel paternal 5-bp deletion c.638_642delAACAC (p.His213Profs*4) in exon 4 of the BTD gene . Furthermore, his family’s genotypes have been confirmed at a heterozygous level by Sanger sequencing , and his healthy elder sister has been shown to carry the same mutations as his father . The pedigree is shown in Fig. a. The p.Arg508Trp mutation has been widely reported to be pathogenic [, ]. The p.Glu336Thrfs*15 and p.His213Profs*4 mutations could not be found in the literature or the 1000 Genome, ESP6500, ExAC, or dbSNP databases and were not detected in 100 healthy individuals. The effect of these mutations on protein function is predicted to be deleterious by PROVEAN and MutationTaster . Additionally, the p.Glu336Thrfs*15 mutation resides in a conserved stretch of amino acids and leads to truncated proteins lacking the conserved domains of HLCS . When all this information is taken into account, the c.1006_1007delGA (p.Glu336Thrfs*15) mutation is considered to be deleterious and likely pathogenic.