The 15-year-old girl was born at 38 weeks of gestation by vaginal delivery to a pair of non-consanguineous Chinese parents. She was the only child and her prenatal period was uneventful. Her growth and developmental milestones were normal.
At age of 5, she suffered from a seizure at sleep in the early morning, characterized by limb twitching and jerking, with loss of consciousness, which lasted for 3 min. She complained of weakness and headache after the attack. She was subsequently sent to the hospital where the electroencephalogram (EEG) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were both non-revealing. At the age of 8, she presented with paroxysms of abnormal involuntary posturing of both hands, ranging from a few seconds to 1 min. The episodes were mostly triggered by sudden movement or emotional stress. Her consciousness was fully preserved during the attacks. Her family history was negative for seizures. However, her mother had dyskinesia after sudden movements when she was young, such as suddenly standing up or running. Her mother's symptoms completely disappeared after the age of 16. Additionally, her mother's younger sister and cousin had similar dyskinesia.
The girl went to a tertiary hospital and was diagnosed with PKD at the age of 10. She was initially treated with oxcarbazepine, which unfortunately, caused an allergic reaction in the form of skin rashes. Levetiracetam was initiated, with an initial dose of 500 mg twice daily. However, she still had paroxysmal dystonia despite the levetiracetam treatment, with a frequency of about once per week.
At the age of 15, she suffered from another seizure at sleep in the early morning, characterized by limb twitching and jerking with loss of consciousness, which lasted for around 3 min. Weakness and headache were reported after the attack. EEG at an outside institute showed the presence of scattered theta waves, sharp waves and sharp slow waves induced by hyperventilation. Long-term EEG showed intermittent bilateral frontal slowing. Neurologic examinations and brain MRI were normal at that time. Similarly, she experienced two grand mal seizures in the next month, both at sleep in the early morning. Dosage of levetiracetam was increased to 1,000 mg twice daily. However, the paroxysmal dystonia persisted. The diagnosis of concomitant PKD and epilepsy was considered. Genetic testing revealed a heterozygous frameshift mutation of c.649dupC (p.Arg217Profs*8) . LCM, at a dose of 50 mg twice daily, was added to the previous treatment. The patient responded excellently to the treatment. Neither dystonia nor seizures recurred after the LCM treatment . No adverse effects such as cardiac abnormalities and mental disorders were observed. The patient remained free of both PKD and seizures at the last follow-up 10 months after the initiation of LCM.