An 86-year-old Japanese woman was transferred to the emergency department with rapidly progressive dyspnoea and wheezing. She also reported a five-month history of lumbago. Her medical history included hypertension, chronic kidney disease, idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, and rectal carcinoma (resected). She had never undergone heart valve surgery or dental treatment. On examination, she was afebrile, and her blood pressure was 165/70 mmHg, pulse 88 /min, and respiratory rate 16 /min with O2 saturation of 78% on room air. Physical examination was notable for expiratory wheezes and a diastolic murmur (Levine 2/6) at the 4th right sternal border. There was no evidence of rash or lumbar spine tenderness. Laboratory tests showed normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin level, 9.2 g/dL; mean cell volume, 91.5 fL), mild renal impairment (serum creatinine level 0.72 mg/dL, Cockcroft-Gault CCr 39.1 mL/min), inflammation (C-reactive protein level 4.61 mg/dL), and elevated brain natriuretic peptide level (319.7 pg/mL). Chest radiography revealed bilateral interstitial opacities, pleural effusion, and a slight cardiac dilatation (cardiothoracic ratio 64%, Fig. a). Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated the presence of mobile aortic vegetation (9.5 × 4.3 mm in size, Fig. b) with perforation, prolapse, and regurgitation of the aortic valve. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar region revealed destruction of the disc structure and adjacent vertebrae at the L3/4 level . A brain MRI showed no evidence of cerebral infarction or aneurysm.
Intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam, furosemide, and carperitide were administered based on a likely diagnosis of infective endocarditis, followed by pulmonary oedema and vertebral osteomyelitis. Gram-positive coccus, which was identified as E. casseliflavus through matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; MALDI Biotyper, BRUKER, Billerica, MA, USA), was isolated from two sets of blood culture bottles on the day after admission. Soon after the causative microorganism became clear, we switched the antimicrobial regimen to ampicillin (3 g every 6 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 h, Fig. ). Based on the broth microdilution method, the strain was susceptible to penicillin, ampicillin, and daptomycin (minimal inhibitory concentration 1, 1, 1 μg/mL, respectively) according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines (M100-ED29). Although the minimal inhibitory concentration of vancomycin was 4 μg/mL, the strain should be considered intrinsically resistant to vancomycin. Detection of vanC gene was not performed, and susceptibility to oxazolidinones was not assessed. Given that no high-level resistance to gentamicin was detected with a screening test on agar plates (the diameter of the inhibition circle was 22 mm), the antimicrobial regimen was changed to ampicillin (2 g every 4 h) and gentamicin on the fifth day of admission. Gentamicin was administered at 120 mg (equivalent to 3 mg/kg) for initial loading and then 45 mg (equivalent to 1 mg/kg) daily for maintenance. The dose of gentamicin was adjusted appropriately to maintain trough levels of < 1 μg/mL. The patient underwent aortic valve replacement (AVR) on the thirteenth hospital day. Vegetations were found to be attached to the ventricular side of all three aortic valve cusps . Histopathological examination of the resected valve showed nodular infiltration of lymphocytes and neutrophils into all the layers, with fibrin precipitation and necrosis and clusters of Gram-positive cocci on the surface, which confirmed the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. The day after AVR, the patient underwent emergency reoperation for cardiopulmonary arrest resulting from cardiac tamponade. The subsequent postoperative course was uneventful. Based on the negative results of both the blood culture taken on the fourth day of admission and excised aortic valve cultures, the patient was administered intravenous ampicillin and gentamicin for 6 weeks. Surveillance blood cultures on days 7, 11, and 27 remained negative. Renal failure and vestibulocochlear dysfunction were not observed. The patient was discharged 8 weeks after admission.