A 32-year-old gravida 0 female presented to the Emergency Department for new onset severe right groin and knee pain and inability to ambulate independently. Over the past several months, she noted paresthesia in her right anteromedial thigh and frequent knee buckling that was worse during menses. Her past gynecologic history is notable for irregular menses lasting three to seven days with heavy flow. Past medical history includes chronic back pain, mild scoliosis, and colitis. She had no prior surgical history and no medication use.
Physical examination revealed a well-appearing female in no acute distress, with right lower extremity edema and adductor muscle weakness, hyperesthesia of the right anteromedial thigh, and an abnormal gait. Pelvic examination revealed a large immobile uterine mass filling the posterior cul-de-sac and extending to the pelvic sidewall. Her labs were normal except for a mild leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 10.9, and a urine pregnancy test was negative. She was admitted to the Gynecology service for further evaluation and pain management. The Neurology and Orthopedic Surgery departments were also consulted.
During the evaluation of her lower extremity pain, a computed tomography (CT) thigh/femur showed a large pelvic mass. Follow up pelvic ultrasound confirmed a multifibroid uterus, with a dominant 13.9 cm posterior fibroid. Lower extremity venous duplex was negative for deep vein thrombosis. Follow-up MR imaging of hip/pelvis, thigh/femur, and lumbar spine was performed. Imaging revealed multiple findings including (1) mild spinal canal stenosis at L4-L5, (2) hip joint distension consistent with synovial thickening, (3) a low grade femoral chondroid lesion that was noted to be benign and unlikely the source of pain per Orthopedic Surgery, and (4) a large fibroid measuring 12.5 cm × 13 cm × 12.5 cm compressing the bladder and the iliac veins in proximity of multiple branches of the lumbar plexus, including the bilateral obturator nerves .
Consequently, as there was no other identifiable cause of her symptoms, it was thought that the mass effect from the fibroid was resulting in lumbar plexus and obturator nerve compression. The patient underwent an uncomplicated laparoscopic myomectomy of the posterior dominant fibroid and additional smaller anterior uterine fibroids .
Laparoscopy was performed with four trocars: one 5-mm at the umbilicus, two 5-mm on the right side, and one 5-mm in the left lower quadrant. The umbilical incision was later extended to 3 cm to allow for contained hand morcellation. 800 mcg of rectal misoprostol, 1 g of intravenous tranexamic acid, and uterine subserosal injection of dilute vasopressin were used to minimize blood loss.
Using an ultrasonic energy device, the uterine serosa was incised until the fibroid was identified. There was minimal myometrial tissue between the uterine serosa and the fibroid. With blunt and sharp dissection, the uterine serosa overlying the fibroid was incised circumferentially, and the fibroid was separated from the uterus in its entirety.
A 2-0 barbed suture was used to close the myometrial defect and reapproximate the serosal layer to achieve hemostasis. Sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose (Seprafilm®) was applied over the hysterotomy site to minimize the risk of adhesion formation. The same technique was applied to remove the other three smaller fibroids. The specimen was placed in an Alexis® Contained Extraction System and morcellated with an 11-blade scalpel through the umbilical incision. In total, the fibroids weighed 1,015 g.
Postoperatively, her pain improved significantly, and she was able to ambulate independently. She was discharged on postoperative day two. Three months postoperatively, the patient noted an improvement in neurologic symptoms with normal gait and significant improvement of pain, although paresthesia and pain with prolonged ambulation over the anteromedial right thigh persisted. The patient was followed by physical therapy and physical medicine and rehabilitation services for continued management of her symptoms.