A 78-year-old man presented with a conjunctival nodule in his right eye. He had a medical history of diabetes, hypertension, and cerebral hemorrhage. He has been under observation due to cataract and glaucoma by a nearby ophthalmologist from February 2012. In July 2012, slit lamp examination of the right eye revealed a primary nasal pterygium progressing to the cornea. Four months later, an elevated lesion was noted at the upper side of the pterygium. Since the elevated lesion became thicker with a rough surface and developed to the cornea, he was referred to our department on February 26, 2013. Visual acuity was 0.4 (0.5 × cyl −3.00DA ×30) OD and 0.3 (0.4 × cyl −1.50DA ×70) OS with normal intraocular pressure. Slit lamp examination demonstrated that the primary pterygial tissue was located in the nasal corneal limbus, where a whitish, bulging lesion with an irregular surface involved the upper side of the pterygium . Anterior segment indocyanine green angiography (IA) displayed that the white mass was fed by neovessels derived from episcleral vessels as well as extended blood vessels originating from the pterygial tissue . Systemic imaging modalities did not show any tumor lesions except in the right eye.
The whitish nodule was clinically diagnosed as CIS adjacent to a primary pterygium. Both lesions were resected with a safety margin (measuring 3 mm), which was reconstructed using a conjunctival rotation flap on March 21, 2013. Histological findings of the tissue surgically removed were CIS as well as squamous metaplasia . In addition, there was an aggregation of plenty of lymphocytes forming lymphoid follicles beneath the epithelium . At high magnification, neutrophil infiltration was markedly found to be present within the carcinomatous tissue . The surgical margin of the corneal site was not free of tumor cells. Topical interferon (IFN) alfa-2b eyedrops were used as postoperative adjunct therapy 4 times a day for 2 months. On June 5, 2013, a biopsy was conducted from the corneal limbus where the tumor had been. Since the histology revealed no tumor cells, topical IFN eyedrop treatment was stopped. The patient was well without local recurrence of tumor or distal metastases up to December 2015.