A 65-year-old male was referred to our hospital and clinically diagnosed with stage III gastric cancer (cT4aN1M0). The patient was enrolled in the phase II clinical trial titled as perioperative chemotherapy with intraperitoneal (IP) and intravenous (IV) paclitaxel (PTX) plus S-1 for serosa positive gastric cancer (UMIN000013109). Therefore, the patient received three courses of IP and IV PTX + S-1; this regimen comprised a 3-week course of oral S-1 (80 mg/m2/day) on days 1–14, with IP PTX (20 mg/m2) and IV PTX (50 mg/m2) on days 1 and 8 . Based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) , the patient without target lesions had a non-progressive disease and non-complete response. Thus, the patient underwent distal gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy. However, as the tumor directly invaded into the transverse colon, he underwent a partial resection of the transverse colon. The pathological examination confirmed stage IIIB gastric cancer (ypT4bN1M0). Postoperatively, the patient received three courses of IP and IV PTX + S-1, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with oral S-1.
While receiving adjuvant chemotherapy 1-year post-surgery, enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed lymph node swelling in station no. 9 along the celiac artery . Upon diagnosed with lymph node recurrence, the patient was treated with two courses of capecitabine + oxaliplatin without trastuzumab because of a human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative gastric cancer. The regimen comprised oral administration of capecitabine 1800 mg/day, two times daily for the first 2 weeks of the 3-week cycle and 130 mg/m2 of IV oxaliplatin on day 1 of each cycle. However, abdominal CT revealed further progression of lymph node metastasis, with a 30.3% increment . As the second-line regimen, the patient received ramucirumab (RAM) + PTX, including a 28-day course of IV RAM (8 mg/kg) on days 1 and 15 + IV PTX (80 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, and 15. After three courses of RAM + PTX, enhanced CT revealed enlargement of lymph node metastasis, with a 32.6% increment . Owing to the patient’s progressive disease in the tumor response to the second-line chemotherapy, nivolumab 3 mg/kg was administered every 2 weeks and 240 mg/body every 2 weeks after September 2018 as the third-line regimen. After four courses of nivolumab, CT revealed a significant shrinkage of the metastatic lymph node, with a 45.6% reduction .
Consequently, the patient exhibited a partial response (PR) based on the RECIST. During 11 courses of nivolumab, enhanced CT confirmed a PR. However, after 12 courses of nivolumab, the patient was diagnosed with grade 4 diabetes mellitus, resulting in the nivolumab discontinuation because of severe irAE. Accordingly, insulin was administered for nivolumab-induced type 1 diabetes mellitus, which promptly regulated the plasma glucose level. Finally, the patient was followed up without any treatment after the nivolumab discontinuation. Abdominal CT after 15 months, since the nivolumab discontinuation revealed a PR , and the patient controls tumor progression under treatment-free and is alive for 31 months since disease recurrence.