A 53-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our Emergency Department with acute-onset speech impairment and coordination defects. She awoke in the morning to notice that when she took her dog for a walk that she had difficulty manipulating the leash and felt clumsy with her right hand. She also had difficulty with her memory in that she placed a water bowl down for her dog but forgot to place water in it. She felt disorganized with her thoughts and was concerned enough to call her brother, who noticed that her speech was slurred. Emergency medical services were activated and the patient was brought to PIH Health Hospital. She had no complaints of any headache, double vision, difficulty swallowing, vertigo, numbness, or focal weakness. There was no lapse of consciousness nor were there any drop attacks or history of seizures.
Her past medical history was significant for migraines with occasional visual auras and scoliosis. Family history was remarkable for an elderly grandmother who suffered a stroke. Personal habits included the use of occasional wine without history of tobacco or illicit drug use. Her medications at the time of admission included multivitamin supplements and hormone replacement therapy.
Physical examination revealed an afebrile, normotensive and pleasant woman who appeared her stated age and was in no acute distress. Neck examination did not reveal any carotid bruits and there were no murmurs noted on cardiac examination. Her cardiac rhythm was even.
Neurological examination demonstrated that she was awake and alert on mental status testing with intact recent and remote memory without any formal thought disorders. Speech examination showed some word-finding difficulty with word substitutions and mild stuttering. No dysarthria was noted but it was felt that she had a mild aphasia. Cranial nerves 2 to 12 were all intact without deficits. Motor examination revealed intact strength at 5 out of 5 on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale throughout without drift, focal atrophy, or fasciculations. No abnormal involuntary movements were noted and tone was normal. Coordination testing revealed slight right-sided finger-to-nose dysmetria. Sensory testing demonstrated intact sensation to all primary sensory modalities with the exception of slight proprioceptive loss involving her right upper extremity. There was a mild loss of stereognosis of her right hand. Gait examination was unremarkable. Her reflexes were intact throughout without any long tract signs.
Radiologic and sonographic investigations included an emergency head computed tomography (CT) scan, which was unremarkable. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed and revealed an acute left parietal operculum ischemic infarct with mid left temporal lobe involvement and findings suggestive of recent embolic infarcts in the centrum semiovale bilaterally. Carotid duplex imaging showed a less than 30% stenosis of the bilateral carotid arteries and transcranial Doppler studies were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the neck revealed a focal 2cm region of fusiform aneurysmal dilatation of the right subclavian artery along with a focal fusiform dilatation of the left brachiocephalic vein in the supraclavicular fossa with a diameter of approximately 1.1cm. MRA of the brain revealed a within normal limits intracranial circulation pattern. A chest X-ray did not reveal any acute cardiopulmonary disease.
Serologic studies included an elevated total cholesterol level of 218mg/dL. A complete blood count and metabolic panel were normal, and no coagulation defects were seen.
Given the brain MRI findings suggestive of a possible embolic pattern, both transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography were performed, which revealed findings consistent with an ASD and a right-to-left shunt. Ejection fraction was normal at 70% without evidence of any pericardial effusion or intracardiac thrombus.
The findings of an ASD on echocardiography coupled with an embolic pattern seen on the brain MRI scan lead to a magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) of the pelvis. The MRV revealed effacement of the proximal left common iliac vein due to impression by the adjacent left iliac common iliac artery without evidence of thrombosis, which was felt to be consistent with MTS.
The patient was placed on aspirin 325mg daily and asked to stop her hormone replacement therapy. The vascular surgery department was consulted and did not recommend any surgical intervention regarding her MTS or for her right subclavian fusiform aneurysmal dilatation or her focal fusiform dilatation of the left brachiocephalic vein. She was subsequently referred to a local tertiary facility where she underwent closure of her ASD.
The patient has been doing quite well to date with five years of follow-up without any new cerebral ischemic events. She remains active and functionally independent.