A 26-year-old Japanese man complaining of diarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever, was transferred to our hospital after treatment with oral antibiotics had failed. Three years prior to this admission, the patient was diagnosed with CVID and had been receiving monthly intravenous immunoglobulin infusions. He also had a history of treatment for tuberculosis and repeated pneumonia. The patient had not been on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), proton pump inhibitor (PPI), or other medications that can lead to intestinal inflammation. Physical examination showed tachycardia and abdominal tenderness. Laboratory data were the following; hemoglobin (Hb) 12.0 g/dL (normal: 11.3-14.9 g/dL), white blood cell count 9000 /μL (4000–9500 /μL), platelet count 29.1 × 104 /μL (11.0-40.0 × 104 /μL), serum albumin 3.1 g/dL (4–5 g/dL), serum IgG 229 mg/dL (870–1700 mg/dL), serum IgA, <24 mg/dL (110–410 mg/dL), and serum IgM, <18.6 mg/dL (33–190 mg/dL). Colonoscopy revealed multiple longitudinal ulcers in the ileum end and the ascending colon . Cobblestone change of the mucosa of the terminal ileum was also observed . No abnormality was found in the rectum and anus. Pathology examination showed erosion, distortion of crypts, and infiltration of leukocytes, although granulomas were not found . Most of the inflammatory cells in the intestinal mucosa were cluster of differentiation (CD) 3+ T cells, whereas CD 20+ B cells were not observed . Cytomegalovirus was serologically and pathologically negative. Taken together, we concluded that these findings were consistent with Crohn’s disease. After admission, he was given mesalazine and intravenous hyperalimentation, which did not improve his symptoms. Oral administration of 50 mg prednisone was given with very limited success. A month after admission, he had a massive melena and his hemoglobin fell to 5.5 mg/dL. Colonoscopy demonstrated an exposed blood vessel in one of the ulcers in the ascending colon, which was considered to as a potential bleeding point . Although hemostasis was temporarily achieved by colonoscopic clipping , he repeatedly experienced melena. He underwent emergency colonoscopy and blood infusion several times in short period. Thus, after excluding the possibilities of active infectious diseases by repeated fecal cultures, chest-abdominal computed tomography, and tuberculosis tests, infliximab was introduced under careful monitoring; venous injection of 250 mg infliximab was given on week 0, week 2 and week 6. Gastrointestinal bleeding from the ulcer halted after the first infliximab injection. Remarkable improvement was seen after the third infliximab injection; he was in clinical remission and deep ulcers in the terminal ileum had healed. Only small erosions in the ascending colon were present on follow-up colonoscopy . Pathological findings also showed improvement with reduced infiltration of CD3+ T cells . Given his history of tuberculosis and repeated infections due to underlying CVID, we decided to terminate the infliximab therapy. He was discharged without side effects and has been in clinical remission for 3 years.