A 71-year-old man was referred to our center owing to the presence of a large right lung cancer, which was 18 cm in size and classified as clinical stage T4N0M0). The patient had parathyroid hormone-related peptide-mediated hypercalcemia and obstructive pneumonia. Following the treatment of hypercalcemia and pneumonia, we performed right pneumonectomy via posterolateral thoracotomy by dividing the latissimus muscle and a part of the serratus anterior muscle. The bronchial stump was covered with a pedicled intercostal muscle flap, achieving pathological curative resection. Pathological findings demonstrated acinar-predominant adenocarcinoma with wild-type EGFR and ALK and low PD-L1 expression—tumor proportion score (< 1%); the pathological stage was the same. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day (POD) 12. However, he was re-admitted to our center due to respiratory failure and severe sepsis on POD 30 owing to PPE combined with BPF. We performed thoracotomy debridement immediately, which demonstrated foul-smelling pus filling the cavity, intercostal muscle flap necrosis, and bronchial stump dehiscence 20 mm in diameter. Considering his poor general condition, we gave up primary closure of the BPF and performed OWT. The blood and thoracic pus cultures revealed Streptococcus anginosus and anaerobic gram-negative rods; therefore, the patient was treated with carbapenem for 2 weeks. After performing OWT, the color of the thoracic cavity wall and pleural effusions gradually turned spotty blue and green, and P. aeruginosa was cultured from the gauze after 1 month. Given the patient’s improved condition, we performed several debridement procedures for sterilization, and a thin granulation tissue covered the whole cavity, but P. aeruginosa was still present. Eight months after the fenestration, we closed the BPF with the pedicled omental flap. Laparotomy was performed to expose the omentum, which was dissected and brought into the pleural cavity through an incision in the diaphragm. Separation of the bronchial stump from the mediastinum and direct closure of the fistula seemed to be unsuccessful; thus, we used the vascularized omental flap as a patch and placed it to the edges of the fistula. The omentum was placed on the stump to cover the fistula and fixed with interrupted 4–0 monofilament sutures to achieve airtight closure. We only administered cefazoline to prevent surgical site infection, but not covering P. aeruginosa. The patient did not experience abdominal complications or adverse events caused by P. aeruginosa postoperatively. We continued to change the dressing daily through fenestration with bared omentum, which soon became granulated. On POD 3, air leakage from the stump occurred, which was detected by the sound of air flow and vibration of the omentum. It was managed by granulation on POD 5. The BPF was closed definitively using the well-vascularized omental flap . BPF closure promoted the accelerated growth of the healthy thick granulation tissue covering the whole cavity, thereby reducing the cavity size . We could not completely eliminate the bacteria from the cavity, and a small amount of yellowish exudate still contained P. aeruginosa . While considering the timing of definitive chest closure, cancer recurrences were detected in the brain and contralateral lung at 4 months after the bronchial closure. Brain metastasis was treated with radiotherapy, and the lung nodule was only observed closely. We decided to proceed with the definitive chest closure. We explained the risk and benefit of thoracostomy closure to the patient, who was eager to return to his normal activities of daily living. At 5 months after the bronchial closure, we simply closed the window using a pectoralis major flap without performing complete obliteration of the cavity, such as thoracomyoplasty or antibiotic filling. Split-thickness skin graft obtained from the thigh covered the area where the pectoralis major was harvested . Cefazoline was administered intravenously to prevent surgical site infection, but not covering P. aeruginosa. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the residual cavity was gradually filled completely with pleural effusion but without any symptoms of infection . Thoracentesis performed at 3 months after chest closure demonstrated slightly cloudy and yellowish pleural effusion, and P. aeruginosa was cultured from the fluid . The pleural cavity seemed to contain a “silent empyema.” He was finally discharged and returned home at 15 months after the first pneumonectomy. The patient chose to receive supportive care. He died at 24 months after the pneumonectomy (10 months after the definitive chest closure) owing to recurrent cancer in the contralateral lung. Until he died, there were no symptoms or signs suggestive of recurrent empyema. Patient consent was obtained for the publication of this report.