A 66-year-old man, who complained of upper abdominal pain, was found to have EGJ tumor by endoscopy . He was diagnosed as having Siewert type II adenocarcinoma (E=G, cT1b, cN0, cM0, cStage I) . We planned to perform lower esophagectomy and proximal gastrectomy with double tract reconstruction.
In the computed tomography (CT) scan before surgery, a 10-mm aneurysm in the middle third of the splenic artery was found . Due to the anatomical location of the aneurysm, endovascular treatment was not considered due to recanalization and coil migration. The size of the aneurysm was not a high risk of rupture , but we concerned about the possibility of SAA rupture due to postoperative pancreatic fistula (PF) associated with suprapancreatic lymph node dissection such as station 11p and 11d. We thought that spleen blood flow could be preserved even after SAA resection by preoperative CT scan and unnecessary invasive procedures could be avoided by simultaneous surgery. However, during simultaneous proximal gastrectomy and SAA resections, it was not clear whether there was sufficient blood supply to the spleen. Thus, we performed the surgery with a minimally invasive abdominal and left thoracic approach (MALTA) while continuously examining for the presence of blood supply to the spleen using fluorescence imaging.
The patient was placed under general anesthesia and was positioned in reverse Trendelenburg with the left side of the upper body lifted and the legs spread. Laparo- and thoracoscopic proximal gastrectomy and lower esophagectomy with D1+ lymph node dissection and double tract reconstruction were performed. First, we resected the SAA. Next, laparoscopic proximal gastrectomy was performed using five ports. Four ports were inserted into the thoracic cavity through the 9th, 10th (× 2), and 11th intercostal spaces, with the patient in the same body position. Lower thoracoscopic esophagectomy and lymph node dissection of the lower mediastinum was performed under artificial pneumothorax. The lower esophagus was resected under the thoracoscopic view to ensure an adequate margin. SAA located at the distal side of the branch of the great pancreatic artery , so we clamped the splenic artery to preserve the great pancreatic artery temporally. Then, we injected 5 mg of indocyanine green (ICG) intravenously to the patient. Blood supply to the spleen was confirmed using fluorescence imaging . Therefore, we resected the SAA without splenectomy (preserving the great pancreatic artery and the spleen). Intrathoracic esophagojejunostomy was performed with a transoral anvil (OrVil™) and a circular stapler (EEA25™) using the laparo- and thoracoscopic techniques. In addition, an oblique jejunogastrostomy for double tract reconstruction was performed. The operative time was 362 min, and there was no blood loss.
Histopathological diagnosis of the tumor was adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation (pTIb, pN1, pStage IIB according to the UICC Classification, 8th edition,) and with clear margins. Oral intake was resumed on postoperative day 5. Postoperative CT scan revealed the preservation of the great pancreatic artery and omental branches of the left gastroepiploic artery . There was no splenic abscess due to ischemia or other complications. The patient’s length of hospital stay was about a month.