A 73-year-old woman, with an unremarkable medical history, was admitted to hospital complaining of a palpable lump located in her right breast. Upon physical examination, a firm mass in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast was found with co-existing edema and erythema of the skin. No evident axillary lymphadenopathy was present. All vital signs, as well as blood and urine analysis and chest X-ray, were normal. Tumor marker analysis revealed that CA-125 was mildly elevated (65 U/ml), while CA 19-9, CA 15-3, a-FP and CEA levels were all within normal limits.
Mammography was performed and indicated the presence of a mass 1.2 cm in diameter, with abnormal borders located close to the axillary process of the right breast, accompanied by two regional lymph nodes of 1.5 and 2 cm respectively . According to the American College of Radiology Breast Imaging and Reporting Data Systems (BI-RADS), the probability of malignancy was high (category 5). Ultrasonographic findings were similar to that seen on mammography while thoracic CT examination did not reveal any pathology in the lung parenchyma or mediastinum.
Based on the physical examination and laboratory data, a preliminary diagnosis of breast cancer was made and the patient underwent lumpectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy.
Frozen section of the specimen revealed "granulomatous inflammation", while gross examination of the tumor, which measured 1.8 cm in greatest diameter, revealed the presence of a multinodular, fleshy mass which microscopically consisted of fibrous and lymphoid tissue infiltrated by large epithelioid granulomas with central acellular necrosis and many giant cells . The same morphologic appearance was identified in the sentinel lymph node which measured 0.9 cm in greatest diameter. Special (acid fast) stains failed to demonstrate microorganisms within the necrosis.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and after the final histopathology report, which established the diagnosis of mammary tuberculosis, underwent a complete work-up including computed tomography of the abdomen, to rule out other foci of tuberculosis, and received anti-tuberculosis therapy with daily doses of 300 mg isoniazid., 600 mg rifampicin, 1500 mg pyrazinamide and 10 mg pyridoxine for six months. No side effects or any complications have been recorded to date.