A 58-year-old black man from the Caribbean was referred by his primary care physician for evaluation of dysphagia and weight loss. He reported a 2-month history of progressively worsening dysphagia with solids only and weight loss of 10 kg over a period of 2 months. He denied cough, regurgitation, hoarseness, palpitations, and dyspnea. Past medical history was significant for hypertension (HTN) for 5 years which had been treated with valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide. He denied any history of cardiovascular problems or arrhythmias. He quit smoking 7 years ago and denied drinking alcohol. There was no other significant medical, family or social history.
Initial physical examination revealed regular heart rhythm with a rate of 81/minute. Abdominal and chest examinations were normal. Initial electrocardiogram (EKG) in the emergency room (ER) showed normal sinus rhythm with a rate of 68/minute and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Chest X-ray revealed multiple nodules in both lung fields without cardiomegaly. Laboratory tests revealed mild normochromic, normocytic anemia with hemoglobin of 12.9 g/dl. Biochemical and coagulation studies were within normal limits. His serum potassium level was 4.2 mEq/liter.
Four hours after presentation to ER, the admitting physician found the patient's heart rhythm to be irregular. A repeat EKG showed atrial fibrillation with a ventricular rate of 143/min. The patient was hemodynamically stable but was complaining of palpitations without dyspnea or chest pain. After 20 mg diltiazem had been administered intravenously, his ventricular rate dropped below 110/minute and the patient was started on metoprolol 25 mg twice daily orally. Troponin I level was below 0.04 ng/ml. Serum creatinine phosphokinase level was mildly elevated at 899 IU/liter with normal myoglobin (MB) fraction level. EKG performed after 12 hours revealed spontaneous reversion back to sinus rhythm.
The next day, transthoracic echocardiography showed normal systolic and diastolic functions, and normal left atrium size without LVH. The patient underwent esophagogastroscopy which revealed a 10-cm, ulcerated mid-esophageal mass. The biopsy of the lesion showed infiltrating SCC. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest/abdomen/pelvis showed subcarinal lymphadenopathy and esophageal thickening compressing the left atrium . Bronchoscopy revealed no abnormalities. Thyroid function tests, prostate specific antigen level, serum and urine protein electrophoreses were within normal limits.
During 15 days of hospitalization, no arrhythmia was witnessed again and he did not complain of palpitations, chest pain or dyspnea. The patient was discharged to have chemoradiotherapy as an outpatient.