A 33-year-old primigravid woman with a twin pregnancy in the 31st week of gestation, who had conceived after in vitro fertilization (IVF), presented to the hospital with intermittent chest tightness for 12 wk, aggravation for 1 wk, and chest pain for 4 h.
Twelve weeks ago, the patient had begun to experience chest tightness after a full meal, which had lasted for approximately 30 min each time. One week prior, her chest tightness was aggravated but was not accompanied by any other discomfort; hence, the patient did not visit a clinician. However, 4 h before admission, the patient had suddenly experienced poststernal colic after having her meal, which was not relieved, accompanied by sweating and awareness of defecation. The patient reported having a fall without injuries. She also complained of nausea and non-jet vomiting. The vomiting included stomach contents, and she had no syncope or loss of consciousness.
Subsequently, the patient was admitted to Beijing United Family Hospital and underwent certain examinations. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, aVF, V3R-V5R, and V7-V9 . The hypersensitive troponin level (TNI, 0.0074 μg/L) was increased, and the white blood cell (WBC, 16.5 × 109/L) count and D-dimer levels were elevated. Echocardiogram suggested akinesis of the inferior wall of the left ventricle and hypokinesis of the basic segment of the posterior wall. Despite the administration of ondansetron and saline, the patient’s chest pain failed to be relieved, after which she was intravenously administered with morphine. The patient was subsequently transferred to Beijing Anzhen Hospital.
The patient had no history of cardiovascular disease, conventional cardiovascular risk factors (such as hypertension, diabetes, and smoking), or relevant family history. Nonetheless, the patient was advised to rest in bed in the 24th week of gestation. She was also administered with nifedipine, dexamethasone, and progestin during the pregnancy and was subcutaneously administered with enoxaparin for her hypercoagulable state 1 wk prior to admission. In addition, the patient had been diagnosed with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 2 wk prior to admission and was treated with Merislon. She was allergic to penicillin and egg yolk.
The patient had no relevant family history.
The patient was conscious on admission; her body temperature was 36.0 °C, pulse was 95 bpm, blood pressure was 119/73 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute. On physical examination, the patient appeared acutely ill, was in the left lying position, exhibited no special cardiopulmonary signs, and had a pregnant abdomen and irregular abdominal contractions.
Laboratory examination showed obviously elevated levels of the following: Creatine kinase 2924 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 558 U/L, creatine kinase isoenzyme MB 21.5 ng/mL, TNI 47.72 ng/mL, and myoglobin 1442.7 ng/mL.
ECG showed that the ST segment in leads II, III, and aVF had dropped back to baseline levels, and the V3R-V5R leads were of the QS type.