A 53-year-old female patient with kidney failure due to chronic glomerulonephritis began peritoneal dialysis 7 years ago. A straight Tenckhoff catheter was inserted. She presented exit-site and tunnel infection one month after PD initiation. She was admitted to a local hospital. The discharge from the exit-site grew Staphylococcus aureus, which was susceptible to cephalosporins including cefazolin. Dressing change at the exit-site was performed and oral cefixime was used. The symptoms improved after 2 weeks. There was no peritonitis.
In the following 7 years, the patient presented repeated episodes of exit-site and tunnel inflammation, and repeated suboptimal courses of antibiotics. She requested to convert to hemodialysis 1 year ago. However, despite elective discontinuation of peritoneal dialysis, with transition to hemodialysis, her peritoneal dialysis catheter was not removed. The patient complained of an abdominal wall mass that lasted for several months. On outpatient clinical evaluation, the mass was soft, fixed, slightly painful to touch, and was located along the tunnel and 2 cm from the catheter exit-site. She was admitted to the Department of Surgery to undergo mass resection. After local anesthetic, the anterior rectus sheath was sharp dissection; the intraperitoneal portion of the catheter is gently withdrawn from the peritoneal cavity. The abdominal mass was completely removed including the superficial cuff and the portion of the catheter. The resected tissue of the abdominal wall mass was sent for pathological examination. The pathological results were as follows: abdominal wall mass with a quasi-circular dermal nodule with a size of 10.0*9.0*8.0 cm; a skin area of 10.0*6.0 cm; and a broken surface area of 2.0*1.5 cm. In addition to the soft tissue, there was a subcutaneous quasi-circular nodule at 0.5 cm from the base with a size of 6.5*6.0*5.0 cm and a thickness of 0.3–0.5 cm (including the capsule), and the capsule was complete. The nodule and the cuff of the peritoneal catheter were difficult to separate, being surrounded by a small amount of adipose tissue . The pathological diagnosis was as follows: in the examined tissues, a homogenous and foreign body without cellular components was observed under microscope; fibrous tissue hyperplasia of the surrounding cystic wall was present; foreign body granuloma with necrosis and abscess formation was observed . After debridement, the infection did not recur, without any complications.