We reported a case of an 81-year-old female patient, diagnosed five years before with aortic stenosis and arterial hypertension. She was in good health, with two adult children and minor non-cardiovascular complaints (lumbar disc herniation) at the time.
Three months before a CT examination, she was referred again to the cardiology outpatient clinic due to a worsening of the clinical status with palpitations and fatigability.
At the time of the examination, the patient’s clinical condition was stable, with a heart rate of 52 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 180/100 mmHg. A systolic murmur of grade 3/6 was found during the clinical examination, but there was no pulmonary or systemic congestion.
Her ECG showed a sinus rhythm with pressure overload changes, large R-waves, and end-phase diffuse ischemic changes.
The echocardiography showed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with no cardiac wall motion abnormalities and an ejection fraction of 58%. The right ventricle function was normal, and there were no signs of pulmonary arterial hypertension. The aortic valve was intensely hyperechoic, with a maximum gradient of 100 mmHg and an average of 23 mmHg, and the diagnosis of severe degenerative aortic stenosis was set. The patient was referred to the cardiovascular radiology department for a CT evaluation prior to the trans-catheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI).
In accordance with the local pre-TAVI protocol, the examination included a native coronary calcium score assessment, an ECG-gated thoracic Angio CT examination with multiphasic contrast agent administration, and a non-ECG-gated Angio CT examination of the abdomen and pelvis. Minor breathing artifacts were noted.
Extensive coronary artery calcifications were discovered in systemically supplied coronary arteries, but they were very mild in the circumflex coronary artery, which originated from the pulmonary artery . The total Agatston score was 4322.72, placing her in the 99th percentile according to age, gender, and ethnicity; however, the LCX calcification represented only 6.56 of those.
A normal left main coronary artery was found to arise from the left coronary sinus, giving rise only to a dilated left anterior descending (LAD) artery (5.9 mm). The dilation of the LAD was evident at the level of the diagonals (4 mm) and septal perforator branches (2 mm) as well.
The enlarged left circumflex coronary artery (LCX; 3.5 mm) arose from the inferior aspect of the right pulmonary artery ( and and ) and gave two thin branches (retroatrial and lateroatrial). It was enlarged up to 8 mm, with a large obtuse marginal, and ended as a posterolateral branch.
The right coronary artery (RCA) was codominant, originated in the typical location, and ended as the posterior descending artery with a serpiginous course.
While the overall coronary circulation was dilated, no definite RCA−LCA collaterals were observed; however, the presence of atypical LCX branches and the enlarged intramyocardial branches was indicative of an established network of collaterals draining eventually into the RPA.
The left ventricle appeared with a normal volume (75.6 mL, 508.5 mL/m2), with thickened walls up to 17.8 mL in the septum and 14.6 mm in the lateral wall.
No congenital malformations have been identified.
The main pulmonary artery was in normal size (26 mm), but both branches were enlarged, with the right pulmonary artery displaying a fusiform aneurysmal aspect reaching 29 mm in the region of the LCX ostium. The normal right-to-left ventricle diameter ratio and the normal arterio-bronchial ratio also implied the lack of pulmonary hypertension.
A general thoraco-abdominal assessment showed minor TB sequelae, diffuse atheromatous plaques, and diffuse bone demineralization, but no further lesions.
The TAVI procedure has been reconsidered, with the patient currently undergoing medical treatment, with mild improvement of the symptoms at the last clinical re-evaluation.