A 73-year-old Japanese female was admitted to our hospital for stent-assisted coil embolization under general anesthesia, for an unruptured cerebral aneurysm of the right internal carotid-posterior communicating artery.
The cerebral aneurysm was first detected thirteen years ago, and had been regularly checked on an annual basis. As it gradually grew, her doctor eventually advised her to have an operation, and she agreed. Starting 10 d prior to the surgery, 100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel were administered orally. Laboratory data taken upon admission was within normal limits, including complete blood count, biochemistry, blood glucose, coagulation ability tests, and adenosine diphosphate. During surgery, a tracheal intubation was performed uneventfully after infusion administration of 50 mg rocuronium, followed by the uneventful insertion of a nasogastric (NG) tube, which was left open to room air until the completion of surgery; there was no spontaneous reflux of gastric contents. The patient underwent stent-assisted coil embolization of an unruptured cerebral aneurysm. At the beginning of surgery, 1000 units of heparin were administered intravenously. Activated clotting time was maintained for 2–2.5 times the control value. We removed the nasogastric tube without sustaining negative pressure, aspirating a small amount of gastric fluid that did not contain blood components. After surgery, we performed extubation uneventfully, with no nausea, vomiting, or strong cough occurring. Afterwards, 3.5 h after returning to the intensive care unit, the patient complained of chest discomfort, and vomited gastric acid that did not contain blood components. Shortly afterward, she vomited about 500 mL of fresh blood, and entered a state of hemorrhagic shock.
The patient’s medical history included essential hypertension and dyslipidemia. She was given 2 mg of temocapril hydrochloride for essential hypertension and 5 mg of atorvastatin calcium hydrate for dyslipidemia, on a regular basis, and her blood pressure, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and neutral fat were all well controlled.
The patient had no history of smoking nor drinking alcohol. There were no abnormal findings on her regular medical exams. She had worked as a salesperson, but was currently unemployed. She had an allergy to alcohol. She did not need any assistance for everyday life activities. She had no family history of malignant disease or hereditary disease.
The patient was 155 cm tall and weighed 53 kg (body mass index: 22.1). Her vital signs and consciousness were as follows: blood pressure of 55/14 mmHg, heart rate of 155 irregular beats/min, body temperature of 36.2°C, blood oxygen saturation of 96% in ambient air, respiratory rate of 24/min, Glasgow Coma Scale score of 7 points (E3V1M3). A physical examination of the patient, including examination of her skin, revealed four abnormalities: hypotension, tachycardia, tachypnea, and disturbed consciousness.
A routine laboratory examination, taken in a state of hemorrhagic shock, revealed an increased white blood cell count of 12.9 × 109/L and increased proportionate values for neutrophil of 83.4%, chloride of 110 mEq/L, plasma glucose of 156 mg/dL, and d-dimer of 1.1 μg/mL, and deceased proportionate values for lymphocyte of 13.4%, eosinophil of 0.4%, potassium of 3.3 mEq/L, and a red blood cell count of 3.13 × 1012/L. On the other hand, the other measured values, such as complete blood count, biochemistry, and coagulation, were normal .
An electrocardiogram taken while the patient was in a state of hemorrhagic shock revealed no abnormalities compared to pre-surgery. We performed an enhanced computed tomography to assess her clinical condition, and it revealed a dilatation from the middle to lower esophagus, and that the esophageal lumen was almost entirely filled with hematomas . In addition, an occupying lesion with a relatively clear boundary was observed under the mucosa at the esophagogastric (EG) junction, which had partial contrast effects .
We administered 0.5 mg of atropine and 20 mg of omeprazole intravenously. In addition, we performed an emergency tracheal intubation using a 7.0 mm endotracheal tube and inserted a nasogastric tube, then continuously aspirated fresh blood from the nasogastric tube. We administered 1,000 ml of extracellular fluid and a transfusion of 4 units of red blood cells plus 4 units of fresh frozen plasma, but the hemorrhagic shock remained. We performed an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for a detailed examination, together with the treatment for bleeding, and it revealed submucosal thickening from the mid to lower esophagus, which was due to the submucosal hematoma . We also confirmed laceration of the gastric mucosa and a large amount of hematoma at the EG junction .