A 73-year-old male with Type II diabetes, ESRD managed with PD, and urethral stenosis managed by suprapubic catheter, presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with fever, abdominal pain, leukocytosis and significant diarrhea. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen demonstrated pan-colitis. Cell count of the peritoneal dialysis effluent revealed 1050 WBCs/mm3 with 71% neutrophils, 1% lymphocytes, and 28% monocytes. Clostridioides difficile PCR on the stool was positive. Patient was started on intra-peritoneal cefepime and vancomycin for treatment of the peritonitis and intravenous (IV) metronidazole and oral vancomycin for treatment of the C. difficile colitis. On day 3, due to development of ileus and worsening clinical status, oral vancomycin dose was increased to 500 mg every 6 h, vancomycin enemas were initiated along with IV tigecycline, and intra-peritoneal cefepime and vancomycin were discontinued. Peritoneal dialysate effluent culture produced no growth. IV metronidazole and vancomycin enemas were discontinued once the ileus resolved. Serial monitoring of the PD fluid with cell count was performed through day 11 and showed continued improvement in the WBC count. [Table ] PD catheter was retained. Patient was discharged from the hospital on oral vancomycin taper after receiving 14 days of IV tigecycline.
A 55-year-old male with ESRD secondary to polycystic kidney disease managed with PD developed acute diarrhea ranging from ten to twenty watery bowel movements per day. He became febrile on the second day of symptoms, and on the third day he noted a cloudy effluent from his dialysis catheter and presented to the ED. He denied pain at the site of the PD catheter, and no drainage was noted at the catheter exit site. Analysis of the peritoneal dialysate effluent found 1450 WBCs/mm3with 49% neutrophils, 49% monocytes, and 2% lymphocytes. Intra-peritoneal cefepime and vancomycin were initiated. CT of the abdomen identified “inflammatory changes of the rectosigmoid colon compatible with an infectious or inflammatory process.” C. difficile PCR of the stool was positive. Intra-peritoneal cefepime and vancomycin were promptly discontinued. Treatment with oral vancomycin 125 mg every 6 h and IV Tigecycline was initiated. Serial monitoring of the PD fluid with cell count was continued. By day 3, the WBC count in effluent fluid decreased to 25 cells/mm3. [Table ] PD fluid culture produced no growth. PD catheter was retained. Tigecycline was discontinued after 5 days, and the patient was discharged on oral vancomycin to complete a 14-day course. At his 2-month follow-up clinic appointment, he had fully recovered.