A 42-year-old man presented with vertigo and progressive diplopia on extreme lateral right gaze. He denied tinnitus, hearing loss, headaches, and was found to be grossly neurologically intact. Magnetic resonance (MR) of the brain revealed a lesion demonstrating T1 hypointensity and T2 hyperintensity with peripheral and septal enhancement in the right CPA . Whether this lesion was intra-axial or extra-axial was not clear. After discussion with the patient regarding options for management, the decision was made to proceed with surgical resection.
The patient was booked for a retrosigmoid craniotomy for removal of the CPA tumor. A right frontal external ventricular drain (EVD) was placed at the beginning of the case. During craniotomy, retraction of the cerebellum revealed the tumor to be extra-axial . The gross appearance of the tumor was suggestive of a highly vascular lesion, and so intraoperatively, a decision was made to attempt an en-bloc resection. The tumor was circumferentially dissected from the cranial nerve VII/VIII complex as well as from the choroid plexus at the foramen of Luschka. Following this, vascular feeders of the tumor were coagulated and the tumor was excised. Frozen sections returned consistent with low-grade tumor. Final pathology showed epithelioid foamy stromal cells with abundant thin-walled capillary-like vessels. The stromal cells were positive for inhibin, vimentin, and S-100. Reticulin and CD34 staining outlined the dense reticular capillary network of the tumor, but the typical dense pericellular network found in schwannoma was not present. No expression of epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) or progesterone receptor was observed. MIB1 index was <5%. The final diagnosis was reticular variant hemangioblastoma .
The patient developed a cerebrospinal leak (CSF) leak in his postoperative course, which required re-operation for revision duraplasty. Otherwise his postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged home with no neurological impairment.