A 24 year old male, Caucasian, with history of dyspnea during deep inspirations for 5 years. He did not have vocal or dysphagia complaints. He reported epiglottis malacia and its partial removal in another service, with little improvement in his dyspnea and having pain during swallowing. During nasopharyngolaryngoscopic exam we observed a tongue base posteriorly positioned, and the patient was submitted to lingual tonsillectomy, without improvement. In a new exam, we noticed a paradoxical laryngeal movement, with glottic closure at the end of inspiration, followed by a slight pharyngeal closure . Larynx electromyography revealed electrical activity in the thyroarytenoid (TA) and lateral crycoarytenoid (CAL) muscles during inspiration . Botulin toxin injection was done on the left TA (10 UI) and left CAL (10 UI) with clinical improvement for 5 months (, , ); such injections were repeated and, facing a worsening of his clinical manifestations, it was necessary to inject also the aforementioned muscles of the right side, with temporary improvement and symptoms relapse when the toxin effect was over, requiring new injections.
Since 6 months ago, he started complaining of palate closure during nasal breathing ( and ) and showing dystonic palate movements at the nasolaryngoscopic evaluation. We then decided to inject Botulin toxin in the palate tensor veli palati muscle (10 UI), bilaterally, with symptoms improvement, although in the first month he complained of ear fullness. During the five months that followed, he remained asymptomatic and without complaints, even having a mild hyper nasality - consequent to Botulin toxin in the palate and blowing voice because of the laryngeal injection of BT. Symptoms recurred one month ago, and through nasofibroscopy we observed vocal fold paradoxical movements, palate and pharyngeal posterior and lateral walls movement during breathing. There were three levels of obstruction during inspiration: palate, pharynx and glottis. and show the paralyzed palate after Botulin toxin injection and the pharynx at rest and contracted (also in an image through the mouth as seen in and ), with inspiration restriction. With this, in order to control dystonia, it was necessary to inject Botulin toxin in the TA and CAL muscles, the tensor veli and lateral pharyngeal walls bilaterally (10UI) . The patient is currently with a slight hyper nasality and blowing voice.
As to his daily activities, when under the Botulin toxin effect, the patient leads a normal life, without professional restrictions - he works in an office and does not have to talk to people. Although his voice is blowing and less intense, he does not complain because his major discomfort was only related to breathing. Even after pharyngeal injection, he does not have complaints related to swallowing. He practices sports such as squash and weight lifting, and only when contractions increase much at the end of the toxin effect, he feels a little out of breath during the exercises.
As to his past, he reports having had a calm childhood. He had many episodes of sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, tonsillitis and pharyngitis. He has had chicken pox and rubella. He does not smoke or drink alcohol. He does not have neck muscle pain, even when the contractions are intense. His cerebral MRI is normal and his polysomnography of August 2004 did not detect oxygen desaturation during sleep, and his lowest O2 saturation index was of 94%.
The patient also reports that his contractions are continuous and happen with a frequency of one each two seconds, and when he breathes deeply, the spasm is more intense, taking longer to start a new breathing cycle.