A 43-year-old man visited the nearest hospital for examination of his increasing complaints of nausea and diarrhea for 4 years and recent development of dysphagia. He had a history of duodenal ulcer perforation, and underwent omental patching surgery 4 years earlier, followed by oral treatment with a PPI (30 mg/day of lansoprazole). Octreotide analog was not used. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (UGE) demonstrated reflux erosive esophagitis with severe esophageal stricture. Plain computed tomography (CT) showed a urinary tract stone and a pancreatic mass. Despite continuous anti-acid therapy, perforation of the small intestine developed, and he underwent closure surgery. Using the selective arterial secretagogue injection (SASI) test, a response by calcium injection was obtained when examined from the superior mesenteric artery, which connects to the feeding arteries to either the pancreatic head, body, or tail. However, it was not obtained by the examinations from the gastroduodenal artery and splenic artery.
The patient was referred to the study hospital to further investigate the suspected diagnosis of MEN1. Blood examination revealed an elevated level of serum gastrin (≥3000 pg/mL, normal: ≤200 pg/mL), glucagon (253 pg/mL, normal: 70–174 pg/mL), calcium (10.9 mg/dL, normal: 8.5–10.2 mg/dL) and intact-parathyroid hormone (PTH) (104 pg/mL, normal: 10–65 pg/mL). Enhanced CT demonstrated multiple highly vascular lesions within the pancreas (head to tail) and duodenum, with up to 20 mm in the pancreas . UGE demonstrated healing of the esophageal erosion, however the stenosis at the lower esophagus, approximately 4 mm in diameter and 5 cm in length, became so severe that only a slim endoscope (Olympus GIF-XP260, Tokyo, Japan), but not a standard scope (Olympus GIF-H260), could pass through. Multiple gastroduodenal ulcer scars were observed. In the second portion of the duodenum, a submucosal tumor, 12 mm in size, was also recognized .
Considering these findings associated with hypergastrinemia, it was planned to treat the esophageal stricture and neuroendocrine tumors prior to the treatment of the hyperparathyroidism. Balloon dilator treatment (CRETM, 15–18 mm, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, U.S.A.) was repeated 16 times, before and after the total pancreatectomy with duodenectomy, until the disappearance of the esophageal stricture. The interval between each procedure was almost once a week for the first 10 procedures, except for the month of the surgical period, followed by two weeks for the 11th-12th procedures, and one to three months for the 13th-16th procedures. Balloon dilation was done for 30–60 s with pressure stepped up as in the following: limited up to 1.5–2 atm for the initial five procedures, 3–4 atm for the next five procedures, and 4–5 atm for the remaining procedures. Since full dilation was not obtained until the 5th procedure, 50 mg (5 ml) of triamcinolone acetonide (Kenacort-A, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, U.S.A.) was injected to the stenotic portion at the 6th-8th procedure. In detail, 0.5–1.0 ml of triamcinolone acetonide solution was injected into 5–8 sites within the stenosis using an injection needle (NeedleMaster, 26 Gy, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) each after the balloon dilation. The patient’s symptoms and stricture had disappeared by the 15th procedure, and the 16th dilation was performed at the patient’s request .
Total pancreatectomy with duodenectomy was performed for the multiple masses within the pancreas as well as in the duodenum. Extent of the pancreatectomy was arguable as the result of SASI test was not well informative, to remove possible functional PNET and possible future malignant lesions, total pancreatectomy was performed. This operation was done between the 2nd and 3rd esophageal dilation procedures. The histology of the multiple tumors in the pancreas (4) and duodenum (1) was entirely neuroendocrine tumor (NET), with histological grade 2 (G2). PNETs were recognized in all parts of pancreas (head, body and tail). Immunostaining of gastrin was strongly positive within the duodenal tumor, but only faintly recognized in the pancreatic tumors . The clinical diagnosis of MEN1 was confirmed with these histological results.
Genetic counseling was completed and his family history was pursued. It was revealed that his father and one of two sisters had hyperparathyroidism, and his father also had a NET with further details unavailable. The patient hoped to have a genetic examination performed after giving informed consent. Germline pathogenic mutation of the MEN1 gene was detected by whole exon analysis using next generation sequencer (Ion ProtonTM system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.), which was employed in the on-going institutional project , and was confirmed by the commercial base analysis (Falco biosystems, Kyoto, Japan). This information was expected to be used for him and his family in their future medical treatment. To date, his hypergastrinemia improved and he remained asymptomatic after the treatments for 28 months. With taking pancrelipase and insulin injection, his nutrition level and blood glucose level kept in good condition.