A 68-year-old Asian female with a medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidaemia presented with effort angina pectoris caused by a CTO in the middle portion of the RCA . She had undergone successful PCI for the LAD, but the RCA CTO had been unsuccessfully treated in two prior attempts at another hospital. As a result, she was admitted to our hospital for retreatment of the RCA CTO. The patient was mobile and receiving antianginal therapy, including bisoprolol fumarate, amlodipine, nicorandil, and isosorbide dinitrate, along with dual antiplatelet therapy. Physical examination revealed blood pressure of 121/51 mmHg and a heart rate of 69 b.p.m. No cardiac murmurs or pulmonary rales were detected. The electrocardiogram showed no significant changes. Echocardiography indicated a 65% ejection fraction and normal left ventricular contraction, with no significant valvular disease. Blood tests showed a creatinine level of 0.63 mg/dL (normal <0.70 mg/dL) and a brain natriuretic peptide level of 34.0 pg/dL (normal <18.4 pg/dL). Technetium-99m tetrofosmin scintigraphy demonstrated reduced uptake in the inferior wall during pharmacological stress, while uptake at rest was normal. Effort angina pectoris due to the CTO lesion was diagnosed based on echocardiography and scintigraphy, which confirmed the viability of the inferior wall. The J-CTO score for this patient was 3 points, attributed to factors including calcification, blunt occlusion, and being a retry case.
Due to the anatomical complexity and it being the third attempt, we initially started with a retrograde approach. However, it was evident that the septal channels were the primary conduits for collateral circulation, which unfortunately did not appear promising due to their misty appearance. We diligently attempted to access several of these misty septal channels, hoping to establish a retrograde strategy. Unfortunately, at the distal segments of these channels, we encountered significant tight bends, and we were regrettably unable to achieve successful passage through any of them. Consequently, we opted to transition to an antegrade approach for this RCA CTO PCI procedure. An 8-French AL1.5SH catheter was engaged in the RCA through the femoral artery. AnteOwl WR (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) IVUS (AO-IVUS) examination revealed a heavily calcified cap at the CTO entry. We attempted to advance the Ultimate Bros 3 (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) wire with the Corsair Pro microcatheter (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) into the CTO lesion, but it appeared to have migrated into the subintimal lumen. Despite attempting the balloon anchor technique, we were unable to advance the AO-IVUS catheter into the CTO lesion. After expanding the CTO lesion using a 1.5 mm ZINRAI (Kaneka Corp., Osaka, Japan) balloon, we introduced the AO-IVUS catheter, confirming its positioning within the subintimal space. The IVUS examination, which was performed in the subintimal space, provided information that the penetration difficulty from the subintima to the true lumen emerged due to extensive calcification. However, in a part of the vessel, which had relatively lower calcification, there appeared to be a potential for penetration from the subintima to the true lumen .
Subsequently, we performed TD-ADR using the Conquest Pro 12 Sharpened Tip (CP12ST) wire (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) in combination with the FinecrossGT microcatheter (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan; ). Despite our efforts, penetration into the distal true lumen was unsuccessful due to the expanded subintimal space . Recognizing the difficulty of penetration with an enlarged subintimal space, we decided to perform the STRAW technique.
The subintimal aspiration using the FinecrossGT microcatheter was performed to decompress the enlarged subintimal space, which was confirmed with IVUS (, , ). To facilitate IVUS-guided TD-ADR while continuing aspiration, a double-guiding catheter system was constructed using a 6-French AL1SH catheter engaged with the RCA. Using this 6-French guiding catheter, the Corsair Pro microcatheter was advanced to the subintimal space. Subsequently, TD-ADR was performed using the CP12ST wire with the Corsair Pro microcatheter while continuing the STRAW technique and IVUS examination through the 8-French guiding catheter . We successfully penetrated the tip of the CP12ST wire toward the true lumen under IVUS observation (, , ). The Corsair Pro microcatheter followed CP12ST into the distal true lumen. We then switched from the CP12ST wire to the Sion wire (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) and successfully passed through the distal RCA. After dilation with a 2.5 mm balloon, two drug-eluting stents were deployed, resulting in the successful revascularization of the RCA CTO . The procedure took 336 min, with a radiation dose of 4.7 Gy. The prolonged duration was primarily due to the initial pursuit of a time-consuming retrograde approach and challenges in wire control caused by subintimal space expansion during the IVUS-guided TD-ADR procedure. However, the introduction of the STRAW technique under IVUS-guided TD-ADR facilitated successful wire passage in ∼25 min.
The patient was discharged uneventfully on postoperative Day 3. Upon discharge, nicorandil was discontinued. Additionally, during the 1-month follow-up after PCI, isosorbide dinitrate was also phased out. These decisions were driven by the complete resolution of the patient’s symptoms. This adjustment in medication regimen serves as a positive indicator of the intervention’s efficacy.