A 66-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital because of a rectal tumor. He had a history of radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer and transurethral bladder tumor resection. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor of 39 mm in diameter with enlarged lymph nodes in the ileal mesentery and a tumor of 24 mm in diameter in the rectum. Preoperative imaging studies suggested that the tumor in the ileal mesentery could be a low-grade malignant lymphoma, a plasmacytoma, a Castleman disease, an IgG4-related disease, a desmoid tumor, a carcinoid tumor, or a gastrointestinal stromal tumor. We performed laparoscopic low anterior resection for rectal cancer and biopsied an enlarged lymph node in the ileal mesentery to diagnose the tumor. He was diagnosed with rectal cancer with a lymph node metastasis (TNM classification 7th edition, pT3 pN1 cM0, and stage IIIB) and NET (G1) of the ileal mesentery. Although we considered complete resection for the NET (G1) lesion, it was a slow-growing tumor, and the 5-year survival rate of patients with gastrointestinal NET (91.3%) is better than that reported for rectal cancer stage IIIB (78.0%) [, ]. Thus, we felt that rectal cancer would determine the patient’s prognosis and decided to follow up the NET (G1) and prioritize adjuvant chemotherapy for the rectal cancer. He received oxaliplatin and capecitabine (XELOX) for 3 months as adjuvant chemotherapy. The NET (G1) lesion of the ileal mesentery had not expanded at follow-up. Three years later, anastomosis recurrence occurred, and we performed abdominoperineal resection of the rectal tumor. At the same time, we again considered resection of the NET lesion, but it had grown to 42 mm and involved both the supra mesenteric artery (SMA) and vein (SMV) and would be very difficult to remove. However, until this point, there were no occlusive bindings of the SMA and SMV. A CT scan that was taken 1 year after the surgery indicated multiple liver metastases and lymph node metastasis of the sacrum. Laboratory tests showed albumin 4.2 g/dl, creatinine 1.36 mg/dl, an international normalized ratio of 0.97, serum bilirubin 0.80 mg/dl, and an indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min of 5.9%. Regarding the tumor markers, serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels were elevated to 15.5 ng/ml. The serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and alpha-fetoprotein levels were within the respective normal ranges, and hepatitis B virus surface antigens and hepatitis C virus antibodies were negative. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed six masses in the right lobe of the liver and segment 3 and a tumor of 47 mm in diameter in the ileal mesentery. The masses in the liver showed ring-like enhancement , and the tumor in the mesentery showed heterogeneous enhancement in the arterial phase . [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed increased uptake by the masses in the liver and slight uptake by the tumor in the ileal mesentery . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated four other masses in the right lobe of the liver and segment 4 which were not visible on CT and that had no accumulation of [18F]-FDG . All tumors expressed low intensity on T1-weighted MRI, high intensity on T2-weighted MRI, and high intensity on diffusion-weighted images . Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) revealed tumors with low signal intensity in the hepatocellular phase .
We suspected that the liver tumors were metastases from rectal cancer based on the imaging and laboratory test findings. To achieve hepatic clearance, right lobectomy with partial hepatectomy in segments 3 and 4 was necessary, and the functional future liver remnant (FLR) volume was 334 ml (26%). The postoperative residual hepatic tissue was insufficient to maintain normal physiological function. Therefore, we decided to achieve sufficient hypertrophy through the modified associating liver partition and portal vein ligation for staged hepatectomy (modified ALPPS) procedure, which has been introduced recently as a new surgical technique to increase FLR in patients with a marginal liver volume contemplating major liver resection . The first stage of the surgery performed laparoscopically included cholecystectomy, ligation of the right portal vein, splitting of the hepatic tissue between the right and left lobe along the demarcation line, and partial hepatectomies of segments 3 and 4. No complications occurred, and the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative day 8. The liver volume increased rapidly after the first stage of the modified ALPPS. The FLR was 38.2% on day 11 and 41% on day 19 after the first stage. MRI performed on day 19 after the first stage showed a new tumor in segment 3. Therefore, right hepatic lobectomy and partial hepatectomy of segment 3 were performed on day 21 following the first stage of the modified ALPPS. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 13.
Macroscopic examination of the cut specimen showed 16 masses, and all were well-defined yellowish-white elastic masses . Histopathological examination showed that 14 tumors located in the right lobe and segment 3 were composed of well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma cells growing in a tubular or cribriform pattern. The features resembled the previous specimens of rectal cancer, indicating metastatic recurrence of rectal adenocarcinoma . Two tumors located in segments 4 and 6 showed atypical cells with rounded nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm . Immunohistochemically, these atypical cells were positive for differentiation (CD) 56 , chromogranin-A , and synaptophysin . The MIB-1 labeling index was less than 1% . These features resembled those of the previous specimen, indicating metastatic recurrence of NET (G1). The patient underwent radiotherapy for lymph node metastasis of the sacrum and received oxaliplatin and capecitabine (XELOX) and was free from recurrence 7 months after the hepatectomy.