A 34-year-old female (with 2 previous pregnancies and 1 delivery) with no significant past medical history delivered a healthy, normal-weight male infant at 40 weeks of gestation. At delivery (via the vaginal route), she developed significant blood loss, which required a transfusion of two units of blood. She was discharged 72 hours postpartum. On day seven postpartum, she presented to the emergency department because of headaches, blurred vision, paresthesias, lethargy, and difficulty breastfeeding. On physical examination, she appeared confused, was hypotensive (80/60 mmHg), and was tachycardic.
Laboratory tests showed hyponatremia of 118 mEq/l (normal range (NR): 138–145) and normocytic normochromic anemia with hemoglobin of 9.7 g/dl (NR: 11.3–14.7). Sheehan's syndrome was suspected based on her clinical presentation with a significant postpartum hemorrhage. Hormone workup revealed secondary hypothyroidism with low free T4 (0.58 ng/dl, NR 0.89–1.76) and normal TSH (0.35 μIU/ml, NR 0.35–5.5) and relatively low prolactin levels (PRL) of 7.12 ng/ml for the early postpartum period (NR for adult women 1.9–25; for women in the third trimester of pregnancy, NR is 84–232). Pituitary MRI showed an enlarged pituitary gland with suprasellar extension, with peripheral enhancement of the pituitary gland, and an irregular and poorly enhanced central portion after gadolinium injection .
She was treated with NaCl replacement to increase her Na levels by 8 mEq/day. Serum 8 AM cortisol was drawn, and as the results were not readily available, treatment with hydrocortisone was initiated with the suspicion of secondary adrenal insufficiency. In addition, levothyroxine treatment was started. Her sodium levels returned to normal, and she was discharged on hormonal replacement therapy (levothyroxine 100 mcg/day, hydrocortisone 15 mg in two divided doses: 10 mg at 8 a.m. and 5 mg at 16: 00 pm).
Laboratory tests six weeks after discharge of the diagnosis of Sheehan's syndrome showed low IGF-1, normal free T4 and LH and FSH levels, PRL levels of 10.2 ng/ml, and serum 8 AM cortisol 24 hours after the last dose of hydrocortisone of 1.72 μg/dl (she did not take the evening dose and took the morning dose after blood was drawn). Cortisol levels at the time of hospitalization before hydrocortisone treatment were 36.2 μg/dl. shows a summary of her hormonal workup. She was able to breastfeed partially until 4 months.
Regular menstrual cycles started three months after delivery. A repeat MRI performed seven months later showed a smaller pituitary gland with peripheral enhancement after gadolinium injection .
Doses of levothyroxine were gradually decreased with normal FT4 levels when she became spontaneously pregnant one year after the previous delivery. The lowest dose of L-thyroxin on which she became pregnant was 50 mcg 2 days a week and 75 mcg 5 days a week. The dose was increased during pregnancy to 75 mcg per day. The cortisol level was rechecked before pregnancy 24 hours after the last dose of hydrocortisone and was still low (2.54 μg/dl).
She had an uneventful pregnancy on levothyroxine 75 mcg/day and hydrocortisone 15 mg/day in two divided doses. She delivered a healthy, normal-weight female at 39 weeks of gestation.