A 23-year-old male was admitted to the ENT department of the University Hospital because of increasing hoarseness for eight months, and dysphagia, odynophagia, and dyspnea since nearly one year ago. He had no weight loss, otalgia, hemoptysis, or constitutional signs of any diseases. Upon indirect laryngoscopic examination, an endolaryngeal submucosal mass, involving the epiglottis and aryepiglottis fold, was discovered. True vocal cords were normal. No masses were palpable in his neck. The results of laboratory studies were normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan was valuable in determining the site of origin and extent of the lesion, that revealed a solid mass, which extended from the hypopharynx into the epiglottis and the area of the aryepiglottis fold, particularly in the left side . Using the microlaryngoscopic procedure, a biopsy sampling was taken from the laryngeal mass. Following that, a wide surgical excision of the tumor with a free margin was performed. Radiotherapy was added.
Microscopic examination reveals fragments of tissue including a neoplasm. It is composed of proliferated epithelial like cellular elements arranged in aggregated and gland like structures with intervening proliferated fibroblastic spindle cells. The neoplasm, found superficially, is papillomatous and forming a separate pseudopapillary vegetation. The epithelial component is more abundant in areas where the neoplastic cells show some atypia and atypical mitotic figures. Located in the deepest portion are spindle cells, which are prominent and show a noticeable pleomorphism and mitotic index in the most active area. IHC stains are positive for CD99 in both spindle and epithelial cells, positive for CK only in epithelial cells, positive for EMA in epithelial cells, weakly positive for EMA in spindle cells, and negative for BCI2. Diagnosis was well differentiated synovial sarcoma of the biphasic type with left supraglottic involvement .
IHC stains are positive for CD99 in both spindle and epithelial cells, positive for CK only epithelial cells, positive for EMA in epithelial, weakly positive for EMA in spindle cells, and negative for BCI 2.
A wide surgical excision of the tumor was planned. The tumor extended from the hypopharynx into the epiglottis and the area of the aryepiglottis fold in the left side and was excised with free margins.
Elective radical neck dissection was not performed; but the patient received radiotherapy after surgery with no recurrence after 42 months.