Consultation was requested from the department of plastic surgery for a 54-year-old male who developed leakage of clear fluid in a lumbosacral pressure sore. He had previously suffered T11 burst fracture and resultant complete paraplegia in a motorcycle accident seven years prior. At the time of the injury, he had received a T9-L2 posterior instrumented spinal fusion at another hospital. Being in a paraplegic state, pressure sore soon developed thereafter. The patient also underwent various types of skin graft and myocutaneous flap surgeries to treat for the repetitive pressure sores around his lumbosacral area. On physical exam, clear, colorless, tap water-like fluid leaked from a small, deep, fibrotic opening formed at a lumbosacral pressure sore. Based on the nature of the fluid and the depth of the opening, we suspected that the liquid from the persistent leakage might be CSF. In addition, although completely paraplegic, the patient reported a sense of lumbosacral instability and kyphosis when in a sitting position and he heard cracking noises in his lumbosacral region upon movement. These symptoms were not associated with pain.
Lateral plain radiograph showed a horizontal split of the L5 vertebral body and complete posterior dissociation of the upper spinal segment with respect to the lower one . Computed tomography (CT) myelogram showed an extensive destruction of the L5 vertebral body and relatively intact superior and inferior endplates. The myelogram dye injected at the L2-L3 level leaked through a fistula from the L5 CSA region to the lumbosacral pressure sore . This finding confirmed that the clear, colorless fluid was CSF and its continuous flow was caused by a CSF-cutaneous fistula . Fortunately, our patient had no apparent symptoms related to the CSF-cutaneous fistula. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed complete transection of the dural sac and cauda equina by destructed bony fragments and surrounding fibrotic tissues . These radiographic findings were consistent with those of previously reported CSA [, ]. Consequently, we established the diagnosis of post-traumatic CSA associated with CSF-cutaneous fistula.
Surgery was planned for management of post-traumatic L5 CSA and CSF-cutaneous fistula. After dissecting from T8 to the ilium, laminectomy was performed at the L2-L3 level and the exposed dural sac was doubly ligated circumferentially with 3–0 black silk. The dural sac and cauda equina just distal to the double-ligation site were transected completely with a surgical blade. The absence of CSF leakage from the proximal cutting site was confirmed with the Valsalva maneuver. Next, the patient underwent posterior four-rod spinopelvic fixation from T9 to the ilium and S2 foramina. Two long rods were inserted into the S2 foramina and the posteriorly dissociated upper spinal segment was reduced with a cantilever maneuver. These two rods were fixed to the intermittent lumbar and thoracic pedicle screws. Then, two short rods were fixed to iliac screws and intermittent lumbar pedicle screws. Each pair of long and short rods on the right and left sides was attached to each other with side-connectors . Culture study performed during surgery revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. After surgery, vancomycin and imipenem were administered to the patient to cover the two bacterial organisms. The CSF leakage stopped and no adverse neurological changes were found. One iliac screw inserted into the right ilium was removed at postoperative one year due to skin protrusion. The four-rod spinopelvic construct was well maintained five years later .