The patient was a primigravida, para 0, 29-year-old woman with unremarkable family history and a medical history of idiopathic thrombocytopenia. Her chief complaints were cough and respiratory distress.
The patient had been examined 3 years previously for cough. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral apical pleural thickening and reticular opacity in the peripheral lung field , but no further examinations were performed. At 19 weeks of gestation, she was examined at our hospital for cough and respiratory distress. In room air, she exhibited an SpO2 of 97% and good oxygenation. At 25 weeks of gestation, she was examined again due to worsening cough and respiratory distress. Her SpO2 had declined to 92% in room air, and she was admitted to the hospital.
On admission, the patient’s height was 164 cm, weight was 47.8 kg, body temperature was 37.0 °C, PaO2 was 68.1 mmHg, and PaCO2 was 26.5 mmHg in room air. Fine crackles could be heard on the dorsal side of the lung; she had clubbed fingers.
Hematological examination on admission revealed a white blood cell count of 5750/μL, hemoglobin level of 9.5 g/dL, platelet level of 67,000/μL, C-reactive protein level of 3.75 mg/d/l, Krebs von den Lungen-6 level of 945 U/mL (reference interval: < 500), and serum surfactant protein D of 274.5 ng/mL (reference interval: < 110). She tested negative for any autoantibodies and infectious diseases.
Chest radiography revealed bilateral pleural thickening, reticular opacity, and reduced pneumatization predominantly in the upper lung . Chest CT showed bronchiectasis and irregular pleural thickening mainly in the bilateral upper lobes, reticular opacity, and ground-glass opacity (GGO) throughout the lung . Image findings worsened compared to 3 years ago. Abdominal ultrasonography estimated the fetal body weight at 886 g (+ 0.2 standard deviation) and revealed an appropriate amount of amniotic fluid and active fetal movement.
The image findings, subpleural dense consolidation, bronchodilation, and reduced pneumatization, predominantly in the bilateral upper lobes, were characteristic of PPFE. Other differential diseases were excluded on account of the clinical course, blood tests, and bacteriological tests. As a result of a conference between radiologists and respiratory physicians with reference to the literature [, ], the patient was diagnosed with probable IPPFE with acute exacerbation. Prednisolone 30 mg/day was started at 26 weeks and 1 day of gestation, but no changes were observed; thus, methylprednisolone 1,000 mg/day was administered for 3 days starting at 27 weeks and 3 days’ gestation. Left pneumothorax occurred at 27 weeks and 5 days’ gestation. Fetal status was evaluated daily using a fetal heart rate monitor and Doppler examinations, and weekly using ultrasonography. Throughout the course, the well-being of the fetus was good, and growth was normal. At 27 weeks and 6 days’ gestation, the patient’s respiratory status had worsened; with 4 L of oxygen, SpO2 was 94%, PaO2 was 67.9 mmHg, and PaCO2 was 29.3 mmHg. Chest CT findings also showed a worsening trend; therefore, steroid therapy was considered ineffective.
To improve the mother’s respiratory status and prioritize the treatment of IPPFE, a cesarean section was performed at 28 weeks and 0 days’ gestation. Preoperatively, a transfusion of 10 units of platelets was administered. Spinal anesthesia was administered. The operation took 46 min, and there was 848 g of blood loss. The baby was a boy weighing 1,185 g, with an Apgar score of 7 and 9 at 1 min and 5 min, respectively, and an umbilical artery pH of 7.320. He was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit.
Immediately after the operation, SpO2 improved to 98% with 3 L of oxygen, and the patient’s respiratory distress decreased. However, respiratory distress worsened again on postoperative day 8, and 5 L or more of oxygen was needed to keep SpO2 from falling below 90%. Chest CT indicated bilateral worsening of the GGO. Methylprednisolone 1,000 mg/day was administered for 3 days, after which immunosuppressant therapy was co-administered with prednisolone 30 mg/day and cyclosporine 3 mg/kg/day. On postoperative day 22, the patient was transferred to another hospital for living-donor lung transplantation. On postoperative day 26, she underwent bilateral living-donor lung transplantation from her mother and brother. The extracted lung showed aggregations of alveolar elastic fibers predominantly in the upper lobes and collagen fiber growth that appeared to fill the alveoli . These findings were compatible with those of IPPFE. In addition, the organization was widely distributed in the lower lobes.
Although her recovery immediately after lung transplantation was relatively uneventful, her clinical course after a month was eventful including repeated nausea and vomiting for unknown reasons which eventually necessitated gastrostomy and jejunostomy; multiple episodes of critical acute rejection, one of which necessitated extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support; and multiple episodes of infection including repeated pneumonia and empyema. She was finally discharged a year after transplantation. Although she still has relatively minor episodes of rejection and infection necessitating temporary admission, she has become relatively stable nearly 2 years after lung transplantation. Hematologically, her relatively mild pancytopenia persisted after lung transplantation. Platelet transfusion was repeatedly needed just after lung transplantation; subsequently, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration has been repeatedly needed.
The baby weighed 3,390 g at age 84 days (corrected: 40 weeks 0 days) and did not display any neurological abnormalities.