A 54 year old male presented to a busy district general hospital medical emergency department with abdominal pains and swelling over the right flank for a two to three week period. More recently he noticed swelling of his right lower leg and thigh. He was a non-smoker, and there was no significant family history of disease. He had no upper or lower gastrointestinal symptoms. There was no change in weight or appetite. There was no history of cardio-respiratory disease, and his exercise tolerance was not limited. He was not able to volunteer any further information as regards to his past medical history other than that he was under annual review by nephrologists for mild chronic renal impairment, due to an "atrophic left kidney". This was diagnosed by ultrasound of the renal tract. There was no evidence of any other imaging modalities or radiological investigations undertaken to investigate the cause of his atrophic kidney.
On further review of his medical notes it was revealed that he had a troublesome childhood with bilateral Perthe's disease, and non-healing venous ulcers on the medial aspect of his right ankle.
In 1973, aged 21 years, he underwent skin grafting of a non-healing ulcer. One year later he was re-admitted with recurrence of ulcers in the same region and was then noted to have dilated varicose veins and thrombophlebitis that was treated with crepe bandaging for 2 years. Treponemal serology then was negative. In 1977 he had ligation of the dilated varicose vein that was "feeding the ulcerated part of the leg". In 1979 he was discharged from follow up with complete healing of the leg ulcers.
On examination he was noted to have bilateral lower limb varicose veins. Examination of the abdomen revealed large, tortuous, hard, "snake like" palpable veins over the right aspect of his abdomen with overlying bruising. (see photo- figure ). A preliminary diagnosis of probable Thrombophlebitis Migrans was made. A CT scan was performed to exclude underlying intra-abdominal malignancy.
The CT scan showed : "A congenitally absent inferior vena cava with collaterals on the anterior abdominal wall and prominent azygous and hemi-azygous veins. Agenesis of the left kidney is noted." (see radiograph- figure )
US Doppler revealed : thrombosis in the right iliac and superficial femoral veins.
He was commenced on low molecular weight heparin and warfarin. Low molecular weight heparin was stopped when the International Normalised Ratio (INR) was greater than 2.0.