A 31-year-old female patient was referred to our general surgical unit by a general practitioner with a large, painless right-sided breast mass which had been growing slowly for the last 10 years. She presented with an ulcer on the same breast that began as a hot porridge scald burn 15 months before. The ulcer had since increased in size and become fungating. During her childhood, she had been of the same stature as her peers. However, her growth had started to lag around the age of 5 years. Around the same age, she had noticed small nodular growths which had begun to appear on the fingers of her right hand as well as angular deformity of the right upper limb and right lower limb. A few months later, she sustained a fracture of her right tibia after a trivial fall as well as another pathological fracture a year later at the shoulder region. Over the rest of her childhood and adolescence, her limb deformity worsened. She was otherwise in good general health. She was right-handed however, the hand deformity did not prevent her from using that hand for daily tasks or writing. She was also able to walk, albeit with a limp and she reported a minimal effect on her work as a subsistence farmer. She had no history of oral contraceptive use and had experienced menarche at the age of 14 years. There was also no family history of breast neoplasms. None of her 5 siblings nor her parents or grandparents were affected by a similar condition of the limbs. Apart from this, her drug, family and psychosocial histories were non-contributary.
Examination revealed a well-circumscribed, irregularly shaped, firm, mobile breast mass, approximately 15 cm in its transverse diameter and 20 cm in its superior/inferior diameter replacing >90% of the normal breast tissue. There was associated solitary, mobile ipsilateral lymphadenopathy. There was a superolateral fungating ulcer which was friable and surrounded by inflammatory skin changes and downward nipple displacement . She was of short stature (149.5 cm), with unilateral distribution of bony abnormalities on the right side. She had irregular angular deformity and limb shortening (A and B) of the upper and lower limb, causing a limp favouring the right side as well as shortening and deformity of the thumb and index finger (C) with associated nodularity. She had no facial dysmorphic changes. She also had a pedunculated, soft hyperpigmented mass on the anterolateral abdominal wall, which was 2 × 2 cm in size (A).
A core needle breast biopsy revealed findings consistent with a tubular adenoma. Because of the breast ulceration and solitary ipsilateral lymph-nodes considered to be suspicious for malignancy, two repeat core needle biopsies were performed and examined by independent pathologists which both confirmed the initial result. The patient was prepared for theatre. Preoperative assessment included a skeletal survey.
Radiographs of the right hand revealed multiple enchondromas in the phalanges and metacarpals (A), as well as in the long bones confined to the right side, (B–E). Typical “ring and arc” chondroid type calcifications were associated with these lesions. Multiple well defined calcified phleboliths were identified within the soft tissues, and these were indicative of associated haemangiomata. The radiographic abnormalities were deemed classical for Maffucci’s syndrome
A simple mastectomy was performed for removal of the mass because almost the entirety of the breast tissue was replaced by the tumour. Two enlarged lymph nodes were noted and also removed. The procedure was performed by a junior resident with 4 years of specialised training under the supervision of a qualified, experienced surgeon. Her post-operative course was uneventful, she did not experience any complications of surgery. The mastectomy specimen was submitted for pathological examination. Her pedunculated abdominal skin lesion was also removed and sent for pathological examination as well as core biopsies of the cystic bony masses noted on x-ray.
Pathological examination of the mastectomy sample revealed a large, well-circumscribed breast mass with a well-defined capsule (A). The tumour was 18 cm × 15 cm × 10 cm with minimal, compressed normal breast tissue adjacent to it. The tumour was composed of lobules of bland tubular glands lined by two layers of cells with a surrounding capsule. The trabeculae were dense and fibrous with focal calcifications (A). The overlying skin was ulcerated with an associated dense mixed inflammatory infiltrate and focally acantholytic epidermis. A diligent search was made throughout the tumour for malignancy but none was found. Of the lymph nodes sampled, none showed any tumour, and all showed follicular lymphoid hyperplasia. Pathological examination of the skin lesion (B) noted a dermal lesion composed of cystically dilated blood vessels with marked congestion, thrombosis and focal calcification in keeping with a cavernous haemangioma. Core bone biopsy of the bony lesions noted lobules of benign cartilage encased by spongy bone marrow consistent with enchondroma with no evidence of malignancy seen (B).
Given the above pathological features, a final diagnosis of Maffucci’s syndrome with giant tubular adenoma was made. The patient did not wish to have surgery of her bony deformities for cosmetic or functional reasons. Her primary concern had been the large breast mass which had attracted stigma from members of her community and we achieved a high degree of patient satisfaction. On 1-year follow-up, the patient is free of malignant disease and had experienced no postoperative complications. A plan was made for surveillance every year with clinical examination for early detection of occult malignant tumours. A timeline of events is provided in .