A 25-year-old male construction worker was brought to the emergency department of Alzahra Hospital after falling down, during working hours, from a height (fifth floor of a building) on a metallic (iron) bar projecting from a pillar of a construction site. There was a delay in reaching the hospital as the penetrated metallic rod had to be cut from the pillar. The patient presentation at the emergency room is shown in .
At the emergency department the patient was conscious, oriented and stable hemodynamically. Clinical examination showed three metallic rods with entry site through the the left arm, left abdominal region and left upper femoral region and exit site from the left scapula, right abdominal region and right upper femoral region, with no other external injury, audible heart sound with no added sound, no raised jugular venous pressure (JVP), flat and soft abdomen and palpable peripheral pulses. All neurological examinations were normal, and the patient’s sensory level was zero. The patient resuscitated with intravenous fluid through two large bore cannulas.
Chest X-ray was done and showed a metallic rod in the left arm and scapula with no obvious fracture of bones, no pneumothorax or hemothorax and no widening of the mediastinum. Pelvic X-ray was also done and showed a metallic bar, which crossed both limbs. Focus Abdominal Sonography for Trauma FAST was done and showed no abdominal free fluid or visceral injury.
The patient was transferred to the emergency operating room, where the exploratory laparotomy was performed. There was no blood and no injury of viscera in the abdomen. The metallic bar crossed from the retroperitoneal space, through the vertebral body and posterior of Psoas muscles and exited from the right side. Inferior vena cava, aorta and mesenteric vessels were not damaged. We detected a piece of bone in the peritoneum; later we found it was part of the L4 vertebral body that was fragmented by the iron bar. As shown in , the postoperative computed tomography showed that one of the iron bars had crossed through the L4 vertebral body. After coordination with neurosurgery services the metallic rod was pulled out and hemostasis was controlled. Surgical wounds were closed with layers.
Bilateral superficial femoral arteries exploration was done. There was no injury of vessels and the foreign body was pulled out and the wound was closed after washing.
The metallic bar in the arm was also pulled out after coordination with orthopedic services.
The patient was treated by broad-spectrum antibiotics and weaned from mechanical ventilation. He was then discharged from the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and admitted to an ordinary ward, after which he had uneventful recovery and was discharged from the hospital with a good general condition.