A 67-year-old man presented after being struck by a vehicle while riding his motorcycle with complaints of pain in his neck, pelvis, and left upper extremity. There was no loss of consciousness. Urinary function could not be assessed at initial presentation due to the presence of a Foley catheter, but there was no blood at the urethral meatus. Medical history was significant only for hypertension. On examination, he was conscious, oriented, and hypotensive (103/55 mm Hg). There was hypogastric tenderness and exposed bone through an open wound near his left elbow. Neurovascular status was preserved in both the upper and lower extremities. There was no damage to the spinal cord elements. Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph revealed pubic diastasis of 4.7 cm and a midline fracture through the sacral body with 1.0 cm of displacement . A pelvic binder was placed to decrease intrapelvic hemorrhage and repeat plain films demonstrated acceptable closure of his pelvic diastasis . After binder application and the placement of two large-bore intravenous cannulas administering crystalloid isotonic solution, hemodynamic stability was achieved and the patient was deemed stable a contrast-enhanced computed tomography CT scan revealed hemoperitoneum, 1.3 cm of pubic diastasis, and a complete, midline sacral fracture through the spinal canal and posterior sacral elements extending from S1 to the coccyx . To rule out urologic injury, a CT cystogram was obtained, which revealed no evidence of bladder or urethral rupture. An urgent irrigation and debridement with surgical fixation of his left open ulnar shaft fracture were performed. Great care was taken to monitor the patient’s skin condition beneath the binder to assure he did not experience any areas of skin necrosis or compromise. 2 days after hospital admission, he underwent open reduction internal fixation of the pubic diastasis using a pelvic reduction clamp and a 6-hole non-locking symphyseal plate by Pfannenstiel approach . During reduction and fixation of the anterior pelvis, intraoperative fluoroscopic assessment revealed increased widening of the midline longitudinal sacral fracture. Due to the fracture’s involvement of the posterior sacral elements and subsequent axial plane instability, fixation of the sacral fracture was deemed necessary to prevent further displacement and potential symptomatic deformity. Under fluoroscopic guidance, transsacral-transiliac guide pins were then used to insert 7.3mm fully threaded screws into the S1 and S2 body, measuring 150 mm and 140 mm, respectively. The screws were inserted posterior to the iliaccortical density so as not to injure the L5 nerve root. Using lag-screw fixation technique principles, these screws closed down the midline sacral fracture diastasis and anatomic reduction was achieved. Postoperatively, the patient was mobilized to weight bear for transfers. At 10weeks, he began weight-bearing as tolerated. The patient developed post-operative urinary retention and a Foleycatheter remained in place on hospital discharge. The urology team followed him as an outpatient and the catheter was removed at 1month, at which time he was able to pass urine normally. The patient received routine follow-up evaluations. Sacral fracture union was evident at 5 months with only mild loss of reduction at the pubic symphysis (1.3 cm of diastasis) . He had persistent impotence with otherwise normal urologic function and no neurologic deficits.