A 24-year-old woman with no medical history was admitted to the hospital for decreased consciousness and hyperthermia. Two months earlier, her relatives noticed behavioral changes with marked anxiety and depressive mood. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis with 470 nucleated cells/mm3 (99% of lymphocytes) and elevated protein level (84 mg/dl). CSF cultures and PCR analysis for HSV and VZV were negative. Electroencephalogram (EEG) disclosed non-specific, slow activity in the fronto-temporal region. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) depicted a few FLAIR hyperintense signals in the white matter. Infectious encephalitis was first suspected and amoxicillin in conjunction with aciclovir were administered. Progressive neurologic deterioration led to transfer the patient to the intensive care unit (ICU). On admission, the patient was confused, agitated, with a Glasgow Coma Score of 12. She also exhibited facial dyskinesia, ocular deviation with ocular dipping, and limb dystonia (A video shows this more in details, see Additional file which shows dyskinesias). The patient was ventilated. She received rocuronium bromide (4 mg) and midazolam (10 mg) for intubation and was maintained on a continuous propofol infusion (50 to 150 mg/h discontinuously) in order to reach a Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale between 0 and -3. Limbic encephalitis was highly suspected because of her young age, the lack of medical history, the clinical presentation and the absence of alternative etiology. Intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg) were promptly initiated (0.4 g/kg per day for 5 days). The diagnosis of anti-NMDA-R encephalitis was confirmed by the presence of specific antibodies in the CSF, revealed by a semi-quantitative test cell based assay. Since the patient exhibited no clinical improvement, high doses of methylprednisolone were administered intravenously (1 g/day for 5 days). Body CT scan disclosed a right ovarian tumor (27 mm) consistent with a teratoma. Tumor resection was scheduled on Day 19. The patient was then sedated with propofol 50 mg/h. General anesthesia was induced with a combination of propofol (100 mg), sufentanil (20 μg) and atracurium (40 mg) and maintained with sevoflurane at 2.5% during 70 min. No complication occurred. The tumor was solid, including teeth and hair and the pathological diagnosis was mature teratoma without malignancy. Sedation after surgery was maintained: propofol was reintroduced 6 hours after the end of the procedure. Eight hours after surgery, the patient’s condition deteriorated with a marked increase in the frequency and amplitude of dyskinesias (a video shows this in more details; see Additional file which shows worsened dyskinesias). Another 8 hours later a tonic-clonic generalized seizure event occurred. It resolved spontaneously within one minute. Propofol flow was 50 mg/h; infusion was stopped because of impaired consciousness. Levetiracetam was then started. Dyskinesias improved but propofol (50 mg/h) was reintroduced 14 hours later because of agitation. Two hours after propofol reintroduction, a second tonic-clonic generalized seizure event occurred which was treated with intravenous phenytoin. Propofol was maintained (80 mg/h), but dyskinesias increased. Eight hours after the second seizure propofol was finally stopped as a side effect was suspected. The neurologic status progressively improved but the patient could not talk. Accordingly, rituximab was administered as a second-line therapy (375 mg/m2 per week for 4 weeks). The patient was discharged from ICU on Day 36. At 3-month follow-up, the patient’s neurological status was slowly improving.