We describe the case of a 40-year-old Berber man, originally from Morocco, who presented to our emergency room with self-inflicted testicular injuries. His medical history was marked by tuberculosis of the lung. His psychiatric history dated from 32 years of age, when he was treated due to alcohol and cannabis abuse. Many medical treatments and psychotherapy techniques were proposed for detoxification but they failed because of his poor compliance with therapy. At the time of admission, he had not consumed alcohol for several months, but he reported using cannabis, particularly a few hours before the act. No childhood trauma, personality or even borderline personality disorders (assessed as a lifetime diagnosis) were diagnosed. He reported no psychiatric or medical diseases among close relatives. He presented to our emergency room eight hours later with unilateral scrotal laceration and externalization of both testis using his long fingersnails . This was associated with hemodynamic shock. Our patient underwent vascular filling and blood transfusion to achieve stabilization of his state. Upon examination of our patient's perineum, one wound was visible on the top of his right hemiscrotum measuring 4 cm with ecchymosis extended from his scrotum to the inguinal region. There was increase in scrotal volume due to the hematoma, with no active hemorrhage found . Our patient was interviewed by our psychiatrist, who found appropriate orientation and good contact. His speech was normal, with emotional indifference. His mood was mildly depressed, following the events that led to his admission. He reported no suicidal ideation, suicidal behavior, or desire for self-injury, and had no psychotic ideation. Computed tomography with intravenous contrast was performed to localize his spermatic cord, which was fortunately not retracted into the inguinal or retroperitoneal region. After stabilization of his psychiatric state with a benzodiazepine drug (diazepam: 30 drops a day), our patient was admitted to the operating room and haemostasis was easily achieved after ligation of both spermatic cords . The dartos and skin were then closed in two layers, with a good postoperative result. Our patient was discharged after his second day to a psychiatric department for supplement care and for substitution therapy for his cannabis use.