A 70-year-old woman of Chilean origin was admitted for investigation of recurrent troponin-positive chest pain and new peripheral oedema. There had been a presentation five years prior with chest pain, troponin-T elevation to 236 mg/dL at peak, non-obstructive coronary anatomy on invasive angiography, reduced ejection fraction at 40% and lateral mid-wall late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) on cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR), with corresponding tissue oedema and inflammation by T1- and T2-tissue-weighted imaging. The diagnosis of undifferentiated myocarditis was made. Medical background included type 2 diabetes mellitus, diagnosed 15 years previously, managed with metformin and empagliflozin, and bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment of moderate severity, onset age 50 years. There was no family history of deafness, diabetes, seizures, or stroke. There were no other systemic or neurological signs or symptoms at the time of this presentation. From this initial presentation, the symptoms of heart failure resolved, the troponin normalised, and the patient was lost to follow up, having been commenced on heart failure therapy with perindopril 2.5 mg daily, bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, and frusemide 40 mg daily.
The patient represented five years later with dyspnoea on minimal exertion, pre-syncope, angina, and reported several episodes of remitting and relapsing dyspnoea and ankle oedema over the preceding three years. Systems review was relevant for a reduced level of mobility of gradual onset over the preceding months. The cardiovascular examination was unremarkable apart from a degree of bipedal oedema. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with broadened QRS complex in a typical left-bundle-branch-block pattern, with a QRS duration of 130 ms. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction testing was negative. Initial echocardiogram showed mild concentric hypertrophy with moderate global impairment of systolic function, without valvulopathy. Global longitudinal strain was reduced -10.5%. With non-obstructive coronary disease on repeat invasive angiography, the patient proceeded to CMR, corroborating moderate impairment of left-ventricular (LV) systolic function and normal right-ventricular systolic function, with an LV ejection fraction of 40%. There were multiple areas of increased oedema on T2-weighted imaging and scar, with LGE uptake in the basal inferolateral wall and septum in a mid-wall pattern . Right heart catheterisation performed after effective diuresis demonstrated a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 14 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure of 18 mmHg, right atrial pressure of 13 mmHg, a transpulmonary gradient 6 mmHg and systemic vascular resistance of 3.5 Wood units. The measured cardiac output was complicated by the fact that the patient went into complete heart block with haemodynamic collapse just prior to measurement with further right heart catheterisation assessment not pursued. The calculated cardiac output was 1.3 L/min with a cardiac index of 0.9 L/min/m2. The high degree atrio-ventricular block did not recur and did not require further treatment. Serum lactate undertaken at the time of right heart catheterisation was found to be elevated at 4.0 mg/dL. Repeat lactate levels subsequently showed fluctuations between 2 and 4 mg/dL (normal range <2 mg/dL). Troponin-T was 1380 mg/dL at day 10 of admission, n terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was 3160 ng/L (normal range <200 ng/L) and creatine kinase was normal. Serum creatinine was 90 mmol/L (normal range <100 mmol/L) and there were no concomitant fluctuations in renal function through the admission.
Given the leading differential of inflammatory myocarditis, and the lack of viral prodrome or raised inflammatory markers to suggest a viral or bacterial aetiology, two courses of 1500 mg pulsed methylprednisolone in divided doses over days 3–5 and days 10–11 were administered. Despite this, a progressive rise in troponin-T was observed to 1380 mg/dL by day 10 and 1800 mg/dL by day 14 . A technetium-99 m pyrophosphate amyloid scan was negative for transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis, a combined positron emission tomography and computed tomography scan excluded cardiac sarcoidosis, whilst serum and urine protein electrophoresis excluded light chain amyloidosis. An endomyocardial biopsy showed non-specific myopathic changes of variable myocyte atrophy, hypertrophy, and minimal interstitial fibrosis.
In summary, the patient manifested troponin elevations with active myocardial injury and moderate LV functional impairment without a clear cause, and treatment with high-dose pulsed steroids for presumed myocarditis did not suppress myocardial injury. Throughout the admission, the patient remained hemodynamically stable with clinically mild heart failure.
The patient was noted to have a reduced level of mobility, with a wide-based gait and reduced proximal limb girdle strength (Medical Research Council grade 4/5), but did not have other features of frailty or sensory neurological findings. Given the constellation of unexplained cardiomyopathy and proximal limb weakness, consideration was then given to a generalised myopathic process. Neurological assessment was undertaken. Electromyography supported a myopathic process, without the characteristic features of myotonia, and no neuropathy was found on nerve conduction studies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain demonstrated marked periventricular deep white matter and white matter subcortical and supratentorial T2/FLAIR hyperintensities. Basal ganglia calcification and global cerebral, brain stem and cerebellar volume loss were noted. MRI of the thighs showed bilateral symmetric muscle oedema and diffuse wasting. Genetic testing was negative for myotonic dystrophy types 1 and 2.
Given the patient was of Chilean descent, the possibility of a Chagas cardiomyopathy due to Trypanasoma cruzi was considered. Chagas cardiomyopathy is characterised by segmental wall motion and CMR abnormalities typically involve the apical and inferolateral walls, with predilection for apical aneurysm formation and thrombus, probably secondary to microvascular disturbance and chronic myocarditis. In contrast to these findings, our patient had relative apical sparing in terms of wall motion, and fibrosis involved the basolateral wall and basal septum. Eventually, negative T. cruzi serology excluded Chagas cardiomyopathy.
The constellation of cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, extensive white matter changes, basal ganglia calcification, diabetes, sensorineural hearing impairment, and elevated serum lactate prompted consideration of a mitochondrial cytopathy. With autoimmune serological testing being positive for anti-polymyositis and scleroderma proteins, the differential diagnosis included autoimmune skeletal and cardiac myositis. A left quadriceps muscle biopsy was stained with a panel of routine, histochemical, and immunohistological stains. The muscle contained numerous angular atrophic esterase-positive (denervated) myofibers, a few scattered COX-deficient myofibers with a disorganised mitochondrial pattern, but fewer than 1% of COX-negative myofibers overall . These mitochondrial changes are within normal limits for this age. Of note, muscle histopathology can be normal in genetically proven mitochondrial cytopathies, which should, therefore, not be excluded based on a negative striated muscle biopsy alone, particularly if denervated myofibers are present. The large number of denervated myofibers present suggest this mitochondrial mutation caused an intramuscular neuropathy rather than a clinical striated muscle myopathy.
Genetic testing of 125 genes associated with myopathy, including 88 nuclear genes and 37 mitochondrial genes, demonstrated a pathogenic mutation in the mitochondrial genome, MT-TL1 m.3243A>G, at a heteroplasmic level of 18% in buccal cells and 64% mutational load in the striated muscle cells, confirming the diagnosis of a mitochondrial cytopathy.