A 3-month-old Caucasian female patient was brought as an outpatient. The main complaint was an infantile hemangioma in facial area , which as per parents’ story appeared within a week of birth like a small reddish line and it rapidly grew.
On the day of the visit in December 2021, the patient had been thoroughly examined not to miss any mass lesions to other organs and organ systems. Physical examination yielded that the child’s growth and development were normal, and no signs of other organ involvement were detected. Oral propranolol had been offered as a first line of treatment, however, as the adverse events were explained, they resorted to topical treatment with timolol for a month to check the effect. As it had little to no effect after 1 month follow-up visit, in early January 2022, oral propranolol had been initiated and after a month the lesion started to shrink. By November of 2022 the hemangioma was completely gone, and we started to taper the dosage, treatment was stopped in January 2023.
By the end of the treatment, we could not detect hemangioma, but there was a visible skin defect, like steroid-induced skin atrophy . To address this complication, we searched for counsel from a dermatologist, who suggested a topical treatment. The treatment was initiated in January 2023, and it yielded a positive effect – the defect has been reduced and the area of the skin atrophy is slowly starting to diminish .
Initial topical therapy chosen by parents was timolol, which was applied to the lesion 3 times a day.
Oral propranolol was started after timolol was deemed ineffective; The dosage was slowly increased. 0.5 mg/kg/day was given for a week, on the 8th day it was increased to 1 mg/kg/day, on the 12th day – 1.5 mg/kg/day and on the 16th day final target dosage of 2 mg/kg/day was achieved. Daily dosage was split 3 times and medication was administered at 8:00, 16:00, and 24:00, 15 min after feeding. Up to 6 months dosage was corrected every month and every 2 months after 6 months of age.
For atrophied skin, the dermatologist suggested treatment with Scarvis, which contains glycerol and dimethicone, 3 times a day.
Currently follow-up is done every 6 months via outpatient visit and online every month.