A 41-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a mass in the distal part of her medial left thigh for which she underwent surgical resection; pathology was consistent with an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, tumor size was 14.8 cm in greatest dimension, the closest margin was less than 0.5 mm from the tumor. Next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using a commercially available platform; it showed the presence of the EWSR1–NR4A3 translocation, mutation in the tumor suppressor gene CHEK2, stable microsatellite status and low tumor mutational burden (TMB, 5 mutations/Mb). Mutations of unknown significance were found in genes related to known oncogenic pathways such as MAPK (MAP3K1 and 6), AKT (ZNF217) and NF-kB (IKBKE) or genes involved in chromatin remodeling (BCOR, MLL2), metabolism (AR), angiogenesis (GPR124) and immune response (PDCD1LG2). Patient was subsequently followed with surveillance imaging; 2 years later she was found to have a recurrence in the original surgical site; chest imaging showed multiple lung nodules. During the following 5 years the patient was enrolled sequentially into 3 clinical trials testing the following drugs: brivanib, a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGF2) inhibitor, KW-2450, an insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor and insulin receptor (IGF-R1/IR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) and PTC299, a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor. After further progression of disease in the left thigh, left pelvis, lung and liver, she was started on the TKI pazopanib. At that time the chest imaging was remarkable for massive infiltration by innumerable lung lesions with very low-background metabolic activity ; of note, patient denied any significant shortness of breath at rest or when walking.
Seven years after diagnosis, given compression of the left common vein from the tumor, the patient underwent percutaneous transluminal venous angioplasty and stenting with markedly improved blood flow. One year later, given anatomic progression of the pelvic and left inguinal mass, she underwent palliative radiation therapy with photons to a mass in the left pelvis (17.4 × 13.4 cm, SUV = 3.6) and left inguinal area (15.1 × 6.9 cm, SUV = 3.3): 4500 cGy were delivered in 18 fractions. A PET/CT done about 4 months after completing radiation therapy showed a metabolic and anatomic response within the pelvic mass (11.8 × 9.2 cm, SUV = 2.8) and the left inguinal area (12.1 × 4.6 cm, SUV = 2.7; Figs. , ). The patient continued pazopanib 600 mg daily (dose was reduced because of diarrhea) with overall stability of disease during the following 4 years of follow-up. After 3 years, given worsening diarrhea with multiple episodes per day (grade 3 per CTCAE criteria), pazopanib was further dose reduced to 200 mg daily. A new CT scan done after about 5 months since this dose reduction, showed increase in size of multiple large left external iliac, femoral and inguinal nodal masses with diffuse tumor infiltration into the left distal external iliac and femoral veins. Patient underwent angioplasty and stenting of left femoral and iliac veins with good reperfusion.
Patient continued the dose reduced pazopanib that was increased to 400 mg after this procedure; she is not able to tolerate higher doses due to worsening diarrhea. She has an ECOG PS of 1 due to a sense of heaviness to her left lower extremity from chronic edema but no other significant symptoms such as shortness of breath or pain.