An 81-year-old woman (height, 145 cm; weight, 65 kg) with severe AS was scheduled to undergo a total mastectomy with a sentinel lymph node biopsy. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiogram showed a maximal blood flow velocity of 4.4 m/s. The calculated aortic valve area and mean pressure gradient were 0.76 cm2 and 43 mmHg, respectively. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved (ejection fraction, 68%). The patient had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention for effort angina 3 months prior to presentation. In addition, she had a history of hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidaemia. Her preoperative laboratory test indicated a severe decline in the estimated glomerular filtration rate (21.4 mL/min/1.73 m2) and haemoglobin level (7.4 g/dL).
Continuous arterial pressure was measured after inserting a catheter into the radial artery, and haemodynamic monitoring was performed using arterial pressure-based cardiac output (FloTrac; Edwards Life Sciences, LLC, Irvine, CA, USA). After establishing the bispectral index (BIS) and conducting near-infrared spectroscopy in addition to standard monitoring, general anaesthesia was induced by intravenous remimazolam (6 mg/kg/h) and remifentanil (0.3 μg/kg/min) along with continuous administration of noradrenaline (0.03 μg/kg/min) to avoid undesirable vasodilation. The patient lost consciousness 171 s after drug administration, and we reduced the dose of remimazolam to 1 mg/kg/h. Rocuronium (50 mg) was administered followed by tracheal intubation. An oximetry catheter (PreSep; Edwards Life Sciences, LLC, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted via the right jugular vein to measure central venous oxygen saturation. Anaesthesia was maintained with remimazolam adjusted from 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg/h to maintain the BIS between 40 and 60. Haemodynamic changes during surgery are shown in Fig. . The patient showed transient hypotension after anaesthesia induction. Mean blood pressures, cardiac output, index, and systemic vascular resistance were 77 mmHg, 4.2 L/min, 2.7 L/min/m2, and 1,333 dyne*sec/cm5 before administrating remimazolam, and 57mmHg, 4.8 L/min, 3.1 L/min/m2, and 833 dyne*sec/cm5 after administration. Systemic vascular resistance was calculated as assuming central venous pressure was 7 mmHg. Remimazolam administration continued until the end of the surgery. The patient regained consciousness 9 min later, was extubated 18 min later, and restored orientation 28 min later. The duration of anaesthesia was 229 min, and the operation time was 142 min. The patient was monitored in the intensive care unit (ICU) overnight, and she was discharged from the ICU the next day.