A 23-year-old man was admitted to a local doctor with symptoms of frequent diarrhea and was referred to our hospital due to mild anemia and positive fecal occult blood. He had no specific past illness but had a history of smoking in the past (Brinkman Index: 20 [10 × 2]). His maternal grandmother had a rectal cancer patient who developed the disease at age 70s. Initial laboratory data revealed a hemoglobin level of 12.0 and platelet count of 3.4 × 105/μL. The tumor marker level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 2.0 ng/mL, and the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was 19.3 ng/mL. There were no abnormal values in other blood test data. All blood test data are listed in Table . Colonoscopy (CS) identified two tumors in the rectum and an accessory lesion between them, and biopsies showed that the large main tumor was a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and the small tumor was well-differentiated adenocarcinoma . The large main tumor was a circumferential advanced cancer and located on the second Houston valve (5 cm from the anal verge), causing severe stenosis . The small tumor was an early cancer 2 cm in diameter and it was about 0.5 cm away from the dentate line (2.5 cm from the anal verge) . The accessory lesion was an adenoma 0.3 cm in diameter . Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the large tumor was located at the peritoneal reflection with irregularity of the serous surface and that the anterior border of the tumor was close to the prostate (<1 mm) . Misty mesentery surrounded the large tumor and there were eight enlarged pararectal lymph nodes . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in these tumors and lymph nodes but no distant metastases. The maximum standardized uptake (SUVmax) of 18F-FDG was 16.07 by the large and 13.41 by the small tumor . The clinical diagnosis was rectal cancer: cT4aN2bM0 cStageIIIc (large tumor) and cT1bN0M0 (small tumor) according to the Union for International Cancer Control Tumor, Node Metastasis Classification of Malignant Tumors, Eighth Edition .
Considering the size and depth of the tumor, it was judged that radical resection with sufficient margins would be difficult. Therefore, the decision was made to perform TNT. At first, CAPOX (capecitabine 2000 mg/m2 for 14 days and L-OHP 130 mg/m2 on day 1) was administered every 3 weeks for 4 cycles. Imaging evaluation after CAPOX showed only slight tumor shrinkage . Next, preoperative CRT using capecitabine (1650 mg/m2 for 5 days per week) was performed. Radiotherapy was performed on the day of oral capecitabine, with a total dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions. After CRT, partial tumor shrinkage was observed in CS . During this period, genetic testing diagnosed this patient as MSI-H, so additional nivolumab (240 mg/body every 2 weeks for 4 courses) was administered after CRT. This patient was under 50 years of age and had concurrent multiple cancers. So, although the patient did not meet the Amsterdam criteria II, he did meet the revised Bethesda Guidelines. Also considering the fact that this patient had MSI-H, Lynch syndrome was strongly suspected. Normally, the presence of BRAF V600E gene mutation and MMR gene mutation should be checked to make a definite diagnosis of Lynch syndrome, and the patient as well as his family members should be followed up. However, he did not have it tested because he and his family refused to have any further genetic testing done.
During the course of preoperative treatment, no side effects were observed. CS revealed a mild stenosis in the area where the large tumor was located, but the viable tumor was no longer detectable . The small tumor was reduced in size but did not disappear. MRI showed residual rectal wall thickening, but the large tumor could not be detected and PET-CT showed no FDG accumulation in the tumor or lymph nodes . The tumor marker levels just before the surgery were CEA 2 ng/mL and CA 19-9 12.8 ng/mL, and CA19-9 was lower than before the treatment. As shown in Fig. , CA19-9 was decreased after the start of CRT.
Robot-assisted intersphincteric resection and bilateral lateral lymph node dissection were performed. The operation time was 550 min, and the blood loss was 150 mL. There was no evidence of peritoneal dissemination or distant metastasis in the peritoneal cavity. Figure A showed the resected specimen. Pathological examination of the resected specimen was performed. In the area where the large tumor was located, there were cancer-free mucous nodules in the submucosa, intrinsic muscularis propria, and subserosa, and foreign body polynuclear giant cells and histiocytes were found around the nodules. The large tumor was therefore diagnosed as pCR . On the other hand, mucous nodules had spread to the submucosa in the area where the small tumor was located, but residual well-differentiated adenocarcinoma was found in the mucosal intrinsic layer (pTis). Consequently, the small tumor was diagnosed as having a partial response (pPR). There was no lymph node metastasis. Since no remaining cancer cells were found at the margins, it was diagnosed that complete resection was achieved. Major complications (Clavien–Dindo classification ≥IIIa) were not observed, and the patient was discharged on the 14th day after surgery. The patient was followed up without adjuvant chemotherapy and is alive and recurrence-free after 9 months.