In February 2019, a 35-year-old African woman in the 22nd week of gestation presented with acute biliary pancreatitis due to gallbladder polyps. Two weeks later, the patient underwent a cholecystectomy by laparoscopy without maternal nor fetal complications. The histopathological examination revealed an incidental gallbladder carcinoma classified as pT2a pNx L0 V0 G2 R0 according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system (8th edition). Additional examinations were therefore carried out, including a non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) two weeks after the first surgery . Serum tumor markers including carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within normal limits (< 2 kU/L and 1.8 µg/L, respectively) and the expression of MMR proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH2 and PMS2) and HER-2 by immunohistochemistry in tumor tissue were normal. After a discussion with the patient, particular care was dedicated to maintain the pregnancy that the patient wished to preserve. Following multidisciplinary tumor board discussion, the patient underwent an open liver bi-segmentectomy of segments IVb and V showing two retro-portal lymph node metastases of GBC with one of them presenting capsular effraction. The tumor was classified pT2a pN1(2/8), grade 2, without lymphovascular invasion, stage IIIB. No postoperative complications were observed. Fetal growth, liquor volume, and end-diastolic flow on ultrasound at 26 weeks were normal.
After an explanation about the benefit-risk balance of adding chemotherapy treatment, the patient began adjuvant gemcitabin and the pregnancy was carried on until 32 weeks of gestation. Because of the risk of preterm delivery, the patient received corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation before hepatic surgery.
Between the 28th and 32nd week of pregnancy, the patient was treated with one cycle of gemcitabine chemotherapy (1000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle) with no grade 2 or more adverse events. Chemotherapy was administered on an inpatient basis to facilitate fetal monitoring, and no adverse fetal effects were observed. The treatment was interrupted 2 weeks prior to the planned birth induction at 32 weeks. Because of breech position at admission, the patient underwent a cesarean section. The newborn girl had a birth weight of 1,570 g, a length of 41 cm, and a head circumference of 28.5 cm (all values in the normal range for gestational age). The Apgar score was 7/9/9 at 1, 5 and 10 minutes respectively.The placenta showed no signs of metastatic spread. A complete neonatal evaluation revealed no gross malformations, neurological or cardio-circulatory abnormalities, infection, or bone marrow suppression. Peripheral blood count was as follows: leukocytes 16.5x109/L, hemoglobin 17.3 g/dL, and platelets 417,000/µL). Supplemental enteral nutrition by nasogastric tube was required for the first 6 days. The infant developed indirect hyperbilirubinemia with jaundice and hemoglobin level of 13.2 g/dl on day 14, requiring iron infusion.
The infant was discharged from the hospital in very good general condition one month after the birth. Her weight was 2,380 g (below the third percentile), height 45 cm (below the third percentile), and head circumference 31 cm (below the third percentile). Pediatric follow-up at 8 and 18 months of corrected age confirmed normal physical and neurological development. At the latter visit, the infant’s weight was 13 kg (above the 97th percentile), her height 87 cm (above the 97th percentile), and head circumference 48.5 cm (between the 75th and 90th percentile).
At 6 weeks postpartum, chemotherapy with gemcitabine was resumed using the same dosing schedule as during the pregnancy, in combination with capecitabine at 1500 mg orally twice a day for the first two weeks of every 3-week cycle and a total of 6 months were administered.
After finishing chemotherapy, the first follow-up imaging by abdominal MRI and thoraco- abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed in October 2019, revealing no signs of local recurrence or distant metastases . Further oncologic surveillance included clinical, laboratory (CEA, CA 19-9) and radiological monitoring. In this respect, the patient had a lung CT and abdominal MRI every three months in the first two years after the intervention, then the intervals were increased to every six months. This patient has been disease-free for more than 3 years with ongoing remission at the last visit in February 2022. summarizes the disease course in our patient.