A 21-year-old unmarried man was referred to the men’s health clinic of our hospital due to flu-like symptoms that developed after ejaculation by masturbation and that persisted for about 2 days. He had his first masturbation with hand thrust at the age of 19 years. Since then, he experienced general fatigue, chills, headache, nasal congestion, and muscle pain almost every after ejaculation. The symptoms lasted for about 2 days and spontaneously disappeared. Moreover, the frequency of his morning erection significantly decreased. The patient’s symptoms met the POIS criteria; therefore, he was diagnosed with POIS.
The growth of his pubic hair and penis was normal (each with a Tanner’s grade of 5). On physical examination, his testicular volume was a little atrophic on the left side (12 mL).
His total testosterone level (4.75 ng/mL), gonadotropic level (luteinizing hormone: 3.5 mIU/mL and follicle stimulating hormone: 8.7 mIU/mL) was normal, and free testosterone level (10.3 pg/mL) was mildly low.
The patient’s AMS score was 45 (psychological: 10, somatic: 19, and sexual: 16), and his SHIM score was 3.
Antihistamine drugs were administered for allergic symptoms. However, the treatment was not effective. For headache and muscle pain, celecoxib 200 mg, which is an NSAID, was administered daily just after ejaculation. Immediately after the intake of the drug, headache and muscle pain were relieved, and the patient was able to ejaculate 3 days per week. However, general fatigue did not improve.
Thereafter, in addition to NSAIDs, 250 mg of testosterone enanthate was administered as a TRT every 2 weeks because the patient’s serum free testosterone level was lower than 70% of the average value in young adult men. His general fatigue significantly improved, and morning erection has been achieved every day. Therefore, he can ejaculate everyday by masturbation. The patient’s AMS score decreased to 21 and SHIM score increased to 7. The interval of drug administration was changed from 2 to 4 weeks. However, no recurrence of symptoms was observed.
TRT was switched to testosterone ointment (Glowmin®; Daito Pharma, Tokyo, Japan), and his symptoms continually improved.