A 3-year-old boy presented with acute myocarditis and congestive heart failure.
The patient was hospitalized at a primary hospital, with a 5-d history of irritability, poor appetite, and respiratory distress. A chest radiograph revealed mild cardiomegaly and pulmonary infiltration. The patient was treated for bacterial pneumonia with a 3-d regimen of an oral antibiotic. He was then referred to a provincial hospital due to his symptoms not improving. His vital signs were as follows: heart rate of 144/min; respiratory rate of 65/min; blood pressure of 145/94 mmHg (right arm) and 144/102 mmHg (left arm), and of 169/90 mmHg (right leg) and 150/119 mmHg (left leg). He had dyspnea, tachycardia, hepatomegaly, and an oxygen saturation of 97%. Bilateral fine crepitations were audible over both lungs. Cardiac examination detected no murmur, regular rhythm, and normal first and second heart sounds, but also revealed an S3 gallop. His liver was palpated 6 cm below the right costal margin.
A firm, non-tender mass was detected at the left upper quadrant of the abdomen, with the lower border at 8 cm below the left costal margin, and was suspected to be an enlarged spleen. A chest radiograph showed mild cardiomegaly and diffuse pulmonary infiltration. Electrocardiography noted a condition of sinus tachycardia and left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. The two-dimensional and color Doppler echocardiography demonstrated presence of a hypokinetic LV wall with an ejection fraction of 29%, no mitral regurgitation, and normal coronary anatomy. The patient was diagnosed with acute myocarditis and treated with intravenous immunoglobulin, milrinone, furosemide, and spironolactone. He was referred to the Chiang Mai University Hospital (Chiang Mai, Thailand) because of the acute myocarditis, poor LV contractility, and hypertension.
The patient was reportedly healthy before the present illness.
The patient had hypertension and a mass at the left upper quadrant of the abdomen, with the lower border at 8 cm below the left costal margin and suspected to be splenomegaly.
On admission, the blood chemistry exam revealed normal renal function, elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase 119 U/L, normal: 0-40 U/L; alanine aminotransferase 139 U/L, normal: 0-41 U/L), slightly elevated troponin T (50 pg/mL, normal: ≤ 14 pg/mL), elevated CKMB (6.1 ng/mL, normal: < 4.8 ng/mL), and markedly elevated pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (21,736 pg/mL, normal: < 300 pg/mL). Urinary analysis showed microscopic hematuria. The patient also had substantially elevated serum chromogranin A (156.9 ng/mL, normal: 31-94 ng/mL), plasma renin activity (34.75 ng/mL/h, normal: 0.06-4.69 ng/mL/h), and plasma aldosterone (961 pg/mL, normal: 20-180 pg/mL). The urinary level of metanephrines was within normal range (56.15 μg/d, normal: 25-312 μg/d).
A chest radiograph revealed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 60% and diffuse small pulmonary nodules . Echocardiography was performed to determine the cause of the acute myocarditis and hypertension. A dilated left ventricle with poor contractility (LV ejection fraction of 30%) and an 8 cm × 9 cm left renal mass were demonstrated . Chest and abdominal computed tomography (commonly referred to as CT) scans delineated the existence of a large lobulated heterogeneously hypoenhancing 9.7 cm × 9.7 cm × 9.5 cm soft tissue mass occupying the left kidney, with intralesional necrotic and non-enhancing cystic portions . In addition, a thrombus in the left renal vein, ascites, multiple pulmonary nodules, and mediastinal lymphadenopathy were noted. Wilms tumor with lung metastasis was suspected.