A 16-year-old male child was admitted to our hospital, the University Medical Center of the National Scientific Center of Maternal and Childhood, after 7 days ingestion of the foreign body, the child was complaining of retrosternal pain radiating to the left side when eating and changing body positions, with a fever as high as 37.8°C. As reported by the parents, the boy had eaten fish, after which time pain manifested itself behind the sternum.
At the time of admission to the hospital, the patient had no fever, nor any difficulty in swallowing, no bloody vomiting, no rectal bleeding, or other related symptoms.
The child fell in the range of normal height and weight for the child's age and sex. There were no prior medical records found for the child and no indications in the family medical history suggesting hereditary or any other health conditions that would explain the complaints.
The patient was admitted to the General Pediatric Surgery Department in the University Medical Center of the National Scientific Center of Maternal and Childhood. During the physical examination conducted on the child noabnormalities were detected. The child laid on his right side that alleviated the pain. Day after the hospitalization, an endovascular implantation of a stent-graft into the thoracic aorta was performed. Using a diagnostic guide wire, a diagnostic catheter Pig Tail 5 Fr was inserted into the ascending aorta, and a control aortography was performed, which showed the location of the aneurysmal dilation. A linear module of the endoprosthesis TAA2222B080 was delivered, positioned, and deployed into the aortic lumen via a stiff guide wire inserted through the right common femoral artery by arteriotomy. It was adequately positioned, confirmed during the control aortography, and the aneurysmal dilation was no longer visible. The Pig Tail 5Fr catheter and the introducer were removed.
Blood test results showed the following inflammatory changes: white blood cells—15.77 * 109 /L (normal range 4.50 * 109 /L–13.00 * 109 /L), C-reactive protein—101.74 mg/L (normal range 0.00 mg/L–5.00 mg/L).
Results of contrast-enhanced computed tomography performed on admission day showed a foreign body in the middle section of the mediastinum in the form of a fish bone , a perforation of the wall of the descending thoracic aorta by a foreign body, and a formation of a post-traumatic saccular pseudoaneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta .
At the level of the middle mediastinum, below the bifurcation of the bronchi, at a distance ranging from 3.6 cm and 1.67 cm from the ventral part of the Th6-Th7 intervertebral space, a transversely oriented foreign body was visible, with dimensions of 2.3 × 0.17 cm, with clear, smooth contours and a density of 184–247 Hounsfield units.
After the bolus intravenous contrast was administered, images were taken of the heart chambers and the major mediastinal vessels . At the level of the ventral portion of the descending aorta, in the projection of the Th6-Th7 intervertebral space, a saccular aneurysm with clear smooth contours measuring 1.25 × 1.06 × 1.18 cm was visible. One-third of the above-mentioned foreign body was located within the aneurysm structure. The left side end of the foreign body projected into the esophageal wall.
A foreign body, a fish bone, was lodged in the mediastinum at the Th6-Th7 level. A false aneurysm of the thoracic aorta was caused by the fish bone in the esophagus.
8 day after the ingestion of foreign body, we successfully performed an endovascular implantation of a stent-graft in the thoracic aorta. Then, endoscopic examination was performed after 4 days. The tip of a white foreign hard body, the fish bone, measuring 1.7 cm × 0.3 cm, with a fixed position and smooth surface, was detected in the lumen of the esophagus, 35 cm from the anterior midline incisors. The mucous membrane around the foreign body was edematous, moderately elevated above the level of the mucosa. The foreign body was removed with biopsy forceps without technical difficulties, and the puncture site did not bleed on inspection .
The length of the fish bone was approximately 25 mm and there were no fractures. There was no bleeding or pus at the site during removal. In the postoperative period, the patient continued to receive antibacterial therapy.
The contrast x-ray examination of the esophagus was performed day after the foreign body removal. Results showed that the passage of the esophagus was preserved, and no contrast leakage was detected. shows the condition after the stenting of the descending aorta. During contrast imaging, the esophagus showed clear and smooth contours, with preserved patency and no signs of contrast leakage. A shadow of the subclavian catheter is seen to the right, projected onto the superior vena cava.
Foreign body in the mediastinum was not differentiated from images of computed tomography after removal. A stent-graft is visible in the descending aorta at the level of vertebrae Th4-Th7. After intravenous bolus contrast administration, the heart chambers and large vessels of the mediastinum were filled with contrast and the aorta was homogeneously filled with contrast material. Signs of aneurysm are not differentiated.
Currently, it has been 12 months since the surgery. The child’s condition is satisfactory.