A 61-year-old Asian male presented to our department with painful left scrotal swelling and pain on urination. He had no medical history and was not taking medication. On physical examination, he had a tender, egg-sized left scrotum but no fever. Blood examination revealed high levels of white blood cells (14 300/μL; normal range 3300–8500) and C-reactive protein (15.50 mg/dL; normal range <0.5). Urine analysis revealed pyuria and bacteriuria. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed swelling of the left testis, epididymis, and right seminal vesicle with an increase in contrast enhancement . Fluid had collected around the scrotal mass. MRI showed a diffuse signal reduction in the left testis with multiple linear hypointense structures, hypointense nodules in the left epididymis, and an intermediate-intensity mass in the right seminal vesicle on T2-weighted images . The mass in the left epididymis and right seminal vesicle demonstrated diffusion restriction . An acute bacterial infection in the epididymis was diagnosed and oral antibiotics (levofloxacin 500 mg/day) administered. Urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli. After 7 days’ treatment, the patient’s general condition and inflammatory status improved. Serum tumor markers, including lactate dehydrogenase, α-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin β subunit, and prostate-specific antigen, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and soluble interleukin-2 level, were within normal levels. However, since the scrotal swelling was persistent, MRI was repeated 11 days after the initial examination. Compared with the prior image, the right seminal vesicle mass was enlarged. The signal intensities of the testis and epididymis remained unchanged . Therefore, in spite of negative testicular tumor markers, we suspected a malignant testicular tumor, specifically, seminoma or malignant lymphoma. A histopathological examination was consequently suggested to the patient. After informed consent, an immediate left orchidectomy and right seminal vesicle biopsy were performed . Histopathological examination revealed infiltrating inflammatory cells of extensive lymphocytes and plasma cells, as well as diffuse fibrosis with a focal storiform pattern in the testis . Due to severe inflammation and fibrosis, seminiferous tubules were atrophied and degenerated; atypical cells were not found. Immunohistochemical examination detected abundant CD138+ and CD3−, CD20− plasma cells . IgG4 and IgG immunostaining revealed IgG4-positive cells among IgG-positive plasma cells. IgG4-positive/IgG-positive plasma cells were over 50% in both the left testis and right seminal vesicle . After surgery, high levels of serum IgG (1940 mg/dL) and IgG4 (142 mg/dL) were observed, although rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody were within normal range. The final diagnosis was IgG4-RD arising in the gonadal gland. Slight discomfort in pelvis persisted after surgical treatment; however, the symptom was gradually improved as time advances. When the patient’s symptoms completely resolved, serum IgG and IgG4 levels became normal . MRI revealed the mass in the right seminal vesicle became reduced after surgical treatment without further medication . The patient has now been in remission for over 10 years.