A 68-year-old male with a history of hypertension presented with a 1-year history of gradually decreasing right eye visual acuity with occasional headaches. His examination was nonfocal except for decreased visual acuity in the right eye without papilledema. Magnetic resonance imaging was initially ordered and demonstrated a giant right paraophthalmic aneurysm . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) further characterized it as a medially and superiorly projecting giant right paraophthalmic aneurysm just distal to the ophthalmic artery, measuring 2.1 by 1.4 cm with an 8-mm neck . After informed consent was obtained, the patient’s aneurysm was successfully coiled and flow diverted with one surpass evolve stent (Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, California) [ and ]. The patient was maintained on dual antiplatelet therapy after that. About two months after his initial treatment, the patient’s right eye’s visual acuity declined, and he also developed a new left visual deficit. He was started on a course of steroids in hopes of alleviating his symptoms from the optic chiasm compression and optic nerve inflammation. A follow-up DSA revealed a residual paraophthalmic aneurysm and balloon test occlusion of his right ICA was successfully performed, with the patient tolerating it without any deficits due to the presence of a large anterior communicating artery. The patient became increasingly more symptomatic despite steroids, with now complete loss of vision in his right eye. The decision was made to sacrifice the right ICA with plans for definitive treatment through surgical clipping and possible decompression of the optic chiasm to preserve what is left of his left visual acuity [ and ].
After his right ICA sacrifice, there was no residual filling of the aneurysm or the right ICA beyond the communicating segment from the contralateral side through the anterior communicating artery complex. The patient underwent an expanded endoscopic endonasal approach for clipping and resection of his right paraophthalmic aneurysm [-]. After the sphenoid was opened, the sella, tuberculum sella, and planum were drilled off to expose bilateral optic nerves. The dura was opened widely to expose bilateral ICAs. It was observed that the giant right paraophthalmic aneurysm severely compressed the right optic nerve and the chiasm. After confirming no flow through the aneurysm with a Doppler, the aneurysm was carefully opened with a featherblade knife, and coils were slowly evacuated. With this maneuver, the aneurysm gradually softened, and the neck of the aneurysm was then dissected out and clipped with a single straight clip. The aneurysm was additionally decompressed by removing more coils until the optic apparatus was adequately decompressed. The skull base was repaired with DuraGen, and the nasoseptal flap was laid on the bony defect and its surrounding edges were lined with SURGICEL and DuraSeal glue. The patient’s immediate postoperative course was uneventful. However, his right eye did not regain the lost vision; his left visual acuity and field testing both improved after the surgery. He is no longer symptomatic and has recovered well. A follow-up computed tomography angiography demonstrated expected postsurgical changes and no further recurrence of the aneurysm.