A 57-year-old Japanese woman, with no past medical history, presented to our institution with a one-year history of abdominal pain, a two-month history of back pain, numbness of both her legs, and a one-month history of dysuria. She initially reported abdominal pain and underwent extensive gastroenterological evaluation at another hospital, including an esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which was unremarkable.
Her physical examination revealed no motor weakness and normal tendon reflexes. She felt hypoesthesia below the umbilicus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results demonstrated a large intradural extramedullary mass at the T3 level that was compressing her spinal cord from the ventral side .
The intradural extramedullary tumor was resected through a laminectomy of T2-T4 and a facetectomy of T2-T3 and T3-T4 in the prone position under transcranial motor-evoked potential (MEP) monitoring. As the tumor was completely covered by her spinal cord, it was surgically removed by rotation of the spinal cord using tenting of the dentate ligament. After tumor resection, the dura that adhered to the tumor was cauterized. A watertight repair of the dura was performed, using fibrin glue to avoid CSF leakage. A T1-T5 pedicle screw fixation was performed . Abnormal MEP signals were observed on her left leg during and after the tumor resection. A subfascial drain was put in place, with negative pressure. After she woke the motor power was weakened to grade three to four in her left knee and ankle. The total operating time was 4 hours 39 minutes, and the amount of bleeding was 108g. The histological diagnosis of the tumor was a meningioma.
Twelve hours after surgery, she developed nausea and confusion, and her clinical status deteriorated with loss of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale score of seven). A total of 850mL serosanguineous fluid had been drained at that time, and drainage was stopped. An emergency brain computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated an acute cerebellar hemorrhage in the superior folia of the cerebellar hemispheres . An MRI scan demonstrated a herniation of the cerebellar tonsils . She was treated conservatively with anti-edema and antihypertensive drugs, and her clinical status improved gradually. After removal of the drain, there was no CSF leakage. The results of her follow-up CT scan performed one week later showed that her hematoma and brain edema were decreased. Twelve days later, the results of her follow-up MRI scan showed ascent of the cerebellum to the normal position . At six weeks after surgery, she had slight ataxia and was discharged with a cane. At her one-year follow-up assessment, she had a normal neurological examination except for hypoesthesia of the right leg, and there was no CSF collection visible on her MRI scan.