A 29-year-old Afro-descendant, single male, undergraduate biological sciences student, who lives in Itaboraí-Rio de Janeiro (RJ) and works as a waiter, was referred by the stomatologist to the Department of Otorhinolaryngology of a private hospital, reporting dysphonia and hoarseness for 2 months.
He is homosexual and reported nonexclusive sexual partnerships in the previous year, and casual condom use during oral and anal intercourse. Regarding HPV infection, his partner already had virus-induced lesions in the anal region, although he had been treated. The patient denied smoking, social drinking, and illicit drug use. He had a verruca vulgaris in his right hand that disappeared without surgery or medication when he was a child. He reported being born by cesarean section.
Lesions were not observed during the intra and extra-oral physical examination, and neither was cervical lymphadenopathy noted. Oral hygiene was satisfactory and there was no biofilm retention, caries, or gingivitis. Body examination revealed a wart in the foot.
Videolaryngostroboscopy presented signs suggestive of pharyngolaryngeal reflux, and retrocricoid and interarytenoidal edema. Remaining unchanged anatomical pharyngolaryngeal sites were noteworthy (Figure A,B) There was formation of a papillomatous aspect in the posterior third and part of the middle third of the right vocal fold. It was also observed normal mobility, reduced mucosal wave activity, normal frequency, and low-amplitude. There was a mild lateral supraglottic constriction, and absence of posterior rhinorrhea. Examinations for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including HIV, syphilis, hepatitis B and C, and gonorrhea were performed with negative results.
After routine preoperative examinations, the patient was referred for surgical excision of the nodular lesion of the right vocal fold. Histopathological examination showed a nodular lesion of the right vocal fold, with several small, firm and elastic brown tissue fragments, with some papillomatous areas measuring 1.7 × 0.8 × 0.2 cm, conclusive of squamous papilloma with absence of malignancy (Figure C). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detected HPV type 6.
After surgical excision of the squamous papilloma on the right vocal fold, the patient was prescribed analgesic and anti-inflammatory agents. Among the prescribed restrictions there was absolute voice rest and ingestion of a liquid and pasty diet, preferably cold or frozen. One week after the procedure, the patient still had difficulty speaking owing to postoperative inflammation. He was prescribed continuous vocal rest and anti-inflammatory agents. After a period of 3 months, another videolaryngostroboscopy was performed, which revealed normal appearance of the epiglottis in the supraglottic region and good mobility, and unchanged aryepiglottic and ventricular folds. In the glottis we observed the right vocal fold with posterior retraction in the middle third, hyperemia in the vocal fold, glottic closure with formation of fusiform average posterior glottis, preserved vocal fold mobility and vertical vocal fold level. It was also observed a non-symmetrical vocal fold vibration, reduced wave mucosa, absent adynamic segments; normal supraglottic activity; free pyriform sinus; and arytenoids with normal appearance.
Videolaryngostroboscopy concluded that, after excision in the glottis, there was a decline in the middle third of the right vocal fold, formation of spindle glottis phonation, right vocal fold hyperemia, and reduction of the mucosal wave in the right vocal fold (Figure D).
Upon the diagnostic appearance presented by postoperative videolaryngostroboscopy, the patient was referred to a phonoaudiologist to perform vocal rehabilitation. He is currently undergoing clinical follow-up.