A 19-year-old woman presented with intermittent pain over a period of 6 months in the left heel, which was severe after activity and relieved after taking rest. There was no history of trauma to the left foot. She visited our hospital for treatment and diagnosis because of worsening pain in last 10 days. The pain was limited to the heel. Tenderness was noted in the posterior part of the calcaneus. No subcutaneous mass was palpated. Normal range of motion was demonstrated in the ankle. Radiograph of the left foot revealed a well-defined osteolytic lesion with marginal sclerosis, involving the calcaneal tuberosity. The size of the lesion was 3.5 × 2.5 × 2.0 cm . An irregular radiopaque mass was observed in this elliptic lesion. For further radiological examination of the lesion, CT scan of the left foot was chosen. An osteolytic lesion was clearly showed in the calcaneal tuberosity. Expansion with a thin peripheral cortex was detected, but not breaking through the calcaneus. There was no swelling in the surrounding soft tissue. A homogenous hyperdense deposit with a size of 2.5 × 2.0 × 1.0 cm was seen in the lesion. The sagittal and transversal images showed the radiopaque deposit was surrounded by the radiolucent tissue. An arc-shaped fat band was laid to the front of the radiolucent tissue. The radiolucent tissue presented the soft tissue dense which is the tumor tissue and CT value was 30.6 Hounsfield Units (HU). The irregular mass was 712.7 HU which was the calcified structure . Taken together, the lesion was initially considered as calcifying solitary bone cyst, intra-osseous lipoma, enchondroma and osteoblastoma. Extragnathic cementoma was hypothesized and surgical excision was recommended.
During operation, the cortex of the affected bone was found to be thin. Granulation with fibrous tissue was observed in the lesion. Calcified sample particles mixed together were also seen. A large stiff sclerotic mass was took out of the calcaneus and appeared pinkish-grey or grey. An excisional biopsy was performed. Histopathological examination revealed there was abundant fibrous tissue containing calcified spherules and few cells in the excised specimens. Cementum-like material was found within the calcified spherules, which irregularly formed acellular trabeculae. Some cementum corpuscles were mixed together . Thus a diagnosis of cementoma of the calcaneus was confirmed.
The patient was treated by curettage, bone grafting and bone packing with the iliac crest in the same side. There was no evidence of recurrence at the 2-year follow-up .