A 4-month-old female with a history of TOF presented after a 5-min hypoxaemic event at home to 40% SpO2 on a home pulse oximeter. She was born at 36 and 1/7 weeks gestational age to a mother with type 1 diabetes. The infant carried a pre-natal diagnosis of TOF and severe right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction which required placement of an RVOT stent shortly after birth. She had been stable at home with oxygen saturations greater than 93% on room air.
On admission, vitals were as follows: blood pressure 97/53 mmHg, heart rate 129 beats per minute, respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute, and SpO2 71% on room air. She was alert and in no distress, acyanotic, and had a normal respiratory exam. She had a III/VI holosystolic murmur, loudest at the left upper sternal border, 2+ femoral pulses, and 3–4 s capillary refill. The rest of the exam was unremarkable.
Echocardiogram demonstrated a widely patent RVOT stent with reduction in the Doppler gradient and flow acceleration in the pulmonary veins . Computed tomography angiography demonstrated severe PVS of all the veins as they entered the left atrium, with the left lower, right upper, and right middle being the worse affected with near atresia . Diagnostic cardiac catheterization was significant for elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 12.58 iWU and stenosis of all pulmonary veins.
At that time, surgical intervention was felt to be associated with unacceptably high risk of mortality. The decision was made to return to the cardiac catheterization lab for intervention. The pulmonary veins were subjected to balloon angioplasty. Her clinical improvement was short lived, and she underwent repeat cardiac catheterization at 5 months of age with stenting of her pulmonary veins with drug-eluting stents and dilation of the RVOT stent . Multiple cardiac catheterizations with ballooning and stenting followed on a regular 4- to 6-week schedule with improvement in pulmonary pressures and PVS.
The discussion about optimal timing for surgical intervention required weighing the risk of surgery in a patient with severe PVS and improving moderate-severe pulmonary vascular resistance vs. the need for recurrent intervention and continuing cyanosis. After a subsequent cardiac catheterization at nine months of age, the patient’s post-intervention pulmonary pressure and PVR had improved, with the latter decreasing to 3.87 iWU. The decision was made then to proceed with surgical repair. At 10 months of age, the patient underwent resection of bilateral PVS via a surture-less technique: the stented pulmonary veins were incised longitudinally into upstream regions without stenosis, and then the atrial wall was sewn to the pericardium around the resected areas. The TOF was repaired with resection of the RVOT stent, closure of the ventricular septal defect (VSD), tricuspid commisuroplasty, atrial septal defect reduction, and aortic homograft in the pulmonary position. The homograph was placed per surgeon preference, with the goal that the patent conduit would improve anterograde flow and improve the odds of pulmonary artery patency. Due to the potential for pulmonary hypertension post-operatively, she was left with a 3 mm VSD fenestration; she was unstable when attempting to come off bypass and the fenestration was enlarged to 6 mm.
In the immediate post-operative period, there was no obstruction across the RVOT and PVS was alleviated. However, within the next 3 months, PVS was observed in all veins. She continued to require frequent angioplasty and stenting of her pulmonary veins every 1–2 months . She did well for a period with minimal complications including gastrostomy tube dependence due to oral aversion and mild developmental delay. At 16 and then 17 months of life respectively, she developed a left and then a middle cerebral embolic stroke post-interventionally with subsequent right hemiplegia and seizures which resolved on anti-epileptic medications. She continues to rehabilitate after these events and to regain her motor and neurodevelopmental skills.