A 4-week-old female infant was born to a thirty eight-year-old para eight plus three with four alive Nigerian mother of the Ekoi tribe in Cross River State through non-consanguineous parentage. From birth, she presented with microcephaly, bilateral microphthalmia, bilateral corneal opacity, bilateral radial club-hand, congenital absence of both thumbs, and an absent anus. The pregnancy was uneventful and was carried to term under supervised antenatal care (ANC) that was booked at 12 weeks’ gestation in a private health facility. Two prenatal ultrasound (US) scans at 5 and 8 months’ gestation did not diagnose any anomalies.
The infant’s mother had no history of ingestion of herbal or non-prescription medications and no intake of alcohol or tobacco in any form throughout the duration of the pregnancy. She had no exposure to irradiation, no viral infections, and no rashes during the pregnancy. However, she did have a history of loss of three previous babies who died from unrelated causes.
Due to premature contractions and malaria in the second trimester, the mother was treated with nitrazepam, salbutamol, Calcium Sandoz (calcium lactate gluconate and calcium carbonate combination), and a dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine phosphate combination. Delivery was completed vaginally and the infant cried after several stimulations.
A clinical examination revealed a full-term female infant with a birth weight of 2.5 kg. She was 44 cm long and had an occipitofrontal circumference of 29 cm. Her heart rate was 140 beats per minute and a pansystolic murmur was heard in heart sounds I and II, which was diagnosed as a ventricular septal defect (VSD) on echocardiography.
Our patient had bilateral microphthalmia with bilateral corneal opacity and low-set ears. She had bilateral radial club-hands with radial deviation of both forearms as well as congenital absence of both thumbs . Her anus was absent and a fistulous tract opened at the infantile vulval vestibule . A gastrografin colostogram demonstrated a fistulous connection between the blind rectal pouch and the vestibule . Plain X-rays of both her upper limbs revealed bilateral absence of the radial bones and deformed, shortened ulna bones as well as bony ankyloses of the elbow . Results from a platelet and full blood count were normal.
She had a defunctioning sigmoid colostomy at 2 months followed by a posterior sagittal anorectoplasty after appreciable weight gain at 7 months and subsequent closure of the colostomy. A plan for corrective surgeries for other associated anomalies was being made when she developed hematuria and a right nephroblastoma with lung metastases . As a result, further treatment was declined and our patient died from cardiopulmonary failure due to metastatic nephroblastoma.