A 39-year-old woman was referred to neurological consultation for recurrent seizures. She had no cardiovascular risk factors, no history of alcohol or drug abuse, and no family history.
Her symptoms began during childhood. Episodes were always described as diffuse abdominal pain, hot flashes and nausea for about 30 s followed by loss of consciousness with myoclonic jerks and absence of post-ictal confusion. Similar seizures continued monthly in adulthood. At first, epilepsy was suspected so two inter-ictal electroencephalograms (EEGs) were performed and did not show any anomaly. Her cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also normal and neurologic examination was unremarkable. Consequently, no antiepileptic treatment was introduced in this patient. No specific cause was found to explain the initial transient and diffuse abdominal pain. She was finally diagnosed with depression and a Fluoxetine treatment was introduced.
After many recurrences of seizures over the last past months, she was admitted to the neurophysiology care unit of a university hospital for a sleep-deprived video-EEG. After 12 h of sleep deprivation without any event, the patient suddenly described abdominal pain. A few seconds later, her heart rate progressively dropped and she developed complete heart block without ventricular escape rhythm and asystole for about 30 s. Her EEG recording progressively showed diffuse slow waves traducing a global cerebral dysfunction and suffering followed by diffuse flattening of the tracing . Clinically, the event started with a loss of consciousness, followed by clonic movements of the four limbs with head deviation and ocular revulsion during a few seconds. Then, burst of tonic movements of the four limbs with cyanosis and stertorous breathing were observed during 30 s (Video 1). The episode terminated spontaneously, and there was no obvious post-ictal confusion. The EEG tracing rapidly normalized after the episode.
Subsequently, she was admitted to cardiology intensive care unit. Her baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal axis and PR interval duration (180 ms), narrow QRS complex (90 ms width) and normal repolarization . Orthostatic hypotension test and carotid sinus massage were negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram and cardiac MRI were performed and did not detect any underlying structural heart disease. In particular, the interventricular septum did not show any granulomatous infiltration that could have been suggestive of sarcoidosis. A 3 days cardiac monitoring was performed and did not detect any recurrence of bradycardia or asystole. The patient also had a negative Lyme serologic test (Elisa method).
The diagnosis of vaso-vagal syncope with cardioinhibitory predominant response was made. Because of the recurrent syncopal episodes with severe bradycardia and asystole, it was decided to implant a dual-chamber pacemaker with rate-drop response algorithm. The day after pacemaker implantation, the patient presented with a recurrence of abdominal pain and nausea. An ECG was immediately recorded and ventricular pacing in response to atrioventricular block was noticed. The patient did not present with any loss of consciousness during this episode. After a 2 years of follow-up, the patient remained free of syncope.