Our patient is a 61-year-old nonsmoker female who was referred to us by a neighboring hospital. According to the patient’s medical records, she was admitted to the peripheral hospital 5 years ago for a complaint of progressive nonexertional shortness of breath associated with a wheezy chest and a dry cough. Electrocardiography and a chest radiography revealed unremarkable pathologies. The findings of the pulmonary function test were consistent with bronchial asthma (reduced forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced vital capacity ratio <70% and significant bronchospasm reversibility was demonstrated by an increase in forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 12% and 200 ml postshort-acting bronchodilator administration). As a result, the patient was prescribed asthma medications and sent home.
After 1 year, the patient was referred to our hospital due to the worsening of the same symptoms without any significant improvement in her clinical condition, despite her bronchial asthma treatment regimen. The patient noticed a loss of weight of ~3 kg over the past 2 months, which was not associated with a decreased appetite. She denied any chest pain or discomfort, fever, chills, hemoptysis, difficulty swallowing, or regurgitation of food. Past medical history is unremarkable except for controlled mild hypertension. The patient reported no personal and/or family history of cancer; any acute, repeat, or discontinued medications; any allergies; any chronic or autoinflammatory diseases; any genetic or psychosocial issues; and a free past surgical history.
Upon admission, physical assessment revealed a mildly tachypneic patient with diffuse bilateral wheezing and expiratory stridor. Cardiac and abdominal examinations were noncontributory. Vital signs, electrocardiography, and laboratory evaluation, including a complete blood count and arterial blood gases, were normal. An radiography of the chest revealed a narrowing of the trachea about 2–3 cm above the carina . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed a mass lesion in the lumen of the distal trachea . A bronchoscopy was done, and a biopsy was obtained and sent for pathologic evaluation. Histopathologic examination revealed endobronchial lining with subepithelial tumor infiltrate composed of nests of uniform bland cells with central nuclei and moderate granular cytoplasm , cords and trabeculae of uniform bland cells with central nuclei and moderate granular cytoplasm , and positivity for neuron-specific enolase and pan-CK immunostains . A positron emission tomography (PET) scan was done and showed no evidence of a metabolically active malignant lesion elsewhere. Considering all of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a primary tracheal carcinoid tumor, which was misdiagnosed and treated as bronchial asthma. Consequently, she underwent resection of the tracheal tumor with anastomosis. The procedure was performed by a consultant in cardiothoracic surgery at a private hospital. The patient then received 30 cycles of radiotherapy, with complete recovery of her symptoms. The patient was followed for 3 years, with CT scans and bronchoscopies every 6 months, and all tests revealed no tumor recurrence at the site of resection and a patent airway with normal mucosa. There were no readmissions to the hospital due to any respiratory or other complaints, and no other adverse events occurred.