A 5-year-old boy comes to the emergency room of our hospital a week after trauma to his right leg during kindergarten activities, falling with his leg turned backward. Immediately after the trauma, he was taken to the hospital closest to his home, where an X-ray of the entire femur was performed. Despite the clear X-ray findings , the patient was discharged with the diagnosis of contusion of the thigh and with the therapy of functional rest and analgesics, when needed.
Due to the persistence of the symptoms, the patient after a week was taken to the emergency room of our hospital, where he presented the right lower limb internally rotated and shortened. An X-ray was then repeated confirming the diagnosis of hip dislocation .
The child was immediately taken to the operating room where sedation and reduction were planned. Once the maximum sedation was reached, we proceeded to the closed reduction of the dislocation with the leg in cautious flexion, light and continuous traction for about 5 min and external rotation, confirmed by the fluoroscopic image obtained in the operating room.
The child remained under observation for 3 days in the pediatric department, the time necessary to perform a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate the state of the femoral head and to immobilize the hip joint with a pelvic-podalic cast .
1 month after the reduction, a follow-up visit with X-ray was performed. The cast was removed and the child clinically moved the hip well, slightly painful at the highest degrees of motion and a slight limp remained.
A new clinical check-up was performed after 3 months, where this time the child presents full load and complete ROM, he has also resumed his sporting activity without limitations.
Six months after the reduction, a new visit was made, this time with MRI of the hip. Clinically, the child still had no pain; the right hip was perfectly comparable to the left hip. In the MRI, the femoral head appeared normal, with no signs of avascular necrosis (AVN).
We decided to perform furthers checkup 1 year and 5 years after the trauma, again with additional MRIs, to exclude definitively a long-term necrosis and to control the clinical function of the involved hip. Also at those check-ups, the child presented no symptoms, the legs hadn’t no discrepancy in terms of length, active and passive ROM and weight bearing, as well as the MRIs were similar to the previous .