A 43-year-old male visited the Department of Neurology, First Hospital of Xi’an in March 2011 and complained of sudden loss of movement in his left extremities accompanied with the symptoms of facial numbness and hearing impairment on the left, as well as dysarthria, cough, and vertigo. Neurological examination revealed left facial hypoalgesia, mild dysarthria, weak uplift of the left soft palate, and a slow gag reflex. Left upper limb hemiparesis with grade V− power and left lower limb with grade IV power along with left unilateral hypoalgesia were noted. Babinski and Chaddock signs were positive on the left side. Diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI) revealed a region of hyperintensity in the left dorsolateral medulla . MR angiography showed a local blood flow disappearance from the left vertebral artery as well as the distortion of the basilar artery. CT angiography showed that the left vertebral artery became slender in the cervical part . The patient’s left hemiparesis slightly improved two weeks after antiplatelet therapy, but his left facial hypoalgesia and thermoanesthesia persisted. The patient suffered from non-controlled hypertension for three years, and had a drinking history of two years and smoking of one year. No history of diabetes, infections, surgeries or drug hypersensitivity was noted.
One month after the stroke, the patient started to complain of dryness, foreign body sensation and blurred vision in his left eye. Three days later, corneal epithelial keratopathy occurred. The patient’s best-corrected visual acuity was 0.06 in the left eye and 1.0 in the right eye. An anterior segment slit-lamp examination showed conjunctival hyperemia and an epithelial defect (4 × 4 mm2) in the center of the cornea with mild stromal edema and entocorneal fold . Moreover, there was loss of corneal sensitivity in the left eye (tested by a gentle touch of the ocular surface with a wisp of cotton followed by observation of the blink reflex or by comparing the sensation with the other eye). No bacterial, viral or fungal growth was found in a culture of corneal scrapings. Due to the ineffectiveness of the antibiotic ointment (Levofloxacin Eye Gel, 3 day treatment) and nutrition therapy (Deproteinated Calf Serum Eye Gel, 3 day treatment), corneal debridement and amniotic membrane grafting (dry, stored, commercial amniotic membrane by JiXi RuiJi BioTechnology Co., Ltd) were performed in the left eye. During hospitalization, the weakness in the patient’s left extremities completely recovered and corneal epithelium healed, but facial hypalgesia was persistent. However, two weeks after discharge, corneal epithelial exfoliation recurred and became more severe. The second corneal debridement and amniotic membrane grafting were subsequently performed in the left eye alongside palliative supporting therapy.
At post-operative month 6, laser confocal microscopy examination showed that the epithelial cells of the cornea were of irregular shape with no innervation observed in the Bowman’s layer of cornea . Scar tissue and neovascularization was present in the superficial corneal stroma. The morphology of endothelial cells was normal. Twelve months post-operative outcome showed that the boundary of the corneal epithelial cells was clearly recovering ; however, nerve fibers were not found in the Bowman’s layer of cornea . At post-operative month 24, nerve fibers and scar tissue were present in the Bowman’s layer of cornea . Moreover, the eyesight of the left eye improved to 0.3. The corneal sensation of the left eye recovered to 70%.