We present the case of a 40-year-old male patient with a history of pulmonary tuberculosis in 2001, which was treated at a regional hospital with a four-drug antitubercular therapy for 6 months, resulting in complete remission. It's worth noting that the patient had a family history of tuberculosis and a history of consuming raw milk; Furthermore, there is no history of contact with animals, nor any previous contamination by hydatid cyst of the liver or any other location. This patient initially sought consultation due to a 10-month-long lumbosciatic pain that was unresponsive to medical treatment and well-conducted rehabilitation. The patient's examination revealed paroxysmal left sciatica in the L5-S1 region. The spine was flexible, with a Schober's index of +4 cm and a fingertip-to-floor distance of 1 cm. There was no tenderness upon palpation of the spinous processes, negative evidence of fracture, and a negative Lasègue and Leri signs. The hip, knee, and ankle joints showed full mobility, without local signs of inflammation.
The patient had consulted on multiple occasions, and the consistently given diagnosis was lumbosciatica, treated in the same manner with painkillers, anti-inflammatories, and rehabilitation. Our approach included further radiological exploration through an MRI of the lumbar spine. During the MRI, an incidental finding of a hydatid cyst on the posterior aspect of the thigh was made. Subsequently, an MRI of the thigh was performed confirming the diagnosis and providing a lesion map. The identified lesion was a well-defined cystic formation located on the medial aspect of the biceps femoris muscle, measuring 16 cm along its longest axis and 5 cm in the transverse plane. The cyst wall appeared thin and did not enhance after contrast injection.
An ultrasound of the posterior aspect of the thigh was subsequently performed, showing an intramuscular formation with a well-defined wall containing rounded fluid-filled structures resembling daughter cysts of a hydatid cyst (.a.b).
This localization in close proximity to the sciatic nerve led to nerve irritation, which was the cause of the symptoms resembling lumbosciatica. The irritation of the sciatic nerve explained the atypical clinical presentation. Consequently, we proceeded with a surgical resection of the entire cyst.
Preoperatively, a variety of biological tests were conducted, ruling out any concurrent infection. It is noteworthy that the complete blood count (CBC) did not show eosinophilia, with an eosinophil concentration of 430 cells per mm3. We proceeded then with a surgical resection of the cyst. The patient underwent surgery in a prone position. A posterior approach to the thigh was performed, and passage through the intermuscular septum between the biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles allowed exposure of the cyst and identification of the sciatic nerve (.a). The initial step involved neurolysis of the sciatic nerve and its release from the medial adhesions with the cyst, which was intimately related to the sciatic nerve over a length of at least 10 cm.
We found that the cyst was developed at the expense of the semimembranosus muscle, and its excision necessitated sacrificing the tendon of the semimembranosus muscle, along with a portion of muscle attached to the cyst to prevent its rupture and the spread of vesicles (.b). Exploration of the cystic cavity after resection revealed daughter cysts resembling the ultrasound appearance described preoperatively (.c). The resected specimen was sent for histopathological examination which confirmed the diagnosis (.c). Thorough irrigation with hypertonic saline solution was performed, and the patient was postoperatively prescribed Albendazole at a dose of 800 mg per day for a period of 1 month.
The patient's progress was marked by the timely healing of the surgical incision and the alleviation of sciatic pain. A three-month rehabilitation program, including muscle strengthening was prescribed. At the latest follow-up, eight months post-surgery, the patient reported complete resolution of pain and a successful return to work without difficulties.