A 68-year-old 95 kg (209 pounds) and 184 cm (6 feet) male with a body mass index (BMI) of 28.1 kg/m2 was scheduled for high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) treatment to treat essential tremor (a nervous system condition that causes involuntary and rhythmic shaking).
The patient had been fasting before the procedure. Before the HIFU treatment commenced, the patient received oral acetaminophen, oral pantoprazole, oral etoricoxib, intravenous betamethasone, and intravenous ondansetron as premedication. The procedure is performed under magnetic resonance imaging and occurs in the radiology department. It is done in cooperation with neurosurgeons, radiologists, neurologists, and HIFU nurses. The patient received standard monitoring, including pulse oximetry and telemetry. Local infiltration anesthesia with ropivacaine 5 mg/ml 10 ml and lidocaine cum adrenaline 10 mg/ml 10 ml was administered to spots on the scalp, where a custom frame was fitted in order to keep the patient’s head still during the procedure. Additional local infiltration of 15 ml lidocaine 10 mg/ml was added later. No sedation is given during the procedure as the neurologist examines the patient and the treatment response.
The HIFU treatment was given as planned. After the treatment, the subject was supposed to be given 10 mg of intravenous dexamethasone (5 mg/ml, 2 ml vial). However, the wrong vial was chosen, and the subject received one vial (2 ml) of intravenous dexmedetomidine (100 mcg/ml) instead. Thus, the subject received a 200 mcg bolus of undiluted intravenous dexmedetomidine. The error was unrecognized at this point.
A few minutes after the end of treatment, the subject suddenly fell asleep. He was drowsy but could be easily woken up. Shortly, his consciousness began to decrease further. The subject had difficulties keeping his eyes open, and his speech began to slur. The neurologist and neurosurgeon attended to examine the patient. The patient’s vital functions remained steady (RR 127/72 mmHg, pulse rate 59/min, SpO2 97%), but his consciousness decreased further. After a short while, the subject did not respond to any stimuli. His pupils were symmetrical and constricted. He was breathing spontaneously, but apnea periods lasting 10–20 s were noticed.
The subject was transferred to the emergency department for further examination. Upon arrival in the emergency department, blood glucose was 10.7 mmol/l (192.6 mg/dL), the temperature was 35.3 °C (95.54 F), and there was a sinus rhythm in the ECG. Because medication error was still not noticed at this point, the possibility of cerebral hemorrhage was suspected, and the subject received a full stroke protocol, including head computed tomography (CT), which was revealed to be normal. Approximately 60 min after dexmedetomidine administration, it was discovered that the patient had accidentally received dexmedetomidine instead of dexamethasone. Since the patient was hemodynamically stable, his respiratory parameters, including arterial blood gas analysis, were normal, and his GCS began to increase slowly; a “watchful waiting” approach was chosen based on a short (2.0-2.5 h) half-life of dexmedetomidine . The situation was resolved by itself during the observation. After five hours, the patient had regained full consciousness. He had an uneventful recovery and was discharged the next day. The vital parameters of the patient are presented in Table .