A 63 year old female patient was referred with a four day history of several, severely pruritic, erythematous blisters and crusts on her extremities (arms and thighs) . Skin biopsies for hematoxylin and eosin (H & E), as well as for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were performed . In addition, direct immunofluorescence (DIF) and indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) with 0.1 M sodium chloride salt split skin were performed. In brief, DIF was performed utilizing skin cryosections, incubated with multiple fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated secondary antibodies. The secondary antibodies were of rabbit origin, and included: a) anti-human IgG (γ chain), b) anti-human IgA (α chains), c) anti-human IgM (μ-chain), d) anti-human fibrinogen, and e) anti-human albumin (all used at 1:20 to 1:40 dilutions and obtained from Dako (Carpinteria, California, USA). We also utilized secondary antibodies of goat origin, including: a) anti-human IgE antiserum (Vector Laboratories, Bridgeport, New Jersey, USA) and b) anti-human C1q (Southern Biotech, Birmingham, Alabama, USA). Finally, monoclonal anti-mouse collagen IV (CIV) from Invitrogen(Carlsbad, California, USA) with a goat anti-mouse Texas red conjugated secondary antibody was utilized to highlight the basement membrane zone (BMZ). The slides were then counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Dapi) (Pierce, Rockford, Illinois, USA) washed, coverslipped, and dried overnight at 4°C. IHC staining using anti human CD45 was performed using a Dako automatized dual endogenous flex system, following Dako technical instructions.
In , we highlight our most significant H & E, PAS, DIF and IHC results, including localization of the BMZ autoantibodies utilizing the IIF sodium chloride split skin technique. The DIF results in the basement membrane zone of the skin (BMZ) were as follows: IgG, linear, ++; IgE, granular, ++; C3, linear, ++; fibrinogen, linear, ++; Complement/C1q, linear, +/-; albumin, linear, +/-; Fibrinogen, linear, ++, and collagen IV, linear, ++. Within the dermis, we observed IgE, fibrinogen and C3 perineural and sweat gland reactivity (++). Indirect immunofluorescence(IIF) performed on 1M NaCl salt split skin displayed the following results: IgG (+, linear, blister roof); IgA (+, linear, blister roof); IgM (+, linear, blister roof); IgE (+, dermal perivascular and perineural); Complement/C1q(+, linear, blister roof); Complement/C3 (+, linear, blister roof); Albumin(+, linear, blister roof); and Fibrinogen (+, linear, blister roof).
Examination of the H&E tissue sections demonstrated a subepidermal, tense blister, with partial re-epithelialization of the blister floor. No impetiginization of the epidermis was seen. Within the blister lumen, numerous neutrophils were present, with occasional eosinophils and lymphocytes also noted. Dermal papillary festoons were not observed . Within the dermis, a mild, superficial, perivascular and periadnexal infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes and occasional eosinophils was identified. Neutrophils were rare. Mild perivascular leukocytoclastic debris was present, but no frank vasculitis was appreciated. A PAS special stain displayed positivity at the basement membrane zone (BMZ), as well as around some dermal blood vessels, nerves and eccrine sweat glands . The PAS special stain revealed no fungal organisms.