A 65-year old male patient was referred to our hospital with several space-occupying lesions in inferior lobe of right lung and enlarged lymph nodes in mediastinum and bilateral hilum detected occasionally by chest computed tomography (CT) scanning during the annual health examination in April 2015 . Sequential brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a space-occupying lesion in left parietal lobe . One of the lesions in right lung obtained by percutaneous lung biopsy (PNLB) was proved to be adenocarcinoma . Subsequent drive gene analysis with the method of amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) using a collected tissue sample suggested a deletion of EGFR exon 19 without T790 M mutation. Hence, a clinical diagnosis was made as adenocarcinoma in inferior lobe of right lung, in association with multiple lesions among bilateral lungs, enlargement of lymph nodes in mediastinum and bilateral hilum, and solitary lesion in left parietal lobe of brain suggesting metastasis . The patient was treated with two cycles of chemotherapy (pemetrexed plus cisplatin) as first-line therapy until June 2015, due to the delayed report of drive gene analysis. After the finish of chemotherapy, repeating chest CT scan revealed an increased lump in inferior lobe of right lung, as well as lymph nodes in mediastinum and bilateral hilum . Brain MRI in the same week showed a stable node . We therefore, evaluated the efficacy of the first-line chemotherapy as progressive disease (PD) according to response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST version 1.1). Icotinib was then administrated as the second-line treatment in June 2015. Subsequent CT scans, as expected, revealed a partial response (PR) for lesions in lung and a complete response (CR) in brain in the following 8months . In February 2016, regular chest CT scanning showed a secondary enlargement of neoplasm in primary location of right lung . Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technique using the patient’s plasma sample suggested an acquired T790 M mutation by frequency of 4% accompanied with the deletion of EGFR exon 19 by 7% (p.745–750 del. c.2235_2249 del GGAATTAAGAGAAGC. Figure a-b). The third-generation TKI of AZD9291, therefore, was prescribed as the third-line therapy in March 2016. After a ten-months duration of response , significant PD of lump in inferior lobe of right lung with atelectasis was detected again by chest CT scanning in January 2017 , while without any lesions in brain . Hence, two cycles of cytotoxic drug with docetaxel were administrated as the fourth-line management then. However, the re-enlargement of primary neoplasm in lung and multiply emerging lesions in brain signified a PD again in March 2017 , with symptoms of cough and hemoptysis aggravated seriously. Repeating NGS with plasma was developed on March 10th 2017. It was detected that the deletion of EGFR exon 19 (p745–750 del) with frequency by 78.3% and T790 M mutation by 0.2%, with concurring Leu792H mutation by 0.2%, rather than C797S mutation . In addition to those, other drive genes in the NGS panel including anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), ROS proto-oncogene 1 (ROS1), V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS), neuroblastoma RAS viral oncogene homolog (NRAS), RET proto-oncogene (RET), V-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homologB1 (BRAF), receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (ERBB2), RAC-alpha serine/threonine-protein kinase (AKT1), discoidin domain receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (DDR2), fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), MNNG HOS transforming gene (MET), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), phosphatidylinosito-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PIK3CA), and mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MAP2K1) were detected as wild type. In view of the primary resistance to chemotherapy, lack of potentially effective selection, and high frequency of EGFR exon 19 mutation, repeating icotinib was attempted as salvage treatment. After 2 months treatment, multiply lesions in brain were dramatically disappeared according to brain MRI , as well as symptoms of cough and hemoptysis relieved apparently. The repeating icotinib was administrated till November 30th 2017 , on which a sudden syncope happened. An emergency brain MRI suggested recurrence of tumors, with an enlarged lesion in left parietal lobe surrounded by encephaledema severely. Coinstantaneous chest CT scanning suggested a PD of the target lesion in right lung . After symptomatic treatment of dehydration with mannitol, whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) was developed as palliative management. PNLB was operated again on December 18th 2017, result of which reconfirm adenocarcinoma in lung , accompanied with the deletion of EGFR exon 19 (p.745–750 del) with frequency by 87.5% and T790 M mutation by 9.4%, without Leu792H mutation any more obtained from plasma or tissue . Sixth-line treatment of repeating AZD9291 was restarted on January 6th 2018 due to the increased frequency of T790 M mutation. One month later on February 5th 2018, repeating pictures of chest CT showed a response of lump in right lung, with partial remission of lesions in brain as MRI presented . The variation of tumor markers including carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA, normal range, 0–0.5 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 72–4 (CA72–4, normal range, 0–6.9 U/mL) are showed in Fig. for each visit from the initial treatment to the present. In addition, variations of tumor size during the whole treatment according to RECIST version 1.1 were listed in Table . The patient feels good without any symptoms and still receives AZD9291 treatment now. The overall survival has been 36 months and still in the extension.