An 81-year-old woman presented with left eye blurred vision and persistent corneal edema despite Sodium Chloride 5% (Bausch & Lomb Americas Inc., NJ, USA) treatment for 7 months following cataract surgery 1 year prior. Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/30 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left, and her intraocular pressure (IOP) measured with applanation tonometry was 16 mm Hg bilaterally. The anterior segment examination of the left eye revealed a well-centered intraocular lens with corneal stromal edema, confluent central guttata, and endothelial folds. The pachymetry measurement of the edematous central corneal thickness was 762 μm. The examination of the right eye was unremarkable, but endothelial cell counts by specular microscopy was 1574/mm2 with increased polymegathism and pleomorphism, whereas it was not possible to obtain measurements in the left eye. She therefore underwent DMEK in her left eye for Fuchs endothelial dystrophy. The patient’s cornea was first stripped of the 8-mm host Descemet membrane (DM), followed by an inferior peripheral iridotomy (PI) before graft insertion. Upon removal of viscoelastic, vitreous prolapse was observed around the intraocular lens (IOL), indicating that the patient had previously undergone a complicated cataract procedure. The stripped donor tissue was preloaded before being injected into the eye. In the process of shallowing the anterior chamber to unfold the graft, additional vitreous prolapsed. The vitreous was removed using a Weck-cell vitrectomy. Once the graft was unfolded and appropriately centered, 20% sulfur hexafluoride gas was placed under the donor graft for tamponade, and a final 80% fill was left at the end of surgery, along with a patent inferior PI. On the first postoperative day, the left eye of the patient demonstrated a BCVA of 20/800 and an elevated IOP of 39 mm Hg, but no pupillary block. Patient was started on brinzolamide and brimonidine tartrate ( Simbrinza, ALCON, INC., Texas, USA) three times per day, and her IOP decreased to 14 mm Hg the next day, with a BCVA of 20/125.
Her early postoperative course was unremarkable. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging revealed that the graft was firmly attached. One month following DMEK surgery, specular microscopy revealed an endothelial cell density of 2,653/mm2. At the 2-month follow-up visit, she was on prednisolone acetate 1% three times daily; her BCVA improved to 20/40 with an IOP of 16 mmHg, and there was no evidence of intraocular inflammation. Donor corneal rim cultures were negative. At the 3-month follow-up, her vision remained unchanged, but an unexpected 1 mm dense paracentral interface opacity was observed at 7 o’clock . OCT showed the nodule had a uniform shape and a discrete increase in interface hyperreflectivity, which suggests the presence of epithelial ingrowth . The eye was first treated medically with 1% prednisolone acetate four times a day, given that the epithelial ingrowth lesion was small, and the patient did not have a significant vision disturbance. At the 4.5-month follow-up visit (1.5 months after epithelial ingrowth), her left eye vision was 20/30, with the same size of interface epithelial lesion. The patient was counseled about possible epithelial advancement and decreased vision. After a discussion of the options of observation versus intervention, consent was obtained to proceed with laser treatment. A YAG laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Germany) of 39 pulses at 0.9 mJ was applied to remove the opacity. The offset control on the YAG laser was set to zero, and the laser was aimed at the graft-host interface. A slightly visible bubble appeared immediately with shots, and the interface opacity was instantly and clearly visible removed upon laser application. By targeting the central island of epithelial cells and the lesion edge with low energy pulses, laser energy was prevented from reaching adjacent endothelial cells to avoid collateral damage. Prednisolone acetate was tapered accordingly. At the 1-month follow-up visit after laser treatment, the dense area of opacification had completely resolved with a clear interface. Four months post-laser treatment, the cornea was clear without reoccurrence . Her BCVA was 20/30, with a corneal thickness of 510 mm.