A 57-year-old male presented at our institution in March 2019. In 2007, after a motorcycle accident, he had sustained a right articular distal tibia and fibular fractures, treated at another institute by open reduction and internal plate and screws fixation. After 7 months, nonunion was observed. Internal fixation devices were removed, and the nonunion was treated with intramedullary nailing fixation. After 2 months, infection occurred. The nail was removed, and antibiotic therapy was prescribed for several months until complete recovery.
When the patient came to our attention, he reported severe pain, loss of function, and marked limitation of ambulation. On physical examination, the right ankle presented a diffuse tenderness, with severe restriction in joint motion.
Standard radiographic examinations, including anteroposterior and lateral weight-bearing views of the ankle, showed severe posttraumatic ankle joint arthritis .
Blood laboratory analyses (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and white blood cells count) and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed no signs of infection.
The patient subjectively rated his foot and ankle pain using a 10-cm visual analog scale , the short-form 36-item health survey , and the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle-hindfoot scale .
After considering the patient’s expectations in terms of functional outcome, a complete customization process for TAA was proposed, also considering that the dimensions of the large size of the available TAA designs were found smaller than those necessary for this ankle joint.
For this purpose, to reconstruct the patient-specific ankle morphology in three dimensions, the lower limb from mid tibia to the whole foot was scanned via CT .
The digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM) images obtained from the CT scan were processed (Mimics, Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) to obtain separate three-dimensional (3D) models of the tibia, fibula, talus, and calcaneus bones by semiautomatic segmentation of the cortical contours starting from reference Hounsfield unit values.
The three sizes of the metal components of the established BOX® ankle prosthesis (MatOrtho, UK) were parameterized using Creo (PTC, MA). This entails identifying the major 3D dimensions and associating these with a current value to be modified according to the dimensions of the joint to be replaced. This would guarantee a final precise prosthesis-to-bone matching by adjusting these parameters according to the patient-specific anatomy. However, much care was taken for this process not to reshape any of the critical curves associated to the biomechanical concepts behind the design of this prosthesis, i.e., the perfect coupling between the curvatures of the tibial and talar components and the geometry of the isometric ligaments. In particular, this resulted also in the maintenance of the original meniscal inserts .
Using GeoMagic Control (3D Systems, SC), virtual in silico, i.e., at the computer, implantation was performed. This started by selecting the most suitable size for each metal component and adjusting to this size the parameters as mentioned above. The goal was to achieve the best possible match between the component and the bone, compatible with overall alignments and also according to surgical and clinical experience. A final compromise solution was found for this preoperative planning by collaboration between the surgeons’ supervision and the engineers. Eventually, an enlargement of the large talar component and a lengthening and posterior narrowing of the large tibial component were performed.
Polygon manipulation (GeoMagic) was used to obtain the corresponding bone resections as well as the corresponding PSI, designed to match exactly the frontal bone of the ankle and embed all necessary guides for bone preparation, including the locations of Kirschner wires and levels of bone cuts and drills. The obtained models of the joint bones, of the custom-based prosthesis components, and of the PSI guides were printed in ABS by state-of-the-art additive manufacturing for a final check. Once the whole planning procedure was approved, the models were sent to manufacturing: the metal prosthesis components using cobalt-chromium-molybdenum powders, and the PSI using biocompatible polyamide (PA12). Before manufacturing, a porous coating interface was added to the models of the metal components for a 3D monolithic ingrowth surface, i.e., the Tri-Por® and Co-Por® technologies (AdlerOrtho, Milan); after manufacturing, usual polishing and hydroxyapatite coating were also performed .
The patient was taken to the operating room and placed in a supine position. The surgical procedure was performed with the patient under general anesthesia and using a pneumatic thigh tourniquet. The leg was sterilized up to the knee. An 8-cm anteromedial skin incision over the previous scar was performed. The reactive fibrous tissue was removed carefully to avoid bony structures resection. The cutting guides were designed to match exactly the front of the articulation in neutral position, including the osteophytes, and therefore, these were not removed during the joint surgical exposure.
The first cutting guide was then placed over the distal tibia front surface , also coming into contact with the top of the talus. Once the guide was inserted in the proper location, three Kirschner wires were placed into the dedicated holes to temporarily hold the guide into the right position. Using the oscillating bone saw, talar and tibial resections were performed .
The tibial surfaces preparation was completed by drilling the two 4.5-mm-diameter holes into the guide up to the depth stop. Bone cut section and fragments were removed using a chisel. Care was taken to avoid fragments in the posterior aspect, because these may be retained by the posterior periosteum.
A custom-made spacer was introduced to verify whether the total amount of resected bone was appropriate, i.e., this matches the aggregated thickness of the three implant components, according to the preoperative plan .
The foot was then placed into plantar flexion for better exposing of the talar dome. A second talar guide was inserted in the best fit location in front and above the horizontal talar cut; the two peg holes were drilled through the drill guide, and talus bone preparation was completed with the posterior chamfer cut using the oscillating bone saw and with the two holes to host the pegs of the talar component.
The cutting guide was removed and the bone section excised. Using the talar impactor, the talar final component was inserted to engage the pegs with the drilled holes. Then, the final tibial component was inserted using the tibial impactor and a spacer to avoid contact between the two superfinished metal components. The profile spacer also acted to keep the tibial component hard up against the cut bone surface during insertion, thus avoiding damage to the two holes. Trials of the meniscal bearing were performed in between the two metal components, and the final 6-mm-thick one was inserted exactly as planned .
An incomplete fracture occurred at the medial malleolus during surgery, so a percutaneous screw was placed to allow early mobilization without fracture risk.
The tourniquet was released, and careful cauterization of the vessels was carried out. Suture of the anatomical planes was performed.
Postoperative X-rays were taken .
After surgery, a non-weight-bearing plaster cast was applied below the knee. After 3 weeks, the plaster cast was removed, and a non-weight-bearing walker boot was applied for another 3 weeks. During this period, the patient underwent functional rehabilitation, including stretching exercises, water exercises, and electrical muscle stimulation. Complete and free weight-bearing was permitted 2 months after surgery.
The design, manufacturing, and implantation procedures were completed successfully and consistently; final dimensions and location for the implant corresponded to the preoperative planning.
Immediate post-op X-rays showed good implant positioning and alignment.
The intervention positively impacted on quality of life. After 4 months, the patient’s clinical abilities were restored without pain. In particular, the visual analog scale pain score improved from a preoperative score of 6.5 to 2; the short-form 36-item health survey physical component and mental component scores improved from 33.4 and 34, to 52.9 and 54 points, respectively; the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score increased from 32 to 81 points. At this follow-up, radiographs showed the prosthesis to be stable with no signs of radiolucency around the implant. Clinically, maximum dorsiflexion and plantar flexion were measured with a goniometer and showed a range of motion of 12° and 8°, respectively.
Four months after surgery, gait analysis with state-of-the-art instruments and protocols was also performed. The kinematics and kinetics of the major joints of both lower limbs were obtained using an eight-camera stereophotogrammetric system (Vicon Motion Systems, Oxford, UK) and two force plates (Kistler, Winterthur, Switzerland), using an established protocol . A quasi-physiological pattern of rotation was observed at the replaced ankle, with only limited plantar flexion at push-off, i.e., in between stance and swing phases of gait, and before landing of the foot. This, combined with normal patterns of the three components of the ground-reaction force, resulted in very limited deficits in joint moment at the ankle complex. Muscle activation timing was found within the normality, with the exception of the gastrocnemius, where a little prolonged activity, coupled with tibialis anterior, was observed.