A 72-year-old man presented with cough. He was referred to our hospital because of an abnormal shadow found on a chest x-ray. His medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hyperlipidemia. Chest computed tomography revealed a 12-mm solid nodule in the left lower pulmonary lobe without notable mediastinal lymph node enlargement . 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed a nodule in the left lower lobe with an increased uptake (maximum standardized uptake value of 5.3). Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the head was negative for metastasis. A primary lung cancer (cT1bN0M0-stageIA2) was suspected; and the patient underwent bronchoscopy, which did not produce a definitive diagnosis. Presurgical evaluation of cardiac function revealed an electrocardiographic abnormality. Coronary angiography showed moderate stenosis of the left anterior descending artery, but lobectomy was judged possible. Laboratory testing found a white blood cell count of 2600/μL with 16% neutrophils; hemoglobin, 11.5 g/dL; and platelet count, 155,000/μL; along with giant platelets in a blood smear, which suggested a hematologic disease. A bone marrow biopsy led to a diagnosis of MDS. The bone marrow biopsy revealed normocellular with 3.2% blasts. The chromosome study showed a 46,XY,+1,der(1;7)(q10;p10). The patient’s bleeding time, prothrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin time were in the normal range. Platelet dysfunction was a concern because of the giant platelets, and platelet aggregation was tested by the agonists ristocetin, epinephrine, adenosine diphosphate (ADP), and collagen before surgery. Ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation was normal, but epinephrine-, ADP-, and collagen-induced platelet aggregation was severely decreased . We ordered platelet preparations for possible intraoperative bleeding. The patient underwent left lower lobectomy and subsequent lymph node sampling by video-assisted thoracoscopy. Intraoperative examination of the frozen section revealed non-small cell lung cancer. The surgery initially was performed without bleeding or other complications; however, just before the chest was closed, oozing from the intercostal muscles was observed, and hemostasis by electrocoagulation could not be obtained. The patient received 20 units of platelet concentrates, and bleeding from the intercostal muscles was controlled thereafter. On histopathology, tumor cells with a very big nucleus were forming a fuller nest and proliferating. Immunostaining of the tumor cells was positive for p40 and CK5/6, but negative for napsin A and TTF-1. The pathological diagnosis of the tumor was poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and without bleeding complications. He was discharged on postoperative day 10. Two years after surgery, the patient is alive without any signs of lung cancer recurrence.