A 50-year-old Caucasian woman (69 kg; 1.66 m, and body mass index 25), a never-smoker, nondiabetic, who consumed ≤5 alcoholic drinks per week presented via a Long-COVID Clinic referral to an integrative-medicine, outpatient clinic–based acupuncturist. The patient had fatigue, anosmia, ageusia, anxiety, dyspnea on exertion, chest pressure, dry cough, brain fog, and palpitations in August of 2021, 35 weeks post-SARS-CoV-2 positivity/COVID-19 illness . She reported having fatigue for 1 month before this test; however, her initial SARS-CoV-2 nasal swab was negative (in November of 2020).
Post-COVID-19 to presentation, she became fatigued from performing everyday tasks (e.g., cooking). Pre-COVID-19, she had exercised regularly without experiencing any issue (performing Zumba®). Upon attempting returning to this exercise 16 weeks-post-COVID, she had to stop due to dyspnea, and reported that she “felt like [she] was going to have a heart attack.” Motivated to overcome fatigue, she would walk for 2-minute intervals to tolerance, later attempting brief periods of yard work.
Pre-COVID-19, the patient had long-standing anxiety that managed successfully with citalopram and buspirone; however, her anxiety became exacerbated post-COVID-19. Pre-COVID, she also had occasional temporal headaches and had undergone an appendectomy that was not recent. Her family history was significant for a cerebrovascular accident and aortic aneurysm (father), and arthritis and colonic polyps (mother). Pre-COVID-19 to current, she took an oral estrogen–progestin contraceptive, and an over-the-counter (OTC) multivitamin and (OTC) calcium/vitamin D.
This patient's COVID-19 course involved no acute/major complications, with a 2-week home-quarantine, and no hospitalization, no supplemental oxygen, and no antiviral/antibiotic treatments. She received a 2-dose COVID-19 mRNA vaccination (Moderna, Inc., USA) 6/10 weeks post-COVID-19, which did not change her PCS symptoms.
This patient provided written informed consent for publication of this case report.
This case report was deemed Not Human Subjects Research by the University Hospitals institutional review board. The authors obtained written consent from this patient for publication about her case.
The patient's primary care internal-medicine specialist evaluated her persistent COVID-19 symptoms An echocardiogram showed no acute findings; a normal ejection fraction (55%–60%); and a small, inconsequential patent foramen ovale. Her thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) was serially elevated (6.55 and 4.10 mU/L) with reflex free thyroxine (fT4) borderline-low (1.00 and 0.96 ng/dL). Her complete blood count, urinalysis, and comprehensive metabolic panel were largely normal (mild hypoglycemia at 70 mg/dL). Her electrocardiogram, chest radiograph, and coronary calcium scan results were normal.
Primary care referred her to a cardiologist, whose examination revealed no abnormalities. Her blood pressure was 121/73 with a resting heart rate (HR) of 58 beats-per-minute (bpm). Her brain natriuretic peptide (46 pg/mL) and troponin-I (< 0.02 ng/mL) levels were normal and the results of a lipid panel were slightly abnormal (total cholesterol: 224 mg/dL). Her d-dimers were elevated (815 ng/mL; normal: ≤500). The cardiologist recommended self-directed-STPA with as-needed rest.
Primary care later consulted a pulmonologist (via the hospital's Long-COVID Clinic), who evaluated for myocarditis, pulmonary embolism, and reactive airway disease. Her respiratory allergen profiles (ImmunoCAP™ and immunoglobulin E), pulmonary-function tests, and computed tomography chest angiography results were normal. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed normal biventricular size/function without gadolinium enhancement to suggest a prior infarct or infiltrative process. There was no aberration in T1/T2-weighted images to suggest underlying inflammation. A nonspecific, small, circumferential pericardial effusion was seen, without pericardial hyperenhancement . A 6-minute walk test (6MWT) provoked 4/10 dyspnea and 7/10 fatigue over normal-for-age distance. Her overnight pulse oximetry (Virtuox, Inc.) revealed no nocturnal desaturation, indicating no need for supplemental oxygen. The pulmonologist referred her for a physical therapist (PT)–led SPTA exercise program.
The initial Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) impression, based on patient symptoms and tongue/pulse examination was of Qi deficiency of the Heart, Lung, Spleen, and Kidney. The goal was to move Qi and tonify these organs, and weekly treatments were recommended. The patient was treated by 2 TCM–licensed acupuncturists (LAcs), with the second acupuncturing treating the patient during visits 2–7. Acupuncture needles (Seirin,® Weymouth, MA, USA) were 0.20 × 30 mm (for meridian acupoints), 0.16 × 15 mm (for ear points), and 0.18 × 30 mm (for scalp points). Auricular needles were inserted before body needles, with insertion depths varying from 0.1 to 1.0 cun. Thirty-minute needle retention, with De Qi and twisting and lifting techniques were well-tolerated.
Stomach (ST) 36 and Large Intestine (LI) 4 acupoints were needled in combination to clear the body of lingering Heat, as seen by a red-pink tongue, and Dampness, as observed by a soft pulse . These points were also selected along with Lung (LU) 7 to fortify the patient against her Lung and Spleen Deficiencies. Triple Energizer (TE) 5 and Gallbladder (GB) 41 acupoints were needled in combination for strengthening her Wei Qi (immunity), draining her Dampness, and regulating her Yangweimai and Daimai. These points were effectively selected to harmonize defensive and nutrient Qi, move Yin through the channels, smooth Liver Qi, and regulate the Shao Yang.
Exercise testing revealed greater-than-expected HR increase during 1-floor stair-climbing (95 bpm, Polar-H10 Sensor), with a mild, transient decrease in SpO2 (96%). STPA was delegated to a PT-assistant, targeting a HR 119–136 bpm (70%–80% maximum for patient's age) for 30–40 minutes with as-needed rest. Intensity-per-session increased dependent on patient tolerance and HR stability (See ).