We report a 60-year-old female patient presented with an asymptomatic nodular lesion in her left dorsal wrist over the 10 years. The mass had grown gradually from the size of a green pea initially, and no history of trauma was mentioned. The mass slightly weakened the degree of dorsal extension of her left wrist, but did not cause any pain or numbness. Upon local examination, we found that the mass was firm, non-tender, and located on the dorsal side of the left wrist. It measured 5 × 6 × 18 mm. The mass was free from the skin but was attached to the extensor indicis proprius tendon. The range of motion of her wrist was 45° extension to 80° flexion. The results of the laboratory studies were as follows: the blood routine, antistreptolysin O (ASO) level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) level, anti-cyclic peptide containing citrulline (anti-CCP) level, and other immune indices were normal. The levels of biological markers of the tumor were also normal. MRI scans showed a mass in her left dorsal wrist, arising from the extensor indicis proprius tendon, and a partial tear in the left wrist triangular fibrocartilage disc. The lesion shows iso-indensity on T1 image (1a),while it shows hyperintense signal on T1WI with fat suppression(1b,1c) and T2WI with fat suppression(1d).On T2WI with fat suppression(1d), we can see the mass (shows hyperintense signal in the center and iso-indensity in the peripheral) attached to the EIP tendon(shows hypointense signal).The MRI scans were helpful in planning an appropriate surgical approach. The location and extent of involvement of the tumor was further evaluated using MRI. The involvement of the adjacent soft tissues, joints, and tendon sheaths were also evaluated. We recommended a biopsy in order to confirm our diagnosis before proceeding with the treatment. Unfortunately, the patient declined the biopsy. We performed the surgery under brachial plexus block anesthesia. During the surgery , we found that the mass was located exclusively on the surface of the left extensor indicis proprius tendon. Even though the tumor had a capsule, it had partially infiltrated and damaged the tendon. The tendon sheath was impaired. We carefully removed the infiltrated part of the EIP tendon and checked whether the residual tendon could be treated by suturing. Fortunately,the residual EIP tendon could be repaired by direct suturing. Analysis of the frozen sections revealed ganglions associated with synovial cell proliferation, while the histological findings revealed GCTTS,and partially invading the EIP tendon. In addition, the micrograph showed numerous short shuttle-like tumor cells, with sporadic multinuclear giant cells and multiple calcifications in the matrix, and the immumohistochemical staining presented CD68(+), Ki-67(+), S-100(focal+), CK(pan)(−),SMA(−). The patient underwent radical resection of the tumor without radiotherapy and demonstrated adequate functional recovery.Above all,no recurrence was found after 2 years’ follow-up.