A 62-year-old Caucasian male (height 1.65 m, weight 65 kg and American Society of Anesthesiologists score 1) with a right eye retinal detachment was admitted for pars plana vitrectomy under local anesthesia. The past medical history was unremarkable and the physical examination, electrocardiogram and laboratory studies were normal. There was no history of epilepsy or allergy.
Preoperatively, the blood pressure (BP) was 125/80 mmHg, the heart rate (HR) was 80 beats/minute and the arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 99 %. A peripheral venous catheter 20 g was inserted in the left hand and powered by an infusion of normal saline (0.9 %). The patient did not receive any medications before the application of local anesthesia except for tropicamide 0.5 % and cyclopentolate 1 % eye drops instilled in the right eye (one drop every 5 minutes × three times). The periocular skin, eyelids and lashes were cleaned with 10 % povidone iodine and the anesthetic technique was explained to the patient. A retrobulbar anesthesia with the patient’s eye in primary gaze position was given by the surgeon. The anesthetic ropivacaine hydrochloride 7.5 mg/ml was administrated and a 23GA, 38 mm, 1½ inch, blunt-tipped needle (Alcon, Central Texas Medical Equipment and Supplies, USA) was used. The injection was performed in the lower temporal retrobulbar space with 6 ml of ropivacaine.
Before needle withdrawal and completion of anesthetic injection, the patient developed twitching of the face which rapidly progressed to generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The needle was immediately removed. Arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) decreased to 75 %. Chin lift was performed and 100 % oxygen was administrated via face mask, which increased saturation to 99 %. Blood pressure (BP) increased to 140/90 mmHg and heart rate (HR) was 93 beats/minute. Midazolam 2 mg was administrated intravenously by the anesthesiologist about 4 min later and controlled the seizures immediately. After cessation of seizures, left-sided hemiparesis was evident from the asymmetric reaction to painful stimulation and gravity (no visible muscle contraction of the affected side). The neurological examination by specialist a few minutes later was normal. The patient was alert and oriented, could follow commands and no signs of contralateral hemiparesis were detected. Surgery was postponed. Brain computed tomography and electroencephalogram were normal 3 h later. The patient underwent pars plana vitrectomy under general anesthesia 4 days later.