An 89-year-old-male relapsed PB patient, who was first treated for leprosy over 50 years prior with chaulmoogra oil, promin and dapsone (diaminodiphenyl sulfone, DDS), was examined.
In December 2004, he complained of facial numbness and received 600 mg of rifampicin (RFP) once per month and 75 mg of dapsone daily for 6 months on suspicion of leprosy relapse. Facial numbness disappeared after these treatments (MDT for the PB leprosy).
In April 2012, he noticed three skin lesions, annular erythemas, with loss of sensation in the thighs . Slit skin smear tests were negative and skin biopsies revealed a pathology of indeterminate (I) to borderline tuberculoid (BT) leprosy . The serum biochemical and haematologic parameters of the patient were almost within the normal range. His body weight was about 62.0 kg and height was about 148.0 cm.
He received 600 mg of rifampicin once per month and 75 mg of dapsone daily for 12 months at the diagnosis of the second relapse of leprosy. The duration of this treatment was extended from 6 to 12 months to improve the therapeutic effect. Approximately one month after starting MDT treatment, the erythemas disappeared and the loss of sensation improved to a nearly normal level of sansation. At the completion of MDT, 12 months after starting treatment, the sensations at healed sites of erythemas on his both thighs were almost normal. Although the patient was an elder, he could understand the duration and efficacy of MDT.
Before treatment and 6 and 12 months after starting treatment, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated using a BD Vacutainer® CPT Mononuclear Cell Preparation Tube. The Th1/Th2 cytokine profiles (IFN-γ, TNF, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-10) in the supernatant of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from the patient after 96 h of culture were examined using a Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) Human Th1/Th2 Cytokine Kit II. Some mononuclear cells were stimulated with 8 μg/mL Mycobacterium leprae soluble protein (MLS) , and 2.5 μg/mL phytohemagglutinin (PHA, Sigma cat. No. L1668) was used as the standard stimulant. The MLS was obtained as described previously . Briefly, since M. leprae cannot be grown in vitro, M. leprae was isolated from the foot pad of M. leprae-infected nude mice. The M. leprae suspension containing protease inhibitors was mixed with zirconium beads and homogenized. The suspension was centrifuged at 10,000×g for 30 min to remove the cell wall debris, and the supernatant was then centrifuged at 100,000×g, and the resulting supernatant was considered the M. leprae soluble protein (MLS).
Since serum taken from the patient one year before the emergence of the symptoms was available, the CBA Enhanced Sensitivity Flex Set system was applied to detect small amounts of cytokines (IFN-γ, TNF, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, and IL-17A) in the serum just before treatment and one year before the relapse.
‘The BD™ CBA Human Th1/Th2 Cytokine Kit II can be used to quantitatively measure IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, TNF, and IFN-γ protein levels in a single sample. Each capture bead in a BD CBA kit has been conjugated with a specific antibody. The detection reagent provided in the kit is a mixture of phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated antibodies, which provides a fluorescent signal in proportion to the amount of bound analyte. The individual standard curve range for a given cytokine defines the minimum and maximum quantifiable levels (20 pg/mL and 5000 pg/mL)’ . ‘The BD CBA Human Enhanced Sensitivity Flex Set System employs particles with discrete fluorescence intensities to detect soluble analytes at very low concentrations. The working assay range for most analytes in this system is 274 to 200,000 fg/mL’ . In both systems, when the capture beads and detector reagent are incubated with standards or unknown samples containing recognized analytes, sandwich complexes (capture bead + analyte + detection reagent) are formed. The intensity of PE fluorescence of each sandwich complex reveals the concentration of that particular analyte. These complexes can be measured using flow cytometry to identify particles with fluorescence characteristics of both the bead and the detector. After acquiring samples on a flow cytometer, BD FACSCalibur (dual laser), FCAP Array™ software was used to generate results in graphical and tabular format.
The supernatant of 96 h cultures showed increases in IFN-γ level and the IFN-γ/IL-10 ratio, and a decreased IL-6 level without stimulation, compared with those found after starting treatment. Upon stimulation with MLS just before treatment, both the IFN-γ and TNF levels increased markedly compared with those obtained after six months or one year later. The IL-10 level was lower than the level detected before treatment and increased 6 months after treatment, but returned to undetectable level one year later. The IFN-γ/IL-10 and TNF/IL-10 ratios after stimulation with MLS, six months after starting treatment, were quite high compared with those values obtained with no stimulus. Upon stimulation with MLS, the IFN-γ and TNF levels decreased greatly twelve months after starting treatment, and IL-6 levels increased markedly. IL-2 and IL-4 levels were below the limit of detection .
For the stimulation with PHA, the levels of IFN-γ and TNF were similarly higher at relapse than those after the treatment. Slight elevation of IL-10 levels by PHA was observed, so IFN-γ/IL-10 and TNF/IL-10 ratios were calculated, and these values were higher upon relapse. As with MLS, IL-6 levels increased upon stimulation with PHA .
In the serum, just before treatment, increases in IFN-γ and TNF levels and the IFN-γ/IL-10 ratio were evident compared with those measured one year before relapse. The IL-17A level in the serum upon relapse was higher than that in serum collected one year prior .