A 55-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a three-day history of dull aching, gradually worsening left hypochondriac region pain accompanied by non-bilious emesis and profound nausea. Pertinently, the patient reported that the pain had no temporal association with eating or drinking, and further stated that physical activity would exacerbate the pain intensity, resulting in immobility and ambulatory dysfunction over the past three days.
The patient initially sustained an episode of acute pancreatitis of unknown etiology 18-months ago, which promptly responded to conservative medical management. Consequently, the patient developed a pancreatic pseudocyst as a complication of his recurrent bouts of pancreatitis. The pseudocyst continued to enlarge in size until the patient presented to the emergency department three months prior to the current presentation. Gastroenterology was consulted at the time and a cystogastrostomy was performed to facilitate drainage into the stomach cavity. A computed tomography (CT) scan at the time divulged enhancing pancreatic walls with a radiologic impression consistent with a pancreatic pseudocyst. Radiological imaging at the time further revealed an unremarkable liver and a gallbladder replete with gallstones within the gallbladder lumen. The gallbladder otherwise appeared normal and no biliary ductal dilation was noted; however, there was appreciable fatty infiltration of the pancreas along with wall thickening consistent with a pancreatic pseudocyst in the setting of recurrent bouts of acute pancreatitis. Interestingly, the patient had tested positive for a COVID-19 infection four days prior to the onset of his symptoms.
In order to better elucidate the etiology underlying the patient's current presentation, amylase and tumor marker levels, including CEA and CA-19-9, were ordered to exclude an underlying malignancy process. All tumour markers and amylase levels were unremarkable. Following cystogastrostomy, the patient was discharged in a stable state. However, two days later, the patient returned with a constellation of symptoms including spiking fevers to 101.3° fahrenheit, dull aching pain in the right upper quadrant, and nausea and vomiting. Considering the presence of an infectious process, intravenous antibiotics were started and resulted in downtrending C-reactive protein levels from 420 μg/mL to 322 μg/mL over three days. Concurrently, the leukocytosis also abated, resulting in downtrending levels of 16000 cells/mL on day 1–11000 cells/mL on day 3 of admission. Given the patient's history of pancreatitis, a CT scan of the abdomen was performed and revealed a large pancreatic pseudocyst .
Furthermore, an infected pancreatic pseudocyst communicating with the posterior stomach wall, consistent with an intact cystogastrostomy, was noted (, ).
The upper and lower limits of the pancreatic pseudocyst were also delineated by the CT scan and reveal exorbitant proportions consistent with a diagnosis of a huge infected pseudocyst (, ).
A multidisciplinary team meeting was thus conjured in order to facilitate optimal management. Input from the infectious disease, general surgery, gastroenterology, and interventional radiology teams was considered and a decision to proceed with ultrasound (US)-guided external drainage was made. The drainage was conducted unremarkably, with the hemorrhagic fluid collection sent for further culture and sensitivity examination. Following US-guided drainage, the patient returned to his baseline afebrile state, and the CRP downtrended to 130 μg/mL. Interestingly, the culture turned out positive for heavy growth of Candida glabrata, which was noted to be susceptible to fluconazole and amphotericin B; however, it was intermediately resistant to caspofungin. At this point, the differentials included an infected pseudocyst, pancreatic abscess, and various subcategories of neoplasms. Thereafter, a decision to commence fluconazole and meropenem in order to curb residual infection was made. The drain output continued to drain 200–300 mL of fluid. Post-operatively, the patient continued to do well with thorough abatement of his symptoms after surgery. The present paper was reported in accordance with the SCARE guidelines . The patient received supportive treatment postoperatively within the hospital for three days thereafter, with regular inflammatory parameters and routine laboratory workup showing resolution in derangement.