A 71-year-old man presented to the Gastroenterology Department of our hospital complaining of symptoms of intermittent upper abdominal pain and occasional acid reflux (heartburn). He denied any fever or night sweats but reported unintentional weight loss of about 2 kg within a month.
The patient’s symptoms started 1 mo prior to presentation but had worsened over the last 1 wk.
The patient had a history of intermittent medication for bronchiectasis and bronchitis for more than 30 years, with no known drug allergies. He denied any other history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes. He declared having no special physical discomfort and not attending regular physical examinations.
The patient denied any family history.
The initial vital sign examination showed normal body temperature (36.4 °C) and regular heart rate (78 beats per min), respiratory rate (18 breaths per min), and blood pressure (118/72 mmHg). Body weight was 73 kg, and height was 168 cm. During the physical examination, a slight tenderness was found under the xiphoid process and upper abdomen. Moreover, there were no palpable lymphadenopathy or mass and no other remarkable findings of positive signs (e.g., McBurney's point tenderness, rebound tenderness and muscle tension, and abnormalities of the cardio-pulmonary system).
After admission to the in-patient ward, laboratory examinations were carried out and included tests for blood routine, stool routine plus occult blood, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, blood coagulation function, and tumor markers. Endoscopy was ordered, and the preoperative examinations ruled out hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, and human immunodeficiency virus. The neutrophilic granulocyte percentage was high (75.1%; normal range: 45%-75%) as was the D-dimer level (1.26 mg/mL; normal range: 0-1 mg/mL). There was no remarkable finding in other hematologic tests.
The patient had undergone upper abdominal computed tomography (CT) plain scan 1 wk prior to presentation at our hospital. Review of the scan showed diffuse thickening of the duodenal wall, duodenal inflammation, and an occupied space around the ampulla. The common bile duct was also found to be widened and the abdominal cavity to be more tortuous. The possibility of duodenal occupation led us to perform an enhanced CT examination of the upper abdomen after admission. The results suggested malignancy, possibly a duodenal carcinoma .
For further clarification, we performed electronic endoscopy. The gastroduodenoscopy showed an irregular lesion, with a markedly congested surface in the medial posterior wall of the descending duodenal region. Multiple biopsies were taken . The histopathological results suggested chronic inflammation of the small intestinal mucosal tissue, with granuloma and necrosis; these findings suggested the need to exclude tuberculosis as a potential diagnosis .
Thus, we subsequently performed tuberculosis-related examinations. The purified protein derivative skin test showed a 2 cm × 2 cm red dermatocolliculus with 1 cm × 1 cm indentation on the right forearm at 72 h, indicating a positive result. The lymphocyte culture plus interferon tests showed the lymphocyte culture plus interferon A increased to 112 and the lymphocyte culture plus interferon B increased to 268; although, the tuberculosis citrus antibody test yielded a negative result.
During the hospitalization, both chest CT and head CT were conducted as well. The chest CT plain scan showed no signs of tuberculosis but showed bronchiectasis in both lungs, with infection . The head CT plain scan showed no signs of cerebral tuberculosis but showed mild cerebral atrophy.