In 2010, a 41-year-old Caucasian Australian man presented with a 2-week history of urinary incontinence and the inability to walk. Difficulty climbing stairs and occasional foot drop had been present for approximately 3 years prior to presentation. He was also found to have Pseudomonas pneumonia, chronic sinusitis, and a small scrotal abscess. Since 1995 he had spent an extensive period in an Aboriginal community in the Great Sandy Desert and was in contact for a total of 4 to 5 years with them. HTLV-1 infection is typically endemic in these Aboriginal populations. He was significantly integrated into the community, undertaking initiation practices such as circumcision and distal urethral hypospadic incision and had unprotected sexual relationships with Aboriginal women. In the Aboriginal community he used intravenous amphetamine and occasionally intravenous heroin with shared needles for several years in addition to cannabis and infrequent ecstasy use. He has had a long history of alcohol abuse with periods of proactive abstinence.
An examination revealed right foot drop, bilateral leg weakness, some quadriceps wasting, bilateral hypertonicity of his lower limbs with sensory impairment reaching his upper thoracic region, and bilateral tingling and numbness in his upper limbs. Urinary incontinence was found to be due to neurogenic bladder dysfunction. Nerve conduction studies ruled out peripheral neuropathy and myopathy. His cranial nerve function was normal. His spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal, showing no evidence of cord lesions or compression. Brain MRI showed nonspecific white matter foci related to perivascular spaces and no signs of demyelination.
HTLV-1 antibodies were detected in his serum and CSF. Polymerase chain reaction was positive for HTLV-1 DNA and negative for HTLV-2 DNA in both whole blood and CSF. CSF analysis also revealed oligoclonal bands, elevated protein and a moderate, nonspecific lymphocytosis with no malignant cells or other abnormalities present. Blood investigations revealed a slight normochromic normocytic anaemia, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 53 to 108mm/hour over hospital stay) and rouleaux formation, all supporting chronic disease. His red-cell thiamine was normal. His estimated glomerular filtration rate was normal; liver function tests showed elevated gamma-glutamyltransferase and alanine aminotransferase with a normal blood ammonia level. Melioidosis, Rickettsia, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Brucella, Strongyloides, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test (syphilis) serology were all negative, as was Mycobacteria microscopy and culture. Increased polyclonal production of immunoglobulin light chains with normal free light chain ratio was present. Flow cytometry of whole blood revealed expansion of CD4+ lymphocytes with a normal CD4+/CD8+ ratio. Predominant left-sided, chronic sinus disease was detected on computed tomography (CT). His sputum culture produced moderate Pseudomonas growth. A chest X-ray in addition to chest, abdominal and pelvis CT were normal apart from a few prominent retroperitoneal lymph nodes of less than 8mm.
On presentation he was started on high dose methylprednisolone (500mg per day for 5 days), resulting in a marked improvement in functionality. His function continued to improve to the point where he could walk into the consultation room on a single elbow crutch. Oxybutynin therapy was initiated to control bladder overactivity and his constipation treated with Coloxyl® (docusate sodium). Six months after initial presentation he presented with complaints of spasticity hindering functionality and sleep. MRI findings at this point again showed no abnormalities. Baclofen was prescribed reducing spasticity and improving functionality. His condition slowly improved until he was walking independently with an ataxic gait and self-catheterising once per day. His myelopathy appeared to have stabilised. On the most recent examination in February 2014, progressive improvement of his myelopathy was noted. He was able to walk 50m without a crutch. Neurological examination revealed pathologically brisk reflexes (3+ in the knees and ankles), plantar flexion, nine beats of ankle clonus on right and six on left. Oxybutynin for bladder control was ceased but he continued to self-catheterise once per day. In addition to baclofen 10mg twice per day, he received, amitriptyline to help him sleep and reduce cramps, as well as Coloxyl® to manage his constipation. He now lives relatively independently.