A 62-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a 1-year history of persistent pain in the right lower abdomen. No abnormalities were observed during the physical examination, and no palpable abdominal mass was identified. Abdominal enhanced CT and gastric reconstruction imaging revealed a gastric filling well, a low-density shadow on the lesser curvature of the gastric cardia with nodular calcifications on the edge, and a mass of approximately 6.4 × 4.9 cm with uniform density. No obvious enhancement, thickening of the gastric wall, or strengthening of the gastric mucosa was observed. No abnormalities were found by electronic gastroscopy. We considered the mass to be a GIST, although we did not exclude the possibility of other diagnoses. Exploratory surgery was performed for diagnosis and treatment.
The patient agreed to undergo laparoscopic surgery. After careful exploration, we found that the mass was located on the side of the lesser curvature, near the cardia. It was prominent on the stomach wall, and its diameter was approximately 6 cm. The mass was soft and mainly consisted of cystic components, which did not conform to the characteristics of a GIST. Therefore, we exposed the visual field of the cardia and endoscopically resected the muscular layer and mass. The mass was not significantly adhered to the surrounding tissues, and the separation was smooth; neither removal of the surrounding tissues nor lymph node dissection was needed. The specimen was sent out for pathological examination. We performed seromuscular suture of the gastric wall after the resection. The patient recovered well and her cardiac function was normal after operation. She was discharged 6 days postoperatively. A follow-up consultation 3 months after the operation indicated that the patient was in good condition and had no abdominal pain or other complaints or complications.
The postoperative pathological examination findings revealed that the specimen was a single nodule of 7.0 × 4.5 × 1.5 cm and had a cystic surface. The contents under the capsule were dark brown, soft, and brittle; the capsule wall was smooth and 0.1 to 0.2 cm thick. A partially mucosal, slightly gray area of 2 × 1 cm was also present The pathological results indicated that the mass was a bronchogenic cyst. The patient underwent regular postoperative follow-up in our hospital for 1 year, during which time she experienced no discomfort or recurrence of the tumor on CT.