A 57-year-old Caucasian woman with a background of treatment-resistant schizophrenia for over 30 years, stable on clozapine, was admitted after being found confused, dysarthric and dehydrated at home, having been uncontactable for several days. Her medical history included unprovoked pulmonary emboli on warfarin and emphysema, and her family history was significant for one brother with schizophrenia and one unaffected sister, but no known family members with MND or dementia-type diagnoses.
Confusion improved following hydration, but she was unable to recall recent events. Paranoia and distrust of staff were consistent with her chronic delusions and limited engagement with assessments. Neurological examination revealed tongue atrophy, increased upper and lower limb tone with hyperreflexia bilaterally, left upper limb and lower limb weakness and proprioception deficits without ataxia.
On admission, full blood examination, electrolytes and renal function were normal. Creatinine kinase was elevated at 882 IU/L (reference: 30–70 IU/L), vitamin B12 level was low at 69 pmol/L (140–650 pmol/L) and folate was normal at 31.5 nmol/L (> 7.0 nmol/L). Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head, MRI diffusion weighted imaging of the brain and electroencephalogram were unremarkable. Subsequent investigations detected other micronutrient deficiencies (iron, copper, zinc) but negative coeliac and pernicious anaemia screens, bland cerebrospinal fluid, and negative serology for relevant infections and anti-neuronal antibodies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed abnormal high T2 signal involving the dorsal column of the cervical cord , consistent with subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord.
On day 10 she was transferred to our rehabilitation unit. Dysarthria necessitating written communication aids persisted, despite intramuscular B12 replacement. Examination further identified profound tongue wasting with intermittent fasciculations and brisk jaw-jerk reflex. Limb reflexes were brisk and power was decreased in the left upper limb only. She had no sensory or gait abnormalities. Chronic paranoid delusions continued but were non-distressing. Her mini-mental state examination scored 27/30 points, and Frontal Assessment Battery 13/18 points, before discharge. The combination of bulbar weakness, mixed upper and lower motor neuron signs and failure to improve despite B12 replacement prompted EMG. Widespread chronic denervation in upper and lower limbs and genioglossus alongside active denervation and fasciculation supported a diagnosis of MND. Interestingly, nerve conduction studies demonstrated no evidence of a sensorimotor neuropathy.
Our patient commenced treatment with riluzole and was referred to a multidisciplinary progressive neurological diseases service. Her disease progressed and she unfortunately died a number of months later.