A woman aged 66 years presented with decreased right visual acuity over several months. On admission, her visual acuity was 0.04 on the right and 0.1 on the left. Right abducens palsy was noted. Conventional MRI and MR angiography (MRA) revealed a giant right ICA aneurysm (diameter 30 mm) and a left ICA aneurysm (5 mm) [Figure -]. T1-weighted MRI (T1WI) showed a mixed iso–low-intensity area in the lumen of the right giant ICA aneurysm, although a flow artifact originating from the aneurysm was present . T2-weighted MRI (T2WI) revealed an iso–high-intensity area at the center of the aneurysm .
In ASL-MRI with PLDs of 1.5 and 2.5 seconds, although the left aneurysm was not demonstrated, the right ICA aneurysm was depicted as a hyperintense signal area in nearly the same configuration [Figure and ]. This area was large enough to extend to the axial level of the basal ganglia [Figure and ], while the aneurysm was not seen at this level in conventional MRI . Hyperintensity circles were also noted in a concentric arrangement central to the right aneurysm [Figure and ]. Although there was no laterality in the bilateral middle cerebral artery (MCA) territories on MRA , ASL-MRI with PLD 1.5 seconds demonstrated decreased signals in the right hemisphere, especially the right MCA territory . ASL-MRI with PLD 2.5 seconds showed improvement in this decreased area, although a slight right laterality was still present .
Carotid angiography (CAG) at 1.5 and 2.5 seconds after contrast medium injection into the right and left ICA, respectively, clearly demonstrated the nonthrombosed giant aneurysm at the cavernous portion of the right ICA and the aneurysm at the cavernous portion of the left ICA , respectively. At 4.5 seconds PLD, the contrast in the right ICA aneurysm was still stagnant [, right], while the contrast in the left aneurysm had completely disappeared [, right]. In the left CAG at 1.5 seconds, the trunks of the left MCA and ACA were well opacified, and their peripheries had started to be visualized [, left]. In contrast, in the right CAG at 1.5 seconds, the trunks of the right MCA and ACA were barely visualized due to stagnation of the contrast in the giant aneurysm [, left]. At 2.5 seconds, the trunks and peripheries of the right MCA and ACA were opacified [, middle] but not fully visualized compared with the left [, middle].
The balloon Matas and Allcock test revealed robust collateral flows through the anterior communicating artery (ACoA) and the right posterior communicating artery (PCoA), respectively. During 20 minutes of balloon test occlusion (BTO), her neurological findings and somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs) following left median nerve stimulation did not show any decline. For the treatment of the “symptomatic” giant right IC aneurysm, proximal ligation of the right cervical ICA was indicated. The patient underwent right superficial temporal artery (STA)-MCA bypass just before the proximal ICA ligation on the same day with monitoring of SEPs and transcranial motor evoked potentials.
During postoperative (PO) 2 months, conventional MRI revealed a gradual signal change of the right aneurysm, although the aneurysm's size had not changed. T1WI depicted the aneurysm as homogenous and iso–low-intensity at PO 1 day , iso-intensity surrounded by hyperintensity at PO 2 weeks , and having an onion skin appearance with flow void signs at PO 2 months . In T2WI, the aneurysm was depicted as mixed iso–low-intensity with a low-intensity peripheral rim at PO 1 day , mixed iso–hyperintensity at PO 2 weeks , and having an onion skin appearance with flow void signs at PO 2 months . MRA did not demonstrate the aneurysm at PO 1 day , but the reappearance of the aneurysm was noted at PO 2 weeks and 2 months . The STA-MCA bypass was patent at PO 1 day and 2 weeks , but there was no visualization of the bypass at PO 2 months .
Perioperative ASL-MRI with a PLD of 1.5 seconds demonstrated a gradual decrease in the size of the aneurysm. At PO 1 day, the size of the ASL hyperintense signal area had markedly decreased in size compared with that shown by preoperative ASL-MRI, and the hyperintense signal area was not demonstrated at the level of the basal ganglia . Furthermore, no concentric artifact was noted. ASL-MRI at PO 2 weeks and 2 months showed further size decreases of the aneurysm. At PO 1 day, ASL signals increased throughout both hemispheres compared with preoperative ASL-MRI . The decreased ASL signals on the right hemisphere were mostly improved, although there was still a slight laterality. At PO 2 weeks and 2 months, the increased ASL signals in both hemispheres showed gradual improvement, although the right side still showed slightly decreased ASL signals compared with the left side [Figure and ].
DSA was performed at PO 5 days. Right common CAG (CCAG) demonstrated complete patency of the bypass, and part of the right MCA territory was visualized through this bypass at 2.5 and 3.5 seconds (equivalent to 1.5 and 2.5 seconds in CAG, respectively) . Through cross flow via the ACoA, left CAG revealed that the trunk of the right MCA was faintly visualized at 1.5 seconds, and the periphery of the right MCA was visualized at 2.5 seconds . DSA did not show opacity of the aneurysm in the right ICA.
At PO 1 year, the patient had completely recovered from her right visual disturbance and abducens palsy and underwent coil embolization of the left ICA aneurysm. At that time, right CCAG failed to reveal the patency of the bypass . Left CAG confirmed successful embolization of the left ICA aneurysm . At 1.5 seconds, the trunk of the right MCA was visualized through cross flow via the Acom, but it was not fully visualized compared with the left side. The aneurysm of the right ICA was not opacified. At 2.5 seconds, left CAG and left VAG revealed visualization of the right MCA periphery, but right laterality was still present.
At PO 2 years, conventional MRI and MRA demonstrated a marked size decrease of the right ICA aneurysm. The aneurysm was detected as a small hyperintensity surrounded by a low-intensity region in T1WI and a small low-intensity area surrounded by a hyperintensity in T2WI . MRA depicted the aneurysm as a small spot without any communication with the artery . There was no visualization of the STA-MCA bypass.
ASL-MRI with dual PLDs demonstrated the aneurysm as a tiny spot of low-intensity signal at PLD 1.5 seconds and an iso-intense signal area at 2.5 seconds . The intensity and configuration of the spot were not identical between PLDs of 1.5 and 2.5 seconds. To compare with pre- and perioperative ASL-MRI findings, the intensity and size of the ASL signal was markedly decreased. Furthermore, preoperative decreased signals in the right hemisphere, especially in the right MCA territory, were markedly improved at PLD 1.5 seconds . Although there was a slight signal decrease in the right hemisphere, this laterality was somewhat improved at PLD 2.5 seconds .