A three and a half year old girl, who presented with a croup history of 4 days duration, was transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit because of worsening respiratory distress. The past history was uncontributory except that the patient was an unvaccinated immigrant, living in close contact with her alcoholic grandfather. The patient was immediately intubated, and a grayish nonadherent membrane extending through the glottis down into the larynx was apparent during the procedure. Material from the membranes was sent for cultures and the patient was started on intravenous penicillin and specific antitoxin. Although blood gases improved initially, respirator settings had soon to be increased significantly to sustain a pO2 value above 60 mm Hg (7.9 kPa). A chest roentgenogram revealed extensive bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrations . Laboratory findings included white blood cells 70,110 cu mm (70*109/L) with segmented neutrophils 46%, band forms 8%, platelets 134,000 cu mm (134*109/L), CRP 177. Serum alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase concentrations peaked at 340 U/L and 721 U/L, respectively and serum creatinine increased to 1.4 mg/dL (124 μmol/L). On hospital day 1 she became hypotensive and remained in shock despite escalating doses of inotropic agents. Echocardiographic findings, which were consistent with acute cardiomyopathy, confirmed extremely poor left ventricular contractility (asystole; shortening fraction <5%), despite high dose continuous dobutamine (20 μg.kg-1.min-1) and epinephrine (up to 5 μg.kg-1.min-1) infusions. After having completed 36 hours of hospitalization in the PICU with multiple cardiac arrests, the child was no more responding to resuscitation efforts and died.
Autopsy findings revealed numerous diphtheritic membrane formations extended down into the larynx and further obstructing the distal tracheobronchial tree . Myocardium edema, congestion and mononuclear and neutrophil cell infiltration, completed the clinicopathologic picture of diphtheritic cardiomyopathy. Membrane formations and visceral hemorrhagic necrotic lesions were associated with numerous strains of corynobacterium diphtheriae (producing the typical club-shaped appearance and distributed in a typical Chinese-letter appearance on the smear) . The organism, however, of Gravis type, grew on the Loeffler cultures of portions of membranes, which were received during the intubation. As also expected, the strain was shown to be toxigenic.