A 76-year-old, vital woman with a history of osteoporosis and a transient ischemic attack visited our outpatient clinic, with high back pain, interfering with daily activities. The pain occurred spontaneously 2 months earlier, and did not improve with acetaminophen and activity modification. On physical examination (59 kg, 1.58 m), compression pain over the spinal column and painful palpation of the spinous processes T6 and T7 was noted. Thoracic spine X-rays revealed an impression deformity of T7, with 15% anterior height loss , AO type A1.2. MRI showed oedema, sign of a recent/active fracture. Due to failure of conservative therapy, the fracture was stabilized using a PEEK wafer KP.
After general anaesthesia and antibiotic prophylaxis (1,000 mg cefamandole) and prone positioning, a K-wire was inserted from a left extrapedicular entry position using fluoroscopy. After measuring the length, the sizer was inserted followed by gently tapping the wafer gun into the vertebra. The device penetrated the anterolateral cortex, and was withdrawn to the correct depth. During insertion of the first few wafers anterolateral protrusion was observed on fluoroscopy. Despite this observation, more wafers were introduced and these seemed to be positioned correctly. However, subsequent wafers again seemed to protrude , therefore the procedure was terminated. Stabilization of the wafers by adding bone cement was omitted because of potential cement leakage into the thoracic cavity. The patient remained stable, and a direct postoperative X-ray revealed no pneumothorax, thus watchful waiting was performed after consulting a thoracic surgeon.
The thoracic spine X-ray performed the following day confirmed malposition of the wafers. The patient remained in good general condition, and was discharged from the hospital. The patient was prescribed acetaminophen with codeine 500/20 mg 4 times 2 daily and tramadol 50 mg 3 times 1 daily (VAS 4).
One week later she visited the emergency department with unbearable high back and right-sided thoracic pain (VAS 10), without dyspnoea. Tramadol had been replaced with Naproxen because of hallucinations. On physical examination, she was hemodynamically stable, without neurological deficit, but axial compression of the spinal column was painful. There were no signs of infection. Progressive displacement of one wafer was noted on the thoracic spine X-ray . The anterior vertebral height loss had increased to 32%, probably due to the weakening of the vertebral body by the previous surgery. A CT-scan revealed protrusion of the wafers, in close proximity to the right pulmonary artery and stem bronchus, with fluid in the right pleural cavity . After consultation with the thoracic surgeon, we decided to remove the wafers, and use an alternative method of stabilisation.
Following general anaesthesia and antibiotic prophylaxis (1,000 mg cefamandole) and left-sided positioning a right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed. By blocking ventilation the right lung collapsed. The wafers penetrated the parietal and visceral pleura . The vagal nerve was stretched around the wafers, but intact. After removal of the wafers, the residual cavity in the vertebral body was probed and deemed circumferentially intact. It was filled with a resected piece of the sixth rib . An intrathoracic suction drain and a subpleural analgesic catheter were inserted. The right lung was inflated and the thoracotomy closed with thick double stranded sutures followed by routine wound closure.
Postoperatively she went to the ICU, and was transferred to the orthopaedic ward the next day after a thoracic X-ray revealed absent residual pneumothorax. Within 2 days the excruciating pain subsided, although analgesics were required for thoracotomy wound pain. X-rays and a CT-scan showed proper positioning of the rib-graft in the vertebra . Three days postoperation, atrial fibrillation developed and was successfully treated with digoxin. She was discharged in good health after 19 days with a 3-point extension spinal orthosis for 6 weeks.