A 29-year-old male patient injured his left ankle after a 2-m fall while bouldering in a climbing gym. During the fall, his left foot caught on a climbing hold, resulting in hyperextension of his ankle joint. He presented himself in the university hospital 2 days after the trauma because of persistent pain and loss of full weight-bearing ability. Severe tenderness at the medial and lateral malleolus was noted during palpation of the ankle joint. Neurovascular function of the foot and ankle was normal, and the skin was uninjured. The patient had never injured his ankles before, and he had not suffered any chronic disease or instability before.
Clinical examination showed the posterior tibial tendon palpable mobile on top of the medial malleolus. Specific tests for tendon instabilities such as provocation test according to Orthner and manual dislocation tests [, ] could not be performed due to severe pain. X-rays of the ankle as well as computed tomography showed a bony avulsion of the superior retinaculum at the lateral malleolus . This has been described as “fleck sign” and is highly indicative for peroneal tendon dislocation . No further fractures were found. The peroneal groove at the lateral malleolus was concave. Therefore, no bony correction, such as groove deepening, was planned. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the posterior tibial tendon still being dislocated anteriorly . The long peroneal tendon was no longer dislocated and positioned anatomically behind the lateral malleolus. No tendon lesions were found. An avulsion of the anterior talofibular ligament and a partial lesion of anterior deltoid ligament fibers were found as concomitant injuries. The syndesmotic ligament showed minor sprain but no rupture.
Surgery was postponed until soft-tissue swelling had subsided and a “wrinkle sign” was present 17 days after trauma. Clinical examination showed that the passive sagittal motion was normal, and the hindfoot motion was restricted in inversion and eversion. Active motion was unpleasant due to pain.
The preoperative American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) Score “Ankle Hindfoot Scale” after injury showed a value of 21 out of 100 points (0 pain points, 11 function points, and 10 alignment points).
An 8 cm curved skin incision alongside the posterior tibial tendon was performed behind the medial malleolus.
The flexor retinaculum was found to be ruptured and deficient.
The posterior tibial tendon was dislocated anteromedially and found on top of the medial malleolus owing to a posterior tibial tendon dislocation Type 3, according to Strydom . The tendon was repositioned to its anatomical position. The remaining retinacular fibers were reattached to the posterior aspect of the medial malleolus via two drill holes using a nonabsorbable thread. A periosteal flap augmentation on top of the retinacular flap in vest-over-pants technique completed the procedure .
An 8 cm posterolateral incision alongside the peroneal tendons was made behind the lateral malleolus. The bony avulsion of the superior retinaculum was verified. The peroneal tendons were found behind the lateral malleolus, but the long peroneal tendon was unstable and could be dislocated with gentle pressure. The injury was classified as an Eckert and Davis Grade 3 . The bony rim and the superior peroneal retinaculum were sutured to the bone through drill holes in the posterolateral aspect of the fibula. Thereby the tendon was stabilized in its anatomic position.
A below-knee cast was applied for 8 weeks postoperatively.
The patient suffered from a punctiform wound healing disorder of 3 × 5 mm size at the distal part of the lateral approach, which was successfully treated with oral antibiotics and needed no operative revision. No further complications occurred.
Initially, no weight-bearing was allowed for the first 6 weeks after surgery. At week 7, full weight-bearing was allowed in the cast. After cast removal, the patient underwent intensive physical rehabilitation. At 3-month follow-up, the patient showed no gait abnormalities. Minor restrictions in range of motion could be observed during physical examination. He was able to follow daily activities and reported no pain. He started to do light sports activity and training. Six months after surgery, the patient reached his preinjury level in climbing and other sports without any noticeable pain and mild restriction due to flexibility while bouldering. He showed no gait abnormality. On clinical examination, we found moderate limitation of sagittal and hindfoot motion. The stability, both subjective and objective, was good. AOFAS-Score “ankle and hindfoot scale” showed a value of 90 out of 100 points (40 pain points, 40 function points, and 10 alignment points).
Although we found mild limitations in mobility on clinical examination, based on patient satisfaction, we decided to adopt a wait-and-see procedure.
Ultrasound investigation showed the posterior tibial tendon as well as the long peroneal tendon in their former position .
Until 1 year follow-up, the patient showed no redislocation of both tendons. He had no pain but reported slight limitation of sagittal movement that was not disturbing in any recreational or all-day activities. AOFAS-Score “ankle and hindfoot scale” showed a value of 96 out of 100 points (40 pain points, 46 function points, and 10 alignment points).