A 76-year old female presented to the authors’ hospital outpatient clinic with pain and numbness of the left suboccipital and preauricular region which persisted for the last six months. There was hypoesthesia of the left C2 and C3 dermatome; there were no signs or symptoms of myelopathy (spinal cord compression). The patient’s past medical and familial history was not remarkable; she never had any previous surgery, and she was not on any medication. The patient’s JOA (Japanese Orthopaedic Association) score was 16 out of 17 (normal function) .
Plain radiographs showed no abnormality. CT-scan and MRI showed expansile bone lesion arising from the left posterior arch of C1 and the left lamina of C2 (, , ). It caused posterolateral compression of the spinal cord at the level of the left C1–C2 spinal canal, especially on the left foramina.
Laboratory examinations did not show any abnormality. Based on the clinical features and pathological radiological findings, the authors suggested that the lesion most likely could be an osseocartilaginous benign tumor or known as osteochondroma.
The authors decided to perform decompression through excision of the lesion. The lesion was explored through posterior approach, exposing level of C1 and C2. As C1 lateral mass was preserved, posterior arch osteotomy of C1 was performed. The osteochondral lesion of left lamina C2 was removed by left hemilaminectomy. The lesion excised is depicted in .
Diagnosis of osteochondroma was verified histopathologically. The patient could mobilize on the next day. There was no postoperative wound complication found. The clinical follow-up was performed up to seven days after surgery. The neck pain decreased, and the hypoesthesia of C2–C3 dermatome was significantly improved.
Radiologic follow-up by MRI after six months showed no sign of recurrence . The latest clinical follow-up was 18 months after the operation. The patient was ambulatory, but she complained of mild fingers numbness and moderate neck pain.