We report a case of a 39-year-old Caucasian female who came to our radiology unit for a computed tomography (CT) staging. Her medical history was remarkable for triple-negative breast cancer, diagnosed by Tru-Cut biopsy, and she had not undergone medical therapy. Laboratory tests were unrevealing.
At the clinical evaluation, the patient complained of pain in her mid-back and low-back regions and intermittent abdominal pain in the left flank region. She weighed 68 kg and had a body mass index of 20 kg/m2.
The patient underwent multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT, Optima 64 slice, GE Healthcare) of the brain, thorax, and abdomen.
The CT scan showed a solid nodule in the right upper outer quadrant of the breast, four hepatic metastases (confirmed later with hepatic MRI), free fluid in Douglas’s pouch, and mixed lytic and sclerotic bone metastases in the thoracic and lumbar spine (confirmed later with skeletal scintigraphy and MRI).
MDCT incidentally revealed a circumaortic left renal vein draining to the inferior vena cava, with bulbous dilatation of both the antero-superior and posterior-inferior branches. The superior anterior branch was compressed between the SMA and the aorta ; the inferior-posterior branch showed entrapment between the aorta and the third lumbar vertebral body . These findings were consistent with combined nutcracker syndrome. There was also pathological serpiginous dilatation of the left ovarian vein due to the compression of the described anterior and posterior branches of the circumaortic left renal vein with varicose pelvic veins .
In the venous phase, an axial CT scan demonstrated the “beak sign” of LRV, a beak angle of 40°, and a left renal vein diameter ratio of 5.7; the sagittal reconstruction demonstrated an aorto-mesenteric angle of about 21.5°.
The distance between the abdominal aorta and the third lumbar vertebral body, measured by MDCT, was 3.6 mm.
Axial CT imaging of the pelvis showed compression of the left common iliac vein by the overlying right common iliac artery in the venous phase consistent with May–Thurner syndrome without signs of venous thrombosis .