A 73-year-old Chinese male patient, who was a community ambulant without aid, slipped and fell while walking. Radiographs revealed a valgus-impacted NOF fracture ( and ). The patient underwent an uneventful cancellous screw fixation with three7.3mmscrews inserted in an inverted triangular configuration (inferior screw placed midway between the anterior and posterior cortices, superior screws placed as anterior and as posterior as possible in the sagittal plane, in the middle of the femoral neck on anteroposterior [AP]imaging). Threads of all three cancellous screws passed the fracture line into the femoral head ( and ).Post-operative Garden’s alignment index was satisfactory at 160° in the AP plane and 170° in the lateral plane. The patient recovered well postoperatively and regained independent ambulatory status.
At 10-month post-operative, the patient sustained another fall while walking and complained of pain over the left hip and inability to weight bear. Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a peri-implant subtrochanteric fracture with a fracture line originating distal to the inferior screw at the level of the lesser trochanter ( and ).
The patient subsequently underwent a Trochanteric Fixation Nail-Advanced Proximal Femoral Nailing System (TFNA, Depuy Synthes) fixation of peri-implant subtrochanteric fracture. This was achieved with the patient under general anesthesia and on a traction table aiding reduction of the subtrochanteric fracture. Two previous cancellous screws (superior-posterior and inferior-central) were first removed to allow the passage of the TFNA nail which just skirted the remaining superior-anterior screw. The TFNA blade was measured and inserted without incident. As per the authors’ preferences, the distal locking screws were left unlocked.
Postoperatively, the patient was allowed full weight-bearing with the patient managing to ambulate with a roller frame support on the immediate 1st post-operative day and was discharged well soon after. This subsequent progress was uneventful and the patient was able to ambulate fluidly at 3-month post-operative. At the final follow-up 6-month postoperatively, X-ray showed complete bony union and the patient is pain free and walking independently.