A 65-years-old female Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital with the chief complaint of abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant for the past 20 days. There was no remarkable family, medical or genetic history. The patient was in good general health and had no significant weight loss. Her vital signs (including heart rate, respiration rate, blood pressure and body temperature) were within normal limit. There were two positive signs during the physical examination, anemic conjunctiva and tenderness in the right upper quadrant. Complete blood count and serum biochemistry data on admission remained normal except hemoglobin, 9.5 g/dl. Significant abnormalities were found in the tumor marker, demonstrated by a normal serum level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 4.85 ng/ml, normal: 0–8.78 ng/ml) and elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 16.3 ng/ml, normal: 0.5–5.0 ng/ml), carbohydrate antigen125 (CA125; 371.2 U/ml, normal: 1–35 U/ml) and CA19–9 (358.96 U/ml, normal: 2–37 U/ml). Multi-detector computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed distension of the gallbladder with gallbladder stones and several homogeneous high-density masses in the gallbladder fundus (intense enhancement on artery and portal venous phase, low attenuation on delayed phase), and multiple hypodensity tumorous lesions adjacent to the gallbladder (mild irregular enhancement at the periphery of the lesions on artery and portal venous phase, further enhancement on delayed phase), which were located in the lower part of segment IV of the liver . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with perfusion-weighted imaging confirmed the presence of gallbladder stones and solitary 3 × 3 cm enhanced lesions in the gallbladder, and 6.2 × 4.5 cm hypovascular tumors in the liver . The data of abdominal ultrasonography was consistent with the above data. Thus, the preoperative diagnosis was GC with hepatic metastasis.
The patient was informed of the risks involved with the surgery before consent for the operation was obtained. After sufficient preoperative preparation, the patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy. During laparotomy, the gallbladder was enlarged to 16 × 6 × 6 cm and showed wall thickening (the thickness was 1 cm). There was a palpable mass felt on the surface of the gallbladder fundus portion. Exploration also showed an 8 × 6 cm rigid lesion fused by multiple masses in liver segment IVb and V and a 1 × 1 cm lesion in segment VIII. Moreover, sporadic lesions on the diaphragm and enlarged station 8 lymph nodes were seen. The patient underwent cholecystectomy, resection of liver segment V, of the lower part of segment IV and partial segment VIII, regional lymphadenectomy and resection of lesions on diaphragm.
The post-operative histopathological examination revealed synchronous double cancers in the liver and gallbladder, which were GC (well-differentiated papillary adenocarcinoma invading the muscularis propria) and CHC . The examination also showed that the metastases in lymph nodes and diaphragm were both from CHC in the liver.
After 10 days of recovery, the patient was discharged without complications. Adjuvant chemoradiation therapy was not performed due to the patient’s refusal. Unfortunately, the patient died of widespread metastasis 8 months after the operation.