The case involved an 85-year-old female with congestive heart failure caused by severe aortic valve stenosis. Aortic valve replacement with a bioprosthetic valve was conducted electively. After the ascending aorta was unclamped, anesthetist noticed blood coming up from the endotracheal tube. Intraoperative flexible bronchoscopy confirmed massive hemoptysis coming up from all peripheral bronchi and mainly from the bilateral inferior lobes. The left chest was inspected through additional anterolateral thoracotomy connected perpendicularly to median sternotomy wound at 4th intercostal space. And the left hilum was exposed and lower bronchus was ligated externally to reduce the amount of intrabronchial bleeding. Repeated bronchoscopy showed persisting large-volume airway bleeding (Additional file : Video S1) and weaning cardiopulmonary bypass was impossible due to a reduced tidal volume of up to around 50 ml caused by severe peripheral airway obstruction. Groin cannulated veno-arterial ECMO with heparin coated circuit was initiated as a substitute for conventional cardiopulmonary bypass, and heparin was reversed precipitously with full dose of protamine sulfate. To treat the persistent airway bleeding, the chest wound was closed and the patient was shifted to a catheterization laboratory for bronchial artery embolization. Intraoperative total blood loss from the airway was over 4000 ml.
Angiography confirmed massive bronchial artery bleeding into the left lower bronchus . However, diffuse bronchial artery bleeding was observed in the left upper lobe and right lower lobe as well. Embolization of the bilateral bronchial artery was conducted successfully. However, hemoptysis continued and repeated bronchoscopy confirmed ongoing diffuse bleeding. The right lower bronchus was blocked internally with an Endobronchial Watanabe Spigot (Nobatech, Cedex, France). Even after these aggressive interventions, diffuse hemorrhage persisted.
Eventually the amount of hemoptysis reduced on day four, and external ligation of the left inferior bronchus was finally released. The patient’s hemodynamics showed slight improvement on day five with, and a decision was made to convert to Venous-Venous ECMO. However, the patient crashed again and passed away from multi-organ failure on day six.