A 64-year-old male with a history of hypertension, tachyarrhythmia, and diabetes presented with a large bladder tumor incidentally detected on examination for weight loss. The patient was on antihypertensive, pulse stabilizer, and antidiabetic medications, and his blood pressure was 121/67 mm Hg. The patient’s abdomen was soft and flat on physical examination, and the tumor was not palpable on digital rectal examination. Laboratory examinations revealed elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (6.3 ng/mL) and α-fetoprotein (14.9 ng/mL).
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 77-mm diameter tumor in the posterior wall of the urinary bladder, with an unclear border with the rectum. The tumor showed heterogeneous enhancement in the solid part with an enhancing hypodense lesion , and no enlarged pelvic lymph nodes were observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large tumor between the posterior wall of the bladder and the rectum, showing a low signal on T1-weighted imaging and a slightly high signal on T2-weighted imaging . Sagittal contrast-enhanced MRI showed an indistinct border between the tumor and posterior wall of the bladder, with the rectum compressed dorsally. . Moreover, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed an intense hypermetabolic lesion in the tumor. Cystoscopy revealed external masses compressing the trigone of the bladder, but no tumor was visible in the lumen . Urine cytology revealed no tumor cells, and colon fibroscopy revealed compression of the anterior rectal wall and no tumor in the tract .
Based on the results of these examinations, a neoplasm of the pelvis of unknown origin was suspected. Therefore, we performed endoscopic ultrasonography fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) biopsy of the rectal wall to diagnose the tumor. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a large, well-vascularized, well-defined tumor, but the border with the rectum was partially obscure . EUS-FNA of the tumor revealed spindle-shaped cells within fibrous tissue. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD34 but negative for S-100, c-kit, β-catenin, and desmin, suggesting a mesenchymal neoplasm such as a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) of the pelvis originating from the rectum. Preoperative neoadjuvant therapy using imatinib, for this case, was discussed during a multidisciplinary team meeting. However, the decision to operate was made because neoadjuvant therapy using imatinib for resectable GIST is still in clinical trials in Japan. Additionally, although the biopsy results were suggestive of GIST, they did not lead to a definitive diagnosis.
During laparotomy, the tumor was located in the posterior bladder wall and was suspected of having invaded the rectum. Therefore, we performed en bloc multivisceral resection (total cystectomy and low anterior resection of the rectum) to obtain a clear resection margin. During surgery, the patient’s systolic blood pressure abruptly increased to 190 mmHg when the tumor was touched. Perdipine stabilized the blood pressure; however, after removing the tumor, the blood pressure decreased, and catecholamine was required. After that, the patient had no further blood pressure attacks and an uneventful postoperative course.
Macroscopic examination showed that the tumor measured 85 × 60 × 45 mm and was surrounded by the bladder, prostate, and rectum . The cut surface of the tumor revealed a well-circumscribed, yellowish-brown solid mass invading the and subserosal layers bladder , with no invasion of the rectal wall . Microscopic findings on hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed nests or cords of cells delimited by connective tissue and vascular septations, with a granular or clear amphophilic cytoplasm with an oval nucleus . Tumor cells proliferated from the muscular layer to the subserosa of the bladder and invaded the surrounding fatty tissue, but not the rectum. Immunohistochemistry was positive for chromogranin A, CD56, and synaptophysin and negative for keratin AE1/AE3, keratin CAM5.2, and SSTR2. Pub was confirmed by pathological and immunohistochemical examination. There was no recurrence at the 7-month follow-up.