A 28-year-old woman suddenly lost consciousness and had general convulsions lasting about 1 min on the second day after cesarean section.
The patient was scheduled for cesarean section under epidural anesthesia using the combined spinal-epidural technique, with an American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status Ⅱ, 69 kg, 159 cm, 40 wk in gestation, and G2P0. The cesarean section was chosen due to social factors. Her prenatal examination and central nervous system examination were unremarkable. No gestational hypertension was noted during pregnancy. Blood routine, coagulation function, and electrocardiography were normal before the operation.
It should be noted that the parturient was very nervous after admission, and often cried and shouted in the ward. The patient fasted on the day of operation. Epidural anesthesia was performed using a one-time lumbar hard joint puncture bag, an internal needle type, a 16 G epidural puncture needle, and a 25 G lumbar anesthesia needle. The L3-L4 gap was selected to perform the combined lumbar and peridural puncture.
When puncturing the lumbar spine, the patient suddenly cried and struggled. We tried to comfort the patient and ease her nervousness. During this chaos, the epidural puncture needle inadvertently entered the subarachnoid cavity at 13:55, although it was withdrawn immediately. Then, lumbar anesthesia was successfully performed at the L2-L3 gap, with 7.5 mg bupivacaine injected into the subarachnoid cavity. The block plane at the beginning of operation was T8-S5. A baby girl was delivered with a weight of 3305 g and an Apgar score of 9 points at one minute after birth. The operation was completed at 14:48. The total volume of bleeding during the operation and on the first postoperative day was estimated to be 50 mL.
Two and half hours after the delivery at 17:30, the patient complained of headaches. Postdural puncture headaches and intracranial hypotension were suspected. The patient was treated with rehydration with crystal salt solution and lying flat without a pillow. The total volume of intravenous rehydration on the day of operation was 4000 mL, including 500 mL of colloidal solution. The headache was relieved at 21:30. However, several hours later at 04:45 of the next day, the patient suddenly lost consciousness and had general convulsions lasting about 1 min, which occurred again at 08:43 . No symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, or visual disturbances were noticed. Emergent blood biochemistry test showed slightly decreased serum levels of electrolytes, including sodium (135 mmol/L), potassium (3.40 mmol/L), magnesium (0.56 mmol/L), calcium (1.96 mmol/L), and phosphorus (0.63 mmol/L).
The patient has no history of systemic disease.
Her personal and family history was unremarkable.
The patient had newly developed hypertension (160/104 mmHg) and fundus artery spasm. Fundus examination showed fundus artery spasm of Grade I.
She had proteinuria with a level of 103 mg/L and 618 mg/24 h. Considering the evidence of hypertension and proteinuria, a diagnosis of preeclampsia was soon established.
T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence showed several hyperintensity lesions in the left basal ganglia and the bilateral occipital lobes, suggesting reversible ischemia . The hyaline mesentery and the fifth ventricle were formed. PRES was diagnosed by a neurologist.