A 10-day-old girl was referred to our neurosurgical department from the neonatal intensive care unit where it was being treated since her 3rd day after birth due to jaundice. She presented with hypotonia, palsy of the right oculomotor nerve, and prominent frontal fontanel; a cerebral ultrasound and subsequently a computed tomography (CT) scan were performed and revealed a large hyperdense space-occupying mass in the right middle cerebral fossa and the suprasellar cisterns. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a tumor with marked inhomogeneous enhancement, with mixed cystic and solid components with dimensions of 6.7 cm × 6.2 cm × 6.1 cm . The tumor was occupying the right anterior frontal and medial cranial fossa along the entire right temporal lobe, extending to the frontal and parietal lobes, crossing the midline, infiltrating the cavernous sinuses bilaterally, and compressing the brain stem. Microsurgical resection of the tumor was performed on the 10th day of her life through a right temporal craniotomy. Only a subtotal resection of the tumor was possible due to the size and the position of the tumor, the age of the patient, and the hemorrhagic tendency of the tissues involved. Histology report of the tumor revealed heterogeneous cellular density with cellular heterogeneity and regions with high mitotic activity 12–40/10HPF×40 (WHO Grade III) as well as regions with ischemic and apoptotic necrosis. The tumor was in continuity with the meninges with perivascular growth of neoplastic cells without neoplastic emboli. Gomori staining revealed HPC growth pattern. Molecular analysis by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction for hybrid gene ETS variant 6/neurotrophic tyrosine kinase, receptor, type 3 t(12;15) (p13;q25) was negative. In the immediate postoperative period, the baby presented with an increased tone of the left upper limp and nonreactive pupil. In the late postoperative period, she had an increase in her head circumference and a bulging frontal fontanel. A CT was performed, which revealed obstructive hydrocephalus . A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted. In the immediate postoperative period, she presented with an improvement in the muscle tone of the upper limbs. Afterward, the child was referred to the oncology department and underwent CHx according to CWS guidance (version 1.5 from July 01, 2009) and received twelve cycles of Vincristine, Actinomycin D, and Cyclophosphamide, without any complications. Postoperative MRI scan after completion of CHx revealed regression of tumor to 3.5 cm × 3.5 cm × 3.8 cm . After a 3-year follow-up, the girl has no muscle weakness, normal tendon reflexes, and no Babinski sign. However, she continues to have a third nerve palsy. She crawls and can walk when she is supported, she can eat by herself, and she receives no antiepileptic treatment.