A 51-year-old female patient of Chinese Han ethnicity was admitted to our hospital because of upper abdominal pain for 5 years and worsened abdominal pain for 1 month. There was no significant weight loss and special past medical history. Physical examination had no abnormal findings. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed. Under white light, the antrum and corpus presented as non-atrophic gastritis, without a sign of Helicobacter pylori infection. A 20-mm type 0–IIa+IIc lesion with submucosal tumor-like change in the greater curvature of the junction between the antrum and body was detected. The lesion has a sense of compactness and fullness with a central depression . Narrow-band imaging (NBI) showed a brownish area with an indistinct boundary . Magnified endoscopy with NBI (ME-NBI) at low and high magnification revealed that most parts of the lesion presented as a regular microvascular pattern and only small parts presented as an irregular microvascular pattern, and there was the presence of a demarcation line, widened intervening parts, and elongated pits . It was considered as an undifferentiated cancer, lymphoepithelioid cancer, or other special type of tumor by endoscopy. The pathological examination from biopsy revealed that the lesion was medium–low-differentiation adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma.
Abdominal computed tomography revealed a local inhomogeneous thickening of the gastric wall at the greater curvature of the gastric body, calcification of the right lobe of the liver, uterine fibroids, and right ovarian cyst. Serum tumor-associated antigen and tumor marker test showed that α-L-fucosidase, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, carbohydrate antigen 153, carbohydrate antigen 125, ferritin, AFP, and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) were all normal.
Radical distal gastrectomy was performed for the patient. Surgery examination showed that the lesion was located in the greater curvature of the junction between the antrum and body, with a size of approximately 20 mm × 12 mm. The lesion did not break through the serous membrane and had no obvious adhesion with the surrounding tissues. A total of 20 lymph nodes in the greater curvature and nine in the lesser curvature of the stomach were palpated. There was no obvious metastasis in the liver, gallbladder, spleen, bilateral kidneys, transverse colon, mesentery, abdominal wall, and pelvic cavity.
Examination of the resected specimen revealed that there was a mucosal protuberant lesion with a central depression in the greater curvature of the junction between the antrum and body, and the size was 20 mm × 11 mm. The surrounding mucosa was smooth, with converging of the mucosal folds toward the lesion and fusion of the folds . The crystal violet staining for the resected specimen more clearly revealed the morphology of the lesion . The lesion and its surrounding tissues were taken every 2–3 mm for histopathological examination according to the cutting standard of early gastric cancer specimens . The lymph nodes were also taken for histopathological examination.
Microscopically, the infiltration of cancer tissue was limited to the mucosa and submucosa and reached the deep layer of the submucosa. The mucosal surface was almost covered by non-neoplastic epithelium . The tumor cells exhibited a different pattern. Some cancer cells were arranged in the form of irregular nests, cords, or micro glandular tubes. The cells were large and cubic in size, rich and eosinophilic in the cytoplasm, and with round or oval nucleus, binucleate and small nucleoli, and hepatocyte-like appearance . Some cancer cells displayed the form of signet ring and distributed diffusely . There was mucus formation in the interstitium of some signet ring cells, and the signet ring cells floated in mucus . The different forms of cancer cells were interlaced with each other . In the submucosa, the stromal fibrous tissue of the cancer obviously proliferated to form a nodular shape with a clear boundary, and the lymphocyte focally infiltrated and formed lymphoid follicles . The gastric mucosa around the cancer exhibited mild chronic non-atrophic gastritis. No cancer metastasis was found in the 20 lymph nodes of the greater curvature and nine lymph nodes of the lesser curvature of the stomach.
Immunohistochemical examination showed that the expressions of cytokeratin (CK) , caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) , and mucin 2 were positive; human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), mucin 5AC, AFP , and hCG were negative; and in situ hybridization showed that EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) was negative in the two forms of cancer cells. While the expressions of glypican-3 , hepatocyte , and spalt-like transcription factor 4 (SALL4) were positive in the hepatoid carcinoma cells. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining showed that the cytoplasms of signet ring cells were red . No vascular invasion was found by CD31 and D2-40 examination.
According to histomorphology and immunohistochemical phenotypes, the final diagnosis was early HAS with signet ring cell carcinoma.