A 61-year-old man was referred to our hospital for the evaluation of syncope. On admission, his blood pressure was 138/85 mmHg, and the pulse rate was regular at 62 beats per minute. Auscultation revealed normal cardiac and respiratory sounds, and lower extremity examination showed no oedema. His blood test results, including serum angiotensin-converting enzyme activity, were normal. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a first-degree AV block, incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB), and terminal T inversion in precordial leads V1–V4 . Chest radiography findings were unremarkable. Echocardiography revealed preserved left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) systolic function, normal chamber size, and cardiac hypertrophy, without evidence of myocardial thinning of the basal interventricular septum (IVS). Coronary computed tomography (CT) revealed no evidence of coronary artery stenosis. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) revealed LV or RV wall motion or chamber size abnormalities and subtle late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) of the interventricular septum of the myocardium (white arrows in , H). Notably, 24-hour Holter monitoring revealed a first-degree AV block and frequent sinus arrest episodes of up to 6 s associated with dizziness. Fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18-FDG-PET-CT) revealed 18-FDG uptake in the mediastinal lymph nodes, the right atrium (RA), RV, and IVS but not in other organs. We performed an RV and IVS myocardial biopsy based on a high index of clinical suspicion for CS. Histopathological findings showed multinucleated giant cells (arrow in ) and a subpleural hyalinized nodule containing abundant dense eosinophilic hypocellular collagen fibrosis surrounding and bridging discrete granulomas (arrow in ), suggestive of early-stage CS. The patient was diagnosed with CS and methylprednisolone (30 mg/day) therapy was initiated. The methylprednisolone dose was tapered over 4 months, and the patient received maintenance methylprednisolone therapy (5 mg) and had no symptoms such as syncope or dizziness thereafter. A 12-lead electrocardiogram continued to show RBBB at the 3-month follow-up, although the first-degree AV block was abolished , and 24-hour Holter monitoring showed no findings of AV block or sinus arrest of >2 s. Therefore, pacemaker implantation was not indicated. Notably, 18-FDG-PET-CT performed after 5-month methylprednisolone immunosuppressant therapy revealed no abnormal 18-FDG myocardial uptake . Considering the evidence of myocardial LGE, we discussed implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation. Based on guidelines of the Heart Rhythm Society, an electrophysiological study was warranted in this patient to evaluate fatal arrhythmia. However, the patient refused ICD implantation and has continued to receive maintenance methylprednisolone treatment (5 mg). He has been asymptomatic and is closely followed up as an outpatient over 2 years after the diagnosis of CS.