The patient is an 18-year-old female who presented to our department on April 26, 2023,with a sudden occlusion of visual field in the right eye for the past 2 days after a 5-day history of COVID-19 infection. She was moderate myopic (right eye, -5.25 -1.00 × 164; left eye,-5.00 -0.50 × 175) and the COVID-19 antigen test was positive. No significant abnormalities were found in other examinations. She said she was in the early stages of her third COVID-19 infection. Ophthalmic examination: the BCVA in the right eye is 0.5,and in the left eye is 0.6. The intraocular pressure is 18 mmHg in both eyes. Anterior segment examination reveals no abnormalities. In the right eye, it showed a tilted optic disc, peripapillary and subretinal hemorrhage, and shallow “flame-shaped” hemorrhages in the superficial layers of the retina before the optic disc. In the left eye, there is a tilted optic disc with unclear disc boundaries. The retinal vessels appear normal without hemorrhages or exudates, a kidney-shaped spot is present on the nasal side of the retina and the macular centrails reflection is present in both eyes . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed tilted optic discs in both eyes, bulged nasal optic discs, and the presence of strong reflective material under the parafoveal retina of the optic discs. This finding is more prominent in the right eye . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) showed masking of fluorescein in the nasal and superior regions of the optic disc during the arterial phase in the right eye. Gradual enhancement of fluorescence was observed in the inferior optic disc, with hypofluorescence in the late phase. The inferior retina of fluorescence was masked by vitreous hemorrhage . The blood routine, coagulation function, and orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities. The diagnosis is as follows: (1) Bilateral intrapapillary hemorrhage with adjacent peripapillary subretinal hemorrhage. (2) Bilateral refractive error. The patient was prescribed Zhixue Mingmu Granules(10 g, 3 times daily, orally) for hemostasis and improving vision and accepted anti-COVID-19 treatment at the same time. Close follow-up was conducted in the outpatient clinic. After 4 months, the hemorrhage had mostly resolved, and the visual acuity in the left eye had recovered to 1.0 but the in the right eye remained at 0.6. By the 5th month after the onset of symptoms, the patient’s visual acuity had fully recovered to 1.0 in both eyes .