The patient was an 8-year-old male who was diagnosed as severe hemophilia A (FVIII activity < 1%) when he was 2 years old and had received coagulation FVIII replacement therapy for 6 years in our hospital. At 6 days before admission, the boy had red rash on both lower limbs and feet without abdominal pain and joint pain. He was diagnosed with HSP in the local hospital and treated with cetirizine orally for 3 days. At 3 days before admission, the rash of the child did not subside and abdominal pain occurred, and received omeprazole by intravenous injection in our hospital for 2 days. When we saw the patient, his red rash on both lower limbs and feet accompany with abdominal pain without joint pain. Bloody stool occurred on the 3rd day after hospitalization for HSP. During hospitalization, the ultrasound was done and the intravenous methylprednisolone was administered to relieve inflammation-swelling caused by HSP. Recombinant coagulation FVIII was used to treat hemophilia A and aminomethylbenzoic acid, etamsylate, haemocoagulase agkistrodon and somatostatin were used to stop bleeding. According to changes in the patient’s condition, such as the presence of hematochezia, we increased the dose of intravenous methylprednisolone from 2 mg/kg/d to 4 mg/kg/d in a timely manner, and reduced 20 mg every 2–3 days when his fecal occult blood test normal. Hemostatic drugs were stopped when no red blood cells are found in the stool. Table fully depicts the timeline of drugs administered to the child and their doses. Tables and show the laboratory tests and gastrointestinal ultrasound results during hospitalization. The patient did not complain of fever, dizziness, palpitations or fatigue, and his vital signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, pulse rate, blood pressure and oximetry) were stable under continuous monitoring system.
A complete blood count showed mild anemia, and fresh frozen plasma and packed red blood cells were provided simultaneously to treat anemia. Furthermore, biochemical examination showed no abnormal liver or renal function or electrolytes. We adjusted the dosage of recombinant coagulation FVIII and methylprednisolone according to the coagulation test, FVIII concentration and gastrointestinal ultrasound and added hemostatic drugs. On the 6th day after onset of hematochezia, the patient’s abdominal pain was relieved, and his stool test results and gastrointestinal ultrasound findings were within normal limits.. Finally, he demonstrated no signs of hemorrhage and was safely discharged from the hospital after palpable purpura disappeared.