The patient was a 26-year-old primiparous woman with a singleton pregnancy. At 15 + 1 wk, the second-trimester serologic screening showed an elevated risk for Down’s syndrome, at 1 in 146 [alpha-fetoprotein: 0.67 multiples of the median (MoM); free β human chorionic gonadotropin: 3.18 MoM; unconjugated estradiol: 0.76 MoM]. The patient requested further testing.
The patient has no present illness.
The patient has no past illness.
The patient denied any personal or family history.
The patient’s basic vital signs were within normal limits. She requested NIPT before amniocentesis.
Maternal plasma was collected for NIPT at 15 + 3 wk. We followed the standard method for performing NIPT, which has been described previously. The NIPT results showed a high risk for trisomy 21, with a Z-score of 16.21 for chromosome 21; however, there was a low risk for sex chromosome aneuploidy (the Z-score of chromosome X and Y was -12.88 and 79.64, respectively).
To confirm the positive NIPT results, amniocentesis was performed at 19 + 2 wk. Copy-number variation sequencing (CNV-seq) and karyotype analysis performed on amniotic fluid cells suggested that the fetal karyotype was XXY, as shown in Figures and and Table . The patient underwent genetic counseling and decided to terminate her pregnancy. After written informed consent for the procedure and further testing was obtained, she underwent an induced abortion at 22 + 5 wk. Samples from the fetus were collected after delivery - including fetal muscle tissue, the middle segment of the umbilical cord, and placental tissue - and sent for CNV-seq. The placental samples included a mid-thickness section from the center of the placenta and samples from the center and margin of the maternal face, and the center and margin of the fetal face. As shown in Table and Figure , the fetal muscle tissue and umbilical cord tissue had a karyotype of 47,XXY - matching that of the amniotic fluid cells. However, the center and margin samples from the fetal face and the margin of the maternal face of the placenta had a mosaic karyotype of 47,XY,+21 (65%) and 46,XY (35%), respectively. The mid-thickness sample from the placental center and the sample from the center of the maternal face of the placenta demonstrated a mosaic of 47,XY,+21; 47,XXY; and 46,XY with different proportions in each sample. In brief, the placenta was a mosaic of 47, XY,+21; 47,XXY; and 46,XY.
No obvious abnormality was detected upon fetal ultrasonography.