A 72-year-old man suffering from type 2 diabetes with paroxysmal II degree AVB, right bundle branch block, and normal left ventricular ejection fraction was implanted with a VVI ILP (Nanostim, St Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA) on May 2014. Following the patient’s preference, it was decided to use an ILP instead of traditional pacing system. The ILP was successfully implanted in the low septum of the right ventricle. Routine device and clinical follow-up visits were performed every 6 months, reporting stable electrical parameters (sensing: 10 mV, Capture Threshold 1.3 v@ 0.24 ms and impedance: 870 Ohm), a low percentage of VP <5%, and a good clinical status. The ILP was programmed in VVI mode at 40 beats per minute (b.p.m.) to promote spontaneous conduction. On June 2020, during a routine follow-up, the patient reported the onset of exertional asthenia and dyspnoea, and an increased percentage of VP (42%) was detected. The electrocardiogram examination revealed a high percentage of VVI asynchronous pacing . Cardiovascular examination was normal.
A change of programming was attempted to enable rate responsiveness, but without any improvement. Moreover, we performed an echocardiography examination that demonstrated a normal ejection fraction of both the right and left ventricle without any valvular abnormalities.
An upgrade to synchronous AV PM was proposed to increase AVS. The patient’s preference was for AV ILP. After an evaluation on the safety and feasibility of extraction, it was decided to implant a new ILP instead of retrieving the old one. During the procedure, the previous implanted VVI ILP was left to VVI 40 b.p.m. and the magnet mode was switched off. Implantation was performed according to the manufacturer’s training recommendation via the right femoral access. Micra™ Delivery Catheter (105-cm-long) inserted in the Micra™ Introducer (27-Fr outer diameter) allowed to deploy the AVS ILP on the mid-ventricular septum to avoid possible interference with the old VVI ILP . Electrical measurements were good [right ventricular (RV) sensing: 6 mV, Capture threshold: 0.63 V @ 0.24 ms and impedance: 700 ohm]. A pull and hold test was performed to confirm the stability of the ILP fixation. At the end of the procedure, the previous VVI ILP was switched off. No complication occurred and the electrical parameters were confirmed the day after. The AV-ILP was programmed in VDD 40 b.p.m. . At the 6th-month follow-up visit, the electrical parameters were stable and the AVS was achieved 72.6% of the time as showed by remote ILP control . No interactions were observed between the two devices. The patient-reported improvement in symptoms with a normal functional class, without any bleeding and infectious complications.