A 65-year-old man (75 kg, 170 cm, BMI = 25,95 kg/m2) with HME and extra-articular multi-axial lower limb deformity was admitted to the orthopedic department due to a severe continual right knee pain caused by secondary osteoarthritis (Kellgren-Lawrence grade IV). He was operated on several times in the past due to a chronic pain caused by nerves compression by a large exostoses, which did not revealed malignant transformation in histopathological examinations. Although, he did not have any traumatic episode before but reported gradual knee distortion. Physical examination revealed highly restricted range of motion with 30○ flexion contracture, 110○ of flexion range and 30○ valgus deformation with medial and antero-posterior knee instability. He scored 5 points in a Lovett’s muscle strength scale. No neurovascular disorders were found. Additionally, patient reached 2 points in clinical and 40 points in functional Knee Society Score (KSS) evaluation.
A long standing x-ray (AP and lateral view) and computed tomography (CT) were done. These examinations showed bilateral valgus femoral necks, 20○ coronal and 40○ sagittal tibial plane deviation, 15○ valgus knee deformity with anterior subluxation, proximal tibio-fibular adhesion and 20○ ankles deformations . Regarding to clinical and radiological assessment, patient was qualified to one-stage TKA combined with TSO. Preoperative osteotomy planning and digital prosthesis templating were done with the use of OrthoView™ software . Due to relatively low risk of development of malignant sarcoma transformation, negative histopathological findings in the past (after exostoses resections), no changes in preoperative x-rays in relation to x-rays made two years before the surgery, a bone scan to exclude malignant lesions was not performed.
A midline skin incision elongated to the level of tibia’s deformation was done. Closed-wedge osteotomy was set in preoperatively planned CORA point (Center of Rotation and Angulation) at the level of tibia deformation, 8 cm below plateau. The osteotomy was closed without cutting of the fibula, after osteophytes resection and partial release of lower part of tibio-fibular adhesion. Subsequently, parapatellar approach was made and the bone cuts were performed. Femur first technique was applied. After the femoral bone cuts, tibial subsequent intramedullary reamers were used. The osteotomy was temporary stabilized on final reamer in proper rotation and alignment. Following the surgical technique, proximal tibial resection guide was slide over the top of the reamer and the cut was done. To improve implant stability semi-constrained condylar knee prosthesis was used (Triathlon TS, Stryker, Mahwah, USA; femoral implant No.5 with 100 mm stem and 20 mm diameter, tibial implant No.4 with 150 mm stem and 10 mm diameter and poly insert 9 mm). In relation to preoperative CT planning, 8 mm tibial offset at 3 o’clock was confirmed intraoperatively and prepared by a bushing guide. Hybrid cementation technique with cemented tibial baseplate and femoral component, without stems cementation was used. Bone fragments at the osteotomy level in proper axis and rotation were immobilized intramedullary by matched press-fit cementless tibial stem without the additional fixation materials. At the end of the surgery, full extension with 120○ of flexion range, proper patellar traction and joint stability were achieved.
Full weight-bearing with flexion up to 90○ was allowed immediately. To avoid the rotation moves patient was equipped with a long knee stabilizer. Walking with the assurance of 2 crutches with above postoperative care strategy was recommended for 6 weeks. Long standing x-ray in two projections was performed 10 days after the surgery .
The first follow-up visit was six weeks after the surgery. Long standing x-rays in two projections revealed no signs of implant loosening or bone fragments malposition. Patient had range of motion from 0 to 80○ with the joint stability in all planes. He did not report the knee pain and gait problems.
One year after surgery, bone union was confirmed and the patient was clinically asymptomatic . KSS evaluation revealed 80 points in clinical and 75 points in functional part that showed significant increase of his efficiency. He had full stability of the operated knee, painless range of motion from 0 to 110○ and could perform the most of daily activities. He was very satisfied with the surgical outcome and significantly improved the quality of life.