A 65-year-old female Caucasian patient, suffering from intraoral purulent discharge in her left mandibular angle and the front of her left upper jaw, was referred to our hospital by her dentist. Her medical history revealed that she had suffered from postmenopausal osteoporosis, which was initially treated with two months of alendronate (70 mg once weekly) administered orally, followed by three annual infusions of zoledronic acid (5 mg intravenously). In addition, our patient was allergic to penicillin and was treated for diabetes mellitus type II with metformin.
Intraoral examination revealed the presence of a fistula formation in her left mandibular angle in region 38 communicating with a retained left third molar. There was also a fistula formation in her upper jaw (region 22/23) communicating with her upper left lateral incisor and canine (teeth 22 and 23), which showed signs of chronic endodontic infections and had received endodontic and surgical treatment (root resection) in the past . Both sites were marked by a purulent discharge on compression which was accompanied by mild to moderate pain on palpation. A panoramic radiograph and cone beam computed tomography identified radiolucent areas at the resected apices of teeth 22 and 23 as well as the region surrounding her left lower wisdom tooth .
A fluorescence-guided removal of necrotic bone parts in her left mandibular angle was performed as previously described and her left third molar was removed . In addition, the upper jaw necrotic bone was resected under fluorescence-guidance and a root-resection of her lateral incisor and canine was carried out under general anesthesia . Furthermore, her right third molar was removed. After the procedure, our patient received an intravenous antibiotic treatment (clindamycin 600 mg, three times daily) and was discharged five days later. The antibiotic was continued for 10 days at the same dose. During the follow-up there was no sign of infection and complete mucosal closure was achieved at all sites .
Histological evaluation revealed the typical hallmarks of an early ONJ lesion, including areas of necrotic bone coinciding with signs of infections as well as areas with increased bone turnover .