A 61-year-old British Caucasian male presented to the Accident and Emergency with a one-day history of haemetemesis with coffee ground vomiting. He was an ex-alcoholic with no history of chronic liver disease or peptic ulceration. After initial resuscitation, he underwent upper GI endoscopy under sedation which demonstrated large clots in the stomach . Repeat upper GI endoscopy was therefore performed urgently under general anaesthesia with a therapeutic endoscope. A large, bleeding, gastric mass with a central crater was identified along the greater curvature of the stomach after the aspiration of clots. Bleeding was then controlled with the use of adrenaline injection and argon plasma coagulation. He needed a blood transfusion following the procedure. Following this, he had a CT scan which showed a well-defined, dumb-bell shaped 6 cm mass arising from the greater curvature of stomach with most of the mass being extra luminal . There was no evidence of distant lesions. He had another episode of haematemesis 48 hours after the therapeutic endoscopy necessitating 5 units of blood transfusion. It was therefore decided to proceed with an upper GI endoscopy with a view to proceed to immediate laparotomy and resect the tumor, which was the source of the rebleeding.
At laparotomy, the tumour was identified on the greater curvature with no evidence of liver, peritoneal, omental or lymph nodal lesions. A partial gastrectomy was performed taking a wedge of the stomach with clearance from the tumour .
The histology report showed a 7 cm , well circumscribed, non-encapsulated tumour within submucosa and muscularis propria. On microscopy the tumour was composed of spindle cells with no significant nuclear pleomorphism . The mitotic count was low (less than 5 mitosis per 50 HPF) with no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy of overlying gastric mucosa . Immunostaining of the tumor cells were strongly positive for CD117 and negative for S100, desmin, smooth muscle, and actin . The above features strongly suggested the diagnosis of GIST. He did well following surgery. Subsequently he was entered into a randomised controlled trial for Glivac.