A 5-year-old boy with a more than 2 months history of otogenic CVST of the right sigmoid sinus was referred by pediatrician consultants. Despite adequate antibiotics and anticoagulant therapy, the child developed progressive bilateral papilledema and visual loss. An MR imaging (MRI) – MR venography (MRV) of the head showed a thrombotic occlusion of the right transverse-sigmoid sinus associated with a tight stenosis of the left transverse sinus [ and b] and bilateral enlargement of the optic nerve sheath with bulging of the optic discs . Serial consecutive measurements of the visual acuity revealed a progressive and dramatic visual loss over 1 week. The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary meeting, and a decision was made to offer an endovascular reopening of the occluded right side, transverse-sigmoid sinus.
An informed consent signed by both parents was obtained, and the procedure was performed under general anesthetics on a biplanar angiography system (Philips Allura). A 7F guider was placed in the right jugular bulb and a diagnostic 4F catheter in the right internal carotid artery (ICA) through a femoral (venous 7F and arterial 4F) approach. After several attempts, we managed to cross the occluded segment of the sinus with a 016” guide and a 021” microcatheter. A 6 × 30 mm Solitaire (Medtronic) stent- retriever was then delivered across the thrombosed sinus, unsheathed and, after a few minutes, wait, trashed out. A second pass with the stent-retriever was repeated: each time only small and scanty clot fragments were retrieved. While attempting to cross the occlusion for the third time, the child presented a transient tachyarrhythmia (200 bpm) and hypotension requiring the anesthesiologist’s assistance with a quick resolution of the event. Once the child was hemodynamically back to normal, a dynaCT was obtained, and it resulted in normal appearances. Subsequent check angiograms showed an unsatisfactory partial reopening of the occluded sinus . A decision was made to stop the procedure after placement of two 0.21” microcatheters in the right transverse and sigmoid sinuses, respectively, their distal tips 2–3 cm apart. Then, a local infusion of rt- PA through the two microcatheters was started. The total dose of the rt-PA was titrated according to the child body weight and evenly split between the two microcatheters at a rate allowing a total 6 h infusion. The boy was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), tubed, and sedated over the night. The following morning, a single pass with two unsheathed, and side-to-side 6 × 30 mm Solitaire stent- retrievers (“double stent-retrievers” technique), followed by aspiration through the 6F guider, resulted in a satisfactory reopening of the right sigmoid sinus [ and c]. Final angiograms demonstrated an improved cerebral venous outflow . At the end of the procedure, a therapeutic dose of heparin was prescribed and the child was woken up in ICU. In the following days, the child vision progressively improved and he could play cards with his mother (recognizing the colors and numbers on the cards). A week later, the bilateral papilledema resolved with further visual acuity improvement. A follow-up MRI three weeks later showed a stable, though partial, reopening of the right sigmoid sinus with a resolution of the bilateral optic nerve sheath enlargement and disc bulging. The boy was discharged home on a full dose of fractionated heparin.