A 26-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan Sinhalese man presented to the Teaching Hospital, Peradeniya with fever, arthralgia, myalgia, and headache of 3 days’ duration. He complained of postural dizziness, nausea, and several episodes of vomiting since the previous day. At the same time, our patient has noticed increased frequency of passage of urine of 1 day duration. He denied any significant past medical history and no family history of diabetes mellitus among his first-degree relatives. He was a carpenter by profession and a nonsmoker and not an alcohol consumer.
On admission to the ward, our patient was conscious and rational, and he was complaining of thirst. He was severely dehydrated with cold, clammy peripheries and prolonged capillary refilling time. He was tachycardic with a pulse rate of 100 beats per minute. His blood pressure was 120/90 mmHg supine and 100/90 mmHg on standing. He had reduced breath sounds in his right lung base. An abdominal examination revealed a marked right hypochondrial tenderness with no clinically detectable free fluid.
On admission his packed cell volume was 55. An urgent complete blood count showed a platelet count of 15 × 103, His hemoglobin level was 15 g/dL and white cell count 4.15 × 106. His transaminases were elevated [aspartate transaminase (AST) > alanine transaminase (ALT)]. His serum creatinine level was 105 mmol/L and his serum electrolytes were normal. A bedside ultrasound scan of his abdomen showed free fluid in the hepatorenal pouch. Diagnosis of dengue hemorrhagic fever was made and fluid resuscitation started. Subsequently, the diagnosis was confirmed with a positive nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen test result on admission and positive antibodies for both immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) on day 6 of his illness.
He was noticed to produce a considerable amount of urine contrary to the degree of dehydration. A random blood sugar test result was 296 mg/dL. At the same time, his urine ketone bodies were positive and arterial blood gas (ABG) showed compensated metabolic acidosis [bicarbonate 14 mmol/L, carbon dioxide partial pressure (PCO2) 23 mmHg and base excess of ˗-11] Diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis was made in the same patient. His serum amylase level was 95 U/L (normal range 22 to 80).
Our patient was initially started on intravenous normal saline bolus of 500 mL and fluids tailed off guided by clinical parameters and packed cell volume. He was started on soluble insulin infusion 0.1 u/kg (6 u per hour in this 60 kg man) and hourly blood sugar monitoring. Once his sugar level was less than 200 mg/dL, he was started on sugar-containing foods (glucose, biscuits, cake, and so on) and his sugar levels were maintained between 100 and 200 mg/dL. Insulin infusion rate was also tailed off according to the sugar level; we did not administer intravenous dextrose as it might have worsened the plasma leak from the dengue fever. Once his urine ketone bodies test results were negative, he was started on a regular dose of subcutaneous insulin and insulin infusion was stopped.
After recovery from dengue hemorrhagic fever, he was commenced on a routine diet and liberal fluids. After 2 days of recovering from the critical phase of dengue fever, his blood sugars were within normal limits without insulin, and his urine ketone bodies were persistently negative. His arterial blood gas showed normal bicarbonate. He was discharged on the fifth day after admission without insulin. He was reviewed in the ward 2 days after discharge and was asymptomatic. His fasting blood sugar was 98 mg/dL, postprandial blood sugar was 136 mg/dL, and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies were negative. Our patient was reviewed in the ward 5 months after his illness. He was back to his premorbid state. His glycosylated hemoglobin value was 5.8%, which was in the nondiabetic range, with a fasting blood sugar value of 92 mg/dL.