52 year old female presented to the department of otorhinolaryngology with complain of unilateral gradually progressive swelling over the left side of the nose below the eyes since 2 months. The swelling was painless to begin with, but patient gives history of pain over the swelling since 2 weeks.
There are no aggravating or relieving factors. No history of radiation of pain. No history of recent trauma. Patient also gives history of watering of left eye since 2 days. Not associated with nasal obstruction, nasal discharge. No history of visual disturbance. There was no history of significant weight loss or loss of appetite. No significant medical history (past history of tuberculosis, exposure to patients with tuberculosis), or family history.
On examination she was conscious cooperative and well oriented to time place and person. Vitals were stable.
A swelling measuring 1.5 x 2 cm was noticed on the lateral aspect of the nasal bridge, inferior to the infraorbital ridge. Firm in consistency, irregular surface, ill-defined margins, non-tender, mobile in horizontal and vertical direction, no local rise of temperature, no skin changes and skin was pinch able.
Rest of the ear, nose, throat and neck examination were within normal limits. No palpable neck lymph nodes.
On investigation
Blood parameters were within normal limits except for ESR, which was 76mm/hr.
HIV, HbsAg and HCV were negative.
FNAC was done from the lesion which showed multiple inflammatory cells- suggestive of chronic inflammation. A plain CT scan was done which showed- soft tissue density noted adjacent to anterior wall of left maxillary sinus. The lesion is not involving the anterior wall of sinus. .
Chest x-ray PA view was normal
Patient was planned for excision of the lesion under ga and was taken up for surgery after anaesthetic pre-op fitness. A cosmetically better approach was planned for this case i.e endoscopic sublabial approach to the swelling. Lesion was identified, it was a well encapsulated lesion present over the inferior orbital margin extending 1cm from the medial canthi laterally to the root of the nose. Lesion was removed in toto and sent for histopathology .
The histopathology showed epithelioid cells with caseation suggestive of tubercular pathology .
Later the patient was subjected to Mantoux test and sputum for acid fast bacilli and was found negative for both test. Patient was started on category 1 antitubercular treatment. And patient has successfully completed 4 months with good compliance and no recurrence of swelling post-surgery.