A 49-year-old healthy female patient presented with anterolateral pain in the upper right thigh, multiple skin contusions, and pain in the left wrist and chest after falling from an electric bike on August 10, 2022. The contusion of the skin of the right thigh was taken into account, and the wound was disinfected with iodophor after the fracture was excluded from the community hospital. However, pain at the lesion site increased, resulting in redness and ecchymosis. When the patient was referred to the outpatient department upon her return visit, an MRI of the right thigh was performed, which suggested right thigh anterolateral subcutaneous effusion and soft tissue mild edema. However, soft tissue edema was diagnosed, and an inexperienced surgeon provided a conservative treatment by administering oral analgesics. Suffering from long-term unremitted pain and swelling, the patient was admitted to the inpatient department for further treatment three weeks later. The symptoms after admission were mainly swelling and pain in the right thigh with anterior and lateral skin abrasions and a slightly red complexion but normal skin temperature. A wide range of skin fluctuations and tenderness existed in the anterolateral thigh, but there was no vertical axis pain in the right lower limb . Magnetic resonance imaging showed no fracture, but an abnormal signal was located in the anterolateral part of the right thigh, between the iliac fascia and the subcutaneous soft tissue. The boundary of the subcutaneous mass was clear, with a range measuring 107 × 15 × 150 mm, and no pseudo fibrous capsule was found. Furthermore, the lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted images (T1WI) and hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences (T2WI) . The lesion's clinical manifestations and imaging appearances were consistent with an MLL, therefore, we diagnosed it as a closed degloving soft tissue injury.
Given the size of the lesion, the patient underwent surgical intervention which included an incision and drainage along with tissue debridement and a surgically placed drain. After completion of the sterile preoperative preparation, an incision in the skin and subcutaneous tissue was made along the anterolateral side of the right thigh, with profuse exudation of light red fluids. We found a space between the fascia lata and the subcutaneous fat, which should not exist in a standard anatomical structure. After irrigating the cavity with a large amount of iodophor, hydrogen peroxide, and saline, we used vacuum-assisted closure therapy to promote cavity closure. The cavity was filled with polyethylene alcohol–hydrated seaweed salt foam dressing, with a semi-permeable bio-membrane covering the incision. Then, a continuous vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) device and a percutaneous drain were used to exhaust blood, lymph, and fatty debris. After 1 week, we removed the VSD and used non-absorbable, non-braided sutures to close the deep fascia and skin of the incision , with an elastic bandage binding the injury area of the right thigh. Finally, the patient reported favorable outcomes; wound pain and a wave-like feeling in the anterolateral right thigh disappeared at discharge .