A 33-year-old manual worker male fell from a six-meter height on his outstretched left hand. He sustained subcapsular hematoma of the spleen which was treated conservatively based on an expectant management policy.
The hand injury was missed from the start. All attention was directed toward the spleen injury. Upon discovery of the hand injury the patient was referred to our hospital eight days after the trauma. On examination, there was a wound on the volar aspect of the palm between the proximal and distal palmar creases with only the head of the fifth metacarpal was exposed. X-ray showed dorsal dislocation of the metacarpophalangeal joint of the index, long, ring and little fingers, in addition to old non united scaphoid waist fracture . Under general anesthesia, trial of closed reduction of the open dislocation was attempted but failed. Decision was taken to proceed for open reduction using the volar approach. The wound was irrigated copiously with sterile saline, explored for foreign material . Incision following the distal palmar and thenar creases was utilized. The incision at the palmar crease included the wound exposing the fifth metacarpal head .
Starting with the little finger, the neurovascular bundles were dissected free and protected, followed by Al pulley release to decrease the tension of the long flexors. Exposure of the joint revealed the volar plate which was intervening between the metacarpal heads and the base of the proximal phalanx. Reduction of the joint and repair of the volar plate was accomplished. Following reduction of the little and ring finger, the tension of the long flexors of the middle finger was partially relieved. Retraction was done easily with no need for pulley release. Reduction of the 2nd metacarpophalangeal joint occurred spontaneously following reduction of the middle finger MCP joint. A dorsal splint was applied to the patient. MCP joints were fixed at 45 degrees of flexion with full extension of proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. Immobilization continued for two weeks, followed by progressive physiotherapy under supervision of a hand therapist. At three-month-follow up the patient regained near full range of motion (ROM) of the fingers with symmetrical grip strength to the healthy side.