A 91-year-old woman presented with severe abdominal pain and vomiting. She revealed a 12-h history of abdominal pain that had suddenly worsened and was associated with vomiting 1 h prior to presentation. She was otherwise healthy and denied the regular use of any medications.
A physical examination showed a blood pressure of 96/58 mmHg, heart rate of 95 beats/min, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, and hypothermia. An abdominal examination showed a diffusely rigid abdomen with rebound tenderness over the entire abdomen and reduced bowel sounds. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography showed a paraesophageal hernia in which part of the stomach was incarcerated . Free air and ascites were observed in the hernia sac and peritoneal space. The patient developed gastrointestinal perforation-induced peritonitis; however, the association between the incarcerated hernia and the perforation was unclear.
An emergency laparotomy was performed through the upper abdominal midline incision, and we observed that part of the stomach was incarcerated within the paraesophageal hernia sac, which also contained ascitic fluid that appeared like gastric fluid. After reducing the stomach, we detected a perforation measuring 7 cm on the posterior wall of the gastric fundus . The affected part of the stomach showed full-thickness necrosis, for which we performed total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction. During the operation, the patient’s hemodynamics was unstable; thus, hernia repair only involved closure of the orifice, and fundoplication was not performed. The operative time was 3 h 22 min and the amount of bleeding was limited to 104 ml. The resected specimen showed an ischemic necrosis–induced perforation measuring 7 × 4.5 cm on the posterior wall of the gastric fundus . Postoperatively, the patient remained hemodynamically unstable despite maximal resuscitative efforts and died on postoperative day 2.
After the operation, the patient remained hemodynamically unstable despite maximal resuscitative efforts. We considered that the distributive shock was affected by the surgery and sepsis on postoperative day 1. However, her condition deteriorated on postoperative day 2. Although we suspected a major leakage, considering her age and hemodynamics, we did not conclude that reoperation would improve her condition effectively. Thus, we informed her family about her condition and decided on nonoperative management. She died on postoperative day 2.