A 74-year-old man noticed a hard, painless mass in his right parotid gland 2 months before his initial visit to our institution. His past medical history included prostate cancer, which was treated with definitive radiotherapy 2 years and 8 months ago. There was no evidence of facial nerve paralysis. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy findings of the parotid mass were consistent with those of CXPA. Positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) revealed an enhanced mass in the right parotid gland, without enlarged cervical lymph nodes. A total right parotidectomy along with right neck dissection and facial nerve reconstruction using cervical nerves was performed. Macroscopically, the tumor measured 25 × 17 mm at its largest dimensions and had a cartilage-like whitish cut surface with focal invasion of the surrounding fat tissue . The mass consisted of broad hyaline tissue with nests of tumor cells . At least two tissue components were identified: high-grade carcinoma with a cribriform growth pattern and comedo-like necrosis in the nests and slit-like tubular epithelium with myoepithelial cells at the base . CXPA with a predominant SDC component was diagnosed on the basis of the presence of a cartilaginous, hyaline, nodular background and benign pleomorphic adenoma in the nodule.
CT performed 4 months after a radical surgery revealed recurrence in the right cervical nodes, which was treated by right neck dissection. The recurrent tumor was histologically diagnosed as SDC . The primary tumor was positive (score 3+) for membrane-localized HER2/neu protein (Dako, HerceptestTM) . Dual-color chromogenic in situ hybridization revealed that HER2 gene was highly amplified (Ventana, INFORM HER2 Dual ISH) . Five months later, CT revealed multiple bilateral pulmonary metastases , and systemic treatment with paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) and trastuzumab (8 mg/kg dose loading followed by 6 mg/kg every 3 weeks) was initiated every 21 days. All pulmonary metastatic lesions had regressed after 4 treatment cycles , and CR was confirmed after 7 cycles. The patient was maintained on trastuzumab alone (6 mg/kg every 3 weeks), and no evidence of disease progression was observed at the last contact with the patient, which was approximately 13 months after initiation of therapy.