A 84-year-old female was scheduled for bilateral total hip replacement due to osteoarthritis of both hips . Medical history included chronic Hepatitis C virus infection with no other medical conditions reported. The patient was allowed to decide which hip would be performed first. 5 months after scheduling, the patient was admitted for surgery arriving in a wheelchair, and new pelvis radiographs were taken . Other causes of the rapid destruction of the hip joint were ruled out, and the patient was diagnosed of bilateral RDO. Keeping in mind a possible septic etiology, despite there was no history of septicemia and inflammatory markers were elevated due to chronic hepatitis, we decided to take samples for microbiology and histology during the procedures. The right hip was performed through an anterior approach by a senior surgeon following standard antibiotic prophylaxis with 2 g of cefazolin 20 min before skin incision. An uncemented prosthesis was implanted with no complications. Femoral head destruction led to an important defect in the posterior and superior wall of the acetabulum. This conditioned high and medial implantation of the cup to achieve stability. 4 days after the first procedure was performed, one out of six cultures was positive for Enterococcus faecium with no local and systemic signs of infection or pain. Synovial biopsy revealed fibrosis, chronic inflammation, calcifications, macrophages, and osteoclast giant cells with no signs of acute inflammation. Urine cultures were negative. The Musculoskeletal Infection Society criteria were not met and the patient did not receive antibiotic treatment. 6 days later, after a favorable post-operative evolution, the left hip was performed through a posterior approach by a different senior surgeon with the same hip system but with a cemented stem . In the left hip, the acetabulum was also affected by the bone destruction, but the cup was able to be placed at a correct height. This ended up with a leg length discrepancy that is well tolerated by the patient taking into account her previous functional status. 5 days after the second procedure and following a post-operative period without complications, the patient was discharged before obtaining definitive microbiological results. Cement was loaded with gentamycin, and the same antibiotic prophylaxis protocol was used. For the second surgery, three out of four samples were positive for the same microorganism. 2 weeks later, the patient was readmitted due to wound drainage of the right hip. Surgical debridement and irrigation with the exchange of the modular components were performed. Empiric antibiotic treatment was started with teicoplanin, amikacin, and rifampicin according to the Infectious Diseases Department’s protocol at our institution. Amikacin was stopped 3 days after surgery because no Gram-negative Bacilli were isolated. All four samples obtained during the debridement were positive for E. faecium 5 days after surgery with identical sensitivity tests as for the first hip. Pathogen-specific antibiotic treatment was then started with amoxicillin and rifampicin. 2 weeks after debridement and 1 month after the first surgery, the patient was again readmitted due to wound drainage of the same right hip. Again, surgical debridement and exchange of modular components were performed continuing with the same antibiotic treatment. For the second debridement, one out of five samples was positive for Propionibacterium acnes. Amoxicilin treatment was followed during 3 months. At 18 months after surgery, the patient had recovered to previous full activity. Blood tests at 18 months showed normal C-reactive protein levels and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 40 mm/h. In the last X-ray control, there were no signs of loosening . Patient regained complete gait independence without pain. No further complications were reported.