During mid-April 2020, a 39-year-old woman with previous medical history of hypertension controlled with medication, type 2 diabetes mellitus of recent diagnosis controlled with medication, and cholecystectomy (6 years ago) was admitted to a teaching hospital in Barranquilla, Colombia, and presented with symptoms of progressive generalised weakness for 6 days, predominantly involving the lower limbs. Twenty days prior to admission, she had an episode of illness consisting of ageusia, anosmia and intense headache for which she had multiple consultations without improvement of the symptoms. She also complained of intense myalgias and symmetric, ascendant and generalised weakness in the lower limbs, which gradually progressed to inability to walk for which she was referred to our hospital. Upon admission, the patient reported symptoms of headache, malaise, generalised myalgias, cough without expectoration and inability to walk. Her blood pressure on sitting was 167/88 mmHg, heart rate was regular (74 beats per min), respiratory rate was 18 breaths per min (bpm) and SaO2 was 95% on room air. Based on her neurological examination, she was found to have peripheral facial diplegia, generalised hyporeflexia, generalised quadriparesis with lower limb predominance, Medical Research Council (MRC) muscular strength of 2/5 in the lower limbs and 4/5 in the upper limbs. She also had left arm paraesthesia. No affectation was observed in the bulbar muscles. During the clinical evolution she had generalised flaccid areflexia. She was later shifted to the intensive care unit due to hypertensive emergency (189/112 mmHg), and progressive diaphragmatic weakness with 36 bpm, without breath sounds in auscultation, which could indicate dysautonomic symptoms. Table shows the results of the initial laboratory tests indicating leukocytosis, neutrophilia (79.90%, with a neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio of 16.27), lactate dehydrogenase and elevated D-Dimer levels. Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels were normal. The cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed protein cytological dissociation (298.3/0.05). Elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein is a hallmark of GBS. The chest X-ray and chest CT scan (128-slice SOMATOM, Siemens, GE) were normal. A nerve conduction and electromyography test confirmed the clinical evaluation of the GBS diagnosis. The MRI showed an incipient degenerative cervical disc disease at the C5-C6 level, normal thoracic spine, a Pfirrmann IV degenerative lumbar disc disease with central protrusions and flavum ligamentum hypertrophy at levels L3-L4, L4-L5 and L5-S1, which are not related with the clinical signs and symptoms of the patient.
The patient was managed with supportive care; administered with enoxaparin (40 mg SC per day), losartan (50 mg BID), meperidine IV for muscle pain, hydroxychloroquine (400 mg twice first day and later on 200 mg BID per 10 days) and dexamethasone (8 mg every 8 h during 3 days); and received standard care. She did not require supplemental oxygen or ventilation, and no alterations were observed in the chest images. She also received plasmapheresis for 5 days, one session per day. After three sessions, the patient had neurological improvement, (MRC) muscular strength of 3/5 in the lower limbs, and improved respiratory rate (20 bpm). During the hospitalization, the patient underwent two nasal swab tests for SARS-CoV-2. The first RT-PCR test (Charité/Berlin Protocol) for SARS-CoV-2 was negative, whereas the second RT-PCR test (Charité/Berlin Protocol) for SARS-CoV-2 was positive. She was discharged after 20 days of hospitalisation with improvement of neurological status (MRC of 4/5 in the lower limbs) and respiratory symptoms.