A 76-year-old man was referred to our hospital with IHCC. Five years earlier, he had been treated for ITP at another hospital, and had been administered prednisolone 5 mg/day. At the time of ITP diagnosis in the prior hospital, the value of the platelet-associated IgG (PAIgG) was elevated and all of the anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome (APS)-related antibodies were negative. In addition, only the number of the megakaryocytes increased in bone marrow aspiration, which suggests the hematopoietic efficacy in bone marrow was maintained. Helicobacter pylori was previously eradicated in the other hospital.
His past medical history was otherwise unremarkable. More recently, his sister had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, and he therefore requested a tumor marker evaluation. The evaluation revealed elevated carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), and a liver tumor was detected by computed tomography (CT). Thus, he was referred to our hospital for detailed examination and treatment for the liver tumor.
Multidetector row CT revealed a liver tumor that was 25 mm in diameter and had a low density with poor enhancement. The peripheral bile duct branch of segment 3 was dilated; therefore, we suspected the periductal infiltrating type of IHCC , which prompted us to perform left hemi-hepatectomy.
His laboratory findings on admission are summarized in Table and included a platelet count of 3.5 × 104/μL. To increase platelet levels prior to surgery, romiplostim was administered subcutaneously (70 μg per week for 3 weeks) and eltrombopag was administer orally (25 mg per day for 23 days), as TPO-RA. Because oral medications we are more convenient, romiplostim was switched to eltrombopag. His platelet count increased to 14.1 × 104/μL . After starting eltrombopag, fibrin degradation product (FDP) and d-dimer levels were slightly elevated. Therefore, we performed lower limb venous ultrasonography, which revealed venous thrombosis in the veins of both soleus muscles. We consulted with cardiovascular medicine and hematology teams about our patient’s case. Because his thrombosis was venous rather than arterial, it was thought to be largely unrelated to the platelet increase. Accordingly, the patient’s cancer was suspected to have caused his thrombosis, via increased activation of clotting factors. In addition, we speculated that the risk of the thrombus in the soleus muscles causing pulmonary thromboembolism was extremely low. Thus, eltrombopag was discontinued. After eltrombopag cessation, the platelet count slightly decreased to 10.0 × 104/μL, but remained at a sufficient level; subsequently, the operation was performed on schedule .
We performed left hemi-hepatectomy combined with left-sided caudate lobectomy and regional lymphadenectomy, because the lymph nodes around the common hepatic artery were larger than the preoperatively measured size. The operative time was 412 min, and blood loss was 395 mL, requiring no transfusion. Pathological findings were cholangiocellular carcinoma of the mass forming type, and bile duct infiltration type.
Although his platelet count decreased to 4.3 × 104/μL just after the operation, eltrombopag and prednisolone were administered on the following day. His platelet count decreased to 2.4 × 104/μL at postoperative day (POD) 3, but increased gradually thereafter, which made blood transfusion unnecessary. Drainage characteristics were not remarkable and bleeding and bile leakage was not observed after the operation. Although chylorrhea developed on POD 8, it was improved through the use of a fat-restricted diet. The drain was removed on POD 14, and he was discharged from the hospital on POD 18 without complications (such as bleeding, sepsis, pneumonia, or portal vein thrombosis). Eltrombopag was continued until POD 37. The platelet count decreased to 3–4 × 104/μL again, which was the same as the preoperative level. However, rebound phenomenon requiring platelet transfusion was not observed.