A 65-year-old seemingly well male was referred to our clinic due to hypertension and hypokalemia. He denied any discomfort in the past few months. However, vague symptoms of muscle weakness with cramping, polyuria, and nocturia were noted upon further interview. During his annual health check-up six months ago, he was diagnosed with hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. On physical examination, blood pressure was 148/72 mmHg. There were no purple striae, central obesity, buffalo hump, proximal muscle weakness, or skin hyperpigmentation. His serum potassium level was 2.2 mmol/l. Hormonal studies demonstrated excess of serum cortisol with loss of diurnal pattern, elevated urine free cortisol and a non-suppressible dexamethasone test. The aldosterone level and plasma renin activity were in normal limits. The laboratory results of hormonal studies are summarized in Table . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 7.8 × 4.8 cm heterogenous lobulated enhancing mass lesion at the right adrenal gland with suspicious local invasion to the posterior segment of the liver . To reduce the cortisol level before operation, etomidate 2 mg/hr was infused and the serum cortisol level decreased from 59.95 μg/dl to 13.3 μg/dl in 48 hours. One week after diagnosis, he received surgical removal of his right adrenal tumor, retrocaval lymph nodes and wedge resection of the liver. Grossly, it was a bulky tumor, measuring 11.6 × 7.0 × 5.1 cm in size with irregular border and central necrosis. Microscopic examination revealed a sheet architectural pattern and focal necrosis. The neoplastic cells had acidophilic cytoplasm with pleomorphism, hyperchromasia, and high nuclear grade. There was sinusoidal and capsular invasion. The immunohistochemical stains revealed that the tumor cells were immunoreactive for melan A and alpha-inhibin diffusely and for calretinin focally. Based on the Weiss system, the tumor was classified as adrenocortical carcinoma. The liver and the retrocaval lymph nodes showed evidence of metastasis . According to the European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumors (ENSAT) staging system, the tumor was classified as T4N1M1, stage IV. Shortly after the operation, the patient presented with severe sepsis with recurrent hypercortisolism. The patient and his family refused further therapy under critical status and the patient died as a result of Fournier’s gangrene with septic shock on the 59th day after diagnosis.