An 83-year-old female sought assistance due to weight loss (10 kg), epigastric fullness and regurgitation of solid food over a three-month period. The patient presented mild hypertension that was under control by means of monotherapy (enalapril maleate) and had undergone partial gastric resection due to a peptic ulcer 35 years earlier.
On clinical examination, an epigastric mass was palpated. Rectal and vaginal examinations showed no alterations. From esophagogastroscopy, the following were observed: Billroth II gastrectomy and diffuse thickening and infiltrative appearance of the gastric stump mucosa, from the esophagogastric junction to the gastrojejunostomy site, suggestive of linitis plastica. Histopathological examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells. A computed tomography scan showed a thickening of the gastric stump from the cardia to the gastrojejunostomy site; there was apparent invasion of the transverse colon and pancreas tail. Colonoscopy confirmed the presence of transmural invasion of the colon.
The patient underwent open total gastrectomy along with D2 lymphadenectomy, segmental colectomy, distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, cholecystectomy and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The operation lasted four hours and the patient was then moved to the intensive care unit. During the postoperative period, the patient presented nosocomial pneumonia that required treated using broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy and developed deep venous thrombosis in her left leg that needed anticoagulation. Enteral nutrition through a jejunostomy was introduced on the fourth day after the operation and oral feeding was started on the tenth day. The patient was discharged from hospital 28 days after surgery, at the time when antibiotic therapy ended and anticoagulation with oral drugs had been achieved.
Histopathological examination on the surgical specimen revealed that it comprised a poorly differentiated, ulcerated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells, which infiltrated the gastric wall and invaded the colon segment. Angiolymphatic and perineural invasion were present; the surgical margins were free; none of the lymph node presented metastases (0/15); the TNM classification was T4N0 (stage IIIA). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed diffuse positivity for AE1/AE3; 40% of the sample was positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin, thus characterizing a differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (NET). Hence, the diagnosis of gastric stump intermediate-grade malignant mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma (MANEC) was confirmed, with predominance of the exocrine phenotype.
Adjuvant therapy was used based on the most common tumor cell type, and the most aggressive type (adenocarcinoma) was taken into consideration. We used postoperative bolus-based chemotherapy consisting of a combination of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus leucovorin (LEU), along with sandwiched chemoradiation therapy of a bolus of 5-FU plus LEU as a radiosensitizer.
The patient presented mild symptoms during the first two courses of chemotherapy, such as abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, but no dose reduction was applied. The third course was administered with concomitant locoregional radiotherapy. After ten days, the patient presented significant gastrointestinal symptoms comprising diarrhea, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain, and the radiation therapy was suspended. The treatment continued with chemotherapy alone until five cycles had been completed, with mild gastrointestinal symptoms. The patient has been followed up for one year since the surgery, and the last CT scan did not show any signs of recurrence.