A 73-year-old woman presented with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). She was found unconscious at home and transferred to the hospital. She had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. Her consciousness level was Glasgow Coma Scale E3V4M5. The SAH grade was Hunt and Hess Grade 3 and WFNS Grade 4. The thickest hematoma of the SAH was noted in the interhemispheric fissure on computed tomography (CT) . CT angiography and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed an azygos ACA with hypoplasia of the A1 segment of the right ACA . Three-dimensional rotational angiography indicated a small and conical aneurysm measuring 0.7 mm in height, with a 1.2 mm neck located on the bifurcation of the distal azygos trunk. This small aneurysm was arising from the distal end of the azygos trunk to the left pericallosal artery . This aneurysm was considered to be ruptured because of the absence of obvious aneurysms on other angiography and the distribution of the SAH in the CT. DSA after waiting for 4 days under sedation showed obvious enlargement of the aneurysm . This small aneurysm was diagnosed as a ruptured BLA located on the distal bifurcation of an azygos trunk based on its size, shape, and growth. Direct clipping and endovascular treatment using simple coiling and balloon-assisted coiling seemed to have a high risk for intraoperative rupture due to the BLA. Trapping with an anastomosis was also difficult because the aneurysm was located on the azygos trunk. Therefore, it was decided to perform stent-assisted coiling (SAC) on the same day as the follow-up DSA. Immediately after the follow-up DSA, dual antiplatelet agents were administered in loading doses (aspirin 200 mg and clopidogrel 300 mg) 4 h before the start of the endovascular treatment. First, a 6-Fr FUBUKI guiding sheath (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) was inserted into the right femoral artery and advanced to the left cervical ICA. A Headway 17 microcatheter (Microvention, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA) was navigated over a CHIKAI 0.35-mm (0.014-inch) microwire (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) into the left pericallosal artery with a 3.4-Fr Tactics (Technocrat, Aichi, Japan) placed on the A1 segment of the left ACA as an intermediate catheter . An Excelsior SL-10 (Stryker Neurovascular, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) shaped by steam on a 45-degree curve was placed in the proximal part of the aneurysm using a Traxcess 0.30-mm (0.012-inch) microwire (Microvention) because of the difficulty of placing the microcatheter inside the aneurysm. After a 2.5-mm * 17-mm low-profile visualized intraluminal support (LVIS) Jr (Microvention) was deployed to just the distal neck of the aneurysm, a Galaxy G3 mini 1-mm * 20-mm (Cerenovus, Irvine CA, USA) was poured into the aneurysm. Two loops of the coil were placed inside the aneurysm by the microcatheter placed in the proximal of the aneurysm, which moved gradually with the coil protruding from the tip. The half-deployed stent was placed across the neck of the aneurysm to the end . Final postembolization DSA showed that the contrast effect of the aneurysm disappeared . Because a thrombus was found at the origin of the right pericallosal artery , the patient was administered 80 mg of ozagrel sodium, and no blood vessels occluded. No new postoperative neurological deficits were found, and magnetic resonance imaging–diffusion-weighted imaging showed multiple spotty high intensities in the ACA region bilaterally , and magnetic resonance angiography showed no vessel occlusion. Follow-up DSA 14 days after onset showed residual aneurysm with contrast inside the dome. However, the findings showed stagnation of contrast in the venous phase and did not show contrast along the aneurysm wall, so follow-up was continued . Follow-up DSA 30 and 90 days after onset showed that the aneurysm thrombosed gradually and reached complete occlusion 90 days later [ and ]. The patient had a good outcome, with a 90-day modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 2 and mild disturbance of memory as a sequela.