A 24-year-old gentleman with Fontan palliation for single-ventricle CHD (DILV, transposition of the great arteries, and interrupted aortic arch type A) was under clinical follow-up at our unit. During his annual cardiology outpatient reviews, he was clinically asymptomatic. He regularly exercised without restriction. On serial surveillance imaging, his Fontan pathways and Damus anastomosis were widely patent. There was no restriction to systemic outflow through the ventricular septal defect (VSD) noted at rest, and flow in the descending aorta was laminar. He had preserved ventricular function. He was, however, noted to have progressive asymmetric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) on serial transthoracic echocardiography since the age of 12 . Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed when he was 19 years old. This showed marked LVH with some focal regions of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the septum of uncertain significance. Ejection fraction was 61%. The hypertrophy was felt to be unusual and other causes excluded including Fabry disease. Genetic testing was not performed at that point as it was felt it would unlikely alter management given the patient was asymptomatic.
Unfortunately, at the age of 24, he presented with an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest while jogging. Immediate bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed. His estimated downtime was 22 min, and on paramedic arrival, he was found to be in pulseless electrical activity. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. He was intubated and transferred to critical care. Before the cardiac arrest, he had no prodromal symptoms and had cycled 15 km on the prior day without any limitations. Clinical examination revealed normal heart sounds and no signs of cardiac failure. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia with voltage criteria for LVH, T-wave inversion, and Q-waves in inferior leads comparable with previous electrocardiograms . His high-sensitivity troponin I increased from 22 ng/L on admission (normal range 1–34) to 424 ng/L after 6 h in the context of CPR, but the troponin rise was not sustained after 12 h (246 ng/L) and 24 h (147 ng/L). Urgent computed tomography pulmonary angiography ruled out pulmonary embolism, which was considered in the context of the pro-thrombotic Fontan circulation. Echocardiogram showed severe ventricular hypertrophy. Left ventricular systolic function was borderline impaired with no outflow tract obstruction, and his Damus and Fontan pathways were patent. Cardiac catheterization demonstrated low Fontan pressure of 10 mmHg and unobstructed coronaries. Repeat CMR demonstrated marked ventricular hypertrophy with punctate areas of LGE in the basal septum, and T1 values were consistent with fibrosis . In view of these findings, the patient was discussed at our cardiac genetics multidisciplinary team meeting. An extended gene panel was recommended, and a pathogenic variant (1504C>T) in exon 17 of MYBPC3 encoding Arg502Trp was identified, confirming co-existent HCM.
A primary arrhythmia cause was considered to be the most likely aetiology for his cardiac arrest. He subsequently underwent an electrophysiological study. Ventricular tachycardia was induced by incremental atrial pacing and rapidly degenerated into ventricular fibrillation requiring electrical cardioversion. No atrial arrhythmias were detected . Following discussion at the joint electrophysiology–CHD multidisciplinary team meeting, he was started on 2.5 mg of bisoprolol and a subcutaneous implantable cardiac defibrillator was implanted.
The patient was referred to a genetic counsellor to discuss the results and support cascade testing. His father, aged 58 years, was found to carry the same variant. His clinical phenotype is currently normal but is under surveillance for emergent cardiomyopathy . The patient also wished to start a family. Pre-implantation genetic testing was addressed as well as the emotional, psychological, and financial impact of a positive gene test.
Two years on, the patient remains well on 2.5 mg of bisoprolol with no arrhythmia detections or therapies from his defibrillator. He has returned to moderate symptom-limited aerobic exercise. He remains under regular annual follow-up in the Fontan clinic.