A 70-year-old woman with lupus complicated by shrinking lung syndrome and chronic respiratory failure, chronic anemia, ovarian cancer in remission, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and necrotizing fasciitis, currently on hydroxychloroquine and mycophenolate mofetil, presented to the emergency department (ED) for symptomatic anemia. On initial lab work, the patient had a glucose of 139 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range 70–99 mg/dL), hemoglobin of 7.0 grams (g)/dL (13.5–17.5 g/dL), and a white blood cell count of 7.6 thousand per microliter/μL (4.0–11.0 thousand/μL). The patient also reported an evolving “bruise” to her sacral region that had developed over the prior seven days. She described a burning sensation for the first three days, which had resolved. The patient was fully ambulatory, without periods of immobilization. On exam of her sacral area , there was a 5 centimeter area of shallow ulceration with scalloped gray borders, dark purple erythema, and an erythematous base with satellite lesions extending caudally from the wound. The ulcer was dry and nontender to touch. Dermatology was consulted in the ED due to concern for vasculitis.
The dermatology team obtained further context about the lesion—there was no prodrome prior to the lesion developing, and the patient had a prior history of cold sores, most recently three months prior. The patient also had photographs showing vesicular lesions in the satellite lesions of the wound during the first several days. The dermatology team was concerned for herpes simplex virus (HSV) or herpes zoster virus and sent a swab of the wound for varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and HSV polymerase chain reaction test. This patient’s rash was noted to cross midline but was localized to two adjacent dermatomes with only two satellite lesions; thus, the rash was considered localized and not disseminated. The patient was started on valacyclovir 1,000 milligrams three times daily for the next seven days and mupirocin 2% ointment and discharged to home.
The patient’s sacral wound swab tested positive for VZV and negative for HSV. She returned four days later with worsening pain at the sacral wound and over 20 new vesiculopustular lesions to her nose, lower back, abdomen, and posterior oropharynx. She was admitted for disseminated herpes zoster virus at that time and was started on intravenous acyclovir. Her hospital course showed improvement in her lesions with crusting, and she was transitioned to oral valacyclovir and discharged to home on hospital day seven to finish her course of oral valacyclovir and to start lifelong prophylactic dosing of valacyclovir.