A 48-year-old man received a bilateral lung transplant for a diagnosis of desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP) that was attributed to smoking cigarettes and cannabis, both of which he ceased 20 months prior to transplantation. The diagnosis of DIP was based on compatible imaging and a prior surgical lung biopsy that was performed at the age of 44 years .
The patient was diagnosed with HIV at the age of 38 years and had started HAART 20 months prior to transplantation at age 47. He achieved excellent control of his HIV infection, with a pre-transplant CD4+ cell count of 950 cells/μL, CD4+:CD8+ ratio of 0.69, no detectable viral load, and no history of AIDS-defining illnesses. His HIV was initially managed with cobicistat, elvitegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir, which were subsequently changed to abacavir, dolutegravir, and lamivudine when lung transplantation became a consideration due to pharmacokinetic interactions between cobicistat and tacrolimus [–].
The patient had progressively worsening dyspnea and lung function that prompted initiation of long-term prednisone and eventually mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), which were both prescribed in consultation with his HIV specialist. His interstitial lung disease continued to progress both clinically and radiographically , with pre-transplant lung function showing a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 55% predicted, forced vital capacity (FVC) 50% predicted, and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) 36% predicted. Prior to transplant, he required 2 l oxygen via nasal prongs at rest.
His induction immunosuppression included basiliximab (20 mg on date of transplantation and post-operative day 4), methylprednisolone (500 mg at induction, 500 mg at reperfusion, and three doses of 125 mg on the day of transplant), and MMF (1 g pre-transplant). His explanted lungs still showed a pattern of DIP, but with a decreased number of airspace macrophages and a picture that in areas was more consistent with fibrotic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) . A similar progression of DIP to an NSIP-like picture has been reported previously .
Post-transplant, his maintenance immunosuppression included MMF 1 g twice daily, prednisone 15 mg daily, and tacrolimus, dosed to a target trough level of 10-12 ng/mL. His previous HAART regimen was also continued. The patient had an uncomplicated course in hospital and was discharged from the intensive care unit on post-operative day 3 and discharged from hospital on day 18. He was maintained on daily valganciclovir 900 mg, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 160-800 mg, and azithromycin 250 mg for prophylaxis against opportunistic infections. Valganciclovir was discontinued 6 months post-transplant as cytomegalovirus DNA remained undetectable in his serum. His tacrolimus trough levels were reduced to 8-10 ng/mL 10 months post-transplant. His prednisone dose was reduced to 10 mg and then subsequently 5 mg daily at 6- and 14-months post-transplant respectively.
He had an episode of Grade A1 minimal acute cellular rejection detected on surveillance transbronchial biopsy 3 months post-transplant. This was not treated, and there was no evidence of graft rejection on repeat biopsies 1 month later. He had an enterovirus/rhinovirus graft infection with significant allograft dysfunction 11 months post-transplant and received 3 daily doses of methylprednisolone 500 mg with a following prednisone dose of 60 mg daily, tapered by 5 mg every 5 days to a baseline dose of 10 mg thereafter. At the time of this infection, he also received a single dose of intravenous immunoglobulin 0.5 g/kg.
Post-transplant, the patient’s markers of HIV infection continue to be controlled, with CD4+ cell count nadir of 120 cells/μL on post-operative day 3. CD4+ count increased to 630 cells/μL at time of discharge from hospital, and was 940 cells/μL at 24 months post-transplant, with a CD4+:CD8+ ratio of 1.03, and undetectable viral load throughout . He continues to have normal functional status, no dyspnea, normal lung function, and normal ambulatory oxygenation 24 months post-transplantation.