A 73-year-old white man presented to our emergency department with a 3-day history of left lower extremity swelling and acute-onset shortness of breath. On evaluation, he was tachycardic with a pulse of 113, hypertensive with a systolic blood pressure of 130-170 mmHg, and demonstrated poor oxygen saturation of 81% on room air. He was supported with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and supplemental oxygen while a computed tomography angiogram (CTA) was obtained, which revealed a saddle PE .
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was administered and he was started on a heparin infusion and admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) for management. He remained on the heparin infusion for 3 days, during which he continuously improved and was eventually weaned to 3 L oxygen via nasal cannula. On hospital day 2, he was transferred to intermediate level of care. Per hematology recommendations, he would have to be on indefinite anticoagulation due to the massive PE he had sustained, the source of which was a left lower extremity popliteal deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The plan was to transition him from the heparin infusion to enoxaparin twice per day with hematology follow-up in 1 month.
On the day of discharge, however, he had sudden onset of right leg numbness and weakness below the level of his hip. He had previously been working with physical therapy and had been able to walk 200 feet with the assistance of a walker during each session. A physical examination revealed decreased sensation to light touch, 2/5 strength in right hip flexion and right knee extension and flexion, and loss of right patellar reflex. Left leg physical examination was normal at that time.
An emergent head computed tomography (CT) scan was ordered due to concern for a possible stroke, and neurology was consulted. The head CT was negative for infarction or hemorrhage. Neurology was concerned for spinal cord infarction versus hematoma and recommended emergent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his thoracic and lumbar spine. The MRI revealed a left psoas hematoma . A CT of his pelvis performed the same day also showed a right psoas and iliacus hematoma. Due to these findings, hematology recommended discontinuing enoxaparin and reverting to a low intensity heparin infusion, as well as placement of an inferior vena cava (IVC) filter. The following day his left leg began exhibiting the same symptoms as his right leg. There was concern regarding the risk of progressive and irreversible nerve damage due to compression if the hematomas were not promptly drained. IR was consulted and advised that if the drainage were to occur while our patient was on anticoagulation, the risk of rebleeding into the retroperitoneum would be high and potentially nullify any benefit from drainage. Our patient would also be at risk of hemodynamic instability if the current hematomas were acting as tamponades against further bleeding. An additional complicating factor was the risk of further thrombosis due to the presenting saddle PE. Hematology was consulted for recommendations on pausing anticoagulation, but they were hesitant to offer a timeframe as there was no established safe period to enable this type of procedure to take place. Eventually, a window period of pausing the heparin infusion for 3 hours pre-procedure and up to 6 hours post-procedure was decided upon in the event that our patient agreed to have the drainage performed.
Throughout this sequence of events, our patient and his wife were aware of the plans and considerations on how to proceed. They were informed of the recommendations and concerns made by neurology, hematology, and IR, as well as the risks and benefits of intervention versus non-intervention.
After speaking with his wife, our patient decided to undergo the procedure. The low intensity heparin infusion was stopped 3 hours beforehand and the IR team then performed drainage of the right retroperitoneal hematoma, placing two pigtail catheters in our patient’s right flank . In total, the hematoma was drained of 215 milliliters of blood, 10 milliliters of which were drained during the procedure itself. The left psoas hematoma was not found to be amenable to drainage.
Our patient tolerated the procedure well, and the heparin infusion was restarted 6 hours after it was completed. A repeat neurological examination demonstrated improved lower extremity strength bilaterally as well as the return of sensation to light touch. Hip flexion improved to 3/5 bilaterally, and knee flexion and extension improved to 4/5 bilaterally. Deep tendon reflexes remained absent. Four days later, the pigtail catheters were removed. His recovery was complicated by anemia requiring blood transfusions totaling 4 units of packed red blood cells (PRBC). Other sources of potential bleeding were evaluated and not found. A repeat CT on hospital day 10 showed a stable right-sided hematoma, and our patient did not experience any further neurologic deficits. He was transitioned again from the heparin infusion to enoxaparin after 3 more days. His hemoglobin and hematocrit remained stable. During this time, he worked with physical therapy, who recommended discharge to a skilled nursing facility where his strength began to improve somewhat. Follow-up was scheduled with neurology and hematology. On hospital day 18, he was safely discharged.