We present a case of a 44-year-old female patient with no personal medical and surgical history nor family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia, operated on in May 2018 for pancreatic glucagonoma revealed by skin necrolytic migratory erythema. The patient had a simple enucleation of the mass. Pathology concluded to an intermediate grade (G2) pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with a Ki67 at 7%. The postoperative period was uneventful, and all cutaneous lesions disappeared.
The patient was regularly monitored by clinical exams and CT scans. In December 2020 (31 months postoperatively), we noticed the recurrence of the cutaneous lesions.
On admission, she had a good general condition, stable vital signs, no abdominal mass but with skin findings suggestive of necrolytic migratory erythema.
Admission laboratory measurements demonstrated hyperglycemia (1.3 g/L, normal values 0.7–1.1 g/L) as well as elevated blood Glucagon levels (>150 pmol/L, normal value < 60 pmol/L). The serum levels of Chromogranin A, were normal (31ng/ml).
MRI and CT-scan showed 3 retro-pancreatic lesions of 10, 13, and 16 mm in diameter. The octreotide scan was normal. Based on these findings, we concluded that it was a recurrence of her glucagonoma.
The patient was operated on 28-05-2021 by an attending surgeon at our department by median laparotomy . On exploration, no ascites, no hepatic metastases. After dissection of the left part of the pancreas, the 3 nodules described upper are found below and behind the tail of the pancreas varying from 10 to 15 mm in diameter .
We performed distal pancreatectomy with spleen preservation and resection of the splenic vessels as shown in Warshow's technique . The postoperative period was uneventful, and all cutaneous lesions disappeared. The patient was very pleased with the result and was willing to comply with the follow-up regimen.
Pathology confirmed the endocrine nature of the 3 nodules and concluded to an intermediate grade (G2) pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with a Ki67 at 5%. We are currently 6 months behind the surgery. The patient has no functional complaints. The examination is strictly normal with no recurrence of the skin lesions so far.