We report a case of a 60-year-old Japanese man who consulted our department for inconsistencies between his clinical course and TFTs. He had undergone right subtotal thyroidectomy for papillary thyroid carcinoma when he was 57 years old. After surgery, levothyroxine replacement at 100 μg/day was used to control his thyroid hormone levels. For over 2 years, TFTs revealed normal TSH, FT4, and FT3 levels. However, 28 months after thyroidectomy, abrupt changes in TSH (0.05 μIU/mL), FT4 (3.24 ng/dL), and FT3 (7.00 pg/mL) were observed (each reference range is shown in Tables and ). Anti-TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) were slightly positive (2.1 IU/L; reference range: < 2.0 IU/L). Subsequently, the surgeon established a diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis and discontinued levothyroxine. Since the TFT results did not improve, the surgeon started potassium iodide treatment. Nevertheless, the TFTs still revealed a pattern of syndrome of inappropriate secretion of TSH (SITSH) precipitation (Tx)), which prompted consultation with our department. Upon consultation, the patient presented with no typical symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. He did not take any biotin related supplments. Therefore, considering the possibility of a false SITSH, PEG Tx using the same sera was performed.
PEG Tx was performed following previously described procedures [, ]. PEG Tx promoted high levels of TSH but low FT3 and FT4 recovery. Subsequently, Heterophilic Blocking Tube (HBT) (Scantibodies Laboratory, Santee, CA, USA) Tx was performed to remove heterophilic antibodies. HBT Tx results thereafter showed that the patient’s sample recorded higher levels of TSH and lower FT3 and FT4 recovery compared to those of the control samples. Furthermore, two additional assays were subsequently performed: (1) the Elecsys assay using Cobas e411, which employs the same method as Cobas8000 e602 except for the pre-wash procedure, and (2) The two-step method, Architect assay, which utilizes a completely different method than the one-step Elecsys assay.
Evaluating the thyroid function using the Architect method resulted in a higher TSH level and lower FT4 and FT3 values compared with the Elecsys method. Since Cobas e411 is not performed with a pre-wash, Cobas e411 was used to compare the possible effects of pre-wash in the thyroid function evaluation. As such, both FT4 and FT3 values were lower with Cobas e411 than with Cobas8000 e602. Nonetheless, the TSH values measured using Elecsys, which does not include pre-wash, produced similar results (shown in Table ). We further examined whether anti-streptavidin antibodies interfere with TFTs by adding streptavidin-coated magnetic particles (SA-MP) (shown in Table ). The experiment showed higher TSH and lower FT3 and FT4 recovery in the patient’s sample. We consequently concluded that interference was caused by the streptavidin antibodies.
One year after consultation, false values of the TFTs were gradually improving, so the patient resumed the original with levothyroxine treatment at 100 μg/day. (TSH: 1.60μIU/mL, FT3: 3.05 pg/mL, FT4: 1.39 ng/dL).