A 75-year-old man who had experienced melena and anemia for more than 20 years was admitted to the Gastroenterology Department of our hospital. Physical examination showed that the patient had mild spleen enlargement, and mild edema of both lower limbs. Ultrasonography revealed cirrhosis, mild spleen enlargement and a small amount of ascites and ruled out Budd-Chiari syndrome. The patient had no long-term history of heavy alcohol consumption. He had no history of hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, or hepatitis. No abnormalities were observed in autoimmune liver disease-related indicators. The patient was admitted to the hospital with a hemoglobin level of 41 g/L, mean corpuscular volume of 69.6 fl, and ferritin concentration of 10.00 ng/mL (normal range 13–150 ng/mL), low albumin level (32 g/L), and slightly elevated liver transaminase (ALT 60U/L). There were no esophageal/gastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy under gastroscopy. Ordinary endoscopy and capsule endoscopy revealed multiple telangiectasias in the stomach, duodenum, small intestine, and colon, with a predominance in the fundus of the stomach, the body of the stomach, the duodenum, and the proximal jejunum, totaling approximately 30 . Cirrhosis of the liver can cause gastrointestinal vascular malformations, and he was diagnosed with unexplained liver cirrhosis. The patient was treated with hemostasis, blood transfusion, iron supplementation, liver protection, and other treatments after admission, but after repeated blood tests, his hemoglobin levels did not increase significantly. During hospitalization, the patient had recurrent melena and nosebleeds and said that he had experienced nosebleeds repeatedly since childhood. Several close relatives in the family also had epistaxis similar to that of the patient . On physical examination, the patient’s nose, cheeks, tongue tip mucosa, and hands had multiple telangiectasias . The patient refused to be tested for mutations, but according to the criteria of the Scientific Advisory Committee of the International HHT Fund in 2000 , the diagnosis of HHT in this patient was clear. In this case, the condition affected the entire intestinal tract; thus, it was classified as Moore type III , which is relatively rare.
General treatment measures, such as blood transfusion and hemostasis, are ineffective in HHT. During hospitalization, the patient was administered oral thalidomide 50 mg twice a day, and argon plasma coagulation (APC) under double-balloon endoscopy was performed at the same time . Eight months after being discharged from the hospital, the patient was taking oral thalidomide 50 mg twice a day as a maintenance dose, with no drug-related side effects. The patient’s fatigue symptoms were significantly reduced compared with before treatment, and a recheck of his hemoglobin showed that it was significantly higher than it was before treatment. He underwent regular review after discharge. At the latest review, the patient's weight increased by 3 kg compared to before the first admission. No abnormal liver function and no ascites occurred more than 8 months after discharge. Additionally, the patient had no more melena, nose bleeding, or bleeding from other organs. The patient is still being followed up.