We describe a 28-year old female (denoted herein as the “index patient”) without previous medical history or family history of thyroid cancer, nor any history suggesting previous radiation exposure. She recently underwent surgery at our department for a cytology-verified sub-centimeter primary PTC with a lateral lymph node metastasis. Histopathology was consistent with a 9 mm primary PTC, but the lymph node metastasis exhibited a predominant morphology suggesting PDTC, as well as a peripheral rim with PTC morphology near the lymph node capsule. Two aspects of this clinical presentation are highly unusually encountered in routine practice: A) young patients often develop PTCs with lymph node metastases, but exceedingly seldom do we encounter dedifferentiation to PDTC in patients < 60 years of age; and B) as the PDTC was observed in the lateral lymph node metastasis adjacent to a remaining rim of PTC, this strongly suggests that the PDTC developed in the metastasis and not in the thyroid gland per se. Therefore, any underlying genetic mechanism leading to dedifferentiation would possibly be identified by parallel sequencing and comparison of data from the primary and metastatic lesion.
The histological attributes of the index patient’s tumors are illustrated in Fig. . DNA and RNA extraction was performed from formalin-fixated paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues from the primary PTC as well as from the lateral lymph node metastasis using standardized methodology and protocols used in clinical routine at the Department of Pathology and Cytology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. In brief, Maxwell 16 FFPE LEV RNA and Tissue LEV DNA Purification Kits (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) were used for nucleic acid extractions, and targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) of the tumor DNA from both the primary and metastatic lesions was performed using the Ion Torrent S5 Ion Chef (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Firstly, we sequenced DNA extracted from the primary PTC and metastatic PDTC using a small NGS panel validated for clinical routine practice (Oncomine Solid Tumor Panel, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) screening for > 1,800 mutations in 22 cancer-related genes. We thereafter interrogated tumor DNA and RNA from the same two lesions using the more comprehensive Oncomine Childhood Cancer Research Assay (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), screening for mutations in 126 genes, copy number alterations of 24 genes and > 1700 gene fusion variants in 88 genes.
The Exome Variant Server and the Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP; ) were used in order to verify the minor allele frequency of the index patient’s MET variant. PolyPhen2 , “Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant” (SIFT; ) and MutationAssessor were employed to examine if the variant had an impact on the MET protein function. The roles of this specific variant in the somatic setting were analyzed using the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database .
MET immunohistochemistry was performed for the primary and metastatic tumor tissue using a monoclonal MET antibody (clone SP44, Ventana/Roche, Basel, Switzerland, article no: 05571219001), and standardized protocols used the Ventana automated methodology in clinical routine practice at the Department of Pathology and Cytology, Karolinska University Hospital. The staining was assessed by an experienced endocrine pathologist using light microscopy, in which the level of immunoreactivity and sub-cellular localization was scored for both tumor samples.
We have previously collected fresh-frozen tissues from PTC specimen from 93 selected patients operated at the Karolinska University Hospital between 1987–2005 for inclusion in unrelated projects. For this study, the 50 youngest patients were selected due to the index patient’s young age. These 50 cases were between 15–53 years old at the time of surgery and thus younger than the AJCC staging cutoff age (< 55 years). The BRAF and TERT promoter mutational status of these cases have been previously published . In order to detect possible associations between PTC cases in terms of MET gene output, clinical parameters were retrieved, including age at diagnosis, date of diagnosis, gender, tumor size, eventual lymph node metastases, eventual distant metastases, BRAF V600E mutation status and TERT promotor mutation status, disease-free survival (endpoints: relapsed/progression or disease-free) and overall survival (endpoints: dead or alive). DNA and RNA extraction as well as cDNA synthesis was performed using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), miRvana miRNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) and High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States) respectively according to the protocols provided by the manufacturers and quantified using NanoDrop ND-100 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA).
Sanger sequencing verification of the MET gene mutation was performed in the independent PTC cohort as well as in leukocyte DNA of the index patient. The PCR reaction was performed using Platinum™ II Hot-Start PCR Master Mix (2X) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), following the manufacturer instructions. Primers for the specific MET region were constructed by using Primer-BLAST (forward primer sequence 5´-TGCTCAGACTTTTCACACAAGA-3’ and reverse primer sequence 5´- GCAGTGCTCATGATTGGGTC-3´). Amplification was accomplished by following a PCR touchdown protocol. Products were purified using Invitrogen ExoSap-IT (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Sanger sequencing was performed at the KIGene core facility at Karolinska University Hospital Solna using routine procedures, in order to screen for the specific p.Arg359Gln MET mutation. All chromatograms were visually inspected by two of the authors.
We used the 7900HT Fast Real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA from PTC samples (n = 50) and histopathologically verified, de-identified normal thyroid tissues (n = 9) were normalized to a reference gene (GAPDH). The following Taqman Gene Expression Assays were used, MET as target gene (Applied Biosystems, Hs00179845_m1) and GAPDH (Applied Biosystems, Hs02786624_g1) as endogenous control. All specimens, tumor as well as normal, were run in triplicate and a mean value with standard deviation was calculated for each case. The relative expression was calculated using the 2−ΔCT method.
Pearson correlation test was used to compare MET expression, tumor size and age at diagnosis and are presented in scatterplots. Mann–Whitney U test was used to analyze differences in MET expression between tumors and normal thyroid tissues. Mann–Whitney U test was also used for analyzing difference in gene expression between mutated and wildtype cases. Both Mann–Whitney U test results are presented in boxplots. Where applicable, MET expression was classified into two ordinal groups, “high” and “low” expression, categorized by expression values above or under the tumor median. Kaplan–Meier was used to plot and present overall and disease-free survival in patients with high and low MET expression, log-rank test was used to calculate statistical significance. Cox regression was used to analyze covariates that could impact overall survival. The statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics version 27 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA).
Detailed information regarding the cell lines and the functional experiments are available in a file.