A 91-year-old woman with a history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, on edoxaban 30 mg/day, was admitted to our hospital with dyspnoea upon exertion. Electrocardiography showed a normal sinus rhythm and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed left ventricular ejection fraction of 65%, LVH, mild mitral regurgitation, estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 35 mmHg, severe aortic stenosis, an aortic valve area of 0.46 cm2, a peak velocity of 5.53 m/s, and mean pressure gradient of 70.0 mmHg. Due to her old age and frailty (clinical frailty scale of 4), she was considered ineligible for surgical aortic valve replacement. A preprocedural computed tomography (CT) revealed the aortic annulus area to be 351.0 mm2. The sinotubular junction (STJ) diameter was 22.3 × 21.0 mm. The height of STJ was 14.3 mm. The diameter of the sinus of Valsalva was 29.3 mm × 28.1 mm × 28.3 mm. The heights of the right and left coronary arteries were 10.1 and 10.0 mm, respectively. The patient had undergone transfemoral TAVI with a 26-mm EvolutR (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). We selected EvolutR due its distinct characteristics such as bulky leaflet calcification and small STJ. While the THV was implanted at a depth of 0 mm, the postoperative aortography showed normal coronary flow and mild paravalvular leak without any complication (Video S). Postoperative TTE revealed the effective orifice area (EOA) to be 1.62 cm2. Edoxaban therapy was continued after TAVI. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient remained asymptomatic at the 6-month follow-up.
However, 8 months after the procedure, she was readmitted to our hospital because she complained of effort angina. Electrocardiography showed new ST-segment depression in V5–6 leads. The TTE showed hypokinesis in the anterior segment and EOA of 1.56 cm2. Laboratory test results were within normal value, except for high-sensitivity troponin I levels at 429.2 pg/mL (<26.2 pg/mL). Adenosine stress myocardial perfusion scintigraphy performed to identify ischaemic area showed myocardial ischaemia in the anterior region. Computed tomography revealed that the THV frame was covered with a low-density mass between the leaflet and STJ, which occluded the left coronary sinus (LCS) . The transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) showed no colour Doppler signal flowing from the aorta to the LCS, but a Doppler signal flowing from the NCS to the LCS was detected through a gap between aortic wall and the THV . The roundabout route was also confirmed using the corresponding CT image .
Selective aortography from each THV cusp revealed the roundabout flow from the NCS into the LCS . While we could not insert a guidewire directly from the aorta into the LCS, we did advance a coronary guidewire through the roundabout route from the NCS into the LCS (Videos 1 and 2). Using a dual-lumen microcatheter, we subsequently advanced another coronary guidewire into the distal left anterior descending artery (Video 3). Following balloon angioplasty, a 4.00 mm × 15 mm zotarolimus-eluting stent (ZES) was deployed into the roundabout route . The intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) showed underexpansion of the stent, despite post-dilatation with a 4.0-mm non-compliant balloon (, ). We implanted another 4.00 mm × 15 mm ZES into the first stent, which did improve stent expansion as shown in the IVUS (, ). Final coronary angiography showed revealed a roundabout route and improved flow to the left coronary artery .
After the procedure, the patient’s symptom improved. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normalized left ventricular wall motion. Stress myocardial scintigraphy revealed improved myocardial ischaemia. Computed tomography showed optimal stent position: the proximal edge of the stent was placed just between the frame of EvolutR . Aspirin and clopidogrel therapy had been initiated before PCI, and aspirin therapy was discontinued at the time of discharge. At the 4-month follow-up, she remained asymptomatic.