A 22-year-old female patient was referred our clinic for evaluation of a painless neck mass, hoarseness and dysphagia. She first noticed the mass in the upper right neck two years earlier without any symptoms. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a submucosal mass in the right lateral oropharyngeal wall with medial displacement of the right tonsil. A non-tender, firm, mobile mass measuring 4 × 4 cm. was detected deep to the right sternocleidomastoid muscle below the angle of the mandible. Superior extent of the mass could not be palpated in the neck. The telescopic examination of the larynx demonstrated a right sided, smooth mass narrowing the rima glottis. There were not any cranial nerve deficits other than the paralysis of the right vocal cord. The computed tomographic (CT) scan showed a large, contrast enhancing soft tissue lesion in the parapharyngeal space extending inferiorly to the level of the right thyroid lobe and pushing the larynx medially . The magnetic resonance image (MRI) demonstrated the tumor between the PPS and the upper lobe of right thyroid lobe, narrowing the airway passage and lateral displacement of the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein . The ultrasonographic evaluation of neck demonstrated a 4 × 4, 5 cm mass adjacent to the superior part of the right thyroid gland with rich vascularity.
Scintigraphic examination of the thyroid gland revealed homogenous distribution of the activity in the gland but no activity was noticed in the mass adjacent to the gland. Angiography and doppler usg findings suggested that the tumor had rich vascularity and the main blood supply was from the superior thyroid artery . The fine needle aspiration of the mass revealed the cellular aspirates with no colloid, and aspirates which included some microfollicular aggregates. However, no papillary folds, psammoma bodies, or nuclear grooves were detected . It was reported as "solid cellular nodule, microfollicular lesion".
Cervical approach was preferred to remove the mass because it was thought to originate from the right thyroid gland. Under general anesthesia, following the skin incision, starting from the greater cornu of the hyoid bone and extending downwards vertically to the thyroid gland, the tumor with enlarged venous structures and measuring as 4,5 × 4,5 cm was identified. Blunt dissection easily detached the tumor from the pharyngeal constrictor muscles, prevertebral fascia and the skull base. The tumor was found to originate from the superior pole of the right thyroid gland, via a narrow stalk, and extended following the neurovascular bundle to the lower part of the parapharyngeal space. Following the removal of the mass, frozen section was performed, and follicular neoplasm that has suspicion of malignancy was reported. As the frozen artefact of the nuclei of the tumor cells, the exact diagnosis was postponed to the paraffin embedded tissue section. The cervical incision lengthened to gain access to visualize the thyroid gland. Total thyroidectomy was performed with the preservation of the both of the reccurent laryngeal nerves. Careful examination of the median compartment surrounding the thyroid gland did not reveal any lymphadenopathy.
On histologic examination, follicular variant of papillary carcinoma was diagnosed. The tumor had totally follicular architecture and the nuclei of the follicle epithelium were characteristic nuclei of the papillary carcinoma. The cells contained finely dispersed chromatin, which imparted empty appearance, giving rise to the designation glass nuclei . The rest of the thyroid revealed lymhocytic thyroditis . The patient did well postoperatively. There was no residual thyroid in postoperative I-131 scanning. She is free of disease for a follow up of five years.