An 81-year-old man with severe AS was admitted for further diagnosis and therapy planning. He was very active in everyday life, but he had been noticing worsening of exertional dyspnoea for a month (New York Heart Association III), which is why a further cardiological assessment was initiated by his general physician. Except for arterial hypertension, no previous cardiac diseases are known. Outpatient transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20% and high-grade AS with a peak velocity of 4.8 m/s and an aortic valve area of 0.7 cm2. On the morning of admission, he suffered from a presyncope. Physical examination revealed mild systolic hypertension (140/80 mmHg), systolic cardiac murmurs with no evidence of heart failure. The laboratory chemistry revealed a significant rise in troponin values. Therefore, immediate cardiac catheterization was carried out. Severe CAD with high-grade stenosis of the left main coronary artery and the bifurcation of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the left circumflex artery (LCX) (Medina 1-1-1) was diagnosed . An immediate heart team was formed. Due to the patient's age and operational risk, the decision was made to proceed with immediate PCI. The implantation of an Impella® was waived due to high-degree AS. After a discussion among the heart team, we decided against using a v-a-ECMO to keep the intervention as short as possible. Therefore, an unprotected left main intervention was planned. The bifurcation of the LAD and LCX was stented using the mini-crush technique . During the intervention of the left main coronary artery, the patient developed cardiogenic shock and consecutive ventricular fibrillation. The return of spontaneous circulation was achieved 11 min after multiple external defibrillations. The patient was orally intubated. To stabilize the patient and to proceed with the intervention, v-a-ECMO via the right femoral artery (17 Fr) and the left femoral vein (21 Fr) (Maquet Cardiohelp®) was implanted . The patient was stabilized under v-a-ECMO and transferred to our intensive care unit.
During the next hours (days), the initially increased catecholamine requirement could be reduced with a slightly positive balance. The patient was quickly weaned from the ECMO. Due to a reduced clinical condition and reduced LVEF of 20%, along with the previously challenging course (EuroScore: 48.5%, STS Score: 7.3%), we decided to carry out TAVR under the same ECMO protection. Unloading was not necessary due to reduced catecholamine support and stabilization of the circulation. Computed tomographic angiography was performed to evaluate the vascular access. It showed no tortuosity or calcification of the iliofemoral arteries, and it revealed severe calculus at the aortic valve. The aortic annular area and perimeter measured 502 mm2 and 80 mm, respectively. Five days later, we performed TAVR. A 5-Fr pigtail catheter was inserted via the left radial artery for the contrast media visualization of the aortic root. Besides, a pacemaker wire was inserted via the right jugular vein for rapid ventricular pacing, and a 14-Fr sheath was inserted via the left common femoral artery for balloon valvuloplasty and valve implantation. After balloon valvuloplasty (20 mm Edwards® transfemoral balloon catheter) , the decision was made to implant an Edward S3 Ultra 26 mm. The prosthesis was advanced into the desired position and implanted under rapid pacing with 200 beats per minute and with a very good primary implant result . Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was successfully weaned immediately after the intervention. The patient demonstrated significant haemodynamic improvement immediately after TAVR. Transthoracic echocardiography showed good results and improvement of LVEF from 20% to 42%. The patient remained in the intensive care unit for 8 days and was finally discharged to rehabilitation after an additional 7 days. The patient was seen in follow-up at 5 months, and he was free of symptoms. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed good results after TAVR and LVEF of 38%.