A 31-year-old Caucasian man, with no significant past medical history, presented to our emergency room (ER) with an acute upper abdominal heaviness of 2 hours’ duration. He was drinking that night at a bar with friends and drank approximately 500ml of vodka. He vomited later while at home and had chest heaviness before arrival. In the ER, he was confused and not able to give exact details about his pain. With this history and presentation, gastritis was suspected. After treatment with an antiemetic and analgesics, he was able answer our questions. He quantified his pain as 5/10 in the upper abdominal and precordial regions, dull in nature and improved on forward posture. On further questioning, he related flu-like symptoms a week ago and for the last 2 days he had a sharp chest pain limiting his exertion. A trial of ibuprofen did alleviate some of his symptoms and he did not seek any medical advice initially.
Initial vitals revealed a blood pressure of 134/96mmHg, pulse of 79/minute, respiratory rate of 20/minute and temperature of 37.5°C (99.5°F). On physical examination there were muffled heart sounds and slightly raised veins. Pulsus paradoxus of 18mmHg was noted. His abdomen was soft and non-tender on palpation.His history and physical examination were suspicious for pericardial effusion. Laboratory investigation was significant for a white blood cell count of 20.0K/uL with mild lymphocytosis. Liver function tests and pancreatic enzymes were within normal limits. A chest X-ray in posteroanterior projection and abdominal films were unremarkable. An electrocardiogram (EKG) showed low voltage waves in all leads and P-R depression in lead II. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a moderate pericardial effusion compromising the right ventricular filling .
He eventually had a pericardial window as it was problematic to reach the pericardial sac with a transthoracic needle. After the procedure he felt better and he was started on ibuprofen 800mg three times a day for 10 days. Two weeks later, he was seen in the out-patient clinic and TTE revealed a normal pericardial sac with no effusion.