A 24-year-old female patient presented to clinic with right shoulder pain and decreased range of motion (ROM). Her symptoms began 1 year before presentation, but significantly worsened over the last month. She used nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs which alleviated the pain at the beginning but failed to do so in the last couple of months. Her history was negative for any traumatic events, fever, chills, and skin lesions. She did not report any other musculoskeletal symptoms. Her previous medical history and family history were noncontributory.
On physical examination, the patient’s active and passive right shoulder motion was markedly decreased with abduction to 45°, forward flexion to 45°, and abducted internal/external rotation each 30°. The joint was mildly tender on palpation, and the pain was mainly motion related. There was no swelling or erythema of the joint. Her distal pulses were palpable and neurological examination was normal. Detailed orthopedic examination of the axial and appendicular skeleton did not reveal any other findings.
Her initial right shoulder X-rays revealed joint space narrowing and marginal osteophytes, resembling primary glenohumeral osteoarthritis . An MRI was ordered to reveal the cause of the significant loss of ROM and arthritic changes. Shoulder MRI (with i.v. gadolinium contrast) was reported as “extensive capsulitis and synovitis, synovial thickening/proliferation zones suggestive of PVNS, and a localized nodular component with a diameter of 12 mm. Glenoid cartilage erosion and marginal osteophyte formation” .
The patient underwent arthroscopic debridement and synovial biopsy of the shoulder with PVNS as a pre-diagnosis. During the surgery, the extensive hypertrophied synovial tissue was debrided, and samples were taken from the nodular portion of the thickened synovium which was also clearly seen on the MRI . Articular cartilage was also found to be injured, with delaminated areas on both humeral and glenoid surfaces. Early post-operative physical therapy was initiated, and the patient was kept in a sling for 3 weeks.
Histologic examination of the synovial tissue unexpectedly came back as non-LCH of the synovium . Microscopic appearance was not suggestive of malignant behavior. The tumor had both lymphoid and histiocytic proliferations in a fibroadipose tissue, with the histiocytic component showing significant pleomorphism and occasional giant cells. Immunohistochemical staining of the neoplastic histiocytic cells was positive for CD163 and CD68 ; negative for CD1a, S100, Langerin, fascin, CD33, CD30, HMB45, pankeratin, and MPO. Following these results, the patient was worked up and staged by the hematology/oncology service. Further radiographic examinations including a PET scan and cranial MRI were normal. No further medical therapy was needed.
The patient’s post-operative clinical course was unremarkable. She was pain-free 1 month after surgery, with a significantly better ROM. On her post-operative 3rd month examination, she had pain-free abduction and flexion to 160, internal and external rotation to 75 . Her latest follow-up visit was at the post-operative 26th month, and she remains symptom free without any sign of local recurrence.