The patient, a 45-year-old male, was referred for genetic assessment due to clinical findings suggestive of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) and polyposis of the gastrointestinal tract. Past medical history included symptoms such as significant seizures since infancy, mild cognitive impairment and adult-onset psychiatric symptoms. These symptoms prompted investigation with a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which showed subependymal nodules and cortical tubers, two major diagnostic criteria of TSC. Physical examination revealed facial angiofibroma but no additional cutaneous abnormalities were observed. Ophthalmologic, cardiac e pulmonary evaluations did not reveal presence of retinal hamartomas, cardiac rhabdomyomas or pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans showed an expansive lesion with heterogeneous enhancement, located in the lower pole of the right kidney, measuring 5.5 cm × 4.0 cm which was later confirmed as a renal angiomyolipoma, another classical sign of TSC. Multiple nodular lesions with arterial enhancement were identified in the liver, the largest one measuring 7.0 × 5.0 cm with features suggestive of secondary implants of unknown origin. In addition, abdominal imaging also showed an expansive lesion in the pancreatic body, with heterogenous enhancement, involving the splenic artery and measuring approximately 6.0 × 4.0 cm. In addition, the patient also had a long history of diarrhea and underwent colonoscopy and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, revealing presence of more than 50 gastric, colonic and rectal polypoid formations (2 mm to 5 mm).
Family history of cancer was significant for presence of 2 relatives with central nervous system tumors (father and brother diagnosed at ages 62 and 57 years, respectively). Eight additional cancer unaffected siblings were reported. There was also no report of any other family member with clinical features of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex or other genetic conditions. Considering the clinical features of TSC and polyposis of the digestive tract, germline genetic testing was proposed with a next generation sequencing panel validated for large rearrangement screening including 80 cancer predisposition genes in a commercial laboratory. Genes in the panel included: ALK, APC, ATM, AXIN2, BAP1, BARD1, BLM, BMPR1A, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CASR, CDC73, CDH1, CDK4, CDKN1B, CDKN1C, CDKN2A (p14ARF), CDKN2A (p16INK4a), CEBPA, CHEK2, DICER1, DIS3L2, EPCAM, FH, FLCN, GATA2, GPC3, GREM1, HRAS, KIT, MAX, MEN1, MET, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, MUTYH, NBN, NF1, NF2, PALB2, PDGFRA, PHOX2B, PMS2, POLD1, POLE, POT1, PRKAR1A, PTCH1, PTEN, RAD50, RAD51C, RAD51D, RB1, RECQL4, RET, RUNX1, SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SMAD4, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, SMARCE1, STK11, SUFU, TERC, TERT, TMEM127, TP53, TSC1, TSC2, VHL, WRN, WT1 genes. The patient died due to complications of the disease a few months after genetic evaluation. Informed consent to publish this case report was obtained post-mortem from his spouse.
Regarding pathology of the tumors, the haematoxylin and eosin stain (HE) performed in lesion of the right kidney revealed round cell renal tumor with typical morphology . The liver lesions were biopsied, showing a histologic pattern suggestive of a low-grade neuroendocrine tumor (NET) . Biopsies of the pancreatic lesion diagnosed a low-grade neuroendocrine pancreatic tumor (PanNET). Based on the major phenotypic criteria identified in the patient, the clinical diagnosis of TSC with a rare manifestation (PanNET) was established. Partial polypectomies were performed resecting three polyps from the gastric body, two polyps from the right colon and four polyps from the rectum. Histologic examinations of the gastric and colonic/rectal polyps revealed fundic gland polyps and tubular adenomas with low-grade dysplasia, respectively . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed in the biopsy of the right kidney lesion and demonstrated positive expression of melanoma antigen (Melan A) , melanosomal glycoprotein gp100 antigen (HMB45) and smooth muscle actin antigen. The lesions in the liver were confirmed by IHC, showing positivity for multiple citokeratins antigens (40, 48, 50 e 50,6 kDa), chromogranin A antigen (CGA) , and synaptophysin (Sinapto) .
Germline genetic testing revealed presence of a large pathogenic deletion in TSC2 gene encompassing exons 2 to 16 and including the initiation codon. No alterations in colorectal cancer/colorectal polyposis genes (APC, AXINS2, BMPR1A, CDH1, CHEK2, EPCAM, GREM1, MLH1, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, MUTYH, NTHL1, PMS2, POLD1, POLE, POLE, PTEN, SMAD4, STK11, TP53) were identified.