A 37-year-old female was taken to the hospital with chief complaints of aggravating tailbone pain, rating it an 8–9 on the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), which she felt for around one month. The patient had a history of falling in a sitting position with formidable contact in the buttocks area with the ground of about 1 m. The patient was not using walking assistance or allergy medicine for an extended period. There is no accommodation while working as a household servant.
Swelling with deformity was found in a physical examination of the buttocks area. Pain and tenderness were complained of during palpation. The pain was aggravated, especially in a sitting position. Radiological assessment of the sacrococcygeal bone showed a discontinuity in the sacrococcygeal bone. Based on physical and radiology examinations, the patient was diagnosed with a sacrococcygeal fracture-dislocation .
Previously, two weeks before admission to the hospital, the patient had received conservative therapy by administering non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs, diclofenac sodium 50 mg two times daily and a special cushion for the buttock area. However, there was no improvement in the patient's quality of life. Subsequently, we chose a close reduction procedure that collaborated with a pain management procedure by a caudal epidural steroid injection with 1 cm3 dexamethasone and lidocaine 0,5 %. Still, the patient complained about pain, and we found instability. One week later, after discussing with the patient, we considered performing a fixation with a mini-open procedure. It was performed to fix the fracture fragment and prevent soft tissue injury. The procedure was performed in November 2023. These surgical techniques are listed below .
A modified figure of eight sutures was performed to immobilize each segment and fix the sacrum and coccygeal structure using a non-absorbable thread (Ethibond Excel, 2-0, Ethicon). After surgery, the patient's hemodynamics improved, and there was no need for intensive care at the surgical intensive care Unit (ICU). The patient was taken to the inpatient room for more observation and was given ketorolac as an analgesic three times daily intravenously. The buttocks segment of the patient was shielded with gauze; excessive pressure in the buttocks area should be avoided .
Next, the patient was brought to physical therapy to improve ROM and relieve pain as tolerated. No significant limitations were found in the rehabilitation phase. The clinician advises avoiding complex manoeuvres such as lifting or carrying something heavier after surgery and performing gradual rehabilitation as pain is tolerated. Six weeks after surgery, the patient was able to perform daily activities such as sitting and even washing his laundry alone. Nevertheless, the minimal pain was still found and localized predominantly in the surgical area while gaining heavy property with VAS 1–2. The x-ray showed an acceptable and stable sacrococcygeal bone three months after surgery. A good outcome was achieved based on the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) score, which decreased from 16 to 3, and the EuroQol-5 Dimensions (EQ5D) score increased from 0,51 to 0,92 .