A 54 year old man attended Liver Transplant clinic with severe proctalgia. He had undergone two liver transplant procedures for liver failure due to autoimmune hepatitis. Severe rectal and perineal pain, faecal urgency and intractable pruritus ani began two months after his second transplant. His pain persisted despite high dose opioids. Two nerve blocks were performed under fluoroscopic guidance by our local pain service, targeting the Ganglion Impar, a sympathetic ganglion located anterior to the sacrococcygeal joint which is involved with innervation of the coccyx, perineum and distal rectum (Gunduz and Kenis-Coskun ). The first block was performed with 5 mls of levobupivacaine 0.5% and 6.6 mg of dexamethasone. Pulsed radiofrequency ablation was performed at the second procedure, however there was no relief from pain.
Colonic biopsy was performed, demonstrating portal hypertensive colopathy, which is a common abnormality of the colonic mucosa in patients with portal hypertension, characterised pathologically by inflammatory change and vascular ectasia. It is usually asymptomatic, but can present with GI bleeding in up to 9% of cases (Rockey ). The patient’s case was discussed at multi-disciplinary rounds and the decision was made to attempt sigmoid proctocolectomy. However, at the time of laparotomy, extensive abdominal adhesions were identified and it was instead decided that a safer approach was to perform a diverting ileostomy, with the intention that diverting faeces from the rectum would improve symptoms. However, there was no subsequent change in symptoms.
Multiphasic Computed Tomography (CT) demonstrated two regions of abnormal, engorged vessels; at the antimesenteric border of the splenic flexure of the colon and adjacent to the rectum. There was arterial hypertrophy and arteriovenous shunting, compatible with arteriovenous malformations (AVM). The lesions did not have dominant draining veins, consistent with type IIa ‘Typical AVM nidus’ according to the Yakes’ Classification System (Yakes ). Upon review of prior imaging, it became apparent that the rectal AVM had been present for many years but that there had been progressive stenosis of the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV), with eventual segmental occlusion, coinciding with the development of proctalgia .
He was referred to Interventional Radiology (IR) and underwent angiography and sclerotherapy, using a 50:50 mixture of absolute alcohol and low-osmolar iodinated contrast introduced via a 2.4Fr 153 cm Rebar 18 microcatheter (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) superselectively into a superior rectal artery branch. This procedure was performed under General Anaesthesia. Excellent symptomatic response was reported, with improved quality of life. Proctalgia recurred three years later, requiring repeat sclerotherapy with resolution of symptoms. This has been maintained to date.