A 23-year-old right-handed male presented to the ED with right middle finger pain and swelling throughout the day. The swelling rapidly progressed over four hours predominately at the palmar aspect of the middle finger. The patient reported working as a chef and wore gloves on a daily basis. He denied trauma, fever, chills, sore throat, joint pain, penile discharge, or genital sores. He had a history of eczema mainly affecting the bilateral palmar hands and had allergies to dust, pollen, and cat dander. The patient reported using Cetaphil cream and took loratadine and diphenhydramine often. He denied any allergies to medication and had no surgeries in the past. The patient had been sexually active with one female partner for the prior six years and denied any history of sexually transmitted infections. He smoked half a pack of cigarettes per day for three years but quit one month prior. He also drank alcohol twice per month and smoked marijuana once per month.
His vitals in the ED were oral temperature 98.4 degrees Fahrenheit, heart rate of 77 beats per minute, blood pressure 128/76 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. He was well appearing and in no acute distress. His right middle finger was held in slight flexion with fusiform swelling and tenderness at the flexor surface . He had pain with passive extension of his finger but sensation was intact. He also had a scaly erythematous skin eruption with desquamation and excoriations of his bilateral palms with several one-millimeter pustules. Laboratory testing revealed a leukocytosis of 12.69 × 103 cells per liter (L) (reference range: 4.8–10.8 × 103 cells/L) with left shift and plain film radiographs of the right hand and fingers were unremarkable. An ED POCUS of the right middle finger was performed showing anechoic fluid within the flexor tendon sheath ( and ).
Based on clinical exam and ultrasound findings, the patient was diagnosed with flexor tenosynovitis of the right middle finger and started on vancomycin and ceftriaxone intravenously. The patient was admitted to the hospital with hand surgery consultation. He subsequently underwent an incision and drainage. Deep wound cultures were positive for Staphylococcus aureus with blood cultures producing no growth. Subsequent gonorrhea, syphilis, and human immunodeficiency virus-1/2 testing was negative. Dermatology was consulted and the patient was diagnosed with atopic dermatitis with dyshidrotic eczema. Dermatology recommended that the patient be treated with triamcinolone 0.1% ointment once a day, clobetasol 0.05% ointment once a day, and hydroxyzine 25 milligrams at bedtime as needed. The patient improved and was discharged home on hospital day three status post incision and drainage with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid for five days and outpatient follow-up with hand surgery.