A 27-year-old primigravida Oromo woman who did not remember her last normal menstrual period, but who claimed amenorrhea of 9 months’ duration, presented to Jimma University Medical Center. She received antenatal care (ANC) follow-up at her local health center and was referred from the district hospital with a diagnosis of preterm labor and hand prolapse. She presented with an urge to bear down of 10 hours’ duration and passage of liquor of the same duration. She did not undergo ultrasound scanning during ANC follow-up. Her personal, familial, medical, and obstetric histories were unremarkable. The pregnancy was planned, wanted, and supported.
Upon arrival, she was in labor pain, and her vital signs were blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate 96 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, and body temperature 37 °C. A pertinent finding was detected on the abdomen: a 28-week-sized gravid uterus, with the fundus occupied with a round, hard mass that was the head. Fetal heartbeat (FHB) was 92 to 98 beats/minute, and uterine contractions were 3 in 10 minutes lasting for 40 to 45 seconds. The patient’s pelvic examination revealed a cervix of 6-cm dilation, membrane ruptured and clear, station high, and left hand prolapsed and in the vaginal canal. Emergency obstetric ultrasound was performed, and the finding was a single intrauterine pregnancy, positive FHB ranging from 92 to 98 beats/minute, fundal anterior placenta, and head occupying the fundus.
With the impression of active first stage of labor with hand prolapse and nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern (NRFHRP [persistent fetal bradycardia]), the patient was investigated with blood group and Rh (O+), hematocrit (37%). Then, she was prepared and taken to the operating theater for emergency C/S within 20 minutes of arrival. Transverse lower uterine segment C/S was performed with the patient under general anesthesia to effect the delivery of an anomalous fetus with Apgar scores of 3, 3, and 0 in the first, fifth, and tenth minutes, respectively. The fetus had only a rudimentary right lower extremity. The liver and intestine lied outside the abdominal cavity and were contained within a sac composed of transparent membrane attached directly to the placenta. The umbilical cord was very short, about 7 cm. The fetus also had severe scoliosis. The placenta and fetal body parts together weighed 2400 g . The newborn lived only for 5 minutes after delivery, and an autopsy was not performed. The patient had no complications during or after surgery, and her postoperative hematocrit was 34%. She was discharged on her third postoperative day. She was counseled and provided an etonogestrel implant. She was given a C/S certificate that she can try labor with subsequent pregnancies.