A 66-year-old man presented with both leg pain and paresthesia for 2 years. The symptoms aggravated in recent 6-month. The patient had a history of alcoholic liver cirrhosis and cured stomach cancer after subtotal gastrectomy 15 years ago with hematological abnormalities including thrombocytopenia (94 K) and anemia (7.6). Neurological examination showed grade 4 motor weakness of the lower extremities and neurogenic claudication with no bowel or bladder dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a large multi-lobulated bead-like mass lesion with a cystic portion from L1 to S3. The lesion was iso-intense on T2-weighted images (WI) and iso- to slightly low-intense on T1-WI with heterogeneous enhancement . Neurophysiological study revealed multiple lumbar radiculopathies. There was no additional lesion of central nervous system on the whole spine and brain MR imaging with no abnormal skin lesion.
The extensive multi-lobulated mass lesions were located intraspinal canal and attached with neural components, which is judged to be difficult to access for a biopsy. We decided on surgical treatment to confirm a histological finding and improve the symptoms with removal of the mass lesion. The large mass lesion had three portions, including a cystic mass at L1, continuous multi-lobulated bead-like mass with cystic portion from L2 to S1, and multi-lobulated round masses from S2 to S3, which were identified under dural opening after total laminectomy of L1-S2. There were severe adhesions and tangles between the large mass lesion and the cauda equina with thickened arachnoid membrane and septum. The mass lesion from L1 to S1 was gross totally removed. We retained several small masses at the lumbar spine and multi-lobulated round masses from S2 to S3 involving nerves related with motor function of lower extremities and anal sphincter, respectively, under intraoperative monitoring.
The patient experienced voiding difficulty with no other additional neurologic deficits after surgery. Histological examination revealed multinodular or plexiform growth pattern composed of spindle-shaped tumor cells. The tumor cells had elongated wavy nuclei and arranged in fascicular pattern with focal nuclear palisading, which were diffusely and strongly positive for S100 protein with KI67 < 1% . A benign PS was eventually confirmed. We decided to observe the remaining mass lesion based on the histology and patient’s refusal for further surgery. The postoperative voiding difficulty and leg weakness completely recovered with no disturbance for normal social activities. There were almost complete removal of the large mass at the lumbar spine, as well as a multi-lobulated round masses at S2-S3 with no changes at 2-year follow-up .