The patient was a 93-year-old male with severe MR caused by prolapse of the mid-posterior mitral leaflet (P2) and atrial enlargement. At the age of 69 years, he was diagnosed with Stanford A type acute aortic dissection (ADD) and underwent ascending and partial arch replacement. In addition, he had hypertension, chronic renal failure (estimated glomerular filtration rate: 33.7 mL/min/1.73 m2, normal ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m2), and persistent atrial fibrillation. Despite his age, he was independent in terms of activities of daily living (Clinical Frailty Scale: 3–4/9) and had near-intact cognitive ability (Mini-Mental State Examination: 29/30). Two months before the MitraClip procedure, he developed dyspnoea on exertion. Severe MR was documented, and HF continued to worsen and required hospitalization.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial fibrillation with premature ventricular contraction (PVC). The origin of PVC was a right bundle branch block (RBBB) pattern with an inferior axis due to a high R wave and negative T wave in V1 . Echocardiography in the stable stage showed severe MR due to P2 prolapse (, ), with elongated chordae tendineae. Evaluation using the proximal isovelocity surface area method revealed an effective regurgitant orifice area of 0.47 cm2 and a regurgitant volume of 71 mL. The mean mitral valve gradient was 2 mmHg and the mitral valve area as determined by three-dimensional planimetry was 4.6 cm2. The left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic diameter was mildly increased at 57 mm, but the LV ejection fraction was normal with no wall motion abnormalities. Moderate post-capillary pulmonary hypertension was detected by right heart catheterization. In addition, coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis. Because of the patient’s history of AAD surgery, chronic renal failure, New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III, and the need for urgent surgery, his operative mortality risk was determined to be 26.6% by the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score and 26.8% by EUROSCORE II. Considering the high surgical risk, our heart team decided to perform MitraClip therapy.
After one clip was placed in the centre of the mitral valve (P2 lateral side), MR severity decreased from severe to trivial. The trans-mitral gradient increased from 0.6 to 2.5 mmHg. The final mitral valve area after MitraClip therapy was 3.06 cm2. However, immediately after grasping of the mitral leaflet, incessant non-sustained VT with a heart rate of 150/min occurred and systolic blood pressure dropped from 110 to 70 mmHg during VT . The VT waveform showed an RBBB pattern with a superior axis .
There were no significant ST-T changes on ECG and no LV wall motion abnormalities on echocardiography. Since PVC occurred frequently after long RR intervals, we performed pacing with a temporary pacemaker at a rate of 100 beats/min, with the expectation of suppressing VT. We also corrected the potassium level (K > 4.5 mEq/L; before correction, 3.7 mEq/L) and administered amiodarone intravenously. While the frequency of VT decreased, it did not disappear. Because the rigid shaft connected to the clip may have caused VT by increasing papillary muscle tension, we decided to release the clip. However, VT persisted after the clip release. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with continued intravenous injection of amiodarone and was treated for HF with diuretics. Surprisingly, PVC/VT disappeared a few hours later and did not recur, and MR remained mild . In addition, there was no significant elevation of myocardial enzymes during follow-up. The patient was clinically stable without VT or HF recurrence during 2-year follow-up.