The patient is an 80-year-old male patient with a longstanding history of coronary artery disease (CAD), hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and permanent atrial fibrillation on anticoagulation, with a past surgical history of four vessel bypass surgery in 1991 with a right IMA graft and three venous grafts. Post-coronary bypass surgery, he developed stable angina, treated on multiple occasions with percutaneous interventions, including PCI to the previously placed saphenous vein graft to the obtuse marginal artery (SVG-OM). In 2011, during the deployment of a 3.0 × 9.0 mm bare metal driver stent in the SVG-OM, a dissection occurred with subsequent vein graft pseudoaneurysm formation. The stent potentially fractured through the graft causing the formation of the pseudoaneurysm, which was being observed since then and was last noted to be over 5 cm on a chest computed tomography (CT) scan in 2015.
The patient remained asymptomatic and the pseudoaneurysm remained stable until his presentation in September 2016 with acute onset of retrosternal chest heaviness and diaphoresis. Initial examination showed blood pressure (BP) measurements of 93/60 mmHg with chest pain. Physical examination demonstrated normal jugular venous pressure, clear lung fields, no murmurs, normal heart sounds, and weak radial pulses. The electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated non-specific T-wave changes in the inferolateral leads . The initial troponin I level was 0.17 mcg/L (N < 0.10 mcg/L). Shortly after admission, the patient developed hypotension which was initially corrected with a fluid bolus to 127/73 mmHg with a heart rate of 78. His O2 saturations were 96% on room air, and his chest pain improved following sublingual nitroglycerine administration. Immediately prior to transfer to the telemetry ward, he re-developed worsening chest pain with a drop in systolic BP to 70 mmHg. A repeat ECG demonstrated new and dynamic ST elevation in leads I and aVL with deep reciprocal ST depression in the inferior leads that were not present on his initial presentation , prompting activation of a code STEMI. Aspirin and ticagrelor were administered and the patient was emergently transferred to the cardiac catheterization lab.
An echo was performed that showed pericardial fluid measuring up to 1.9 cm in diameter, but there was no right ventricular collapse and no other signs of tamponade . Cardiac catheterization revealed normal left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 60%, visually estimated from a left ventricular angiogram. The previously placed cardiac stents within the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) as well as the distal RCA remained patent without any significant narrowing. However, the saphenous vein graft to the second obtuse marginal branch of the circumflex artery demonstrated a large pseudoaneurysm. No intervention was initially felt possible given the size of the pseudoaneurysm.
Several hours post-catheterization, the patient experienced recurrent chest pain with transient lateral ST elevation. A CT angiography (CTA) scan of the chest demonstrated expansion of the pseudoaneurysm from 5.2 cm in 2016 to 7 cm in maximum dimension (7 cm × 5 cm). It also demonstrated that the pseudoaneurysm had ruptured into the pericardium with the presence of a moderate size haemopericardium producing compressive mass effect along the lateral right ventricular surface .
After consultation between cardiology, cardiovascular surgery, and interventional radiology, it was felt that the patient was not a good candidate for redo sternotomy nor for PCI; thus an endovascular coiling of the SVG-OM graft circumflex was performed by interventional radiology.
Utilizing a right femoral artery approach and placement of a 6 F sheath, a 6 F Burke Chaperon guidecatheter (Microvention-Terumo, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA) was advanced into the ascending aorta. With the 6 F Burke placed into the origin of the SVG-OM graft, an initial angiogram demonstrated the previously placed stent at the origin of the venous bypass as well as a second stent in the mid-portion of the graft in association with the pseudoaneurysm. There appeared to be a small tear with extravasation of contrast through the proximal interstices of the stent, but little flow into the distal outflow vessel. A 2-tip Headway microcatheter (Microvention-Terumo) was coaxially advanced into the proximal portion of the neck of the pseudoaneurysm . Delivery of multiple HydroFrame coils (MicroVention-Terumo) (two 7 mm × 28 cm, one 6 mm × 19 cm, two 5 mm × 15 cm, two 4 mm × 8 cm) and a single 4 mm × 10 cm HydroSoft coil was performed producing slowing of flow into the pseudoaneurysm sac . A post embolization control angiogram demonstrated near complete occlusion of the sac with patency of the proximal graft . A 16 h follow-up CTA was performed and, although there did appear to be flow into the distal outflow of the graft, there was none into the pseudoaneurysm sac.
The patient tolerated the procedure well, with no new onset of symptoms, no ECG changes, no arrhythmias. There was a small rise in the troponin I level to 3 mcg/L (N < 0.10 mcg/L) noted post procedure. No further haemodynamic or electrical instability was observed. Mild congestive heart failure developed that responded to medical therapy. Repeat echo and CT scan showed no changes in the pericardial effusion. The patient was ultimately restarted on anticoagulation and discharged from the hospital in stable condition on post-operative Day 7. At clinical follow-up at 1 month, the patient was clinically stable. A repeat CTA at 10 months , demonstrated no filling of the pseudoaneurysm and good flow into the distal outflow territory. At a 1-year clinical follow-up visit, the patient remained asymptomatic, with good exercise tolerance and no recurrence of chest pain.