A 17-year-old girl passed out suddenly and was admitted to the emergency room of a local hospital. She presented with persistent fever for 1 month before admission, with headache, fatigue, arthralgia, myalgia and sweating. The overall past medical history was negative, with no family history of hypertension or cardiovascular diseases. An acute computed tomography (CT) scan showed subarachnoid hemorrhage in the left fissure and cistern .CT angiography demonstrated an aneurysm in the M2 segment of the left middle cerebral artery . Emergency surgery was performed and the aneurysm rupture was fixed by clipping. After the surgery, the patient had persistent fever. Intravenous cefuroxime (3.0 g q12h) was empirically administered for 2 weeks, but the patient’s condition did not improve. The patient was transferred to our department for further management.
Neurological examination was notable for positive right pathological reflexes, including Babinski’s sign, Chaddock’s sign, Hoffmann’s sign and Kerning’s sign. In addition, the patient had aphasia. Her parents denied a history of infectious diseases or contact with livestock. Laboratory studies showed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), at 64 mm/h (normal range 0–20), and mildly elevated liver enzymes, whereas other blood testing parameters, including complete blood counts, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, creatine, antinuclear antibodies, etc., were within normal ranges. Blood bacterial culture was negative. Abdominal CT scan revealed mild splenomegaly.
Given the negative blood culture and potential infectious aetiology, we performed lumber puncture (LP) to obtain CSF for further examination. Her intracranial pressure was elevated at 320 mmH2O (normal range 80–180 mmH2O). The appearance of CSF was cloudy with 118 white blood cells/mm3 (lymphocyte predominance), protein1.37 g/L, chloridion123mmol/L, and glucose 2.07 mmol/L. Detailed results of the CSF test are shown in Table . An advanced diagnostic workup, including CSF cultures for bacteria, fungi and tuberculosis (TB) and polymerase chain reaction for virus, bacteria and TB,was performed without any positive findings (see Table ). Based on the CSF results, bacterial infection of central nervous system (CNS) was considered and intravenous ceftriaxone (2.0 g qd) was prescribed empirically.
After 10 days of treatment, fever resolved and the clinical status of the patient improved. She could communicate with simple words, and her neurological status improved slightly. A second LP with CSF analysis was performed, and the results of the CSF test were similar to those of the previous ones (see Table ), with a negative result for bacterial culture. Autoimmune-encephalitis-specific antibodies, including anti-glutamate receptors, anti-γ-aminobutyric acid B receptor, leucine-rich glioma inactived-1 and contacin-associated protein-2, were all negative. A re-examination of blood revealed a decreased ESR, at 10.0 mm/h, and other laboratory studies (routine blood parameters, liver-enzymes, procalcitonin, etc.) were negative. The patient was referred to the rehabilitation department for the start of her rehabilitation.
Twenty-five days after the second LP, the patient’s symptoms worsened. She developed fever again, and her body temperature fluctuated from 37.3 °C to 38.2 °C, accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Neurological examination found neck stiffness. A complete blood count showed a total white blood cell count of 3.75 × 109/L, with 34% neutrophils and 60.3% lymphocytes. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed multiple infarction lesions accompanied by regional cerebral cortex necrosis on the left side of the brain. A third LP with CSF analysis was performed, and CSF culture was repeated. This time, the organism Brucella melitensis was identified. Given the positive culture, Brucella antibodies in serum and CSF were analysed by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (IBL International GmbH, Germany). A concentration of ≥12 U/ml was considered positive. The results were positive both in the serum (IgM 10.88 U/ml; IgG>150 U/ml) and in the CSF (IgM 6.37 U/ml; IgG>150 U/ml). Echocardiography showed no sign of endocarditis.
With the confirmed diagnosis of Brucella-related CNS infection, triple-agent therapy composed of intravenous doxycycline (0.1 g bid) and ceftriaxone (2.0 g qd) plus oral rifampin (0.6 g qd) was administered. After 2 weeks of treatment, the patient’s body temperature returned to normal. Other symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting were also relieved. A fourth LP was performed and showed that CSF Brucella-antibodies were IgM 4.37 U/ml and IgG>150 U/ml. CSF culture showed no growth, as expected. The triple-agent regimen continued for 1 month, followed by the fifth LP, which showed that the level of CSF Brucella antibody IgM dropped to 1.49 U/ml and IgG remained >150 U/ml. The patient had no fever, and all symptoms continued to improve. She was discharged and continued on treatment with oral doxycycline (0.1 g bid) and rifampin (0.6 g qd). At the last follow-up, 6 months after anti-Brucella therapy, the patient’s condition had markedly improved and her speech recovered.