A forty-nine-year-old female who was not a known case of any medical illnesses, presented to the outpatient clinic with a two-week history of pain in the left forearm, and numbness over the 3rd, 4th and 5th digits and medial aspect of the hand, which limited her daily living activities. This was associated with pallor of the ulnar aspect of the hand during excessive use. The patient denied having loss of motor functioning and trauma to the affected limb. Moreover, the patient did not have any risk factors for aneurysmal formation such as smoking, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, or connective tissue disease. She did not have any cardiovascular complains either.
General examination was normal. A peripheral vascular exam of both upper limbs showed no skin changes, ulcers, or peripheral cyanosis. Skin temperature and capillary refill time was normal. All upper limb pulses were present bilaterally, however, the left distal ulnar artery pulse was faint, whilst the pulse at the aneurysm’s site was prominent. Tenderness was present in the medial left forearm. Sensation was reduced over the left 3rd, 4th and 5th digits suggesting an ulnar nerve distribution. Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable.
Blood tests for vasculitis and connective tissue disorders were sent and results were reported as negative. A duplex ultrasound of the left forearm showed a dilated middle segment of the ulnar artery with limited flow. These findings were confirmed with an MRI (, ). Subsequently, a left upper limb angiography revealed a fusiform aneurysm of the proximal to mid segment of the left ulnar artery measuring approximately 9 cm in length and 8 mm in diameter . A sluggish flow was noted in the ulnar artery in comparison to the radial and interosseous arteries. The aortic arch, subclavian, axillary, brachial and radial arteries were patent with no evidence of atherosclerotic changes. The palmar arch was discontinuous; with the radial artery supplying the radial two-and-a-half digits, and the ulnar artery supplying the ulnar two-and-a-half digits . The ulnar artery was anatomically variant. Angiography revealed that the patient’s ulnar artery aneurysm was double the size of a regularly functioning ulnar artery. As the ulnar artery lies adjacent to the ulnar nerve, the clinical presentation and radiological findings of this patient suggested symptomatic ulnar artery aneurysm due to ulnar nerve compression. Therefore, a decision was made to repair the aneurysm.
A left ulnar artery aneurysm repair was performed by the senior consultant of vascular surgery. First, an antecubital fossa incision was made, identifying the distal brachial artery and both ulnar and radial arteries. The ulnar artery was dissected out distally until it went deep into the muscular planes of the medial forearm. A distal medial forearm incision was made, and tissue dissection was carried out until the ulnar artery and nerve were identified and preserved. The aneurysmal portion of the ulnar artery was seen, and further dissection was carried out to the healthy portion of the artery distally. A subcutaneous tunnel was made between the two incisions. A below-the-knee portion of the right great saphenous vein was harvested in the usual fashion and passed through the tunnel made in the forearm in a reversed fashion. The vessels were clamped after systemic heparinization. Prolene 6.0 and 7.0 sutures were used to perform the proximal and the distal anastomoses, respectively. A full thickness layer of the distal part of the aneurysm was excised and sent for histopathological examination. Post-operatively, good left ulnar and radial artery pulses were felt, and the graft was functioning well.
The histopathology report revealed a true aneurysm of the ulnar artery with no signs of inflammation. The patient’s hospital stay was uneventful, and she was discharged home on the 4th post-operative day.
The patient was followed up regularly in the surgical clinic. She was doing well, apart from having initial occasional numbness of the little finger and half of ring finger which resolved on further follow up. All incisions healed well and both radial and ulnar pulses were easily palpable. A duplex ultrasound was done to assess the patency of the bypass, proving to be patent with good flow at 3, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, and 30 months post-operatively . Currently the patient remains asymptomatic.