An 83 years old female was admitted in 2012 to the Peruvian Naval Hospital, Centro Médico Naval ‘Cirujano Mayor Santiago Távara’ (CEMENA), in Lima, Peru, with complaints of low back pain, vomiting and intestinal obstruction. The patient had a history of high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic renal disease and multiple urinary tract infections. In addition, she had a prolapsed bladder with a prior history of hysterectomy. At the time of admission, the patient was taking loperamide, amlodipine and ranitidine.
As part of her initial work-up, a midstream urine sample was collected and sent to the local CEMENA laboratory for routine urine culture. P. aeruginosa was isolated and initial antibiotic susceptibility testing showed it to be sensitive to imipenem. The clinicians started a course of meropenem at 500 mg IV q12h based on her renal function, but the patient did not improve. After 5 days, a second urine culture was performed, isolating P. aeruginosa that was now resistant to imipenem. She was then changed to renaldosed fosfomycin at 0.8 g IV q12h with noted improvement and clearance of her infection.
The second P. aeruginosa isolate was sent to the Naval Medical Research Unit No. 6 (NAMRU-6) in Callao, Peru (coded as MIS1668) for confirmation and further molecular characterization. The isolate was confirmed as P. aeruginosa by routine biochemical algorithms and antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) was performed using the automated Phoenix System (BD Diagnostics). MIC results were interpreted using the Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines (CLSI M100-S23) . The isolate was found to be resistant to all antibiotics on the NMIC/ID-124 Phoenix panel . Additional antibiotic susceptibilities were tested using the disk diffusion test (DDT) for colistin 10 µg, imipenem 10 µg, and ticarcillin–clavulanic acid 75/10 µg, with only sensitivity to colistin exhibited, thus meeting the criteria for an extensively drug-resistant (XDR) isolate according to the international guidelines .
Since the MIS1668 isolate was carbapenem-resistant, we used the modified Hodge test (MHT) assay to screen for carbapenemase activity with Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 700603 . A P. aeruginosa harboring the blaIMP-16 gene and P. aeruginosa ATCC 27853 were also used as positive and negative controls, respectively. Surprisingly, MIS1668 was determined to be negative for carbapenemase activity by MHT (a). Thus, we subsequently characterized the isolate using the disk diffusion synergy test (DDST) using EDTA disks with imipenem, meropenem and ceftazidime disks placed 15 mm center-to-center of each disk using the method described by Radice et al. . Although MHT was negative, DDST showed synergy when subjecting the isolate to all disks (b), indicating the presence of an MBL enzyme being inhibited by chelation of the metal ion required for activity by the added EDTA. Synergy between imipenem and ceftazidime was observed only in the presence of the EDTA disk, a pattern similar to activity exhibited by the GES enzyme (c) .
To further characterize the carbapenem-resistance activity, we performed a combination of multiplex PCR to detect bla genes with primer sets for the MBLs (IMP, VIM, NDM), serine-carbapenemase KPC, and for other beta-lactamases (TEM, SHV, OXA, GES, VEB, PER and CTX-M) using the primers listed in . The series of multiplex PCRs clearly demonstrated positive bands for blaVIM, blaGES and blaOXA-1-like from the P. aeruginosa MIS1668 isolate with band sizes consistent with those of the controls . Subsequently, we used Sanger-based sequencing (Applied Biosystems) of the amplicons followed by blast search of the sequences to confirm the blaVIM-2, blaGES-1 and blaOXA-1 gene variants . Finally, we used the Diversilab Rep-PCR method (Biomerieux) to detect homogenous DNA regions in the bacterial genome to the reference strain ATCC 27853 and found the MIS1668 isolate to be 94.1 % homologous.