A 56-year-old diabetic man on MHD was referred to us for persistent fever. Until then, the patient had started MHD through a right femoral vein catheter two months ago and was again admitted to the same local hospital for fever one month later. His temperature fluctuated between 38.0-39.5ºC with the highest readout accompanied by rigor during the dialysis session. Laboratory tests showed leukocyte 2.83 × 109/L with 69.7% neutrophil, hemoglobin 91 g/L, platelet 124 × 109/L, serum creatinine (Scr) 1242.0 µmol/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 5.97 ng/mL (reference, < 0.05ng/mL), ferritin 409 ng/mL (25-350ng/mL), fibrinogen 4.17 g/L (2.0-4.0 g/L). Treatment was begun with Ceftriaxone and Meropenem, and accordingly changed over to Norvancomycin when microbial culture of the peripheral blood and tip of the removed catheter both grew C. striatum. Despite remission of the infectious indices, however, his fever remained unabated. Finally, the patient was transferred to us after a hospital stay of 34 days .
On arrival, the patient was febrile, pale and asthenic with right jugular vein catheter visible upon a temperature of 38.6 ºC and BP 140/85 mmHg. Systemic examination revealed enlarged superficial lymph nodes with tenderness, normal auscultation of lungs and no hepatosplenomegaly. Initial workup showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, elevated C-reaction protein, PCT, lactate dehydrogenase, triglycerides and serum ferritin . By comparison, all tumor markers, immunological and microbiological tests yielded no remarkable finding. Specifically, serological tests excluded as follows: hepatitis B and C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, parvovirus B19, enterovirus, herpesvirus, Rickettsia, mycoplasma, chlamydia, Brucella spp., toxoplasmosis, fungi and mycobacterium tuberculosis. Metagenome next generation sequencing and repeated cultures of his blood were also negative. Moreover, there was no sign of cerebral, thoracic and abdominal infection on CT scans, whereas enlarged lymph nodes were confirmed by ultrasound at the cervical (the largest one 15.7 × 7.8 mm), supraclavicular (7.3 × 5.1 mm), axillary (15.8 × 8.2 mm) and inguinal (7.8 × 3.6 mm) areas. Subsequently, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy found active trilineage hematopoiesis with scattered hemophagocytic macrophages. In addition, needle biopsies of the left cervical/axillary lymph nodes identified histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis. Upon these findings , further investigation detected a surge in soluble CD25 level and lower NK cell activity. Taken together, a diagnosis of HLH and KD secondary to the catheter‑related BSI was considered. After a hematology consult, the patient was treated with daily intravenous dexamethasone of 5 mg for one week and eventually discharged with a normal temperature. Of note, his relevant clinical indices showed clear improvements two months after discharge.