A 34-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Neurosurgery with a complaint of persistent headaches and convulsions. The patient had no medical or family history. The patient was injured in a car accident 7 years before the admission date, which resulted in a nondisplaced right parietal linear fracture and a mandibular fracture without intracranial bleeding or neurological sequelae, and was treated conservatively. After the trauma, the patient had chronic headaches relieved by painkillers. However, a year ago, headaches became refractory, and the patient started complaining of recurring convulsions, which were followed by transient left hemiplegia (Todd’s paralysis). Convulsions’ frequency gradually increased despite pharmacological treatment that reached maximum doses without improvement. Muscle weakness had become permanent with muscle strength of 4/5 on the left side during the last month before the surgery. Brain CT revealed an extra-axial calcified lesion in the right parietal frontal lobe near the calvaria, and the MRI in T2A and T1A showed a hypointense lesion compatible with calcification/ossification.
The diagnosis of post-traumatic ossified or calcified CSDH was suspected based on the patient’s history of head trauma, physical examination, and imaging findings. Surgery was decided upon considering the patient’s young age, the presence of refractory convulsions and muscle weakness, as well as the patient’s desire to undergo surgery that would relieve symptoms permanently. The surgery was carried out in a general university hospital’s neurosurgery unit. Two junior trainees with 3 years of surgical specialty training worked under the leadership of a neurosurgery specialist with 25 years of experience. The procedure was done while the patient was under general anesthesia. During surgery, after bone lifting, dura dissection and lesion isolation were done easily since the lesion was of a hard consistency without adhesions to the surrounding tissues .
Then the lesion was carefully dissected without injuring the brain. The extracted lesion was hard and measured 6.3×1.1×7.3 cm .
Following the surgery, no complications occurred during the recovery period, and the patient was discharged with an improvement in muscle strength, which was 5/5 at discharge. A CT scan performed 5 days after the surgery revealed no abnormalities. Histopathologically, the lesion was reported as bone tissue with trabeculae of lamellated bone and bone marrow so, the diagnosis of OSCH was confirmed.
It was decided that the patient should continue using the anticonvulsant treatment for at least 1 year, with follow-up visits to ensure improvement and tapering the anticonvulsant dose when appropriate. In the first 6 months after surgery, no convulsions occurred, then the patient abruptly stopped taking the anticonvulsant medication by herself. Two weeks later, she experienced a seizure. The anticonvulsant treatment was reestablished and planned to be continued for a further 2 years with a gradually tapering dose.
This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE (Surgical CAse REport) Criteria.