A 35-year-old female presented with an 11-month history of progressive numbness in both of her legs. Over the last month, she developed weakness in her left leg and loss of bladder control. Physical examination showed a loss of sensation below the level of crista iliaca and muscle strength of grade 4/5 in the left lower extremity. There was no remarkable finding in her past medical history, and she denied a family history of central nervous system diseases.
The laboratory data were all in the normal range. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an intramedullary well-circumscribed 4.3×0.9×1.3 cm mass at the C6-T1 vertebral level and associated spinal cord edema in the rostral region of the lesion. The lesion was isointense on T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging . Homogeneous and bright contrast enhancement was noted after intravenous injection of gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetate (Gd-DTPA) . A further three-dimensional computed tomographic angiography (CTA) reconstruction was requested, which demonstrated the mass was remarkably enhanced , suggesting its rich vascularization; nevertheless, identifying its definite feeding artery is quite challenging.
The preoperative suspected diagnosis was spinal hemangioblastoma. The tumor was surgically resected via a posterior midline approach, under neurophysiological monitoring with motor and sensory evoked potentials. Intraoperative findings revealed an intramedullary white-yellowish tumor. There was no cleavage plane between the tumor and the parenchyma of the spinal cord. A gross total resection was achieved.
Histological examination revealed uniform spindle cells arranged in interlacing fascicles, with intermingled collagen fiber bundles and a dense reticulin fiber network. The nuclei were oval to elongated without pleomorphism. Mitotic activity and necrosis were absent. There were no psammoma bodies or whorls. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed strong and diffuse immunopositivity with vimentin and CD34, while the tumor was negative for S-100, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and CD56. The Ki–67 labeling index was low (<1%). Based on the immunohistochemical profiles and the histopathological fascicular spindle cell morphology, the lesion was diagnosed as SFT .
The postoperative MRI confirmed a complete resection (–), and the postoperative course was uneventful. The paresthesia and weakness in the lower extremities and dysuria were completely relieved seven months postoperatively. The patient was asymptomatic over the subsequent 23-month follow-up. The latest MRI showed no evidence of recurrence.