A 19-year-old man presented to the emergency department in our hospital with a chief complaint of general malaise, headache, and low back pain. He was an American football player in a college team. His medical history was not significant except for minor head injury.
History taking revealed that, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic and nationwide emergency state in Japan, team practice had been suspended for 2 months. Two days before this visit, he finally resumed training including the repetitions of 50-m sprinting. He started to experience headache, back pain, and general fatigue the night after training. His symptoms did not improve, and he visited the emergency department in our hospital.
The vital signs were stable; however, he developed severe back pain and malaise. Table shows his laboratory tests on first visit, which revealed a serum urea nitrogen level of 38.7 mg/dL (normal values: 8–22 mg/dL), creatinine level of 4.77 mg/dL (normal values: 0.61–1.04 mg/dL), and estimated glomerular filtration rate of 15 mL/min/1.73 m2, indicating stage 3 AKI (Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes or KDIGO). Serum creatinine kinase levels were 259 U/L (normal values: 60–287 U/L). A urinalysis showed a 2+ result for protein and was negative for occult blood. Ultrasonography showed diffuse enlargement of both kidneys without stones or hydronephrosis.
Based on the typical medical history and symptoms, we made a diagnosis of ALPE. He was treated with infusion therapy for the first 3 days of hospitalization; on the fourth day, his back pain resolved. The creatinine level worsened until day 3 (5.73 mg/dL) but then improved, and it was 3.17 mg/dL on day 9. He was discharged on day 10. One month after discharge from the hospital, his creatinine level was 1.14 mg/dL, his serum uric acid level was 0.8 mg/dL, and his fractional excretion of uric acid was 48.5%, suggesting renal hypouricemia.
Although he was informed about the risk of recurrence and renal failure, he wanted to continue playing. He started with aerobic exercises such as jogging, making sure he did not have any symptoms, and then gradually increased the program to include anaerobic exercises. There has been no flare-up of symptoms and he has returned to competition.