The patient, a 65-year-old man, was diagnosed with abdominal swelling that had persisted for 1 year,and was accompanied by abdominal pain, abdominal distension and dyspnea for 7 days. A year prior, the patient found an"abdominal cystic mass (approximately 25 cm × 1.6 cm × 22 cm)” and attended an other hospital. He was admitted to the local hospital 7days prior due to sudden intermittent diffuse abdominal pain with abdominal distension, dyspnea, no fever, nausea, and vomiting. Abdominal CT suggested an “abdominal mass and intestinal obstruction”, and the symptoms did not improve. The patient was admitted to the hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. The patient had had hypertension for 10 years and regularly took levamlodipine besylate tablets for 5 mg/days,which controlled his blood pressure within the normal range. A cardiac stent operation was performed 4 months prior because of myocardial infarction. Physical examination showed: no obvious heart abnormalities,although shortness of breath, obvious abdominal swelling, frog belly, no gastrointestinal type and peristaltic wave were noted,as well as a large mass that could be felt asoccupying most of the abdominal cavity. Regarding tumor markers: CA125:65.47 U/ml (reference value < 35 U/ml), other tumor markers were not abnormal. Abdominal enhanced CT: huge cystic space in the pelvis and abdominal cavity, with an irregular shape, linear septum, (approximately 24.2 cm × 16.7 cm × 27.8 cm), extending along the mesentery of the small intestine . In contrast-enhanced scan, the cystic components were not enhanced, the septum was uniformly enhanced, the intestinal canal was displaced laterally under pressure ( Magi B), and the inferior vena cava was narrowed . The preliminary diagnosis of the nature of abdominal mass pending diagnosis: cystic lymphangioma? An exploratory laparotomy was performed,during which a large cystic mass of approxmately 30 × 28 × 14 cm was observed retroperitoneally. The surface of the mass was smooth, white and red, with a light yellow exudate on the surface. The tumor formed extensive adhesion with the transverse colon, small intestine and pelvic wall, and enveloped the abdominal aorta, superior mesenteric artery, inferior mesenteric artery and inferior vena cava to varying degrees. We decided to surgically remove the cystic mass completely . Postoperative pathology: microscopically, necrosis and protein exudation in the cystic cavity, chronic inflammation with inflammatory granulation, obvious proliferation of interstitial vessels and fibrous tissue, scattered in clusters of smooth muscle bundles and more inflammatory cells, and occasional giant cells, as well as proliferation of small lymphatic vessels outside the cyst wall, consistent with cystic lymphangioma with chronic inflammation .
The patient recovered well and could eat normally 5 days postoperatively. The patient was discharged 10 days after the surgery,at which point,he was in a good condition, with no pain or complications. In the initial recovery stage, he was advised to ingest high-quality protein that was easily absorbed and high in nutrition,and to avoid high-fat, high-fiber, indigestible and absorbed food, The patient was subjected to, regular re-examination and follow-up.