An 18-week-old female infant weighing 5950 g was admitted to the hospital due to respiratory distress, cough, cyanosis, and fever that had persisted for six days. The infant was born at full term through an elective repeat cesarean section, with a birth weight of 3195 g and no congenital anomalies or delivery complications. She attained normal developmental milestones until two months of age, when decreased activity was observed. Both parents were in good health and unrelated. This child was their third offspring. Their first child was healthy, but their second child died at five months of age due to Pompe disease.
The infant’s vital signs upon admission were as follows: a temperature of 38.3 °C, a heart rate of 147 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 47 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation of 92% on room air. Clinical examination revealed lethargy, pallor, and cyanosis. Physical characteristics included a flattened nasal bridge and a slight macroglossia. Mid-systolic murmurs were detected in cardiac auscultation. Both lungs had rales on examination. The abdomen was non-tender and soft to the touch with no signs of organ enlargement. A neurological examination revealed generalized hypotonia and absent deep tendon reflexes in all four limbs. The infant had suboptimal eye contact and poor head control. The patient was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit.
Initial laboratory investigations yielded the following results :
The results of the urinalysis, urine culture, and blood cultures returned negative. Positive results were obtained from the tracheal secretion cultures for the presence of Acinetobacter. The COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, as well as tests for Influenza A and B, were negative. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, short PR interval, ahigh-voltage R in left precordial leads, and strain pattern in V6 suggestive of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy .
Echocardiography demonstrated biventricular severe hypertrophy, significant LV systolic-diastolic dysfunction, and high LV filling pressure. The interventricular septum measured 8 mm. The LV ejection fraction was 30–35%, and mild mitral valve and tricuspid valve regurgitations were present. Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly with an increased cardiothoracic ratio .
Pompe disease was suspected based on the patient’s clinical features and positive family history. Dried blood spot testing for Alpha-1,4 glucosidase (GAA) activity using tandem mass spectrometry confirmed the diagnosis of Pompe disease, showing significantly reduced enzymatic activity of 0.4 µmol/L/h (reference range for normal individuals: > 2.0 µmol/L/h). Genetic testing was not performed due to financial constraints the patient’s family faced. The patient received non-invasive ventilation with a nasal mask and continuous positive airway pressure of 5 cm H2O. Enteral nutrition was administered through a nasogastric tube using a high-calorie formula. Metoprolol was initiated at 0.5 mg/kg/day to suppress myocardial remodeling and reduce oxygen consumption. Antibiotics were prescribed for suspected pneumonia, and antipyretics were given to manage fever. The patient was referred for ERT with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA), but she succumbed to cardiac arrest before treatment initiation.