A previously healthy 63 year-old Japanese female presented with gait disturbance and was diagnosed as having transverse myelopathy with a sensory level of T5 and bilateral Babinski signs. She was given intravenous methyl prednisolone, resulting in a complete clinical recovery. At age 67, she started to complain of numbness on the left side of her face and developed an ataxic gait. MRI of the brain and the spinal cord revealed a focal lesion in the pontine tegmentum on the right, a cystic lesion in the subcortical white matter lateral to the basal ganglia on the right , and a longitudinally extending cavitary lesion affecting the C2-C6 cervical cord . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed normal protein content (43 mg/dl) with increased myelin basic protein (MBP) (253 pg/ml, normal < 120). Oligoclonal bands were negative. Steroid therapy resulted in a good recovery. At age 69, she developed optic neuritis bilaterally. Serum antibodies to AQP4 was positive, and she was diagnosed as having NMOSD. After intravenous steroid therapy, she was started on a low maintenance dose of oral prednisone of 15 mg. At age 70, she was unable to walk and was admitted to our hospital. The neurologic examination revealed the patient had normal mental status, bilaterally decreased vision, mild dysarthria, weakness and sensory loss in the right upper extremity, and spastic paraplegia. Steroid administration was not effective in reversing her condition and she became wheelchair bound. At age 72, she developed acute myocardial infarction which was successfully treated with a stent placement. She was incidentally found to have aplastic anemia and received blood transfusions. One month prior to death, she developed right hemiparesis and disturbed consciousness over several days, and the brain CT revealed a large low-density lesion involving the left basal ganglia . A diagnosis of acute infarction was made and she was treated conservatively. She gradually recovered consciousness but never returned to her baseline. She died from heart failure at age 73.
The general autopsy was granted and was performed 1 hour after the death, which revealed old and recent myocardial infarcts and aspergillosis of the lung.
There was no evidence of systemic vasculitis. The brain was small and weighed 1080 g. There were mild atheromatous changes in the basal arteries of Willis. The bilateral optic nerves and chiasma were atrophic.
On the coronal sections, there was a large soft necrotic focus involving the putamen, globus pallidus, internal capsule and caudate nucleus on the left side . A soft necrotic lesion was also seen in the corpus callosum (arrowhead in Fig. a). On the opposite side of the cerebral hemisphere, there were cystic lesions in the subcortical and deep white matter . In the brainstem, there was a focal plaque-like lesions in the medial lemniscus. The spinal cord revealed central cavitary lesions extending from C3 to C5.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded sections of the brain and the spinal cord were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E), Klüver-Barrera (KB) and Grocott methenamine silver staining for fungi. Immunohistochemistry with a streptavidin-Biotin method was performed with the following antibodies. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against AQP4 (Chemicon, 1:1000), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; DAKO, 1:800), myelin basic protein (MBP 1:150, Novocastra), the cytotoxic T-cell marker CD8 (1:50, DAKO), the plasma cell marker CD138 (1:200, DAKO), macrophage/microglial marker CD68 (1:100, DAKO), fibrinogen (1:3000, DAKO), C9neo (Dr. Paul Morgan, UK, 1:200). Reaction products were visualized with DAB.
Histologically, optic nerves revealed moderate gliosis without active features of neuronal degeneration. The wall of the small vessels in the optic nerve invariably showed hyalinized thickening. The necrotic foci in the left ganglia stained pale with H&E and KB stains, and was well demarcated and irregular in contour . The lesion was largely GFAP and AQP4 negative, with some tendency of relatively more GFAP preservation than AQP4 . At the margin surrounding the lesion, there was a prominent perivascular inflammatory cell infiltration around small and medium sized vessels. Many of the infiltrating cells were immunoreactive either for B and T lymphocyte or plasma cell markers . Immunohistochemistry with antibodies for C9neo and fibrinogen were positive in vasocentric patterns, which was found exclusively in the necrotic lesion . Numerous macrophages were also found to contain corpora amylacea in their cytoplasm . The Grocott methenamine silver stain was negative in the necrotic lesions. Occasional eosinophils and neutrophils could be recognized in the macroscopically fresh appearing lesion of the corpus callosum.
By contrast, the cystic lesions contralateral hemispheres were lined by fibrillary gliosis and there were few inflammatory cells . In the periphery of a lesion, many viable looking neurons were seen within the loosely arranged myelinated fibers . No thrombotic occlusions could be found in the lenticulostriate arteries on both sides despite an intensive search. There were no cortical demyelinating lesions except for several scattered foci of ischemic infarcts of various stage.
In the brain stem, the pontine tegmentum showed a few foci of gliosis associated with demyelination and relatively preserved axons. In the spinal cord, there were cystic lesions predominantly involving the central gray matter of the thoracic cord. There was relative sparing of axons compared to myelin in the area surrounding the cystic lesions, where the loss of AQP4 was much broader than those area with GFAP loss. In and around the cystic lesions, small vessels with thickened hyalinized walls were seen. There were only a few infiltrating T and B cells.