A 28 year-old lady who was had previous 3 children (Gravida 3, Para 3) presented 6 months after cesarean section with history of severe pain and blood discharge during menstruation from the previous transverse supra-pubic scar, in between the menstrual cycles she complained from pus discharge from the same site of the scar. The patient had no dysuria with normal color urine, no frequent urination, and the defecation was normal.
The patient had history of previous 2 cesarean sections, the past medical history was negative for any chronic illnesses, and the cycles were regular with no history of dysmenorrhea.
The cesarean section was done at the 37th week of gestation as an emergency surgery because she had previous 2 scars and developed severe uterine contractions, she delivered a healthy male baby weighing 3.6 Kg.
The drug history was negative and the family history was negative for any relevant genetic information or psychosocial abnormalities.
On physical examination she had normal vital signs, the patient was afebrile, with no pallor, and the body mass index was 28.
Abdominal examination revealed a localized tenderness at site of previous cesarean section scar with a 1*1 cm opening at the central part of the scar which was discharging blood during pressure over the lower abdomen. There was no urine discharge from the scar. Vaginal examination by the speculum was normal.
The complete blood count was normal with normal hemoglobin and white blood cells count, the urinalysis was also normal. The patient was sent for abdominal ultrasound which showed no abnormalities.
From the clinical scenario we suspected endometriosis as the provisional diagnosis as many patients present after cesarean section complaining from cyclical bleeding at the site of the scar. The patient received medical treatment in the form of GnRH agonists for three months with little improvement and the symptoms recurred after that.
The second option was surgical intervention, the operation was performed under general anesthesia, the scar was excised and there was an abnormal fistulous tract which was connected to the uterus and the endometrial cavity at the site of the previous uterine scar which was sutured by a non-absorbable suture material (Silk) at the time of previous surgery (, ).
Complete excision of the tract was done with removal of the previous sutures, removal of the necrotic tissue was done, refreshment of the edges was performed, the uterus was re-sutured using a slowly absorbable suture material, irrigation of the wound was performed with warm normal saline, and then the abdominal wall was closed .
The operation was done by a gynecologist and a general surgeon.
The immediate post-operative condition was smooth and satisfactory with no immediate complications. Follow up the patient was done for 8 months with no post-operative complications with normal regular menstrual cycles.