A 14-year-old boy was admitted for bilateral scrotal masses for 11 years in our outpatient department. According to the previous documents provided by his family, his parents were normal but his elder brother showed same scrotal masses.When they were 3 years old,the elder brother,who is 10 years older than the younger, accepted serious hypospadias repair surgery in 1999 while the younger in 2009 at Wuhan Children’s Hosptial. In the short postoperative period, this younger child’s skin color became tanned and the color deepen. Although parents noticed that his testicles were slightly larger than peers in progressive pigmented stage, occasionally even with orchialgia, same to childhood of his elder brother, they still ignore it and did not take him to medical treatment until oversize bilateral lumps 5 years later. Thus his parents sent them to Tongji Hosiptal affiliated to Middle China University in Wuhan, and both were diagnosed as TARTs with 3β-2HSD by routine hormone examination(see in Fig. ) and recommended gene analysis(see in Supplementary Fig. 1).In addition, tumor tissue biopsy approved by custodians also supported TARTs diagnosis. The markedly elevated androgen, ACTH and 17-OHP levels and actual bone age(15-year-old) indicated only hydrocortisone(HC) supplementary therapy feasible when they refused surgerical excision. In long-term follow-up, HC dosage(15 mg/m2·d) was gradually adjusted to 23 mg/m2·d, which was proven effective by diminshed tumor size. While two siblings often forgot to take medicine on time for one year and did not seek for regular examination due to COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan. The bilateral TARTs size became slightly larger than pre-treatment and seemed insensitive to HC.
In the second admission to Shenzhen Children’s Hospital, we conducted sonography and computed tomography(CT)(show in Fig. ).The Physical examinations details included:Height_145.4 cm(-3.4 SD), Sitting Height_84.6 cm, Weight_55.7 kg, Pigmented Skin(see Supplementary Fig. 2). Tanner staging: breast B1, armpit hair A2,pubis PH5,penis 6 cm*2.7 cm.
With slowly increased height about 1.2 cm since first admission 5 years ago, we replaced HC with dexamethasone(DXMS) to control the disease. The CT image suggested that testis tumor nearly replaced normal testicles tissue and hyperplasia in bilateral adrenal cortex. After Multi-disciplinary discussion, the tumor was proposed to excise to avoid growing up and his parents accepted our advice.
After the incision into tunica vaginalis in each side, there is an obvious characteristic that cavity of tunica vaginalis disappeared, we can noticed two hard giant tumors(see Fig. ) with several sporadic bean-like tubercles and cannot clearly distinguished structure of epididymis and testis. Finally,we stripped the tumor and suture incision by rolling residual testicular tissue and tunicae vaginalis.The tumors were demonstrated TARTs by pathology results (see in Supplementary Fig. 3 and Table 1 ) with no existence of Reinke crystals.
In the postoperative week,bilateral scrotum skin folds gradually resumed with subsidence of scrotum swelling and bilateral size obviously decreased comparing with primary manifestation.
During the third admission to Shenzhen Children’s Hospital in 2021 July, physical examinations included:Height_146.2 cm(-3 SD), Sitting Height_85.3 cm, Weight_64.5 kg, Pigmented Skin color improved. Tanner staging: breast B1,armpit hair A2,pubis hair PH5,penis 1 cm*3.5 cm.The surgery incision recovered well and bilateral testis unltrasound show Left volume was 11.59ml and Right was 10.79ml. Adrenal hormone profile shows ACTH 4.090pg/ml, testosterone 7.54nmol/L,17-OHP 0.47nmol/L, serum cortisol is 0.000ug/dl and follow-up is necessary for long-term prognosis.