A 79-years-old female came for routine follow-up investigations for her carcinoma of the urinary bladder , which was diagnosed 15 months ago.
At present, she was asymptomatic and underwent contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis, for a routine follow-up, which showed the tumor’s complete resolution. This revealed osteolysis of the right pubic rami with a small fluid collection. Bilateral sacral IF were also noticed in the healing stage (, ). A CT-guided biopsy was done of the public lesion, and 6 ml of blood mixed fluid was aspirated. Cytolopathological examination did not reveal any malignant cells, nor there was any microbial growth. The Gene X-pert assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. Her full blood counts and other laboratory investigations were within normal limits. A diagnosis of radiation-induced IF was thus made.
She had undergone combined chemotherapy and RT as a bladder preservation protocol and was given 6 weekly chemotherapy cycles (Cisplatin, 45 mg) and 64 Gy radiations in 32 cycles. Volumetric arc radiotherapy was given to the draining pelvic lymph nodes (46 Gy/23 fraction) and the whole bladder (54 Gy/27 fractions), followed by a booster dose to bladder tumor (10 Gy/5 fractions). To avoid the risk of pelvic IF (PIF), the sacral doses of radiation were limited to a mean dose of 29.6 Gy and each sacroiliac (SI) joint to a dose of 24.5 Gy (which is below the recommended dose of <35 Gy). Thr dose to pubic symphysis (drawn retrospectively) was higher a mean of 55.8 Gy and the maximum dose of 66.8 Gy.
The last dose of RT was completed 13 months ago. Three months after completing the radiation, she developed persistent low back pain, which was moderately severe in intensity, and stopped walking without support. The Positron Emission Tomography-CT scan showed a diffuse increase in metabolic activity in the sacrum’s bilateral ala, suggestive of an IF . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) further confirmed a linear hyperintense line seen through the bilateral ala of sacrum representing IF . Plain radiographs revealed generalized osteoporosis but did not show any fractures . The DXA scan confirmed the diagnosis of osteoporosis, with a T-score of −2.6.
As the patient refused any interventional treatment like Cement augmentation (Sacroplasty), she was treated conservatively with weekly supplementation Vitamin D (60,000 I.U) and sodium alendronate (70 mg), along with calcium and analgesics. She responded to the conservative treatment slowly, and the pain vanished in about 6 months. After 2 months of the onset of low back pain, she felt some discomfort and stiffness in the groin, for which a plain radiograph was done, which did not reveal any pathological changes . No specific treatment was given, and it settled along with low back pain. Since then, her mobility has been pain-free, and she did not require any walking support or painkillers.