The patient was a 27-year-old man who complained of enlarged right-sided cervical lymph nodes and progressive pain aggravation of the right shoulder in 2014.
The patient’s right-sided cervical lymph nodes appeared significantly enlarged approximately 3 mo before admittance, and lymph node biopsy was suggestive of cHL. The patient experienced failure of eight lines of therapy. The treatment procedure is provided in Table .
The patient was diagnosed with subclinical hypothyroidism in September 2018, and levothyroxine (25 µg/d) was prescribed at the Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital. The patient’s family history was negative.
Other symptoms were not present and the patient did not drink alcohol, smoke, or have a history of surgery.
On admission, the patient’s blood pressure was 120/74 mmHg, pulse rate was 80 beats/min, and temperature was 36.1 °C. His body weight was 77.5 kg, and his height was 172 cm (BMI 26.2 kg/m2, body surface area). His performance status was 2 according to the criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, and his pain was 6 out of 10 according to the numeric rating scale (NRS). No superficial lymphadenopathy was noted. The left buttock was fuller than the right buttock, and no soft tissue tumor was palpated in the left buttock. Left hip tenderness was noted.
On admission, routine blood tests revealed significant leukocytosis, moderate anemia, decreased albumin, and slightly elevated blood urea nitrogen. The patient’s blood biochemical tests were indicative of impaired liver function with a slight elevation of alkaline phosphatase and glutamyl transferase levels. The coagulation function test showed a marked elevation in plasma fibrinogen and activated partial thromboplastin time levels. The results are presented in Table .
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed that multiple lung nodules significantly decreased or disappeared after treatment with three cycles of combination therapy of decitabine and tislelizumab . Similarly, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed that abdominal lymph nodes decreased in size .