A 36-year-old Caucasian man underwent a right radical orchiectomy in another hospital in November 2017. A pathological examination showed mixed embryonal carcinoma with 30% seminoma and 70% embryonal cancer. The tumor had invaded the tunica albuginea focally but not the tunica vaginalis, with no involvement of the epididymitis or spermatic cord. The tumor was 1.5 × 1.3 × 1.2 cm in size. The levels of tumor markers, such as human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), were in the normal range before and after surgery. In April 2018, he came to our clinic due to upper-right abdominal pain. He was free from other medical illnesses, and he had no family history of cancer. He was an English teacher and had never smoked tobacco or drank alcohol.
He had normal blood pressure, pulse, and temperature. Laboratory tests showed normal white blood cell count, red blood cell (RBC) count, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and creatinine levels. His LDH, HCG, and AFP levels were 452 U/L, 0.1 U/L, and 2.46 μg/L, respectively. A computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast in April 2018 showed metastatic retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy near his IVC and a tumor thrombus invading the IVC lumen (1.4 × 1.1 × 13 cm), as well as lung and liver metastasis nodules.
The diagnosis was mixed testicular germ cell cancer with an IVC tumor thrombus and lung, liver, and retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis.
He underwent four cycles of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (BEP; cisplatin 35 mg × 5 days, etoposide 160 mg × 5 days, bleomycin 30 mg × 3 days) chemotherapy starting from May 2018, which resulted in a clinically complete response and disappearance of the lung and liver metastasis nodules. However, according to CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans obtained on September 10, 2018, he still had contradictory residual retroperitoneal enlarged lymph nodes 1.8 cm in size close to his IVC at the level of the right renal hilum and a 9.8 cm IVC tumor thrombus (level IIIA), according to the staging system for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with an IVC tumor thrombus [, ].
Pre-surgical three-dimensional image reconstruction was performed based on contrast CT data. The IVC tumor thrombus was found in his vena cava at the level of the celiac trunk and the inferior mesenteric artery .
A four-port right R-RPLND followed by IVC tumor thrombectomy was performed. The robotic port placement and patient position are described in Fig. . A seven-port approach was used, including two assistant ports and one liver retractor port. Right unilateral template lymphadenectomy was performed using a nerve-sparing approach, including complete removal of the ipsilateral spermatic cord.
Right R-RPLND was completed in the standard fashion. There were extensive adhesions, and several enlarged lymph nodes around his vena cava and right renal hilum were identified and removed.
IVC tumor thrombectomy and reconstruction were then performed as follows. Dissection of the infrarenal IVC involved the control of all relevant lumbar veins, which were ligated with Hem-o-lok clips and cut. Dissection was carried out in a cephalad direction within the aortocaval region. The IVC at the level of the inferior mesenteric artery was encircled with a double vessel loop tourniquet passing through a half-inch (12.7 mm)-long piece of 20 F rubber tube and secured in place with a Hem-o-lok clip. The left renal vein was mobilized and encircled with a tourniquet. The right renal hilum was dissected, the right renal vein was exposed and encircled with a tourniquet, and the right renal artery was dissected and made ready for bulldog clamp control.
For proximal IVC control, careful aortocaval dissection was performed toward the liver. The right central adrenal vein was controlled with Hem-o-lok clips, and the right lateral border of the suprarenal IVC was dissected. For this level IIIA tumor thrombus, there were no relevant short hepatic veins in the surgical area. A double-fenestrated grasper was used to encircle the IVC with a tourniquet at the retrohepatic location.
All tourniquets were visually reconfirmed to be in the appropriate position with a sufficient margin around the thrombus defined by a drop-in robotic ultrasound probe (ProART™ Robotic Transducer, BK Medical) . Transesophageal ultrasound was used to monitor the potential for tumor thrombus dislodgement and air emboli.
Anesthesiologists were alerted that vena cava blood flow would be temporarily halted. We first cinched the distal IVC tourniquet. Once the anesthesiologists assured that our patient was able to tolerate cava clamping and showed no significant hemodynamic changes, the left renal vein, right renal artery, right renal vein, and proximal IVC tourniquets were cinched sequentially to exclude the tumor thrombus-bearing cava segment. The right renal artery was clamped with bulldog clamps. Cavotomy was carried out at the level of the interior mesenteric artery from the assistant port . Through vena cavoscopy using a flexible ureteroscope (P5, F5.3/8.4, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), we found that the tumor thrombus adhered to the cava wall in all directions. The cavotomy was extended along the right edge of the IVC past the right renal vein ostium and toward the upper cava tourniquet, for a total length of approximately 10 cm. There was bleeding from the vena cava, and the tourniquets were tightened again; then, there was no more active bleeding.
The thrombus was reddish and tightly adhered to the vena cava wall. It was carefully dissected free from the IVC wall without local spillage . The IVC lumen was irrigated with heparinized saline. Cava reconstruction was performed with 5-0 Gore-Tex® sutures (W.L. Gore & Associates, Newark, DE, USA) with a single-layer running stitch. The tourniquets were released sequentially (proximal IVC, left renal vein, right renal vein, right renal artery, distal IVC), and cava flow was restored. The ischemia time for his right kidney was 40 minutes. There was right renal vein bleeding after restoration of the renal artery. The leakage was repaired with 4-0 proline sutures (Johnson & Johnson Medical NV, Belgium). His right kidney was preserved.
After decreasing the abdominal pressure, there was no active bleeding. A 20 F free-drainage tube was placed. The specimens were removed using an Endo Catch™ pouch. The wounds were closed accordingly.
The operative time was 550 minutes, and the estimated blood loss was 2300 ml with the transfusion of 10 units of RBCs. Postoperatively, he was placed in an intensive care unit (ICU) for 4 days. Subcutaneous heparin was prescribed at a dose of 5000 IU every 8 hours. There were no postoperative complications, and he was discharged on day 7 after the operation. Prophylactic anticoagulation treatment with 40 mg of enoxaparin sodium daily was continued for 1 month. A pathological examination showed no viable cancer cells in the residual tissue, lymph nodes, or vena cava tumor thrombus, which indicated that the treatment for the tumor resulted in a complete response.
Follow-up observations: A routine postoperative clinic visit 2 weeks after discharge revealed no wound infection, stable vital signs, and free mobilization. His erectile function and ejaculation status were normal, without retrograde ejaculation, at 1 month after surgery. CT, chest X-ray, and laboratory investigations at 3 and 6 months showed no abnormalities.