A 53-year-old male Korean patient was referred to our institution for further evaluation and treatment of a gastric SMT discovered by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) during a routine medical check-up.
The patient had no abdominal pain or related discomfort.
He had a history of abdominal surgery due to duodenal ulcer perforation 30 years previously.
The patient had diabetes that was being treated with oral hypoglycemic agents. He was a smoker (30 pack-years) and social-alcohol drinker and had no significant family history.
Physical examination was unremarkable, and his abdomen was soft, nontender, and nondistended with no palpable mass.
Laboratory tests, which included tests for common serum tumor markers such as CEA and CA 19-9, revealed no abnormalities.
At initial EGD, an SMT-like elevated lesion of diameter 15-mm was observed at the great curvature side of the proximal part of the gastric antrum . The lesion was covered with normal-appearing mucosa without any erosion, ulcer, or mucosal erythema. Mild-atrophic gastritis, confined to antrum, was observed in background mucosa. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS; GF-UM2000, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) demonstrated a 15 mm × 7 mm homogeneous, well-circumscribed hypoechogenic lesion arising from the second sonographic layer with associated subtle obliteration of the third sonographic layer . The EUS appearance of the lesion was suggestive of a gastric neuroendocrine tumor (NET) or ectopic pancreas. Initial biopsy specimens were negative for neoplasm. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a 15 mm protruding intraluminal mass at the gastric antrum and no evidence of lymph node enlargement or distant metastasis . After this initial work-up, endoscopic resection of the lesion was planned for definitive histopathologic examination and treatment. However, the patient declined any invasive procedure and was subsequently lost to follow-up.
About 3 years after initial EGD, he underwent a national health screening examination at our hospital, and the previously noted gastric SMT was detected again by EGD. The lesion showed no change in size as compared with its size 3 years previously, but marked erythema of overlying mucosa was observed . Endoscopic biopsy was performed, but specimens were negative for neoplasm. During consultation regarding his health examination results, he was recommended for further evaluation and treatment at the gastroenterology department but again refused and was lost to follow-up.
About a year later, he revisited our hospital with mild indigestion. Follow-up EGD then revealed the SMT-like lesion had enlarged (to a greatest diameter of approximately 18 mm) and that a 5 mm central ulcer had developed on the top of the lesion . EUS also demonstrated an 18 mm × 9 mm homogeneous, well-circumscribed hypoechogenic mass arising from the second sonographic layer with associated subtle obliteration of the third sonographic layer . Echogenicity at this time was slightly more heterogeneous than that observed by initial EUS. CT of the abdomen showed no evidence of lymph node enlargement or distant metastasis, and endoscopic biopsy specimens taken from the lesion revealed tubular adenoma with high-grade dysplasia.