A two-month-old male infant weighing 6.9 kg was admitted to the pediatric ICU with
respiratory distress, tachycardia, hypotonia, cold extremities, and fever. About three
days earlier, the infant started with fever (37.8ºC to 38.5ºC), vomiting, apathy and
eventually progressed to respiratory distress and cardic arrest. No relevant facts about
his previous health history were available.
At admission, the infant was hypotonic, with moderate subdiaphragmatic and intercostal
retractions; the skin was pale and cold. Breathing rate was 80 incursions/minute and
heart rate was 180 bpm. It was interpreted as circulatory collapse and the infant was
put in orotracheal intubation. The nurses tried a peripheral venous access, but
dehydration made it difficult. An intraosseous access was achieved. A total of 40
­mL/­kg of saline solution was infused in 20 minutes. After that, a peripheral venous
line was inserted and another 40 ­mL/­kg of saline solution was administered to the
patient in 60 minutes. Perfusion was regular and the mean arterial pressure (MAP) was
low (30 mmHg). Milrinone (0.5 mcg/kg/min) and norepinephrine (0.2 mcg/kg/min) was
started and perfusion improved 30 minutes later. MAP raised to 50 mmHg. Ceftriaxone 100
­mg/­kg/­day and acyclovir (45 mg/kg/day) were administered in the first hour of
admission, as per institutional sepsis protocol. A lumbar puncture was performed to
collect cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and study the hypothesis of central nervous system
virus infection.
Peripheral blood count showed 21,780 leucocytes (58% neutrophils, 4% bands, and 54%
segmented), 12.6 g/dL hemoglobin, 34.9% hematocrit, and 482,000/mm3
platelets. C-protein reaction (CPR) level was 2.48 mg/dL (normal <0.6 mg/dL).
Procalcitonin concentration was 7.6 ­ng/­mL (normal <0.5 ng/mL). Lactate level was 50
mg/dL (normal <11.3 mg/dL). Troponin I was 1.67 ng/mL (normal <0.16 ­ng/­mL).
Creatine kinase (CK) level was 926 U/L (normal: 38-174 U/L) and creatine kinase MB
(CKMB) was 24.1 ng/mL (normal <5 ng/mL). CSF analysis showed white blood cells (WBC)
count of 174/mm3 (60% polymorphonuclear cells), protein at 100 mg/dL, glucose
at 92 mg/dL, and lactate at 33 mg/dL. Diagnosis of viral meningoencephalitis was
considered, but CSF cultures for bacteria, fungi, herpes virus, and enterovirus resulted
negative. Acyclovir was then suspended. A doppler echocardiography showed moderate left
ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction: 45%) and mild pulmonary hypertension (35
mmHg) while in milrinone (0.5 mcg/kg/min).
Seven days after admission, hemodynamics and infectious status improved. However, there
was no sign of neurological improvement. The patient had no respiratory drive or cough
reflex, and Ramsay scale was 6 even after sedation was removed.
MR showed: “T1-D1 hypointense, T2/Flair hyperintense images in diffusion sequence at the
dorsal medulla oblongata and pons, with involvement of VI cranial pair” . Hyperintense lesion was seen in the
diffusion sequence, affecting the corpus callosum. These alterations
were compatible with the Dorsal Brainstem Syndrome (DBSS), a condition occurring after
hypoxic-ischemic injury in neonates and infants. The pattern of brain injury relates to
the pathogenetic mechanism and provides information about outcomes and prognosis.
Two weeks after admission, vasoactive drugs started being removed, the cardiovascular
function had improved, and CSF was normal. On week 3, we started weaning the patient
from MV. However, the procedure was not successful and pCO2 would raise every
time we tried to wean MV. Hence, the patient remained dependent of MV with no
improvement in respiratory drive, although his neurological status improved and he
started moving the limbs, doing eye contact, and reacting to painful stimuli.
Tracheostomy and gastrostomy were performed at this time.
Since the MV weaning was challenging and the medical staff were in doubt about neural
conduction integrity, we decided to use neurally-adjusted ventilatory assist (NAVA).
After adequate eletrode positioning, Edi signal was detected (8 mV) and confirmed neural
conduction . After that, a program of MV
weaning using NAVA was proposed; each day the patient remained four hours in NAVA,
switching to pressure support for another four hours and synchronized intermitent
mandatory ventilation (SIMV) during the night. The patient was discharged from the
hospital three months after admission, and is currently in homecare, receiving
nebulization during the day, and bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) overnight.