A five-year-old girl was admitted to our institution for the first time in November 2016, with complaints of fever, cough, breathlessness, and paleness for 20 days. There was no history of recurrent lower respiratory tract infections, tuberculosis, or cardiac disease. There was neither a history of pica, chronic diarrhea, bleeding, nor personal or family history of repeated blood transfusions. Her birth history and developmental history were normal except that she had severe bilateral sensorineural hearing loss diagnosed during infancy, with poor compliance to the treatment advised. The child was immunized completely as per age and consumed a vegetarian diet. On examination, at the time of admission, the child was afebrile but had tachycardia, tachypnea, respiratory distress, severe pallor, stunting, and rickets (frontal bossing, wrist widening, and pectus carinatum). The respiratory system examination revealed bilateral fine crepitations; the rest of the systems were normal.
Hemoglobin estimation revealed severe anemia with a hemoglobin level of 2.3 gm/dL. The chest radiograph showed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, suggestive of bronchopneumonia, which was confirmed on the HRCT of the chest (however, the images are not available). The child was extensively investigated for the cause of her anemia. Her peripheral blood smear showed macrocytosis, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, and blood indices revealed dimorphic anemia . Direct and indirect Coombs test, as well as Sickling test, were negative. The liver and renal functions as well as stool and urine examination were normal. Serum lactate dehydrogenase levels were elevated (1,224 IU/L; normal range 8–30 IU/L). The coagulation profile was normal. The anti-HIV antibody, Anti-hepatitis C antibody, and HBsAg antigen tests were negative. An abdominal ultrasound showed mild hepatomegaly. In view of (i) severe anemia with stunted growth; (ii) High anti-tissue transglutaminase (TTG) IgA antibody levels (>200 U/mL; normal range: 0–10 U/mL); and (iii) Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showing reduced mucosal folds with scalloping in the duodenum and the duodenal biopsy showing partial villous blunting with intraepithelial lymphocytes, the final diagnosis of celiac disease was made. The child initially received packed cell transfusions, parenteral course of vitamin B12, amoxicillin with clavulanate for pneumonia and dobutamine for congestive cardiac failure, and was discharged on a gluten-free diet (GFD), oral iron, folic acid, vitamin B12, and calcium supplements but the compliance to this treatment and diet was poor.
The child was admitted for the second time in May 2017, with similar complaints as before. Blood investigations revealed similar findings as previously, and the child was treated on similar lines. She was admitted for the third time in September 2017 with the same complaints. Interestingly, the child had persistent bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, initially attributed to congestive cardiac failure (CCF) or bronchopneumonia, but these infiltrates persisted even after treatment for the CCF . Workup for tuberculosis (TB) was negative (Mantoux and gastric lavage negative).
The cardiac 2D echocardiography showed a small patent ductus arteriosus. A (repeat) HRCT chest revealed interstitial thickening and bilateral alveolar shadows (ground-glass opacities), suggesting a radiological differential diagnoses of interstitial lung disease, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, or Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia . A bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was done, showing mature bronchial cytology with a few inflammatory cells. The child was discharged with a plan to do pulmonary function tests as the parents did not wish to undergo further investigations at that time. The child was readmitted for the fourth time in November 2017 with similar complaints and was given packed cell transfusions. Gastric lavage for hemosiderophages was done and was negative. Since the first BAL had not yielded a confirmatory result, it was deemed prudent to go ahead with a thoracoscopic lung biopsy rather than repeating the BAL. Histopathological examination revealed an irregular expansion of the alveolar spaces with widening of the interstitium. The majority of the alveolar spaces were filled with pigment-laden macrophages. Occasional peribronchial lymphoid aggregates were seen. The pigment was confirmed to be Hemosiderin on Prussian blue staining [Figures -]. Thus, a diagnosis of extensive pulmonary hemosiderosis without capillaritis was made.
The patient was further investigated for the cause of pulmonary hemosiderosis. Serum ferritin level was done, which was normal (242 mcg/L). Urine analysis and renal function tests were done to rule out Goodpasture's syndrome and were normal. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double stranded DNA antibody (dsDNA), anti-phospholipid antibody (APLA), anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibody (cANCA), anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies (for ruling out other/auto-immune causes), were planned, however, the parents did not consent for the same due to monetary issues. The presence of celiac disease with pulmonary hemosiderosis led to the eventual diagnosis of the ‘Lane–Hamilton syndrome.’ The child was treated with a course of oral corticosteroids (Prednisolone, 2 mg/kg/day) for 6 weeks, with a GFD, following which a dramatic improvement in both the anemia and pulmonary infiltrates was seen .