A 59-year-old Asian male who was a shopkeeper by profession presented with complaint of progressive dysphagia to solids that had started a few months ago. His history was suggestive of diabetes and hypertension for the last 10 years. He was on metformin, 1 g twice daily; glimepiride 3 mg once daily; and pioglitazone, 15 mg once daily for diabetes; and telmisartan, 40 mg once daily for hypertension. There was no history of surgical interventions in the past. He was a nonsmoker and nonalcoholic and had no significant history suggestive of acid peptic disease. There was no family history of any malignancies, and his dietary history and environmental history were unremarkable. At the time of initial evaluation, his radial pulse in the right forearm was 88 beats per minute while the blood pressure was 138/90 mmHg. On examination, there was no palpable lymphadenopathy or clubbing. Neurological examination showed normal mental status, no cranial nerve dysfunction, normal reflexes, and normal sensory-motor function. Oral, respiratory, cardiovascular, and abdominal examination was also normal. His blood parameters were as follows: hemoglobin 12.2 g/dl, white blood cell count 10,500/mm3, platelet count 277,000/mm3, fasting blood sugar 149 mg/dl, urea 18 mg/dl, creatinine 0.47 mg/dl, total bilirubin 0.6 mg/dl, total protein 6.3 g/dl, and albumin 3.2 g/dl. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and anti hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody tests were nonreactive. Urine routine microscopy was normal while the culture was sterile. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an ulceroproliferative growth in the lower esophagus. A biopsy was performed that was suggestive of adenocarcinoma. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) showed a metabolically active mass in the distal esophagus without any evidence of distant metastasis. The patient was started on preoperative chemotherapy as per the Medical Research Council Adjuvant Gastric Infusional Chemotherapy (MAGIC) protocol. The chemotherapy protocol was as follows: on day 1, he was administered one capsule of aprepitant 125 mg; dexamethasone injection, 16 mg in 100 ml of normal saline administered over 15 minutes; palonosetron injection 0.25 mg intravenously; epirubicin injection, 90 mg intravenously over 5 minutes; oxaliplatin injection, 250 mg intravenously in 250 ml of 5% dextrose over 2 hours; tablet capecitabine (500 mg), three tablets in the morning and two tablets in the evening, continued for 21 days. On days 2 and 3, tablet aprepitant 80 mg was given along with tablet dexamethasone 8 mg twice daily. His blood sugar levels increased owing to the administration of steroid during the curse of chemotherapy, and hence, human Mixtard insulin had to be added to his medications, 22 units before breakfast and 16 units before dinner. He had an Ivor Lewis esophagectomy in December 2015 after completion of three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Histopathology was suggestive of residual adenocarcinoma, ypT2NO. In the perioperative period, he was administered injection of cefoperazone and sulbactam 3 g twice daily, injection of paracetamol 1 g three times daily along with injection of fentanyl through epidural catheter for pain control. The patient made an uneventful recovery. Three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy were administered, which he completed in March 2016. He was under follow-up when he was found to have a enhancing nodule of 1.6 × 1.3 cm in the left adrenal gland on a contrast-enhanced CT scan in July 2018 . A PET-CT scan done in October 2018 showed no other pathological uptake except in the left adrenal nodule . A CT guided biopsy was suggestive of metastatic adenocarcinoma. His laboratory reports at this point in time were as follows: hemoglobin 11.1 g/dl, white blood cell count 9100/mm3, platelet count 190,000/mm3, fasting blood sugar 134 mg/dl, urea 21 mg/dl, creatinine 0.62 mg/dl, total bilirubin 0.71 mg/dl, total protein 6.9 g/dl, and albumin 3.6 g/dl. Serology was nonreactive, and urine examination was normal. The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary meeting, and a left adrenalectomy was planned as it was the only site of metastasis.
The patient was placed in a right lateral position. Pneumoperitoneum was created; the first port was created in the spinoumbilical line, and the abdomen was inspected carefully. There was no visual evidence of peritoneal disease or any other evidence of metastasis; hence, the decision was made to proceed with the adrenalectomy. As there were dense adhesions in the upper abdomen, two more ports were placed in the subcostal and paraumbilical area, taking care to avoid inadvertent visceral injury. The left colon was mobilized, and the retroperitoneal space was entered. The left renal vein was identified, following which the left adrenal vein was isolated and divided. There was significant difficulty in separating the medial aspect of the adrenal gland from the pancreas and the lateral wall of the pulled-up stomach . The adrenal gland was then mobilized by blunt and sharp dissection using a vessel sealing device. The gland was bagged and delivered out . The total operative time was 70 minutes. The patient made an uneventful recovery and could be discharged on the second postoperative day. Histopathological examination of the specimen was suggestive of a metastatic adenocarcinoma focus of 2.9 × 3.3 cm in the background of normal adrenal tissue . All the margins were negative. On immunohistochemistry, the cells showed uptake of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2), supporting the pathological diagnosis. The patient was discharged on the second postoperative day. He has successfully completed a follow-up of 27 months and is presently disease-free as per follow-up scans.