A 37-year-old woman treated with levothyroxine who developed iatrogenic hypothyroidism after having received radioiodine therapy was seen in our hospital (laboratory 1) for her annual checkup.
The patient was asymptomatic, without signs suggestive of thyroid disease. Her biochemistry demonstrated: TSH 7.75 mU/L (reference value [RV]: 0.38–4.84), FT4>7.7 ng/dL (RV: 0.8–1.8) and FT3 of 7.6 pg/mL (RV: 1.8–4.6 pg/mL). The three parameters were measured using an automated electrochemiluminescent immunoassay analyzer (Cobas 8000® [Roche Diagnostics®]). The euthyroid state of the patient was confirmed by determination of sex hormone-binding globulin, which was 38.7 nmol/L (RV: 11–124).
The presence of elevated concentrations of thyroid hormones, normal or elevated TSH levels, the absence of clinical symptoms of hyperthyroidism and in the absence of pharmacological interferences raised the possibility of a methodological interference. The main causes of interference in TSH and FT4 determination were evaluated including macro-TSH, heterophile antibodies, thyroid autoantibodies, biotin, antistreptavidin or antiruthenium antibodies , , , , , . The presence of interferences was assessed using the following protocol :Results were confirmed by repeating the test in the same sample using the same method to discard a problem with pipetting, inadequate washing or the presence of aggregates or bubbles. Measurements were repeated in a new sample from the same patient, which yielded the same results. Measurements were repeated using a different method. For this purpose, (in this regard) the sample was sent to other laboratories where a different analyzer was used. The methods used and results obtained are shown in . Serial dilutions were performed to measure TSH. Dilutions of the sample were performed using the diluent recommended by the manufacturer (1:2, 1:4, 1:8). No loss of linearity was observed in serial dilutions. The presence of macro-TSH was excluded by precipitation with polyethylene glycol (PEG 6000) at 20%, with a recovery percentage of 114% (acceptable range: 80–120%). Rheumatoid factor (RF) was measured, with a result of <20IU/mL (RV: <20IU/mL). The presence of heterophile antibodies was assessed by incubation of the sample in heterophilic blocking tubes (HBT tubes, Scantibodies®) . Tests for antimicrosomal antibodies and anti-TSH receptor antibodies were negative. The sample was finally sent to the Department of Research and Development of Roche Diagnostics.