A 62-year-old Asian man complained of persistent difficulties in bending his waist forward for six months.
The patient underwent a curative surgery for gastric cancer about a year earlier and had been making routine visits to our outpatient department for regular surveillance. After the gastrectomy, he continued to display a tendency toward excessive anxiety about his health. He kept complaining about memory loss, hair loss, and constipation, which were somewhat different from the usual postgastrectomy complaints, such as diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and other gastrointestinal symptoms. Four months after the gastrectomy, he started complaining of stiffness along the surgical scar but received little medical attention at the time. The symptoms worsened over the next two months, and the patient started experiencing difficulties in bending his waist forward. The patient had a normal weight (62.7 kg) and body mass index (20.9 kg/m2). Postgastrectomy weight loss was minimal (weight loss of 1.3 kg). There were no signs of cancer recurrence.
The patient underwent distal subtotal gastrectomy, D2 lymphadenectomy, and Billroth II anastomosis for gastric cancer a year earlier. He did not undergo adjuvant chemotherapy as the surgical specimen confirmed stage I cancer according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control classification. The patient had no history of smoking, alcohol abuse, or previous illnesses except for well-controlled hypertension and type 2 diabetes.
The patient had no significant personal or family history.
The vital signs were unremarkable. Abdominal physical examination revealed no distension or rigidity. Bowel sound was normal. There was a firm, fixed palpable mass along the surgical incision that was about 10 cm in size. There was no pain or tenderness.
Routine blood and urine analysis results were normal. Serum tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were normal with 3.4 ng/mL and 21.4 U/mL, respectively.
An abdominal computerized tomography (CT), taken for 6-mo postgastrectomy surveillance, revealed a 10 cm-sized ossification along the surgical incision . The latest CT, taken for 1-year postgastrectomy surveillance just before the admission, confirmed an 11 cm-sized ossification along the surgical incision.