A 48-year-old woman, who complained of fatigue, whole body edema for 1 year, alopecia and skin pigmentation for 5 months, was transferred to West China Hospital of Sichuan University on May 25th, 2016. It was noteworthy that the female patient was once hospitalized in her hometown for the orbital mass 20 years ago, but the patient was asymptomatic at that time. Thus the local physician found it to be an inflammatory pseudotumor, and discharged the patient directly without operation. Approximately 1 year before admission, though suffering progressive fatigue, body edema, and palpitation, the patient didn’t apply for any evaluation or treatment till obvious weight gain (10 Kg) was noticed. Then, the patient was admitted to the hospital in her hometown for alopecia, skin pigmentation, and severe fatigue. The blood pressure was 180/116 mmHg, the blood glucose was elevated, and no further treatment approaches were given.
On the patient’s arrival at West China Hospital, additional history was obtained. She didn’t smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs. She didn’t have any surgery history as well. Her menstrual history was basically normal, the age of menarche was 12 years old, and her last menstrual period (LMP) was August 16, 2015. Physical examination showed that the patient had mildly elevated blood pressure (150/79 mmHg), moon face, central obesity, multiple purple striae on abdomen, scattered bruises, and proximal muscle weakness. And her BMI was 25.5 kg/m2. And the rest of the physical exam was normal.
Laboratory testing showed impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) with fasting blood glucose: 5.7 mmol/L and 2 h blood glucose8.0 mmol/L, negative ketonuria. Islet-specific auto antibodies including GAD -Ab, IA2-Ab, and islet cell antibodies (ICA) were negative. Meanwhile, biochemical results exhibited hypokalemia, but no obvious dysfunctions in patient’s kidney or liver . Thyroid function was normal. Initial hormonal measurements showed abnormally elevated levels of cortisol (Cortisol 8 a.m. =887.5 nmol/L, normal range 147.3 ~ 609.3 nmol/L, Cortisol 12 p.m. = 978.6 nmol/L) and morning ACTH concentration (138.1 ng/L, normal range 5.0 ~ 78 ng/L),and the result of 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test indicated Cushing syndrome . Then, ACTH measurement, high-dose dexamethasone suppression test were conducted to determine the hidden causes. It showed significant elevation in ACTH level, but failure of PTC suppression, suggesting possible ectopic Cushing syndrome . What’s more, pituitary enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was negative. However, the profiles of BIPSS summarized in Table contradicted the former results. The blood sampling test of the inferior petroglyphic sinus vein showed that the basic ratio of ACTH in the right inferior petroglyphic sinus to peripheral blood was over 2.0, and the maximum ratio of ACTH in the right inferior petroglyphic sinus to peripheral blood was over 3.0 after the injection of 10μg DDAVP. Moreover, prolactin-normalized ACTH IPS/P ratios and post-DDAVP prolactin-normalized ACTH IPS/P ratios were above 1.3, indicating a pituitary origin. Paradoxical functional tests challenged the diagnosis. Image studies were performed to assist the diagnosis. Chest multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) was normal. Abdominal CT showed nothing but hyperplastic adrenal glands. Sellar region enhanced magnetic resonance image (MRI) though suggested a normal pituitary, accidentally found an enhancement in the lateral rectus muscle of the patient’s left eye . Therefore, orbital enhanced MRI were performed and enhanced orbital mass was found encompassing the lateral rectus muscle of left eye . Since the venous communications between ophthalmic vein and inferior petrosal sinus has been reported in several studies [, ], we inferred that BIPSS could be false-positive and the orbital mass could be an ectopic ACTH secreting adenoma.
To find out whether orbital EAS was a possible etiology for this patient, the ophthalmologist completed the tumorectomy. The mass was sent to the pathology lab of West China Hospital. And the lesion showed positive staining of ACTH, chromogranin A, Syn, PCK and EMA . According to Word Health Organism (WHO) classification 2015, the lesion was a typical orbital carcinoid tumor. Thus, the diagnosis of EAS was finally established.
The patient was discharged after surgery on replacement doses of hydrocortisone with advice on stress dosing, and with prednisone supplementation for eight weeks, followed by regular outpatient follow-up. Nine months after the operation, the patient appeared stable with no complaints nor any symptoms of CS. The ACTH and PTC levels of the patient remised to normal gradually . Post-operation MRIs were all clean . Clinical manifestations including moon face, purple striate, central obesity disappeared. The patient also reported significant improvement on life quality.