A 52-year-old male patient was referred to the Department of Interventional Radiology for angiographic evaluation and endovascular management to control postoperative bleeding after open PN.
He underwent nephron-sparing surgery as an indication for left renal cell carcinoma (T1b) . Immediately after surgery, a continuous discharge of fresh blood was noted in the Jackson–Pratt drain, with a total drainage volume of 600 mL within 24 h postoperatively.
He had no underlying medical conditions or diseases that may indicate a coagulopathy.
His personal and family history was unremarkable.
His hemodynamic status was relatively stable as follows: Systolic blood pressure of 115 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure of 63 mmHg, and heart rate of 99 beats per minute. However, compared to his preoperative status, a decrease in blood pressure and a significant increase in heart rate were observed (systolic blood pressure of 145 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure of 86 mmHg, and heart rate of 66 beats per minute). He did not manifest with gross hematuria; however, he experienced abdominal and flank pain and tenderness, which are considered typical following renal surgery.
Laboratory examinations revealed a decline in the hemoglobin level from 13.4 g/dL to 11.4 g/dL, even after receiving transfusion of three units of packed red blood cells following surgery. Other laboratory findings were unremarkable.
Minimal amount of fluid adjacent to the operative site of the left kidney was demonstrated in the abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT); however, no signs of contrast extravasation or pseudoaneurysm indicative of active bleeding were observed . The patient was referred to the interventional unit for angiographic evaluation and endovascular treatment due to clinical suspicion of active bleeding despite the absence of radiologic evidence.
Selective digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was conducted for the left renal artery using a cobra catheter (Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, IN, United States). Angiographic opacification of left renal artery did not show any positive findings indicative of ongoing bleeding . After catheterization of the left testicular artery , which originated from the segmental artery of the left renal artery in the renal hilar shadow, contrast medium was injected using a microcatheter (Progreat; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) with a coaxial technique. Subsequently, extravasation of the contrast medium was noted on the fluoroscopic spot images .