A 46-year-old Caucasian male with a medical history of hypertension and psychiatric history of schizoaffective disorder, depressed type, presented to the behavioral health unit with paranoid ideation and aggression. He had previously tolerated quetiapine at 800 mg but was medication non-adherent for an unknown duration of time prior to this presentation. On admission, his vitals were normal except for hypertension (154/94 mmHg). Urine toxicology screening was negative, and his labs were unremarkable. On hospital day 1, he was started on risperidone 1 mg twice daily to treat psychosis. On hospital day 2, risperidone was increased to 1.5 mg twice daily. Simultaneously, the patient was started on clonidine 0.1 mg twice daily for ongoing hypertension. Clonidine was chosen for short-term use, as it was unclear if the patient had chronic hypertension in early hospitalization. As hypertension continued, on hospital day 3, amlodipine 10 mg daily was added to his regimen with titration of risperidone to 2 mg twice daily. On hospital day 4, the patient exhibited mild sialorrhea [drooling severity score: 3, moderate (, , )] along with mild muscle rigidity and was administered benztropine 2 mg intramuscular for extrapyramidal symptoms that alleviated the rigidity only. Throughout that night, his blood pressure remained elevated, prompting consultation with internal medicine, who recommended discontinuing his clonidine and adding lisinopril 20 mg daily. The final hypertension regimen for hospitalization was lisinopril 20 mg daily and amlodipine 10 mg daily.
The next day, on hospital day 5, risperidone was also titrated to 6 mg daily. After the discontinuation of the clonidine, the patient had significantly worsened thick mucinous saliva and was found to have cogwheel rigidity with masked facies . In response, he started on a benztropine 2 mg daily but had no alleviation of severe mucinous sialorrhea and was wearing a towel over his shoulder due to the amount [Drooling severity scale rating: 5, profuse (, , )]. The patient utilized atropine 1% ophthalmic drops (administered orally sublingually) but still had minimal relief of sialorrhea despite frequent use. His worsening rigidity and sialorrhea on hospital day 6 prompted medication changes, including discontinuing risperidone and benztropine and starting olanzapine 10 mg daily. After the medication changes, the patient's sialorrhea and rigidity began to subside and eventually resolved. The patient was later transitioned to quetiapine 300 mg prior to discharge and did not experience any further psychotropic-induced adverse reactions.