A 68-year-old Japanese postmenopausal woman developed brown vaginal discharge after radical cystectomy for bladder cancer, which was histologically diagnosed as high-grade UC invading up to the superficial muscularis propria without metastasis (pT2a pN0 cM0 [Union for International Cancer Control, 8th edition]) concomitant with focal urothelial carcinoma in situ in the urethra. She had a history of left renal pelvis UC, which was surgically removed after repeated 80-mg/fraction Bacillus Calmette-Guérin injections via a single J stent, resulting in no residual carcinoma 9 months before the radical cystectomy. She was also treated for breast cancer at 47 years of age without postoperative recurrence. Gynecologic examination of the lower genital tract, including the periurethral region, was unremarkable; however, cervical screening cytology demonstrated severely atypical cells suspicious for adenocarcinoma . Cervical colposcopy and diagnostic conization revealed no cervical neoplasm. Eleven months post-cystectomy, punch biopsy of the vulva and vagina confirmed intraepithelial UC in the juxtaposed squamous epithelium with pagetoid spread . Concurrent invasive malignancy was ruled out, and CO2 laser vaporization of the vulvar and vaginal lesion was performed. The patient remained alive without evidence of invasive malignancy for 14 months after the radical cystectomy for bladder cancer.
The CINtec® PLUS cytology test (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), an immunocytochemical p16/Ki-67 dual staining kit for screening of cervical disease, was negative for p16 labeling . Immunocytochemistry revealed neoplastic cells positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, p63, and GATA3 . Immunohistochemical examination of the biopsy sample of the vulva and vagina revealed neoplastic cells positive for uroplakin III, thrombomodulin, and uroplakin II but negative for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP15), and S100. No high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) genotype was identified by an automated DNA chip system (Clinichip™ HPV test; Sekisui Medical, Tokyo, Japan) using LBC samples.