A 56-year-old man with hepatitis C, diabetes, and mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) due to active smoking (Brinkman index: 200) was referred to our hospital with a one-month history of occasional bloody sputum. He had been treated for right lower lobe pneumonia in the outpatient clinic 2 years previously. Initial blood tests showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 12,300/μL and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 3.5 mg/L. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed granular opacities, patchy consolidation along the airways, and bronchial wall thickening in the right upper and lower lobes. No signs of emphysema, bronchiectasis, or lung abscess was observed . Sputum culture confirmed MRSA and mycobacterial culture was negative. At a one-week follow-up, the patient returned with worsening symptoms. His CRP level had increased to 47.5 mg/L. Based on the drug susceptibility test results , oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) 160/800 mg twice daily was initiated and continued for 2 weeks, leading to rapid improvement in his symptoms and radiological findings. However, symptoms of productive cough relapsed with worsening radiological findings 2 weeks after TMP/SMX discontinuation.
Bronchoscopy was performed and revealed erythema, and sputum retention in the right upper and lower lobe bronchi . MRSA was again isolated from the bronchial lavage fluid obtained from the right upper and lower lobes whereas the mycobacterial culture was negative. The patient was admitted and treated with intravenous vancomycin (VCM), maintaining the trough concentration between 10 and 15 μg/mL. Blood culture and SARS-CoV-2 PCR performed on admission was both negative. His symptoms and radiological findings improved within a week, and he was discharged after 2 weeks of VCM and switched to oral TMP/SMX for a further 4 weeks. In addition, low-dose erythromycin (200 mg twice daily) was initiated aiming for a local immunoregulatory effect.
However, the patient experienced a second relapse 2 weeks after discontinuing TMP/SMX. Complication of immune deficiency was considered, but HIV antibody was negative, and WBC and immunoglobulin levels were both within the normal range. The MRSA isolate had the same drug susceptibility pattern as that from the first sputum culture, and TMP/SMX was restarted and continued for 3 months, followed by a third relapse after discontinuation of TMP/SMX. MRSA was again detected on culture of bronchial lavage fluid. Confirming that the drug susceptibility pattern of MRSA remained the same, the patient was treated with an extended 6-month course of TMP/SMX , and achieved infection control. A follow-up CT six months after discontinuation of antibiotics showed improvement in bronchial wall thickening with a slight residual granular shadow, however, the disease has not relapsed for more than one year.
We performed whole-genome sequencing of the first isolated strain, TUM20898. Genomic DNA was extracted with EZ-Beads (Promega K.K., Tokyo, Japan) using the bead-beating method, and then processed with a combination of magLEAD 6gC and magDEA Dx SV (Precision System Science, Chiba, Japan). DNA library preparation and sequencing were performed using Illumina DNA Prep (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina) for paired-end reads of 300 bp using the MiSeq reagent kit v3 600-cycle kit (Illumina). Genome assembly and downstream analysis of sequence data were performed as described previously . The genome analysis revealed that the MRSA strain was member of sequence type (ST)1/staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec) type IVa, a clone that is rapidly spreading in Japan. The other genome characteristics and drug susceptibility of the MRSA isolate are shown in Table .