In 2016, a 66-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with a chief complaint of right buccal swelling that had begun 1 month earlier. A hard, mobile mass was detected under her right buccal mucosa . The mass caused her no pain, and her facial appearance was normal. Computed tomography demonstrated a clearly demarcated lesion under the right buccal mucosa along with swollen submandibular lymph nodes . The buccal mass showed a low signal on T1- and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and a high signal on T2 fat-suppression imaging . Biopsy of the buccal mass was performed, and pathology was indicative of breast carcinoma metastasis .
One month before her visit, concurrent to the discovery of the buccal mass, she also noticed a left breast lump. After biopsy of the buccal mass, ultrasonography revealed an 18 × 17 × 22 mm mass located in the upper left breast, and a core needle biopsy performed by a breast surgeon resulted in the diagnosis of breast carcinoma as well as scirrhous carcinoma . Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) showed FDG avidity in the patient’s right cheek, submandibular area, left breast, supraclavicular fossa, and axilla . Immunohistochemistry revealed tumor cells positive for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR) and no amplification of the HER2 gene .
After consultation with the breast surgeon, as the patient was postmenopausal, anastrozole (ANA) was used as hormonal treatment. Seven months later, no palpable mass was found in the oral and neck region, and FDG-PET/CT demonstrated partial response of the primary breast lesion and complete response of the buccal and submandibular metastases. In 2018, CT showed swelling of the right submandibular lymph nodes; at that point, treatment with fulvestrant was initiated, and it proved effective. However, the right submandibular painful lymphadenopathy reappeared in 2020. CT demonstrated swelling of the right cheek and bilateral neck lesions, and a regimen of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor abemaciclib with fulvestrant was prescribed and has been used to this day. As of August 2021, the oral and neck lesions have disappeared and the chest lesions are well controlled.