A 38-year-old man with a history of schizophrenia under Haloperidol, Trihexyphenidyl, and Levomepromazine was admitted to the ER for the management of an acute respiratory distress, history of the present illness revealed that the patient first developed 2 weeks prior to his admission a flu-like syndrome made of fever, shivering, dry cough, myalgia, and shortness of breath on exertion for which the patient self-medicated without any improvement.
Following the rapid worsening of his dyspnea a day before, the patient sought the ER. On initial clinical assessment he was conscious and well oriented in time and space with a Glasgow Scale of 15/15, afebrile (36.8 °C), tachycardic at a 140 beat per minute, normotensive at 125/75 mmHg, with an O2 saturation of 84% on ambient air and 91% under nasal oxygen therapy (3L/min), pulmonary auscultation revealed right basal crackles.
An electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed a sinus rhythm with a high frequency of 140 beat per minute with an incomplete Right Bundle Branch Block (RBBB) and T wave inversion in V1 to V3 .
Laboratory tests revealed a slightly elevated WBC (White Blood Count) of 11150/μL, a CRP (C Reactive Protein) level of 193,29 mg/L, with a hemoglobin at 11,1 g/dl, serum ferritin level of 1017,64 ng/mL, and LDH levels of 641 IU/L, HS Troponin levels at 115,2 ng/L, and an IL-6 level of 61 pg/mL, a platelet count of 239,000, D-dimers levels at 3293 ng/mL, normal electrolyte, liver and kidney function tests. A SARS-Cov-2 RT-PCR of a nasal swap sample came back positive.
Initial arterial blood gas revealed: 7,54 pH, 116 mmHg PaO2, 23 mmHg PaCO2, 20mEq/l HCO3-, 2,29mmol/l lactatemia. A CXR showed ground-glass opacities (GGO) in the right lung , Chest CT showed bilateral multifocal subpleural and peribronchial GGO (Glass Ground Opacities) with septal thickening and consolidation mainly in the periphery , contrast-enhanced sequences revealed a filling defect in the left lobar pulmonary artery suggestive for pulmonary embolism .
Considering the rapid worsening of the dyspnea, the EKG abnormalities and the pulmonary embolism we performed a transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) unveiling a large serpiginous floating thrombus (90 × 15mm) in the right and left atrium, straddling across an interatrial communication, and extending across the tricuspid and mitral valves, into the respective ventricles, the right heart cavities were dilated with paradoxical motion of the ventricular septum as well as a severe right ventricular systolic dysfunction with classic McConnell's sign and moderate pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure was estimated as 50 mmHg) ( and 6). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was not performed given the patient's respiratory distress.
For the COVID-19 pneumonia the patient was treated with ceftriaxone 2g/day and levofloxacin 500mg/12h during ten days, dexamethasone 6mg/d, vitamins C 2g/12h and D 25000IU/week, zinc 45mg/day, and aspirin 160mg/day for the entire duration of hospitalization. As for the intra-cardiac thrombus and pulmonary embolism he received an 8000 IU subcutaneous injection of sodic enoxaparin every 12h also for the duration of his hospitalization.
A follow-up TTE was performed after 6 days revealing the total disappearance of the thrombus. Even though the patient exhibited no acute symptoms suggestive of a thromboembolic event a whole-body contrast-enhanced CT was performed as a precautionary measure and came back normal except for the pre-existing pulmonary embolism.
Follow-up laboratory tests showed a decrease of the inflammatory markers as well as D-dimers (from 3293 to 748 ng/mL).
Ther patient was gradually weaned off oxygen and discharged 14 days after admission, upon discharge we prescribed Apixaban 5mg/12h in concertation with our center's cardiology department which scheduled follow-up appointment for treatment adjustment and management of the interatrial communication.
The patient was seen 6 weeks later, a TTE was performed revealing a complete resolution of the pulmonary hypertension with normalization of the right heart cavities, completed by a TEE which showed no septal aneurysm, ASD, nor a PFO completed by a bubble test that was negative .
In retrospect, we retained the diagnosis of a PFO re-opened by the right-heart high pressure secondary to the pulmonary embolism which progressed towards a functional closure of the PFO after normalization of the right atrial pressure.