Hemoptysis for 15 d.
A 19-year-old girl was admitted on January 26, 2021 because of hemoptysis for 15 d. The girl started coughing blood for no apparent reason 15 d ago, and the maximum amount of hemoptysis was approximately 100 mL at one time. She also had irritative coughs without expectoration. The patient did not complain of other symptoms, including fever, chest pain, respiration difficulties, headache, or vomiting. Seven days before admission, she received intravenous cefotaxime (2 g, twice daily) and an unknown hemostatic medication for 7 d at a local hospital.
The patient’s history was unremarkable, without previous contact with infectious agents.
The patient was living on campus and had no contact with animals or fungus exposure, with no history of smoking or drinking, denying a history of drug abuse. There was no history of infectious disease in her family.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.5 °C, pulse rate was 86/min, respiration rate was 20/min, and blood pressure was 92/68 mmHg. Except for diminished vocal fremitus, dulls on percussion, and moist rales being found in her lower right lung, no other remarkable abnormalities were observed.
Relevant laboratory examinations were as follows: White blood cell count: 12.74 × 109/L (reference interval: 4.0-10.0 × 109); hemoglobulin: 82 g/L (115-150 g/L); neutrophils%: 53% (50%-70%); lymphocytes%: 22% (20%-50%); hypersensitive C-reactive protein: 36.1 mg/L (< 4 mg/L); and D-dimer: 12.94 mg/L (< 0.5 µg/mL). No obvious abnormalities were found on an electrocardiogram or for the rheumatic immune system, routine urine and liver function, electrolytes, renal function, HbAIc, and HIV tests.
According to the China Community Acquired Pneumonia Treatment Guidelines (2016), the patient was given intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g, 3 times daily). No abnormalities were found in sputum culture or smear. The serum (1-3)-beta-D-glucan (G test) and galactomannan assays (GM test) were negative. Percutaneous lung biopsy with the right lower lobe was performed 2 d after admission, and positive staining of hexamine silver indicated pulmonary mycosis with granulomatous inflammation and necrosis. The histopathological features of thick and scattered hyphae were in line with mucormycosis . PCR test of tuberculosis was negative.
Three days after admission, the patient received electronic bronchoscopy. Purulent secretions and a swollen mucosa were observed in the basal segment of the right lower lobe . An analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was quickly performed by mNGS (VISION MEDICALS, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China). The mNGS results were obtained after 2 d, suggesting Rhizopus microspore infection. No bacteria, viruses, mycoplasma, chlamydia, Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, or other pathogenic microorganisms were detected. The G test and GM test of BALF were negative. A diagnosis of Rhizopus microspore lung infection was made.
Chest computed tomography (CT) suggested bilateral pulmonary infection with cavitation involving the pulmonary right lower lobe .