A 58-year-old Iranian woman was admitted to a secondary healthcare center complaining of paresthesia and weakness in her left lower limb which had begun abruptly on the night before admission. Her past medical history was notable for rheumatoid arthritis (with a drug history of 5 mg of prednisolone every other day and 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine taken daily) and a hospital admission due to COVID-19 nine months ago. The patient did not report any history of heart diseases, coagulation disorders and had not received any COVID-19 vaccinations. The patient did not report any history of heart diseases, or coagulation disorders and had not received any COVID-19 vaccinations. The patient underwent color Doppler ultrasonography of the lower limbs at the mentioned center and was diagnosed with arterial thrombosis of the left lower limb. She was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
On admission, the patient’s vital signs showed no fever, a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg and a heart rate of 95 beats per minute. Physical examination revealed that the left lower limb was noticeably colder than the right lower limb, had much weaker distal pulses, and had an O2 saturation of 85% as opposed to 95% in the right lower limb.
Initial laboratory results showed a slightly elevated leukocyte count of 10.5 × 103/mm3 (normal 4–10 × 103/mm3), a hemoglobin level of 9.3 g/dl (normal 12–16 g/dl), thrombocytopenia with a count of 95 × 103/mm3 (normal 140–440 × 103/mm3), normal liver function tests, increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH: 891 U/L, normal 225–500 U/L), increased C-reactive protein (CRP: > 24 mg/L, normal < 6 mg/L), increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR: 73 mm/hour, normal < 15 mm/hour), and an abnormal coagulation panel (INR: 1.16, normal 1–1.1; PT: 15.5, normal 12–13; PTT: 62.2, normal 25–45) .
The patient underwent a CT angiography of the lower limbs and was immediately sent to the operating room (OR) for aortic and iliofemoral thrombectomy. The patient was initially started on ceftriaxone and vancomycin (in the first 48 hour), which was changed to meropenem and vancomycin (and continued for 3 weeks). After the preliminary pathology results of the lower limb emboli revealed possible fungal hyphae, amphotericin B was also added to the treatment regimen (it was used for 5 days). The specimen was sent for further cultural evaluations.
The day after the surgery, the physical examination showed a significant improvement in circulation in the left lower limb, but the distal pulses of the right lower limb could not be palpated. Considering that acute signs of ischemia were not present in the right lower limb, possible thrombectomy of the right lower limb was postponed until the source of the emboli was found.
To find the source of the lower limb emboli, an echocardiogram was performed, which showed a large mobile mass on the tip of the A2 scallop [ mm] and another mass (6 × 7 mm) attached to mitral valve chorda in the left ventricle . The patient was scheduled for mitral valve replacement (MVR), which was performed one week after the left lower limb thrombectomy. The preliminary pathology report of the cardiac vegetation was also suggestive of a fungal infection, possibly aspergillosis or mucormycosis. Accordingly, amphotericin B therapy was continued. A coronary angiography was performed before the surgery, which yielded normal results.
A day after the MVR surgery, the patient’s right lower limb showed mottling and signs of ischemia. Therefore, a superficial right femoral artery thrombo-endarterectomy and right common femoral embolectomy were performed. After the surgery, the right lower limb was still colder, and its distal pulses were weaker than those of the opposite limb. Two days after the right lower limb thrombectomy, the patient began experiencing pain in the right leg and showed signs of mottling. Color Doppler ultrasonography of the right lower extremity arteries showed a cut-off external iliac artery. Angiography of the right lower limb confirmed the findings of the Doppler ultrasonography, and percutaneous old balloon angioplasty (POBA) was performed on the right external iliac artery. Due to the high thrombosis burden of the patient, no stent was implanted, and surgical thrombectomy was suggested in case of medical failure. The patient developed a hematoma at the site of angiography and was sent to the operating room (OR) for thrombo-endarterectomy of the right common femoral artery. The day after the surgery, both lower limbs were warm, and distal pulses were strong.
The patient did not develop any further complications during admission and underwent medical therapy with Amphotericin B while waiting for the final pathology reports. Eventually, culture results of the mitral valve came back, showing the growth of Aspergillus spp. PCR sequencing was performed to determine the subtype of the organisms, and the results revealed Aspergillus fumigatus (A. fumigatus) as the culprit pathogen. The organism showed resistance to Amphotericin B in the fungogram study conducted on the cultures. Consequently, the patient’s treatment regimen was changed to Voriconazole. On day 25 of treatment, Amphotericin B was switched to Voriconazole, and the total duration of antifungal therapy was 6 months. The patient was followed for 7 months after discharge, and no further complications developed.