A 24-year-old female patient presented to our hospital on June 10, 2020 with a 26-day history of repeated fever (Maximum temperature 39.5°C) and ankle arthritis. Skin nodule (one, 1 cm × 0.5 cm, tenderness) was at 5cm below the right tibial tuberosity. The family history was silent. Laboratory data during admission were notable for mild anemia, and raised SF, LDH, TG, elevated liver function enzymes, IL-6, IFN-γ and sIL-2R, as well as decreased activity of NK cells. Autoantibody profile (antinuclear antibody, antibodies to extractable nuclear antigen, anti-phospholipid antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody were all negative), thyroid function, infection indexes (procalcitonin, bacterial and fungal culture of bone marrow, and examinations of Cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus) and serum tumor markers were normal. Whole body PET-CT didn’t find any signs of tumor or abnormal lymph nodes. Ultrasound suggested normal liver and spleen. The pathological biopsy of the subcutaneous nodules indicated nodular panniculitis . Hemophagocytic cells were found in bone marrow aspiration . We didn’t see Reed-Sternberg cells or lymphoma cells in the bone marrow smear. Considering the clinical characteristics and results from the tests especially pathological biopsy findings from the subcutaneous nodules, we made the diagnosis of nodular panniculitis for the patient . Besides, although the patient didn’t fulfill the most commonly used criteria for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) , she met the reactive hemophagocytic syndrome diagnostic score (HScore) . Hence, she was considered as a rare case of MAS secondary to nodular panniculitis. She was treated with glucocorticoids (started with MP 40mg bid), immunoglobulin and cyclophosphamide (the cumulative dosage was 2.0g). Besides, methotrexate (MTX) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) were used for nodular panniculitis on June 28, 2020. Her symptoms and laboratory data improved. She was discharged with 20mg oral prednisone twice a day, 10mg MTX once a week and 0.2g HCQ twice a day.
Nevertheless, fever recurred when the patient reduced the prednisolone dose to 20mg 8am and 15mg 4pm. She visited our department on July 24, 2020. Laboratory examination during the second admission showed cytopenia (including hemoglobin and neutrophils), hypofibrinogenemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperferritinemia and abnormal liver function tests. In addition, she had decreased NK cell activity, elevated sIL-2R and abnormal cytokine levels. Ultrasound suggested splenomegaly. She met the HScore as well as met six of eight clinical criteria for HLH. She was considered as a relapse of MAS secondary to nodular panniculitis. She was treated with glucocorticoids (MP 0.5g/d for 5 days), immunoglobulin and cyclosporine (CsA) on July 28, 2020. Her symptoms and laboratory abnormality improved gradually. She was discharged on August 12, 2020 with medications (prednisone 25mg bid and MTX 10 mg qw). Soon after the discharge, the patient required not to use CsA on August 31, 2020 due to her increased hair growth potentially caused by CsA. Therefore, CsA was switched to baricitinib 2mg daily with the permission of the patient on August 31, 2020. During one and a half years of follow-up, she is stable without a MAS recurrence, though the prednisolone dose is reduced to 5 mg every three days. The abnormal laboratory findings all returned to normal .