A 62-year-old woman was diagnosed with c-kit-positive GIST of the ascending colon with a single hepatic lesion. She was surgically treated by right hemicolectomy and partial hepatectomy. A histological assessment of a specimen of the hepatic lesion revealed GIST metastasis. Therefore, imatinib mesylate (400 mg/day) was started. After 2 years of imatinib treatment, the disease recurred in the liver, mesentery and peritoneum. Increasing the dose of imatinib to 600 mg/day did not prevent disease progression, so an arterial infusion of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) was added to the imatinib treatment for 3 months. Thereafter, intestinocutaneous fistulae developed on the previous surgical wound and she was referred to our hospital for further treatment for recurrence.
Her baseline performance status was excellent. A physical examination revealed right-sided abdominal tenderness. A small amount of a fetid discharge exuded from the cutaneous fistulae, suggesting communication with the intestine. An ostomy bag was therefore placed around the fistulae. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) images revealed that an abdominal mass involved the abdominal wall, urinary bladder wall, bowel, mesentery and peritoneum in the pelvic cavity and that a 1.3-cm low-density lesion was located in the right lobe of the liver. Signs of active infection had been absent.
Sunitinib was initiated as a standard regimen (50 mg/day for 4 weeks, every 6 weeks) for the peritoneal and liver metastases. The patient developed mild diarrhea (NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events; grade 2) accompanied by mild abdominal pain, fever and leukocytosis on day 11 of the first course of sunitinib. No obvious signs of infection sign were evident on CT images or in culture samples of urine, stool, blood and sputum. Sunitinib was re-administered at a dose of 37.5 mg/day. The patient developed grade 2 hypothyroidism on day 8 and grade 3 vomiting with severe dehydration on the day 18 of the second course. Therefore, sunitinib was discontinued until recovery. During the third course of sunitinib, the patient tolerated a reduced dose of 25 mg/day, despite the presence of grade 1 non-hematological toxicities such as hand-foot syndrome, nausea and diarrhea. At the end of the third course, she had frequent urination with micro-hematuria. Leukocytopenia and elevated C-reactive protein were not found. The symptoms disappeared during antibiotic therapy.
On day 4 of the fourth course of sunitinib, the abdominal mass was reduced on CT images and the hepatic mass decreased in density but not in size. Immediately after this CT examination, the patient developed severe abdominal pain with moderate muscle defense. A large amount of fluid material was concomitantly discharged from the cutaneous fistulae. Urinary communication was indicated from the results of an intravenous indigo carmine injection. The fistula orifice was markedly dilated on CT images and a small opening in the anterior bladder wall was evident . Urinary leakage was localized in the subcutaneous cavity and pan-peritonitis was not evident. The abdominal symptoms gradually improved with decreased fluid drainage after sunitinib was discontinued. One month later, the size of the fistula had also obviously decreased and the fistula orifice was closed . The clinical course indicated that sunitinib might have been associated with formation of the vesicocutaneous fistula in our patient.