Age and sex: 53-year-old female
Chief complaints: the patient presented with a mass in the buttock that had been growing in size since 2019.
History of present illness: The right buttock mass was present for 1 year and was gradually increasing in size. The clinical manifestations were symptoms of rectum and uterus compression, with discomfort, dragging sensation, and distension in the lower abdomen, and the mass inhibited defecation.
History of past illness: The patient had hypertension for 10 years, with stable blood pressure control.
Family history: None of her family members were diagnosed with carcinoma.
Physical examination: A fixed mass was present in the right buttock, with no skin changes or ulceration; the local boundary was still clear; and the patient had local tenderness. The tumor firmness and mobility were poor.
The laboratory testing showed the following: Serum red blood cell count: 3.5*1012/L; serum white blood cell count: 5.7*109/L (neutrophil percentage: 65%, lymphocyte percentage 23.7%); hemoglobin concentration: 113 g/L; hematocrit: 0.330 L/L; serum alanine aminotransferase concentration: 23.0 IU/L; serum aspartate aminotransferase: 20.0 IU/L; serum albumin concentration: 39.8 g/L; serum triglyceride concentration: 2.23 mmol/L; serum urea concentration: 5.0 mmol/L; serum creatinine concentration: 73.2 μmol/L; serum uric acid concentration: 320.3 μmol/L; alpha-fetoprotein: 1.5 ng/ml; carcinoembryonic antigen: 0.9 ng/ml; carbohydrate antigen199: 6.9 U/ml, carbohydrate antigen125: 2.2 U/ml, carbohydrate antigen153: 4.3 U/ml, and carbohydrate antigen242: 2.9.
Imaging examination: Computed tomography (CT) showed that there was a mass of cystic low-density shadow on the right side of the ischiorectal fossa, and the mass was approximately 6.95 cm×7.79 cm, with segmentations visible inside . Enhanced scanning of the cyst wall and segmentations showed mild enhancement and visible right internal iliac artery branches supplying blood to the tumor. There was adjacent ischium bone destruction, and the adjacent rectum and vagina were pushed to the left .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that there was a mass of mixed T1 and T2 signal shadows in the right ischiorectal fossa. The main body of the lesion showed equal T1 and long T2 signal shadows, and small patches of shorter T1 and equal T2 signal shadows were visible . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) images showed a high signal . The obturator internal muscle was unclear since it was involved in the lesion. The adjacent tissues were pushed to the left. The tumor was approximately 8.55 cm×7.59 cm×8.32 cm. The adjacent soft tissues showed a grid-like high signal in the fat suppression sequence .
Genetic testing: none
Final diagnosis: Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor showed positive staining for S100 and Vimentin, suspicious positivity for mesothelial cells, and negative staining for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, EMA, CK19, E-cadherin, and CK5/6. The Ki67 labeling index reached approximately 40% in some areas.
The tumor stroma showed mucinous denaturation, the tumor cells were polygonal and epithelioid, the nuclei were slightly atypia, grid-like calcification, and reactive bone formation were found within local lesions, and the bone tissues were invaded by the lesion. All the changes pointed to the diagnosis of EMC .
Treatment: Before the surgery, the tumor supplying artery was embolized through intervention. Subsequently, a needle biopsy of the tumor was performed, and the results showed that some spindle cells were visible . We performed a resection of the tumor with an extended range of excision. During the surgery, we made a curved incision along the posterior midline of the sacrum at the level of S4, extending towards the right buttock tumor area. The incision was approximately 30cm long. The layers of skin, subcutaneous tissue, and deep fascia were sequentially dissected. Blunt dissection was performed from the tailbone area towards the right buttock to expose the tumor, while taking care to protect the gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and gluteus minimus muscles. The proximal portion of the tailbone was removed first, revealing that the tumor extended anteriorly from the right buttock to the pelvic cavity, with an intact capsule. After thorough exposure of the posterior aspect of the tumor, the tumor was bluntly dissected along its margins. Exploration revealed the tumor closely related to the ischial tuberosity with significant involvement of the bone. Partial resection of the ischial tuberosity was performed to further separate the tumor deeply into the pelvic cavity. Exploration indicated that the tumor was closely related to the right pubic branch with bone involvement. To protect the surrounding tissues, partial resection of the pubic branch was performed using a saw. At this point, exploration confirmed complete separation of the tumor from the surrounding tissues, and the tumor was completely excised . No infiltration was observed at the tumor margin. After surgery, the patient received three rounds of chemotherapy (Anlotinib, 10mg, QD, 14days) after surgery.
Outcome and follow-up: The patient recovered well after the operation, the patient’s limb function was normal, and there was no recurrence or metastasis during the 18-month follow-up after the operation .