A 56-year-old Arabian woman presented to our institution with a palpable right breast mass . Two months prior to presentation she complained of a painless right breast lump that quickly increased in size with bluish coloration of overlying skin. She had no personal or family history of cancer, breast surgery, or breast irradiation. A physical examination revealed a 5 cm ill-defined painless mass that overlapped two upper quadrants. The mass was firm and fixed to the skin which was bluish without ulceration. There was no nipple retraction, no axillary lymphadenopathy, and no signs of lymphedema. A mammography showed no evidence of spiculation. No suspicious calcifications were seen. A needle core biopsy was performed and showed anastomosing round-to-oval spaces which contained erythrocytes. Lining cells had thin, elongated but hyperchromatic nuclei, which sometimes protruded into the luminal spaces. The neoplastic vascular channels invaded adipose tissue. Immunohistochemical stains performed on the core biopsy revealed membranous reactivity of the tumor cells for CD31-related antigen and CD34-related antigen. These findings were initially interpreted as a benign vascular tumor. However, as the mass measured 5 cm, the diagnosis of angiosarcoma was more appropriate. A mastectomy without axillary dissection was performed since angiosarcoma was suspected. At gross examination, the tumor appeared ill-defined, spongy, and soft . A microscopic examination revealed vascular channels lined by atypical endothelial cells with hyperchromatic, spindle-shaped or round nuclei . There were mild to moderately scattered pleomorphic cells, and scattered mitotic figures . Other sections showed papillary formations, solid foci of spindle cells, and hemorrhagic necrosis . The margins of the tumor were infiltrative . The diagnosis of primary intermediately differentiated angiosarcoma of the breast (grade II) was made. No distant metastases were found. She was lost to follow-up and further treatment after mastectomy until she developed local tumor progression 4 months later.