A 24-year-old male underwent a modified Ravitch procedure for pectus excavatum for a persistent referred tachycardia and dyspnea on exertion (A, B). Preoperative chest CT showed a severe pectus excavatum with Haller index equal to 3.44. For the first time, the pectoralis muscle flap mobilization adapted to the modified Ravitch technique for pectus excavatum reconstruction has been shown with no complications. After being discharged on the eighth postoperative day, the patient returned to our hospital due to excessive serum exiting from the surgical wound. A clinical examination showed that the hardware was exposed. Microbiological samples from the wound were negative, and the patient was apyretic, with no general symptoms. Therapy with a broad-spectrum antibiotic was introduced. In accordance with the plastic surgeon, the patient underwent surgical debridement multiple times (three times) to prevent infection of the bone (D–H). VAC therapy was performed every time after debridement. The patient was then referred to the Plastic Surgery Unit. The final closure of the wound was performed 10 days after the last debridement.
At this time, a pectoralis muscle flap transposition was performed to reduce the risk of infection, protecting the bar with the muscle layer. Both pectoralis muscles were carefully dissected on a superficial prefascial plane from the overlying skin and subcutaneous layer. When proceeding cranially, care was taken not to devascularize the skin flap. The pectoralis muscles were elevated, and the thoracoacromial pedicle was identified and preserved. Muscles were then mobilized as needed to reach a comfortable lateral-to-medial rotation/transposition. Once the flaps had been fully mobilized, hemostasis was accurately controlled, and the two flaps were sutured to one another medially with PDS sutures . With this, full muscular coverage of the osteotomized sternum and ribs was obtained. The hardware was also almost fully protected by this maneuver. Two submuscular drains were inserted, and the muscles were sutured inferiorly to the deep fascia or to the rectus muscle fascia to obtain complete muscular coverage of all the underlying elements. Final closure was thus obtained with skin sutures in a double layer .
The patient was discharged in good condition after 10 days with no further complications. At one month after surgery, an outgrowth from the wound appeared at the level of the sternum with the release of clear serum, which was negative on microbiological examination and required removal under general anesthesia after patient hospitalization (I). The one-year follow-up examination showed no more complications and total resolution of the surgical scars. Chest X-ray showed radiological findings indicating complete stability, with no hardware exposure (C).