This case study will discuss the hospital course of a 22-year-old shelter-housed female patient provisionally diagnosed with bipolar I disorder, hospitalized for a manic episode in the context of stimulant use and medication noncompliance to lithium. This review discusses the development of auditory hallucinations (AH) after initiation of varenicline for smoking cessation. This case is unique in that it highlights the potential risk of de-stabilization in a vulnerable youth with newly diagnosed bipolar I disorder and precarious social circumstances, in attempts to further concurrent approaches to psychiatric care.
The main objective exam used to track patient progress through the duration of her hospitalization was the mental status exam (MSE). This is standard practice for psychiatric care and qualitatively assesses factors related to a patient’s behavioral and cognitive functioning . Important factors assessed for this patient include appearance and behavior, speech, affect and mood, thought form, thought content, perceptual abnormalities, insight and cognition.
The patient reported at least five elevated mood episodes in recent years and one previous hospitalization 8 months prior to her current admission. A review of psychiatric progress notes indicates that there was disinhibition present during this previous admission in the form of oversexualized behavior and only superficial cooperation was established. It was also documented that the patient demonstrated inappropriate physical intimacy with a male patient during the admission, which was attributed to her hypomanic state. She was diagnosed with stimulant-induced psychosis thought to be secondary to cocaine use as well as bipolar disorder. By the end of a two-week period, the patient was discharged with appropriate living arrangements and a prescription for lithium that was subsequently not filled.
The patient was raised by her biological mother until the age of 7, after which she and her sister were taken out of their mother’s custody and put into foster care. It is reported that their mother engaged in substance use, sex work, and had been in jail for severe physical attacks on one of her sexual partners. The patient also recalls her mother vaguely stating in the past that she has bipolar disorder in addition to vague mood instability.
At age 9, the patient began living with her adopted parents. While the patient states that her adoptive parents were relatively supportive and denies being in trouble at school or in other social situations, she always wanted to leave home. She left home at age 18 after graduating high school and subsequently completed two years of a business degree. Despite her initial goals of pursuing a master’s degree, she became involved with substance use in her late teenage years. With a desire to leave her home province, the patient unknowingly became part of a sex trafficking ring that brought her to the province in which this hospital admission took place. She self-described being forced to live in vulnerable housing conditions - some of which involved sexual interactions to continue residence. The patient also reported instances of forcible confinement and sexual assault.
The patient’s substance use history consisted of smoking up to half a pack per day, and binge-drinking of alcohol from her teenage years approximately twice a week with an average of 12 drinks each time. She also endorsed smoking approximately one gram of cocaine per week since the age of 19, several grams of cannabis daily on a regular basis since the age of 17, as well as the use of ketamine. She described using substances for social purposes as well as a way to help her with stress.
During the initial days of psychiatric treatment, the patient was admitted on an involuntary basis to the psychiatric stabilization unit. Perceptual abnormalities, including auditory hallucinations were not recorded during her admission consult. The patient also remained fairly paranoid about men in the community, which may be based on the reality of her past circumstances. With the patient’s date of admission being defined as Day 0, on Day 6, she stated that “my sleep [was] good” and that her mood was “much steadier”. She voiced a number of future oriented plans, stating “I want to go back to school to be a healthcare assistant” and that “I want to get my life together” and get out of the sex industry. She states that she has previously experienced hallucinations but claims she “only [heard] them when [she was] manic”. After stabilization and thorough assessment by the psychiatric team, lithium and aripiprazole treatment was started on Day 9 and Day 11 respectively for management of bipolar I disorder (Appendix ).
She was eventually transferred to an inpatient psychiatric unit and seen by the addiction medicine service. After this assessment, she was started on nicotine replacement therapy as per her preference for smoking cessation. After further re-assessments and conversation regarding smoking cessation, the patient showed interest in starting varenicline and agreed to the treatment after discussion about the medication and potential adverse effects including neuropsychiatric side effects. Varenicline was started on Day 14. Upon assessment on Day 15, the patient had an episode of emesis during the morning and reported experiencing vivid but enjoyable dreams at night, with no other symptoms. She was provided further instructions regarding side effects and after this indicated she wished to continue treatment.
On Day 16, the patient developed auditory hallucinations, paranoia and referential beliefs. However, her insight was intact, and she had minimal thought form disorganization. Her symptoms were thought to be secondary to varenicline, and she met criteria for a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder as per the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition criteria. On Day 17, the patient reported hearing auditory hallucinations of a derogatory nature described as “voices of people [she] knows” . In addition, the patient’s affect appeared to be more distressed and irritable on Day 18, compared to MSE results recorded from Day 5 to Day 15 . During this time, the patient also expressed interest of returning to the province that she grew up in despite her family’s disagreement. Urgent reassessment occurred given the need to balance treatment of her nicotine use disorder with the risk of ongoing psychotic symptoms. After consultation between the addiction medicine and psychiatry teams, varenicline was discontinued on Day 18 and the patient was monitored for resolution of these symptoms . In her destabilized condition, she was thought to be at high risk in community given her history of high risk sex work and sex trafficking. The original plan for discharge was therefore halted due to the vulnerability of this patient.