A 68-year-old man was delivered to our hospital for impaired consciousness with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E4V3M4. His serum glucose level was 28 mg/dL (1.56 mmol/L); his consciousness was completely restored by intravenous glucose administration. In his medical history, he had undergone resection of a left temporal SFT at the age of 48 years. At that time, since he had no hypoglycemic symptoms and hypoglycemia was not observed on the blood tests, no further examination about the possibility of hypoglycemia and the productivity of big IGF2 was performed in the previous hospital. At the ages of 51 and 60, he underwent repeated operations for local recurrent tumors. Again, no hypoglycemia was observed. Pathological examination showed the typical findings of SFT; the tumors were composed of spindle cells arranged in the patternless pattern. At the age of 64 years, bilateral lung metastases appeared and were treated with partial lobectomies. At that time, multiple intraabdominal and subcutaneous tumors were detected by CT scan and thereafter gradually increased in size. Based on the clinical course, we considered these tumors as metastases of SFT. However, since he was asymptomatic, he was followed up without any intervention. During the follow up, he noticed no hypoglycemic symptoms and no laboratory data showed evidence of hypoglycemia. Moreover, his dietary intake had not changed according to his and his wife’s interviews, and his weight was stable at around 50 to 52 kg .
On admission, his height was 162.0 cm; body weight, 52.0 kg; and body mass index, 19.8 kg/m2. On physical examination, he had palpable masses at right axilla and left hip, and he took no glucose-lowering agents. After admission to our hospital, he required continuous infusion of glucose (7–9 g/h) and a diet of 2200 kcal per day to prevent hypoglycemia. In a fasting test, after 6 hours of fasting, his plasma glucose levels dropped to 36 mg/dL (2.00 mmol/L), which was accompanied by a low serum insulin level <0.5 μU/mL, C-peptide 0.07 ng/mL, acetoacetate 16.0 μmol/L, β-hydroxybutyrate 10.7 μmol/L . Notably, despite his severe hypoglycemia, he was otherwise asymptomatic. Intravenous glucagon administration (1 mg) led to an increase in plasma glucose from 36 to 87 mg/dL (2.00 to 4.83 mmol/L) in thirty minutes. The levels of counter hormones during hypoglycemia were shown in . A rapid ACTH test showed a peak cortisol level of 20 μg/dL 60 minutes after the infusion. His laboratory examination in the morning showed serum growth hormone level 0.09 ng/mL, IGF1 24 ng/mL (reference range, 66 to 213 ng/mL), and HbA1c 4.8%. Anti-insulin autoantibodies were negative. Renal and liver function were normal, and nutritional parameters, including albumin and cholinesterase, were not obviously decreased .
Due to past history of SFT, we performed a CT scan on admission. CT scan revealed 14 intraabdominal tumors with maximum size 9.1 cm and 4 small subcutaneous tumors maximum size 3.3 cm at right axilla and left hip. The tumors were increased in size compared to six months before . These findings in combination with the laboratory results suggested that metastatic lesions of SFT were producing big IGF2 to cause hypoglycemia. Immunoblot analysis revealed serum big IGF2, which established a clinical diagnosis of NICTH . As larger tumors are more likely to produce big IGF2 and be more responsible for the hypoglycemia, we planned to perform debulking surgery on the larger tumors preferentially, seeking to reduce the level of big IFG2 secretion as well as the total amount of residual tumors, and significantly reduce hypoglycemia.
Concurrently, we also investigated a pharmacological treatment option. DOTATOC-PET/CT showed high uptakes of the radiotracer in all of the intraabdominal and subcutaneous lesions, indicating the expression of somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), mainly SSTR 2 and 5 . Accordingly, the efficacy of octreotide to improve hypoglycemia was examined in the preoperative period. Single-dose subcutaneous octreotide administration was found by continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) system to increase the postprandial blood glucose level .
In the surgery, five of the largest intraabdominal tumors (tumor #1–4, #8 in ) and six small tumors accessible from the abdominal operative field (tumor #5–7, #9–11 in ) were resected. Histopathological examination revealed spindle to ovoid shaped signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6)-positive tumor cells, compatible with the metastatic SFTs . Additional immunohistochemical studies showed positive immunostaining for IGF2 and SSTR2 and negative immunostaining for SSTR5 in the tumor cells . The MIB-1 index was 5%. In order to seek which tumor was responsible for the production of big IGF2 in the resected ones, we performed immunoblot analyses. The immunoblot analyses of 7 of the 11 resected tumors, for which samples were available, revealed big IGF2 production in all of them . After the surgery, hypoglycemia was resolved even after discontinuation of glucose infusion . Consistently, serum big IGF2 was null one week after the surgery . In addition, two weeks after the surgery, 72-hour fasting showed that plasma glucose levels no longer dropped to 55 mg/dL (3.06 mmol/L) with high ketone body levels; acetoacetate was 596 μmol/L and β-hydroxybutyrate was 2,170 μmol/L . Moreover, no apparent hypoglycemia was found by CGM. One month after the surgery, the HbA1c level was 5.1%, and the serum IGF1 concentration was restored to the levels of normal range . Subsequently, hypoglycemia was not observed for three-month follow-up and the HbA1c level increased to 5.7%. These findings indicated that the subcutaneous tumors were considered to have a small or negligible contribution to hypoglycemia.