A woman, 33 years old, married, merchant, 8 years of schooling, Jehovah's witness, from the countryside of the state of Pará/Brazil, attended the Gaspar Vianna Clinical Hospital Foundation in May/2015 complaining of difficulty to walk, dyspnoea at rest, cough with hemoptoics sputum and syncope.
Since the age of 16, she had dyspnoea and fatigue, with worsening of symptoms after the first pregnancy, at 17 years. In the same period, she started to experience frequent episodes of headache, palpitations and hypertension, a condition that was treated as anxiety attacks. At the age of 32, she reported loss of motor strength, drowsiness, fatigue and indisposition to daily activities.
After worsening the condition, in 2015, at the age of 33, she sought specialised care in Belém, the capital of the state of Pará, being referred to the reference institution in cardiology of the public network of the region with a clinical picture of acute pulmonary oedema with aetiology yet to be determined.
On physical examination, she demonstrated tachypnoea, skin pallor (++/+++), fine basal rales and moderate mitral systolic murmur. She had no diagnosis of primary heart disease and denied exposure to chemicals and toxic materials.
She underwent transthoracic echocardiography , which showed cavitary enlargement of the left atrium, moderate to important mitral stenosis with mass adhered to the anterior leaflet, a systolic function of the left ventricle preserved at rest and mild aortic and tricuspid insufficiencies. Based on these findings and epidemiology, the hypothesis that it was a benign tumour called myxoma was raised.
She underwent urgent cardiac surgery at the institution for complete removal of the lesion or R0 resection of an adipose nodule encapsulated in the wall of the left atrium measuring 6.0 cm, in its largest diameter, which obstructed the mitral valve.
Anatomopathological analysis revealed negative microscopic margins for tumour. The morphology described was myxoid fusocellular tumour with cellular anaplasia, and the immunohistochemical study with desmin showed that the neoplastic cells were positive for D33 and smooth muscle actin 1–4; and negative for CD34, AE1/AE3, FSD and protein S100; findings compatible with undifferentiated high-grade LMS in the left atrium.
The young woman was subsequently referred to the oncology centre in the state of Pará/Brazil, where the initial proposal was to perform five cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy, therapy administered every 21 days, with Gemcitabine (900 mg/m2/day) – 1,620 mg (days 1 and 8) and Docetaxel (75 mg/m2/day) – 135 mg (day 8), in addition to receiving the granulocytic colony-stimulating factor (days 9–13). However, before the third cycle, she presented adverse effects, such as myalgia (grade 1), asthenia (grade 1), mucositis (grade 1), nausea (grade 1), diarrhoea (grade 2) and arthralgia (grade 2). It was necessary, from the third cycle, to increase the chemotherapy interval to 28 days and reduce the initial dose of Docetaxel by 15%, remaining 63 mg/m2/day or 114 mg, until the fifth cycle.
Concomitant to chemotherapy, she performed three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy, 25 sessions, in the cardiac area, with a total of 50 Gr in 25 phases of 2 Gr/day or PTV 200 cGy/day and a total of 5,000 cGy, in the period from January 4 to 2 March 2016.
After these sequences of treatments with post-surgical radiotherapy and chemotherapy, no evidence of local or systemic oncological disease was detected, proven by staging tests. However, the patient presented cardiac sequelae, with moderate symptoms of arrhythmia and heart failure, well controlled with the use of medication: Enalapril, Carvedilol and Ancoron.
In 2018, she performed a diagnostic investigation of breast and lung nodules, excluding malignant neoplastic processes.
In 2020, 5 years after diagnosis and treatment, the patient remained in complete remission, in follow-up with the multiprofessional oncology team. She used medications for systemic arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart failure and arrhythmia.