A 23-year-old young man was taken to the ED (Emergency Department) of the local hospital via EMS (Emergency Medical Services) with a clothesline-type injury to the anterior neck caused by a rope, while riding a motorcycle. The patient was hemodynamically stable and conscious at the scene. He was provided with 100 % Oxygen via face mask, and his cervical spine was immobilized using a hard collar. There wasn't any open wound seen at the site of injury.
At ED vital sign included a blood pressure of 110/70 mm Hg, a pulse rate of 50 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min, and an axillary temperature of 37.4 °C, and the pulse oximetry oxygen saturation was 82 %. A few minutes after arrival, the patient developed respiratory distress. Since the respiratory sounds were absent at the left hemithorax, a chest tube was inserted by the center's general surgeon. But the respiratory distress did not vanish and the oxygen saturation did not increase. On further examination, subcutaneous emphysema was noticed in the patient's neck. After a failed trial of orotracheal intubation, the center's surgeon decided to explore the injury site, as he was suspicious of tracheal injury. Opening the site of injury with a transverse incision, a complete transected trachea was noticed at the subglottic area. Blood vessels were intact, and no sign of active bleeding was present. A 7.5 mm endotracheal tube was inserted in the distal part of the transected trachea. After providing a secure airway and completing the Primary survey, on Secondary survey, orthopedic and neurological injuries were ruled out, and the patient was referred to Tertiary Care Trauma Hospital for further investigations. After arriving at the second center, the patient was transferred to the operating room immediately. The neck opened by a cervical collar incision extended bilaterally to SCM (Sternocleidomstoid) muscles. In addition to the complete transection of the trachea, 80 % of the esophagus circumference was ruptured. As a vascular surgeon was present throughout the surgery, any vascular injuries were ruled out. An NG tube was inserted in the esophagus, and it was repaired with 3-0 absorbable interrupted suture , primarily in one layer. To prevent further tracheoesophageal fistula, an SCM muscle flap was placed between the repaired esophagus and the trachea. Afterward, the transected trachea was repaired by end-to-end anastomosis using an interrupted simple 3-0 absorbable suture. Two drains were inserted. The injury to recurrent laryngeals could not be ruled out; therefore, tracheostomy was performed two tracheal ring below the injury site, and then it was connected to a ventilator. To maintain the patient's feeding, a Jejunostomy feeding tube was inserted subsequently. Following the operation, the patient was stable and was transferred to the ICU (Intensive Care Unit). On second post-operative day, the patient was weaned from the ventilator. No drop in oxygen saturation was noticed, and he had spontaneous breathing afterward. On the Fourth post-operative day, the chest tube was removed, and on the fifth post-operative day, a fibreoptic bronchoscopy was performed. The vocal cords were seen without abnormalities, but the tracheostomy tube was not removed till further examination to prove recurrent laryngeal nerves were intact. On seventh post-operative day, drains were removed as the output was insignificant, and an esophagography was performed to study esophagus anastomosis. As no leakage or aspiration was found, the patient went on oral feeding . After three days of tolerating oral feeding, the Jejunostomy feeding tube was removed. Four weeks after operation, a fibreoptic bronchoscopy was carried out. No signs of tracheal stenosis and no abnormalities in vocal cords were detected; therefore, the tracheostomy was removed.
On the fourth month follow up, the patient underwent a flexible fibreoptic bronchoscopy, which was completely normal.