A 44 years old Chinese woman, para one with a history of poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus since 2011. In 2013 she underwent induction of labour for poor glucose control at term, and finally gave birth by caesarean for failed induction of labour. The baby was born alive with a birthweight of 3.630 g. Afterwards she defaulted medical follow-up for six years due to financial and childcare issues. She did not have any fertility plan, but did not practice any contraception either.
She was unaware of her index pregnancy, as she had a negative pregnancy test after three months of amenorrhea in mid 2018. She did not seek any medical advice despite remaining amenorrhoic as she thought she was menopausal. She noticed an increase in bodyweight, but never felt any fetal movements. On the day of admission in early 2019, she had leaking sensations and colicky abdominal discomfort at home. As she thought of urinary incontinence and constipation, she started straining in the toilet. Afterwards she felt a bulging mass at her perineum, and noticed that the fetal scalp was already at the introitus, but she could not push the baby out.
She delayed calling an ambulance and arrived three hours later in the Accident and Emergency Department of Prince of Wales Hospital in Hong Kong. Upon arrival, uterine contractions had completely subsided. Maternal vital signs were stable. Physical examination revealed a soft abdomen which was distended with the gravid uterus. The woman was put into the lithotomy position and the edematous fetal scalp was distending the perineum. The fetal head was still within the vagina, facing the maternal left side. Ultrasound examination confirmed a demised term sized fetus. The woman was told to push but in vain as she was exhausted. As the fetus had died for some time with loss of muscle tone, the fetal neck was hyperflexed towards the right side, resulting in severe asynclitism. Hence, after making an episiotomy, the operator had to put his right index and middle fingers into the fetal mouth, and applied force to correct the neck hyperflexion and the head asynclitism. After birth of the head difficult shoulder dystocia occurred. The posterior right shoulder remained very high up in the pelvis. Different manoeuvres including McRobert’s, suprapubic pressure and internal rotational manoeuvres were applied to relieve the shoulders, but all failed. Posterior arm extraction was attempted, but the arm was too high and unreachable by the operator’s hand. The mother was already exhausted and could not get into an all fours position.
Finally, an attempt to extract the posterior shoulder with posterior axillary sling method was performed (Video ). Firstly, two long ribbon gauzes were tied together . With its knot held by the operator’s right index and middle fingers, the ribbon gauzes were brought to the anterior side of the axilla of the posterior right shoulder . A pair of long right-angle forceps was inserted along the fetal back with the operator’s left hand, so that the forceps tips reached the posterior side of the right axilla. The forceps tips were then passed under the axilla to grasp the knot of the ribbon gauzes . The ribbon gauze was then pulled through to create a sling around the axilla . Traction force was applied through the ribbon sling, in an outward, leftward (maternal left side) and upward manner in order to pull down the posterior shoulder, as well as to rotate it in anti-clockwise direction . The posterior right shoulder was then extracted successfully, followed by the anterior left shoulder and the rest of the baby’s body. There was no additional perineal or vaginal tear, with a total blood loss of 150 ml. The baby weighted 3488 g and was certified stillborn. The woman was managed with uterotonic prophylaxis and antibiotic cover. Placental pathological examination revealed severe acute chorioamnionitis and the placenta swab showed growth of Escherichia Coli. Other investigations were all unremarkable.