A 29 years-old man was hospitalized in May 2023, presenting with a 3 days history of fever and dyspnea. The patient had previously been diagnosed with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) 9 years ago and had been on a long-term use of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). He denied any related family history. On 6 November 2021, the patient was admitted to the hepatology department presenting symptoms of jaundice and lower limb edema. After admission, the patient was diagnosed with acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF) and underwent liver transplantation surgery after 1 year. The patient adhered to the prescribed regimen of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil after liver transplantation to prevent transplant rejection. The physical examination of the patient revealed a temperature of 38.4°C, a heart rate of 84 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, an oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 99%, a blood pressure of 120/82 mmHg, and lung auscultation revealed diminished sounds with a few moist crackles heard. Other physical examinations were negative. Blood tests indicated a white blood cell count of 3.75 × 109/L, a neutrophilic granulocyte percentage (NE%) of 77.6%, a procalcitonin (PCT) of 21.8 ng/mL, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 22 mg/L. The results of 1-3-β-D-glucan and G-lipopolysaccharide tests were negative, and the absolute counts of helper T lymphocytes and killer T lymphocytes were 220/μL and 261/μL. Upon admission, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan indicated minimal bilateral pulmonary exudates. According to the aforementioned findings, the preliminary diagnosis indicated that the patient had community-acquired pneumonia. Empiric therapy with cefuroxime was initiated upon admission for prophylactic purposes. Nevertheless, the patient’s pyrexia remained refractory, and there was an escalation of bilateral moist rales on the third day. Therefore, for further insights into the etiology, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples were obtained through fiberoptic bronchoscopy, which revealed yellow foam-like exudates in the lungs that were positive for Gomori methenamine silver staining and displayed a small quantity of pneumocystis jirovecii encapsulation. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with PJP. The immunosuppressive agent and cefuroxime were discontinued, and caspofungin was introduced in conjunction with sulfamethoxazole (SMZ) for anti-infective purposes. Additionally, 40 mg of methylprednisolone was administered to mitigate the inflammatory response. After treatment, the patient continued to experience recurrent hyperpyrexia and dyspnea, accompanied by deterioration in vital signs. The patient’s temperature was recorded at 39.4°C, heart rate was 101 beats per minute, and respiratory rate was 32 breaths per minute. Then, despite the utilization of high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) with an oxygenation flow rate of 50 L/min and FiO2 of 70%, as well as non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) with an IPAP of 18 cmH2O, an EPAP of 8 cmH2O, a frequency of 20 breaths/min, and FiO2 of 90% on alternate occasions, the pO2/FiO2 (P/F) ratio of arterial blood gas (ABG) was 100 mmHg. The P/F value satisfied the diagnostic criteria for severe ARDS. The patient experienced an exacerbation of dyspnea, and a reexamination of chest CT revealed an aggravation of lesions in both lungs . On the 15th day, the patient was admitted to the ICU under consideration of PJP and severe ARDS as diagnoses. He was still under hyperpyrexia and dyspnea physical examination and laboratory data showed a deterioration of general conditions: temperature: 39.3°C, heart rate: 102 beats/min, respiratory rate: 34 breaths/min, SpO2: 88% under high-flow nasal cannula oxygen (HFNC: oxygen flow rate of 40 L/min, FiO2 of 60%, and blood pressure: 115/74 mmHg). Arterial blood gas analysis showed severe hypoxemia: pH: 7.41, PaO2: 51.3 mmHg, PaCO2: 29.7 mmHg, and P/F 86 mmHg. The patient was expected to require mechanical ventilation for an extended period, which significantly increased the risk of mechanical complications. Meanwhile, given the patient’s desire for autonomy to manage his own behavior during dyspnea, without resorting to endotracheal intubation, coupled with the urgent need for oxygenation, the early employment of awake VV-ECMO represented the optimal course of action. With the patient’s consent, the VV-ECMO was connected to him. A 15F cannula inserted through the right internal jugular vein and a 23F catheter through the right femoral vein were placed for VV-ECMO under local anesthesia. ECMO parameters (blood flow velocity: 4.5 to 5.0 L/min, gas flow rate: 4 L/min, FiO2: 100%) were continued to be given with HFNC (Oxygen flow rate: 60 L/min, FiO2: 50%). On the basis of SMZ treatment, meropenem (1 g q8h) combined with vancomycin (1 g q12h) was given for antimicrobial therapy, dexmedetomidine (from 0.3 μg/kg/h to 0.5 μg/kg/h) was used for shallow sedation, and remifentanil (from 0.03 μg/kg/min to 0.05 μg/kg/min) for analgesia with the purpose to smooth the dyspnea. We maintained the RASS score from −1 to 0 of shallow sedation and controlled the spontaneous breathing rate at 8–15 breaths/min for lung protection. To prevent the formation of blood clots, we employed continuous infusion of heparin and frequently monitored the patient’s activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) with the aim of maintaining a target APTT value between 60 and 80 s. Additionally, we administered enteral nutrition through a nasogastric tube to ensure a daily caloric intake of 2,100 kcal for the patient. On the 17th day, respiratory physiotherapy was initiated, which included daily use of the Portex Acapella Breathing Trainer was made at 6250 Shier Ring and sitting at the bedside with the intention of exercising respiratory muscles, preventing ICU-acquired weakness, and promoting pulmonary recruitment. On the 21st day, the manifestation of respiratory distress exhibited complete alleviation, the body temperature gradually regressed to the normal range, and the parameters obtained from blood gas analysis as well as the radiological interpretation of the thoracic X-ray depicted a gradual enhancement. According to , the counts of NE, CRP, PCT, and IL-6 exhibited a gradual decrease over time, implying a potential amelioration or resolution of the infection. We partially adhered to the guidelines recommended by ELSO for weaning off VV-ECMO . We initiated a weaning trial at a PaO2 condition of 131 mmHg on supplemental O2 with an oxygenation flow rate of 40 L/min and FiO2 of 45% on HFNC while the fraction of delivered oxygen (FDO2) of VV-ECMO was 21%. Subsequently, we gradually reduced the sweep gas flow rate by 1 L/min from 5.0 L/min to our goal of 1 L/min over 4 h. Since the patient was able to tolerate the low sweep gas flow rate of VV-ECMO, we turned off the sweep gas for 4 h. Then, the arterial blood gas results obtained during the off-sweep gas trial demonstrated a PaO2 of 125 mmHg and pH of 7.41 without any excessive work of breathing based on the patient’s condition. Following an 8 h spontaneous breathing test mentioned above, the patient’s P/F was 277 mmHg, leading to the withdrawal of ECMO support. The patient was finally discharged from the ICU, and the LOS in ICU was only for 7 days without any adverse and unanticipated complications.