At 10:45 the 68 year old, male patient got injured after being attacked by a bull while working at a rural slaughterhouse. 10 minutes after the accident, an advanced life support team arrived on scene. Initially, the patient was in severe respiratory distress due to flail chest. He was able to communicate and to respond to given commands but had no measurable blood pressure. Initial ECG monitoring showed ST elevations in the aVR lead. Emergency endotracheal intubation was performed and as the breathsounds over the left side were impaired, a tube thoracostomy was performed via a Monaldi approach in the 3rd intercostal space midclavicular line and connected to a Heimlich flatter valve. Fluid resuscitation with cristalloids and colloids was initiated. Epinephrine and dopamine were then given as the response to fluid resuscitation was not sufficient. The patient was transferred in a critical condition 150 miles by helicopter from the rural district to the next level I trauma centre. At 12:10, during transport, the patient suffered from cardiorespiratory arrest with asystole. At 12:25 the patient was admitted to our trauma room undergoing manual external chest compressions with a massive subcutaneous emphysema despite the pre-hospital inserted chest tube, which had been inserted on the left side. Inspection of the tube and valve showed no obstruction through bending or clotted blood. Assuming a contralateral tension pneumothorax, a chest tube was placed on the right side while still on the gurney. Prior auscultation of the breath sounds was not possible due to the massive emphysema. An immediate chest film was taken the moment, when the patient was placed on the radiotranslucent trauma room table. Focused assessment with ultrasound in trauma (FAST) revealed neither pericardial effusion nor massive free abdominal fluid. A left side resuscitative thoracotomy was performed for direct cardiac massage and thoracic aortic occlusion. After opening the thorax it could be seen that the chest drain with the connected Heimlich flutter valve had been placed correctly in the pleural space.
Now available developed chest film demonstrated correct tube positioning corresponding to the in situ findings. A subcutaneous emphysema but also a massive tension pneumothorax on the left side was visible, despite the inserted chest tube on scene [figure ]. Further exploration of the thorax showed an insufficient filling of the ventricles, an apical lung rupture and comminuted multiple rib fractures. Under manual cardiac massage, catecholamine adminstration and volume restoration, ventricular flutter occurred and was successfully defibrillated to a sinus rhythm with a blood pressure of 100 mmHg. Initial blood samples revealed hemoglobine concentration of 7,2 mg/dl, thromboplastine time of 31% and base excess of -22,5.
The apical lung rupture on the left side was sutured and 2000 ml of blood, resulting from multiple rip fractures, was drained via a chest tube on the right side. In the further progress celiotomy was performed and abdominal exploration showed no additional relevant findings.
Despite the occluded thoracic aorta, high-dosage catecholamine medication and massive blood transfusion with 20 units of packed red blood cells, the patient remained hemodynamically unstable. Although supportive manual cardiac massage was performed, cardiac output detoriated and intermittent ventricular flutter episodes occurred. Resuscitative efforts were stopped at 13:45. Post mortem computed tomography and autopsy confirmed our major findings and revealed, except a pelvis fracture, no further relevant injuries.