A 64-year-old woman was undergoing follow-up for primary aldosteronism at the Department of Internal Medicine of our hospital. The patient had hypertension, primary aldosteronism, and a goitrous tumor. The patient had last undergone follow-up computed tomography (CT) more than 10 years previously. However, in 2012, follow-up CT incidentally revealed a 7-mm cystic lesion in segment 8 of the liver. At that time, the cyst was considered benign and monitored regularly. Moreover, from 2012 to 2017, the cystic lesion kept increasing in size, reaching 17 mm. In 2017, CT also revealed a 13-mm mural nodule in the cyst wall ; therefore, the patient was referred to our department for a possible malignant tumor. CT revealed that the proximal bile duct showed no abnormalities, such as dilation or stenosis, while the distal bile duct showed slight dilation, indicative of a mucin-producing biliary tumor. In addition, magnetic resonance imaging (T2-weighted imaging) revealed a 17-mm cystic lesion, with an internal signal intensity equivalent to that of water . Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a 13-mm mural nodule in the cystic wall that was enhanced on contrast-enhanced ultrasonography . Laboratory measurements revealed normal level of liver enzymes. The carcinoembryonic antigen level was slightly elevated (5.3 ng/ml), but the levels of carbohydrate antigen 19-9, alpha-fetoprotein, and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II were within the normal ranges.
We suspected a branch-type IPNB and thought that the presence of mural nodule suggested a potential of malignancy. However, the mass was small and diagnosis could not be made without performing biopsy. Several previous studies showed the usefulness of FDG-PET as a diagnostic tool to detect biliary malignancy . However, considering the small tumor size, we considered CT, MRI, and contrast-enhanced ultrasonography were sufficient for the assessment of surgical indication. Thus, we have omitted FDG-PET from preoperative workup at this time.
Accordingly, surgical resection was planned for diagnosis and treatment. Because branch-type IPNB might show horizontal spread through the intrahepatic bile duct, we thought that anatomical resection of the liver was appropriate to obtain a sufficient surgical margin as much as possible. Accordingly, we performed laparoscopic anatomical resection of segment 8 of the liver via the extrahepatic Glissonean pedicle approach . After cystic plate cholecystectomy, the Glissonean pedicle of segment 8 was isolated and clamped by using a vascular clip . After confirming the ischemic demarcation line, the liver parenchyma was dissected along the marked line and the middle and right hepatic veins . During dissection, the Glissonean pedicle of segment 8 was ligated, clipped, and divided.
Macroscopic examination revealed that the cyst was 17 mm and located in S8; the mural nodule was 13 mm and showed mucin production. The bile ducts of segment 8 were visualized in addition to cystic space , suggesting that the cystic tumor communicated directly with the lumen of the adjacent bile duct. The tumor was very close to the bile duct. On microscopic histopathological examination, the resected specimen showed papillary growth and fibrovascular cores in the nodular area, comprising high-grade atypical epithelial cells in the cystic wall. However, papillary projection did not invade the adjacent bile duct lumen. The tumor was composed of papillary and glandular components; the origin of the present tumor might have derived from a peribiliary gland, not the large bile ducts.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor was positive for MUC1, MUC5AC, MUC6, CK7, and CK20 and negative for MUC2. The final pathology was an IPNB, high grade that did not invade the bile duct epithelium. The ductal margin at bile duct resection stump was also negative on histopathological examination.
The patient had an uneventful recovery, with no postoperative complications, and discharged 12 days after surgery. Follow-up abdominal CT after surgery did not reveal any mass, with the patient being asymptomatic 30 months after the surgery.