A thirty eight year old South American man presented to eye casualty with a four-week history of bilateral progressive visual loss. His past ophthalmic history includes laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) five years previously and cosmetic anterior chamber iris implants (NewColorIris®) four years prior to presentation. These operations were performed in Panama. At presentation, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) with glasses was 1/60 (2/60 with pinhole) right eye (OD) and 6/18 (6/9 with pinhole) left eye (OS). Anterior segment examination revealed the presence of blue angle-supported iris implants and bilateral corneal decompensation with stromal oedema and endothelial pigment deposition . Intraocular pressure (IOP) at presentation was 40 mmHg in both eyes and on gonioscopy all angle structures were obscured by the implants. There were no peripheral iridotomies seen. In addition, bilateral lens opacities were present (left eye lens opacities worse than right).
Anterior segment optical coherence tomography confirmed that the iris implants were in direct contact with both the cornea and iris. Imaging also demonstrated fluid in the interface between the LASIK flaps and underlying corneal stroma .
The patient was immediately commenced on two hourly G. dexamethasone 0.1 % preservative-free drops and G. Ganfort® (bimatoprost 0.3 mg/mL and timolol 5.0 mg/mL) once a day to both eyes. He was reviewed three days later, when his BCVA had reduced to counting fingers (CF) at 1 m OD and 6/36 (6/12 with pinhole) OS. IOP was recorded at 18 mmHg in both eyes.
After obtaining fully informed consent, the patient underwent removal of the anterior chamber implants under general anaesthesia. The implants were removed through a temporal corneal tunnel. The anterior chamber was first formed with a cohesive viscoelastic (Healon®). A 2.75 mm corneal incision was then made. Two sphincterotomies were performed to facilitate the folding of the implants. The implants were mobilised, folded and removed via the wound. The wound was then secured with 10/0 Nylon sutures after the removal of the viscoelastic.
One week post-operatively, the BCVA remained at CF at 1 m in both eyes due to persistent corneal decompensation. The IOP in the left eye began to rise despite good compliance with the drops (from 18 mmHg to 28 mmHg). G. apraclonodine 0.5 % was commenced three times per day in the left eye.
The corneal decompensation unfortunately did not improve. With consent, the patient underwent right Descemet stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK) under general anaesthesia one month after his initial presentation. He subsequently underwent left phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation combined with DSEK under general anaesthesia nine months after his original presentation. Both operations were uneventful.
At final follow up six months after his left eye surgery, the patient’s BCVA was 6/12 in the right eye and 6/12 in the left eye. Both anterior chambers were deep and quiet, with clear, well-centred grafts . The IOP was 11 mmHg OD and 14 mmHg OS. On gonioscopy the angle was open on 360° inspection in the right eye. In the left eye there were 270° of broad peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS). Fundus examination showed a healthy optic disc in the right eye with a cup:disc (C:D) ratio of 0.2 and healthy neuroretinal rim. The left eye however did show evidence of neural rim loss mainly superiorly with a C:D ratio of 0.7. The patient was being maintained on G. dexamethasone 0.1 % drops once a day to each eye and G. timolol 0.5 % twice a day to the left eye.