A 29-year-old active Caucasian female with multiple facial cutaneous nodules was diagnosed with NF1 according the clinical criteria of NIH . She presented in the outpatient’s department of our institute complaining about progressive bone aches of the feet and ankles, lower limbs, and low-back pain for the past 5 years that were accompanied by muscle weakness, unstable gait, inability to weight bear, and frequent falls. She had also experienced right femoral shaft fracture before 1 ½ years treated with intramedullary nailing . She did not suffer from any visual or hearing impairment and her medical history did not reveal renal, liver, gastrointestinal, or constitutional symptoms associated with malignancies. In addition, focal or generalized neurological symptoms were not present. Family history affirmed that her mother was diagnosed with NF1 without evidence of bone metabolic and systematic clinical diseases.
Physical examination displayed a female with short stature (1.52 m with body mass index of 19.8 cm/kg2) with small facial neurofibromas located in the temporal, orbital and cheek areas. Few neurofibromas were also observed over her trunk associated with axillary freckles and numerous café-au-lait macules over her back. Neuromuscular and skeletal examinations were unremarkable. Bilateral multiple Lisch nodules were, also, found during ocular examination.
Skeletal survey with plain radiographs demonstrated generalized demineralization of bilateral lower limb bones (, , ) as well as signs of moderate periosteal and endosteal reactions with cortical thickening at the posterior proximal metadiaphyseal region of both tibias (, , ), consistent with recent healed stress fractures . Stress fractures were also detected in the lower third of the fibula bilaterally (, , ). Despite the fact that feet and ankle aches were prominent symptoms, radiographic examination did not show fracture defects. Full spine X-ray in standing position revealed a right thoracic curve of 11 degrees between T5 and T10 vertebrae without any dystrophic signs . Bone densitometry measures by DEXA showed low BMD. Spinal sBMD was 914 mg/cm2, while lumbar spinal and hip T and Z-scores were −2 and −2.2, respectively. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected two low-grade gliotic lesions on the right to putamen and globus pallidus without signs of calcification and ossification or ventricle displacement . CT-scan and ultrasonography (U/S) of the abdomen were normal, while renal U/S revealed solitary kidney with the left renal agenesis . Application of quantitative renal scintigraphy with technetium-99m dimercaptosuccinic acid (99mTc-DMSA) did not detect any disturbances in the structural and functional renal integrity.
Laboratory findings were as follows: Serum calcium was 8.9 mg/dL (reference range between 8.5 and 10.5 mg/dL), serum phosphorous was 1.8 mg/dL (normal: 2.5 and 4.5 mg/dL), serum 25-(OH) Vitamin D, and 1,25-(OH)2 Vitamin D3 were 30.2 ng/ml (normal: 30 and 80 ng/ml) and 55 pg/ml (normal: 16 and 56 pg/ml), respectively, serum alkaline phosphatase and plasma osteocalcin were elevated to the level of 480 iu/L (normal: 35 and 150 iu/L) and 110 ng/ml (normal: 11 and 43 iu/L), respectively. Daily urinary excretion of calcium and phosphorous was 80 mg/24 h (normal range: 0–300 mg/24 h) and 400 nmol/24 h (normal range: 10–40 nmol/24 h), while serum levels PTH, urea, and creatinine were measured within normal limits.
The combination of normal levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, PTH, serum calcium, and the concomitant presence of low serum and increased urine secretion of phosphate, as well as the association with bone defects, led us to the diagnosis of oncogenic HO. Patient was treated with oral phosphorous supplementation (2.0 g/day) and calcitriol (1 mg/day). Although during the assessment of the patient 8 weeks after initiation of the treatment, radiological findings were not altered significantly, clinical symptoms, such as foot and lower limb aches or weakness, were markedly improved. Laboratory findings, also, demonstrated elevation in the serum calcium (9.6 mg/dL) but slight improvement in the levels of serum phosphorus (2.0 mg/dL), while the plasma levels of osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase were not significantly altered.