Fever, cough, hemoptysis, and dyspnea for one week after 30 cycles of gemcitabine instillation as the standard topical chemotherapy for invasive urothelial carcinoma.
A 67-year-old man was referred to the emergency department for the fever, cough, hemoptysis, and dyspnea for one week. The peak temperature was 38 °C. The cough was productive with recurrent sticky bloody sputum. Dyspnea was progressive with dyspnea at rest on admission.
The patient presented with a history of asymptomatic hematuria for 3 mo and a left urothelial mass. The perioperative screening examination and staging indicated a left urothelial obstruction via the ureterography and a urothelial tube had been placed for urine drainage. Laparoscopic radical nephroureterectomy with bladder cuff excision was performed and the pathological examination revealed invasive urothelial carcinoma with infiltration to the muscular layer . Part of the vesical and ureteric epithelial cells exhibited atypical hyperplasia. The patient received the standard topical chemotherapy with gemcitabine via intravesical instillation at a dosage of 1.0 g per 1.75 m2 every 2 wk. During the period of 30 cycles of gemcitabine instillation, no side effects occurred.
The patient’s medical history was significant for a 40 pack-year smoking history.
On examination, the patient exhibited decreased bilateral breath sounds and bilateral fine crackles.
During the admission checkup, a pharyngeal swab was taken and tested by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction for influenza, producing a negative result. Tests for autoimmune-disease antibodies were all negative, with a ferritin level of 270.9 ng/mL (normal range: 11-336.2 ng/mL) and an IgG4 level of 0.764 g/L (normal range: 0.012-2.01 g/L). Other laboratory examination results were as follows: White blood cells 8.08 × 109/L, neutrophils 5.8 × 109/L (72.3%), lymphocytes 1.1 × 109/L (13.8%), C-reactive protein (CRP) 87.80 mg/L (normal range: ≤ 8 mg/L), interleukin-6 24.73 pg/mL (normal range: ≤ 8 pg/mL), creatinine 108.6 µmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 5.07 mmol/L, and interferon-gamma release assay was negative. Blood gas analysis showed hypoxemia with a partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of 66 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of 38 mmHg, and pH of 7.44. During empirical antibiotic treatment, the patient showed no improvement. On the eighth day after admission, his respiratory distress became worse, with PO2 and PCO2 decreasing to 48 mmHg and 34 mmHg, respectively. A recurrent, sticky hemoptysis, cough, and newly emerging fever began over a 3-d period. The peak temperature was 38.4 °C. The CRP level increased to 130 mg/L along with the appearance of respiratory distress and fever, but there was no obvious change in routine blood test results. Before that, all the tests, including sputum and blood smears for Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, mycoplasma, and chlamydia, were negative.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan on admission revealed bilateral emphysema and bullae with patchy infiltration . A CT scan performed 3 mo prior was compared, which showed previously existing bilateral emphysema and bullae .