A 72-year-old man was transferred to our hospital because he was suspected to have ingested insecticide as a suicide attempt. On admission, he was disoriented with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 11 (E3V3M5) and suffered from nausea and vomiting. His blood pressure (BP), heart rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature were 87/45 mmHg, 76 b.p.m., 24 breaths/min, and 36.2°C, respectively. An atrioventricular block was observed by electrocardiogram on admission. Blood gas analysis revealed lactic acidosis with pH 7.422, pCO2 22.4 mmHg, pO2 126 mmHg, HCO3 14.3 mmol/L, lactate 9.0 mmol/L, and anion gap 20.3 mmol/L. Renal replacement therapy was used on days 1–30 because of the progression of metabolic acidosis and acute kidney injury resulting in anuria. The patient was agitated and uncooperative, and required sedation under endotracheal intubation with ventilator support. Therefore, the patient was well oriented and had recovered from circulatory failure and lactic acidosis until day 3. However, the patient's consciousness was disturbed owing to carbon dioxide retention, and artificial ventilation was started on day 11. He became ventilator-dependent status and could not respond to any commands after day 16. Although no remarkable finding was observed in brain computed tomography, magnetic resonance image, or electroencephalogram, a nerve conduction study on day 35 showed a reduction in the amplitudes and conduction velocities of compound muscle and sensory nerve action potentials in the limbs, indicating that his ventilator-dependence and unresponsiveness were secondary to polyneuropathy. The patient's responsiveness to verbal stimuli was recovered on day 44, and artificial ventilation was withdrawn on day 54. Serum toxicological studies and scrupulous interviews revealed that the patient had ingested approximately 100 mL insecticide containing 2% acetamiprid, 97% DEG, and 1% surfactant, which was approximately equivalent to 2.06 mL/kg DEG.
After withdrawn from the ventilator, the patient became fully oriented, could speak frequently, and his muscle weakness of the limbs was improved. However, he complained of dizziness every time he tried to maintain a standing position for a certain amount of time during rehabilitation, although the muscle strength of his legs was adequate. The patient was subjected to a head-up tilt test at 70° on day 70. The test was positive and finished in 2 min after tilting because the subject felt uncomfortable with unmeasurable BP . His coefficient of variation of R-R intervals was 1.04%. Iodine-123-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scintigraphy showed a marked reduction in cardiac 123I-MIBG uptake with heart/mediastinum ratio of 1.49 on early phase and 1.44 on delay phase without scatter correction . These lines of evidence indicated that he suffered from autonomic neuropathy. We thus undertook his rehabilitation in a sitting position or raising his upper body on the bed. The change in his rehabilitation program motivated the patient to undergo rehabilitation. On day 85, he was discharged to rehabilitation hospital with the use of a wheelchair without assistance but could not keep a standing position. Although receiving mental health support from a psychiatric hospital, the patient had recovered from any neurological symptoms within 2 years of exposure to DEG.