We present a female born via Caesarean section at 32 weeks gestational age to a 31-year-old gravida 4 para 3 (now para 4) mother. The pregnancy course was uncomplicated, and no prenatal genetic testing was indicated. Delivery was emergent due to fetal heart rate decelerations, and after delivery a nuchal cord was noted. Birth weight was 1304 g (10–25%ile for gestational age). The patient stayed in the neonatal intensive care unit for 2 months, during which her course was complicated by intraventricular hemorrhage of unknown grade.
Paternity testing was obtained a few months after birth due to court regulations involving the patient’s parents. Samples from the patient, mother, and alleged father were analyzed using PowerPlex© 16 and CS7 in accordance with standard laboratory practices. A total of 21 polymorphic loci were genotyped. Initial results appeared to exclude the alleged father from paternity due to genetic inconsistencies at loci F13A01 and D5S818. However, the mother insisted on the alleged father’s paternity, and additional testing was subsequently performed. As part of the process for resolution of this unique case, the lab tested PowerPlex© ESX, PowerPlex© Fusion, and PowerPlex© LC5 test batteries. HLA testing was performed as well. Of note was the finding that the patient was homozygous for maternal alleles for all loci located on chromosome 6 (see Table ). These findings prompted the laboratory to recommend that the patient receive a medical genetics evaluation for possible maternal uniparental disomy. Table summarizes the genetic irregularities associated with chromosome 6 that led to suspicion of the underlying condition.
The patient presented for a medical genetics consultation at 10 months of age following the updated test results. During the visit, her mother reported that the patient appeared to be developing well and reaching milestones appropriately. No concerning symptoms were discovered on review of systems. Upon physical examination, her weight was less than the 3rd percentile (even when corrected for prematurity) and length was less than the 3rd percentile (10th percentile when corrected for prematurity). Head circumference was at the 25th percentile. The exam was otherwise unremarkable except for small preauricular pits. Her family history was notable for a maternal half-brother with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and grandparents with hypertension.
Due to potential health implications of UPD, chromosomal microarray (CMA) testing was ordered to confirm chromosomal composition. CMA analysis using Agilent 4x180k aCGH+SNP array supported the diagnosis of maternal UPD6 . Of note, after confirming this diagnosis, the additional inconsistency on chromosome 5 was concluded to be an unrelated single inconsistency. A single inconsistency in paternity testing is usually interpreted as an inconsequential mutation, and for the D5S818 locus these single inconsistencies are seen in about 0.17% of paternity cases .
The patient was next seen at 14 months of age to discuss the results of the CMA. At this time, her weight and length were at the 5th percentile (10–25th percentile when corrected for prematurity). She had continued to reach developmental milestones and had no new symptoms or concerning physical exam findings. The family was counseled on the possibility of the patient developing an autosomal recessive condition due to unmasking caused by the UPD. Overall, however, her prognosis is good based on her reassuring first two visits.