A 53-year-old man was admitted with a history of a left- sided weakness and facial drooping 3 h before the arrival. On neurologic examination, left hemiparesis, dysarthria, and facial palsy were noted at the admission (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale [NIHSS]: 11).
A noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scan showed an acute thrombus extending from the right ICA bifurcation into the ipsilateral middle cerebral artery (MCA). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated an infarct involving the right basal ganglia and the insula (Alberta stroke programme early CT score: 7) along with an eccentric hyperintensity extended within the cervical segment of the right ICA wall, suggestive of an intramural hematoma. At the MR angiography, ICA terminus (ICA-T), MCA, and A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery of the right side were absent. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and susceptibility-weighted imaging images showed good collaterals and a large thrombus (27 mm length) on the right ICA-MCA, respectively.
The patient underwent dynamic cerebral angiography for endovascular treatment. The right carotid angiogram showed a severe stenosis of ICA in the cervical segment and an ICA-T occlusion. After three attempts of direct thrombus aspiration (ADAPT technique) at the ICA-T and MCA, a successful revascularization of the vessels was obtained. After 12 h, his NIHSS improved to 3. Three days later, a CTA showed a bilateral ICA dissection with bilateral elongated SPs (35 mm) and a close proximity of ICA with both SPs anteriorly and C1 transverse process posteriorly . The left ICA seemed to be compressed by both EPs and C1 transverse process.
A surgical treatment was planned to free the left ICA. The patient underwent surgical treatment by an extraoral approach. A vertical skin incision of 4 cm in length was performed from the posterior border of the mandibular angle along with the anterior edge of sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM). Once the platysma was opened, the superficial layer of deep cervical fascia was then excided. The head of the submandibular gland was mobilized superiorly while the SCM and posterior digastric muscle belly were retracted posteriorly to expose the SP. The SP was medially directed and the left ICA compressed by both SPs anteriorly and C1 transverse process posteriorly, with a direct impingement by the latter. To decompress the left ICA and at the same time, preserve the main muscular and ligamentous connections of the styloid chain, a portion of the left C1 transverse process was removed using a piezosurgical device .
A temporary paresis of the ipsilateral lower lip lasted 1 month, with a partial remission after 3 months. Overall, the patient reported significant improvement of symptoms with a good esthetics and functional outcome.