A 67-year-old gentleman with undiagnosed dyslipidemia and hypertension presented with difficulty in walking and painless diplopia for 1 week. He noticed the symptoms after waking up from sleep.
He denied any head trauma, headache, nausea, or vomiting. There were no associated sensory, motor, speech, and vertigo symptoms. There was no family history of cerebral vascular accident or ischaemic heart disease. His ocular history was insignificant, with no previous ocular surgery. He had never undergone any medical check-up.
The vital sign showed elevated blood pressure (175/89 mmHg) with normal random blood sugar (6.7 mmol/L). Visual acuity with a pinhole was 6/10 OD (right eye) and 6/15 OS (left eye). Both pupils were round and equal in size (3mm) with a sluggish direct light reflex. The swinging light test showed no relative afferent pupillary defect.
On primary gaze, eyes were central on Hirschberg light reflex test. There was no ptosis, proptosis, or abnormal head posture. Assessment of extraocular muscle motility revealed a horizontal abducting nystagmus in the right eye in right gaze and left eye was unable to adduct beyond the midline on dextroversion. Besides that, there was a limitation in elevation in both eyes, with normal depression. He experienced diplopia only in dextroversion, dextroelevation and dextrodepression. He was unable to converge, hence light-near dissociation could not be elicited. Slit-lamp examination showed cataract in both eyes. Otherwise, his anterior and posterior segments were normal in both eyes.
Moving on to neurological examination, the patient was alert and conscious with a full Glasgow Coma Scale. His speech was clear, coherent, and relevant. Besides the abnormal ocular motility, other cranial nerves were all intact. The sensory and motor function of all 4 limbs were full and of normal tone. Proprioception and plantar reflex were unremarkable. However, he had bilateral appendicular ataxia in both upper and lower limbs worse in the left side. He was frequently falling towards the left side on tandem gait assessment.