A 60-year-old right hand dominant male suffered a blast injury from a stick of dynamite. He was complaining of left hand, forearm, and elbow pain. Patient also endorsed significant numbness and tingling in the left hand. On physical exam, there was significant degloving of the palm and partial amputations of the second and third distal phalanges. Radial pulses were intact, with no evidence of an arterial bleed. A photograph of the hand on presentation can be seen in . Figures and are the initial radiographs of the hand and elbow, respectively, showing the extent of the injury.
The patient went for emergent washout and exploration by hand surgery. He was found to have complete obliteration of the superficial and deep palmar arches. Approximately half of the flexor tendons were intact. The thumb was attached via a single flexor tendon and remnant skin. The median nerve was completely severed at the level of the wrist. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the distal radius and the distal ulna was not performed because of a lack of viable soft tissue coverage secondary to the traumatic injury from the blast effect as determined by the hand surgeon intraoperatively. The amputation level was partially based on the level at which viable soft tissue coverage was available for coverage of bone. The hand surgeon proceeded with a transradial amputation.
Closed reduction of the ulnohumeral joint was performed by the orthopaedic team once hand surgery was done with their part of the procedure. The patient required 90 degrees of flexion at the elbow to maintain reduction due to gross instability. 3D reconstructions from the postreduction computerized tomography (CT) scan are seen in Figures and showing the terrible triad injury of the elbow.
Twelve days after the initial injury, the patient returned to the operating room for definitive fixation. A Kaplan approach was used, which demonstrated rupture of the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) as well as a comminuted radial head fracture. An ulnar nerve decompression was performed because of preoperative ulnar nerve symptoms. A Hotchkiss “over the top” approach was used to expose the coronoid and medial collateral ligament (MCL), which demonstrated a midsubstance disruption. MCL was reconstructed and reattached to the medial epicondyle. The small coronoid tip fragment was excised. A cemented radial head arthroplasty was performed. LCL was then repaired. The remnant radial shaft and ulnar shaft were percutaneously pinned in neutral pronosupination due to instability noted intraoperatively.
The patient was seen in the clinic two weeks postoperatively. Radiograph revealed maintained reduction of the ulnohumeral joint and satisfactory alignment of the radial head replacement. The patient was noted to have a stable arc of motion between 20 and 90 degrees. Five weeks after reconstruction, the distal forearm pin was removed. The patient had a flexion arc of 5-90 degrees, but limited pronosupination. Two months postoperatively, his arc of motion was 5-115 degrees, as seen in Figures and . He was able to attain 50 degrees of pronation and 50 degrees of supination. Radiographs at that time once again show intact hardware, seen in .
The patient was seen again at 12 months postop for prosthetic consult. The patient was fitted for prosthetic devices including the body-controlled hook prosthesis and the myoelectric hand prosthesis. The patient chose the myoelectric device due to the cosmetic appearance and fine motor capabilities. shows the myoelectric device prior to fitting. Figures and show the patient during his prosthetic fitting. We will continue to watch his progress and long-term outcome.