A 76-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital with a liver tumor discovered during a follow-up examination of past colorectal cancer. Comorbidities included hypertension and hyperlipidemia, with no history of drinking or smoking. She had undergone ileocecal resection for cecal cancer (T1N0M0, according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) classification) 5 years and 3 months ago. Physical examination revealed no abnormal findings, except for a lateral rectus incision.
The patient underwent 4 years and 6 months of follow-up surveillance according to the Japanese Society for Cancer of the Colon and Rectum (JSCCR) Guideline for the treatment of colorectal cancer. Serum tumor markers, which are recommended to be examined every 6 months after 3 years, remained within the normal ranges until 4 years and 6 months after ileocecal resection. She had been diagnosed with liver cysts but not liver tumors on an enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan until 5 years after ileocecal resection. However, due to the patient’s fatigue, serum examinations were canceled at 5 years. After persuading her to undergo the final follow-up examination three months later, the serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level increased to 929 U/ml, not observed 9 months earlier (4.5 years after ileocecal resection), with no detectable mass lesions on abdominal ultrasound sonography (AUS). Other parameter levels were within normal ranges in the serum analysis. We suggested that the patient undergo an enhanced CT scan. However, she hesitated to accept our recommendation, expressing disappointment with the results, and declined further examinations and treatment. Two weeks later, she presented herself, and subsequent dynamic enhanced CT detected an ambiguous low-density tumor measuring 2.2 × 2 cm in liver segment 8 , and serum CA19-9 levels further increased to 2023 U/ml. The tumor exhibited delayed enhancement in the inner part and marginal enhancement in all phases . Peripheral intrahepatic bile duct dilatation and regional lymph node swelling were absent. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed low intensity on T1-weighted images , high intensity on T2-weighted images , and high intensity on diffusion-weighted images (DWI) . Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA) MRI showed marginal enhancement in the arterial-to-venous phase and hypointensity in the hepatocellular phase . Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed high integration into the tumor (SUVmax, 5.9; Fig. ) without any suspected metastasis or lymph node metastasis 10 days after tumor detection on CT. Tests for hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibodies were negative. Further gastrointestinal workup, including upper and lower endoscopies, yielded negative results.
The patient was diagnosed with ICC or atypical metastatic tumor from past cecal cancer without lymph node or distant metastases and resection was planned 3 weeks after PET–CT was performed. Liver function in this patient was well-maintained at Child–Pugh A, and the indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 2.0%. The remnant liver volume after right anterior sectionectomy was 675 ml (63.6%). The patient was scheduled to undergo hepatectomy after informed consent was obtained. Despite the initial plan for right anterior sectionectomy, laparotomy revealed swelling of the hilar lymph node, measuring 3 × 1.5 cm . Since pathological examination during surgery revealed lymph node metastasis of adenocarcinoma, she underwent right anterior sectionectomy with hilar lymph node dissection. The operative time was 486 min, and the blood loss was 400 ml.
On gross findings, the liver specimen showed a fibrotic hard, yellowish-white, and solid mass measuring 3.0 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.0 cm with an irregular border and bleeding and necrotic area in inner zone . The tumor lacked a capsule but seemed well-defined from the surrounding normal liver.
Histopathological examination of both the liver tumor and lymph nodes revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas . Although the lymph node specimen showed only adenocarcinoma , the liver tumor showed sarcomatous changes, including severe desmoplastic changes , and pleomorphic or fusiform giant cells . A large part of the tumor was covered by adenocarcinoma, which obscurely transited to a sarcomatous component covering approximately one-fifth of the tumor . The tumor had no histological elements suggesting HCC or bilirubin production. The surrounding liver parenchyma showed a normal liver.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed that the cancer cells were negative for desmin and positive for vimentin . The cancer cells were also positive for cytokeratin-7 (CK7; Fig. a), CK19 , and CA19-9 but negative for CK20 , alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; Fig. e), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, Fig. f). A negative finding for AFP and bilirubin production denied the possibility of CK19 positive HCC, and positive findings for CK7 with negative findings for CK20 and CEA denied the possibility of colorectal cancer metastasis. The final pathological diagnosis was sarcomatous ICC, and the tumor stage was determined to be T2N1M0 stage IVA, based on the 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM staging system. The genomes of the tumors were microsatellite stable (MSS) and immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair gene deficiency (dMMR), including MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2, was proficient in concluding that the tumor was MSS/MMR-proficient (pMMR).
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 15. Serum CA19-9 went down to a normal range after resection. She received a combination of gemcitabine and S-1 for six months as adjuvant therapy. Follow-up diagnostic imaging and blood examination showed lymph node swelling in the mediastinum and elevation of serum CA19-9 (72 U/ml) and CEA (6.7 ng/ml) at 13 months after surgery. The patient was diagnosed with lymph node recurrence and received combination therapy of gemcitabine, cisplatin, and S-1; however, she died 20 months after surgery.