A 26-year-old man was referred to the Orthodontic Clinic of the “A.Gemelli” University hospital in Rome. A clinical examination revealed the presence of a bilateral posterior open bite . The panoramic radiograph showed affection mainly of the lower arch of the Type I PFE variety . Given the similarity to other PFE cases reported in the literature, genetic counseling was offered to the patient and clinical examination (including panoramic X-rays and photos) of all available relatives - mother (II:2) , father (II:3), maternal aunt (II:1) and maternal grandfather (I:1), indicated in Fig. - was conducted at the Dental Clinic of the Fondazione Policlinico “A.Gemelli” IRCCS in Rome, while genetic analysis was carried out at the laboratories of the Institute of Genomic Medicine and the Dental Institute of the Catholic University (UCSC). We also measured the height of the proband and his parents, although there was no evidence of craniofacial and skeletal malformations, in order to test the presence of short stature.
This study was approved by the local Ethics Committee (#UCSC prot. 36,110/10 ID: 565), the procedures followed were in accordance to the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975 and subsequent revisions, and all patients involved provided a written informed consent to participate. Patient’s information were de-identified.
Cells from saliva and oral mucosa were collected from each available family member by buccal swabs for genetic analysis of the PTH1R gene. DNA extraction and purification was carried out using an automatic MagCore Nucleic Acid Extractor. DNA concentration and quality were measured by absorbance at 260 nm and by the ratios of A260 nm/A280 nm. PCR primers were designed using Genamics Expression DNA Sequence Analysis Software and the in Silico-PCR tool provided by the UCSC Genome Browser . Primer sets were designed to include all exons and splice junctions, including a minimum of 50 nucleotides of intron sequence. PCR amplification of the 16 exons was performed using PCR Master Mix (ProMEGA Corporation). PCR cycles consisted of denaturation at 95 °C for 2 min, 38 cycles of 95 °C for 45 s, 55 °C for 45 s, 72 °C for 45 s, and a final elongation at 72 °C for 5 min. PCR products were purified using PCR purification Kit EuroClone ExoStar PCR-plate, directly sequenced on both strands using BigDyeTerminator V3.1 and subsequently resolved on an ABI3130 or ABI3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA). Identified variations were confirmed with a new sequencing reaction. NM_000316.2 was used as reference sequence of PTH1R gene. Identified variations were confirmed in a new PCR and sequencing reaction.
Sequence data were inspected using Sanger Sequencing and Fragment Analysis Software SeqScape of Applied Biosystems (ThermoFisher Scientific). The reference mRNA sequence is NM_000316.3 and variants are indicated starting from the first nucleotide of the coding sequence (+ 1). The reference protein sequence is NP_000307.1 and corresponds to a 593 aminoacid-long receptor with an extracellular N-terminal domain (aa 1–183), 7 transmembrane domains (aa 184–476) and an intracellular C-terminal domain (aa 477–593). PTH1R sequence variants were searched in gene-specific databases, such as the Leiden Open Variation database - LOVD and the NCBI ClinVar database , as well as in general population databases, namely the NCBI Database of Short Genetic Variation – dbSNP and the Genome Aggregation Database - GnomAD .
The proband (III:1) is the only one in the family with a characteristic PFE phenotype: failure of eruption of the first molars, additional posterior teeth involvement, supracrestal position of affected teeth (i.e. the eruption pathway was clear) [, , , ]. If two or more of these clinical and radiographic criteria are found, the probability that PFE is caused by PTH1R variants increases . Clinically, the proband (III:1) shows a severe open bite of the lateral-posterior sectors with associated root anomalies (extremely curved roots), especially in molars . Radiographically , it is possible to observe the symmetrical infraocclusion of the inferior molars and asymmetrical inclusion of the maxillary molars. In the lower arch we observe the infraocclusion of 3.6 and 4.6 with mesio-inclination and total inclusion of both the second and third molars of both mandibular sides. In the upper arch, instead, the infraocclusion affected the second right molar and both third molars . According to the clinical classification of PFE , our patient could be assigned to Type I. On the other hand, all family members were clinically inspected and did not show any clinical sign of PFE. Intraoral pictures and panoramic radiograph of the mother (II:2) are shown in Fig. . The proband is 173 cm tall, while his parents are 158 cm (mother II:2) and 171 cm (father II:3).
A buccal swab was obtained and DNA extracted for all available family members . Sequencing analysis revealed a novel heterozygous nonsense variant (c.505G > T; p.Glu169Ter) in our PFE patient (III:1), resulting in the insertion of a premature stop codon in exon 7 of the PTH1R gene . This variant is classified as pathogenic since it results in the production of a truncated protein, lacking all 7 transmembrane domains and the intracellular C-terminus. The patient’s variant was then searched in the other family members and it was found only in the patient’s mother (II:2). The maternal grandfather (I:1) did not carry the variant, but we could not test the maternal grandmother (I:2).