A previously healthy 37-year-old man presented to an outside hospital with a 2-month history of progressive headache, nausea, and intermittent blurred vision. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed a large suprasellar mass and obstructive hydrocephalus, and the patient was transferred to our facility for further evaluation.
Neurologic examination revealed moderate gait ataxia, but no focal deficits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 4-cm mass with solid and cystic components filling the suprasellar region and causing considerable compression of the optic apparatus . The enhancing solid component originated in the suprasellar cistern, while the large cystic portion of the mass extended into the third ventricle superiorly. The lateral ventricles were enlarged bilaterally with evidence of transependymal flow of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). A diagnosis of craniopharyngioma was considered very likely based on these imaging findings.
Shortly after his initial evaluation, the patient was taken for resection of the mass via a left-sided pterional craniotomy. Initial microdissection revealed two large-caliber vessels ascending between the optic nerves and coursing posteriorly over the chiasm Further investigation demonstrated the vessels to be bilateral infraoptic A1 segments. Care was taken to preserve these vessels, as well as the left-sided hypoplastic A1 branch that was found coursing over the chiasm . Intraoperative frozen section confirmed the diagnosis of craniopharyngioma, adamantinomatous type. Following gross total resection of the lesion, the infraoptic course of the A1s could be easily visualized . The anatomy of the region is illustrated in .
The patient remained neurologically stable throughout his hospitalization. He developed diabetes insipidus postoperatively which was controlled with vasopressin. Routine MR examination on the first postoperative day revealed image-complete resection of the craniopharyngioma, with evidence of resolving hydrocephalus. In the absence of the large mass, the A1 segments could be seen clearly taking their origin near the level of the OphA and passing beneath the optic nerves bilaterally . Because of the relatively strong association of cerebral aneurysms with an infraoptic A1 anomaly, an MR angiogram was obtained . This did not demonstrate the presence of any aneurysms.