Our patient was an 8 years-old male child who belong to a Tharu family in the southern part of eastern Nepal. The child presented to a Paediatrics emergency with complaints of fever, vomiting, and jaundice. Fever was documented and the maximum recorded temperature at home was 101.8 °F. Vomiting was non-bilious, non-projectile, and non-foul smelling. The patient developed decreased appetite and jaundice, which was first noticed by the child’s mother on 3rd day of the fever. There was a history of dark-coloured urine and altered stool colour. There was no recent travel history of the patient and his family members or history of illicit drug use, herbal remedies, or blood transfusions. There is no history of a similar episode of jaundice and prodromal symptoms in the past.
On examination at presentation, the child had a fever of 100.4 °F, was icteric and his vitals were within normal limits. On abdominal examination, there was non-tender hepatomegaly extending about 4 cm below the right costal margin in the midclavicular line, but the enlargement of the spleen was not detected. The cardiovascular system, respiratory system, thyroid, and neurological examinations were normal. He was hemodynamically stable with no clinical evidence of hepatic encephalopathy. Blood investigations were done which showed a deranged liver function test (LFT) and the child was admitted to the Paediatrics ward. In the ward, a LFT was requested along also tests for hepatitis A, B, and C, autoantibodies, ferritin, ceruloplasmin, and α1-antitrypsin.
LFT was deranged but other test results were negative. Then ultrasound of the liver was performed which showed decreased overall echotexture and patent liver vasculature. The gall bladder and the biliary tract were regular and there was no ascites. Due to inconclusive results, a test for hepatitis E was performed and a liver biopsy was planned. Serological test for hepatitis E IgM came out to be positive (407 mg/dl) which confirmed the diagnosis of hepatitis E infection. Tests for viral loads, such as reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was not performed.
The patient was managed symptomatically, and regular monitoring of his vitals (pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and temperature) and urine output was done. Despite symptomatic management, the child’s condition did not improve for which a liver biopsy was performed which showed hepatic cholestasis and inflammation of sinusoidal space as shown in Figure . Symptomatic management was continued, and more vigorous monitoring of the child was done. With time the child’s condition improved and the child was discharged to follow-up in OPD after 2 weeks or when needed .