This patient was a 28-day-old female neonate born at gestational age of 39 weeks with no prenatal diagnosis. The neonate was diagnosed as having interrupted aortic arch (IAA) type B, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), ventricular septal defect (VSD), and atrial septal defect. At 13-days old, this neonate underwent aortic arch reconstruction by extended aortic arch anastomosis, PDA ligation, and VSD patch closure under general anesthesia using 3.5 mm of uncuffed endotracheal tube (ETT). Immediately after the extubation on postoperative day (POD) 2, the patient presented hoarseness and severe stridor that were diagnosed as left recurrent nerve palsy by an otolaryngologist with fiberoptic examination of the vocal cords. Although stridor occurred when asleep, the patient was uneventfully discharged from the intensive care unit (ICU) on POD4 without any respiratory support. On POD 15, elective pericardiocentesis in the operating room (OR) was scheduled for increasing pericardial effusion. Pericardiocentesis was performed uneventfully by epigastric approach under general anesthesia with tracheal intubation. Ten milliliters of serosanguineous fluid was drained, and a silicon drainage tube was left in the pericardium. The tube was connected to a drainage system applying negative pressure of 8 cmH2O. After confirming no pneumothorax or pneumopericardium on chest X-ray , the patient was extubated in the OR and was transferred to the ICU. The clinical course of this patient after admission to the ICU is shown on Fig. .
In the ICU, the patient presented with tachypnea, tachycardia, hypertension, and stridor, and was given acetaminophen for analgesia. The acetaminophen was not effective, and the patient was administered 0.7 mcg ⋅ kg−1 ⋅ hour−1 of dexmedetomidine for analgesia and sedation in the hope of decreasing work of breathing. However, the stridor deteriorated, and retraction developed. In addition, systolic arterial blood pressure (sABP) dropped to 40 mmHg in 15 min although the heart rate was kept over 140 beats per minute. Because of new onset of mandibular breathing in addition to progressive hypotension, we stopped dexmedetomidine infusion and started bag-valve-mask ventilation 2 h after admission to the ICU. After starting positive pressure ventilation, blood pressure slightly increased. A chest X-ray revealed pneumopericardium and pneumomediastinum without pneumothorax . The cause of the hemodynamic deterioration was thought to be developing cardiac tamponade secondary to tension pneumopericardium. Inspection of the drainage system showed no loose connection which could suck air into the pericardium through the drainage tube or obstruction by blood, clots, and bending. In addition, we confirmed that excessive negative pleural pressure was generated because negative pressure alarm in the drainage system sounded and the drainage fluid was about to draw into the pericardial space. As a result, we concluded that (1) inspiratory effort by upper airway stenosis due to the existing left recurrent nerve palsy was exacerbated by glossoptosis induced by sedation and that (2) negative pleural pressure augmented by the increased inspiratory effort caused air suction into pericardium via insertion route of a drainage tube. The patient was intubated and was placed on mechanical ventilation. Eventually, sABP became stable to 70 mmHg, and pneumopericardium decreased on the chest X-ray . Two days later, confirming no remaining pneumopericardium or adverse events, the drainage tube was removed, and the patient was extubated again . The patient used high flow nasal cannula for 1 day in the ICU and spent an additional 6 days in the ward with no recurrent pericardial effusion or pneumopericardium before being discharged from the hospital.