A 38-year-old woman with no relevant medical history was brought into our emergency department for urgent neurological evaluation. Her relatives described a sudden language disturbance which had started less than three hours earlier. They also explained that throughout the previous day she had complained of gradually worsening holocranial headache and had suffered vomiting. There was no prior history of migraine or toxic abuse. On examination, the patient was slightly agitated and showed global aphasia without any other neurological deficit. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) scored 6 points, all of them from the area of language.
A non-contrast cerebral CT scan, performed 185 minutes after the aphasia onset, was normal, revealing no signs of brain ischemia or hemorrhage. A transcranial Doppler study (TCD), immediately carried out after CT scan, showed velocity asymmetry between both middle cerebral arteries (MCA) compatible with a left MCA TIBI 3 pattern. An embolic stroke was suspected and intravenous thrombolysis was proposed. As the time elapsed since the aphasia onset was now over 3 hours, a multimodal brain MR study was made following our center´s protocol. Although the images revealed extensive delayed perfusion in the whole left hemisphere, including the territory of anterior (ACA), MCA and posterior (PCA) cerebral arteries, there were no altered diffusion-weighted images . In the MR-angiography the diameter of left MCA and its main branches was reduced with respect to the contralateral artery . There was no fetal origin of left PCA or flow alteration in terminal internal carotid artery. The existence of a complete hemispheric perfusion/diffusion mismatch, together with the clinical picture including the presence of headache, led to a presumed diagnosis of HaNDL (ICHD-II 7.8). A lumbar puncture was performed with a CSF opening pressure of 18 cmH20, 80 cells/mm3 (95% lymphocytes), 0.50 g/L proteins and 82 mg/dL glucose. These results were congruent with the suspected diagnosis. Invasive procedures or treatments were avoided, and the patient was admitted to a follow-up of her evolution. Eighteen hours later her symptoms had improved, and 2 days after admission her NIHSS scored 0. A new TCD study showed symmetric MCAs velocities.
CSF stains and cultures were normal. Additional tests performed (CBC, ESR, biochemistry, thyroid hormones, vitamin B12 and cold agglutinin) showed normal values. Borreliosis, syphilis, brucellosis, mycoplasma, hepatitis B, C and HIV serologies were negative. Studies of autoimmunity were carried out (ANA, anti-DNA, anti-Ro, anti-LA, anti-RNP, p-ANCA, c-ANCA, IgG and IgM cardiolipin), all yielding negative results. Given the presence of CSF pleocytosis and the patient's clinical evolution, we did not consider a high probability of reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome or primary CNS vasculitis. Moreover, since it has been described that cerebral angiography could worsen neurological deficits in HaNDL, conventional arteriography was not performed.
After 30 days the patient suffered another episode. She came back to the emergency department with worsening headache, which had started 10 hours earlier, accompanied by vomiting without fever or other neurological deficits. The patient recalled the intensity and characteristics of headache as identical to that of the previous event. CT without contrast was again performed, showing no ischemic or hemorrhagic lesions (images not shown). A new TCD study displayed no abnormalities in mean blood flow velocity (MFV) of intracranial arteries. Lumbar puncture was not done because there was no neurological deficit and the suspicion of HaNDL recurrence was high. The episode was resolved with 50 mg of intravenous dexketoprofen. There were no further recurrences. We repeated TCD and multimodal-MRi four months later. These explorations were completely normal, including FLAIR images, with symmetric findings in both hemispheres .