A 29-year-old man was referred to our clinic by the cardiologist to evaluate the likelihood of CNC because of recurrent cardiac myxomas. The patient became a candidate for kidney stone surgery by an urologist 2 years ago. In preoperative evaluation according to the previous history of cardiac myxomas, consultation with the cardiologist was requested. Echocardiography revealed a well-defined mobile mass (21 × 19 mm) in left ventricle (LV) and a tag-like mass in opposite part of tumor in anterior LV wall probably beginning of tumor formation; then, the patient was referred to us. He came to our clinic 8 months later (in last year). In history, he sometimes suffered from self-limited episodes of non-exertional palpitation, dyspnea, weakness, and pallor. He denied any headache, fever, weight loss, or sweating.
He had a history of recurrent atrial myxomas in the past 16 years for which he underwent repeated surgeries. At the age of 11, because of dyspnea, anemia, and fever, he was admitted and echocardiography documented a 32 × 32 mm myxoma in left atrium that for which he was operated in the same year, followed by a repeated surgery after 7 years (at 18 years old) for a recurrence (32 × 20 mm left atrial myxoma). He had history of multiple renal calculi. The patient was not on regular follow-up after second surgery till 2 years ago (at 27 years old).
On examination, the patient was obese [body mass index (BMI): 44 kg/m2]; his cardiac exam showed normal sinus rhythm at 98 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg, and no murmur. The lungs were clear. He had multiple spotty pigmentations (lentigines) (A) on his face and trunk. Multiple cutaneous myxomas (confirmed histologically) (B) and skin tags were seen on his neck, trunk, and abdomen, and there were also several myxomas on the eyebrows, eyelids (C), and nipples. He had frontal skull bossing, a big fleshy nose, and large number of moles on his skin. Acanthosis nigricans (AN) was present on his neck. Cafe´-au-lait (CAL) spots (D) were seen on both forearms and abdomen. Increased acral size was seen. Family history of such illness was negative.
Because of skin lesions and recurrent cardiac myxomas, CNC was suggested, so further evaluation for other associations was performed. Given the hypertension (HTN) and episodic symptoms suspicious of spell, evaluation for pheochromocytoma was performed. Our investigation revealed 24-hour urinary concentration of vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) of 41 mg/day (reference range: up to 4 mg/day), a metanephrine level of 568 μg/day (reference range: up to 350 μg/day), and normetanephrine level of 895 μg/day (reference range: up to 600 μg/day) (these results were repeated in 2 tests on separate days). Evaluation for acromegaly (performed due to the increased acral size, multiple skin tags, and AN) revealed an elevated insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) of 388 ng/ml (reference range: 109-290 ng/ml). The GH level after oral administration of 75 g glucose (0, 30, 60, 90, 120 minutes) was not suppressed below 1 mg/ml. Thus, pheochromocytoma and acromegaly were confirmed biochemically, and dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of sella and abdomen (adrenal glands) (A, B) showed a microadenoma (5.79 × 2.80 mm) in the superior part of left posterior of the pituitary gland and a 26 × 13 mm mass with minimal enhancement in peripheral rim in medial to right adrenal gland. The left adrenal gland was normal in size and signal intensity.
Laboratory tests for Cushing’s syndrome were borderline: baseline (8 am) morning plasma cortisol level of 9.5 μg/dl (reference range: 5-23 μg/dl), 24-hour urinary free cortisol (UFC) level elevated in one test (274 μg/day, reference range: 50-190 μg/day) and normal in another test (121 μg/day), overnight dexamethasone suppression test (DST) result of 2.6 μg/dl (above 1.8 μg/dl), a low-dose DST result of 6.5 μg/dl, a high-dose DST result of 2.7 μg/dl in plasma and 102 μg/day in UFC, and an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level of 15.4 pg/ml (reference range: 7.2-63.0 pg/ml). Prolactin level was slightly high (16.5 ng/ml, reference range: up to 15 ng/ml). Levels of other pituitary hormones were normal. Calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone were all normal.
The echocardiography showed a well-defined and homogenous mass in LV attaching to papillary muscles and a small mass opposite the papillary muscles suspicious of benign cardiac tumor (20 × 18 mm) (C), and he became a candidate for a heart surgery again.
Thyroid gland ultrasound showed multiple cystic nodules with the largest diameter of 3 mm in right lobe. The patient was euthyroid, and breast ultrasound was normal. However, scrotal ultrasound revealed testicular microlithiasis (TM). Brain MRI was performed according to the radiologist recommendation based on the incidental findings noted in pituitary MRI (some T2 hyperintense lesions in frontoparietal subcortical white matter) that revealed multiple ischemic lesions (lacunar infarct, presumably due to emboli from cardiac myxoma) which were seen in right frontoparietal subcortical white matter and bilateral corona radiata, so anticoagulant therapy was started.
Based on clinical and biochemical findings that were in favor of the pheochromocytoma and MRI report on a medial adrenal nodule, finally laparoscopic right adrenalectomy was performed (after preoperative pharmacologic preparation). The adrenal gland was greater than normal macroscopically. Pathology (reported by two pathologists) revealed nodular hyperplasia with one dominant nodule but unexpectedly, the adrenal medulla did not have any lesion (D, E).
Two weeks after surgery, the patient’s symptoms and signs (HTN and tachycardia) were resolved, and 24-hour urinary concentration of VMA (3.9 mg/day, reference range: up to 4 mg/day), metanephrine (47.8 μg/day, reference range: up to 350 μg/day), and normetanephrine (551 μg/day, reference range: up to 600 μg/day) were normalized. This discrepancy between biochemistry and pathology remains questionable.
The patient refused transsphenoidal surgery (TSS) for pituitary microadenoma and preferred medical treatment [somatostatin analogues (SSA)] to decide on surgery later. He was referred to the cardiac surgery clinic in order for the cardiac surgeon to decide on cardiac myxoma surgery. Echocardiography was performed on his first-degree family, of whom none had cardiac myxoma.
Unfortunately, despite frequent emphasis by the medical team, the patient did not have regular follow-ups. He came to our clinic one year after the unilateral adrenalectomy, while he was generally good and did not mention any problem. Blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg and pulse rate was 78 bpm. 24-hour urinary fractionated metanephrines, 24-hour UFC, and overnight DST were normal. IGF1 level was 280 ng/ml (reference range: 109-290 ng/ml) and GH level was suppressed below 1 mg/ml after oral administration of 75 g glucose. He did not accept the risk of cardiac re-surgery.
For all lab tests and adrenalectomy, informed consent was taken from the patient.