A 56-year-old woman presented with lower extremities weakness and progressive cognitive decline for four months. Initial laboratory studies revealed a mild anemia (hemoglobin level of 90 g/L). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (44 mm/h) and serum C-reactive protein levels (50.71 mg/L) as well as serum lactic dehydrogenase (867 U/L) were markedly elevated. The investigation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed no pleocytosis but a slightly elevated protein concentration (0.97 g/L). Brain MRI demonstrated multiple lesions with hypointensities on T1-weighted images and hyperintensities on T2-weighted images and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) in the bilateral periventricular areas, centrum semiovale and frontal lobes. She was then transferred to our hospital for further management.
On admission, neurological examination showed cognitive deficits in orientation, memory, calculation and language with a Mini-Mental State Exam score of 8/30 points. The muscle force was graded as 4/normally 5 for bilateral lower extremities with positive left Babinski sign.
While the serologic tests of treponemapallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA) and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) IgG for syphilis were positive, the same tests in CSF were nonreactive plus the absence of relevant clinical manifestation, suggesting the diagnosis of neuro-syphilis unwarranted. The investigation of chemistry, cytology--particularly for neoplastic and atypical cells and other screening tests for bacteria, fungi and viruses in CSF, were negative. The serologic assay for human immunodeficiency virus was negative.
T1-weighted MRI demonstrated a hypointense area with focal hyperintensity in the left temporal lobe, suggesting newly patchy hemorrhage within the lesion. T2-weighted MRI and FLAIR showed no changes compared with the previous images (not shown). Part of lesions showed irregular spotty enhancement after contrast, together with the enhancement of adjacent leptomeninges. T2*-weighted MRI demonstrated multiple hypointensities in the right parietal lobe, bilateral basal ganglia and cerebellum , indicating hemosiderin depositions, however, the locations were not compatible with the hemorrhagic lesions visualized on T1-weighted images. Given the discrepancy between the lesions on T1-weighted and T2*-weighted MRI, silent hemorrhage caused by malignancy was suspected. The whole body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scanning revealed multiple hypermetabolic foci in pelvic cavity and the spleen, indicating malignant lymphoma. Therefore, computed tomography-guided aspiration biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass was performed. Microscopic findings showed a diffuse growth pattern of atypical lymphoid cells with CD20 positive on immunohistochemistry, consistent with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. The patient declined chemo-radiotherapy, and died of tumor progression four months later.