A 32-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital complaining about a 3-year history of intermittent dry cough and a 2-year history of diffuse reddish-brown maculopapules. In the meantime, he experienced a gradual increase in physical weakness and malaise over the past 2 mo.
The patient developed a recurrent dry cough 3 years ago, which broke out in day and night. However, he denied obvious sputum, fever, shortness of breath, or joint pain. He had been treated with several kinds of empirical antibiotics with no improvement. Two years ago, a gradually increased scattered reddish and brown maculopapules began to appear on his face, neck, and trunk without itch, ecdysis or blisters. There were no symptoms on limbs. Although the patient had visited several dermatologists, the diagnosis remained vague, and effective treatment was not obtained. Two months ago, he began to feel a gradually progressed physical weakness and malaise.
The patient was born, raised, and has been living in Shanghai. He was allergic to sulfonamides and aspirin. He underwent appendectomy because of appendicitis 2 years ago. Otherwise, he denied infections, bad habits, or any family history.
On physical examination, he was not feverish with oxygen saturation 98% in room air. Innumerable symmetric brownish-red macules, papules and plaques about 0.2-1 centimeters in diameter were distributed on his face, neck, chest, abdomen and back . Besides, there were palpable lymph nodes without tenderness in cervical, axillary and inguinal regions.
On laboratory tests, he had normocytic anemia with a hemoglobin of 11.6 mg/dL (reference range 13.1-17.2 mg/dL) and thrombocytosis with a platelet count of 341 × 109/L (reference range 85-303 × 109/L). Total serum protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) elevated to 102 g/L (reference range 65-85 g/L), 112 mm/h (reference range 0-15 mm/h), and 91.6 mg/L (reference range < 10 mg/L) respectively, while serum albumin decreased to 23 g/L (reference range 35-55 g/L). Polyclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) elevated with IgG 5350 mg/dL (reference range 751-1560 mg/dL), IgA 572 mg/dL (reference range 82-453 mg/dL), IgE 430.0 IU/mL (reference range 5.0-165.3 IU/mL), and IgG4 1590 mg/dL (reference range 3-200 mg/dL). Blood and urine immunofixation electrophoresis showed no abnormal monoclonal bands. Serum cytokine assay revealed the levels of multiple cytokines elevated with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 780.42 pg/mL (reference range 0-142 pg/mL), IL-6 39.3 pg/mL (reference range < 3.4 pg/mL), IL-8 75.6 pg/mL (reference range < 62 pg/mL), soluble IL-2 receptor 1692.0 U/mL (reference range 223-710 U/mL) and tumor necrosis factor > 24.1 pg/mL (reference range < 8.1 pg/mL). Other laboratory values including tests for infections and other immunological parameters were unremarkable.
The chest computed tomography (CT) conducted 3 years ago revealed that small patchy shadows with ground-glass nodules scattered in bilateral lobes with mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The chest CT has been repeated several times in the recent 2 years, which showed gradually progressed pulmonary lesions accompanied with new developed cysts in upper lobes, and lymphadenopathy developed in the mediastinum, hilum, and bilateral axillary fossa . Ultrasonography revealed that the largest lymph node was located in the right groin with the diameter of 2.2 cm × 1.2 cm. Positron emission tomography-CT showed no neoplastic lesions except for enlarged lymph nodes in multiple sites, hepatosplenomegaly, and diffuse lesions of bilateral pulmonary parenchyma. Pulmonary function was basically normal. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy found no new organisms or bleeding, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid analysis revealed no evidence of infection or malignancy.
A thoracotomy biopsy of the middle lobe of right lung revealed fibrous tissue hyperplasia accompanied by infiltration of a few lymphocytes and plasma cells . The immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the infiltrated plasma cells were positive for both κ and λ chains without light chain restriction. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy found no evidence of neoplastic or preneoplastic diseases.
Furthermore, biopsies of the abdominal papules and the right inguinal lymph node by surgical resection were performed. Histopathology of the skin lesions showed that the epidermis was basically normal; lymphoid follicular-like hyperplasia was observed in the superficial and deep layers of the dermis, and medium-density plasma cells and lymphocytes infiltrated around the blood vessels and glands with no atypia . Histopathology of the lymph node showed that lymphoid reactive hyperplasia mainly occurred in the paracortical region, and plasma cells infiltrated mainly in the medulla region; the structure of the lymph node was intact, but no transparent small angiogenesis was found . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the skin and lymph node revealed that the number of IgG, IgM, κ and λ staining-positive plasma cells were comparable, with few IgG4-positive plasma cells. There was no light chain restriction. The test of Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) in situ hybridization and HHV-8 by the IHC staining of latency-associated nuclear antigen 1 in the lymph node specimen was negative. Several experienced pathologists in our hospital analyzed the histopathology of the lung, skin, and lymph node, a diagnosis of the plasma cell type of CD was finally considered.