The patient is a 22-year-old male presented with a painless scrotal lump in the left scrotum over a 2-month period. When the patient was admitted to hospital, physical examination revealed a large and palpable scrotum mass in the left side of the epididymis without enlarged lymph nodes. Laboratory studies such as blood counts, lactate dehydrogenase, beta-HCG, and alpha-fetoprotein were normal and did not reveal abnormalities. Ultrasound of the scrotum were performed and revealed a hypoechoic mass measured about 3 cm × 4 cm in diameter with anechoic areas. On computer tomography, a solid mass was found in the left epididymis with regional extension to the testis. There were low density areas surrounding the mass . A conventional radiographic bone and chest survey also yielded no abnormal findings. Computed tomographic scan of abdomen revealed no evidence of metastasis in local and distant organs. It was diagnosed as epididymal neoplasm and hydrocele. The patient underwent surgical exploration. On operation, bloody hydrocele was seen and a solid rough mass was invaded into the testis. Intraoperative frozen section was diagnosed as a malignant tumor and the patient underwent a radical inguinal orchidectomy. The postoperative course was smooth. Specimen was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Microscopically, the tumor tissue disclosed a malignant schwannoma with rhabdomyosarcomatous features. Rhabdomyoblasts with dense eosinophilic cytoplasm and cytoplasmic cross striations were scattered through the stroma, which was made up of pleomorphic spindle cells . The immunohistochemistry was positive for S-100 protein, NF, CD68, Ki67, MYOD1 and Desmin, leading to the diagnosis of MTT . Histological and immunohistochemical findings supported the diagnosis of malignant triton tumor.
He was treated with four cycles of multi-agent systemic chemotherapy with ifosfamide, vincristine, carboplatin, epirubicin regimen and received 3600 cGy of radiotherapy to the primary site and groin area. The patient had evidence of multi-organ metastasis on clinical or imaging examination during 14th months’ follow-up. Although three-stage and multiple agents chemotherapy were performed, unfortunately, partial response was achieved and the patient died of 12 months later.