An 80-year-old woman with a history of gastroesophageal reflux and hypertension presented to the emergency department (ED) with sudden onset, severe, sharp epigastric pain with radiation to her back. The pain began after an episode of emesis immediately following the ingestion of polyethylene glycol approximately 11 hours prior to arrival. Upon her presentation to the ED, the patient was in apparent distress secondary to pain; however, her vital signs were normal with a temperature of 36.7° Celsius (C), blood pressure of 142/65 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 80 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. Physical examination revealed only mild epigastric tenderness. No subcutaneous emphysema was present in the tissue overlying the neck or chest. Due to the patient’s acute distress and comorbidities, a broad differential was considered for evaluation of critical etiologies of her clinical presentation including aortic dissection, bowel perforation, esophageal rupture, acute coronary syndrome, mediastinitis, bowel obstruction, and pancreatitis.
A chest radiograph (CXR) showed a large hiatal hernia with trace bilateral pleural effusions and displacement of the gastric bubble to the right. Computed tomography (CT) with contrast of the chest/abdomen/pelvis ( and ) demonstrated a large hiatal hernia with most of the stomach in the chest, associated volvulus, bilateral pleural effusions, right greater than left, and a complex, partially fluid-filled collection along the posterior aspect of the hiatal hernia just above the diaphragm. Laboratory studies revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis with 83.7 % neutrophils and a white cell count of 16.4 × 109 per liter (L) (4.8–10.8 × 109/L) and elevated lactic acid of 2.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.5–2.2 mmol/L). The patient was given 3.375 g of piperacillin/tazobactam intravenously for coverage of gastrointestinal flora, and transfer to a tertiary care facility was initiated. While in the ED, the patient developed room air hypoxia, which resolved with three liters of oxygen therapy via nasal cannula.
After transfer, a contrast esophagram was performed and showed a perforation near the gastroesophageal junction. The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy, which confirmed the presence of an esophageal rupture near the squamocolumnar junction and revealed the presence of a giant hiatal hernia with an associated upside-down stomach. Surgical repair of the esophageal perforation and gastropexy was performed. The patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit for a total of five days during which she had an episode of atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response that resolved after metoprolol and diltiazem.
On day five of her hospitalization, she was transferred to a cardiac telemetry unit after being weaned off supplemental oxygen. She was continued on intravenous (IV) fluconazole 400 milligrams (mg) daily, piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 g every eight hours, and vancomycin dosed and monitored by pharmacy for a total of 14 days. Multiple esophagrams were performed, which revealed a persistent leak from the esophagus; however; this resolved spontaneously with monitoring throughout the remainder of the hospital course. The patient was ultimately discharged on hospital day 18 with continued antibiotic therapy on amoxicillin-potassium clavulanate 600–42.9 mg twice daily for seven days. After discharge, the patient was seen for multiple follow-up visits, with the last follow-up occurring approximately 16 months after her original presentation.