A 66-year-old, right-handed, Chinese man came to the Neurology Unit of a local hospital in Guangzhou, China, for evaluation of a 5-day history of right-side weakness, right upper limb stiffness, and unsteady gait. An initial diagnosis of ischemic stroke was done following a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), showing a cortical hyperintensity in the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with a mild decrease in apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in the left occipital lobe (–). The patient received treatment with lipid-lowering and anti-platelet agents.
The patient did not experience any motor improvement and developed rapidly progressive cognitive decline with dull affect, apathy, mutism with spontaneous speech severely decreased, and social withdrawal. A neurological examination 15 days later showed signs of parkinsonism with hypomimia, muscle rigidity (mostly on the right upper limb), stooped posture, and postural instability with moderate retropulsion. The patient could not walk without assistance owing to parkinsonism and gait ataxia. There was no fever, sleep disorder, obstructive apnea, gaze palsy, seizures, dysphagia, dysarthria, or upper motor neuron signs. No myoclonus or other movement disorders were observed.
A review of the initial MRI was consistent with “cortical ribboning” regarded as a typical imaging feature of sCJD (–). In a second MRI carried out 2 weeks later, the cortical hyperintensities in DWI became more extensive, involving the left frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes with mild cortical restriction in the right hemisphere (,), along with decreased ADC over the corresponding cortex (,). The EEG showed periodic sharp wave complexes with triphasic waves (TWs), mostly in the occipital lobes with diffuse background slowing . Lumbar puncture (LP) showed normal CSF opening pressure (95 mmH2O), normal cell count, and mildly elevated protein level (55.7 mg/dL), and an analysis for 14–3-3 protein was positive (Kindstar Global, Beijing, China). Genetic sequencing for the PRNP gene by PCR and Sanger sequencing were negative (Guangzhou Kingmed Center for Clinical Laboratory, Guangzhou, China). We did not carry out the RT-QuIC test. Determination of oligoclonal bands (OCBs) showed an identical pattern in the serum and CSF (type 4 OCB pattern), indicating a possible disruption of the blood–brain barrier. Interestingly, the results of tissue-based assays (TBAs) showed the presence of an uncertain neuronal surface antibody. Compared with a positive control (titer 1:1) , no immunofluorescence was detected in serum ; however, compared with a positive control in the CSF (titer 1:50) , an immunofluorescence signal was also detected in the CSF (titer 1:50) .
Then, cell-based assays (CBAs) were performed showing IgLON5 antibodies in the serum (titer 1:300) and the CSF (titer 1:100) , while other autoantibodies remained negative. The Abs against the following antigens were tested: NMDAR, AMPA1, AMPA2, LGI1, CASPR2, GABAB, DPPX, GlyR1, DRD2, GAD65, mGluR5, mGluR1, neurexin-3α, GABAA, KLHL11, AChR, AQP4, MOG, GFAP, titin, recoverin, PKCγ, Zic4, Tr (DNER), SOX1, Ma2, Ma1, amphiphysin, CV2, Ri, Yo, and Hu (Methods: CBA and immunoblotting.) Additionally, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing showed that our patient had haplotypes DQB1*0501 and DRB1*1001, which are strongly associated with anti-IgLON5 disease .
The clinical presentation, MRI, EEG, and CSF results were consistent with “probable” sCJD according to the 2017 diagnostic criteria . However, the presence of an anti-IgLON5 Abs prompts us to consider immunosuppressive therapy. However, no signs of focal infection or systemic inflammation were observed in routine hematic, CSF, and urine tests and x-ray images. We initiated treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) (0.4 g/kg per day for 5 consecutive days) simultaneously with prednisolone 500 mg I.V. per day for 5 days, followed by daily prednisone 60 mg orally. However, the symptoms did not improve in the following 10 days during hospitalization. We then administered cyclophosphamide (600 mg I.V. once, followed by a maintaining oral dose of 100 mg per day) before he was discharged. Unfortunately, the patient died suddenly 3 days after being discharged home. No specific reason for his death was registered. An autopsy was not authorized by the patient’s family due to cultural reasons.