A 73-y-old Caucasian male was admitted to our tertiary care hospital to undergo elective angioplasty due to peripheral artery disease Fontaine’s stage IV. Diabetic and hypertensive nephropathy led to CK5D, i.e. chronic dialysis. He had been undergoing peritoneal dialysis treatment for two years. His past medical history included Insulin-dependent Diabetes mellitus type II and heart failure New York Heart Association stage III due to severe ischemic cardiomyopathy. He was status post aortocoronary bypass operation and had a cardioverter-defibrillator due to recurrent monomorphic ventricular tachycardia.
On admission the patient complained about fatigue and stupor. His wife reported that that his agitated and at times hostile temper had recently completely subsided. Relieved at first, the wife of the patient was than worried as this hallmark of his character had remained constant since they met more than 50 years ago. A thorough history revealed this new calm and at times sleepy state coincided with the start of levetiracetam treatment. The patient received a dose of 500 mg bid due to suspected partial seizures with secondary generalization eight weeks to the recent admission. A neurological workup at that time showed however no pathological findings. Due to the severe fatigue our patient stumbled and fractured his metatarsal bone of his left digitus V a week prior to admission.
On admission physical examination showed an obese (height: 160 cm, weight 93 kg, BMI 36.3 kg/m2) patient with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 10 and with ulcerations of both legs. Neither popliteal, tibial nor peroneal pulses were palpable. His blood pressure was 135/75 mmHg, heart rate 65 bpm. He presented with anemia (hemoglobin of 8.7 [13.5-17.5] g/dl) and an elevated c-reactive protein of 46 [<8] mg/l. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty could be performed with good result and without complication. As fatigue and drowsiness did not improve over time, we assumed an overdosing of the antiepileptic drug levetiracetam with typical symptoms of overdose, particularly as vital signs, especially blood pressure, were normal and evidence of cardiac instability were missing. Twentyfour hours after discontinuation of levetiracetam we found levetiracetam-levels still at about 29.8 mg/l (therapeutic range: 12 – 46 mg/l). Five days after discontinuation the level was at 2 mg/l. Unfortunately there were neither blood samples at the time of trauma, nor between discontinuation of the drug and day 5 after discontinuation available, which would have allowed a stronger conclusion in terms of causality. Clinically, however fatigue and stupor had disappeared five days after discontinuation of the levetiracepam. In order to establish the assumed accumulation/overdose of levetiracetam we re-exposed the patient to the drug. After discontinuing levetiracetam for 7 days, a single dose of 500 mg levetiracetam was administered after end of automated peritoneal dialysis (APD). Blood was taken before ingestion and at regular intervals until 24 hours after ingestion as well as peritoneal fluid before ingestion and 7.5 h and 20 h after ingestion in order to study pharmacokinetics in peritoneal dialysis . Samples were centrifuged at 2800xg for 5 min at 4°C and stored at −80°C until analysis. Levetiracetam levels were measured using an HPLC method. In brief, after a liquid-liquid extraction of 300 μl serum to eliminate lipophile components the samples were applied to a reversed phase HPLC with UV detection. The detection limit of levetiracetam was 1 mg/l and the linearity of the method was from 0–100 mg/l. Intra-assay CV was 3.1% (pool serum with 15 mg/l; n = 10), Inter-assay precision (n = 8) was 7.2% (15 mg/l), and 6% (30 mg/l), respectively. Levetiracetam half life after a single oral dose of 500 mg was found to be 18.4 hours, which is more than doubled as compared to patients with normal renal function (half life 7 hours). Serum levels and peritoneal fluid levels were nearly equivalent at two different time period.