The patient was a 39-year-old man with Osler disease, who had previously been diagnosed with multiple FNH and who had been followed for 8 years. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) at the initial visit revealed that the common and proper hepatic artery was markedly dilated and tortuous, and the liver parenchyma was strongly enhanced from the arterial phase and was very heterogeneous due to small telangiectasias . Twelve masses of up to 78 mm in diameter were located in both lobes of the liver, and each mass showed mild enhancement with a delayed contrast effect . Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (Gd-EOB–MRI) showed similar findings to CT, with all lesions enhanced in the hepatocellular phase. On imaging obtained during 8 years of follow-up, a segment 6 (S6) lesion was the only lesion to increase in size, with the tumor diameter gradually increasing from 30 to 50 mm . On CT, the tumor growth was unclear due to extensive shunt formation, and size changes could not be confirmed. The shunt proliferation was almost no change. Percutaneous liver puncture was not performed to decide the indications for hepatectomy, because a negative biopsy result would not prove the absence of malignancy in the tumor mass, besides, there the procedure was associated with a certain risk of hemorrhage due to Osler disease. We, therefore, decided to perform liver resection as total biopsy for the growing tumor, due to the possibility that malignant components were present in the growing tumor lesion. Due to the development of intrahepatic arteriovenous shunt, we opted to perform partial resection of S6 by laparotomy to secure the patient’s safety.
When the patient was hospitalized for surgery, he had not taken any medications or nutritional supplements. He had no relevant past medical history or family history, and tests for hepatitis B and C were negative. On physical examination, there were no remarkable findings. Laboratory tests on admission showed a few abnormal results. As follows: γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 200 U/L; alkaline phosphatase,132 U/L; and indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICG-R15), 30%. Since it was assumed that the increase of ICG-R15 may have been influenced by the presence of arteriovenous shunts in liver, asialoglycoprotein receptor imaging was performed. Radio isotope (RI) accumulation in the liver was reduced, at 0.865 (normal range 0.924–0.959), indicating mild liver damage. Tumor markers were normal at all preoperative stage. Patients with Osler disease often show shunt formation in other organs, but in this case, there were no obvious arteriovenous shunts on echocardiography, brain MRI, and pulmonary–vascular scintigraphy. Fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG–PET) showed no abnormal uptake in the liver or other organs.
In surgical findings, we recognized many telangiectasia on the surface of liver. We performed liver resection using the Pringle maneuver procedure; however, bleeding from the hepatic vein was conspicuous during surgery, possibly because the venous pressure remained high due to telangiectasia. For veins of ≤ 7 mm during hepatectomy, a vessel sealing device was used. Surgery proceeded without any major problems; the operative time was 147 min and the total bleeding volume was 220 ml. Observation of the resected specimen showed that the tumor was yellow to brown with a well-defined border . A pathological examination revealed no obvious malignancy. The final diagnosis was FNH. In general, the portal region consists of three elements: the artery, portal vein and bile duct. However, in the portal region of this case, where the tumor was located, these components were absent and scattered small blood vessels were observed .
There were no complications in the time from surgery until the first discharge from our hospital. In blood tests at 7 days after surgery, the CRP level had returned to normal but the D-dimer level remained mild high. Contrast-enhanced CT was performed for the purpose of evaluating hepatic blood flow and excluding venous thrombosis. We confirmed that the hepatic blood flow was normal and that there was no venous thrombosis. Hence, we considered that the increase in D-dimer was a postoperative change. The patient was discharged 14 days after surgery. At an outpatient visit 7 days after discharge, the D-dimer level had returned to normal and there was no increase in the inflammatory response.
At 2 months after discharge, the patient was transferred to our hospital due to sudden abdominal pain in the right hypochondrium with severe tenderness. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 143/72 mmHg, his pulse was 73 beats/min, and he showed diaphoresis. His laboratory test data showed no marked changes from his last blood test data . Since he had previously undergone laparotomy, contrast-enhanced CT was performed to investigate adhesive ileus or strangulation ileus. CT showed the extravasation of contrast medium from the hepatic S6 dissection surface, and the hematoma extended to the pelvic floor . During CT, the patient developed tachycardia and shock, and emergency interventional radiology (IVR) was immediately performed. IVR revealed the leakage of the contrast medium from A6 branch was observed . Vascular embolization was performed using Lipiodol from the root of A6, and embolization by Lipiodol at the bleeding site was confirmed by CT. After embolization, there were no major problems, and the patient was discharged on the 9th day after treatment. The patient spends common day life for 1 year after the discharge without major complications.