An 11-year-old boy was admitted to Shijiazhuang Ping’an Hospital, Hebei Medical University, because of aggravated walking instability and slurring of speech. He had been hospitalized in a local hospital for 10 days due to neonatal hyperbilirubinemia and hepatosplenomegaly at birth. He was then hospitalized to treat liver and spleen enlargement and thrombocytopenia at the age of four months but failed to recover. He was prone to nasal bleeding, which was difficult to stop.
A physical examination revealed that he could not touch the ground with his heel when squatting and he found it difficult to rise from a squat. He had vertical gaze palsy and limited up and down movement of both eyes. The neurological examination showed that the dysdiadochokinesia, VSGP, plus the finger-nose test and the eyes closed difficult to stand sign was positive. The blood examination showed elevated levels of serum aspartate aminotransferase (50.5U/L) and triglycerides (2.01mmol/L). A brain MRI showed slightly widened ventricles and sulcus . A chest radiograph showed slightly more texture than is normal in both lungs. An abdominal ultrasound showed that the spleen was 4.8 cm thick (standard range: 7–12 years old < 4.0 cm) and 15.4 cm long (standard range: 8–12 years old < 11.5 cm) . The anteroposterior diameter of the right lobe of the liver was 9.9 cm, whilst the anteroposterior diameter of the left lobe was 8.3 cm (standard range: 9–12 years old < 9.1 cm) . When the clinical manifestations and medical history were combined, the child was suspected of having NPD. Foamy cells were observed on the bone marrow smears. These cells were large, round or oval in shape and had abundant cytoplasm. The nuclei were located in the center or to one side of the cells. The cytoplasm was filled with vacuoles and erythrophagocytosis was observed on the smear .
Next-generation sequencing revealed two mutation sites in the NPC1 gene of the proband. One chromosome had the c.3452 C > T (p. Ala1151Val) missense mutation in exon 22, inherited from his mother and not previously reported. The other chromosome had the c.3557G > A (p. Arg1186His) mutation in exon 23, inherited from his father . Based on the above findings, the patient was confirmed as having NPC and was treated with Miglustat to reduce the accumulation of neurotoxicity. The treatment was also used to stabilize and improve neurological symptoms and prevent or delay disease progression. Since the diagnosis, the patient has had regular bimonthly follow-ups with normal blood counts and liver and kidney function results, but hepatosplenomegaly persisted.