Painless jaundice and emaciation for the past 2 mo.
A 36-year-old man was transferred to the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University with a recent history of painless jaundice, elevated blood glucose and a weight loss of approximately 10 kg for the past 2 mo with no complaints of diarrhea or vomiting.
The patient’s past medical and surgical histories were nonsignificant. He was previously diagnosed with autoimmune pancreatitis in another institution and had no response to steroid treatment.
He had a 10 pack-year history of smoking. He denied any other specific personal or family history of other diseases.
The patient appeared cachexic and was mildly jaundiced. A nontender epigastric mass of approximately 5 cm was palpable, with a soft nondistended abdomen and normal bowel sounds.
Laboratory tests showed a normal white blood cell count (9.32 × 10E9 cells/L), mild anemia (118 g/L) and an elevated platelet count (476 × 10E9 cells/L). Liver function tests showed elevated transaminases (ALT 97 U/L and AST 46 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (377 U/L), gamma-GT (337 U/L), total bilirubin (107.6 µmol/L), direct bilirubin (77.64 µmol/L), indirect bilirubin (30.2 µmol/L) and a mild decrease in albumin (31.8 g/L). Autoimmune antibodies such as ANA and rheumatoid factor were negative, and IgG4 (0.333 g/L), amylase and lipase levels were normal; the tumor marker panel showed elevated levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) (475.6 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 125 (77.1 U/mL) but normal serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (2.2 µg/L) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (15.94 U/mL). Markers for hepatitis B and C and human immunodeficiency virus serology were negative.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the upper abdomen showed a diffusely enlarged pancreas, appearing “sausage-shaped”, with loss of pancreatic lobular structure; the lesion was isointense to hypointense on the T1-weighted image, isointense to hyperintense on the T2-weighted image, and had a mixed signal on DWI, with central necrosis. In addition, there was a distinct hyperintense rim surrounding the mass, which demonstrated delayed enhancement and a capsule appearance. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed upstream ductal dilation secondary to strictures of the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct, which were not visible .
A percutaneous pancreatic biopsy was performed under ultrasound guidance.
Histopathological analysis revealed heteromorphic neoplastic cells arranged in glandular, nested or striped patterns. Immunohistochemistry showed tumor cell positivity for HepPar1 (a hepatocyte-specific antigen), polyclonal CEA and CK19 . The morphological and immunohistochemistry features were suggestive of hepatoid carcinoma of the pancreas.