A 45-year-old female, with no significant past medical history, presented with features of refractory right heart failure. Jugular venous pressure (JVP) was 18 cm with prominent Y descent. Kussmauls sign, increase in JVP or failure to fall on deep inspiration, was present. An early diastolic sound characteristic of pericardial knock was best heard at left sternal border. Her baseline biochemistry was normal with no evidence of hepatic or renal dysfunction. Chest X-ray showed cardio-thoracic ratio of 0.5 with radiopaque density suggestive of calcium around cardiac silhouette which was better appreciated on fluoroscopy . Transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiogram showed mildly dilated atria with a near normal left ventricular systolic function, normal ventricular wall thickness, and hyperechoic shadow surrounding the ventricle suggestive of thickened pericardium. Septal bounce, exaggerated respiratory variation in both tricuspid and mitral inflow velocities (e) and annulus reversus (medial e′ > lateral e′) were other features of chronic constrictive pericarditis (CCP) that were demonstrated in our patient (, and ). Right heart catheterization revealed elevated and equalization of diastolic pressure, classical dip and plateau pattern with discordance of right and left ventricular systolic pressures during respiration. Pulmonary artery pressures were 32/10 (m22) mmHg. Epicardial coronaries were normal on angiogram with no external compression or pinching detected.
Subsequent imaging with non-contrast computed tomography (CT) chest detected the presence of a thickened, extensive, asymmetric, and circumferential egg-shell like calcific pericardium encasing the heart . A volume-rendered CT precisely delineated the extent of calcification. A pericardiectomy through median sternotomy approach was performed. However, densely adherent pericardium over posterior surface was not resected. Histopathology revealed moderate fibrosis with calcification with no evidence of granulomas . Postoperative CT revealed denuded anterior and lateral surface of the heart with minimal residual pericardium over the posterior surface of heart . Tissue Doppler velocities revealed improved ventricular filling with no respiratory variation across the tricuspid and mitral inflow . Inferior vena cava size was normal with normal collapsibility although septal bounce was still present on echocardiogram. She is currently on follow-up for more than 2 years with asymptomatic cardiac status. She showed no features of constriction on follow-up transthoracic echocardiogram and continues to have near normal left ventricular function.