The patient was a 55-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 3. She had her first menstruation when she was aged 11 years and underwent menopause at 51 years of age. She was referred to our institution with a chief complaint of irregular vaginal bleeding; however, cytological examination of the uterine cervix and endometrium showed no abnormalities. At that time, the left ovary was solid and enlarged to 6 × 6 cm, but because there were no subjective symptoms and her CA125 level was 23 U/mL, the patient was followed up. Three months later, her left ovary had increased in size, and thus, surgery was planned. On pelvic examination, the uterus was the size of a goose egg, and a mobile mass greater than fist-sized was palpated in the cranial part of the uterus. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed a solid mass measuring 10 × 8 cm in size in this region . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) also showed a solid mass measuring 10 × 8 cm in size in the cranial part of the uterine body . Routine blood test and biochemical analysis results showed no abnormalities. Regarding tumor marker levels, CA125 levels were elevated at 41.6 U/mL, while CEA and CA19–9 levels were 2.2 ng/mL and < 2.0 U/mL, respectively, which were within the normal ranges. Magnetic resonance imaging was not performed because the patient had claustrophobia. She was diagnosed as having a solid ovarian tumor and thus underwent laparotomy. A small amount of clear yellow ascites was observed, and the left ovary was swollen to greater than fist-sized. The uterus was enlarged to the size of a goose egg, while the right ovary was thumb-tip in size. There was no obvious dissemination in the abdominal cavity. The rapid pathological diagnosis of the left ovary was signet-ring cell carcinoma. Total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy were performed. Intraoperatively, the digestive tract was palpated by a surgeon, with no abnormal findings. Macroscopic examination of the extracted left ovarian tumor showed a smooth and pale yellow surface and a pale yellow and solid cut surface without mucus . Cytology of the ascites was suspected to be positive. Histological examination (hematoxylin and eosin staining) showed a characteristic finding of signet-ring cell carcinoma with large and round-to-oval cells, in which the cytoplasm contained rich mucus and the nucleus was displaced toward one pole of the cell . Both periodic acid-Schiff and Alcian blue staining were positive , cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK 20 were negative . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with signet-ring cell carcinoma. Histological examination of the right ovary also showed signet-ring cell carcinoma. As metastatic ovarian cancer was suspected, a whole-body examination was performed to search for a possible primary lesion. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy and positron-emission tomography-CT showed no findings suggestive of a primary lesion. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with primary ovarian signet-ring cell carcinoma with FIGO Stage IB (2014) (PT1b, NX, M0). After surgery, S-1/CDDP therapy (S-1120 mg/day/body × 14 days, CDDP 50 mg/m2 day 8, q 21 days) was administered for six cycles after providing sufficient explanation and obtaining informed consent. The S-1/CDDP therapy for ovarian cancer was approved by the chemotherapy committee of Hachinohe Red Cross Hospital. The observed adverse events according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events ver. 4.0 during the six cycles included grade 1 leukocytopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, liver dysfunction, nausea, vomiting, and leg edema. The six treatment cycles were completed without extending the length of the therapy or reducing the dose. Six months after the initial surgery, repeat upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, and no abnormalities were found. No recurrence was found 27 months after the initial surgery.