A 63-year-old Caucasian man presented to our facility with a four-week history of pain and redness in his right eye. He had had a traumatic retinal detachment of the right eye (55 years ago) after being struck in the eye with a stone. He subsequently developed a cataract in his right eye, for which he underwent cosmetic lensectomy at age 25. His best corrected visual acuity post lensectomy was light perception (LP), with a persistent retinal detachment. He was left aphakic in his right eye. At age 39, he had laser retinopexy in his left eye for lattice degeneration. He had a history of diabetes mellitus, quadruple cardiac bypass surgery, and defribillator implantation.
On examination, his visual acuity was NLP (right eye) and 20/20 (left eye). External examination showed ptosis and exotropia in his right eye. Slit lamp examination revealed right eye nasal and temporal band keratopathy, mild corneal edema, total hyphema and no posterior view given the hyphema . He had an unremarkable examination of his left eye, with early nuclear sclerosis. Intraocular pressure (IOP) by Goldmann applanation tonometry was 60 mmHg (right eye) and 10 mmHg (left eye). Dilated fundus examination of his left eye revealed two areas of laser retinopexy surrounding lattice degeneration at 1:00 and 3:00 o'clock. Ultrasound of the right eye revealed low-lying retinal detachment with vitreous hemorrhage .
Immediate AC paracentesis to relieve pain and pressure reduced the IOP to 38 mmHg. Over the following two weeks, his IOP fluctuated between 36 to 50 mmHg (right eye), with no resolution of the hyphema or pain. AC washout was performed, and during surgery he was noted to have NVG with 360° rubeosis iridis, and vitreous hemorrhage with ghost cells. Over the next three weeks, he had two doses of 1.25 mg/0.05 ml intravitreal bevacizumab two weeks apart to treat his neovascularization.
Over eight weeks, his IOP gradually decreased to 15 mmHg (right eye) on four antiglaucoma medications, and his visual acuity improved from NLP to LP. His retina was noted to be normal in color and not necrotic or cystic. Given the good appearance of the retina and because he had recovered LP vision, we decided to see if vision would improve further by repairing the detachment. At two months after AC washout and three months after presentation, pars plana vitrectomy, membrane peel, retinotomy with aspiration of subretinal blood, endolaser retinopexy, inferior iridotomy, air/fluid exchange and retinal reattachment with silicone oil were performed.
Following surgery, his vision improved to counting fingers vision in the right eye at five metres, with IOP of 12 to 17 mmHg (right eye) on two antiglaucoma medications. There was complete regression of the rubeosis. His IOP remained stable over the next year on the same medication regimen. Fundus photography performed during a follow-up visit revealed a flat retina in both eyes, though there was residual fibrosis in the right eye . However, one year after retinal reattachment, he was noted to have an inferior tractional retinal detachment in the right eye with areas of subretinal fibrosis.
He subsequently had a second membrane peeling, removal of subretinal membranes, drainage of subretinal fluid, controlled retinectomy, and endolaser retinopexy. Postoperatively, his best corrected visual acuity remained CF in the right eye at five metres and his IOP remained stable at 10 to 12 mmHg on timolol 0.25% once daily. The optic nerve and macula had retinal pigment epithelial hypertrophy and subretinal fibrosis . Our patient is currently being monitored with visual acuity of CF at five metres in the right eye and IOP 19 mmHg on timolol 0.25% once daily at last follow-up.