A 53-year-old man was shown to have an elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen level during a routine physical examination. His medical history was unremarkable, but he had diarrhea for several years. Computed tomography (CT) identified 3 hypervascular tumors in the liver, as follows: segment 1, 12 mm; and segment 4, 18 mm and 28 mm . A percutaneous transhepatic biopsy of the tumor was performed, and an adenocarcinoma was suspected. We did not perform immunohistochemistry for distinguishing a neuroendocrine neoplasm. We diagnosed liver tumors as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. A tumor of the segment 4 abutted to the right anterior portal vein, left portal vein, and common hepatic duct on CT, so we considered the right anterior and left portal veins resection and a bile duct resection to be necessary. The right posterior portal vein branched independently from the main portal vein, and was distant from the tumors. Moreover, a caudate lobectomy for a tumor of the segment 1 was also needed. Thus, we planned a left trisectionectomy with a bile duct resection. We performed a staging laparoscopy and portal embolization in preparation for a left trisectionectomy. Two weeks later, the remnant liver volume was 47.7% and the future liver remnant plasma clearance rate of indocyanine green was 0.106.
We performed a left trisectionectomy with a bile duct resection. The operative time was 477 min and the blood loss was 1390 ml. He was discharged to home on postoperative day 8 without complications. The formalin-fixed liver specimen had 3 yellow-white masses (Additional file : Figure S1). The histologic examination showed neuroendocrine tumors G1 . Calcification was not observed. There was no lymphatic, vascular, or bile duct invasion. Lymph node metastasis was not observed. Chromogranin-A and synaptophysin were positive. Carcinoembryonic antigen and thyroid transcription factor 1 were weakly positive. Immunohistochemistry was strongly positive for calcitonin, but negative for insulin, gastrin, glucagon, somatostatin, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. The serum calcitonin level was elevated (389 pg/ml). Thus, we diagnosed calcitonin-producing neuroendocrine neoplasms of the liver.
Neuroendocrine neoplasms of hepatic origin are extremely rare, so a systemic exploration was performed. We performed upper and lower endoscopy, a thyroid gland ultrasonography, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, but no tumor was identified. We re-reviewed the preoperative CT, which showed a 4-mm calcification in the pancreatic body, but no contrast-enhanced mass was observed . There was no evidence of tumor in the calcified area, so we followed the patient closely.
Although the liver tumors were resected, diarrhea persisted and the serum calcitonin also continued to be elevated . Diarrhea had occurred 3–5 times a day. Repeat ultrasonography, CT, FDG-PET, and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy were performed for 6 years after the hepatectomy, but no obvious tumor was identified; however, 6.5 years after the hepatectomy, laboratory testing revealed elevation of the serum calcitonin level (324 pg/ml). We performed a CT, which showed a 10-mm contrast-enhanced mass in the calcified area of the pancreatic body . FDG-PET was performed, but showed no significant accumulation. The tumor was suspected to be a PanNEN, thus we performed a distal pancreatectomy. The operative time was 285 min and the blood loss was 509 ml. He was discharged to home on postoperative day 8 without complications. The formalin-fixed pancreatic specimen showed a yellow-white mass that mimicked the liver tumors (Additional file : Figure S2). The histologic examination revealed a neuroendocrine tumor G1 that mimicked the liver tumors . Calcification 4 mm in size was observed. Minimal lymphatic, arterial, and venous invasion was observed, but perineural invasion was not observed. Lymph node metastasis was not observed. Chromogranin-A and synaptophysin were positive. Carcinoembryonic antigen and thyroid transcription factor 1 were also weakly positive. Immunohistochemistry was strongly positive for calcitonin, but negative for insulin, gastrin, glucagon, somatostatin, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide. After a distal pancreatectomy, the serum calcitonin level decreased and diarrhea resolved. We finally diagnosed him as a calcitonin-producing PanNEN with liver metastases (pathological T1N0M1, stage IV according to the Union for International Cancer Control classification of malignant tumors, 8th edition) . He is currently recurrence-free 6 months after the distal pancreatectomy.