A 3-year-old Hispanic female, from Francisco I. Madero, Coahuila, Mexico, presented to pediatric orthopedic service at Hospital Los Angeles, with a 2-month history of pain and swelling in her left ankle. Her parents reported a history of the upper respiratory tract infections and fever; no recent trauma was reported. Before admission to this medical unit, the patient was treated for a suspected insect bite in her left ankle; she was prescribed antibiotics, anti-inflammatories, and abscess drainage, but pain, swelling, and redness increased.
On hospital admission, she complained of localized pain and increased volume and redness in the lateral malleolus of the left ankle. At that time, there was no evidence of pus or abnormal discharge in that region. She was afebrile with stable vital signs .
Imaging studies were indicated in which a well-defined lesion with a lytic appearance was observed in the distal metaphyseal region of the left tibia . Given the possibility of a tumor disease, a magnetic resonance image was carried out, and a hyperintense metaphyseal mass was reported magnetic resonance imaging with extension to the growth physis, suggestive of osteomyelitis .
Laboratory tests reported an increase in white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein (CRP) rate (11,600 cells/μl, 100 mm/h, and 130 mg/L, respectively). In addition, serum antibodies specific for C. immitis were reported with increased IgM (0.338) and IgG (1.608) titers.
Fluconazole therapy was then started at a dose of 7 mg/kg/day (100 mg/day) and surgery for biopsy was scheduled. No growth of C. immitis was observed after the culture of samples. However, the histopathological study revealed the presence of multinucleated giant cells, one of which has a spherule of coccidioidomycosis inside .
Surgical debridement and curettage of the granuloma in the distal tibia were performed and an advancement flap was made to cover the skin defect . The patient continued with medical treatment based on anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen 30 mg/kg/day) and antifungal medication at the dose indicated above (fluconazole). She was discharged from the hospital 24 h after the procedure in a non-weight-bearing limb-protecting splint.
Three weeks after surgery, the surgical wound showed complete healing, no infection signs and flap integration were observed.
Six weeks after surgery, the splint was removed and the patient was instructed to start partial weight-bearing. Antifungal treatment with fluconazole was continued at the specified dose.
Eight weeks after surgery, the patient had full weight bearing on her limb. She had no pain and the surgical area showed signs of complete healing, with no signs of infection recurrence.
Finally, after 6 months of follow-up, all symptoms and signs of infection resolved and radiologic studies showed evidence of bone healing . The patient continues long-term therapy with fluconazole at the dose previously described.