A 50-year-old woman presented with burning epigastric pain, loss of appetite and associated GORD (gastro-oesophageal reflux disease) symptoms for 4 years duration. She had a history of worsening symptoms of severe dyspeptic symptoms. There was no history of loss of appetite, post prandial vomiting or gastrointestinal bleeding. Previously she had undergone several upper GI (Gastrointestinal) endoscopic examinations at a local hospital for epigastric pain, dyspeptic symptoms and found to have a hyperplastic polyp on biopsy. She gave a history of diabetes mellitus with satisfactory glycaemic control on oral hypoglycaemic drugs. She was on long standing proton pump inhibitors and antacids to relieve symptoms. Physical examination was unremarkable. Her routine laboratory investigations were normal. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an elevated area of mucosa resembling a sessile polyp in the gastric fundus and an adjacent diverticulum . On upper GI endosonography , a solid mass in the region of the gastric fundus was visualized. Contrast enhanced CT scan of abdomen showed a well-defined predominantly homogenously enhanced area (Hounsfield 60 unit) on the anterior wall of the stomach in the region of the fundus. Other abdominal organs including pancreas were normal. The operative plan was to perform on table upper GI endoscopy followed by laparoscopic wedge excision of the fundal mass. Diagnostic laparoscopy was normal. There were no regional lymph node enlargement or peritoneal deposits. Other pelvic organs appeared normal on laparoscopy. Laparoscopic surgery was converted to open approach due to the bleeding from the short gastric vessels and wide local excision of the mass (1.6 × 1.5 × 1 cm) with a small cuff of the stomach was carried out. The post operative period was uneventful and she was discharged on post operative day seven. Histological examination of the specimen revealed a heterotopic pancreatic tissue(1 × 2 × 3 cm) in the submucosa and muscularis propria of the stomach. Heterotopic pancreatic tissue comprised of acinar and ductal structures together with scattered islets of langerhan. Her post-operative period was uneventful and she was discharged on 4th post-operative day.