A 41-year-old male sustained fractures in the left-sided femur shaft, proximal tibia, and left calcaneum. The patient had initially been managed elsewhere and underwent intramedullary interlocking nail fixation for the femur fracture, anterolateral plating for the tibia fracture, and percutaneous screw fixation for the calcaneum fracture. After 1 year, the patient presented to our hospital for implant removal, as clinical and radiological examinations indicated that all fractures had successfully united.
The patient was scheduled to remove all implants under spinal epidural anesthesia. Following sterile aseptic precautions, an 18G Tuohy epidural catheter (PORTEX Epidural Minipack System 1) was inserted. After several attempts, a space was identified at 4 cm, and the catheter was threaded through the needle on confirmation of the space. The placement of the catheter in the epidural space was confirmed by a meniscus sign and fixed at 10 cm. Subsequently, a 25G spinal anesthesia needle was inserted into the subarachnoid space at the L4-L5 level and 3 cc of 0.5% heavy bupivacaine and 60 μg injection buprenorphine injected as an additive after confirming the free flow of cerebrospinal fluid and negative aspiration of blood.
The procedure began with removing the proximal tibia and calcaneum implants, followed by the femur implant. The surgery proceeded uneventfully. However, during the post-operative removal of the epidural catheter, it was observed that approximately 8 cm of the catheter was broken and missing .
Althoughthepatient experienced back pain, no neurological impairment was noted. Fluoroscopy and X-ray examinations were inconclusive in locating the remaining catheter fragment, and a computed tomography (CT) scan prov ided no helpful information ( and ).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to investigate further, which localized two suspect areas t h a t m a y c o n t a i n t h e remaining catheter fragment. The abnormal foci of low signal in the posterior epidural space, one at the L4-L5 level and the other at the level of the superior endplate of L3 represented the retained epidural catheter .
The patient experienced persistent pain and concern regarding the retained fragment, necessitating immediate intervention. The patient underwent explorative laminectomy at the L4-L5 level, the retained catheter was found to be trapped partially inside the sub-laminar space . The retained fragment was removed en bloc and measured 8 cm . Postoperative period was uneventful, the patient recovered without any neurodeficit and returned to normal life.