A 73-year-old male with ischaemic cardiomyopathy and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 30% was brought to our hospital with a complaint of palpitation and general malaise. Previously, he underwent aortic valve replacement with a mechanical valve and coronary artery bypass grafting. Later, he experienced sustained ventricular tachycardia and underwent unsuccessful catheter ablation. Subsequently, he underwent implantation of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD). Before the current admission, he was stabilized medically with bisoprolol 7.5 mg, azosemide 30 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, rosuvastatin 5 mg, lansoprazole 15 mg, warfarin 1 mg, empagliflozin 10 mg, febuxostat 10 mg, and amiodarone 100 mg. On arrival, the 12-lead electrocardiogram during the VT showed three distinct morphologies (–). Despite multiple attempts of electrical cardioversion, the VT storm persisted leading to a decline in his haemodynamic stability. He was hospitalized for recurrent haemodynamically unstable VTs. Subsequently, he required intubation with sedatives and MCS devices [extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP)]. Intravenous administration of amiodarone (loading dose: 125 mg for 10 min and 288 mg for 6 h, maintenance dose: 600 mg/24 h), landiolol (360 mg/24 h), and lidocaine (1000 mg/24 h) was initiated as the primary therapeutic regimen. The frequency and duration of the VT storms gradually decreased, albeit the transient disappearance on Day 4, followed by its reappearance and persistence on Day 5. Because at least three different morphologies of the VT were identified despite the previous VT ablation, we concluded that the elimination of those VTs by a re-ablation would be very difficult. Then, a SGB was considered as an alternative therapy. However, it was deemed inadequate due to the high risk of bleeding, given that the patient required anticoagulant therapy involving the continuous administration of heparin for the MCS devices and the aortic prosthetic valve. Therefore, SGP with the Super Lizer (Tokyo Iken, Japan Co., Ltd), which uses near-infrared light with a wavelength of 600–1600 nm, was selected. From Day 6, a daily exposure of 5 min of near-infrared light targeting his left-sided neck, specifically between the cricoid cartilage and the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (the jugular groove ∼2.5 cm above the costoclavicular joint, and ) was performed. From the first attempt of the SGP, the duration of the VT storm decreased gradually and disappeared completely. Consequently, with an improvement in his haemodynamics from Day 7, he was successfully weaned from ECMO on the same day. Despite the ECMO removal, the VT storms remained controlled, maintaining his haemodynamic stability. This allowed for the removal of the IABP on Day 12, followed by extubating on Day 13. Finally, he was discharged from the ICU on Day 17 . Upon transfer to the general ward, the patient was offered the option of a re-do catheter ablation or hybrid surgical ablation, but he declined any further cardiac interventional therapy. He agreed to the SGP and provided written informed consent. Since the daily SGP effectively controlled the VT episodes, a sympathectomy was scheduled on Day 54. However, the patient unexpectedly died on Day 52 due to a VT storm.