A 79-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology of our institution for jaundice that developed 1 mo prior.
The patient had also experienced general weakness and fatigue for a few months before admission, but had shown no change of body weight. The accompanying symptoms were reddish discoloration of urine and pruritus all over the body.
He had taken medicine for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and benign prostate hypertrophy and had history of tuberculosis pleurisy 18 years before. The patient underwent percutaneous coronary intervention for unstable angina 7 years before. However, the patient had no history of bile duct surgery or intervention.
He was a social drinker and had a 10 pack-year smoking history. There was no family history for autoimmune diseases or biliary cancer.
The patient’s vital signs at admission were within normal limits, with the exception of a body temperature of 38.2 ℃. The skin and sclera showed jaundice. The abdomen was soft and he had no signs of tenderness on the upper abdomen. The gallbladder was not definitely palpable.
Blood analysis revealed no leukocytosis (7560 white blood cells/µL) with normal hematocrit and platelet count. Total bilirubin was markedly increased (17.9 mg/dL; normal range: < 1.2 mg/dL) along with aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase (97/52 IU/L; normal range: 4-40/4-41 IU/L) and alkaline phosphatase (339 IU/L; normal range: 35-105 IU/L). Serum amylase/lipase was normal and C-reactive protein was slightly increased (1.48 mg/dL; normal range: < 0.5 mg/dL). Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was greatly increased (1061 U/mL; normal range < 37 U/mL). Carcinoembryonic antigen was within normal range. Serum IgG/IgG4 levels were not measured. Urine color was dark brown, and bilirubin was 4+ mg/dL.
Computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreaticography (MRCP) revealed a short segmental concentric wall thickening of the proximal to mid CBD with diffuse dilatation of the bile duct to the periphery and gallbladder distension . Subsequently-performed endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) demonstrated a 1 cm-long segmental stricture at the proximal CBD level , but no malignant cells or specific histopathological confirmation were proven in biopsy tissues of the bile duct. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT supported these findings by showing a focal hypermetabolic lesion (SUVmax 4.2) in and around the proximal CBD area . These findings made a straightforward impression of proximal CBD cancer.