A 66-year-old man presented at the emergency department with a 4-h history of lower abdominal and epigastric pain with low-grade fever.
The patient had a normal bowel movement at around 6 am on the day of presentation, then 4 h later he developed abdominal pain in the lower abdomen that increased in intensity and extended to the epigastric area. The pain was accompanied by multiple bowel movements, without nausea or vomiting. He presented to the hospital four hours after the abdominal pain started with lower abdominal pain.
The patient had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and gout, and regularly visited the cardiology outpatient department for follow-up and maintenance medication. The patient had no history of rectal bleeding, anorexia, or weight loss. Seven years before presentation, the patient underwent a colonoscopy, which revealed no abnormal mucosal or mass lesions up to the ileocecal valve.
The patient has a history of cigarette smoking, averaging 1-1.5 packs per day for decades. Additionally, he occasionally consumed alcohol socially. Regarding family history, his mother had a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
On physical examination, the patient was conscious and alert. His vital signs were: Body temperature, 36.2 degree Celcius; pulse, 96 beats per minute; blood pressure, 142/82 mmHg. Examination of the abdomen demonstrated rebound tenderness in the right lower quadrants and suprapubic area upon palpation, normal bowel sounds, no tympanic sounds, and no Murphy’s sign. A digital rectal examination revealed traces of stool with a minimal amount of gross blood. No masses were palpable.
A complete blood count showed a white blood cell count of 18.05 × 109/L and a haemoglobin level of 14.7 gm/dL. Other laboratory investigations showed normal results.
A plain radiograph of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder revealed a focal lesion in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen . Further imaging via an abdominal computed tomography scan showed a suspected bezoar (approximately 7.6 cm in diameter) in the dilated cecum accompanied by pericolic fat stranding, mild proximal dilatation of the ileum, pneumoperitoneum, and minimal ascites .