We describe a 58-year-old white woman who was living alone at home with a known history of SLE-associated secondary APS. The diagnosis of SLE had been made 27 years previously when she developed recurrent episodes of pneumonitis, malar rash, and renal failure complicated by recurrent deep vein thrombosis. Blood tests at that time revealed positive antinuclear antibody (ANA), elevated anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti-dsDNA) titers, and low complement (C3 and C4) levels and urine analysis revealed proteinuria, hematuria, and cellular casts suggestive of lupus nephritis. A diagnosis of secondary APS was made on the basis of positive LA in two determinations with a 3-month interval and a history of recurrent deep vein thrombosis. Additional thrombophilia screening (factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin gene mutation, factor 8 levels, protein C, protein S, and antithrombin 3) was negative.
At the initial diagnosis, she received pulse cyclophosphamide and prednisolone for lupus nephritis and, after resolution of the initial thrombotic event, she was started on hydroxychloroquine and lifelong warfarin anticoagulation with a target INR between 2 and 3.
Her other medical issues included obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, diet-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, stage 3B moderate chronic kidney disease, fatty liver, endometrial cancer (treated 14 years ago with progesterone, ongoing surveillance showed no recurrence), left total shoulder joint replacement for severe osteoarthritis, and Sydenham’s chorea.
Her regular medications included warfarin, atenolol, hydroxychloroquine, oxycodone, naloxone, paracetamol, and multivitamins.
Two months prior to the current admission, she developed ulcerative lesions on her anterior abdominal wall which she related to an abdominal ultrasound performed for suspected kidney stones. She reported that, at sites of ultrasound probe pressure, she initially noticed small bruises with subsequent skin breakdown associated with oozing of clear fluid and pain. She consulted her general practitioner who prescribed wound dressings and referred her to our hospital after local wound swabs grew multidrug resistant Enterobacter cloacae. At the time of hospital admission she was found to be afebrile and hemodynamically stable and had five ulcers on her anterior abdominal wall. The largest ulcer was located over her right flank and had irregular margins with surrounding erythema with a clean base. She was seen by a surgeon who did not think that the ulcers needed debridement.
Her investigations revealed mild normocytic anemia with stable chronic renal failure, that is, creatinine 134 micromole/L and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 38 ml/minute; her INR was therapeutic at 2.5. Her INR in the preceding 8 months had been in the therapeutic range of between 2.3 and 3.6 . Her inflammatory markers were elevated with a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 250 mg/L. A wound swab grew Enterobacter cloacae, sensitive to ciprofloxacin, and this was prescribed orally along with local wound dressings. She was discharged home with an instruction to continue warfarin and antibiotics for a period of 2 weeks.
She re-presented 11 days later with worsening of her symptoms: specifically non-healing ulcers and increasing pain. An examination revealed progression of the abdominal ulcers with the largest ulcer located over her right flank showing increased size and depth, hemorrhagic scab, black eschar, and yellow exudate . There were new ulcers located on her left breast and left interscapular area. Wound swabs from the abdominal ulcers grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococci but repeated blood cultures remained sterile. Her repeat investigations revealed elevation of her white cell count and a further increase in CRP with a mild worsening of anemia but stable renal function. She was found to be positive for LA, but negative for cardiolipin IgG, anti-β2-glycoprotein 1, cryoglobulin, cryofibrinogen, ANA as determined by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) assay, extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) but her complement levels were mildly elevated: complement C3 1.93 g/L (normal range 0.85–1.60 g/L) and complement C4 0.44 g/L (normal range 0.12–0.36 g/L). She had a negative hepatitis C screen and urine analysis revealed mild albuminuria with no active sediment on microscopic examination: albumin/creatinine ratio 3.7 (normal < 3.5 mg/mmol).
A skin biopsy of one abdominal ulcer showed ischemia and necrosis of the subcutaneous fat, with granulation tissue reaction within the dermis and cutaneous necrosis. There was evidence of thrombo-occlusive material but there was no evidence of calciphylaxis or medium-sized vessel vasculitis .
A second skin biopsy of a right flank ulcer showed numerous microthrombi in small vessels of the subcutaneous fat, including a recanalizing thrombus within a medium-sized vein but no vasculitis . A note was made of focal fat necrosis with mild inflammation of fat with rare Gram-positive cocci.
She was commenced on vancomycin and her warfarin anticoagulation was intensified to maintain the INR between 3 and 4 and wound dressings were continued as per consultation with the dermatologists and surgeons. She reported minimal improvement in her symptoms with ongoing pain and non-healing ulcers despite being on high-intensity warfarin anticoagulation and antibiotics.
After a multi-specialty case conference involving the rheumatology, hematology, and dermatology teams, it was thought that her thrombosis was warfarin-resistant and anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin was suggested but she refused any form of long-term injections. Her clinical course was further complicated by an episode of per rectal bleeding while on high-intensity warfarin anticoagulation and this was managed by blood transfusions. A malignancy screen, including a computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and a mammogram and pelvic ultrasound excluded underlying occult malignancy as a cause for her hypercoagulable state; a gynecologist excluded recurrence of endometrial cancer through transvaginal ultrasound, hysteroscopy with dilatation and curettage (D & C), and endometrial biopsy.
She was informed that the most likely cause for her symptoms was APS-related skin necrosis with superadded bacterial infection. She remained resistant to the idea of long-term injectable heparin although she was happy to try one of the newer oral direct inhibitors (ODIs) of coagulation despite a lack of firm evidence of efficacy. She was commenced on apixaban with continuation of wound care and an increase in analgesia.
Changing her anticoagulation from warfarin to apixaban, however, made little difference to her symptoms and she had multiple subsequent admissions with sepsis and bleeding from her ulcers with worsening of renal function. In the subsequent admissions, she was managed with blood transfusions and antibiotics. Plasmapheresis and intravenously administered immunoglobulins were tried along with ulcer debridement with little response to treatment. Due to declining renal function and lack of response to apixaban, she was changed back to warfarin anticoagulation. During her last admission (6 months from the first presentation), she was found to have an infection by Staphylococcus epidermidis of her left shoulder joint prosthesis. The prosthesis was removed and she was commenced on vancomycin. This admission was further complicated by hemarthrosis of her left shoulder and rectal bleeding needing blood transfusions. A colonoscopy performed during this admission revealed bleeding hemorrhoids, which were managed conservatively. Due to recurrent bleeding and the need for repeated blood transfusions, a decision was made, after consultation with our patient, to stop anticoagulation.