Sixty five year old lady presented with swelling in left inguinal region of six months duration. Swelling was gradually increasing in size and was not painful. There were no associated systemic symptoms. There was restriction of movement in the hip joint.
She gave a past history of swelling around medial condyle of left femur eight years back. Swelling was excised three times. After the second recurrence she received telecobalt therapy for 15 days. At the time of third recurrence, swelling was extensive, infiltrating surrounding tissues and underlying bone, encasing femoral and popliteal vessels for which she underwent an above knee amputation. The swelling recurred after one and half years above the amputation site and debulking of the tumour was done. She presented after one year with swelling in inguinal region for which a disarticulation was suggested. First biopsy was reported as Giant cell tumour tendon sheath/PVNS and subsequent biopsies were diagnosed as pigmented villonodular synovitis, recurrent. She now presented to our hospital for further management. There was no significant family history or personal history.
On examination, she was a thin frail lady with an above knee amputation stump.
Swelling in the inguinal region was irregular measuring 5.7×3.0 cms. Margins were ill defined, swelling was adherent to surrounding structures. Her hematological investigations revealed microcytic hypochromic anemia. Leukocytes and platelets were normal. Her biochemical parameters were within normal limits. She was HIV non reactive, HBsAg and HCV negative. Chest x-ray was normal. Positron Emission Tomography Scan (PET-CT) revealed multiple enlarged left common iliac, internal and external iliac nodes, largest measuring 7.0 cms. Large enhancing deposits were seen in inguinal region measuring 5.7 cms. No lesions were seen in lungs or other organs. Both the inguinal and pelvic nodes were excised.
Pathology: Grossly pelvic lesion was an irregular mass measuring 6.5×4.5 cms. Inguinal mass was a nodular mass measuring 5×5 cms with adherent skin. Surface was smooth. Cut section was yellowish brown Microscopic examination revealed compressed lymphoid tissue with a cellular lesion composed of cells arranged in sheets. Cell showed moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm, nuclei were vesicular, there was mild anisonucleosis with prominent nucleoli. Mitoses were 3-4/10 high power fields. Interspersed through out the lesion were osteoclast type giant cells. (-) Groups of pigment laden macrophages were seen. There was no necrosis. A panel of immunostains was done. S-100, HMB-45, EMA were negative. Vimentin and CD-68 were positive. A targeted therapy was planned, so an immunostain with anti-platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) was done which was diffusely and strongly positive. With these features, lesion was diagnosed as malignant giant cell tumour tendon sheath/malignant PVNS metastatic to lymphnodes. She was put on Imatinib with a dosage of 400 mg per day. An ultrasound abdomen done after six months revealed recurrence of pelvic mass, which measured 6×5 cms. She also complained of weakness and bone pains. Investigations revealed anemia of 6.7 gms and an ESR of 140 mm/hr. Immuno-electrophoresis revealed M band. Bone marrow revealed 22% plasma cells. She is presently on treatment for myeloma with good clinical response.