A 57 year-old Chinese female with no other past medical history of significance, presented with recurrent epistaxis and was found to have thrombocytopaenia. Subsequent investigations showed infiltration of the bone marrow with clonal plasma cells with plasmablastic morphology. Although she had mild renal impairment, there was no hypercalcaemia or anaemia. Her skeletal survey was normal; however, there were fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid bone lesions on PET-CT. She was diagnosed with ISS stage II, IgG kappa multiple myeloma (MM) with normal cytogenetics. Flourescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was not done. Serum M protein was 61.8 g/L at diagnosis.
She underwent 4 cycles of bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone (VCD) and achieved very good partial remission (VGPR). Thereafter she underwent ASCT with a reduced dose of melphalan (140 mg/m2) due to renal impairment. She was subsequently treated with monthly bortezomib maintenance but developed peripheral neuropathy during the fifth month of maintenance after SCT. Her main symptoms were paraesthesia and numbness in the palms and soles which worsened despite symptomatic treatment and discontinuation of bortezomib.
She further developed right upper and lower limb weakness. Her neurologic examination revealed decreased proprioception in a glove and stocking distribution, areflexia, bilateral foot drop and power of 3/5 in the right arm and leg. An MRI brain showed lytic bone lesions with dural-based masses within both occipital lobes. Lesions suspicious of myelomatous involvement were also detected in the pituitary, hypoglossal canal, cavernous sinus and sella turcica. Her MRI spine did not show any myelomatous involvement. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology revealed 88% plasma cells which were confirmed by flow cytometry. Her CSF plasma cell morphology and flow cytometric immunophenotyping are shown in respectively. She underwent concurrent cranial irradiation with intra-thecal (IT)-methotrexate/cytarabine and thalidomide-dexamethasone (Thal-Dex) for control of CNS disease. She remained stable for 6 months after relapse, while on lenalidomide and dexamethasone (Len-Dex). She developed progressive disease thereafter, with a rising serum Free Light Chain ratio (sFLC) and multiple FDG-avid PET lesions. She is currently receiving salvage therapy.