A 53-year-old woman presented to the Neurology outpatient office with a three-month history of headache and diplopia. There was no history of fever, weight loss, or nocturnal sweating. The patient had no history of diabetes, hypertension, or neurological diseases and no risk factors for stroke. No cervical bruits or lymphadenopathy in the cervical, supraclavicular or axillary areas were appreciated. Neurological examination revealed complete left occulomotor nerve palsy, with ptosis, mydriasis and outward positioning of the left eye. The remaining results of the physical examination were within normal limits. All serum laboratory and hormonal values were within the normal ranges.
MRI demonstrated a homogenous soft-tissue lesion occupying the left sphenoid sinus and invading the left cavernous sinus . The mass was homogenously enhanced by Gadolinium injection, and no intradural extension of the tumor was noted. A space-occupying lesion in the sphenoid sinus, such as a carcinoma, mucocele, or ectopic pituitary adenoma, was suspected as a preliminary diagnosis.
During the open surgery, the left sphenoid sinus contained a red friable vascular tumor, which was biopsied. Frozen sections of an intrasurgical biopsy were diagnosed as compatible with a small round cell tumor. The final histological diagnosis was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell type, which has uniform, round-to-oval nuclei with vesicular chromatin and one or multiple conspicuous nucleoli. These tumor cells were positive for CD20 and negative for CD3 .
The patient was referred to medical oncology for a staging work-up, including bone marrow biopsy and positron emission tomography (PET), all of which were negative. The patient received chemotherapy consisting of eight cycles of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine (oncovin), and prednisone) with adjuvant Rituximab. Following six cycles of chemotherapy, the previously observed left third nerve palsy was completely resolved. There was no enhancing lesion noted on follow-up MRI 6 months postsurgery . The patient is currently under regular follow-up monthly in the medical oncology clinic.