A previously healthy 13-year-old Caucasian girl was admitted to the Children’s Clinical University Hospital with complaints of weakness in her right arm, unilateral facial weakness and speech problems. Regarding the patient’s medical history, at the age of 2.5 years she was diagnosed with a patent ductus arteriosus which was corrected by transcatheter closure. Prior to the surgery, she had disseminated Molluscum contagiosum infection that was treated with electrocoagulation and left multiple scars. At pre-school age, she had motor tics (eye blinking). It was also documented that she had recurrent acute respiratory viral infections, skin infections of unknown aetiology, otitis and episodes of arthralgia of the elbow joints, usually lasting about 2 days. Her developmental history was compatible with her age and she had received all vaccinations according to the recommended schedule. The girl was born to non-consanguineous parents and her family’s medical history did not reveal any hereditary diseases. It was noted that one of her grandparents had a stroke at an elderly age.
On admission to hospital, the patient’s general physical examination was found to be normal: blood pressure 119/78 mmHg; pulse 70/min regular; respiratory rate 18/min; weight 56.2 kg (+ 0.5 SD); height 164.5 cm (+ 0.5 SD). She had multiple punctate scars on the arms and legs due to the contagious molluscum infection in personal medical history; no other skin abnormalities were observed. Neurological examination revealed elements of motor aphasia (she spoke in short phrases) and corticonuclear insufficiency on the right side: facial asymmetry to the right, more pronounced in cheeks and mouth area; otherwise, cranial innervation was intact - visual fields were normal in all quadrants, pupils were reactive to light and accommodation, eye movements unrestricted in all directions, tongue protruded midline and moved symmetrically. Pharyngeal reflex was positive. There was slight unilateral pronator drift of right arm on the right side. Muscle strength in the right arm was proximal 4 points, distal 3 points (MMT; Manual Muscle Testing). Active movement in the right shoulder were up to 100° flexion; there was limited forearm pronation/supination and extension of the fingers. Muscle strength in the right leg was 4 points, both proximal and distal. Muscle strength in the left arm and leg was normal (5 points). Coordination test was performed more inaccurately with the right hand, according to paresis. Tendon reflexes were symmetrical (2/4 bilaterally). Pathological reflexes were negative. Sensation was intact bilaterally. She was able to sustain balance with eyes closed (Romberg test). Meningeal symptoms were negative.
Her initial full blood count, biochemistry and coagulation testing did not reveal any pathology. A computed tomography scan of the patient’s head detected no abnormal findings. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging was performed the next day and confirmed acute/subacute ischaemic changes in the posterior limb of the left-sided internal capsule and in the apical part of the thalamus. Magnetic resonance angiography showed no abnormal changes in the blood vessels and subacute ischaemia in the left posterior capsula interna and apical-lateral part of the thalamus, presumably in the branches of the left middle cerebral artery (lenticulostriate arteries). The patient was started on aspirin 100 mg a day.
Consequently, the possible aetiology of an early-onset stroke was investigated. To exclude a cardiac aetiology, electrocardiography was performed – no pathological findings were observed. Furthermore, transthoracic echocardiography with agitated saline did not detect a right to left shunt. Laboratory screening for hypercoagulable states was negative. Screening for infection was also negative (SARS-CoV-2, influenza, HIV-1/− 2 antibodies and HIV-1 antigen, viral hepatitis B and C, Borrelia burgdorferi IgM and IgG, Treponema pallidum IgM and IgG, TPHA, Varicella zoster DNA). No specific finding indicative of a primary metabolic defect was detected via determination of the spectrum of organic acids in urine. Rheumatological workup showed a slightly elevated anti-dsDNA, with other tested antibodies within the reference range. However, the rheumatologist suspected ADA2 deficiency and so the patient was referred to the genetics clinic.
Genetic testing was performed and sequence analysis using Blueprint Genetics’ Primary Immunodeficiency Panel (comprising of 336 genes) identified two variants in the ADA2 gene: a missense variant c.506G > A (p.Arg169Gln) and a frameshift variant c.464del (p.Pro155Hisfs*29). The next-generation sequencing data indicated that these variants were on different parental alleles (in trans position) in the patient. The frameshift variant c.464del (p.Pro155Hisfs*29) is not recorded in the ClinVar and HGMD databases. This variant deletes one base pair in exon 3 (of a total of 10 exons) and generates a frameshift which leads to a premature stop codon at position 29 in the new reading frame.
After the ADA2 deficiency diagnosis was confirmed, the patient was consulted by an immunologist and subsequent laboratory immunological evaluation revealed decreased B cell absolute counts and low serum IgA with normal IgG and IgM .
On discharge from the hospital, facial asymmetry had decreased, but elements of motor aphasia remained. Right-sided paresis remained, more pronounced in the hand. She was able to grasp an object with her right hand, but her fine motor and object manipulation skills in the hand were impaired. Stroke rehabilitation (physiotherapy, ergotherapy and audiologopaedic therapy) significantly improved the patient’s functional state – facial asymmetry was no longer observed and full motor function of the right arm was regained within 4 months. Neurological examination showed positive palmomental reflex on the right side, otherwise with no signs of focal neurological deficits. Following rehabilitation, she started the combined medication of adalimumab (TNF inhibitor) 40 mg twice a month and methotrexate 7.5 mg once a week (to reduce the risk of developing an antibody to adalimumab). At her 1.5-year follow-up, she continues to take the medication and has remained well with no further ischaemic events. Control MRI scan was performed and no silent brain infarcts were detected.