The patient was a 65-year-old man diagnosed with metastatic prostate cancer to bone and pelvic lymph nodes 7 years prior. At the time of diagnosis, he presented with a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) of 23 ng/ml, and prostate biopsies confirming Gleason grade 4 + 5 = 9 disease with 12/12 cores involved and 80% overall involvement. Staging bone scan and CT thorax, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated multiple bone metastases and pelvic lymphadenopathy. The prostate was described as enlarged and heterogeneous with irregular margins. He commenced on a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist and achieved a PSA nadir of 4.68 ng/ml 1 year following androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) institution.
The patient subsequently had progressive lower urinary tract symptoms with nocturia x 5 and weak stream. His PSA had risen to 47 ng/ml and re-staging CT showed progressive bone metastases together with soft tissue disease and a 5.5-cm left adrenal metastasis. Additionally, there was a markedly enlarged pelvic mass centered on the prostate with gross extra-capsular extension and invasion into the posterior bladder wall . Enzalutamide was commenced, with an initial biochemical and radiological response. However, this was transient and within 4 months of commencing enzalutamide, PSA started rising again and peaked at 60 ng/ml associated with imaging progression. The imaging revealed multiple lobulated masses arising from the prostate encroaching onto the rectum, and new intramuscular masses in the right iliopsoas and right obturator internus . Coinciding with this, the patient reported symptoms of pelvic pain and lower limb paresthesia. Enzalutamide was stopped and he was referred for palliative radiotherapy to the prostate. After discussion, it was agreed to proceed with radiotherapy, but as the mass was so large, it was felt that an ultra-hypofractionated approach might be beneficial. MR-Linac treatment was thought to offer the most ability to tailor radiotherapy delivery to maximize dose delivery but minimize dose to OARs.
The patient underwent both CT and MRI simulation session for treatment planning. A high-resolution T2-weighted MR image acquired on the Unity MR-Linac (Elekta Unity, Stockholm, Sweden) was used for reference planning, and the CT image was used to provide electron density information. The target (clinical target volume, CTV), bladder, rectum, and large bowel were contoured by the radiation oncologist (RO), and a planning target volume (PTV) was created using a 5-mm uniform expansion around the CTV. A reference plan of 36 Gy over 6 weekly factions was generated in the MR-Linac treatment planning system (Monaco v5.4, Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden) using a 9-field IMRT technique. The plan derived was purposefully heterogeneous allowing central tumor region dose escalation to 48 Gy. The OARs assessed included rectum, large bowel, and small bowel where dose constraints were strictly observed. The majority of the dose-escalated tumor mass was posterior–superior and no attempt was made to include the urethra in the dose-escalated volume. It was observed at fraction 2 that there had been substantial target volume reduction (17%) mostly in the superior and posterior directions. A new reference plan was generated after 3 fractions to add the sacral plexus contours and constraints (previously not visible due to mass encroachment) and also accounted for the changing tumor mass.
For each MR-Linac treatment session, a localization T2-weighted MR image (MRLoc) was acquired. The reference plan was used as a starting point to generate an adapted plan based on the contours redefined in-session on the MRLoc by the RO. While quality control checks, including secondary monitor unit verification and multi-disciplinary plan quality review on the adapted plan were performed, a verification MR (MRVer) was acquired to ensure the target was encompassed within the PTV. A third beam on MR (MRBO) was acquired during radiotherapy beam on, which allowed assessment of the internal anatomy during treatment delivery. The patient completed the patient-reported outcome tool, Expanded Prostate Cancer Index Composite for Clinical Practice (EPIC-CP), prior to each treatment.
To determine the delivered dose for each treated fraction, the clinically treated daily adapted beams were computed on the MRBO. To simulate the delivered dose without daily adaptation, we computed reference plan beams on the MRBO. The delivered dose without daily adaptation using the initial reference plan for the first three fractions and the updated reference plan for the final three fractions were simulated. All images, structures, and dose distributions were exported to a separate treatment planning system for dose accumulation (Raystation v8, RaySearch, Stockholm, Sweden) using deformable image registration (DIR). To generate a high-quality DIR, manual contours were generated on the MRBO images and these contours were used as controlling regions of interest (ROIs) for the hybrid intensity and structure-based DIR between the reference MR and each MRBO. Following manual review of the DIR quality, dose for each adapted fraction as well as the simulated no-adaptation dose was deformed to the reference MR using the deformed vector field for evaluation on the reference MR.
The average MR-Linac treatment time was 64 min (range 59–77 min). Over the course of 6 fractions, the CTV decreased in volume from 453 to 233 cc (49%) . Using dose accumulation, the demonstrated cumulative dose to OARs was reduced with the use of daily adaptation compared with the simulated single offline adaptation . Both daily adaptation and offline adaptation provided sufficient target coverage, but with offline adaptation, target doses were greater than intended and exceeded the maximum dose to 1 cc clinical goal. Use of daily adaptation resulted in lower OAR doses as we were able to progressively spare the OARs as the target mass decreased . In particular, dose reduction to the bladder, rectum, and large bowel was substantially reduced with use of online adaptation. There was a 16% reduction in D5cc bladder and 12% reduction in D20 rectum in plans with adaptation versus without adaptation.
Treatment was well tolerated with no patient-reported acute toxicities. Patient-reported outcomes collected through EPIC-CP indicated no worsening urinary and bowel symptoms throughout treatment. More so, urinary symptoms improved during treatment, corresponding with treatment response. The score for need to urinate frequently became a small problem by fraction 2, reduced to a very small problem by fraction 4, and resolved to no problems for fractions 5 and 6. The patient experienced very small problems with hot flashes and feeling depressed for the first 3 fractions, resolved to no problems for either factor over the last 3 fractions. Finally, the patient experienced a very small problem with a lack of energy for the first 4 fractions, increasing to a small problem on fraction 5, and moderate problem on fraction 6.
One month following radiation treatment, the patient’s PSA reduced to 21 and there was evidence of partial radiological response within the prostate . There was, however, progression within the intramuscular masses and left adrenal gland, which were not intentionally a part of the treatment target volume. Biopsies were obtained of the adrenal mass, which confirmed metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma. The patient was referred for consideration of systemic therapy clinical trials and underwent genetic testing as part of the assessment. He was found to carry a BRCA2 mutation, and was subsequently enrolled onto a randomized trial involving a PARP inhibitor. At the last follow-up, there was biochemical and radiological stability of disease.