A 39-year-old male farmer was referred to our emergency department with generalized pain on the right leg with loss of the skin throughout the lower leg leaving the soft and hard tissue exposed to the environment shown in . He could not move his right leg and feel no sensation at some part of the limb. No history of loss of consciousness, amnesia, and headache was reported. He was a smoker and occasional drinker but did not have allergic and vascular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, or dyslipidemia. There was no history of medication use.
Two weeks earlier, he had a motorcycle accident and crashed into a truck with the right leg as the focus of impact. He was immediately brought to the hospital, where he was taken plain X-Ray on the right leg with suspicion of open fracture of the right lower limb. Clinically, the patient was alert and complained that he had intense pain and unable to move the right leg. The doctor explained the urgent need for operation as there was an open fracture observed, but the patient decided to discharge against medical advice and sought home treatment with a TBS. During the treatment, the leg was directly manipulated by holding the patient down, while the TBS performed the manipulation without using analgesics. The traditional herbs were used in the mixture and blended into a cream that was applied to the lower leg right after the manipulation. Afterward, the splint was applied over the herbal cream, and a bandage was put around tightly to hold the splint in place.
After 24 h, he started to feel intense pain, swollen and numbness throughout the right leg. He had a fever that developed in the following days with limb exuding foul-smelling discharge. Progressive darkening of the limb was noticed, and the leg was swollen. He was subsequently brought to the hospital and treated for five days. Before referred to our hospital, his vital signs were reported as blood pressure 90/60 mm Hg, pulse rate 110 beats/min, respiration rate 20 breaths/min, temperature 38.3 °C. Laboratory results in indicated severe anemia (hemoglobin was 4.6 g/dl) and severe infection (white blood cell count was 29.3×109/l). He was given intravenous fluid, analgesics, antipyretic, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and blood transfusion.
Physical examination at presentation showed he was alert with vital signs showing a blood pressure of 100/60 mm Hg, a pulse rate at 96 beats/min, respiration rate at 20 breaths/min, a temperature of 37.8 °C. The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) was 7. The results of the general examination were within normal limits. Essential findings in the musculoskeletal system of the right leg were the loss of skin tissues from the knee to the foot. The bone and the soft tissues such as muscles and tendons were exposed, dirty, darkened, and dead, leaving a foul smell. The knee was held in a fully extended position. Palpation of the limb showed crepitation at the level of the femur, and the temperature of the gangrenous part was cold. Range of motion (ROM) examination showed there was no active movement below the knee joint. Normal pulse was palpated at the femoral artery, but there was no pulse at dorsalis pedis, posterior tibial, and popliteal artery. No sensation felt throughout the lower leg and no active movement below the knee joint. His laboratories at the time of admission showed: hemoglobin 8.6 g/dl, hematocrit 26.5%, erythrocyte 3.36×106/mm3, white blood cells 9700/μL (diff. Count of neutrophils 90.7%, lymphocyte 2.8%). All other laboratory values were within normal limits, shown in . Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral (L) view X-Ray of the upper leg showed displaced transverse fracture of the middle third of the femur. AP/L view of the lower leg showed an incomplete fracture of the middle third of the fibula, soft tissue defect at the proximal third and distal third of the tibia, and gas density around soft tissue suggestive of gas gangrene. AP/oblique view of the foot showed an oblique fracture of the 5th metatarsal, dislocation of the middle phalanx of the 2nd digit, subluxation of the distal phalanx of the 4th digit, and gas density around the soft tissue suggestive for gas gangrene. . Biopsy could not be performed due to financial reason.
With the above physical and imaging characteristics, a diagnosis of dead limb secondary to bone setter's treatment was made. The patient and his family were informed about the urgent need for amputation after stabilizing the patient's condition. He was given intravenous fluid, antibiotics (ceftriaxone, 1 g every 12 h; gentamycin 80 mg every 8 h), analgesics (ketorolac, 30 mg every 8 h), antipyretics (paracetamol, 1 g every 8 h IV drips), and blood transfusion one bag every 24 h until the hemoglobin reaches the minimum of 10 g/dl. He underwent above-knee amputation by an orthopedic surgeon in our center on the 3rd day of admission . This was considered as the limb was non-functional, the inconvenience of wound care, and the risk of becoming a focus of infection.
Postoperative recovery was excellent, surgical drain and the urethral catheter were removed after 72 h, and on the 5th postoperative day, he was discharged with suggestions for routine wound control in the orthopedic outpatient department. He was given oral antibiotics (cefixime 200 mg every 12 h, metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h), analgesics (mefenamic acid 500 mg every 8 h), ferrous sulfate 200 mg every 12 h, and calcium lactate 500 mg every 24 h. One week follow-up of the patients showed satisfying wound control, and he was referred to rehabilitation for exercises such as; standing, balancing, and endurance exercise. After two weeks, he presented without any additional complaints and was grateful for his condition.