A 71-year-old male patient was followed up at irregular intervals. When his chest pain symptoms gradually worsened, he was followed up in a local hospital by a CT scan, which revealed problems before coming to our hospital. TEVAR and left subclavian artery fenestration stent implantation were performed for his descending aortic dissection 5 years ago in our hospital. He had a history of rheumatoid arthritis and had been taking steroids for a long time. The follow-up computed tomographic angiography (CTA) revealed TAAD with proximal occlusion of the brachiocephalic trunk artery due to obvious compression of the false lumen . The patient had no obvious symptoms or clinical manifestations of cerebral ischemia before surgery, and CTA, computed tomographic perfusion (CTP), and transcranial Doppler (TCD) examinations of the cerebral arteries showed that the cerebral ring was intact with good collateral circulation. After fully informing the patient of the advantages and disadvantages of thoracotomy and interventional surgery, the patient again strongly requested endovascular treatment and refused thoracotomy. After discussions between the vascular surgery team and the ECMO team, TEVAR under venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) protection was planned. The procedure is as follows.
After successful anesthesia, routine disinfection and towel laying were performed, followed by bilateral neck and left elbow incisions to expose the bilateral common carotid artery and left brachial artery, respectively, and the proximal and distal rubber circles were retained for use. After systemic heparinization (5000 IU), bilateral carotid arteries were punctured by Seldinger’s method with an 8-F vascular sheath. The proximal innominate artery was occluded in the true lumen of the carotid artery and the innominate artery, as shown by right carotid sheath angiography. Using Seldinger’s method, we punctured the left brachial artery with a 6-F vascular sheath and inserted an indwelling pigtail catheter into the ascending aorta.
The left femoral artery was successfully punctured using Seldinger’s method, and an 11-F arterial sheath was indwelled. The right femoral vein was punctured successfully using Seldinger’s method, and a venous drainage catheter (Maquet®, 21 F) was inserted into the right atrium opening of the inferior vena cava. An arterial perfusion catheter (Maquet®, 15 F) was inserted through the right axillary artery to the proximal end of the right subclavian artery, and ECMO was successfully started at a flow rate of 1 L/min.
The left brachial artery was punctured successfully by Seldinger’s method using a 6-F vascular sheath, followed by a pigtail catheter to the ascending aorta, and the sheath was indwelled. A 4-F labeled angiography catheter was pushed up to the ascending aorta through the left femoral artery sheath. The aortic angiography showed a dissecting aneurysm in the greater curvature of the aortic arch, involving the innominate artery, the right common carotid artery, and the right subclavian artery . A covered stent (GORE® TGU454520) was inserted through the right femoral artery of the thoracic aorta and pushed upward under fluoroscopy so that the proximal marker of the stent was positioned in the ascending aorta, approximately 2 cm away from the coronary artery opening, and then released to fully cover the diseased segment.
The liver puncture needle was inserted through the vascular sheath of the left carotid artery, following the V-18 guide wire. After the successful puncture of the covered stent, the guide wire was inserted into the ascending aorta and then dilated with a 4-mm balloon. After exchanging the superhard guide wire, 6- and 10-mm high-pressure balloons were used for expansion. After swapping into the 11-F sheath, an 11 mm × 50 mm Gore VIABAHN covered stent was implanted. The proximal end exceeded the main stent of the thoracic aorta by about 1 cm, and the stent was released under fluoroscopy. In this way, the left common carotid artery in situ fenestration stent placement was completed. In the same way, innominate artery in situ fenestration stent implantation was performed by implanting a 9 mm × 50 mm Gore VIABAHN covered stent. The angiography was satisfactory.
After smooth bilateral carotid blood flow was achieved, the ECMO flow was slowly downregulated, and the whole procedure ensured that the oxygen saturation of both brains was greater than 65%. The puncture needle was inserted through the left brachial artery access, followed by a V-18 guide wire, and then the guide wire was inserted into the distal part of the descending aorta. After stepwise dilation of the puncture orifice with a balloon, the 11 mm × 50 mm Gore VIABAHN covered stent was inserted; the stent was released approximately 1 cm beyond the proximal left subclavian artery opening.
ECMO was stopped, and aortography and coronary arteriography were performed again. The results showed that the covered stent was positioned satisfactorily, the stent was close to the vascular wall, there was no twist or end leakage, and the covered stent was not blocking the coronary artery. The thoracic aortic dissection was completely isolated by covered stents, and contrast media could be seen in the innominate artery, right common carotid artery, right subclavian artery, left common carotid artery, and left subclavian artery . The operation was completed, the ECMO arterial catheter was removed, and the left femoral artery puncture wound was successfully closed with an embedded ProGlide vascular suture device. The right axillary artery incision was closed with 6-0 Prolene. The right femoral vein was closed with the previously embedded ProGlide suture device, and the elastic band was applied for compression. On the second day after surgery, the patient awoke in the EICU with stable vital signs and good muscle strength in the extremities and was transferred to the ward. One week later, the patient was discharged and followed up for 6 months without obvious discomfort. CT angiography showed blood vessels in good condition . Informed consent was obtained from the patients and family members for case information reporting.