A 53-year-old female patient, gravida 1, para 1, with menopause at age 50, presented to the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics with a 2-year history of a nodule in the left corpus uteri. The asymptomatic lesion was incidentally detected by ultrasound 2 years ago at a routine health check and had slowly increased in size . The sonographic test showed an oval and hypoechoic mass measured 5.8 x 5.7 x 4.6 cm . The clinical impression of a leiomyoma was made. Except for an oophorocystectomy of the left ovary 11 years ago for which pathological evaluation revealed a serous cystadenoma, her medical history was silent. Laboratory studies were within normal limits. Biopsy via fractional curettage and colposcope excluded endometrial or cervical-derived tumor. At laparotomy, a nodular neoplasm, protruding into the peritoneal cavity, was located beneath the serosa of the left side of the corpus and completely removed. The patient was followed up for 2 months with no recurrence.
On gross pathological examination, the mass measured 6 x 6 x 5 cm and exhibited a firm and fibrous texture on sectioning. The cut surface was solid and yellowish-gray in color . Microscopically, tumor epithelial cells were arranged in oval or cord-like well-defined nests, most of which were surrounded by hyalinized stromal cells . Central cavities containing hyaline material were seen in some nests . Of note is that a minority of nests consisted of large round cavities that compressed the lining cells resembling WNs . Epithelial cells displayed the morphologic continuum from short spindled shapes at the margin of the nests to the umbrella cell-like pattern at the center . They contained moderate clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm and oval nuclei with longitudinal grooves . No intercellular junctions or keratinization were seen. The leading edge of the tumor was examined carefully to explore the direct extension of mesothelium into tumor stroma. Tissue sections showed no evidence of mesothelium-derived cells in the tumor.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on serial sections to further confirm the nature of the tumor and explore its pathogenesis. BTs and urothelium-derived tumors commonly show highly overlapping phenotypic features. The primary antibody panel, consisting of cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, GATA3, CK5/6, 34βE12, p63, PAX8, p53, p16 and cyclinD1, was used to gain more insights into its nature and whether BT involves the transitional-cells metaplasia. Consistent with previous studies, epithelial cells expressed strong to diffuse reactivity for CK7 and negativity for CK20 . GATA3 belongs to a zinc finger transcription factor family and plays an essential role in the development of Müllerian duct . It always serves as an important marker to distinguish breast or urinary-derived diseases from their mimics. A strong nuclear immunoreaction was observed for GATA3 in the majority of the epithelial cells .
CK5/6 are high-molecular-weight cytokeratins, which decorate basal-type cells in normal urothelium . In this case, epithelial cells displayed a graded intensity for CK5/6 and 34βE12 . The proportion of 34βE12 positive cells was higher than that of CK5/6 positive cells. P63, an essential factor for the development of urothelial and squamous cells, marks basal and intermediate urothelial cells . Consistent with previous studies, more than 80% of epithelial cells showed nuclear positivity for p63 antibody .
An interesting observation is that the single layer of cavity-lined cells did not express p63 and CK5/6. However, Uroplakin III revealed a linear apical positivity in a few of these cells . Mesothelium markers such as WT1 and calretinin were negative in cell nests (data not shown). The combination of morphologic features and desmin positivity confirmed that spindled stromal cells were smooth muscle cells . Like normal counterparts in the corpus uteri, these tumor stromal cells, rather than epithelial cells, expressed estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) . Both epithelial and stromal cells were negative for PAX8, p53, and p16 . Epithelium showed weak positivity for cyclinD1 .