A 57-year-old Japanese woman who had been receiving chemotherapy for inflammatory breast cancer became unable to walk due to high fever and lower back and left leg pain. She was transported to another hospital as an emergency. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed psoas and epidural abscesses accompanied by pyogenic spondylitis and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was detected in a blood culture. A laboratory analysis revealed a white blood cell count of 17600/mm3, and a C-reactive protein level of 39.5 mg/L. The psoas abscess was drained under echo guidance. MRSA was also detected from the breast cancer ulcer and the aspirate of the psoas abscess. In spite of continuous drainage and antibiotic therapy with vancomycin, the abscess became larger and she was referred to our institution. On admission, she had a fever of 38.0 °C and her left leg was in the psoas position due to pain. Her manual muscle test (MMT) results were as follows: hip flexor, 5/3; knee extensor, 5/3; ankle extensor, 5/5; and ankle flexor, 5/5. A laboratory analysis revealed the following findings: white blood cell count, 10810/mm3 (neutrophils, 85%), C-reactive protein, 15.8 mg/L; total protein, 6.0 g/dl; and albumin, 1.6 g/dl. MRI demonstrated psoas and paravertebral abscesses, and epidural abscess with pyogenic spondylitis . We performed percutaneous drainage for psoas and epidural abscess by endoscopy, and open drainage for paravertebral abscess under general anesthesia. At 1 week after drainage, the abscesses decreased to < 1 cm in size and the drain was removed . The sensation around her knee weakened after surgery but the pain was immediately relieved. Antibiotic therapy with daptomycin was continued for 8 weeks. She regained the ability to walk and the inflammatory reaction subsided. The hypesthesia around her knee recovered. No recurrence of pyogenic spondylitis or psoas abscess was observed. At the final follow-up, the pyogenic spondylitis was healed with degenerative change between the third and fourth lumbar vertebra . She died of breast cancer 1 year after surgery.
Our patient was placed prone on a Jackson Table for a fluoroscopy. All procedures were performed under total intravenously administered anesthesia. A spinal needle was inserted into the target disk from a point 10 cm from the midline. Indigo carmine and Omnipaque (iohexol) were injected into the disc. The passage between the lumbar disc and the psoas abscess was detected by the flow of Omnipaque (iohexol) on fluoroscopy . A dilator and elevated working sleeve were guided over the needle and into the disc space. The dilator was removed and a cutting tool was inserted. A piece of disc was removed and the cannula was pulled to find the epidural space. The epidural space above the posterior longitudinal ligament was felt carefully by spatula and the pus was evacuated and irrigated. The water pressure was set to 30 mmHg. To drain the psoas abscess, the same procedure was performed. A spinal needle was inserted into the psoas muscle from a point 10 cm lateral from the midline. Under fluoroscopy, the spinal needle was inserted to the middle depth of the fourth lumbar vertebra at the transverse process level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. The placement was confirmed to be safe by preoperative MRI. Indigo carmine and Omnipaque (iohexol) were injected to confirm that the needle was located in the psoas muscle . An elevated-type cannula was impacted and inserted into the psoas muscle. A large amount of pus flowed from the cannula. The psoas muscle was felt carefully by spatula and the position of the cannula was confirmed by fluoroscopy to ensure that it did not move ventrally . After irrigation, suction drains were placed in the spinal disc space and the psoas muscle.