A 44-year-old female presented to our department with symptoms of intermittent abdominal distension for 6 months and repeated vomiting over the last 3 days.
Because of the abdominal distension, the patient presented to a local hospital for assessment and underwent a gastroscopy 2 months later. The gastroscopy revealed a protruding lesion in the gastric antrum, with its distal margin invading the pyloric ring. Since no malignant tissue was found in the biopsy specimen obtained from the lesion, the patient was treated with acid-suppressive and mucosa-protecting drugs. At 2 months later, gastroscopic re-examination was carried out at the same local hospital and showed gastric retention and pyloric stenosis. An ultrasound gastroscopy was then performed and detected significant thickening of the gastric antrum wall, with a heterogenous hypoechoic lesion where the layered structure had disappeared.
As the abdominal distension symptom persisted and progressed to repeated vomiting, the patient came to our hospital for further evaluation.
The patient had no other significant medical history. She denied history of hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, and any other chronic disease.
The patient had no significant personal and family history.
Physical examination showed no abnormality.
The results of complete blood count and routine biochemical investigations were unremarkable. Blood tumor marker tests showed elevated level of carbohydrate antigen 72-4 (CA724) (50.1 kU/L; normal range: 0-6.9 kU/L) but normal levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA199).
Gastroscopy showed that the antrum mucosa was congestive and edematous, and its part near the pylorus appeared rough, with a nodular protruding lesion causing obstruction of the gastric outlet . Endoscopic passage through the site was difficult, and only an ultrathin electronic gastroscope could pass to the duodenum. The duodenum bulb and descending duodenum appeared unremarkable. Biopsies were not representative for a neoplastic lesion. Abdominal computed tomography showed marked wall thickening of the antrum, which was enhanced by contrast agent , while the remainder of the abdomen, including the pancreas, was unremarkable. Barium meal examination showed filling defect at the antrum and stenosis of the lumen .
A distal gastrectomywas performed. Gross examination of the surgically resected specimen revealed that the gastric pylorus was thickened and rigid. Histopathological examination confirmed the presence of a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma and the coexisting presence of pancreatic heterotopia composed of ducts (Heinrich type III) , thus supporting the diagnosis of a malignancy arising from pancreatic heterotopia in the stomach. The lesions developed predominantly in the submucosal layer and infiltrated the muscular layer. The lesions also invaded and broke through the serosal membrane and invaded bundles of nerves . The resected margins were free of tumor tissue.
None of the 20 identified lymph nodes was positive. Immunohistochemistry analysis of the cancer cells showed positivity for cytokeratin 7 , cytokeratin, CEA , CDX-2 , cytokeratin20 (partially) , P53 (about 10%) and Ki-67 (about 7%), and negativity for Her-2.