The patient (male, 60 years old) was admitted to our department in May 2017.
Abdominal bloating for one month.
The patient presented abdominal distension without obvious inducement 1 month ago, and was aware that the abdominal distension was more obvious in a few days, which affected breathing and daily life. During the course of the disease, the patient had no diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fearlessness, cold, fever, or other discomfort. The patient had been hospitalized in other hospital before. Routine examination of blood in other hospital showed that white blood cell count was 11.5 × 109/L, lymphocyte ratio was 11.3%, and eosinophil count was 39.4%. Immune-related tests showed IgG 38.94 g/L, IgE 7250 g/L, and IgM 0.4 6 g/L. Urine is negative for Bence Jones protein. A full abdominal-pelvic computed tomography (CT) plain scan and three-dimensional reconstruction examination showed: (1) Wide nodular thickening of the peritoneum and multiple soft tissue masses in the abdominal cavity (considering malignant tumors with peritoneal metastasis and multiple lymph node metastasis); (2) The right liver lobe low perfusion area which suggested a possibility of metastases; (3) Mucosal thickening of the gastric antrum (it is recommended to perform gastroscopy); (4) A large amount of peritoneal effusion; and (5) Small renal cysts. Gastroscopy showed chronic non-atrophic gastritis with erosion. During hospitalization in other hospital, symptomatic treatments including absorbing ascites and diuretic treatment were provided. In order to facilitate further treatment, this patient was admitted to our hospital as “ascites to be diagnosed”. Since the onset of the disease, the patient had a systemic rash accompanied by pruritus, which was diagnosed as “eczema” in the other hospital and the effect of drug treatment was poor. In recent 1 mo, the patient had normal defecation and urine, and was mentally stable, with poor appetite, poor sleep, and a weight loss of 10 kg.
The patient had a medical history of “hypertension” for 3 yr, without regular drug treatment, and denied a chronic medical history of diabetes, coronary heart disease, and other diseases, an infectious medical history of hepatitis and tuberculosis, a medical history of surgery, blood transfusion, and trauma, and a history of drug allergy. The patient’s history of preventive inoculation was unknown.
The patient had a drinking history of 20 yr, about 250 mL liquor daily, and had been sober for 3 yr. The rest of the personal and family history sections were unexceptional.
Admission examination showed stable vital signs, visible multiple skin rashes, and itchy skin lesions after pruritus in mucous membranes without obvious abnormalities in heart and lung examinations. Abdominal distention with frog-like ventral appearance was observed. No obvious abnormalities in the liver, kidney and spleen were observed. Shifting dullness was positive. There was no obvious edema in both lower limbs.
After admission, the relevant examinations were performed. Routine blood tests showed that the white blood cell count was 7.89 × 109/L, eosinophils accounted for 22.4%, and absolute eosinophil count was 1.77 × 109/L. High-sensitivity CRP was 12.7 mg/L, and procalcitonin was 0.17 ng/L. Biochemical tests showed that serum potassium was 3.2 mmol/L, serum sodium was 132.0 mmol/L, total protein was 99.5 g/L, albumin was 37.3 g/L, globulin was 62 g/L, immunoglobulin G was 46.04 g/L, IgG1 was 19.5 g/L, IgG4 was 5.93 g/L, and IgG 2 and IgG 3 were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 47 mm/h, CA125 was 983.90 U/mL, coagulation function, renal function, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, HIV test, tuberculosis immune examination, ANA series, anti-ENA antibody spectrum, vasculitis series, and other tests showed no obvious abnormalities. Ascites examination showed that it was yellow in color, slightly turbid, and qualitatively positive for mucin; the number of cells in ascites was 9829/μL, and the number of nucleated cells was 5829/μL (polymorphonuclear cells accounted for 8.1%, and mononuclear cells accounted for 91.9%). The total protein was 62.2 g/L, albumin was 22.1 g/L, globulin was 40.1 g/L, and adenosine deaminase was 15.9 U/L. CDC examination showed that Schistosoma IgG antibody was positive. Ascites bacteria, fungi, anaerobes, and mycobacteria culture and smears were negative. Ascites cytology showed that the smear had mesothelial cells, phagocytes, a large number of lymphocytes, and a small number of eosinophils.
After the patient was admitted to the hospital, we performed gastrointestinal endoscopy and multi-point biopsy of the gastrointestinal mucosa. Gastroscopy revealed chronic superficial gastritis. Biopsy was performed for the gastric fundus, gastric body, gastric antrum, duodenal bulb, and duodenum descending area. Pathological diagnosis was chronic superficial gastritis in the fundus (eosinophil count < 20/HPF [high-power fields]); chronic superficial gastritis with intestinal metaplasia in gastric body (eosinophil count < 20/HPF); chronic superficial gastritis and focal glandular epithelial metaplasia in the gastric antrum (eosinophil count < 20/HPF), and chronic inflammation in the duodenal bulb and descending area (eosinophil count < 20/HPF) . Colonoscopy showed no obvious ab-normalities in the ileum and colon mucosa. Multi-point biopsy by colonoscopy was performed in the distal ileum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum. Pathological diagnosis was chronic inflammatory changes in mucus (eosinophil count < 20/HPF) . The smear showed mesothelial cells, phagocytic cells, a large number of lymphocytes, and a small amount of eosinophils . The routine examination failed to identify the cause. In order to further diagnose, the patient completed laparoscopy with full communication and informed consent of the patient and her family. The patient underwent intravenous general anesthesia and tracheal intubation. Under the umbilicus, a long observation hole of about 10 mm was constructed, and pneumoperitoneum was built with the pressure of 12-14 mmHg. A laparoscope was placed through the sheath for examination. According to the nature and location of the lesion, two additional holes were made as surgical operation holes. Under the laparoscope, we found that the abdominal cavity was scattered with a large number of nodular lesions. Part of the omentum resection was sent for pathological examination. Histopathology showed that there was diffuse lymphoid cell infiltration in omentum tissues. Thus, we consider lymphoproliferative disease. Immunohistochemistry showed that there was lymphoid tissue hyperplasia that was closely arranged in a follicular shape. No typical cuff structure was observed. Focal follicular fusion was observed. Central cells and centroblasts (>15/HPF) were seen in the follicles. Thus, we considered follicular lymphoma (grade 3a, follicular type) . Immunohistochemistry results showed CD20 (+), 20/HPF CD10 (+), Bcl-6 (+), Bcl-2 (-), CD3 (-), CD38, IgG, IgG4 (follicle cell plasma +), Ki-67 (60%), and CK (-) . After operation, the patient had no complications such as bleeding or infection. The final diagnosis was peritoneal follicular lymphoma. The patient was immediately transferred to the local hematology department for further treatment. The patient was followed once a month for 11 mo. He had no ascites and was generally in good condition currently.