A 73-year-old man with dyslipidaemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus and triple-vessel disease [90%, 50%, 100%, and 99% stenosis in the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD), proximal left circumflex coronary artery (LCX), distal LCX, and right coronary artery (RCA), respectively] underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) with left internal thoracic artery (ITA) to LAD, right ITA composite grafting with radial artery to LCX and RCA. The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 53% during CABG but decreased to 34% within 4 years, leading to the diagnosis of ICM. Despite optimal medical therapy with a beta-blocker, digoxin, and phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitor, heart failure (HF) symptoms remained consistent at New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III. Owing to chronic kidney disease, the patient was unable to take the full medication for HF, such as angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, angiotensin II receptor blocker, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor, and sodium glucose cotransporter 2.
We considered the progression of coronary artery lesions and a newly developed valvular disease as causes of HF. However, none were confirmed through cardiac workup.
At 6 years post-CABG, echocardiography revealed the LV end-diastolic diameter (LVDd), LV end-systolic diameter (LVDs), and LVEF were 60, 53 mm, and 25%, respectively . The peak VO2 was 11.4 mL/min/kg . Coronary flow reserve in NH3-positron emission tomography (NH3-PET) was impaired in each region (total, 1.69; LAD, 1.67; LCX, 1.64; RCA, 1.83) . In Tc-99m MIBI scintigraphy, the washout rate (WR) was 17% and was especially high in the anterior to lateral region , suggesting impaired mitochondrial function. In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), the enhanced area [scar area (SA)] percentage was 29.9%, distributed in the lateral to inferior region but not transmurally .
As the patient was ineligible for heart transplantation, AMP transplantation was performed 6 years after CABG. Muscle specimens were harvested from the vastus medialis and cultured in a sheet as previously reported. Five patches were transplanted to the anterolateral LV wall via left thoracotomy. The patient required inotropic support for 3 days post-surgery, which was smoothly weaned off and he was discharged 30 days after surgery.
The patient had an uneventful course after discharge, without HF-related hospitalizations. One year post-AMP transplantation, the LVDs decreased from 53 to 47 mm; the LVEF improved from 25 to 36% . Physical activity showed improvements, with peak VO2 increasing from 11.4 to 13.8 mL/min/kg, and NYHA classification improving from Class III to Class I . NH3-positron emission tomography indicated a decline in myocardial blood flow (MBF) both at rest and in stress conditions . Coronary flow reserve declined from 1.69 to 1.24 at 6 months after treatment but significantly improved to 2.07 at 1 year after treatment . Coronary flow reserve improvement was observed in all coronary regions . The Tc-99m MIBI WR improved from 17 to 7% 1 year after treatment, especially in the anterolateral region . Coronary flow reserve increased in all 17 American heart association segments. The Tc-99m MIBI WR improved in most segments, except 4 and 10 (see , ). Magnetic resonance imaging with LGE revealed a reduction in the percentage of the SA from 29.9 to 21.7% after treatment (, , ). The percentage of the SA in each coronary region also decreased after treatment ( Consequently, there was an improvement in LVEF on echocardiography and a reduction in SA on MRI after treatment, along with the improvements in CFR and Tc-99m MIBI WR .
The bull’s eye image demonstrates local changes in CFR, Tc-99m MIBI WR, and SA on MRI . CFR improved globally; Tc-99m MIBI WR and SA improved around the LAD and LCX regions near the AMP-implanted area. The parameter details of each image modality are shown in the , .
The patient has been outpatient for two years after the surgery without any HF readmissions.