A 52-year-old North African Tunisian Caucasian woman was admitted with a six-week history of headache to hospital. She had been diagnosed with seropositive destructive RA nine years before, without any extra-articular manifestations. She received methotrexate 7.5mg per week, low doses of prednisone 7.5mg per day and anti-inflammatory drugs. She presented with a six-week history of bilateral temporal headaches. There was no fever or vomiting. Her body temperature was normal and her blood pressure was 120/60mmHg. Physical examination revealed typical joint deformities of RA, but with no subcutaneous nodules or skin lesions. Synovitis was noted at both wrists as well as at the second and third metacarpophalangeal joints of both hands. Her neurological examination was normal including her deep tendon and plantar reflexes. There was no evidence of meningitis or focal neurological signs. Her temporal pulses were brisk and symmetric. Laboratory tests revealed the following results: erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 27mm/hour, C-reactive protein of 14mg/l (normal: <6) and hemoglobin of 14.9mg/DL. The white blood cell count was normal (8180/mm3) as were her platelets (380,000/mm3). Liver and kidney function tests were normal, as well as blood glucose levels. No obvious infection, disseminated intravascular coagulation, atlanto-axial dislocation or other collagen diseases were recognized by physical and blood examinations. Electrophysiological studies showed no evidence of peripheral nerve lesion or denervation. Tests were positive for rheumatoid factor (512UI/ml) and for antinuclear antibodies (1/640). Her serum complement, circulating immune complexes, and antineutrophil cytoplasm antibodies were normal. The fundus examination and the fluorescein angiography did not reveal any signs of vasculitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain with the T2 sequence showed high-intensity signal images at the frontal and parietal-cortico-subcortical junction suggesting hemispheric vasculitis (Figure
, ). Our patient had not had any severe neurological manifestation or any systemic non-neurological manifestation. She suffered only from persistent headache. Intensification of the methotrexate therapy (15mg per week) was enough to give a good outcome. Her headache disappeared in two weeks and there were no symptoms of meningitis or focal neurological signs after four months.