An 80-year-old man, affected by coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia, former heavy smoker, was admitted to our Department on May 5, 2011. Previous Doppler ultrasound exams had shown the presence of an aneurysmatic dilatation of the infra-renal portion of the aorta, which had been followed-up until reaching a maximum diameter of almost 5.2 cm (January 2011). Thus, the patient underwent computed tomography (CT) angiographic imaging, which demonstrated aneurysm sac shrinkage of about 5 × 5.5 cm, with a longitudinal extension of about 8 cm and showed also signs of mural thrombotic apposition of about 3 cm of maximum assial thickness.
Physical examination evidenced a tender and pulsatile abdominal mass, accompanied by the auscultatory finding of a systolic murmur in the paraumbilical region. During the hospitalization, aortic ecotomography was repeated and revealed maximum diameters of the aneurysmatic formation of about 6 × 5.8 cm, confirming the presence of a large, eccentric intra-sac thrombus. The patient also underwent coronary angiography, which showed significant stenosis of the left anterior descending coronary artery and of the circumflex coronary artery, which were judged not amenable of percutaneous treatment. Given the size of the aneurysm sac (and, in particular, the progressive and quick enlargement), the presence of intramural thrombotic burden causing a not trivial potential risk of a severe peripheral embolism and the severe coronary artery disease, we decided to perform EVAR with implantation of an aorto-bisiliac endoprosthesis, using surgical isolation and access of the left common femoral artery and percutaneous access of the right common femoral artery. At the final angiographic control, no endoleak was visible. The following hospital course was completely devoid of complications, without significant post-operative anemia or signs of infections, and the patient was discharged five days after the procedure.
In July 2012, a routine CT control revealed the presence of an apparent type I endoleak. The patient was in a clinically stable state (without any symptoms and no signs of anemia). Aortography confirmed the presence of a posterior peri-graft large leak . The patient declined the high-risk option of open surgical repair in favor of a final endovascular attempt. He underwent percutaneous closure of the peri-graft endoleak (type I) by means of embolization release controlled spirals and liquid embolization Onyx. Trans-arterial embolization was performed via the radial artery approach. A right radial access was obtained using a micro-puncture kit (Cook Medical), and a 6 Fr sheath (Cordis) was placed in the right radial artery without difficulty. The endoleak channel was engaged with a (SOS Omni) selective catheter. The presence and location of the type I endoleak was confirmed by aortography. The aneurysm sac was treated using embolization release controlled spirals and liquid embolization Onyx (Micro Therapeutics Iac, Irvine, Calif) . Before injection of Onyx, the microcatheter was flushed with DMSO and Onyx was subsequently injected under fluoroscopy. We used the currently available solutions Onyx-18 (6 % Ethylene vinyl alcohol (EVOH)/94 % DMSO), Onyx-20 (6.5 % EVOH/93.5 % DMSO) or Onyx-34 (8 % EVOH/92 % DMSO). Onyx-18 had the lowest and Onyx-34 the highest viscosity. Post-embolization angiography showed no further endoleak . At 3-month-follow-up, the patient was free of radiographic evidence of type I endoleak or aneurysm sac espansion.