A 50 year old male presented with intermittent colicky abdominal pain for 3 months. Abdominal ultrasound and the KUB (Kidney, ureter and bladder) x-ray revealed 1.2 cm calculus in the mid right ureter with mild hydronephrosis. His left kidney was normal in size and both kidneys showed normal corticomedullary pattern. His renal function was normal.
While waiting for lithotripsy he developed chest pain which turned out to be extensive anterior ST elevation myocardial infarction. Coronary angiography showed a complete occlusion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). He underwent primary angioplasty to the proximal LAD, 150 mL of iodixanol contrast agent was used for this intervention. His haemodynamic parameters remained stable throughout. He was normotensive. His jugular venous pressure was not elevated and the lung bases were clear. From the onset of chest pain he did not pass any urine. Anuria persisted despite adequate fluid resuscitation. He was treated with 80 mg of intravenous furosemide without any response.
His full blood count was normal and there was no eosinophilia. Urine full report was normal without any urine eosinophils. Serum complement (C3 and C4) level was normal. However his creatinine continued to rise steadily, and reached 6.2 mg/dl at 48 hours after the stenting. Urine electrolyte value and fractional excretion of sodium were not consistent with a pre-renal pathology. Repeatedly abdominal ultrasound scan with Doppler showed right ureteric calculus and failed to reveal any abnormalities in renal arterial or venous flow. 2D echo cardiogram showed anterior wall hypokinesia with preserved ejection fraction. Since his renal function deteriorated, he was supported with haemodyalysis. Total anuria persisted for three days. On day four he passed 30 ml of urine. Six days after myocardial infarction he underwent ureteric stent implantation to the right ureter. Despite the stenting, he was anuric (i.e. <50 ml/day) until the day nine. His urine output gradually improved thereafter. Two months after the acute event he underwent successful lithotripsy. After 6 months of the acute event his DTPA scan showed normal renal function.