A 41-year-old female presented to the emergency department with a one-week history of abdominal pain, worsening back pain and constipation. Past medical history included congenital lumbar myelomeningocele causing paraplegia status post spinal fixation, extensive sacral decubitus ulcers, obesity, severe lower extremity lymphedema, Arnold Chiari malformation type II with remote ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement and neurogenic bladder with chronic indwelling Foley catheter. She complained of vomiting and fatigue but denied fevers and chills. Her Foley catheter was changed two days prior to admission. Upon physical examination, she was found to have a foul smelling stage IV right ischial decubitus ulcer, bilateral leg lymphedema with multiple skin excoriations and poor dentition. The patient was unable to recall how long she had the wounds. The wounds had worsened over time due to inadequate wound care and the inability to shower at home due to body habitus and paraplegia. Additional exposure history included living with a dog and cigarette smoking. She denied intravenous (IV) drug use.
Laboratory data was consistent with an elevated white blood cell count (WBC) of 42.60 K µl−1, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia and pyuria with acute kidney injury. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was concerning for osteomyelitis of the right ischium with adjacent abscess. The patient was diagnosed with sepsis, blood cultures were obtained and she was treated with empiric IV vancomycin and cefepime. An unsuccessful attempt to place an intraosseous catheter was performed. Blood culture became positive after 17 h of incubation and a Gram stain of the blood culture revealed Gram-negative bacilli . The sample was inoculated to sheep blood, chocolate and MacConkey media (Becton, Dickinson and Company) and cultured aerobically at 37 ˚C for 24 h, growing W. chitiniclastica . Proteus mirabilis was also isolated from the culture after 48 h. The organisms were identified accurately by MALDI-TOF MS (RUO version 3.1, Bruker Daltonics) with a score of >2.0. Extraction was not required. A culture sent from the ischial wound grew W. chitiniclastica, Myroides injenensis and Enterococcus faecalis aerobically, and Bacteroides ovatus/Bacteroides xylanisolvens anaerobically. Susceptibilities were determined using the MicroScan WalkAway (Beckman Coulter). The interpretation of antibiotic susceptibility was based on the minimal inhibitory concentration breakpoints (µg ml−1) for other non-Enterobacteriaceae described in the M100 Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing, CLSI, 27th edition January 2017. Appropriate quality controls (Escherichia coli ATCC 35218, Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 700603 and Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853) were utilized for the interpretation of susceptibility results. The W. chitiniclastica isolate was susceptible to all antibiotics tested .
The patient remained afebrile throughout her admission and WBC improved with antibiotics. On hospital day 6 she was taken to the operating room for wound debridement, but no additional cultures were obtained. Given her improvement on hospital day 15 she was discharged to a skilled nursing facility on IV vancomycin and cefepime via a peripherally inserted central catheter, and oral metronidazole for a planned 6 week course.
Five days after discharge she developed altered mental status and became hypotensive. She was admitted to the ICU and required vasopressor support. She was treated with IV vancomycin and meropenem. A stool PCR was positive for Clostridium difficile so IV metronidazole and oral vancomycin were added. She developed worsening metabolic acidosis, requiring continuous renal replacement therapy, and acute encephalopathy, necessitating intubation for airway protection. Despite aggressive treatment she continued to decline and on hospital day three, her family decided to transition her to comfort care and she expired shortly thereafter. Blood cultures from the second admission were initially negative, but a line culture was positive for Candida albicans shortly after she expired.