A 65-year-old Asian female with Ph+-ALL in complete remission presented at our institution with symptoms of visual disturbance, central scotoma and pain with eye movement in both eyes for a 1-month duration. Her past medical history included a diagnosis of Ph+-ALL initially presenting as fever 2 years previously, after which she started chemotherapy for 18 months. At the time of presentation, her ALL status was in complete remission, and her laboratory test results were normal for 6 months. Ocular examination revealed a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/40 in the right eye (RE) and 20/50 in the left eye (LE). The intraocular pressure (IOP) of both eyes was within normal limits. Both eyes had normal pupillary reflexes and normal ocular adnexa, a quiet anterior chamber, a clear lens with increased density and no vitreous cells in the anterior vitreous face. Overall, the anterior segment examination was unremarkable. A fundus photo showed dramatic creamy-white optic nerve infiltration with multiple flame-shaped peripapillary hemorrhages, retinal venous dilation and tortuosity, and blot hemorrhages on the foveal area in the RE . The LE had a similar hemorrhagic fundal presentation as the RE, except that fewer peripapillary and retinal hemorrhages were located in the LE . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed exudates with irregularity in retinal layers and subretinal fluid around the optic disc in the RE . Serous macular detachments with subretinal hyperreflectivity and subretinal fluid around the optic disc were observed in LE . Neither neurologic nor dermatologic signs were present on physical examination. Based on the ocular findings and history of blood disease, the patient was referred to the treating oncologist for further management. Peripheral blood investigations (performed within 3 days of initial presentation) revealed a hemoglobin level of 11.6 g/dL, a white blood cell count of 3680/µL, and a platelet count of 129,000/µL. Bone marrow examination revealed an increase in blast cells. Lumbar puncture (LP) showed normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) open pressure (16 cm). Flow cytometry analysis of CSF samples revealed 1667/µL nucleated cells and 97% immature B cells with a phenotype similar to that of cells detected at initial diagnosis. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no enhancement of the optic nerve top or bottom. She was managed as a case of ALL relapse with CNS involvement and the patient was subsequently treated with 12 cycles of intrathecal (IT) therapy (methotrexate, dexamethasone, and cytarabine) for 6 weeks. Cranial irradiation was scheduled but delayed for personal reasons. We followed up with the patient for a duration of 8 weeks, during which she experienced visual recovery, as revealed by a BCVA of 20/25 in the RE and 20/32 in the LE. However, complete resolution has not yet been achieved. Follow-up fundus examination along with OCT revealed that retinal hemorrhages were significantly reduced and that edema of the optic nerve decreased in both eyes.