A 59-year-old male patient presented with widespread edema and decreased urine output. The patient had no history of active arthritis, hemoptysis, bleeding, purpura, fever, chills, weight loss, streptococcal infection or known tropical disease and had not suffered from asthma or any other atopic diseases. At the time of his visit to our hospital, his blood pressure was 136/93 mmHg, and his temperature was 36.9 °C. The physical examination showed that the patient was suffering from left-sided hearing loss and revealed the presence of a palpable swollen mobile and non-tender lymph node with a size of approximately 1.5*1 cm located behind the left ear. No other superficial lymph nodes were palpable. A urinalysis showed 3+ proteinuria and 3.68 g of proteinuria in 24 h.The serum albumin (Alb) concentration was 11.3 g/L, the serum creatinine concentration was 218.7 μmol/L, the BUN concentration was 25.33 mmol/L, the eGFR was 27.4 mL/min/m2, and the ESR was 112 mm/h. The patient’s serum complement (C3 and C4) levels, antinuclear antibody titers, antistreptolysin O titers, and hepatitis screening results were normal. Hematology revealed a normal hemoglobin concentration and platelet count, a total white blood cell count of 6.98*10E9/L, and a percentage of eosinophils of 6.6%. The serum IgE concentration was elevated, as it was higher than 4000 IU/mL. A Mycobacterium tuberculosis γ-interferon release test was negative, and a bone marrow biopsy did not display obvious abnormalities. A neck CT showed that the cervical vascular sheath was surrounded by several small lymph nodes, and an ultrasound demonstrated the presence of bilateral pleural effusions and ascites. Pleural effusion examination revealed a karyocyte count of 76*10E6/L, a neutrophil count of 12%, a lymphocyte percentage of 85%, an Alb concentration of 1.8 g/L, a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) concentration of 44 U/L, and an adenosine deaminase (ADA) concentration of 1.3 U/L.
Histological sections of lymph nodes were examined in the department of pathology. The examinations revealed the presence of follicular and interfollicular hyperplasia and the proliferation of venules surrounded by infiltrating eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and mast cells. An eosinophilic microabscess was detected in the cortical area of the lymph nodes . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of KD.
Renal biopsy showed that two glomeruli were sclerotic (13 glomeruli were assessed). The remaining glomerular mesangial cells and stromal cells showed signs of mild proliferation. No significant widening of the mesangial area was observed, and the basement membrane had no obvious lesions. The tubular epithelial cells displayed signs of vacuolization. Additionally, part of the renal tubular epithelium had flattened, and the bristles had fallen off. Small numbers of protein casts were present in the dilated tubules. No obvious interstitial inflammatory cell infiltration (including eosinophil infiltration) was present, and no IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C1q, C4 or Fib deposition was noted in any of the glomeruli. Electron microscopy showed mild hyperplasia of mesangial cells and stromal cells, extensive fusing of the podocyte processes of the epithelial cells, and a lack of electron-dense deposits .These findings confirmed the diagnosis of MCD combined with acute renal tubular injury.
The patient’s volume load did not respond to diuretics, and his urine output decreased. Furthermore, increases in the patient’s urea and creatinine levels were observed. Therefore, hemodialysis was initiated to improve the patient’s edema and kidney function. The renal biopsy demonstrated the presence of MCD combined with acute renal tubular injury. The patient was ultimately diagnosed with KD associated with MCD and acute renal tubular injury. The patient subsequently received 40 mg/day methylprednisolone for 3 weeks. Urinary protein and renal function were monitored during treatment, which decreased the patient’s serum creatinine level to 62.3 μmol/L, increased the eGFR to 103 mL/min/m2, increased the serum albumin concentration to 15.6 g/L and significantly increased urine output compared with pre-treatment values. However, the patient’s proteinuria increased to7.02 g/day.
The patient withdrew from hemodialysis and continued taking 40 mg/day prednisolone after discharge, but returned to our hospital after 6 weeks. At that time, urinalysis revealed 1+ proteinuria. The serum albumin concentration was 37.5 g/L, the serum creatinine concentration was 69.4 μmol/L, the BUN concentration was 12.55 mmol/L, and the eGFR was 97.8 mL/min/m2. The changes in the patient’s laboratory indexes are shown in Fig. .
Several databases, including PubMed, EMBASE, MEDLINE (Ovid), the Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), the VIP Database for Chinese Technical Periodicals (VIP), and WanFang Data, were systematically searched from the date of database inception until Nov 01, 2017 to collect published international and domestic studies with the term “Kimura’s disease” and “Nephrotic syndrome”. The selection criteria were as follows: 1). studies including patients who were diagnosed with KD by lymph node or mass biopsy; 2). studies in which renal involvement was noted in all patients, and renal biopsy was used to define the pathology. The exclusion criteria were as follows: 1). studies which the patients were diagnosed with Kimura’s disease but with no renal involvement; 2). the data provided by the articles could not be accessed, or the full text could not be transformed. 3). the articles were reviews or abstracts. Ultimately, 18 studies [, , –] were included in the analysis. 8 studies [, , –, , , ] were published in English, and the others were published in Chinese. 26 patients were involved in this review. 20 patients were from China, 2 were from India, and one each was from Japan, Turkey, Vietnam, and Egypt .
Of the 26 patients included in the review, two were female and were from China and India, respectively, and the remaining patients were male. Thus, the male-to-female ratio was 12:1. Most of the patients presented with cervical lymphadenopathy or subcutaneous masses in the head or neck region. The mean age of these patients was 31.1 ± 14.2 years, the daily protein excretion level was 8.04 ± 4.62 g/24 h, the serum albumin concentration was 21.2 ± 8.57 g/L, the serum creatinine concentration was 170 ± 190 μmol/L, the blood eosinophil count was 23.7 ± 15.4%, and the IgE titer was 1285 ± 1223 IU/mL.
Renal biopsy was performed in all patients. Most of the patients presented with mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (13 patients). Other patients presented with membranous nephropathy (4 patients), minimal change disease (3 patients), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (3 patients), IgA nephropathy (2 patients) and acute tubular injury (1 patient).
The majority of patients were treated with corticosteroids alone, while a small number of patients received corticosteroids combined with immunosuppressive agents, such as Tripterygium wilfordii, cyclophosphamide and leflunomide. With the exception of 2 patients who progressed to ESRD (end stage renal disease) and received hemodialysis, all other patients achieved remission with respect to their proteinuria. Simultaneously, the neck lymph nodes or masses became smaller. However, 5 patients experienced a proteinuria relapse during follow-up, including 4 patients with mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis and one patient with membranous nephropathy.