A 71-year-old Japanese woman presented to our institution with highly symptomatic paroxysmal AF refractory to antiarrhythmic drugs . The patient had a history of cholecystectomy. She reported experiencing recurrent epigastric pain after cholecystectomy, which was relieved with nitrates. Coronary angiography revealed moderate (fractional flow reserve negative), mid-segment left anterior descending artery stenosis. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed no obstructive lesions, such as stones or tumours in the biliary tract. The patient was diagnosed with SO dysfunction. Apixaban 5 mg twice daily and cibenzoline 50 mg thrice daily were prescribed. Her blood pressure was 130/55 mmHg, and physical examination revealed normal heart sounds, no jugular venous distention, or pedal oedema. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal biventricular function with an LA diameter of 33 mm and LA volume index of 16 mL/m2. The preprocedural computed tomography (CT) scan is shown in Figure , and left atrial appendage thrombus was not detected with the delayed phase acquisition protocol. The patient underwent CBA for AF with the procedure as follows: PVI was performed under deep sedation. Midazolam (4 mg bolus), thiopental (100 mg bolus), and propofol (170 mg) were continuously infused. Luminal oesophageal temperature was monitored. A 28-mm cryoballoon (CB) (Arctic Front Advance; Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was applied for 180 s to the right superior, right inferior, and left superior pulmonary vein (PV) and for 150 s to the left inferior PV. During right PV ablation, the phrenic nerve was paced at 50 b.p.m. from the superior vena cava while recording diaphragmatic compound motor action potentials (CMAPs). Cryoablation was immediately interrupted if a 30% reduction in CMAP amplitude was observed, or if the oesophageal temperature was below 15°C. The fluoroscopic images are shown in Figure and the details of the procedure are presented in Table . All PVs were successfully isolated after single application. Transient phrenic nerve injury was observed during right superior PV ablation at 83 s. After complete recovery of diaphragmatic movement, an additional CB application was delivered to the right superior PV for 90 s. Vital signs were stable during the procedure, and the procedure time was 63 min. Approximately 15 min after the procedure, the patient experienced epigastric pain. Electrocardiogram monitoring was consistent with sinus tachycardia without ST-T segment changes. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated that her cardiac wall motion was normal and no evidence of pericardial effusion, which excluded the possibility of coronary spasm, coronary air embolism, and cardiac tamponade. An immediate CT scan of her abdomen ruled out acute pyloric spasm, but surprisingly, dilation of the intra- and extrahepatic bile duct, with the diameter of the common bile duct (CBD) measuring ∼15.6 mm, was observed . Intravenous nitroglycerine administration successfully relieved her symptoms. Blood tests on postoperative day 1 revealed severely elevated aminotransferase levels [aspartate aminotransferase, 3156 U/L (normal value 8–38); alanine aminotransferase, 2084 U/L (normal value 4–44); lactate dehydrogenase, 2279 U/L (normal value 106–211); total bilirubin 1.7 mg/dL (normal value 0.2–1.2)]. However, her symptoms were completely relieved on post-operative day 1, without any additional treatment. On post-operative day 5, her liver enzyme levels were almost normalized (aspartate aminotransferase, 86 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 403 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 175 U/L; total bilirubin 1.0 mg/dL) , and a CT scan revealed that the bile duct distension had improved . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. During a follow-up period of 12 months, the patient remained free of any AF episodes without the need for antiarrhythmic drugs.