A 68-year-old woman with a long history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension, who underwent CABG comprised of the in situ left internal thoracic artery (LITA) to the LAD, the in situ GEA to the RCA, and the saphenous vein graft (SVG) to the obtuse marginal branch of the left circumflex artery (LCX) to the triple vessel coronary disease 9 years before, was referred to our hospital due to the aortic valve stenosis. She suffered a chest pain on exertion 2 months before the presentation. A transthoracic echocardiography showed severe aortic valve stenosis with the aortic valve area (AVA) of 0.83 cm2 and the mean transvalvular pressure gradient of 38 mmHg. Her coronary angiography revealed severe triple vessel disease with occlusions of the proximal parts of the LAD and that of the RCA, and all of the bypass grafts were patent .
At the surgery, a standard re-sternotomy was performed paying careful attention to avoid any injury to mediastinal structures. The living grafts including LITA-LAD, GEA-posterior descending artery, and SVG-LCX were dissected completely freely from adhesion with surrounding tissue, and the adhesion of the heart was completely freed from the pericardium. A cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established by the cannulation to the ascending aorta and to the superior and inferior vena cava respectively, and the left ventricular venting tube was inserted from the right upper pulmonary vein. First and foremost, a new SVG was anastomosed to the mid-portion of the RCA. The ascending aorta was cross-clamped, and the in situ grafts of LITA and GEA were also clamped simultaneously. The initial cardioplegia was infused antegradely from the aortic root and the SVG anastomosed to the RCA, after which the retrograde cardioplegia infusion from the coronary sinus was followed additionally. Topical cooling with ice slush was employed for myocardial protection as well. The ascending aorta was incised obliquely below the proximal anastomosis of the previous SVG to the LCX. The aortic valve was exposed and all three cusps were thickened and densely calcified; their mobility was almost completely lost and the valve area was strictly restricted. The aortic valve was excised and replaced with a 19-mm bioprosthesis. During these procedures, the second cardioplegia was infused from the left coronary orifice, the orifice of the SVG to LCX and the temporary SVG to the RCA antegradely, after which the retrograde cardioplegia was followed as well. The aortotomy was closed, and the clamps of the ascending aorta and living in situ grafts were released under deairing from the LV vent and the aortic root. Once normal sinus rhythm was restored, the patient could be weaned off CPB without much difficulty. The SVG to the RCA was tied off. The durations of the operation, CPB, and the aortic clamp time were 346, 164, and 88 min, respectively. The creatine kinase-MB level on the first postoperative day rose up to 263.4 ng/ml, but a new asynergy of left ventricular wall motion was not recognized. The postoperative transthoracic echocardiography showed the prosthetic valve functioning well with the AVA of 2.06 cm2 and the transvalvular peak pressure gradient of 15.3 mmHg. The patient went along with an uneventful recovery course and was discharged on the 15 postoperative days. She was reviewed at our outpatient department 1 month after the discharge and found to be asymptomatic.