A 37-year-old white man with a past medical history of mitral valve prolapse and gastritis presented with abdominal pain. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an 18 cm × 17 cm × 11 cm colonic flexure mass. The patient underwent a resection of the intraabdominal mass with partial small bowel resection, resection of distal transverse and descending colon with enteroenterostomy, as well as colocolostomy, appendectomy and gastrostomy . Pathology was thought to be consistent with leiomyosarcoma, grade 3/3.
The gastric wall tumor showed a high-grade spindle cell neoplasm with focal epithelioid features . Numerous atypical mitotic figures were noted. The background showed moderate amounts of chronic inflammatory infiltrate. The tumor was originally thought to represent a gastrointestinal leiomyosarcoma. Subsequent studies performed 20 years later included immunohistochemical stains showing patchy reactivity for vimentin, cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and cytokeratin 7, while other markers tested, including gastrointestinal stromal tumor and smooth muscle markers were negative. Notably, calretinin was also negative. This histology and immunoprofile were thought to represent an undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS).
Two months after resection of the intra-abdominal mass, the tumor recurred . He underwent resection of multiple masses in the falciform ligament, left pelvic side wall, small bowel, mesentery, and retroperitoneum. Multiple lymph nodes were also resected. Pathological examination was again thought to be consistent with leiomyosarcoma.
After recovery from surgery the patient received three courses of adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin, ifosfamide, dacarbazine, and doxorubicin. This involved 50 mg/m2 of cisplatin on day 1; doxorubicin 65 mg/m2 on day 1; dacarbazine 300 mg/m2 on days 1, 2 and 3; and ifosfamide 2.5 grams/m2 a day by continuous infusion for 3 days. This treatment was well tolerated, aside from neutropenic fevers requiring hospitalization.
Three months later, however, a CT scan revealed a 4-cm metastatic lesion in the left lobe of the liver. The patient underwent a partial left hepatectomy and cholecystectomy.
Three months later, a CT revealed multiple 2–3 cm lesions along the margin of the previous partial left hepatectomy. At the time, the patient noted night sweats and low-grade fevers of 99–100 °F, but good appetite and no significant weight loss. The tumor doubled in size during the next 5 weeks and imaging revealed multiple lesions throughout the remaining left lobe. He subsequently underwent a complete left hepatectomy and excision of perigastric lymph nodes. Pathological examination was thought to confirm metastatic grade 3 leiomyosarcoma of the liver. No extrahepatic involvement or lesions in the right lobe were noted by intraoperative ultrasound.
Five weeks later, the patient noted right upper abdominal fullness and pain, left shoulder pain, and presented to our clinic. Pathology review of the earlier resections at our institution and at another large sarcoma center in the US agreed with the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. A CT scan showed multiple metastases in the right lobe of the liver and splenic metastases. Immediately before starting PLD, CT imaging revealed multiple metastases in the remaining left lobe of the liver, the largest being 4 × 4 cm, and one spleen nodule. The left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was 58% by multi-gated acquisition (MUGA). The patient began treatment with PLD at 55 mg/m2 monthly. After 2 cycles of PLD a CT scan showed regression of tumor nodules. Because of mucositis and hand-foot syndrome the dose was reduced 10% for cycles 2–4 and 50% for cycle 5; thereafter, the dose was increased to 30.8 mg/m2 monthly starting with cycle 6 and the treatment interval lengthened to every 6 weeks starting with cycle 7. The left ventricular EF was 61% by MUGA before cycle 12. After 14 cycles the EF was 62% by MUGA and a CT scan showed a persistent lesion in the spleen. At this point, after 14 cycles of PLD, CT imaging revealed no visible disease in the liver and the spleen nodule that was unchanged in size but had a lower density. Thus, while a complete response by RECIST criteria was evident in the liver, the stable size of the spleen nodule indicated a partial response to PLD by RECIST. A splenectomy was performed revealing some viable tumor cells in a necrotic nodule. The patient received 3 more cycles of PLD for a total PLD dose of 595 mg/m2 and a total dose of free doxorubicin of 196 mg/m2. CT imaging revealed no tumor and MUGA showed an EF of 70%. The patient was followed with interval imaging with no recurrence.
Twenty-two years later, the patient experienced several months of scrotal pain radiating to his urethra and localized to his right testicle. An ultrasound showed a 2.8 cm × 1.6 cm × 0.8 cm mass on the outer surface of the bladder. Fine needle aspiration of the mass showed poorly differentiated carcinoma that was CK7+/CD20+ and histologically compatible with urothelial origin. A PET-CT revealed an intense hypermetabolic pelvic mass contiguous with the right side of the bladder. An exploratory laparotomy, intraabdominal mass resection, and partial cystectomy were performed.
Pathologic examination of the bladder wall tumor showed a 5.5 cm high-grade malignancy with epithelioid and sarcomatoid features . Margins were negative on the perivesical soft tissue mass, and 16 of 16 lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. Mitotic activity was high, and the background showed moderate chronic inflammation. It appeared predominantly located in the outer half of the bladder wall, involving the muscularis propria and perivesical fat. No mucosal involvement or in situ urothelial carcinoma was identified. The tumor was diffusely and strongly positive for calretinin, vimentin and cytokeratin. It was negative for all other markers tested, including gastrointestinal stromal tumor and smooth muscle markers. Given the presence in the bladder and co-expression of keratin and vimentin, it was possible that this represented a urothelial or a urachal remnant-based carcinoma with sarcomatoid differentiation. However, the location of the tumor (posterior dome, per imaging), lack of associated mucosal lesion, positive calretinin stain, and lack of reactivity for urothelial markers such as GATA3, p63, and CK5/6 were unusual for the above diagnosis. The diffuse calretinin reactivity, in conjunction with co-expression of keratin and vimentin, raised the possibility of mesothelial differentiation/origin. While the morphology was not incompatible with a poorly differentiated biphasic mesothelioma, the overall clinical presentation, lack of serosal continuity and non-reactivity for ancillary mesothelial markers (WT1, D2-40 and CK 5/6) precluded a definitive diagnosis of the same.
The morphology and immunohistochemical staining patterns of the remote gastric lesion were compared to that of the bladder neoplasm. Both were poorly differentiated neoplasms, but the high magnification cytology and calretinin reactivity were dissimilar; there was no clear evidence that the tumor on the bladder wall represented a recurrence of the remote malignancy. His hospital course was complicated by Citrobacter urinary tract infections and intraabdominal abscesses requiring three intraabdominal drains and intravenous antibiotics. EF by ultrasound was normal at 55–60%. He subsequently underwent neoadjuvant gemcitabine and cisplatin followed by total cystectomy; the cystectomy specimen showed no evidence of residual tumor. He continues to do well 4 months after surgery, with no evidence of tumor recurrence.