A 43-year-old Caucasian American man, who was a smoker but had no subjective or objective evidence of pulmonary disease or atopy, was in good health until he used a domestic aerosol product called 'Stand N' Seal "Spray-On" Grout Sealer' in an enclosed room in his house. Within a few hours of exposure to this sealant, he developed rapidly progressive shortness of breath and a severe non-productive cough. He did not have any associated chest pain or fever. His examination at our Emergency Department revealed a blood pressure of 155/89 mmHg, a heart rate of 126/minute, a respiratory rate 24/minute and a temperature of 37.2°C. No cyanosis, clubbing or edema was found. Lung auscultation revealed diminished air entry and inspiratory bilateral rales. A basic laboratory work-up showed normal results, including normal cell count differential.
An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia without any other abnormality. An arterial blood gas on room air demonstrated a PO2 of 32.7 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 67.2%, which improved to 85.2 mmHg and 97.4%, respectively, with 100% inspired oxygen. A chest X-ray and computer tomography of the patient were also obtained .
The patient was initially admitted to the intensive care unit to treat his chemical pneumonitis. He was initially treated with oxygen, albuterol nebulization and intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone, which was then followed by oral dexamethasone (10 mg every 8 hours). His condition improved in a few days. Upon discharge, he did not require oxygen. His respiratory symptoms had improved and he was instructed to take a 10-day course of oral prednisone.
The patient went to our pulmonary clinic one week after being discharged. He noted a definitive improvement in his symptoms but said that he was still experiencing intermittent wheezing and chest tightness, which could be alleviated by inhaling albuterol. He reported that he had not smoked tobacco since his hospitalization. A second chest X-ray yielded a normal result. A pulmonary function testing (PFT) showed reduced lung volumes and mild reduction in the patient's single-breath diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO). He did have a significant bronchodilator response to albuterol (320 ml and 13% improvement in FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 second)).
The patient returned for follow-up one month after presentation with complaints of an intermittent cough and shortness of breath in response to strong odours, fumes, cold air and exertion. He had not smoked tobacco since his hospital discharge. He then underwent cardiopulmonary exercise testing, which showed no ventilatory mechanical limitation, gas exchange abnormality or diffusion impairment. At about 3 months after his initial exposure to the cleaning product, the patient underwent a methacholine challenge test (MCT), which demonstrated a 22% decrease in his FEV1 level from 2.80 liters to 2.19 liters following the administration of methacholine at a concentration of 1 mg/ml. A diagnosis of reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS) was thus made, as our patient fulfilled the seven diagnostic criteria for RADS .
The patient was started on inhaled fluticasone and salmeterol. His cough and shortness of breath in response to strong odours, fumes, cold air and exertion showed a slow but steady improvement. His PFT showed a gradual improvement in flows . Six months after the initial exposure to the chemical, the patient had a repeat MCT and his FEV1 decreased from 2.75 litres to 2.33 litres (21% reduction). However, the concentration of methacholine, which had to achieve a positive test, was now 4 mg/ml as opposed to the 1 mg/ml on the initial MCT . He was made to continue his therapy until his bronchial reactivity is resolved.