A 42-year-old Caucasian male presented with rapidly progressive gait disturbance, distal weakness of the lower extremities, ascending hypoesthesia, impaired fine motor skills, and beginning cranial nerve palsy showing dysarthrophonia, facial paralysis, and eye movement abnormalities within several months. Tendon reflexes of the upper extremities were reduced and absent in the lower extremities. Nerve conduction studies showed a proximal demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy with active denervation, prolonged motor distal latency, and a reduction in the motor conduction velocity in N. medianus and N. ulnaris . The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed albuminocytologic dissociation with an elevated protein level of 22,300 g/L (reference value [RF] < 0.4 g/L). Ganglioside antibodies (GD1a, GM1, GM2, GQ1b, and GT1b) were negative. Nerve conduction studies showed proximal demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy with active denervation. With progressing symptoms showing no response to intravenous methylprednisolone, the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU). Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg, 30 g/day for 5 days) was initiated and the patient rapidly improved. Due to the clinical course of the disease and according to the EFNS/PNS criteria, the patient was diagnosed with typical CIDP.
Three months after discharge, the patient developed dysphagia, facial nerve palsy, dyspnea, and paralysis of the lower extremities. Under combined treatment with IVIg and methylprednisolone, the patient improved and was discharged to rehabilitation care. There, he complained about increasing physical exhaustion, reduction of his walking distance, worsening of the residual dysphagia, and dysarthria with an inability to swallow. His AChR antibodies (17.0 nmol/L, RF < 0.4) and titin antibodies were positive and repetitive nerve stimulation showed an abnormal decrement matching the criteria of MG.
The patient’s symptoms improved after the administration of pyridostigmine. Computer tomography of the upper chest revealed an inhomogeneous mass in the anterior mediastinum. Biopsy confirmed a thymoma, which was subsequently managed by a thymectomy.
Follow-up visits displayed consistent albuminocytologic dissociation in the CSF and the AChR antibodies decreased (2.1 nmol/L). Under long-term immunosuppression with azathioprine 150 mg and prednisone 15 mg daily and another IVIg application, dysphagia, dysarthria, and gait unsteadiness consistently improved.
However, almost 2 years later, the patient developed severe acute-on-chronic renal failure with high-grade proteinuria resulting in generalized edema followed by secondary hyperparathyroidism and dialysis-dependent renal failure. Renal biopsy confirmed beginning anti-phospholipase A2 receptor antibody-positive membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN), a common cause of nephrotic syndrome . One year of critical illness complicated by sepsis led to myasthenic crisis, but the patient recovered under repeated IVIg therapy and finally regained the partial ability to live autonomously.