A 72-year-old white man presented with a 2-year history of gait and balance disturbance, associated with paresthesia to his upper and lower limbs and frequent episodes of falling to the ground. He recently referred episodes of morning vomiting. At a physical examination he presented with a short neck and a low hairline at the back of his head. A neurological examination revealed ataxic gait with retropulsion at the Romberg test, slight weakness in his right limbs, tetra hyperreflexia with bilateral Hoffmann and Babinski signs, and dysmetria in the finger-to-nose test. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study revealed a fourth ventricle neoplastic lesion, with infiltrative features and non homogeneous signal. The lesion presented a uniform contrast enhancement in its posterior part while a peripheral enhancement was observed in its anterior portion.
A craniocervical computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed a scoliotic deformation of the vertebral column with C3 to C4 synostosis. These features allowed a diagnosis of Klippel–Feil syndrome .
The patient was operated through a suboccipital craniectomy with a C1 laminotomy and bilateral vertebral artery transposition. We performed a subtotal tumor resection using a telovelar subtonsillar route, because of tight neoplastic adhesions to the cranial portion of the floor of the fourth ventricle.
A histopathological examination revealed a periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)-positive dysmorphic material with pluristratified epithelial islands. A teratoma, partly cystic, with pseudo-cartilage areas and hair and tooth-like formations was identified. There were also features of a squamous cell carcinoma with atypical polymorphic epithelial cells, necrosis and focal cornification. The lesion was related to a teratoma with malignant transformation .
The postoperative course was uneventful with neurological improvement. The patient was able to walk without ataxic feature and the Romberg test was improved. A postsurgical CT scan demonstrated a partial removal .
At 6-months follow-up, a MRI showed an early regrowth of the fourth ventricle tumor, with the same radiological features . According to the wishes of the patient and his relatives, no further surgical treatment or adjuvant therapy was performed.