A 73-year-old woman with progressive weakness in the proximal muscles since age 50 was diagnosed with LGMD. Her parents were first cousins, and of her four younger siblings, three were diagnosed with LGMD. The patient underwent resection of a soft tissue tumor in the left thigh at age 49. The pathological diagnosis was lipoma.
The tumor recurred in the left thigh at age 62. At the time of presentation to our department, the tumor had been present for 11 years and had gradually increased in size. Physical examination at first visit revealed an elastic hard mass measuring approximately 25 cm in width and 30 cm in length, located in the posterior left thigh. No tenderness, redness, or local warmth was noted. Laboratory examinations revealed that serum creatine kinase (CK) was mildly elevated at 825 μIU/L. Plain radiography showed a soft tissue mass shadow in the left thigh without calcification or periosteal reaction. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images and heterogeneous hyperintensity on short-TI inversion recovery images . In addition, severe muscle atrophy and lipomatous changes were observed in both thighs. Open biopsy revealed no evidence of highly malignant cells. Therefore, we considered the tumor to be a lipoma or an atypical lipomatous tumor.
Surgical excision of the tumor was performed. On exploration, the tumor consisted of fat globules partially surrounded by a capsule and with poorly defined margins that was infiltrating different layers of the thigh muscles. We performed marginal resection including the semitendinosus muscle, semimembranosus muscle, and biceps femoris muscle . The resected tumor measured 15 × 35 × 20 cm. Pathological examination revealed that it contained mature adipocytes with cellular atypia . Immunohistochemical expression was positive for p16, MDM2, and CDK4. The final pathological diagnosis was atypical lipomatous tumor. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and there was no evidence of recurrence at 36 months postoperatively.
Since western blot analysis of muscle showed a deficit of dysferlin, the patient was finally diagnosed with LGMD2B.