A 30-year-old Japanese male presented to the emergency room with a 4-month history of right leg discomfort, swelling, and intermittent serosanguinous drainage. The medical history was significant for OM of the right leg at age 4, requiring inpatient hospitalization in Japan for treatment with intravenous antibiotics and monitoring due to lesion proximity to the tibial growth plate. He reported no complications from the hospitalization, however, noted that the area of infection would have intermittent swelling and warmth. During his pre-adolescent and adolescent years, the patient complained of “flare-ups,” in which he described mild pain with movement at the infection site, particularly during exercise and team sports. Episodes would occur as frequently as every 3 months, however, would self-resolve after several days with rest and over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications. Orthopedic evaluation and diagnostic imaging in Japan were largely inconclusive. Due to its benign, self-resolving course, the patient and his family elected for observation instead of further work-up.
At presentation, the patient stated that this episode did not resolve with rest or anti-inflammatory medication. He reported the drainage had been ongoing for 2 weeks and appeared to come from a punctum in the center of the swelling, but denied any fever, chills, sharp pain, change in sensation, or restriction in active or passive range of motion. X-ray showed no acute OM or fractures ( and ). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knee revealed 6.8 × 5.3 × 8.5cm septated fluid collection consistent with a large abscess extending from the subcutaneous adipose tissue along the lateral aspect of the thigh through a perforation in the fascia posterior to the vastus lateralis and tensor fascia lata and anterior to the biceps femoris (-). The fluid collection also extended deep between the muscle bellies to the level of the posterior lateral cortex of the distal femoral diaphysis. Diffuse soft-tissue edema was visualized; however, no periosteal or marrow edema was present, confirming the absence of acute OM ( and ).
Surgical and orthopedic consultation determined that no acute intervention was required at the time and for the patient to follow-up as an outpatient. Subsequent culture and biopsy revealed granulation tissue with skin flora. Concern for possible cold abscess versus malignancy resulted in transfer of care to orthopedic oncology, who recommended open debridement to better evaluate and treat the abscess. On opening the site, copious scar tissue and cystic debris were evacuated from the area, with gross appearance consistent with longstanding subacute OM and a Brodie’s abscess (BA). Bone biopsy and culture revealed methicillin-sensitive S. aureus. Polymethylmethacrylate antibiotic beads were placed and the incision closed in a standard fashion. Infectious disease recommended that the patient be discharged on 6 weeks of Keflex (Cephalexin). At the 6-month follow-up, the patient reported return to his baseline mobility after physical therapy and no flare-ups of his previous symptoms.