An 11-year-old female was admitted to the vascular surgery service of León General Hospital, referred by Irapuato General Hospital for a tumour on the right elbow observed by her mother 6 months before her assessment. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) of the right thoracic extremity was requested and a soft tissue tumour with significant peripheral vascularisation was found.
shows a photo of the tumour on the right elbow before surgical intervention.
shows the NMR image of the tumour, showing vascularisation and non-involvement of the bone tissue.
NMR with vascularised tumour growth in the right elbow without any apparent bone involvement.
Excision of the tumour on the right elbow was scheduled, and a vascular tumour of approximately 10 × 15 cm was found; soft consistency, not adhered to deeper levels nor bone structures, with several alimentary vessels; the placing of a partial thickness skin graft of approximately 15 × 15 cm taken from the right thigh was performed .
In , the excised tumour is shown, showing significant vascularisation and no bone involvement.
Resected tumour, showing significant vascularisation with no bone involvement, as well as the 15 × 10 cm surgical site.
In , the skin graft placed on the right elbow is shown. This graft was obtained from the thigh on the same side of the body.
A partial thickness graft was placed on the right elbow and obtained from the ipsilateral thigh.
A piece was sent for pathology which showed a histological type consistent with paediatric fibrosarcoma with margins of less than 1 mm from the lesion. The patient was sent to the paediatric oncology unit, where further studies via positron emission tomography (PET CT) were requested, in which no evidence of macroscopic anatomo-metabolic tumour activity were found, with hypermetabolic changes of physiological origin in the mediastinum and post-surgical inflammation in the right elbow .
In , the PET CT does not show evidence of tumour activity.
Coronal PET CT without evidence of macroscopic anatomo-metabolic tumour activity, with hypermetabolic changes of physiological origin in the mediastinum.
The PET CT sagittal cross-section in does not show tumour activity either.
Sagittal PET CT without evidence of macroscopic anatomo-metabolic tumour activity, with hypermetabolic changes of physiological origin in the mediastinum.
Subsequently, treatment was started by paediatric oncology with two sessions of chemotherapy with a weekly 1.5 mg/m2/dose of vincristine, as well as 20 sessions of post-operative radiotherapy of 50 Gy in 20 fractions to the surgical site in conformal modality with adequate progress. Finally, assessment by plastic and reconstructive surgery was performed and an adequate quality of graft was observed, without the need for any other intervention by that service .
In , the state of the skin graft after the chemotherapy and radiotherapy sessions is shown.
The patient was examined at an external reconstructive surgery consultation to assess the skin graft after the chemotherapy and radiotherapy sessions.
The patient was examined at an external reconstructive surgery consultation to assess skin graft after the chemotherapy and radiotherapy sessions.