A 45-year-old Japanese woman, an out-patient, underwent an emergency examination for left lower abdominal pain. She was in her usual state of good health until 1 day ago when she noticed the gradual onset of abdominal pain. Over the last 12–24 hours, she noticed it more in the left lower quadrant. Pain did not radiate, but stayed localized in the costovertebral angle (CVA) when her back was clapped. She had not noticed any fever, chills, or night sweats. She reported anorexia. She was not pregnant; she was not menstruating. She had no past medical history except for mammoplasty. No diseases run in her family. She drank alcohol occasionally; she did not smoke tobacco or use illegal drugs. She worked as an office worker. The physical findings were absence of the sternal head of the right pectoralis major and protrusion of the right scapula . She reported right-sided weakness and presented symptoms of glaucoma. There were no symbrachydactyly on right hand and no signs of neurological disorders. She had been aware of an underdevelopment of one breast since infancy, lack of right underarm hair, difficulty exerting strength on the right side of her body, and feeling fatigue mainly on the right side when in a supine position.
Computed tomography (CT) images revealed a hydronephrotic left kidney and dilatation of the left ureter. No ureteral calculus, neoplasm, or obstruction was found, and no abnormal findings that would explain her left abdominal pain were identified. Other CT findings were absence of the sternal head of the right pectoralis major, asymmetrical malformation of her chest wall due to hypoplasia of the right rib cage , a shortened sternal body and anomaly of the xiphoid process , spinal curvature to the right , hypoplasia of the right ilium , advanced atrophy of her right kidney , hypoplasia of the right gluteus minimus , and cystic mass in her right ovary . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a disruption of her right internal iliac artery . Blood examinations revealed no abnormalities. Urine analysis revealed leukocytosis but no urinary blood. Nephritis was diagnosed and antibiotics were prescribed. She is currently showing improvement and receiving out-patient treatment. She has recently been on the verge of developing glaucoma and is seeing an ophthalmologist.