A 61-year-old woman presented to the hospital emergency department with left-sided lower limb pitting oedema. She reported 4 days of progressive worsening oedema and month-long exercise intolerance with malaise, but without resting dyspnoea, chest pain, fever, chills, or syncope.
The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2, and diabetic nephropathy. She had suffered a stroke 4 years previously, which resulted in mild left-sided hemiparesis. One month before the admission, she was diagnosed with bilateral COVID-19 pneumonia and was subsequently treated with non-invasive respiratory support (continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP] mask), glucocorticoids, and low molecular weight heparin. No central lines or urinary catheters were inserted, and she was discharged with a low dose of oral methylprednisolone (32-24-16-8 mg per oral (PO), 7 days per dose).
On arrival, the patient had a blood pressure of 135/85 mmHg, heart rate of 100/min, respiratory rate of 16/min, SpO2 of 94%, and body temperature of 36.6°C. Physical examination did not reveal jugular venous distention or murmurs or rubs; however, she exhibited oedema of the left lower limb (4 cm increase in circumference compared to the right lower limb). The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, low QRS voltages in the precordial ECG leads, slight electrical alternans, and no ST segment changes . Laboratory results were significant for leucocytosis of 11 × 109 cells/L (normal range 3.4–9.7 × 109 cell/L), neutrophils were 69.8% (normal range 44–72%), lymphocytes were 23.2% (normal range 20–46%), elevated C-reactive protein of 24.4 mg/L (normal range <5.0 mg/L), negative procalcitonin, and elevated D-dimers of 6036 mcg/L (normal range <550 mcg/L). Due to elevated D-dimer values and unilateral lower limb oedema, a colour Doppler analysis of the lower limb veins was performed. Non-compressive masses were observed in the anterior and posterior tibial and gastrocnemius veins. The diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis was confirmed, and the patient received anticoagulation therapy. Chest radiography revealed an enlarged cardiac silhouette and dilated mediastinum; however, no further evaluation was performed at that time .
After confirming the diagnosis, the patient was admitted for overnight observation and follow-up. Owing to the persistent sinus tachycardia present during rest, a computerized tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) was performed excluding the pulmonary emboli. It revealed a hypodense pericardial collection, suggestive of a large circumferential pericardial effusion (50 mm) .
Small bilateral pleural effusion and pulmonary consolidation have also been described. Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed a large pericardial effusion; however, no fibrin strands were observed. The ejection fraction of the left ventricle was estimated as 55%, and no major valvular pathologies or valvular vegetation were seen. While we observed a 20% variation in the transmitral inflow pattern, no collapse of the right heart chambers was noted .
The following day, the laboratory results were negative for troponin I antibodies; however, N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was elevated to 1600 pg/mL (normal range <125 pg/mL). The patient was haemodynamically stable during the examination. As cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was unavailable in our hospital, only pericardiocentesis was performed, which showed macroscopic purulent effusion, and more than 800 mL was drained. Immediately after drainage, we started empirical antibiotic treatment with intravenous vancomycin (15 mg/kg twice daily, bodyweight 65 kg) and ceftriaxone (2 g once daily). Analysis of the pericardial fluid revealed an exudate (pH 8.0, leucocytes 105 × 109/L, glucose 1.4 mmol/L, LDH 11758U/L, proteins 51 g/L). Cultures of the aspirated pericardial fluid showed MSSA. Therefore, we switched the antibiotic therapy to cloxacillin 6 × 2 g IV for 6 weeks.
Interestingly, four blood cultures remained negative, and the patient had no history of intubation, chest trauma, intrathoracic procedures, or central venous lines. A myocardial biopsy was not performed. The cytology was negative for malignancy. Urinary cultures also showed MSSA.
After 6 weeks of the intravenous antibiotic regimen, the patient had a full recovery and was scheduled for a follow-up 3 months after discharge. At the 3-month mark, the patient did not report any symptoms of heart failure. Echocardiography showed complete resolution of the pericardial effusion, the left ventricular ejection fraction was normal, and no valvular or other pathologies were recorded.