A 48-year-old Chinese female with HBV infection for 15 years was regularly followed up at gastroenterology outpatient department by abdominal ultrasound (US) and serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) screening every six months. In May 2005, abdominal US demonstrated a low echoic nodule, 1.6 × 1.6 cm in size in the sixth segment of the liver and mild parenchymal liver disease . She was asymptomatic and no abnormality was disclosed by physical examination. Noncontrast liver computed tomography (CT) showed a 1.6 × 1.6 cm well-circumscribed and low density nodule in the same liver segment . Dynamic CT scans showed enhancement of the nodule in the arterial phase and early washout in the portal phase . Serum was positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), but negative for HBeAg. The serum anti-HCV was also negative. AFP and CEA were within normal range. Based on the imaging findings and underlying HBV infection, small HCC was highly suspected and a US-guided liver biopsy was performed for definite diagnosis. However, the pathological finding suggested a malignant neoplasm originating form neuroendocrine cells . The result of immunohistochemical (IHC) stain was positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and chromogranin A . The pre-operative 24-hour urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) value was within normal limits. We undertook a more thorough investigation to rule out the possibility that the liver tumor was a metastatic carcinoid. This workup included upper and low GI endoscopy, a small bowel series, abdominal US, and chest and abdominal CT scans. All imaging findings were unremarkable. Partial hepatectomy was performed. Small bowel, appendix and large bowel were checked during operation and no tumor was found. No cirrhotic liver was noted. The surgery was performed successfully and the patient recovered well. The resected liver tissue contained a 1.6 × 1.6 × 1.5 cm circumscribed tumor . Histological examination revealed the round or ovoid neoplastic cells arranged in insular pattern with a rosette formation. There was no tumor embolus in the vessels and the resection line was free from tumor invasion. The IHC stains were positive for chromogranin A, cytokeratin, NSE, and synaptophysin. The final diagnosis was PHCT. She was followed up regularly at our hospital and remained disease-free 3 years after operation.