A 45-year-old woman presented to our clinic with severe epigastric pain and vomiting. Her past surgical history was significant for a primary endolumenal obesity surgery (POSE) one month ago. The patient's past medical history included polycystic ovarian syndrome, hypertension, and recurrent miscarriages. She was admitted for further evaluation and management. The patient was febrile on admission, and laboratory investigations showed leukocytosis and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP). Her Body Mass Index (BMI) was 28.4, blood pressure 117/81, heart rate 107, and respiratory rate 17. She was started on Meronem 2 g IV Q8hrs for 11 days, and IV Anidulafungin 200 mg with on the first day followed by 100 mg once daily for 5 days. She was also given Fentanyl 50Mcg IV four times daily, Diclofenac 1 suppository per rectal twice daily, Ibuprofen 400 mg IV Q8hrs for 3 days, Oxycodone 2 mg/h IV infusion + 2 mg IV bolus, along with Dormicum 2 mg and Ketamine 2 mg IV STAT for severe pain.
A gastrografin swallow was performed by the interventional radiologist on the first day of admission and revealed marked free air under the diaphragm, but with no definite contrast leak . However, there was suspicion of mucosal thickening in the gastric pylorus. The visualized parts of the distal esophagus and stomach appeared unremarkable. An abdominal CT scan with IV and limited oral contrast was also performed and revealed evidence of a previous surgical procedure along the distal body of the stomach, with thickening of the antrum wall, and a mildly distended stomach likely related to the patient's recent endoscopic procedure. More concerningly however, the CT scan showed leakage of contrast from the gastric fundus, along with a large amount of pneumoperitoneum and free fluid in the abdomen. These findings, when correlated with the patient's clinical findings and results of the gastrografin study, were found to be consistent with gastric perforation. There were also minimal, small, left-sided pleural effusions with atelectasis of the basal segments of both lower lobes, with a small right-sided pleural air bubble likely representing leaked air from the abdomen . A pigtail catheter was inserted into the left pleura of the patient, which drained 315 cm3 of yellowish exudative fluid. A nasogastric tube was also inserted and drained 560 mL of gastric fluids. The patient was kept in the hospital and closely monitored. Pleural fluid analysis revealed normal values. Pleural fluid culture was negative. For the next 6 days, the patient was vitally stable and afebrile but still complaining of mild abdominal pain and left chest pain.
Seven days later, the patient developed severe abdominal pain, vomiting, tachycardia, and elevated temperature. This prompted a diagnostic laparoscopy, which showed a severely dilated proximal stomach secondary to extreme narrowing at the incisura angularis. This narrowing was caused by fragments of Prolene sutures in the gastric body, which was done to the patient when she underwent the POSE procedure. All sutures were pulled out and cut with scissors, which relieved the obstruction, and thereby reversed the POSE procedure. An air-leak test was performed to assess the staple line for obvious leakage, and no bubbling of air was seen. An upper endoscopy was also performed intraoperatively, which revealed no obstruction.
A chest X-ray performed two days after the surgery showed that the left pleural effusion had decreased, and that there was no pneumoperitoneum . During her stay at hospital, the patient underwent several sessions of chest physiotherapy and was prescribed analgesics. She was discharged on the 4th day post-operation, with no and further complaints and complications.