A 46-year-old woman presented with intermittent abdominal pain and melena for 2 months. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of chest and abdomen revealed a round soft tissue shadows of increased density that was suspected to be located in the small intestine. Additionally, an enlarged lymph node with a maximum diameter of 4.6cm in the right upper mediastinum was suspicious for metastasis. Further small intestine endoscopy suggested a mass about 4 cm in diameter in the small bowel with lumen stenosis. A biopsy was performed and a diagnosis of mesenchymal spindle cell tumor was rendered. A definite diagnosis had not been established due to inadequate sampling. Surgery was performed in our hospital in order to establish a diagnosis and subsequent treatment plan. Intraoperatively, there were multiple masses in the jejunum and ileum. Two segments of jejunum and two segments of ileum were removed. Grossly, a total of seven masses measuring from 1x1x0.5 cm3 to 8x4x2cm3 were found in the jejunum and ileum, with one in one segment of the ileum, one in the other segment of the ileum, four in one segment of the jejunum, and one in the other segment of the jejunum, respectively. All the masses were completely sampled to histopathological examination. Microscopic examination revealed that one tumor in the ileum was morphologically different from the other six tumors in the jejunum and ileum. The tumor was centered in the muscularis propria with focal extension to the mucosa and ulcer formation . Tumor cells predominantly arranged in sheets, nest, papillary, fascicular and pseudoalveolar architecture with epithelioid and spindle cells. Rosette-like pattern and palisade structure were focally present as well. At high magnification, the tumor cells showed moderate amounts of eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, ovoid vesicular nuclei with inconspicuous or prominent small nucleoli and infrequent mitotic figures. Necrosis was absent. Peritumoral lymphocytic infiltration and lymphoid follicles were observed . Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were strongly and diffusely positive for S-100 and SOX-10, focally positive for Syn, and negative for pancytokeratin, CD117, DOG1, Melan A, HMB45, CD34, ERG, chromogranin A, desmin, and myogenin. INI1 and SMARCA4(BRG1) were stained positively in the nuclei. The Ki-67 index was low (about 5%) . Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using EWSR1 break apart probe (Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL) at 22q12 showed split EWSR1 signals in the tumor cells, indicating the presence of EWSR1 rearrangement. Further next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of this tumor in the ileum revealed EWSR1-CREB1 fusion . By a comprehensive evaluation of the microscopy examination, immunohistochemistry and molecular testing, the diagnosis of GNET was established.
For the other six tumors in the jejunum and ileum, a completely different morphology from GNET was observed. These tumors were located in the upper part of the small intestine, predominantly in the mucosa and submucosa with or without ulcer formation, partially involving the muscularis propria and/or subserosa. Histologically, these tumors were composed of non-cohesive anaplastic rhabdoid cells showing abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and eccentric vesicular nuclei with one or more nucleoli. Only several neoplastic glandular structures were observed in the mucosa. Multiple necrosis, brisk mitotic figures and patchy infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed. Scattered multinucleated tumor cells and irregular large cells were focally noted . There was extensive lymphovascular invasion . Immunohistochemically, these tumor cells diffusely expressed pancytokeratin and cytokeratin7, and focally expressed vimentin with characteristically paranuclear accentuation, and was negative for S100, SOX10, desmin, myogenin, chromogranin A, Syn, CD117, DOG1, cytokeratin20, CDX2, TTF-1 and CD34. The Ki67 proliferative index was high (about 90%). Mismatch repair (MMR) proteins, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6, were stained positively in the tumor cells. INI1 protein expression was intact, whereas complete loss of SMARCA4(BRG1) was observed . NGS analysis revealed a SMARCA4 frameshift mutation [c.4882_4886dup (p. Lys1630fs)] , which might lead to protein truncation and loss of expression, rather than EWSR1-CREB1 fusion. The absence of EWSR1 rearrangement was also confirmed by FISH using EWSR1 break apart probe (Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL) at 22q12 . All these results supported the diagnosis of SMARCA4-deficient undifferentiated carcinoma for these other six tumors in the jejunum and ileum.
The patient then underwent positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) examination. PET-CT scan showed multiple lymph node metastases might occur, including the cervical, supraclavicular, subclavian, mediastinal and abdominopelvic mesenteric lymph nodes. Active metabolized lesions of gluteus maximus, pectineus and adductor brevis were detected, which also suggested the possibility of tumor involvement. In addition, active metabolism in the right parietal lobe that suggested a brain metastasis was observed as well. No subsequent pathological examination was performed. The patient then received chemotherapy. Unfortunately, clinical follow-up revealed that the patient suffered a rapid tumor deterioration and died five months after initial surgical resection.