A 64-year-old female (152 cm, 42.4 kg) with a history of ureteral stone was referred to our hospital for asymptomatic hematuria. She was alert, SpO2 was 94% in room air, and body temperature was 36.4˚C on admission. The blood pressure was 78/50 mmHg, and the heart rate were 100/min with sinus rhythm but marked QT prolongation (corrected QT interval, 695 ms) . Chest XP demonstrated no abnormal findings , computed tomography (CT) showed a 40 × 30 mm mass on the left thyroid gland and an enlarged pancreas . Blood test was remarkable for calcium 21.9 mg/dL, phosphorus 4.6 mg/dL, potassium 2.2 mmol/L, magnesium 1.0 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 57 mg/dL, creatinine 2.42 mg/dL, and prothrombin time international normalized ratio of 1.44. Of note, serum lipase was 499 U/L (normal range: 14–54 U/L) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) was 2204 pg/mL (normal range: 15–65 pg/mL). She received fluid infusion and calcitonin with a diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism due to parathyroid tumor and secondary acute pancreatitis. Parathyroidectomy was planned after improvement of the general condition at this time.
On day 2, continuous hemodiafiltration and infusion of noradrenaline 0.05 μg/kg/min was started for acute kidney injury, for remarkably increased serum calcium level of 22.3 mg/dL and persistent hypotension . On day 3, the patient was endotracheally intubated and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) because of hypoxia with arterial partial oxygen pressure (PaO2)/fractional inspired oxygen concentration (FiO2) ratio of 212 mmHg due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Besides noradrenaline 0.2 μg/kg/min, adrenaline 0.04 μg/kg/min and vasopressin 0.02 unit/min, administration of etelcalcetide for regulating PTH secretion and denosumab, an anti-receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) antibody for inhibiting osteoclast activation was started. The respiratory condition worsened further to a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 76.7 mmHg with rapid progressing bilateral lung infiltrate shadow . Emergent parathyroidectomy under VA-ECMO was planned for possible fatal arrhythmias caused by severe hypercalcemia resulting from surgical maneuver of the tumor on day 4.
General anesthesia was induced and maintained with propofol, fentanyl, and remifentanil with continuous infusion of adrenaline ≤ 0.05 μg/kg/min, noradrenaline ≤ 0.2 μg/kg/min, and vasopressin ≤ 0.03 units/min under monitoring of arterial pressure, central venous pressure, and transesophageal echocardiography. No intracardiac or pulmonary emboli were detected; continuous hemodiafiltration was continued intraoperatively. After insertion of drainage and return catheters to the right atrium through the right femoral vein and to the right femoral artery, respectively, ECMO was started at a flow rate of 3.5 L/min. Nafamostat mesilate was infused for maintaining activated coagulation time approximately 200 s. Surgical resection of the left parathyroid tumor and combined left lobe of thyroid were completed uneventfully. Duration of surgery and anesthesia was 177 and 284 min, respectively. Intraoperative blood loss was 202 mL, and we transfused 840 ml of red blood cells, 720 mL of fresh frozen plasma, and 200 mL of the platelet. The patient was returned to the ICU with ECMO support.
PTH was markedly decreased to 31 pg/mL, and the serum calcium level decreased to 15.2 mg/dL on postoperative day 1 (day 5). Vasoactive drug requirements were reduced in response to improved cardiac function, and the patient was weaned from ECMO on day 6. She was discharged from the ICU on day 8 with a serum calcium level of 11 mg/dL and an ionized calcium level of 1.14 mmol/L . Pathological findings of the excised tumor suggested a parathyroid carcinoma. After discharge from the ICU, she developed further complications, including pneumothorax, ventilator-associated pneumonia, and sepsis associated with a relapse of pancreatitis, resulting in a long hospital stay. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital with a tracheostomy on day 104.