A 26-year-old man presented black stools and anemia. He had not taken any medication and had no specific family or past medical history. His height and weight were 172.3 cm and 93.4 kg (the body mass index was 31.5 kg/m2). His body temperature was 36.7°C, blood pressure was 137/77 mmHg and radial pulse rate was 80 beats/min and regular. Complete blood count showed the red blood cell count of 326 × 104/μl, hemoglobin concentration of 8.6 g/dl (reference range: 13.5 to 17.6 g/dl), and mean corpuscular volume of 87 fl. Serum chemistry showed that hemoglobin A1c was 4.2% (National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program number). Endoscopic examination of the upper digestive tract revealed a large pedunculated polyp arising from gastroduodenal junction, close to pyloric ring on the side between minor curvature and anterior wall (Figure A). The head of the polyp was incarcerated toward duodenal lumen. The lower side of the polyp showed hemorrhage in part. The stalk was too thick to be removed by endoscopic mucosal resection. Instead, distal gastrectomy with lymph node dissection was performed. No metastasis was found in the dissected lymph nodes.
The postoperative period was uneventful that the hemoglobin concentration gradually increased and became 11.6 g/dl on day 12. He was subsequently discharged without any complications and was in good health with 1 year follow-up.
The surgically resected specimen showed a lobulated polyp sized 6.4 × 3 cm (Figure B) and the cut surface was solid and white (Figure C). Histologically, the stalk of the polyp projected from duodenal mucosa, not pyloric mucosa. In the lesion, marked proliferation of Brunner’s glands was noted showing lobular structures separated by fibromuscular septa (Figure A). Acini and ducts were well preserved (Figure C) and cystically dilated ducts were scattered (Figure B). Lymphocytic infiltrate was observed in the entire lesion and lymphoid follicle formation was intermingled in and between the lobules of hyperplastic Brunner’s glands (Figure B). The upper two thirds of the polyp was covered by a surface epithelium histologically similar to gastric foveolar epithelium (Figure A), randomly with surface erosions (Figure E). No evidence of malignancy was found within the specimen (Figure C). These findings suggested that the lesion was composed of normal tissue elements of duodenal mucosa and submucosa, but formed a disorganized aberrant mass. Thus, we diagnosed this lesion as Brunner’s gland hamartoma. Helicobacter pylori infection was not detected in Giemsa stain.
Then, we sought to clarify the possible pathogenesis of this lesion by immunohistochemical analyses for mucin phenotypes, CDX2 expression and MIB-1 labeling. The surface epithelium resembling gastric foveolar epithelium was positive for MUC5AC (Figure B), indicating gastric foveolar metaplasia, while the epithelium in deeper portion and Brunner’s glands were positive for MUC6 (Figure C). The epithelial cells at the transition zone between MUC5AC- and MUC6-positive areas showed concomitant expression of MUC5AC and MUC6 (Figure B and C). These results confirmed that the surface epithelium differentiated towards gastric foveolar epithelium but preserved intestinal epithelial nature in the deeper portion. Interestingly, the MUC5AC-positive epithelium and adjacent MUC6-positive epithelium were diffusely positive for MIB-1 (Figure D), and the Brunner’s glands beneath them showed high MIB-1 labeling index (7.9%; Figures D and
A).
The similar staining pattern was observed in the area with surface erosion (Figure E-H), where most of surface epithelium was lost, but the deeper portion of the epithelium was minimally left (Figure E), showing MUC5AC/MUC6 double positivity (Figure F and
G) with significantly high MIB-1 labeling (Figure H). Moderately high MIB-1 labeling of Brunner’s glands (9%) was accompanied (Figures H and
B).
On the other hand, surface epithelium in the lower part of the polyp showed a villous structure containing goblet cells without apparent gastric foveolar metaplasia (Figure I). Immunohistochemically, positivity of MUC5AC staining decreased in the lower one third of the polyp, particularly on the distal side. In the same area, CDX2-positive nuclei (Figure J) and MUC2-positive goblet cells (Figure K) were observed at the surface epithelium showing intestinal nature. Below the surface epithelium preserving intestinal nature, Brunner’s glands had less proliferative activity with low MIB-1 labeling index (0.77%) (Figures L and
C). These results suggest that gastric foveolar differentiation is possibly related with the observed proliferative activity of Brunner’s glands.