A 38-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with the chief complaint of back pain and loss of consciousness. He had been diagnosed with GPA on the basis of the presence of inflammatory nasopharyngeal lesions and glomerulonephritis 22 years ago. At the time, histopathologic examination of a biopsy specimen from the nasal cavity had shown necrotizing giant-cell granulomatous inflammation and a necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis. A serum sample was positive by indirect immunofluorescence for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (×128) (i.e., anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were detected in 128 times the diluted serum sample). With the exception of three recurrences, the GPA had remained in remission with treatment with prednisolone (15mg/day). At this latest admission, the patient had chest pain on physical examination. Laboratory tests showed the following: leukocyte count, 15.15 × 109/L; hemoglobin, 10.8mmol/L; C-reactive protein, 1.36mg/dL; and stable serum creatinine, 1.31mg/dL. A chest X-ray showed lateral shift of the left lung . A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan showed enlargement of the wall of the thoracic aorta, which was surrounded by a hypo-dense rim, and rupture of a dissected aortic aneurysm . The patient underwent emergency surgery. Rupture of a 70mm length of the distal arch of the aorta was confirmed during surgery, and a J-graft was inserted. Culture for syphilis was negative. The aortic aneurysm was embedded in an area of tissue inflammation. Histopathologic examination showed a necrotizing inflammation of the aortic wall and a necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis . The diagnosis of aortic rupture as a complication of GPA was made on pathological findings. Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the 21st postoperative day. Treatment was continued and consisted of prednisolone (15mg/day). After 6 months, a positron emission tomography scan showed no new signs of vascular inflammation or other aneurysm.