An 80-year old male presented with a swelling on the dorsal surface of the tongue which had been removed superficially once before by a dentist and recurred again after several months. Intraorally, a 1×1-cm oval-shaped, reddish, sessile, slightly indurated and painless swelling was observed on the midline of the dorsal surface of the tongue which had started bleeding over 5 months previously. The patient had hypertension, and there were no similar lesions in other parts of his body.
A biopsy was taken from the lesion and submitted for histopathologic examination with suspicions of a reactive lesion.
An oval-shaped, creamy-to-brownish, elastic soft tissue mass, covered by epithelium, was submitted for histopatho- logic examination. The lesion measured 10×7×5 mm in size.
A malignant epithelial proliferation of mostly clear cells was observed that was located as a relatively well-circumscribed nodular mass below the parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium of the tongue mucosa .
These cells were arranged in a nested pattern and separated by fibrous septa . Neoplastic cells were polygonal, had pleomorphic vesicular to hyperchromatic nuclei, were located mostly eccentrically, and had clear and sometimes eosinophilic cytoplasm with sharply outline cell membranes . There was a rich capillary vascular network at the surface.
According to histopathologic examination, primary and metastatic clear-cell tumors were suspected. Systemic examination of the patient revealed that there had not been any similar lesion in other parts of his body. The patient-stated past medical history had no notable features. Because of this, the possibility of a metastatic clear-cell tumor was dismissed.
The tumor was initially thought to be a primary tongue cancer with salivary gland neoplasms, especially mucoepidermoid carcinoma and acinic cell carcinoma. Mucicarmine and periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining were performed to assess the presence of mucous cells and PAS-positive glycogen-containing cells. Mucicarmine staining became negative and PAS staining was highly focally positive ( and ). Therefore, these staining patterns did not prove conclusively an origin in the salivary gland. In searching for a diagnosis, we performed immunohistochemical staining for cytokeratin 7 (CK7). CK7 staining became negative, ruling out salivary gland origin. We began to suspect a metastatic clear-cell tumor such as RCC, and further investigated the patient’s history. The patient was invited to the oral and maxillofacial department once again. On this occasion, the patient mentioned a history of nephrectomy after we asked him about his renal status. Inspection of his previous pathology report showed that the patient had had a radical nephrectomy 4 years previously and the diagnosis was RCC (clear-cell variant). To confirm a diagnosis of RCC which had metastasized to the tongue, we ordered immunohisto- chemical staining for CD 10 marker; CD10 is a good marker for RCC to distinguish it from other clear-cell-type carcinomas. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were positive for CD10 .
To complete the immunohistochemistry panel, Melan-A staining was performed in order to rule out clear-cell melanoma. Melan-A staining also became negative. Therefore, we made a diagnosis of clear-cell tumor suggestive of “metastatic renal cell carcinoma”.
A CT scan of the neck, chest, and abdomen revealed no other metastatic disease. Therefore, the patient underwent surgical re-excision of his lesion in order to provide comfort and prevent bleeding and infection. Afterwards, the patient was referred to an oncologist for systemic therapy. Subsequently, the patient was treated with sunitinib and sorafenib for his metastatic disease. The patient was still alive with no recurrence of his metastatic tongue lesion after 6 months of treatment.