We report the case of a 66-year-old female patient who consulted for chronic mixed pain in the right shoulder progressively worsening during the last year. The clinical examination showed rather moderate and increased pain on mobilization, without movement limitation or palpable mass. Bony prominence palpation did not generate pain, and rotator cuff testing was negative.
The radiological assessment included a CT scan and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ( and c), which showed an osteolytic lesion of the base of the neck of the scapula with a cartilaginous matrix. The lesion was centered on the anterior part of the neck of the scapula and the base of the coracoid process measuring 5.6 × 4.5 × 5.9 cm, with tumor development toward the subscapular fossa and invading the anterosuperior part of the glenohumeral joint with reactive synovitis.
Primary bone tumor diffusely infiltrated the bone. As the pathological diagnosis required a tissue sampling, we performed a CT-guided bone biopsy which showed a Grade II chondrosarcoma.
After discussion of patient’s file in a multidisciplinary meeting, the recommended therapeutic option was a total scapulectomy with extra-articular resection followed by reconstruction with custom-made scapular prosthesis and total reverse shoulder prosthesis, in a one-stage procedure.
The patient was placed in left lateral decubitus, under general anesthesia . A Judet approach was performed, widened into the acromioclavicular joint . A diamond shape incision was made into the incision to completely excise the biopsy scar . Careful and progressive muscular disinsertion was performed plan by plan. Then, muscles of the upper angle of the scapula were secured with the trapezius muscle and the muscles of the lower angle were secured with the latissimus dorsi, major and minor teres . Then, the scapula’s anterior face (including the brachial plexus and the subclavian artery) was uncovered . The subscapularis muscle was preserved . The scapula was excised, preserving the acromion . As the tumor invaded the anterior capsule, we performed a humeral neck (extra-articular) osteotomy to leave the joint capsule closed. Once the neck was removed, the humeral shaft was prepared . Then, a reversed humeral prosthesis was implanted .
A custom-made MUTARS from IMPLANTCAST® (implantcast GmbH Lüneburger Schanze 26 D-21614 Buxtehude Germany) scapular prosthesis was implanted . The periscapular muscles were reattached to the scapular prosthesis (anterior serratus, rhomboid muscles, and trapezius) . The posterior edge of the deltoid was sutured on the acromion. Satisfactory stability of the prosthetic complex was achieved ( and ).
Shoulder was immobilized with an elbow splint for 6 weeks followed by progressive rehabilitation. At 3-year follow-up, there was a complete remission of the tumor, and the patient had a good shoulder function, allowing him independence for basic daily life activities .