A 43-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of a tumor on the back of her head. She had undergone hemodialysis due to end-stage kidney disease caused by IgA nephropathy when she was 32 years old. The next year, she received an ABO-compatible living-related kidney transplant from her father. Her allograft kidney was maintained by immunosuppressive therapy consisting of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and methylprednisolone. After transplantation, her serum creatinine level remained stable at 1.5 mg/dL. In addition, her serum trough level of tacrolimus was mostly controlled at 3 to 5 ng/ml after transplantation. The patient’s clinical course is outlined in Fig. . Ten years after transplantation, she noticed a soft and compressible tumor on the left back of her head, and the major axis rapidly increased from 2 to 4 cm within 2 months . Echography revealed the characteristics of the tumor, including border irregularity, heterogeneity, and hypervascularity, suggesting malignant properties. Surgical resection of the tumor was then performed for diagnosis and treatment. Histological findings revealed solid aggregations of neoplastic cells that varied in size in the thickness of the dermis and subcutaneous tissue exclusively . There were many luminal structures that varied in shape inside the aggregations. Coagulative necrosis containing eosinophilic products and lipid granules in the cytoplasm of the cells was demonstrated in alveolar structures of the tumor on hematoxylin-eosin staining . In addition, a high rate of neoplastic cells was stained by Ki-67 (MIB-1 index, 22%), diagnosing the neoplasm as SC. To diagnose the MTS, further screening of visceral tumors was performed. The examinations revealed an early-stage adenocarcinoma in the transverse colon, which was subsequently treated with endoscopic mucosal resection. To make a definite diagnosis of MTS, we performed the following examinations of the tumors: 1) MSI gene locus assay, 2) immunohistochemical staining with MMR gene proteins, and 3) DNA direct sequencing of MMR genes. We performed MSI gene locus assays with the Promega MSI Analysis System , which consists of five mononucleotide repeat markers (BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24, and MONO-27) and two pentanucleotide markers (Penta C and Penta D). MSI in three of the seven markers was positive (MSI-H), indicating a high probability of MTS. HNPCC/MTS is induced by defective MMR due to germline mutations in any one of the DNA MMR genes. The deficiency of MMR is commonly demonstrated by the lack of any MMR proteins—MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, or PMS2—in neoplasms. The DNA MMR system mainly consists of two different heterodimers: MutSα (ex. MSH2-MSH6) and MutSβ (ex. MLH1-PMS2), and its defect, cause a dysfunction in the repair of base-base mismatches and small insertions and deletions, leading to the development of neoplasms . Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated the disappearance of MMR gene proteins in neoplastic cells of both the SC and colon cancer. All four MMR gene proteins—MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2—were positive in normal epidermis and sebocytes, while the neoplastic cells of the SC were negative for MSH2 and MSH6 . The colon cancer also exhibited the significant disappearance of two MMR gene proteins (MSH2, MSH6), but normal development of MLH1 and PMS2. Furthermore, the patient’s familial history included only one brother with colon cancer, at 48 years of age. The patient’s genetic assessment using real-time PCR/direct sequencing detected a germline mutation of c.1226_1227delAG, p.Gln409ArgfsX7 in MSH2 exon 7, which was previously reported as the cause of HNPCC , and finally we diagnosed her with MTS. Thus, a low dose of everolimus, a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor, was administered and the serum trough level of tacrolimus dropped to 2 ng/ml at a dose of 1 mg/day to prevent further development of neoplasms due to MTS.