An 83-year-old male patient was emergently admitted to the hospital with the chief complaint of progressive dyspnoea over several days due to acutely decompensated HF (NYHA-IV) with hypotension (60/42 mmHg), bradycardia, and an irregular pulse (30 b.p.m.). The patient was uneventful for recent several years, and was not on any regular medication, including cardiovascular drugs, before the present admission. Table shows the clinical course of his HF-related tests, peripheral blood and urinary tests, and medications given to treat the decongestion and electrolyte disturbance. Physical examination on admission revealed jugular venous distension, systemic oedema, bilateral basal pulmonary rales, distant heart sound, and peripheral coldness. A 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed sinus arrest with a junctional escape rhythm and an irregular heart rate of 30 b.p.m. A chest X-ray revealed mild cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic ratio 55%) and prominent vasculature in the upper lung fields. Transthoracic cardiac ultrasound revealed a moderate degree of aortic regurgitation (III/IV), but the left ventricular ejection fraction (60%) was preserved, and its diastolic volume was almost within the normal range (143 cc). Thoracic and abdominal ultrasound showed massive bilateral pleural effusion and an expanded inferior vena cava with minimal respiratory change.
Urgent initiation of a noradrenaline drip infusion (2–3 μg/kg/h) and beta stimulant adhesive skin patch (Tulobuterol 2 mg/day) promptly restored the sinus rhythm (70 b.p.m.) and the normality of conduction and the QRS complex on electrocardiography, resulting in the recovery from hypotension with a systemic blood pressure of 117/56 mmHg. Blood tests on admission revealed moderately elevated b-type natriuretic peptide (BNP 576 pg/mL; normal range <18.4 pg/mL), hyponatraemia (128 mEq/L; normal range 135–147 mEq/L), hypochloraemia (95 mEq/L; normal range 98–108 mEq/L), hyperkalaemia (5.7 mEq/L, normal range 3.6–5.0 mEq/L), and preserved renal function (creatinine 1.0 mg/dL; normal range 0.61–1.04 mg/dL) under no particular cardiovascular medications. Immediately after resolving the bradycardia and hypotension, low-dose oral acetazolamide (500 mg/day) and 20% polystyrene sulfate-Ca jelly (Argamate 25 g/day for 3 days) were prescribed to correct the decompensated HF status and electrolyte disturbance. Three days later, both the serum sodium and chloride concentrations had recovered to normal levels (136 mEq/L and 104 mEq/L, respectively), and the serum potassium concentration had decreased to 4.5 mEq/L.
Two weeks later, the patient’s body fluid retention was ameliorated and the serum BNP concentration was near normal (55 pg/mL). Serum chloride and potassium concentrations remained in the normal range, but the serum sodium concentration was slightly reduced (133 mEq/L) compared to that at Day 4 of the hospital admission, which could be managed by changing the diuretic prescription and/or dietary salt adjustment in accordance with the ‘chloride theory’ for HF pathophysiology. Three weeks later, the patient was discharged in an acceptable HF status. Two months later after discharge under the same medication, the patient’s HF status remained stable (serum BNP level of 65 pg/mL) and both the serum sodium and chloride concentrations were normal (139 mEq/L and 108 mEq/L, respectively).