A 25-year-old pregnant woman, on the waiting list for a heart transplant was admitted for treatment of heart failure and ventricular tachycardia. She had a clinical history of complete atrioventricular canal repair at 2 years of age, which evolved with mitral regurgitation and left ventricular ejection fraction of 33% . At 19 years of age, she underwent mechanical mitral prosthesis implantation (St Jude-27) and cardiac resynchronization therapy (Boston Scientific). Despite the cardiac interventions and optimized pharmacological treatment, she remained self-limited with New York Heart Association Class III.
In January 2020, she reported an unplanned pregnancy, in the 14th week of gestation. At that time, the multidisciplinary team recommended terminating the pregnancy, but she refused. She remained under strict obstetric and clinical care with reinforced comments about the risks of pregnancy and those inherent to anticoagulation. The therapy was maintained with carvedilol 25 mg/day, furosemide 40 mg/day, and warfarin with INR levels between 3.0 and 3.5.
However, the patient then evolved with worsening heart failure until the 30th week of gestation and required hospitalization. The initial management, which included non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, low-dose intravenous furosemide, morphine, adjusted dose of carvedilol to 75 mg/day, improved the patient’s clinical condition. After a week of inpatient hospitalization, she developed a sore throat and cough, and her nasopharyngeal smear was positive for SARS-CoV-2. On examination, she had a temperature of 36°, blood pressure of 115/75 mmHg, heart rate of 85 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation of 97%. The physical examination revealed a decrease in respiratory sounds in the lung bases and a systolic murmur along the left sternal border. The laboratory values timeline, and echocardiographic and tomographic images are shown in and Figures , respectively.
After 4 days of COVID-19 symptoms, the patient developed fever, myalgia, and hypotension, and she was referred to the COVID-19 intensive care unit (ICU) with a prescription for piperacillin and tazobactam, therapeutic unfractionated heparin, amiodarone, and supportive care with norepinephrine and dobutamine. The worsening of the clinical condition induced acute foetal distress and, consequently, the need for emergency caesarean delivery in the 32nd week of pregnancy. The healthy female baby weighed 1580 g, Apgar 5-7-9, and she tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection. The baby was discharged 15 days after birth, and at 6-month follow-up she did not have evidence of complications related to maternal COVID-19.
After delivery, the patient required mechanical ventilation, progressing to failure of multiple organs and septic shock, which were the diagnoses made by the intensive care team. A notable increase in biochemical markers and worsening of the lung tomographic scan were observed . The peripheral cultures, blood cultures, and tracheal secretion were negative. The patient was sedated (midazolam, fentanyl), paralyzed with neuromuscular blockers (cisatracurium), and received lung-protective ventilation in volume control mode (low tidal volume and low driving pressure). Initially, the arterial oxygen partial pressure and fractionated oxygen concentration in the inspired ratio (PaO2/FiO2) was 167 with an FiO2 of 45%, followed by titrated positive end-expiratory pressure of 8, and after a few days, she achieved PaO2/FiO2 of 240.
The adjusted daily prescriptions included furosemide, methylprednisolone, and antibiotic therapy with meropenem, fluconazole, polymyxin B, amikacin, and daptomycin. After being in the ICU for 30 days, the patient experienced significant clinical improvement and sustained haemodynamic and respiratory parameters. She was extubated with PaO2/FiO2 of 240, maintaining 94% oxygen saturation with a 2 L/min nasal catheter alternating with non-invasive ventilation with positive pressure. She was conscious and in good clinical condition, which allowed videoconferencing with her family. However, on the 37th day, she experienced a dramatic alteration, declining to acute respiratory failure, low cardiac output, major gastrointestinal and airway bleeding, progressing to death.
Minimally invasive necropsy guided by ultrasound (per Hospital protocol) confirmed COVID-19, showing diffuse alveolar damage, viral cytopathic effects, small pulmonary thrombi in pulmonary capillaries, acute tubular necrosis, and cerebral oedema. Placental pathological examination showed villous maturation appropriate for gestational age with frequent syncytial knots, mild fibrin depositions, and central and peripheral acute placental infarcts involving ∼20% of the villous tissue. No chronic histiocytic inter villositis or deciduous acute inflammation were noted, as shown in .