In April 2017, a 34-year-old premenopausal primipara woman underwent oncoplastic resection with sentinel biopsy on the right side with diagnosis of a poorly differentiated invasive ductal BC. The lesion was staged as pT1c (15 mm), pN1mi (1/2) (sentinel node (sn)), Bloom–Richardson–Elston (BRE) grade 3, R0, estrogen receptor (ER) 90%, progesterone receptor (PR) 60%, human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2) negative, and Ki-67 15%. The initiated oncotype DX showed a score of 18. The patient received adjuvant radiotherapy to the right breast and axilla (50.4 Gray (Gy)), paraclavicular (45 Gy), and a local boost dose of (6 × 2 Gy). Concomitantly, antihormonal therapy with tamoxifen was initiated; however, due to adverse effects (menopause-like symptoms, weight gain, and exacerbation of her depression), treatment was discontinued by the patient after 2 months without further antihormonal treatments.
Genetic counseling and testing showed a familial predisposition towards endometrial, liver, kidney, and lung cancer. A verified Lynch syndrome mutation was identified in the patient’s mother in 2015 and was subsequently confirmed in the patient with diagnosis of the poorly differentiated invasive ductal BC; it is a heterozygous mutation of the mismatch repair gene MSH6: c.2690dupA/p.Asn897LysfsTer3. As a result, the patient opted for a preventive hysterectomy and salpingectomy after completing family planning.
The patient’s medical history included three deep vein thromboses secondary to a hereditary antithrombin deficiency type 1. Her medical history also included a vaginal birth in 2005, newly diagnosed depression and hyperthyroidism in 2020, and 20-pack-year smoking history. Her current medications included Eliquis (5 mg PO, twice a day), escitalopram (20 mg PO once a day), and Tirosint (25 μg PO once a day).
The follow-up mammogram in December 2020, 3 years after the initial diagnosis, revealed increased parenchymal density and progressive micro-calcifications in the right breast compared to the regular previous imaging. These findings were suspicious for an ipsilateral relapse of invasive ductal BC .
The biopsy confirmed a relapse with infiltrates of a moderately differentiated invasive ductal BC (ER 90%, PR 30%, HER2 negative, Ki-67 25%, microsatellite stable). The patient was started preoperatively on an endocrine therapy with the nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor (AI) letrozole (2.5 mg PO QD) along with the gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist goserelin (3.6 mg SQ QM) for ovarian function suppression (OFS).
Preoperative evaluation with fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with computed tomography (FDG PET/CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed relapse of the right breast, with no sign of lymph node involvement or distant metastases. However, delayed lymphoscintigraphy (2 h after injection) detected a sentinel lymph node in the contralateral axilla .