A 2-year-old boy presenting with paroxysmal abdominal pain for 1 day was diagnosed with ileocecal intussusception and treated with saline enema in a local hospital in December, 2015. He was transferred to our department due to IR the following day. At admission, the patient’s main complaint was abdominal pain without vomiting, hematochezia or melena. History of diarrhea, food allergy, genetic disease and chronic disease was denied. Physical examination revealed normal vital signs. Abdominal tenderness without palpable masses was noted. Routine blood testing and rotavirus antibody measurement were negative. Abdominal CT scan revealed no abnormalities. Color Doppler ultrasound confirmed ileocecal intussusception. Final diagnosis of IR with unknown causes was made.
Ultrasound-guided saline enema was performed and intussusception was successfully reduced. The patient was administered with dexamethasone (3 mg) intravenously. The following day the child encountered another episode of intussusception, and saline enema was repeated, resulting in the reduction of the intussusception. Intravenous dexamethasone was continued. During the period of day 3 to day 8, intussusception recurred almost every day with no signs of peritonitis and perforation, or ultrasound findings of intestinal ischemia, trapped fluid and bowel obstruction. The parents of the patient were informed of different treatment alternatives including surgery, but all episodes of intussusception were treated with saline enema while intravenous dexamethasone was discontinued on day 5. Complete reduction of the intussusception was confirmed by Ultrasound after each saline enema . When intussusception recurred on day 9, in view of that multiple saline enema reductions and dexamethasone failed to cure the IR, laparotomy was eventually performed upon the consent of the parents, which revealed ileocecal intussusception without bowel necrosis and perforation. The intussusception was manually reduced, and distal ileum thickening with palpable masses were noted. The distal ileum was opened for exploration with a 1 cm longitudinal incision, and scores of nodular mucosal protrusions were seen . ILH was suspected and a biopsy of the affected intestine was performed. Afterwards, the incision was closed by interrupted inverted transmural plus interrupted seromuscular stitches using a 5-0 absorbable suture. The terminal ileum (~ 6 cm in length), and the ileocecal junction were fixed to the paralleled ascending colon and the peritoneum by interrupted seromuscular stitches using a 4-0 silk suture, respectively . The appendix was removed. Histopathological analysis of the surgical biopsy revealed hyperplastic diffuse lymphoid tissue and lymphoid follicles (H&E staining) with abundant CD3 (+) T lymphocytes and CD20 (+) B lymphocytes . It appeared that B lymphocytes were distributed only in lymphoid follicles while T lymphocytes were seen in both the diffuse lymphoid tissue and lymphoid follicles. The postoperative recovery was uneventful and no IR was observed during over 5 years of follow-up.