A 50-year-old man of Middle East ethnicity presented with a 16-week history of CSF rhinorrhea, short-term memory loss, and slight decline in cognitive function. On physical examination, clear watery rhinorrhea, right-beating nystagmus, tongue deviation to the left side, mild facial asymmetry, multiple lipomas, bradycardia (52 beats/minute), and high blood pressure (194/118 mmHg) were detected. Laboratory tests results revealed presence of beta-2 transferrin in rhinorrhea fluid and hypokalemia (3 mmol/L). There were no other abnormalities in his hematology (for example, blood count) and chemistry test results (for example, liver function and CSF analysis). His past medical history was significant for: hypertension; Dercum’s disease; right internal carotid dissection with pseudoaneurysm formation which was stable and conservatively treated, and followed with imaging; chronic compensated noncommunicating hydrocephalus secondary to obstruction at aqueduct of Sylvius, and a one-time seizure episode.
Computed tomography (CT) showed bony defects in his left lateral sphenoid sinus and right anterior cribriform plate . CT cisternography revealed adjacent meningocele to the aforementioned defects with pooling of intrathecal contrast, confirming herniation into the left lateral sphenoid and right anterior ethmoid air cells.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 2.9 × 1.8 × 1.8 cm right anterior meningocele traversing the anterior cribriform plate inferiorly into anterior ethmoid air cells and nasopharynx with extension into the right maxillary sinus . Another contrast extension from the left middle cranial fossa along its most anterior aspect into the most lateral aspect of the sphenoid sinus was identified suggesting a second meningocele measuring 1 × 1 × 0.9 cm . Both lesions were enhanced with gadolinium but no brain parenchyma could be identified within the sacs. Other findings on MRI included a significantly flattened pituitary gland within a remodeled sella and a slightly dilated ventricular system.
He underwent neuronavigation-assisted expanded endoscopic endonasal surgery with resection of the anterior skull base meningoceles. The first lesion was right ethmoidal and the second lesion was left sphenoidal. Repair of the dura was carried out with two layers of dural matrix. Insertion of a lumbar drain was done to drain CSF and for injection of fluorescein to help confirm dural seal. Opening pressure upon insertion of the lumbar drain at the time of surgery was 20 mmHg. Septal and anterior ethmoidal flaps were used to support the repair of the sphenoid and anterior ethmoidal lesions, respectively. He recovered uneventfully and postoperative imaging showed complete resolution of the meningoceles bilaterally .
Four weeks after the surgery, he presented to our clinic with CSF leak and headache. MRI revealed evidence of CSF leak noted within the left sphenoid sinus. He underwent an endoscopic repair of the CSF leak and insertion of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Postoperation, he recovered well and presented no symptoms. He had 3-year follow up with no recurrence of the meningoceles.