A 28 years old female without any comorbidities presented in the month of September (just after the rainy season in North India), with complaints of high grade fever for 10 days,18 days prior to admission. 5 days after subsidence of fever, she developed gait ataxia with tremulousness of hands. The following day, she had an episode of generalized tonic clonic seizure followed by altered sensorium. On examination, she was conscious and oriented to time, place and person. Neurological examination revealed broken horizontal pursuits and hypermetric saccades, pancerebellar signs in form of gait ataxia,scanning speech, bilateral dysmetria and intention tremor,dysdiadochokinesia, rebound phenomena and impaired heel knee shin test.
On investigating, her CSF analysis was normal (no cells; normal sugar and proteins) and the cranial contrast MRI was also normal . Her hemogram showed a low hemoglobin (9.4 g/dl), thrombocytopenia (platelets 86,000) with normal leucocyte count. Serum biochemistry revealed deranged liver function tests (T. bilirubin -1.9 mg/dl,Alanine aminotransferase (AST -78 U/L and Aspartate aminotransferase (ALT -88 U/L). Her renal function test (serum urea,creatinine), viral markers (HBs Ag detection and Anti HCV antibodies), Malaria work up (pLDH and anti HRP2 antibodies by Rapid Diagnostic Test, Direct microscopy with thick and thin smears) and Widal test were negative. Dengue infection was ruled out with rapid chromatographic immunoassay for NS 1 antigen and IgG and IgM antibodies. Ultrasound abdomen showed presence of fatty liver. During the hospital stay, she showed a further rise in her serum transaminases (AST -391 U/L and AST -389 U/L). Serum Leptospira serology showed high titres of IgM (ELISA-SD Bioline) and MAT (microscopic agglutination test;serovar canicola, RMRC, Port Blair,India) titre >1:800. Diagnosis of Leptospira infection was made using modified Faine’s criteria (7 - clinical, 5 - epidemiological and 15 - positive serology) .
She was administered intravenous ceftriaxone for 14 days. On 4th day, her anemia, thrombocytopenia and transaminitis started improving. At 1 month follow up, she had marked recovery of ataxia and she could walk independently.