A 72-year-old male presented to the Emergency Room of our hospital, due to persistent lumbar, abdominal, perineal pain, and severe constipation. Due to the evidence of increased levels of pancreatic and hepatic enzymes, patient was admitted to a medical ward, and the diagnostic pathway was planned. A whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and showed a mass, centrally colliquated, originating from the right lateral wall of the rectum, with lower margin approximately 7.5 cm far from the anal verge, determining significant reduction in lumen caliber. The mass infiltrated the right mesorectal fascia, posteriorly the right side of the anterior presacral fascia and the postero-medial portions of the homolateral piriformis muscle, and anteriorly the right lobe of the prostate gland. Enlarged lymph nodes suspected for metastatic involvement were detected in the right obturator region (15 mm), along the rectal vessels (10 mm), and in the right side of the prevescical space (10 mm). More, CT scan showed in the context of the subcutaneous soft tissues of the posterior abdominal wall, in the lumbar region, a nodule of 10 mm diameter, centrally colliquated, suspected for a subcutaneous metastasis .
Patient underwent a multidisciplinary evaluation involving medical oncologist, abdominal surgeon, radiotherapist, and diagnostic and therapeutic plan was shared and defined. Endoscopic evaluation of rectum confirmed an ulcerated proliferation, located 7 cm from the anal verge, involving the bowel semi-circumference, and extending for 5 cm in the cranial direction. The pathological examination of the bioptic specimens revealed features consistent with poorly differentiated NEC, with cytoplasmic staining negative for Chromogranin A and positive for CK AE1/AE3, CD56, Synaptophysin and Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 (TTF-1). Staining for Ki-67 revealed high expression of this proliferation marker in cell nuclei, consistent with a high proliferation rate in tumor cells . KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF genes were analysed and no mutations were detected.
In the context of soft tissues of the posterior abdominal wall, ultrasound confirmed a hypo-anechoic nodule of 10 mm, suspected for a subcutaneous metastasis.
To better define metastatic extension of disease, a whole body 18F-FDG PET was performed , showing an extended area of disomogeneous abnormal hypermetabolism, probably due to necrotic phenomena, at the level of voluminous mass of the rectum, with both endoluminal and extraluminal expansion, involving the right mesorectal space and reaching the posterior wall of the bladder and the right lobe of the prostate gland, without a well-defined cleavage plan. Pathologic spot was confirmed at the level of lymph nodes and the already known nodule of the subcutaneous soft tissues of the right lumbar region. More, PET showed a metabolic increased concentration at the left sacral wing, near the synchondrosis, with a thickening alteration .
Patient underwent resection of subcutaneous nodule, and the pathological examination revealed features consistent with metastasis from a small-cell NEC. Immunohistochemical study revealed cytoplasmic staining for Synaptophysin, TTF1, AE1/AE3, negative for Chromogranin A, CK20. Staining for proliferation marker Ki-67 was detected in 90% of cell nuclei . More, patient underwent baseline cardiac evaluation with echocardiogram, showing 70% left ventricular ejection fraction, signs of altered diastolic function, systolic arching of the mitral posterior flap, mild mitral and tricuspid insufficiency, Chiari network in the right atrium.
Laboratory tests, particularly pancreatic and liver enzymes, progressively improved after specifically administered medical treatments; tumor markers, specifically CEA, Ca19.9, Ca125, chromogranin, NSE, and PSA values were in the normal range. Patient underwent an analgesic therapy with pregabalin 75 mg twice a day, and oxycodone naloxone 10 mg twice a day.
Due to metastatic disease, involving a rare site such as subcutaneous tissue and suspected bone metastasis, and locally infiltrating mesorectal, muscular, pre-sacral tissues, prostate gland, with lymph nodes involvement, multidisciplinary team shared the indication to first line medical treatment. Patient was young-elderly (72 years old), with intermediate Cumulative Illness Rating Scale (CIRS) score , due to hypertension on treatment, ECOG performance status (PS) 1, symptomatic for pain and constipation, familial history positive for cholangiocarcinoma diagnosed in the father 75 years old, KRAS/NRAS/BRAF wild-type genotype. Intensive first line treatment according to FIr-B/FOx schedule, previously reported as highly active, also specifically in young elderly MCRC patients, was selected due to metastatic, locally advanced rectal NEC: bevacizumab (5 mg/kg) day 1,15 - irinotecan (160 mg/m2) day 1,15 – oxaliplatin (80 mg/m2) day 8,22 – 5fluorouracil (900 mg/mq/day) day 1–2, 8–9, 15–16, 22–23, cycles repeated every 28 days . A central venous access, port-a-cath, has been placed.
A consistent rapid improvement in clinical conditions, particularly constipation and pain, were observed during treatment, and patient discontinued symptomatic administered therapies. Treatment was well tolerated, with maximum toxicities represented by G2 diarrhea, G2 asthenia, G2 nausea. Re-evaluation of disease was performed, as planned, after the first three cycles of treatment. CT scan showed a marked reduction of the rectal mass of about 70–80%, with reduction also of lymph nodes and the prostatic involvement . No evidence of the rectal mass was reported at the endoscopic evaluation. Echocardiogram confirmed mild mitralic insufficiency, with 55% left ventricular ejection fraction.
Due to good safety profile of administered treatment, the marked and rapid improvement of symptoms related to primary tumor, and the metastatic extension of disease, multidisciplinary team shared the indication to continue the same medical treatment for other three cycles. Median received dose-intensity was 100% for all associated drugs. Maximum toxicities were represented by G1 nausea, G1 rhinitis, G1 epistaxis, G1 neurotoxicity, G1 asthenia, G3 alopecia, and G3 neutropenia. CT scan showed further improvement of the marked reduction of the rectal mass, and lymph nodes and prostatic involvement disappeared . No evidence of the rectal mass was reported at the endoscopic evaluation, with the evidence of a scar. Echocardiogram confirmed mild mitralic insufficiency. Multidisciplinary team shared the indication to curative surgery that confirmed a pathologic complete response. At the level of the residual depressed area of distal rectum, histology revealed no evidence of neoplastic tissue and the presence of atrophic mucosa with fibrosis and lymphocyte infiltration; absence of neoplastic cells was confirmed in 32 resected locoregional lymph nodes; actual PFS is 9 months without evidence of residual disease.