A 56-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital owing to upper abdominal pain. She did not have fever. Her Murphy’s sign was negative. Laboratory data were as follows: white blood cell count, 72.0 × 103/μL, and C-reactive protein, 0.23 mg/dL. Plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed dilation of both the RHD and gall bladder . She was admitted to our hospital for observation. On the next day, contrast-enhanced CT and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) were performed, with the latter detecting a congenital anomaly of the RHD entering into the cystic duct . Although several small stones in gallbladder was found, no choledocholithiasis was confirmed to cause biliary obstruction. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed that the RHD entered the cystic duct. Therefore, an endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) tube was placed inside the RHD. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was planned. The cystic duct was carefully dissected, and RHD bifurcation was confirmed . Intraoperative cholangiography was performed using an ENBD catheter, after grabbing the gallbladder neck with forceps at 10 mm away from the confluence. Intraoperative cholangiography revealed that the catheter in the RHD was not grabbed by forceps . The Hartmann’s pouch of the gallbladder was clipped and divided, and the ENBD catheter was removed. Laparoscopic subtotal cholecystectomy was safely performed. The patient was discharged without any complication. At 1 month postoperatively, the patient complained abdominal pain and high fever. Imaging analysis suspected biliary obstruction at the cystic duct due to choledocholithiasis which was also suspected at the first visit preoperatively. A plastic biliary stent was placed, resulting in immediate disappearance of symptom. The stent was removed 3 months postoperatively; however, abdominal pain recurred. Imaging analysis revealed that the RHD was dilated and cystic duct stenosis was suspected. The plastic stent was placed again, and further investigations for malignant diseases were performed. No malignant diseases were found. The patient was observed for 3 months, and the stent was removed again. One month after the last stent removal, MRCP revealed no RHD dilatation . Sustained swelling of biliary tract after surgery might mainly be the cause of stenosis. The patient has been free from any symptom for a year after MRCP.