A 57-year-old Caucasian woman underwent a mitral valve replacement (MVR) for severe mitral stenosis. Her past medical history included obstructive sleep apnoea, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. The regular medications included thyroxine 50 mcg daily, warfarin, and Aspirin 81 mg daily. One month following MVR, she presented with symptomatic third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, and a dual-chamber PPM (Advisa™, Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) was implanted as per guidelines and programmed DDD 50–130 b.p.m., However, several months after her device implantation, she reported frequent episodes of abrupt lightheadedness that were not orthostatic. Device interrogation parameters were unchanged from the time of implant. P waves were 2.8 mV and R waves were 18 mV. Right atrial and right ventricular lead impedances were 531 and 862 Ohms, respectively. Capture thresholds on both leads were <1 V/0.5 ms. Provocation testing in the clinic with deep respiration and active movement of the arms and the generator pocket did not evoke pacing inhibition or show artefact on either atrial or ventricular leads. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial tracking with ventricular pacing and no loss of capture. Chest X-ray showed no obvious lead dislodgement or fracture.
Since she was stable and had no syncope, she was ultimately sent home with an ambulatory Holter monitor. She had intermittent ventricular pacing inhibition, as shown in documented only on the Holter monitor. Ventricular pacing inhibition was seen with sinus rate tracking of ≤75 b.p.m., was not preceded by any visualized artefact, and did not correspond to standard device features such as Managed Ventricular Pacing or Capture Management. AV delay remained the same during ventricular capture, excluding AV hysteresis.
The pacing inhibition’s recurrent and predictable nature every 1 h and 30 s suggested a device feature as opposed to a hardware malfunction. This was reported to the device manufacturer and discussed with a technical expert from the company. In this case, it was caused by an internal function of the Advisa™ series of PPMs that attempts to store an electrogram (EGM) every 1 h and 30 s. During EGM storage, an amplified signal from the storage capacitor can result in oversensing by the ventricular channel and inappropriate ventricular pacing inhibition. To rectify the issue, the ventricular lead sensitivity value was increased from 0.9 mV to 1.2 mV. No further instances of inappropriate ventricular pacing inhibition were noted on the follow-up ambulatory monitor at 3 months, and the patient’s symptoms resolved.