A full-term female infant, appropriate for gestational age, was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery, weighing 3680 g, to an 18-year-old primigravid Hispanic mother and a 21-year-old African American father. The neonate adapted well to extra-uterine life as evidenced by Apgar scores of eight and nine at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. The pregnancy had been uneventful, and the maternal screens were all negative. There was no evidence of diabetes or pre-eclampsia during pregnancy. The neonate was transferred to the newborn nursery for routine newborn care. Physical examination in the newborn nursery revealed a palpable mass in the right lumbar area. Significant laboratory findings in the neonate included hematuria, and an elevated serum creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dl prompting transfer to the neonatal intensive care unit. A renal ultrasound evaluation showed an enlarged right kidney (5.56 cm) with loss of corticomedullary distinction. A renal Doppler flow study demonstrated an increased resistive index of the right renal artery with suboptimal wave forms of the right renal vein and a clot in the right renal vein . A Doppler flow study of the left renal artery and vein was normal. The neonate had normal blood pressures throughout the hospital stay.
The neonate and her parents were evaluated for prothrombotic risk factors. The mother's laboratory parameters were remarkable for an elevated level of Lp (a) of 73 mg/dl (normal 0 to 40 mg/dl), and fibrinogen of 512 mg/dl (156 to 400 mg/dl). The plasma Lp (a) concentration was measured by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) technique using mouse monoclonal anti-apo (a) capture antibody and sheep polyclonal anti-apoB detection antibody (COALIZA Lp (a), Chromogenix). The other laboratory tests on the mother were normal: plasma homocysteine 5.3 μmol/l; protein C activity greater than 125%; protein S activity greater than 125%; anticardiolipin antibody IgG 6.2 IgG phospholipid binding units; anticardiolipin IgM 6.4 IgM phospholipid binding units; beta 2 glycoprotein IgG less than 9 standard IgG antibeta 2 glycoprotein units; beta 2 glycoprotein IGM less than 9 standard IgM antibeta 2 glycoprotein units; lupus anticoagulant negative; Factor VIII A assay 108%; antinuclear antibody (ANA) screening negative; antithrombin III 94%; prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), international normalized ratio (INR) normal. DNA analysis showed no point mutation (G20210A) in the 3' untranslated region of the prothrombin gene, no genetic polymorphism (Arg 506/Glu 506) for Factor V Leiden, and no gene mutation (C677T) for 5' 10 methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). The paternal screens were all normal.
The plasma Lp (a) level in the neonate was 11 mg/dl (0 to 40 mg/dl). This was measured when the maternal Lp (a) results became available, that is, 4 days after the diagnosis of RVT. The plasma homocysteine level was 4.6 μmol/l (4 to 13.7 μmol/l). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head of the neonate was negative for saggital sinus thrombosis. The neonate was started on low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) at 1.5 mg/kg/day every 12 hours, with antifactor Xa monitoring. The antifactor Xa activity measured was 0.74 IU/ml (less than 0.10 IU/ml). The serum creatinine level decreased to 0.5 mg/dl 9 days after initiation of treatment, and urinalysis showed no evidence of hematuria. Renal ultrasound Doppler flow studies were repeated at weekly intervals during the hospital stay. One week after initiation of treatment, an ultrasound demonstrated persistence of RVT and development of a new thrombosis in the inferior vena cava. The neonate was discharged home on enoxaparin and followed by a hematologist, a nephrologist and a primary care physician. A follow-up ultrasound Doppler flow study at 2 months of age showed a normal flow pattern in the aorta, inferior vena cava, right and left renal arteries and veins indicating resolution of the thrombosis . Enoxaparin was discontinued at 2 months of age. The baby continued to do well with no evidence of residual renal dysfunction or hypertension at 18 months of age.