A 6-year-old girl patient presented to the ER (emergency room) with an intense abdominal pain accompanied by pallor, vomiting, sweating and hematuria. The abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of a nodular lesion in the left kidney and local hemorrhage. Her medical history was unremarkable except for occasional self-limited episodes of mild headache. She had normal developmental milestones, a satisfactory school performance and brisk dancing skills. Some family members were diagnosed with carcinomas, all with adult-onset. At admission, her physical examination was remarkable for abdominal tenderness without any evident neurological deficits. The abdominal CT scan ruled out acute arterial bleeding and an MRI confirmed a tumor in the upper pole of the left kidney with extensive intracapsular hemorrhage, suggestive of a Wilms’ tumor . Due to the episodes of headache, the initial workup was extended with a brain MRI that the presence of a fairly large left supratentorial tumor with high cellularity and vascularization, features suggestive of high-grade neoplasia . There was no evidence of leptomeningeal, lung, or systemic dissemination. Deeper neurological examination revealed full right hemianopia, which had been detected to that moment.
Since the renal hemorrhage improved spontaneously during the initial evaluation period, the cerebral tumor surgery was prioritized. The initial neurosurgery could only achieve a partial resection due to the high vascularity and extremely hard texture of the tumor, requiring intraoperative transfusional support. Postoperative hydrocephalus required a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt. The CT scan after the shunt procedure showed a highly calcified tumor . The histological analysis identified a choroidal plexus tumor composed of well-differentiated papillary pattern covered by cells with nuclear pleomorphism and cytological atypia, but no evidence of solid pattern, mitotic figures or necrosis were identified . Intense p53 nuclear staining was identified by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in the near-totality of cells. The Ki67 stain was positive in less than 10% of cells. The histopathological diagnosis was plexus papilloma with atypical features. However, due to difficulty in evaluation of the grade of this tumor, an international review was requested which confirmed the diagnosis of a typical choroid plexus papilloma (CPP) (Dr. Martin Hasselblat, international CPT registry also see acknowledgments-. Sanger sequencing of TP53 (NM_000546.6) identified in the CPP the missense variant c.844 C > T (p.Arg282Trp), previously reported as a pathogenic/likely pathogenic mutation (COSM10704; dbSNP variant rs28934574). The wild-type allele was absent, consistent with the loss of heterozygosity . Germline TP53 mutation analysis was performed. Sanger sequencing revealed the presence of the c.844C > T mutation in heterozygous status in the patient’s peripheral blood. Informed consent signed by parents was obtained before germline testing. Our findings confirmed the suspected Li–Fraumeni syndrome as the cancer predisposition syndrome underlying the patient’s malignancies . Genetic testing of the family disclosed that she shared with her healthy father the same TP53 mutation, while both, her mother and sister, had no deleterious variants.
After the first neurosurgery, the administration of a course of ICE chemotherapy (Ifosfamide-carboplatin-etoposide) was given to facilitate a second look surgery, but also considering that would be useful for both the choroid plexus tumor and the likely concomitant Wilms tumor. After one ICE Course the MRI evaluation showed that the cerebral tumor was stable, whereas the renal tumor was slightly reduced and the pericapsular hematoma was completely resolved. Before the second neurosurgery a cerebral arteriography was performed without detecting any actively dependent vessels, therefore tumor embolization was not performed. In the second neurosurgery only partial resection could be accomplished because of hemodynamic instability due to hemorrhage. The histopathological analysis confirmed CPP with atypical features and prominent osseous and cartilaginous metaplasia. The residual tumor caused partial exclusion on the left lateral ventricle. An Ommaya-type reservoir with the catheter tip implanted into the excluded ventricle permitted withdrawal of CSF and resolved the symptoms of the segmental ventriculomegaly.
After confirming the stability of the cerebral tumor, complete resection was deferred in order to focus on the renal tumor. A radical left nephrectomy showed a Stage II Wilms’ tumor without anaplasia, but nuclear unrest was patent; p53 IHC staining was very strong and Sanger sequencing of TP53 demonstrated the presence of the same homozygous c.844C > T mutation identified in the CPP tumor . Chromosomal analysis (CytoScan HD Array, ThermoFisher Scientific) of the Wilms’ tumor revealed a complex pattern of copy-number gains and losses affecting numerous chromosomes ( C). Chromosome 17 displayed two chromosomal abnormalities, a long contiguous region of absence of heterozygosity encompassing the entire short arm of chromosome 17 associated with an extra copy of the entire chromosome (trisomy). The short arm of chromosome 17 displayed thus three homozygous, uniparental copies. More than 70% of the viable tumor consisted of blastema. Chemotherapy was tailored to the blastemal-type Wilms tumor and the persistent CPP, with alternating cycles of VAD chemotherapy (Vincristine / Actinomycin / Doxorubicin) with ICE, for four courses. Although the role of adjuvant chemotherapy is controversial in CPP, the aim of the treatment was to facilitate the surgical resection . At the end of chemotherapy the patient underwent a third intervention for the brain tumor and a complete resection was achieved with an uneventful postoperative course. The histology confirmed CPP.
At the time of this report, more than 2 years follow-up after diagnosis, the patient is in complete remission with no new tumors identified during the follow-up. So far, her father has regular follow-up examination and has not been diagnosed with any type of neoplasia.