We report a 6-year-old female who came to the genetic outpatient clinic for multiple consecutive fractures. She was born by vaginal delivery from nonconsanguineous parents with no complications and achieved all developmental milestones without delay. These include fine motor, gross motor social-emotional, and behavioral, language, and cognitive milestones . At 6 months, she presented hip dysplasia and bilateral valgus cavus that was treated with an orthopedic diaper. In June 2021, she fell from her height and suffered a left femoral shaft close fracture that required surgery and plating nailing placement ( and ). Eight months later, the surgeon removed the plating. Fifteen days later, the girl slightly twisted her left leg and fractured her left femur again. The pediatrician ordered additional imaging studies and ruled out malignancy. Her physical examination revealed blue sclera without coloboma and hypermobility in her hands and feet. Her family history information is relevant for blue sclera but no fractures in her mother.
We ordered the Osteogenesis Imperfecta and Bone Fragility Panel that analyzes 67 genes and identified a heterozygous G > C c.2398-1 (splice acceptor) pathogenic variant in intron 34 of COL1A1. The variant alters splicing with a frequency of 0 in The Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) and in The Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) databases. The splice variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
We reviewed all cases of splicing variants reported in PubMed until June 2022 and filtered the case reports that include the splice variant location and the OI type. We identified 336 splicing variants, most of them were OI type I and located in intron 17. Most of the splice variants were located in introns 28, 33, 35, and 50 and in exon 49 (, ). OI type I was located mostly in intron 17 and 19; type 2 in intron 14, 26, and 47; type 3 in intron 11 and 6; and type 4 in intron 8, 9, 15, 16, and 19. The most intron splice variants were located in introns near exons that become the triple-helical region domain . Splice variant mostly caused OI type 1. Intron 17 includes the most single nucleotide variants (mostly G > C/A) and reported 17 type 1, 3 type 3, and 1 type 4 case. Most of single nucleotide variants in OI type 2 are A > C and type 3 G > C .