A 35-year-old woman presented to us after an accident in which her back was impacted by an 80-kg-heavy-giant rubber tire with metal wheel hub. When the tire fell down from about 10 m high, the patient was standing right under it and the middle thoracic back was hit by the tire from above. She felt pain in her back and remained in place until emergency personnel arrived. After conservative management in the local hospital for 3 days, the patient was transferred to our hospital safely. During the 3 days in the local hospital, the patient received neurotrophic factors and antithrombotic reagent given by venous transfusion without any reduction treatment and she hesitated to accept a surgery. Upon examination, her blood pressure was 142/94 mmHg, pulse rate 60 per minute, respiratory rate 15 per minute, and body temperature 37 °C. She denied numbness and weakness in her extremities. Physical examination revealed that she was neurologically intact without focal sensory or motor deficits and had normal reflexes. Neurological examinations revealed a Frankel grade E. According to ASIA scoring system, the patient got 112 points for light touch sensation, 112 points for pain sensation, 50 points for the upper limb main muscles, and 50 points for the lower limb main muscles. No perianal sensory was lost. Normal anal contractility and sphincter reflex were observed. A severe tenderness point was found in the middle back. She had Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 5 power in both lower limbs. Associated injuries were pulmonary contusion resulting in right pleural effusion, which was treated by chest tube insertion in the local hospital. No neurogenic bladder or fecal incontinence was observed.
Spine radiography revealed a burst fracture of T7 with complete fracture-dislocation and sagittal displacement of the T6-7 vertebrae . Spinal computed tomography revealed fractures involving the left pedicle of T4; spinous process, vertebral laminae, and bilateral pedicles of the T5 and T6; spinous process of T7; and both pedicles of the T8 vertebra. The fractures in the bilateral facet joints of the T6/7 vertebrae and T7 body burst fracture resulted in the dislocation between the T6 and T7 vertebrae. There was no retropulsion of bony fragments into the spinal canal, and spinal canal was expanded because of the fracture of pedicles . Magnetic resonance imaging showed spinal fracture-dislocation of T6 to T7 and no abnormal high signal intensity of T2 weight image . According to the records of the local hospital, 1.8 g methylprednisolone were administered at the local hospital about 2 h after admission and decompressive immobilized surgery was performed 3 days after arriving in our department.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was carefully placed in a prone position. A traumatic hematoma was evacuated on the fascia after a thoracic midline vertical incision. The erector muscle of the spine from T5 to T8, adjacent part of the latissimus dorsi, and corresponding skin and superficial fascia were found to be damaged severely. The fracture formed a spontaneous decompressive sparing canal containing the spinal cord. The vertebral body of T7 was broken almost vertically and the majority detached posteriorly. The bilateral superior facet of T7 was broken and dislocated behind the inferior facet of T6. No hematoma or dura membrane tear was found. After extensive decompression from T5 to T8 with a high-speed burr, the dura and spinal cord appeared as normal without tearing except for the displacement. Realignment of the spine was achieved with rods after placement of transpedicle screws in the T3, T4, T5, T8, and T9 vertebrae . During the reduction, two rods were placed in the screws firstly. The nuts of screws in T8 and T9 were tightened while the other nuts were not. A distractor was applied between T4 screw and a powerful plier biting on the proximal of rods. Then, the dislocated vertebrae were replaced with distraction between T4 and pliers. All the nuts were tightened after reduction of vertebrae. Finally, posterolateral bony fusion of T3 through T9 was performed. Intra-operative neurophysiological monitoring was applied throughout the operation. The massive blood loss from comminuted fracture of the vertebral body was solved by autologous blood transfusion.
No deteriorated neurological function was observed postoperatively. The patient was discharged on day 27 and could walk without assistance. At 6-and 12-month follow-up, the patient has recovered well. At 6 months after the injury, the patient returned for reexamination walking on foot without any brace. At the 12-month follow-up, the patient was able to walk 2 km a day continuously and returned to her job.