The patient was a 63-year-old man with HS, idiopathic aortic bileaflet, and subaortic aneurysm (SAA) caused by infective endocarditis. The SAA was incidentally discovered during a clinical evaluation for aortic regurgitation (AR); this was due to idiopathic aortic bileaflet and infective endocarditis that were diagnosed 10 years ago. Because of the patient’s HS history and severe anemia, a cardiologist conducted the medical follow-up. The patient’s LV systolic function worsened gradually and he had frequent episodes of dyspnea. Moreover, transapical echocardiography showed a decrease in the AR grading. On admission, the hemoglobin level was 8.7 mg/dL, hematocrit was 23.8 %, platelet count was 18.2 × 104/μL, blood urea nitrogen was 15.1 mg/dL, and creatinine was 0.93 mg/dL. The physical examination revealed an anemic and icteric conjunctiva, and his skin appeared jaundiced. The laboratory findings of the patient’s blood smear revealed a type 1 + polychromasia.
The transthoracic echocardiogram showed a bicuspid aortic valve (adhesions on the left and right coronary cusps), a 10-mm SAA prolapsing at the atrio-ventricular continuity, an ascending aorta measuring 38 mm, and a grade IV central AR . The left ventricular ejection fraction was preserved. The computer tomography angiography revealed a right coronary sinus aneurysm in the sagittal and axial plane.
A surgical intervention was indicated because of severe AR due to the bicuspid aortic valve, moderate dilation of ascending aorta, and SAA. The procedure was performed through a median sternotomy. A CPB was instituted by ascending aortic cannulation and bicaval drainage. Left atrial venting was carried out from the right upper pulmonary vein. Cardioplegia was performed by selective antegrade and retrograde perfusion with blood Frem’s solution and cold blood. Before initiating the CPB, we transfused four units of RBCs (hemoglobin of 12.1 mg/dL). Furthermore, human haptoglobin was also transfused.
At the time of the CPB, the centrifuge pump was selected rather than the roller pump, and perfusion index was 2.5 L/m2/min. First, the epicardial membrane was used for the repair of the SAA . Second, aortic valve replacement was performed by using the biological valve (Magna EASE 21 mm, Carpentier-Edwards, Japan). Third, an ascending aorta replacement was performed under moderate hypothermia and cross-clamping condition. The aortic cross-clamp time was 182 min, and CPB time was 234 min. The urine remained clear throughout and after CPB, indicating that no significant hemolysis had occurred during the procedure. The patient was extubated on day 1, and all the vasoactive infusions were discontinued on day 3 postoperatively.
Despite the 1.5 L RBC transfusion during the operation, the immediate postoperative blood smear did not show any spherocytes and other abnormal RBC morphologies. Postoperative bleeding was minimal, and further RBC transfusions were performed on day 4 and 14 postoperatively.
The echocardiography showed no residual AR, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on day 18 without any hemolysis. At the 6-month follow-up, he was doing well. Recent echocardiography showed no residual AR, and good left ventricular function. Hematogenic investigation showed the hemoglobin level to be maintained at 10.6 g/dL without any transfusion. The total bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase levels were 3.9 mg/dL, and 303 IU/L, respectively .