A 28-year-old female presented to the emergency department for a gynecological consultation after imaging performed at an outside hospital showed a large right ovarian mass concerning for malignancy. The patient’s presentation followed two months of upper abdominal pain aggravated by movement, coincident with weight loss, shortness of breath, abdominal distention and decreased appetite. Her ultrasound and CT scan showed an 18cm abdominopelvic mass originating from the right ovary which was cystic in appearance containing soft tissue, fatty and calcified components. Importantly, there was a large volume symptomatic mucinous appearing ascites . Serologic tumor markers including CA-125, CA19-9, and CEA, were normal. Past medical, surgical, social, and family history were non-contributory.
The patient underwent a two-staged operative approach. The index procedure included debulking of symptomatic mucinous ascites and resection of a pelvic mass requiring a right salpingo-oophorectomy. An 18-cm right ovarian tumor was described within a large volume of mucinous ascites. Pathology review demonstrated a mature cystic teratoma containing a mucinous epithelial component . The ovarian mass contained multiple thick mucoid fluid-filled cysts ranging in size from 3 to 15cm. In addition, the mass appeared grossly necrotic with soft tan-gray areas interspersed among follicles of mature hair. The fallopian tube was not involved. Neoplastic cells on immunohistochemistry (IHC) were strongly positive for CK20, CDX2, and SATB2, and focally positive for CK7 . Pelvic washings revealed abundant extracellular mucin, paucicellular with scant reactive mesothelial cells. Peritoneal cytology demonstrated mucicarmine (mucin) staining of the dense ascites. These clinical and pathologic findings were consistent with the diffuse peritoneal adenomucinosis (DPAM) variant of PMP originating from a ruptured LAMN-like ectopic mucinous neoplasm arising from a malignant transformation of an ovarian mature cystic teratoma. This pathological designation is in accordance with the recent 2016 Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group International (PSOGI) consensus for classification and pathologic reporting for PMP and associated appendiceal neoplasia that recommends distinguishing between the histologic grade of the appendiceal primary and the metastatic peritoneal disease that occasionally may be discordant .
After multidisciplinary review, completion of CRS and HIPEC was recommended. For the HIPEC portion of the procedure, 40 mg of alkylating agent mitomycin-C (MMC) was employed. The peritoneal cancer index (PCI) was scored and calculated as described by Jacquet and Sugarbaker . Calculated total PCI was 21. A complete macroscopic cytoreduction of all diseases was achieved. Procedures included a greater and lesser omentectomy, omental bursectomy, splenectomy, cholecystectomy, right and left upper quadrant and subhepatic parietal peritonectomies, partial glissonian capsulectomy, appendectomy, removal of small bowel mesenteric and serosal implants, total abdominal hysterectomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic peritonectomy with cytoreduction of mucinous peritoneal disease implants including resection of the upper vagina.
Pathology after complete macroscopic cytoreduction similarly demonstrated abundant pools of paucicellular mucin on the resected abdominopelvic disease-bearing visceral and parietal peritoneal surfaces. Importantly, the appendix was diagnosed as benign on permanent histology. Abundant pools of mucin demonstrated no additional or synchronous malignancy and were confirmatory for the DPAM-variant of PMP. Outpatient genetic counseling revealed no familial and/or genetic predisposition.
The patient’s tumor was sent for molecular profiling and next-generation sequencing. The genetic report showed mutations in ATM at splice site 8268+1G>A, GNAS R201C, and KRAS G12D. The molecular profile was also consistent with tumor-associated microsatellite stability with a tumor mutational burden of 3Muts/Mb. Due to the low-grade nature of the tumor, systemic therapy was not recommended. The patient will undergo a biannual routine examination and cross-sectional imaging. Currently, there is no evidence of disease recurrence 1 year after the procedure.