A 68-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our Arrhythmology and Electrophysiology Unit for lead revision of a single-chamber ICD implanted ten months earlier in another center. Two months before ICD implantation, the patient was hospitalized for symptomatic heart failure, NYHA class 3. A 12-lead ECG showed atrial fibrillation (AF) with rapid ventricular response. A transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF, 30%) and severe left atrial enlargement without significant valvular disease. An invasive coronary angiography (ICA) showed multivessel coronary artery disease (MVCAD) with a low Syntax score. Myocardial revascularization with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and two drug-eluting stents (DES) implantation in the left anterior descendent (LAD) coronary artery and the obtuse marginal branch of the left circumflex was performed without complication. The patient was discharged on heart failure and rate-control therapy with a beta-blocker (bisoprolol 5 mg bid), an angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI, sacubitril/valsartan 49/51 mg bid), a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (MRA), a loop diuretic, and digoxin (0.125 mg qd). After two months, because of persistent severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction, a single-chamber ICD with a single-coil passive fixation lead was implanted for primary prevention of sudden cardiac death (SCD). During subsequent follow-up, the patient was referred to our center for symptomatic PNS. At admission, the patient presented with mild dyspnea and mild ankle swelling. Blood tests were in the range of normality except for increased levels of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP, 1,230 pg/ml, nr <125 pg/ml). Device control showed an excessive ventricular pacing percentage (about 15%) although ICD programming in VVI mode with a lower rate of 30 beats per minute, indicating phases of slow ventricular response with the necessity of ventricular pacing. PNS at very low energy output was also confirmed. Several symptomatic episodes of high ventricular rate (HVR) indicated an unsatisfactory pharmacological rate-control despite maximum tolerated drug dosage. Lead parameters were in the range of normality with a normal trend, thus excluding lead failure due to fracture or insulation defect. A 12-lead ECG showed AF with rapid ventricular response and normal QRS duration (90 ms) . Unfortunately, a 12-lead ECG during ventricular pacing was not recorded before admission, however it was obtained during hospital stay from continuous ECG monitoring . Paced QRS morphology showed a right bundle branch block (RBBB) pattern and superior axis. A chest X-ray (CXR) was obtained at admission . CXR showed a single-coil passive fixation defibrillation lead placed in coronary sinus posterior branch, thus explaining occasional PNS. Interestingly, the patient previously underwent two other CXR examinations but the incorrect lead placement was not recognized. A TTE was repeated and reduced LVEF without visualization of defibrillation lead in the right ventricle, in the absence of pericardial effusion, was confirmed. Lead explantation and CRT implantation for both high ventricular pacing percentage and predictable subsequent atrioventricular junction (AVJ) ablation for “ablate-and-pace” therapy were planned, because of reported suboptimal rate-control in patient history (alternance of slow and rapid ventricular response). A venogram was performed in order to confirm subclavian vein patency. A successful lead explantation with simple gentle traction using a non-locking stylet was performed. At the same time, we performed implantation of a CRT device with a single-coil active fixation defibrillation lead placed in the mid-ventricular septum, and a quadripolar passive fixation lead in coronary sinus posterior branch (the only available, ). The LV quadripolar lead was tested for PNS that was absent in pacing configurations excluding distal electrode, with optimal pacing threshold. Bedside echocardiographic examination ruled-out pericardial effusion. The patient was discharged the day after the procedure, and AVJ ablation was postponed after rate control evaluation at subsequent follow-up .