A 54-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department (ED) of our institution with uncontrolled hypertension and new-onset seizures. Two weeks prior to this admission the patient's hypertensive medication had been switched in a tapered fashion from clonidine to lisinopril because of a reported intolerance in the form of general malaise, sinus headache and non-productive cough. Five days before presentation she had developed generalized headache, blurred vision and nausea, and she decided to visit her closest ED, an outside facility in Northwestern Massachusetts, which found her hypertensive with systolic blood pressure of 260 mmHg. At that time, she was treated with analgesics and parenteral antihypertensive medications, which led to partial improvement of her symptoms and subsequent discharge to her home in rural western Massachusetts. Twenty-four hours before her hospital admission, she again visited the ED of the same outside facility complaining of recurrent, severe headaches accompanied by blurred vision. Her blood pressure recorded at that time was 260/160 mmHg. She was again treated with intravenous narcotics and antihypertensive's; however, while being treated, she developed confusion, and the decision was made to transfer the patient to our hospital. En route to our hospital she had an episode of tonic-clonic seizure activity lasting three to four minutes. In our ED, she received a dose of 1000 mg intravenous fosphenytoin once upon arrival and was subsequently intubated for airway protection because of unresponsiveness. Her admission blood pressure was 194/115 mmHg, and she was given two doses of 10 mg of intravenous labetalol.
Her medical history was notable for hypertension, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), end-stage renal disease (ESRD) secondary to lupus nephritis on daily ambulatory intermittent peritoneal dialysis, with a history of good dialysis compliance and blood pressure control. Her most recent peritoneal dialysis treatment had been the day preceding admission. She had also had a mechanical aortic valve replacement for a history of aortic stenosis and underwent chronic anticoagulation treatment. She was no longer on any immunosuppressive therapy for lupus. She did not use alcohol, tobacco or recreational drugs. There were no reported sick contacts, recent travel or outdoor exposures.
Her initial laboratory data were relevant for leukocytosis of 16,500 cells/mm3. No thrombocytopenia or schistocytes were noted on peripheral blood smear. Her liver panel was normal. Her blood urea nitrogen was 68 mg/dl with serum creatinine of 5.6 mg/dl. Her baseline serum creatinine was 5.2 mg/dl. Continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis was initiated in the Intensive-Care Unit (ICU). She underwent computed tomography of the brain, which showed subtle evidence of a possible acute abnormality in the right occipital lobe in addition to an unusual pattern of calcifications in the cerebral hemispheres . The patient underwent lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, which showed clear fluid, a white blood cell count of 99 cells/mm3, a protein level of 9860 mg/dl and a glucose level of 53 mg/dl. Her chest X-ray was unremarkable. Empiric treatment for viral and bacterial meningitis with intravenous acyclovir, vancomycin and ceftriaxone followed. Her blood and CSF cultures ultimately showed no growth, and her CSF venereal disease research laboratory, herpes simplex and varicella virus polymerase chain reaction results were negative.
In our ICU, the physical examination revealed an afebrile patient with a blood pressure of 145/92 mmHg while sedated on propofol and intubated on assist control ventilation, tidal volume of 550 ml, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, oxygen saturation of 100%, fraction of inspired oxygen of 50% and heart rate of 85 beats/minute. She had a noticeable generalized fine maculopapular rash not reported on admission. Her head and neck examination revealed no signs of trauma, with equal and reactive pupils without subconjunctival hemorrhage. Her neck was supple without lymphadenopathy. Her neurological examination showed no obvious posturing or asymmetry; however, she had bilateral lower-extremity hyperreflexia accompanied by the presence of a coexistent Babinski sign. Her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, and her cardiac examination showed a regular pulse with normal S1 and S2 and an audible systolic click. No rashes on her palms or soles were noted. No embolic or immunologic phenomena of endocarditis were encountered.
On ICU day 2, the patient developed a fever of 102°F, and a nasopharyngeal direct fluorescent antibody test was positive for parainfluenza virus, which was confirmed by viral cultures for parainfluenza virus type 3. Lupus activity studies showed normal C3/C4 levels and elevated complement 50 levels > 60 U/ml. Her anti-nuclear antibody titer was 1:800 with a homogeneous nucleolar pattern. Transesophageal echocardiography showed normal prosthetic valve function and no evidence of vegetations. MRI of the brain without contrast enhancement was also performed on ICU day two. The image revealed multifocal T2-weighted hyperintense lesions present within the parasagittal white matter and both cerebellar hemispheres .