A 61-year-old male patient without previously known coronary artery disease was admitted for subacute STEMI. The patients cardiovascular risk factors included arterial hypertension and dyslipidaemia. The patient reported mild angina and dyspnoea beginning 3 days prior hospital admission. Symptoms were initially interpreted as muscular in origin by the patient, therefore he did not seek immediate medical attention. However, upon persistence of symptoms the patient performed serial ECG recordings on his Apple Watch, where he noticed a change in QRS-complex morphology himself. depicts the corresponding single-lead ECG tracings acquired by the patient’s Apple Watch a week before (A) and a day after (B) the start of chest pain, together with the specific recommendation generated by the applications internal algorithm. After onset of chest pain, the ECG tracing clearly showed an ST-elevation, QRS widening, R-wave loss, and T-wave inversion. The ECG lead acquired was corresponding to the Einthoven I lead, since the patient wore his smartwatch on the right wrist. These alterations were new in comparison to the previous ECG tracings before onset of angina and moreover, they were clearly reproducible in repeated tracings, which were acquired by the patient in the course of the following 3 days preceding hospitalization. Importantly, after onset of chest pain, the device algorithm noted an inconclusive ECG and suggested consultation of a doctor if the patient experienced any symptoms , while the ECG tracing before was diagnosed as non-pathological by the device . Angina and dyspnoea symptoms persisted during the following 3 days, but since the patient did not consider symptoms to be of cardiac origin, it was this Apple Watch alert which prompted the patient to arrange an appointment with a primary care cardiologist, where a 12-lead ECG showed ST-elevation of the anterior wall (I, aVL, V3–V6) . The patient was immediately transferred to our chest pain unit. Physical examination showed rhythmic, normofrequent heart rate, blood pressure of 140/85 mmHg. Auscultation of heart and lung was inconspicuous. Transthoracic echocardiography on admission showed moderately impaired global left ventricular ejection fraction with akinesia of the apex and significant hypokinesia of the anterior left ventricular wall (representative video clips are included in the Video 1). Initial troponin (T-hs) was 5.29 ng/mL (ref: <0.014 ng/mL) and increased to a maximum of 6.22 ng/mL, CK-MB activity was 70 U/L (ref: <24 U/L) and lactatedehydrogenase upon admission was 806 U/L (ref: <249 U/L). Despite the subacute clinical course, persistence of angina symptoms upon hospitalization together with ST-elevations triggered the performance of an urgent coronary angiography, which revealed coronary artery disease with thrombotic occlusion of the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Successful recanalization of LAD was achieved by thrombus-aspiration and placement of one drug-eluting stent (Xience/3.5 mm × 28 mm) (representative video clips are included in the Video 1). The patient’s cardiovascular risk factors were arterial hypertension and hypercholesterinaemia of which only hypertension was previously treated. Peak creatine kinase reached 980 U/L (ref: <189 U/L) and normalized after 3 days. Angina symptoms ceased completely immediately after the coronary intervention. The patient was discharged from our intensive care unit after 24 h and left the hospital 4 days after admission. Upon follow-up after 3 months, the patient reported absence of any symptoms, with good exercise capacity.