A 51-year-old right-handed male, from Estado de México, presented with deficient hygiene and dietary habits. He was hypertense since 5 months prior to presentation which was controlled with losartan (40 mg once daily). Two days before admission, he experienced holocraneal headache 7/10 in the visual analogue scale, intermittent, with no response to any medication, sudden worsening of pain to 10/10, nausea, and vomit. On physical examination, he presented with 14 points in the Glasgow coma scale (M6, O4, V4), pupils were 3 mm, adequate light-reflex response, and bilateral papilledema. The cranial nerves did not have other pathological responses, extremities had adequate strength 5/5, and normal reflexes (++/++) were noted. He presented with gait disturbance with lateralization to the right side .
We describe our surgical decision and rationale for this management. The patient had classical clinical symptoms of intracranial hypertension such as headache, nausea and vomiting. The computed tomography (CT) scans showed tetraventricular hydrocephalus and important dilatation of the fourth ventricle, due to this finding and because of the high prevalence of neurocysticercosis in our country, we decided to perform a fourth ventricle exploration with the Hopkins II rigid endoscope (Karl Storz, Germany)®. In this case, we considered that the described approach for the exploration of the fourth ventricle through a prefrontal burr-hole with flexible endoscopy could be riskier than approaching just the fourth ventricle with one suboccipital burr hole because the third ventricle and cerebral aqueduct were not dilated enough to allow our endoscope to go through. The patient was placed in a Concorde position, with a soft head paddle, taking care of the pressure points to avoid any complication, and then adequate antisepsis of the region was performed with iodine solution. A single burr hole approach was made, which was planned 3 cm from the midline to the right side and 2 cm down from the inion. The burr hole was planned with craneometric points in the preoperative images, as shown, we did not use any image-guided system. The skin was approached in the standard manner until the suboccipital bone was reached. Then we performed the burr hole with a midas rex system and adequate hemostasis was made. The dura was opened in a cruciate form and then we performed a 1 cm cortisectomy with bipolar forceps. The rigid endoscope was inserted directly through the cerebellar cortical surface in the right hemisphere with a freehand approach. Just as soon as the endoscope passed through to the fourth ventricle, a cystic lesion was found, which was compatible with a neurocysti; as shown in the image it was not adherent to any of the fourth ventricle structures. We were able to remove the entire cystic lesion, and then we performed a fourth ventricle exploration, showing that the aqueduct and both Luschka foramina were permeable, as well as the obex. Surgical time was 40 minutes with no complications. The fourth ventricle ependymal showed no macroscopycal findings of ependymitis, and due to the surgical procedure the cerebrospinal fluid flow was restored. Postoperatively, the patient did well and was discharged home 48 hours later, with oral standard neurocysticercosis treatment with albendazole 15 mg/kg and corticosteroids [Figures and ].