A 7-year-old male patient (the proband, IV-4; ) had a history of two episodes of mycobacterial lymphadenitis and recurrent typhoid fever. He was referred to the pediatric immunology clinic due to a newly diagnosed disseminated tuberculosis (TB) affecting the lungs and multiple lymph nodes that included the mesenteric lymph nodes. The patient had a history of fever and left axillary lymphadenitis at the age of 6 months, for which he received oral and injectable antibiotics without improvement. Excisional biopsy and histopathology showed caseating granuloma diagnosed as BCGitis, and he was treated with four anti-TB drugs (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) for only 6 months. At 2 years of age, he developed fever, weight loss, and cervical lymphadenopathy. Fine-needle aspiration cytology showed caseating granuloma. He received the same combination of anti-TB drugs as before for 6 months, and his symptoms improved .
He also had recurrent febrile illnesses associated with abdominal pain and mesenteric lymphadenitis that were diagnosed as typhoid fever on many occasions based on a very high antibody titer on Widal test (culture not done) . On each occasion, his condition improved remarkably after treatment. There was no history of other infections (pneumonia, otitis media, nor skin, bone, or joint infections). The patient’s new TB condition started 6 weeks before referral to the Pediatric Tropical and Infectious Diseases unit. He appeared to have normal growth with a weight of 20 kg (10th) and a height of 118 cm (25th). He presented with high-grade fever, mainly at night with sweating, which improved with oral paracetamol. He also had severe abdominal pain disturbing his sleep and daily living activity, but there was no abdominal distension, diarrhea, constipation, or vomiting. The mother noted that the patient had significant weight loss and fatigability. Two weeks later, the patient developed a cough, which started dry and then became productive with thick mucoid sputum without blood. He did not suffer from chest pain or shortness of breath. In this occasion (January 2022), his diagnosis was disseminated TB . His family history was remarkable for the affection of four other members (
: III-1, III-5, III-11, IV-2, and IV-4) across two generations including his father (
: III-5), with a similar condition. The patient’s father (
: III-5), who was 40 years old at the time of presentation of the proband, had recurrent TB adenitis since early childhood, which was diagnosed based on histopathology and acid-fast Bacillus (AFB) stain. Furthermore, the proband’s parents reported that the father had three episodes of meningitis. One of these was cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-confirmed tuberculous meningitis. In two occasions, failure of therapy was followed by the detection of Aspergillus fungal hyphae on the CSF. As a result of complicated TB and fungal meningitis, the father is now deaf, blind, and with shunted hydrocephalus. The patient’s mother (III-6) aged 35 years is phenotypically healthy, is not blood related to the father, and is not from the same region. After taking a detailed family history, the mother mentioned a similar presentation of disseminated BCG infection leading to early infantile death in one of her own cousins (
: III-11). There is a positive family history of recurrent adenitis among members of the patient’s paternal family including his paternal aunt (III-1) and paternal cousin (IV-2) .