A 54-year-old man presented with gradual onset slowly progressive weakness of the right arm over a period of 2 months. Weakness was preceded by pain in the right shoulder region which radiated down the right arm. Pain was present even at rest. Weakness was predominant in the proximal muscles of the right upper limb, with preserved fine movements of the right hand. He denied a sensory loss involving the affected limb. His left upper limb and both the lower limbs were normal with regard to the power and sensation. He did not have dysphagia, dysarthria, diplopia, or unsteadiness. His higher functions were intact. He did not report any fever, loss of appetite or weight, chronic cough, or hemoptysis. There was no recent history of trauma. He was not a smoker and neither did he consume any illicit drugs.
On examination, enlarged, multiple, hard, and fixed lymph nodes were noted in right supraclavicular fossa and anterior triangle of the neck. There was no finger clubbing. Wasting and fasciculation were observed in the muscles of the shoulder girdle and proximal part of the right upper limb, sparing forearm, and the hand muscles. Proximal muscle power was of 3/5 with preserved distal power. Posterior winging of the right scapula was noted, which became more prominent up on pushing against resistance . Rest of the examination including voice, cranial nerves, pupils, contralateral upper limb, and lower limbs was normal. Bronchial breathing was heard in the upper zone of the right lung, with trachea slightly deviated to the opposite side.
The electromyography (EMG) revealed large motor unit potentials with increasing amplitude and duration and poor activation of right serratus anterior and internal scapulae muscles. The nerve conduction studies (NCS) suggested a compressive lesion involving C5–C7 nerve roots of the brachial plexus. The chest radiograph revealed a large homogenous opacity involving the right apical region .
Subsequent contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CECT) showed an ill-defined enhancing malignant lesion, obliterating the right upper bronchus, right upper lobe, pulmonary artery, and pleura . Probable stage was IV (T4N3M1a). Enlarged necrotic lymph nodes were seen in the mediastinum, with some in the right supraclavicular fossa. Histology and immunohistochemistry of a cervical lymph node revealed metastatic deposits from a poorly differentiated carcinoma, most probably of pulmonary origin.
At bronchoscopy, right upper bronchus was seen to be completely obstructed by a tumor with endobronchial invasion. The histology and immunohistochemistry from the tissue obtained by bronchoscopy confirmed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung. Magnetic resonant imaging (MRI) of cervical spine was planned, but the patient refused to undergo further investigation.