A 46-year-old man with dextrocardia, unpalliated tricuspid atresia, transposition of the great arteries, pulmonary valve stenosis, and atrial and ventricular septal defects presented with shortness of breath, recurrent syncopal attacks, and chronic atrial fibrillation . At that time, chest X-ray showed no opacities and SARS-CoV-2 screening was not recommended for routine clinical practice. Heart catheterization revealed satisfying pulmonary hemodynamic data (mean pulmonary venous wedge pressure 15 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance 199.67 dynes*sec/cm5). Consequently, due to severe mitral insufficiency and a highly enlarged atrium, the patient underwent elective mitral valve reconstruction, bilateral maze procedure and bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt with additional pulmonary blood flow (also known as pulsatile bidirectional Glenn). The right pulmonary artery (RPA) was narrowed with a fenestrated pericardial patch, but pulsatile blood flow to the left pulmonary artery was preserved. Due to right-to-left shunt, an arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 83% and a partial pressure of oxygen (paO2) of 47 mmHg were considered satisfactory. On postoperative day (POD) 4, reintubation was necessary due to atelectasis and bacterial pneumonia. Atelectasis was opened by bronchoscopy, and pneumonia was treated.
Due to suspicious X-ray findings, SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay was performed on bronchoalveolar lavage and nasopharyngeal swab, yielding a positive result on POD 6 . Dexamethasone (6 mg/d) was administered for 10 days, and therapeutic anticoagulation was continued with unfractionated heparin. However, oxygenation deteriorated until an SaO2 of 76% and a paO2 of 45 mmHg could only be maintained with pressure-controlled ventilation at a fraction of inspired oxygen of 100% and 10 mbar positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). Chest X-ray showed bilateral ground-glass opacities; thus, severe ARDS was diagnosed . Simultaneously, significant increases in lactate dehydrogenase (599 U/l) and interleukin-6 (188.9 pg/ml) were noted. Heart frequency lower than 100 bpm, mean arterial pressure of 70 mmHg, SaO2 of 80% and cerebral oxygen saturation above 35% measured with near-infrared spectroscopy were considered as surrogates for sufficient cerebral blood flow and cardiac output. Tidal volume was kept between 500 and 650 ml (6 - 8 ml/kg body weight). Unfortunately, no further increase in PEEP was possible due to increased venous congestion and decreased cardiac output following a reduction of venous return (VR). To counteract these effects, inhaled nitric oxide (NO) therapy was initiated for pulmonary vasodilation. Levosimendan (0.05 μg/kg/min) ensured additional inotropic support. Mean arterial pressure was maintained with noradrenaline (maximum rate of 0.1 μg/kg/min) and vasopressin (maximum rate of 2 I.E./h). Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was considered as last resort treatment. Intermittent prone positioning was utilized for 16 h each day, which improved the patient’s oxygenation. After further intensive treatment with tracheotomy, weaning proceeded without abnormalities, and the patient was discharged to rehabilitation in good neurological condition. The patient is followed-up regularly at the outpatient clinic for adults with congenital heart disease. Today, he presents in stable general condition and his oxygen saturation is 83% at rest.