A 9-day-old Caucasian boy was referred to our department of ophthalmology for bilateral buphtalmia and corneal haze. He was born at term, by spontaneous delivery, of non-consanguineous parents, with no significant personal or family medical history, except a keratoconus in his older brother.
Clinical examination showed no dysmorphic facies, but bilateral megalocornea and buphtalmia, associated with photophobia. Right eye (OD) examination revealed nasal corneal clouding, deep anterior chamber and normal crystalline lens. Funduscopic examination confirmed optic disc cup (cup-to-disc ratio: 0.4) without any vitreous or retinal hemorrhages. Left eye (OS) examination disclosed an epiphora, associated with major corneal edema, deep anterior chamber and normal crystalline lens. Funduscopic examination showed optic disc cup (cup-to-disc ratio: 0.7). Detailed examination under inhalational anesthesia was performed urgently and demonstrated corneal asymmetry up to 1.5 mm (horizontal corneal diameter: 11.5 mm OD and 13 mm OS) and increased axial length in the left eye (axial length: 18.5 mm OD and 19.21 mm OS). The pachymetry showed central corneal thickness of 863 μm OD and 927 μm OS. The IOP (measured with Perkins MK2 tonometer, Haag-Streit, UK) was 22 mmHg OD and 26 mmHg OS. Gonioscopy showed an open angle with normal trabecular meshwork pigmentation in both eyes. Findings included the absence of angle recess and flat iris insertion. There was no peripheral anterior synechiae or embryotoxon .
A non-penetrating deep sclerectomy with trabeculotomy was firstly performed in the left eye under general anesthesia.
The surgical procedure started with a corneal traction suture temporally and nasally. This is followed by a conjunctival incision and localized tenectomy in the superior quadrant. A pentagonal scleral flap was created of 5 × 4 mm, half the scleral thickness, and dissection was carried forward 2 mm into clear cornea. We used mitomycin C, 0.4 mg/ml for two minutes, followed by careful irrigation. After this, a deep triangular scleral flap was marked, 4 × 4 × 2 mm, and dissection was performed forward until the level of Descemet’s membrane. The inner wall of Schlemm’s canal and the juxtacanalicular trabeculum were peeled off using toothed forceps (25-gauge Eckardt End-gripping Forceps, Dutch Ophthalmic, USA) without perforation of the trabeculodescemetic membrane. Then, a trabeculotomy was made, using the trabeculotome handpiece (Bausch & Lomb E0421 Harms Trabeculotome Set 1.8″ Left Right Ophthalmic, USA). The two third of the trabeculotome length were introduced into Schlemm’s canal to treat, nasally and temporally, an average of 70 degrees of the angle. A space maintainer (cylindrical collagen implant; Aquaflow®, Staar Surgical, Monrovia, CA, USA) was inserted in the scleral bed to prevent collapse of the superficial flap and secured with a single 10/0 Ethilon suture. Closure of the scleral flap and the conjunctiva was done by 10/0 Ethilon sutures and 10/0 Vicryl reabsorbable sutures respectively. The procedure was completed by subconjunctival injection of betamethasone (0,1 ml).
The same surgical protocol was performed in the right eye one week after. Postoperative treatment included antibiotic (tobramycin) and steroid (dexamethasone) eye drops, 6 times a day, during one week, followed by gradual reduction of the steroids over a period of 8 weeks and reduction of antibiotic dose.
One week postoperatively, the IOP was 11 mmHg OD and 7 mmHg OS. The anterior chamber and the bleb were well-formed in both eyes . Fundoscopy exhibited a well-circumscribed, crab claw-shaped hemorrhage, corresponding to a pre-macular subhyaloid hemorrhage in the right eye, resulting in an artificially decrease of the OD axial length . Fundus examination of the left eye was unremarkable. Complete blood coagulation analysis was performed and revealed no significant anomaly, excepted moderate polycythemia (hemoglobin: 22.8 g/dL). The patient had no incident of coughing or sneezing postoperatively. A suspected diagnosis of decompression retinopathy was proposed. Close observation was firstly decided. Three weeks after initial surgery, as there was no improvement in subhyaloid hemorrhage, pars plana vitrectomy (25-gauge Stellaris PC System, Bausch & Lomb, Rochester, NY, USA) of the right eye was performed, allowing a complete resolution without any recurrence.
Three years after initial surgery, the IOP remained controlled in the normal range for both eyes, with reversal of optic disc cupping (c/d 0.1 OD and c/d 0.1 OS). A relevant finding was the onset of high myopia in the OD requiring refractive correction .