An 81-year-old African American man presented with a 2-month history of painless gross hematuria. Medical history included hypertension, sick sinus syndrome and favorable intermediate risk prostate adenocarcinoma (Gleason grade 3+3=6, T1c, prostate-specific antigen of 10.5 ng/ml) on surveillance. He was an ex-smoker with 10-pack-year smoking history. Other social and family history was unremarkable.
Workup including a cystoscopy followed by a CT urogram revealed a large 5 cm bladder tumor and several prominent pelvic lymph nodes (up to 1.1 cm). He was diagnosed with muscle invasive high-grade UC through transurethral resection of bladder tumor. Staging CT scans did not suggest any distant metastasis. Neoadjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy was felt inappropriate due to poor performance status and renal function. He underwent an uncomplicated radical cystoprostatectomy and bilateral extended pelvic lymph node dissection, and ileal conduit urinary diversion. Surgical pathology showed pT2bN0 high-grade UCB with squamous differentiation (15%) and plasmacytoid features (5%; ), and pT3bN1 prostate adenocarcinoma (Gleason grade 4+5=9). During the postoperative period, he was followed by surveillance CT and bone scans which showed no evidence of neoplastic process. The PSA nadir was 0.49.
Unfortunately, 8 months after cystectomy, he developed metastatic recurrence of a left chest wall mass (measuring 3.8×3.4 cm, ), the biopsy of which confirmed metastatic UC with extensive tumor necrosis. In addition, there were new CT findings of a left hemipelvic lesion (3.6×2.8 cm, ) consistent with metastasis. He was treated with first-line carboplatin and gemcitabine chemotherapy. However, it was discontinued after three cycles due to disease progression. Afterwards, he received second-line immunotherapy with anti-PD-L1 antibody, atezolizumab. A partial response was observed after cycle 9. A research biopsy of the left chest wall lesion performed after cycle 20 showed only fibrosis with no evidence of disease. He achieved radiographic complete response after 18 months of atezolizumab therapy .
PD-L1 IHC (SP142) of the primary tumor showed overall low positivity (<5% of the tumor infiltrating immune cells) but paradoxically increased staining in the squamous histology . CD3-positive and CD8-positive tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) were also enriched in squamous variant . It suggests that there is histology-dependent heterogeneity of the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME). National Cancer Institute recommended PCR-based MSI testing using five microsatellite markers which revealed MSI-H in all three types of histology. Interestingly, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 were intact by IHC (data not shown).
In order to investigate the cause of MSI, we performed bulk DNA and RNA-seq of the primary tumor. The whole exome sequencing (WES) confirmed that MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2 and EPCAM were wild type. However, a somatic missense mutation of MSH4 L359I (1.76288179C>A) was detected. The variant allele frequency was 0.3. The corresponding amino acid change was located in the core domain MutS III . Polyphen2-predicted MSH4 L359I mutation was probably damaging of protein function (score of 0.873).
In addition, two proof reading defects were identified: POLD1 C319R (19.50905983T>C) and POLE R712H (12.133244980C>T) mutations. Polyphen2 suggested that the POLD1 mutation was probably damaging (score of 0.999) and the POLE mutation was benign (score of 0.067). Nevertheless, both mutations were affecting the DNA polymerase domains . The complete list of somatic mutations is listed in . There were 2166 altering and truncating mutations in the 58947532 bp capture regions. The calculated tumor mutational burden (TMB) was 36.7 mutations per Mb.
To study the molecular mechanisms of tumor heterogeneity, we performed WES and RNA-seq of each histology after microdissecting the bulk tumor. The mutational landscape in heatmap showed divergent genomic profile of the squamous from urothelial and plasmacytoid variant . Gene set enrichment analysis demonstrated upregulated chemokine and T-cell receptor signal pathways in the squamous histology .