A 73-year-old man who was confirmed to have COVID-19 was hospitalized for treatment. The patient had underlying comorbidities, including hypertension and diabetes mellitus, had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) two years earlier, and had been taking 100 mg aspirin daily. The patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by real-time reverse transcription polymerase reaction (RT-PCR) on February 27, 2020, and was admitted to the Pohang Medical Center. At admission, the patient presented with a fever of 37.7℃ and cough, which are typical symptoms of COVID-19, and chest radiography revealed ill-defined, hazy, and streaky density in both the lungs . Therefore, oral hydroxychloroquine treatment was initiated; however, due to symptoms of pneumonia accompanied by hypotension and melena, the patient was transferred to the Samsung Medical Center for further management. After his vital signs had been stabilized, the patient remained under observation without additional treatment. However, on Day 1 of admission at the Samsung Medical Center, the patient expelled a large quantity of melena and developed hypotension and tachycardia along with a peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of approximately 80%, and his hemoglobin level had decreased to 6.3 mg/dl.
The patient underwent blood transfusion and endotracheal intubation as well as the insertion of arterial catheter and central venous catheter. The patient was evaluated using esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which revealed a duodenal ulcer without active bleeding. The patient was at risk of re-bleeding; however, computed tomography (CT) and embolization for COVID-19 patients were not possible at the Samsung Medical Center at the time. Therefore, the patient was transferred to our hospital where a COVID-19 patient care environment had been prepared. As the patient was at a high risk of re-bleeding, the patient immediately underwent endoscopic hemoclipping and embolization. Surgery was considered; however, given the patient’s condition and the stress of invasive surgery for the patient, we decided to first perform endoscopy and embolization.
One day after hemoclipping and embolization, the patient complained of abdominal pain, and the follow-up chest X-ray revealed subphrenic free air, an indication of pneumoperitoneum. Based on his endoscopic findings, perforation of the duodenal ulcer was suspected, and emergency surgery was planned. Despite a fever of 37.8℃, the patient’s preoperative vital signs were stable; electrocardiography (ECG) showed a normal sinus rhythm, and chest radiography revealed peripheral lung consolidation, which suggested aggravated pneumonia . Blood analysis revealed hemoglobin and C-reactive protein levels of 11.1 mg/dl and 103 mg/L, respectively. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed the following: pH, 7.48; pCO2, 33.0 mmHg; pO2, 173 mmHg; bicarbonate, 24.7 mmol/L; and saturation, 99.4% under mechanical ventilation of synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation mode with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.35. The patient was on a continuous infusion of remifentanil for sedation and intravenous antibiotics, such as tazobactam and piperacillin, to treat the pneumonia.
The patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 again when RT-PCR of his nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs was performed on March 3, 2020. Since the patient presented with severe pneumonia symptoms and persistent detection of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the risk of nosocomial transmission to the medical staff during endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation was high. Therefore, the medical staff who participated in the surgery and anesthesia wore PPE, and the surgery was performed in a negative-pressure operating room. The anesthesiologist and nurse inside the main operating room wore fluid-resistant protective suits, double gloves, boots, shoe covers, and aprons with a powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) hood , whereas the staff outside the main operating room wore N95 masks, anteroposterior (vinyl) gowns, and gloves. During the preparations for surgery and anesthesia, the assistant staff, who wore protective suits, double gloves, boots, shoe covers, aprons, N95 masks, and face shields, planned and controlled the patient’s path to the operating room.
After the preparations had been completed, the sedated patient was transferred to the operating room and connected to a portable ventilator equipped with a high-efficiency particulate absorbing (HEPA) filter in the expiratory circuit by medical staff wearing the same PPE who controlled patient’s path. An anesthesiologist and a nurse stood by in the operating room, and the patient was taken over from the accompanying medical staff by the surgeon in the waiting room and subsequently transferred to the operating room through the anteroom . An assistant surgeon followed the patient and sterilized the site where the cart had moved on the floor by spraying a diluted 1:100 solution of bleach (NaClO 4%). After the patient moved onto the operating table, the stretcher used for patient transfer was similarly disinfected with a diluted 1:100 solution of bleach in the operating room and was again disinfected when it was moved into the anteroom.
Invasive arterial blood pressure (ABP), ECG, heart rate, SpO2, and bispectral index monitoring were commenced in the operating room; the patient’s vital signs were stable. After clamping the endotracheal tube, the tube was detached from the portable ventilator and connected to the anesthesia machine, which had a HEPA filter in the expiratory circuit, and end-tidal carbon dioxide monitoring was started. General anesthesia was induced by 0.5 mg/kg propofol (intravenous) and 0.6 mg/kg rocuronium. Thereafter, the esophageal temperature probe was placed, and temperature monitoring commenced. Anesthesia was maintained by 2.0% sevoflurane and target-controlled infusion of 1.5–3.0 ng/ml remifentanil as well as continuous infusion of 0.15 mg/kg/h rocuronium. Considering the patient’s lung condition, a lung-protective mechanical ventilation strategy (fraction of inspired oxygen, 0.5; fresh gas flow, 2 L/min; tidal volume, 6 ml/kg; peak positive end expiratory pressure, 8 cmH2O cm; and peak inspiratory pressure, ≤ 30 cm H2O) was used.
During surgery, the pressure in the operating room and the anteroom was maintained between −2.5 and −20 Pa. The nurse on standby outside the operating room placed additional required items, such as equipment or drugs, in the anteroom where the item was collected by the medical staff in the main operating room once the outside nurse had left the anteroom. An arterial blood gas sample obtained during surgery was sent out of the operating room in the same way for analysis. The operation lasted 120 min, without any notable events, and the perforated ulcer was found at the expected site. The operative procedure included pyloric exclusion with primary closure of the perforation and formation of a gastrojejunostomy.
The patient was intravenously injected with 0.07 mg/kg midazolam and 0.3 mg/kg rocuronium for sedation during transfer to the ward, while maintaining the intubation. Prior to the detachment of the anesthesia machine from the patient’s tube, closed in-line tracheal suction was performed. Subsequently, the anesthesiologist switched the ventilator to manual mode, opened the adjustable pressure-limiting valve, and clamped the tracheal tube. The patient was transferred to a stretcher cart that was placed in the anteroom. Monitoring of ECG, SpO2, and ABP continued, and 10 L/min of oxygen was supplied through an Ambu bag with a HEPA filter. The patient was transferred to the waiting room after passing through the anteroom and was finally moved to the intensive care unit (ICU) by the surgeon who had, in the meantime, changed the external gloves and footwear .
The disposable equipment used for anesthesia was discarded, including the capnography sampling line and water trap, whereas reusable equipment was disinfected with a diluted 1:100 solution of bleach after first remaining in negative-pressure ventilation in the operating room for an hour.
The patient was continuously monitored in the ICU. Antibiotics were administered intravenously, and hydroxychloroquine was administered via L-tube to treat pneumonia. No surgical complications, such as re-bleeding or perforation of the surgical site, were observed. However, despite continued pneumonia treatment up to the fifth postoperative day, elevated C-reactive protein and fever between 37.3 and 38.8℃ persisted, and the patient consistently tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR. From chest radiography, increased pneumonic infiltration and pleural effusion were observed . Other vital signs were stable, except for body temperature. On the sixth postoperative day, the patient developed a fever of 39.5℃, and hypotension was observed. The administration of fluid and norepinephrine was initiated after the pulmonary medicine staff diagnosed septic shock that developed due to failure to control the infection despite the continuous treatment for pneumonia. Despite persistent resuscitation, the patient expired on the seventh postoperative day.