In November 2022, a 17-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital complaining of facial and limb edema persisting for 2 months and abdominal distension for the last 20 days, which had worsened in the preceding 2 days. On physical examination, notable finding included facial and limb edema, the presence of ascites, and splenomegaly. She did not exhibit any oral ulcers, rash, arthralgia, fever, jaundice, or neurological symptoms. Laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 80 g/L and a platelet count of 100 × 109 /L. During hospitalization, the recorded lowest platelet count was 78 × 109 /L. Urinalysis showed 35% dysmorphic red blood cells (RBCs). The anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) titer was 1:320 (nuclear-speckled pattern). Tests for antibodies against Sjögren's syndrome A antigen (SSA), lupus anticoagulant (LA), and extra-criteria antiphospholipid antibodies, including anti-domain I β2GPI antibodies, anti-vimentin antibodies, and anti-annexin A2 antibodies, were positive. The anti-double-stranded DNA antibody (anti-dsDNA) test was negative. Lower levels of complement 3 (C3, 0.290 g/L) and complement 4 (C4, 0.065 g/L) and higher levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG, 17.9 g/L) and immunoglobulin M (IgM, 3.65 g/L) were noted. The patient's liver function test demonstrated elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 57.6 U/L) and gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT, 78.8 U/L) and lower levels of serum albumin (24.2 g/L) . The results of Coombs test (direct and indirect) were negative, but bone marrow analysis showed iron deficiency and mild defective megakaryocyte maturation. Abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of ascites. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed right pleural effusion. According to the 2019 EULAR/ACR classification criteria, eligibility criteria for establishing the diagnosis of SLE are ANA ≥ 1:80, at least one clinical classification standard, and a total score ≥10 points . The patient's ANA titer was 1:320, and the total score was 15 points (decreased platelet count, Score 4; positive LA, Score 2; hypocomplementemia, Score 4; pleural effusion, Score 5). Thus, a diagnosis of probable SLE with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLA) was established. The patient started receiving methylprednisolone and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) treatment.
However, in the absence of proteinuria, the persistent hypoalbuminemia in the patient remained unexplained (the 24-h urinary protein test yielded negative results). Moreover, prothrombin time, the International Standardized Ratio of Prothrombin, and activated partial thromboplastin time were prolonged, and the fibrinogen content was extremely reduced. CT of the upper abdomen showed a diminutive liver volume, irregular edges, uneven hyperechoic nodules in the liver parenchyma and abdominal and pelvic effusion, indicating liver cirrhosis with splenomegaly. A non-invasive diagnosis of liver fibrosis by ultrasound revealed an elevation in liver hardness, which was consistent with Metavir stage > F4. This prompted us to investigate the cause of liver cirrhosis. The patient tested negative for hepatitis B and other hepatitis viruses. Although the ANA test was positive, other autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)-related autoantibodies, such as anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMAs) and liver kidney microsomal (LKM-1) antibodies, were found to be negative. The test for primary biliary cholangitis (PBC)-related anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA) was also found to be negative. The serum ceruloplasmin level was 5.3 mg/dl (normal range: 16–45 mg/dl), and the 24-h urine copper level was 460 μg/24 h (normal range: 15–60 μg/24 h). A slit-lamp ophthalmological examination confirmed the presence of Kayser–Fleischer (K–F) rings in both eyes. The genotype test for WD revealed that the patient (proband) exhibited a compound heterozygous mutation in the ATP7B gene . Both the paternal heterozygous mutation (c.4114C>T, p.Gln1372*) and the maternal heterozygous mutation (c.2975C>T, p.Pro992Leu) were previously confirmed as pathogenic. The Ferenci score for the patient was greater than 4, confirming the WD diagnosis. A liver biopsy aimed at histologic examination and quantification of hepatic copper deposition can aid in the diagnosis of WD and rule out other competing liver diseases. A liver biopsy is only required when clinical signs and non-invasive examinations fail to establish a final diagnosis or when there is suspicion of other liver diseases. Our patient was ultimately diagnosed with WD, and a liver biopsy was not needed.
Based on these findings, the final diagnosis was WD with probable SLE and APLA. Although oral d-penicillamine remains the principal treatment for WD, lupus induced by d-penicillamine is well documented. Considering the co-occurrence of WD and SLE in our case, d-penicillamine is not suitable for WD treatment. Therefore, the patient was started on oral zinc gluconate tablets (50 mg p.o. t.i.d.) for WD and methylprednisolone (40 mg i.v. q.d. for 16 days, then 36 mg p.o. q.d. for 2 weeks), mycophenolate mofetil (MMF, 0.75 g p.o. b.i.d.), and HCQ (0.2 g p.o. b.i.d.) for SLE. During the subsequent 6-month follow-up, almost all clinical symptoms of the patient, including facial and limb edema and abdominal distension, were resolved. In addition, laboratory tests showed significant improvement. The RBC count; hemoglobin level; platelet count; coagulation function, including prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and fibrinogen content; liver function tests, including transaminase, bilirubin, and serum albumin levels; and IgG, IgM, C3, and C4 levels returned to normal ranges . The steroid dosage was gradually tapered to 8 mg/day while keeping the therapeutic doses of zinc gluconate tablets, MMF, and HCQ unchanged.