A 32-year-old woman (married, gravida 6, para 2) presented to our clinic with cessation of menstruation for 51 days. She reported no nausea, vomiting, vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain, or bloating. The physical examination revealed no abnormality in the vagina and uterus. The serum β-hCG was 66.2 IU/ml . The transvaginal ultrasound showed an intrauterine device (IUD) in normal position in the uterine cavity. A woman of reproductive age who presented with amenorrhea, elevated serum β-hCG level, and the absence of an intrauterine embryo but IUD on transvaginal ultrasonography should be primarily suspected of ectopic pregnancy. The patient was treated with oral mifepristone at 50 mg combined with traditional Chinese medicine for ectopic pregnancy once a day for 3 days in all. A few days later, she reported minor vaginal bleeding. The serum β-hCG levels fluctuated between 52.0 and 75.3 mIU/mL within 25 days. Subsequently, she was hospitalized for the removal of IUD and underwent dilation and curettage (D&C). The pathological examination revealed proliferative endometrium with no villi structure. Within 10 days after suction and curettage, the serum β-hCG rose to 63.1 mIU/mL despite a repeated unremarkable transvaginal ultrasonography examination. The patient was suspected with ectopic pregnancy in unknown location and administered with 75 mg of methotrexate (MTX) chemotherapy through muscle injection. However, her serum β-hCG remained at persistently low elevations. During her second gynecological hospitalization, she added the complaint of mild chest pain in the past half year, denying cough or hemoptysis. The chest CT showed a mixed ground-glass nodule (mGGN) (24 mm × 14.2 mm) in the apical segment of the right upper lobe which was considered to be invasive cancer and a mGGN (10 mm × 8 mm) in the posterior segment of the right lower lobe undetermined . There was another one thin-wall cavity in the posterior segment of the left lower lobe. We invited a consultation with the thoracic surgeon immediately. Antibiotic was recommended to differentiate from inflammatory pulmonary nodules, and no significant degradation was observed on chest CT scan images at 1 month later. The patient was hospitalized thirdly for video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS).
Video-thoracic right upper wedge resection was performed. Intraoperative fast frozen pathology of the resected right upper lobe specimen showed an epithelial-derived tumor consisting of multiple psammoma bodies. Right lower segmentectomy was continued. The fast frozen pathology of the right lower lobe specimen was consistent with that of the right upper lobe. The mitotic count was 20 mitotic figures (MFs)/10 high power fields (HPFs) and the MIB1 proliferative index (Ki-67) was 40%. No tumor metastasis was found in the 11th hilar lymph node. The histology of two resected pulmonary specimens reported an epithelioid trophoblastic tumor . The immunohistochemistry analyses showed GATA-3(+), hCG-a(+), hPL(+), P63(+), Ki-67(40%+), CD10(+), Inhibinα(mostly +), CK(pan)(+), Calcitonin(-), TTF-1(-), NapsinA(-), CgA(-), and SYN(-). These findings indicated a pulmonary ETT at stage III presenting as right lung metastasis with unclear primary lesions according to the FIGO 2000.
Her menstruation returned with a sharp drop in serum β-hCG levels, and the mild chest pain was relieved after her thoracoscopic surgery within 1 month. Cranial CT scans were performed, and no metastatic lesions were detected. The patient was very young and expressed strong willingness to preserve her fertility. She refused uterine removal surgery; therefore, we were not able to thoroughly verify the absence of lesions in the primary uterine site through histopathology. We repeated D&C instead of hysterectomy and failed to find intrauterine ETT lesions. Weekly serum β-hCG assessments for surveillance were recommended until three consecutive normal assays, supplemented with monthly β-hCG monitoring for an additional 6 months. However, mildly recurrent elevation of β-hCG was reported 1 week after her first normalization of serum β-hCG. The PET-CT scans showed that the nodule in the left lower lobe was enlarged, and there were more solid components compared with the former chest CT. The lesion was about 1.0 cm × 1.7 cm, measuring the maximum standardized uptake value (SUV max) of 1.8 compared with the average mean SUV from normal lung tissue which was 0.45. Given the recurrence of ETT, she was admitted at our hospital to receive left pulmonary wedge resection. The results of fast frozen biopsy, routine pathological examination, and immunohistochemistry were confirmed to indicate ETT. A pulmonary surgeon agreed with the likelihood of secondary remission for surgery after relapse. In a multidisciplinary meeting, obstetrics and gynecology, thoracic surgery, and pathology experts discussed and shared the final decision for a long-term management involving the fertility-sparing surgery and a critical follow-up plan. At 3 days later, the serum β-hCG was normalized. The patient refused to take the chemotherapy treatment since there were no signs of relapse after having surgery twice and due to fear of adverse reactions such as myelosuppression and hair loss. At the 12-month follow-up after surgical therapy completion, the patient was disease-free with negative β-hCG. The chest CT scans at 3 and 11 months after surgery were performed, and no metastatic lesions were detected. As of the 12-month follow-up, no recurrence has been observed.