A 52-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with dyspnoea, chest pain, and haemoptysis. She was haemodynamically stable (blood pressure 137/85 mmHg, heart rate 85/min, respiratory rate 22/min) with signs of cardiac congestion. The physical examination revealed mild bilateral ankle oedema with bilateral basal crackles and a systolic click without additional heart sounds. She underwent a mitral valve replacement with a mechanical prosthesis (St. Jude Medical 25 mm) 7 months ago, because of recurrent moderate to severe mitral regurgitation after mitral valve repair in the same year due to symptomatic severe primary mitral regurgitation of (post-)inflammatory aetiology. Her electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were unremarkable. However, plasma N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide was significantly elevated (6944 ng/L, N < 249 ng/L), and her serum creatinine was 129 µmol/L (N < 80 µmol/L) consistent with her well-documented chronic renal failure.
Her current pharmacological therapy on admission was Phenprocoumon 1.5 mg OD, Bisoprolol 10 mg OD, Levothyroxine 0.1 mg OD, Pantoprazole 40 mg OD, Montelukast 10 mg OD, and Budesonide/Formoterol Inh 0.4 + 0.012 mg bid. Despite being on oral anticoagulation therapy because of mechanical mitral valve prosthesis, her INR was below her target range (2.3). Hs-troponin (101 ng/L, N < 14ng/L) and C-reactive protein (24 mg/L, N < 5mg/L) were slightly elevated.
The emergency TTE revealed a markedly elevated diastolic transmitral pressure gradient of 21 mmHg with impaired movement of one of the prosthesis discs. The last documented transvalvular gradient in our institution was 4 mmHg before discharge after the mitral valve replacement (20 April 2018). Left ventricular systolic function was normal and no mass was visualized in conjunction with the prosthesis. However, the atrial part of the mechanical prosthesis was not demonstrated sufficiently because of shadowing and reverberation artefacts . Fluoroscopy revealed an immobile anterior disc of the mitral prosthesis. Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed the severe stenosis of the mitral prosthesis due to an immobile anterior disc, but no mass could be detected .
Based on the medical history with acute onset of symptoms, inadequate anticoagulation, and restricted leaflet motion we diagnosed a PVT and initiated a therapy with diuretics and IV unfractionated heparin. We performed a PET/CT scan that excluded inflammation and showed a minor lesion on the atrial and ventricular side of the septal hinge point of the mitral prosthesis without involvement of the prosthesis ring . Five days after IV unfractionated heparin in high therapeutic range the severity of the mitral stenosis remained unchanged. Therefore, we performed a ‘low-dose, ultra-slow’ fibrinolytic therapy with 25 mg Alteplase; a tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA), without a bolus and with an infusion period of 25 h, as proposed in the focused update of the Americal College of Cardiology (ACC) guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease (2017). This fibrinolytic schema was repeated the day after, thus a cumulative dose of 50 mg t-PA was administered, after a pause of 15 h with unfractionated heparin in therapeutic range. We decided for this treatment because it is associated with a lower bleeding risk. The TTE performed on the next day confirmed successful resolution of the thrombus as the motion of the prosthesis discs was normal and the diastolic pressure gradient had returned to baseline values .
On discharge, we intensified the oral anticoagulation with Phenprocoumon 1.5 mg setting a higher INR target range (INR 2.5–3.5), reduced the dose of Bisoprolol to 5 mg OD, and started with Lisinopril 2.5 mg OD. She remained on Levothyroxine 0.1 mg OD, Pantoprazole 40 mg OD, and Montelukast 10 mg OD. The antiobstructive therapy with Budesonide/Formoterol Inh was stopped.
After discharge, the patient has been regularly seen in our outpatient clinic. She has been doing well and has no cardiac symptoms. The last echocardiography was performed 4 months after discharge showing a normal function of the mitral valve prosthesis. Due to difficulties in dose adjustment of oral anticoagulation therapy with Phenprocoumon, we perform a regular control of her INR value on a weekly basis and individually adjust the dose in correspondence with her pharmacist in order to remain in the INR target range of 2.5–3.5.