A 72-year-old female patient with severe AVS was referred to a cardiology unit for detailed examination and multidisciplinary treatment decision. The medical history revealed previous chest radiation treatment for a malignancy from which the patient had been in remission for several years. The patient was a previous smoker without co-morbidities. No diabetes, obesity, hypertension, or chronic kidney disease (CKD) were noted and no history of rheumatic fever. Blood work showed sign of a low-grade systemic inflammation with a C-reactive protein of 2 mg/L, normal estimated glomerular filtration rate of 73 mL/min/1.73m2, normal HbA1c, and normal whole blood cell count. Preoperative invasive coronary angiography only showed mild local atherosclerosis without any significant stenosis. On preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), severe AVS was evident with a peak transaortic jet velocity (Vmax) of 4.8 m/s without concomitant aortic regurgitation, mean pressure gradient (Pmean) 58 mmHg, Doppler velocity index (DVI) 0.22 and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55%. The valve was tricuspid and the valve morphology did not indicate rheumatic valve disease. Preoperative TTE revealed normal ascending aortic dimensions (29 mm in diameter). The patients was offered and accepted surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) and was included in the Disease of the Aortic Valve Ascending Aorta and Coronary Arteries (DAVAACA) study with written informed consent.
One day before and 3 days after SAVR, CAVI was obtained using Va-Sera 1500 (Fukuda Denshi) as part of the DAVAACA study. Before surgery, CAVI was 4.7 (average of left and right CAVI) with an ejection time of 386ms . During surgery, a severely calcified tricuspid aortic valve was replaced with a biological valve prosthesis. The patient suffered a postoperative stroke but quickly recovered with minor sequel. After 3 days, the average CAVI increased to 9.35, and the blood pressure increased 148/63 mmHg to 163/78 mmHg. TTE 6 days after surgery demonstrated relief of the aortic valve obstruction with a Vmax of 2.5 m/s, Pmean 14 mmHg, DVI-index 0.54, a minor paravalvular leakage and an unchanged LVEF at 55%. The left ventricular ejection fraction remained at 55% on the pre- and post-operative examinations. The heart rate moderately increased from 69 bpm to 75 bpm. In tandem, the ejection time decreased to 271ms, and the pre-ejection period increased from 34ms to 112ms. Finally, the morphology of the brachial pulse wave changed after the relief of the left ventricular obstruction to a steeper upstroke signal compared to a prolonged and flattened pattern before . TTE after 1, 3 and 5 years demonstrated normal trans aortic flow velocities with a Vmax of 1.5 m/s after 5 years and normal LVEF. The patient was without any clinical cardiovascular symptoms 5 years after surgery.