A 43-year-old male presented with a 10-d history of pyrexia, fatigue, diarrhoea, and weight loss.
Upon presentation, he was pyrexial at 39°C, accompanied by fatigue, confusion, and diarrhoea.
He regarded his skin disease as psoriasis since childhood, with recurrently diffuse palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, erythema and hypernatremia on the flexor surfaces of both arms. He was not on regular medications and had never sought medical advice about his hyperkeratosis. He had never smoked, did not drink alcohol, and had no history of drug addiction. The patient had never received professional dermatological treatment.
The patient had no significant prior family history.
The patient was pyrexial at 39°C with a blood pressure of 132/78 mmHg on admission. His hyperkeratosis affected his upper and lower limbs as diffuse palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, erythema, and scales on the flexor surfaces of both arms . He had a systolic murmur over the mitral area but did not exhibit the meningeal irritation sign or cardiopulmonary or abdominal issues.
White cell counts and C-reactive protein levels were elevated to 17.07 × 109 cells/L and above 250 mg/L, respectively. His procalcitonin levels were 3.38 ng/mL. His tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis antibodies were negative. His electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Blood cultures isolated methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) 2 and 4 d after admission to the hospital. Transthoracic echocardiography indicated mitral valve disease with severe insufficiency.
Cranial computed tomography revealed multiple low-density shadows in the brain . The computed tomography (CT) results of the chest were normal. Abdominal enhanced CT showed multiple low-density shadows in the spleen, which were considered to be splenic abscesses with subcapsular effusion . Given the persistent fever, bacteraemia, abscesses, and mitral valve insufficiency, we conducted transoesophageal echocardiography , which revealed a wart in the mitral valve with prolapse along with severe insufficiency. He was diagnosed with definitive infective endocarditis, clinically suspected to be attributable to his skin lesions. He was urgently referred to a dermatologist, who advised treatment with tretinoin, urea cream for external use, skin biopsy , and genetic tests. Later, a pathological examination was conducted on his skin, which showed epidermal hyperkeratosis, acantholysis, and lymphocytes infiltrating the superficial dermis around the blood vessels and adjuncts. Genetic tests revealed mutations in the keratin 1 (KRT1) gene .