A previously healthy 79-year-old man with epigastric pain was admitted to another hospital. After examination, he was diagnosed as having acute pancreatitis due to a tumor of the pancreatic tail. After treatment for pancreatitis, he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment of the tumor. The patient's blood chemistry data were within normal limits except for slightly elevated serum pancreatic amylase (264 IU/l) and lipase levels (430 IU/l). Serum levels of CA19-9 and CEA were both normal. Serum gamma globulin and total IgG were normal, but IgG4 was elevated (256 mg/dl). Serum autoantibodies and rheumatoid factor were negative. Dynamic CT imaging revealed an irregular mass measuring 40 × 23 mm in the tail of the pancreas. The tumor was not enhanced on the arterial phase and slightly enhanced on the portal phase . The splenic vein was obstructed by the tumor. MRI imaging showed that the intensity decreased in the T1-weighted images of the pancreas and increased in the T2-weighted images. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a hypoechoic lesion detected in the tail of the pancreas. EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA), however, did not reveal any cancer cells. 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed hot spots of FDG uptake at the site of the pancreatic mass. No extrapancreatic lesions were detected. ERCP revealed an obstruction of the MPD at the site of the tumor . Insertion of a guidewire to the distal MPD was impossible. Brush cytology was negative for cancer cells. We suspected PC concomitant with AIP or rather than AIP. The patient underwent a distal pancreatectomy with an uneventful postoperative course.
Gross inspection of the resected specimen revealed a diffusely enlarged and firm pancreas. Histologically, it was remarkable for an intense mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate predominantly composed of lymphocytes and plasma cells, and centered on the pancreatic ducts. The inflammation was associated with significant acinar dropout and parenchymal fibrosis. An obliterative venulitis was noted at the leading edges of the inflammatory cell infiltrate. Immunohistochemical labeling with an antibody to IgG4 revealed large numbers of IgG4-expressing plasma cells.