A 58-year-old woman who never smoked was referred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment due to multiple lung nodules found in a routine examination in 2019 . Pre-operative CT examination suggested seven nodules distributed in the right lung (two in the right upper lobe, one in the right middle lobe, and four in the right lower lobe, Fig. 1A–F, N-1 to N-7) and no nodule in the left lung. Figure showed us that N-7 in the right lower lobe is the largest nodule with a large solid component in the lung window, which has pleural traction. Considering the tumor's maximal removal and preservation of normal lung parenchyma, we performed right lower lobe resection and systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection on this patient. After the operation, we delivered resection specimens to pathological and gene detection. Table shows the CT and pathological features of the seven nodules, and Fig. shows the pathological sections of the five samples. Postoperative pathology confirmed the solid nodule (N-7 in S10) as a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (solid predominant subtype) with a diameter of 2.5 cm . N-4 and N-5 were moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with a diameter of 0.8 cm and 0.6 cm, separately. N-6 was well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with a diameter of 1.2 cm. Metastasis was found in N1 nodes (Station 12), and it was confirmed that the positive lymph node was metastasized from N-7 through the whole exon sequencing. Four cycles of chemotherapy (Carboplatin 500 mg + pemetrexed 800 mg) were administered after surgery in October 2019. No relapse was observed and the residual nodules showed no apparent changes on the chest CT scan nearly 36 months after the chemotherapy.
Whole exon sequencing (WES) was conducted to further analyze the relationship between the four primary tumors (N-4 to 7) and the metastatic lymph node (LN1) . Among the top 30 mutation genes (results of detected actual nucleotide position/change and variant allele frequencies of the variants were provided as Additional file ), only NEFH mutation was found in all five samples. Other mutations, including MUC4 (80%), ATG9B (60%), DDX11(60%) and HDAC2 (60%), were detected in three or more than three samples. EGFR 19del mutation was detected only in N-4. No arm-level copy number variants (CNVs) were detected except for N-6, in which 16p/q, and 5p/q harbored amplification. However, no classical lung cancer driver genes existed simultaneously in two or more samples . All five samples showed a dominant substitution of C > T/G > A, and cytosine deamination was considered in our analysis . Previous studies have shown that C > A/G > T transversions were smokers' most common base conversion type, while C > T/G > A were prone to be found in non-smokers. This patient had no history of smoking, which is consistent with previous reports. Besides, 26.7% (4/15) somatic mutations of N-7 were found in metastatic lymph nodes , and metastatic lymph nodes had the most similar mutation signature (R version 3.5.3, code: ; method: ) with N-7 (Pearson = 0.97) , which suggested that the metastatic lymph nodes were metastasized from N-7.
We further analyzed cancer cell fractions with PyClone to understand the clonal population structure among the five samples. Somatic mutations were classified into 4 clusters . Cluster 1 (14 mutations) has the higher CP (cellular prevalence) values in N-5, 6, 7, and lymph nodes, representing the main clone. Clusters 2 and 3 are highly distributed in N-6 and N-7, respectively, indicating that these clusters’ mutations are sub-clonal mutations, which occurred later during the tumorigenesis . According to the results of PyClone analysis, LN1 was evolutionarily closer to N-7, which was consistent with our pathological and genomic findings.