A 50-year-old man presented with pseudophakic bullous keratopathy after cataract surgery. His visual acuity was counting fingers at 1 m; the posterior capsule was intact with well-positioned intraocular lens (IOL) in the bag. The patient was scheduled for DSAEK surgery. In the DSAEK procedure, recipient corneal epithelium was removed and four venting incisions were made in the midperiphery of the cornea before Descemet stripping. The donor cornea was inserted using a Busin glide; after DSAEK lenticlue insertion, air injection was done up to the border of DSAEK lenticule. The surgical procedure resulted in a clear cornea. However, the patient presented with gradual visual loss three months later and the DSAEK lenticule was detached, non-mobile and folded confirmed by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) (CASIA SS-1000, TOMEY, Nagoya, Japan) . On confocal scanning microscopy (Heidelberg Retina Tomograph 3 with the Rostock Cornea Module, Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Dossenheim, Germany), epithelial cell sheets were detected in the interface leading to the wrinkling of the donor tissue and detachment .
After general anesthesia, proper prepping and draping was done followed by placement of eyelid speculum and irrigation of ocular surface by povidone-iodine. In the primary maneuvers refractory nature of the detached lenticule to repositioning was noted and despite multiple attempts for re-surfacing and attachment of lenticule, shrinkage was happened. We thought that entered epithelial cells from venting incisions were culprit for this event. So, from the venting incision, epithelial cell sheets of the interface, which were diagnosed on confocal scanning and AS-OCT were carefully debrided and scraped using a secondary instrument and double cannula. After repeated irrigation and aspiration, epithelial strands were removed as much as possible. However, possibility of remaining some epithelial cells is still there. Then, we used several straight 10–0 prolene needles for transient fixation of lenticule followed by full air injection . The needles were removed after five minutes and the air was deflated up to the lenticule border. These actions led to unfolded lenticule. The cornea turned clear in the one-year follow-up, with uncorrected-visual acuity of 20/30 and best-corrected visual acuity of 20/25 (Video 1). Also, preoperative and postoperative (1st year follow-up visit) CCT were 928 μm and 598 μm, respectively.