A 40-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our institution for a hybrid AF procedure after three percutaneous radiofrequency (RF) ablations. He underwent a first AF ablation in June 2010 for drug-refractory paroxysmal AF consisting of RF pulmonary vein isolation, mitral isthmus ablation and defragmentation of the coronary sinus. An additional right cavo-tricuspid isthmus ablation was performed in October 2010, followed by a roofline in March 2011 .
The procedures and the postoperative course were uneventful apart from recurrence of symptomatic arrhythmia. He had no history of structural heart disease, normal left and right ventricular ejection fraction, normal coronary arteries, no diabetes and no sleep apnea syndrome.
During admission, a preoperative transthoracic echocardiography revealed a small left atrial diameter of 29 mm. A contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) revealed occlusion of the left PVs and a major reduction of the LA volume from 141 ml pre-ablation (CT: June 2010) to 51 ml after the third ablation (CT: November 2011) .
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed an extremely small left atrium with extensive fibrosis .
A pulmonary arteriogram confirmed total occlusion with a length of approximately 1 cm and the absence of reasonably sized veins distal to the occlusion. Therefore, surgery was the treatment of choice rather than BA with stenting (November 2011).
Surgery was performed through median sternotomy. The small fibrotic left atrium was opened over the Waterston’s groove and the ostiae of the PVs were inspected. Both left PVs were occluded. The right veins were not significantly reduced. The left pleura was opened confirming continuation of the strictures of the PVs over their entire length. Both PVs were then longitudinally incised at the hilum. The remaining diameters at this level were respectively 3 and 4 mm. Surgical left PV reconstruction with a pericardial patch plasty was performed. A neo-vein was created using a 2.5 by 5 cm bovine pericardial patch starting from distal (intrapleural) to proximal, including the occluded part of the PVs as the posterior wall. This neolung vein was implanted in the left atrium as a common ostium. Concomitant left-sided cryo lesions (roof and inferior line) and a right-sided cryo-maze were made. A left atrial appendage (LAA) exclusion or resection, which is often done as an adjuvant therapy in surgical AF procedures, was not performed to avoid further reduction of the LA volume. After weaning, transesophageal echocardiography showed good patency of the (neo)pulmonary vein with increased flow rates related to the small venous diameters at the level of the hilum.
The patient was extubated within 4 h and was discharged on day 7 on coumadin and aspirin. At 3 months follow-up, the patient was free of symptoms. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed right ventricular (RV) dysfunction with patent PVs. Over the following months, symptom burden due to progressing tricuspid regurgitation (TR) increased and diuretics were started. Two years later, after an episode of hemoptysis, a CT showed stenosis of the common ostium left PVs. A successful additional BA and stenting of the left PV was performed using a Valeo vascular stent .
In the following years, despite maximal right heart failure treatment, symptoms and RV failure steadily progressed. Eleven years later, he received a heart transplantation, with removal of the stent and reimplantation of the left PVs.