A 43-year-old man was rushed into the Emergency Department (ED) whilst undergoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Witnessed cardiac arrest had occurred during transportation to the hospital for sudden onset of shortness of breath. His initial cardiac rhythm on ED arrival was recorded as pulseless electrical activity (PEA). After confirming correct endotracheal tube placement, he was noted to have significant swelling of his entire right lower limb . A right sided iliofemoral DVT and dilatation of the right ventricle were demonstrated on point of care ultrasound assessment that had been performed in the ED. Thrombolytic therapy with alteplase (Actilase®, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co, Germany), 100 mg (10 mg over 1 minute and then 90 mg over 2 hours), was promptly initiated whilst high quality CPR was continued. A return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved approximately 30 minutes later. The patient remained haemodynamically stable and was sent to the radiology department for a computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) after completion of the alteplase infusion. The diagnosis of PE was confirmed on CTPA, which demonstrated multiple large filling defects in both main pulmonary arteries as well as regions of pulmonary oligaemia. An area of hyperdensity in the posterior right lung region, suggestive of an intra-alveolar haemorrhage, was also noted on CTPA as well as on the post-thrombolysis but not the pre-thrombolysis chest X-ray films . Since this did not result in any haemodynamic or ventilatory instability, it was decided to manage the intra-alveolar haemorrhage conservatively. Continuous monitoring of vital signs, including temperature, was maintained in the ICU to ensure that core body temperature remained below 37°C. There was no need to initiate any active cooling measures. On day 3 after admission, a repeat in cardiac echocardiography demonstrated that the right ventricle had normalized in size. Further diagnostic investigations led to the conclusion that enlargement of regional inguinal lymph nodes secondary to active venereal disease precipitated the development of the lower limb DVT. Seven days after thrombolysis and treatment of his underlying pathology, the patient had completely recovered and was discharged home neurologically intact.