A 3 days old male neonate from southern Ethiopia presented to a nearby health institution with difficulty in sucking, failure to pass meconium and abdominal distension since birth.
Physical examination revealed imperforate anus. After referral to a tertiary hospital, loop colostomy was done to relieve respiratory distress. Ampicillin and Gentamicin were started because of persistent respiratory distress and a possible association of sepsis. After four days of treatment, the antibiotics were changed to ceftriaxone and metronidazole because of colostomy site infection. However, after completing 8 days of antibiotic treatment the respiratory distress had not resolved. Treatment for sepsis was continued.
The baby was born at term at a government health institution (health center) to a 35 years old para VII mother through spontaneous vaginal delivery. The birth weight and APGAR score were not recorded. The mother’s antenatal care and follow up were done at a local health center where Tetanus Toxoid vaccine was given. Contraceptive injection (Depo-Provera) was given for three years but was discontinued six months prior to the current pregnancy. There was no maternal history of alcohol consumption, smoking cigarette, diabetes mellitus, hypertension or human immunodeficiency virus infection.
There was no history of consanguinity and no family history of cardiac disease. The patient was exclusively breast fed since birth. Physical examination on admission: -Vital signs: - Temp- 37.2oc, RR-68/m, AHR-160 bpm, BP-74/46 mmHg, SPo2–92%, Weight- 3.8 kg (50th–75th centile), Length-52 cm (50th–75th centile), Head circumference-36 cm (50th–75th centile).
There were no gross dysmorphic features. The lympho-glandular system was normal. Inter-costal retractions and relative dullness with reduced air entry on the right-side lung field were noted. Peripheral pulses with strong volume were palpable in all accessible area. The precordium was quiet. The point of maximal impulse was felt at the 4th intercostal space medial to mid clavicular line. There was no thrill detected. The heart sounds were normal and without any murmur or gallop on auscultation. There was no pedal edema and no hepatosplenomegaly.
External genital examination showed normal male phenotype. There was low type imperforate anus. No other gross dysmorphisms were detected on physical examination. Investigations:
Hemoglobin and C-reactive protein ranged between 12.7–15.2 g/d and 12-24 mg/dl respectively. WBC-6700/mm3, platelet-203,000/mm3, MCV-89.2, Serum creatinin-0.5 mg/dl. Abdominal ultrasound performed using 5 MHz probe (Sono-scape ultrasound) showed minimal inter-loop fluid collection. Chest x-ray showed abnormal curvilinear radiographic shadow in the right mid lung zone extending across the diaphragm in to the inferior vena cava . Echocardiographic examination was performed by an experienced pediatric echocardiographer using Philips Ultrasound 22,100 Bothell USA MOD iE33 system with a 2.5-mHz transthoracic probe. Apical and subcostal four-chamber sections were obtained. Two-dimensional(2D) transthoracic echocardiography were used to assess the characteristics of the atrial septal defect, pulmonary vein connections, inferior vena cava drainage, presence of obstruction in the venous collector, and dilation of the right cardiac chambers. The diameters of the main and branch pulmonary arteries were determined in the parasternal view. Right pulmonary arterial hypoplasia was defined as a diameter < 5 mm (MPA), < 3.5 mm (RPA) at birth [, ].
Pulmonary hypertension was suspected when the trans-tricuspid regurgitation velocity was > 3.4 m/s by Doppler method. Using continuous wave and color doppler imaging in an apical four chamber view, the sample volume was placed at the height of the tricuspid valve and the pressure gradient between the right atrium and the right ventricle was determined using Bernoulli’s method. The result was multiplied by a correction factor of 1.23 to obtain the pulmonary artery systolic pressure .
Post contrast computerized tomography of the chest (CT angiography) was performed using a 64 detector row scanner (GE medical systems; Optima CT 660).The scan was acquired in helical mode and was performed using pediatric protocol with parameters of KV 120 and MA 130.The thorax from the thoracic inlet to the upper abdomen was included. CT scan was done to confirm the findings found in the other imaging modalities and to look for additional associated findings. CT scan showed Scimitar vein arising from right middle lung zone draining the whole right lung as a single right pulmonary vein into the IVC at the level of its junction with the right atrium . The right lung looked relatively small compared to the left and there was secondary dextro-position of the heart with right side mediastinal shift . The RPA looked markedly hypoplastic . There was small PDA and secundum ASD . CT angio also showed left superior vena cava draining into the coronary sinus which is markedly dilated . The right heart chambers looked markedly dilated with right ventricular hypertrophy . Systemic collateral arteries arising from abdominal aorta drained into the right lower lung . Course in the hospital: after confirmation of the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension, intravenous furosemide 1 mg/kg/dose BID was started. Sildenafil 0.5 mg/kg TID was also initiated orally. The respiratory distress resolved (RR ranging between 72/m and 48/m). The temperature dropped between 35.8oc and 36.7oc. Oxygen saturation ranged between 92 and 99%. Patient was discharged to be followed in the cardio-thoracic section for possible surgical intervention. Also referred to general pediatric surgery for correction of imperforate anus.