A 45-year-old man with a past medical history of hypothyroidism and nodular sclerosing classic Hodgkin lymphoma stage IIB presented with back pain. Classic Hodgkin lymphoma was treated with systemic chemotherapy, external radiation and autologous stem cell transplant in 2006. Disease relapsed and patient underwent double umbilical cord allogeneic transplant in 2007, which was complicated by numerous infections and graft versus host disease requiring immunosuppression. Patient completed immunosuppression in 2008 and had been in remission since.
Sixteen years after the double umbilical cord allogeneic transplant, the patient presented to an outside hospital, with several weeks of back pain and was treated for suspected lumbar stenosis with steroids. After persistent pain and onset of headache, lumbar and cranial imaging revealed a small right cerebellopontine angle (CPA) mass as well as subarachnoid hemorrhage, trace intraventricular hemorrhage, and some subarachnoid hemorrhage within the spine. Cerebral and spinal angiography demonstrated no evidence of vascular malformation or abnormality. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained and demonstrated intermediate signal on T2 with a hypointense rim and restricted diffusion. The CPA mass was thought to be consistent with a meningioma. The patient was then discharged and was planned for outpatient follow up with neurosurgery.
Patient presented again two weeks later with acute onset of severe headache, crushing in quality, affecting the right side of the face, associated with right facial numbness and weakness. Additionally, he reported left sided ptosis. Patient had a possible seizure event with loss of consciousness, no shaking, unclear postictal period, and no tongue laceration or urinary incontinence. The patient received a loading dose of levetiracetam and was started on standing anti-seizure drugs. Repeat MRI scans showed an interval and significant increase of the right CPA lesion . Chest, abdomen and pelvis nonenhanced computed tomography (CT) scans were negative for metastatic disease.
Biopsy of the CPA lesion was planned with suspicion of lymphoma. The tumor extended from the tentorium to below the hypoglossal nerve. Intraoperative pathological analysis revealed dense and diffuse infiltrate of large atypical cells with irregular nuclei, multiple small nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm. Findings were not consistent with an acoustic neuroma, meningioma, or epidermoid cyst. Lymphoma was not clearly identified with intraoperative analysis. A near total resection of the tumor and decompression of the brainstem was achieved. The tumor was removed due to clear malignancy and difficulty achieving adequate hemostasis with biopsy alone. A small amount of tumor was left on the facial nerve, which responded with 0.05mA of monopolar stimulation following resection.
As seen in , the tumor is comprised of large atypical cells with irregular nuclei with vesicular chromatin and scant cytoplasm (A). The tumor cells are positive for B-cell markers CD20 (D)and CD79a (C) and EBER-ISH. The immunohistochemical phenotype of the tumor cells is as follows: CD45+/- (weak, variable), CD20+, CD79a+, CD5-, CD10-, BCL6-, MUM1-, LMO2-, HGAL+, FOXP1-, BCL2+, CD23+, CD43+, MYC+ (80-90%), CyclinD1+/- (40-50%), SOX11-, CD21-, EBER(ish)+. Flow cytometry of the CPA soft tissue showed an aberrant cell population with the following phenotype: CD45dim/-, CD19-, CD20+, cCD79a+, CD22+, CD5-, CD10-, CD23+, CD25+, CD200+, CD30-, CD43+, CD38+, CD33+, HLA-DR+, IgM-/+, IgD-. Final diagnosis was PTLD, monomorphic type, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBL), non-germinal center B-cell type, EBV+. Cytogenetic results showed no evidence of IGH/BCL2, BCL6, MYC, or CCND1 rearrangement/translocation, however, increased copies of all the genes (IGH, BCL2, BCL6, MYC, and CCND1) in were detected in ~60% cells, indicative of polyploid cells. The patient was sent back to his long-standing oncologist to discuss treatment options for the newly diagnosed primary central nervous system lymphoma. The patient began a high-dose methotrexate-based regimen (the MATRIX regimen).
Five months post-resection, the patient has completed 4 cycles of MATRIX. Brain MRI performed at two months post-resection demonstrated no new nodular or mass-like enhancement to suggest recurrent or increased tumor. Patient underwent an autologous stem cell transplant 4.5 months after resection, conditioned with thiotepa and high-dose carmustine.