A 74-year old male patient was sent to the emergency neurologic outpatient clinic because of progressive confusion, lethargy, dysarthria, fatigue and weakness in the last week. He complained of constipation, anorexia and vague abdominal pain. The CT scan of the brain that was immediately performed by the neurologist was normal.
An interview with his son who arrived a few hours later revealed that the patient had been treated for hypertension and postsurgical hypoparathyroidism without any other important comorbidity. He was followed regularly at an endocrinology outpatient clinic once yearly. His last visit two months before current admission showed normal laboratory values including serum calcium, creatinine and phosphate. He had near-total thyroidectomy for benign goiter back in 1955. Following the surgery he had episodes of tetany and postsurgical hypoparathyroidism was diagnosed 2 years later. A therapy with dihydrotachysterol was introduced in 1957. In 1972 he had a single episode of renal colic which ended with spontaneous stone passage. In 1995 thiazide diuretic was added to the dihydrotachysterol due to hypercalciuria. There were several attempts to introduce shorter acting vitamin D derivatives during 50 years of the disease history, but finally the patient had always rejected all new medications and switched back to dihydrotachysterol.
On examination, he was lethargic, dysarthric with slow tongue movements and poor cognitive estimates, hypertensive (blood pressure was 165/95 mmHg), dehydrated. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. Cranial nerve examination was normal. He had bradykinesia with decreased power of the limbs, in association with decreased reflexes and slightly increased tone in the axial parts of the limbs. Plantar responses were normal. After admission we noted also severe constipation and polyuria few days later.
When laboratory investigations demonstrated serum calcium of 3.7 mmol/L, serum creatinine 188 μmol/L and urea 16.2 mmol/L, he was admitted to the endocrinology department where some additional tests were done. Urinary calcium excretion in the 24 hours collection was increased to 1.1 mmol/mmol of creatinine. Alkaline phosphatase, phosphate, 25 OH vitamin D3, ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme), PSA and CEA were normal. Serum parathormone and 1,25 di OH vitamin D3 were low . The QTc interval on ECG was within reference range. Test of occult blood in stool specimen was negative. Abdominal ultrasound showed normally sized kidneys, no renal calculi and no nephrocalcinosis. Chest X-ray was normal.
Based on the history the patient was diagnosed with vitamin D intoxication due to dihydrotachysterol overdose. Differential diagnosis included malignancy and sarcoidosis. However, according to the data collected they seemed unlikely and therapy was initiated before their proper exclusion. The patient was treated according to conventional treatment regimen for this condition with intravenous saline infusion, careful administration of loop diuretic (furosemide) and methylprednisolone. We additionally applied 60 mg of pamidronate sodium in slow intravenous infusion over 4 hours. Two days after the admission the patient became less confused. His communication improved and he admitted that he had been mistakenly taking 75 drops (2.5 ml) of dihydrotachysterol per day for the last 6 to 8 weeks instead of his usual daily dose of 50 drops (1.7 ml). The reason for this sudden change of his regimen remained a mystery. On the fourth day after admission serum calcium dropped rapidly to the reference range. The observed constipation and polyuria resolved in few days after normalization of serum calcium concentrations. The treatment for hypoparathyroidism had to be reinstituted 10 days after dihydrotachysterol had been discontinued. The patient was now easily switched to shorter acting vitamin D derivate calcitriol (0.25 μg twice per day) which maintained a normal serum and urinary calcium concentration without a thiazide. However, two weeks after the discharge from the department of endocrinology he discontinued calcitriol and again started taking dihydrotachysterol, since old habits die hard. Laboratory values and treatment during follow up are reported in Figure .