The patient was a 31-month-old Chinese male with a homozygous frameshift variant c.118delG (p.A40fs*24) of the HEXB gene. He was admitted to our hospital in October 2019 because he was unable to walk unsupported. The child was found to have shown exaggerated startle reactions during infancy, movement retrogression at 2 years of age, and reduced limb activity. He underwent rehabilitation treatment for 1 year at a local rehabilitation hospital with no improvement in physical or language skills.
The child was in good health and had no abnormal birth conditions. The child’s mother was G2P1 and had a spontaneous delivery. The child was born without oxygen deprivation or asphyxia, and the umbilical cord was not wrapped around his neck. The birth weight was 3.4 kg, and the birth height was 50 cm. The parents were healthy, and the mother did not have any special medical history during pregnancy. The child received mixed feeding after birth. At 3 months of age, he could raise his head; at 7 months, he could sit independently; at 10 months, he started crawling; at 12 months, he could stand with the support of external objects; at 15 months, he could speak single words; so far, he could not walk unsupported.
A detailed physical examination of the patient was performed. The general state of the child was normal, but he exhibited poor communication skills. Moreover, he had telecanthus. No abnormalities were found in the heart, lungs, abdomen, spinal extremities, and external genitalia. A high degree of muscular tension was observed in the limbs (strength IV). Bilateral knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were hyperactive. Ankle clonus and bilateral Babinski sign were positive. All the meningeal stimulation signs were negative. To observe whether the patient had typical ophthalmologic signs, we suggested a specialist examination, but the family refused our request.
Description of the patient’s gross motor skills: He could stand with the support of external objects but could not stand or walk independently. His head was tilted backward. A high degree of muscular tension of the limbs and tiptoe walking (the right foot was worse) were observed; contracture of the right Achilles tendon was observed. Poor hip and knee flexion and extension were noted.
Description of the patient’s fine motor skills: The patient could grasp, place, and pinch several items, and build 2 to 3 building blocks using both upper limbs.
Description of the patient’s intellectual abilities: He was able to discern when his name was spoken and could respond to the name-calling. He exhibited poor language comprehension skills, his pronunciation lacked clarity, and he spoke single words instead of sentences.
The patient’s routine blood and urine test results, liver and kidney function test results, and myocardial enzyme, lactic acid, and homocysteine levels were normal. The results of urine and blood analyses by gas chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry were normal. Abnormalities were not detected in the electrocardiographic examination. However, magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed brain atrophy and delayed myelination of the white matter of the brain. The Gesell Developmental Schedules score was 38.96.
To confirm the diagnosis, we performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) using blood samples collected from the proband and his parents. The analysis revealed a novel frameshift mutation, c.118delG (p.A40fs*24), in the HEXB gene. The child’s father carried the heterozygous variants in the same location, but not his mother .
To guarantee the patient’s rights, we obtained written informed consent from the patient’s guardian. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples collected from the patient and his parents. This patient’s genetic model was considered as paternal uniparental disomy. The standards and guidelines prescribed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics were followed for the interpretation of sequence variation and comprehensive evaluation of the pathogenicity of the mutated sites.[ Analysis of the general population database revealed that it was a low-frequency variant; it was a null mutation, which might have led to the loss of gene function observed in the patient.
In February 2020, at the age of 3 years, the child had a seizure and was treated with oral levetiracetam. At present, the child is 5 years old, and his motor abilities are significantly regressed; thus, he is unable to sit or stand independently.