A 19-year-old young female, primigravida presented to the gynecology and obstetric ward for routine antenatal care at 26 weeks of gestation. The patient was an unbooked case with no prior history of antenatal examination in her present pregnancy. There was no history of fever, rashes, spotting per vaginum, drug intake, or radiation exposure during the pregnancy. There was no family history and psychosocial history of congenital abnormalities, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, thyroid dysfunction, tuberculosis, etc. There was no history of alcohol consumption, smoking, or recreational drug use. The patient has been in consanguineous marriage for the past 4 years. Her vital and general physical examinations are within normal limits. On abdominal examination, symphysis fundal height was 26 weeks, with a longitudinal lie and cephalic presentation, palpated just above the pubic symphysis, and with a regular fetal heart rate of 144 bpm, suggesting a viable pregnancy. No abnormality was detected on respiratory, cardiovascular, or central nervous system examinations. The differential diagnosis of TD includes homozygous achondroplasia, achondrogenesis, campomelic dwarfism, rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, short rib polydactyly syndromes, severe hypophosphatasia, and severe osteogenesis imperfecta. Blood investigations were within normal limits. On further evaluation, USG revealed a single live intrauterine fetus of 26 weeks and 3 days of gestational age with fetal heart rate 144 bpm, estimated fetal weight (EFW) 441 g, a biparietal diameter of 6.7 cm, a head circumference of 23.1 cm, a femoral length of 4.7 cm, an abdominal circumference of 19.6 cm, a humerus length of 3.9 cm. Shortening of bilateral hindlimbs and forelimbs, narrowed chest with short horizontal ribs, atrial septal defect, abnormal shape of skull giving the appearance of a cloverleaf skull, not clearly visible kidneys, no frontal bossing, and cleft palate are found as shown in the Figure . The amniotic fluid index was within the normal range.
Based on the above finding, severe skeletal dysplasia was diagnosed. The mother was counseled in detail by the obstetrician about diagnosis, prognosis, complications, and the termination of pregnancy. Induction of labor was recommended to the patient due to fetal congenital abnormalities. The procedure of induction of labor was performed by the obstetrician. The patient received misoprostol at a dose of 50 mg per vaginum in the posterior fornix, with the administration initiated at 4 am. Then the patient was placed in the left lateral position for a period of 30 min. Subsequently, regular reassessment was conducted every 4 h to monitor the progress of cervical changes. The initial assessment using the Bishop score indicated greater than 6, along with a cervical dilation greater than 2 cm and a cervical effacement of less than or equal to 30%. In response to these findings, the labor was augmented by introducing oxytocin. The patient delivered a preterm male baby, which did not cry after birth even after stimulation and suction, was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) immediately with respiratory distress, and expired after 1 h. The baby looks dysmorphic, with a widened anterior and posterior fontanel, an enlarged head, a coarse and edematous face, a flattened nasal bridge, a short neck, a low set of ears, shortening of both upper and lower limbs with short fingers, bowed thighs and legs, a relatively narrow thorax, and abdominal distension as shown in Figure . On parental evaluation, no apparent skeletal abnormalities were observed. The prenatal ultrasound scan findings, clinical findings, postmortem findings, and autopsy findings were consistent with severe skeletal dysplasia.
Due to the patient being lost to follow-up, intervention adherence, tolerability, and essential postintervention considerations such as ongoing monitoring and support were not effectively implemented.