A 40-year-old female patient sought treatment at our department because of eye pain and decreased vision in the left eye.
The patient reported pain and decreased vision of the left eye with no obvious cause 1 wk ago, with pain of the ipsilateral head and double eyelid swelling. Therefore, she visited our hospital. Since the onset of the disease, her spirit, appetite, sleep, and urine were normal.
The patient’s medical history was not remarkable, and there were no symptoms to indicate connective tissue disorder.
The patient had no family history of ocular diseases.
The examination showed that her visual acuity was 40/100 in the left eye and 100/100 in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination of the anterior chamber revealed clear cornea, KP(-), and clear aqueous humor. The pupillary reflex and the eye movements were normal in both eyes. No systematic deficits were noted on physical examination.
The patient’s leukocyte count was 6.06 × 109/L [normal range, (3.5-9.5) × 109/L], lymphocyte count was 1.16 × 109/L [normal range, (1.5-4) × 109/L], serum complement C3 was 0.779 g/L [normal (0.9-1.8) g/L], and the immune function test showed that her immunoglobulins were within the normal level.
Ocular fundus images of the left eye showed that there was a cinerous protuberance of the retina in close proximity to the optic disc and the macula . In her right eye, the fundus examination did not reveal any pathological findings . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of her left eye showed retinal edema and choroidal folds, and at the periphery of the macular, there was serous retinal detachment . Then, we carried out fundus fluorescein angiography. The fluorescein angiography of the left eye (red light free image) showed that there was a dark area in macula, which indicated periretinal edema . In the latter stages of the angiography, there was an increased dark area at the peripheral of the macula with no leakage in choroid or retina . Ultrasonography showed ‘T-sign’ with an eyeball thickness of 3.68 mm . MRI examination showed left eyelid swelling and thickening of eye ring.