A 15-year-old female national POM cheer competitor with no known medical history presents to the clinic with a week of the right shoulder pain. The pain was described as a nagging ache over the anterolateral arm with the severity rated as 5/10. It was exacerbated by pressure, movement, and cheer events. The symptoms were partially alleviated by ibuprofen. The patient denied any recent injury, trauma, swelling, mechanical symptoms, or neuropathic symptoms.
On physician examination, the patient had point tenderness over the proximal humerus, limited abduction to 160°, and limited forward flexion to 120°.
The patient’s primary care physician had ordered X-rays of the shoulder which demonstrated multiple calcified loose bodies in the axillary recess . Erosions were also seen posteriorly on the scapular Y-view . MRI demonstrated several loose bodies in the subcoracoid bursa .
On diagnostic arthroscopy, no labral, rotator cuff, or biceps pathology were observed. Minor cartilage wear on the glenoid was noted. Several loose bodies were found intra-articularly (, ). The loose bodies were removed through a large (hip arthroscopy) posteroinferior portal with a high inflow to act as a suction (.) Extensive debridement around the rotator interval was performed to adequately remove all subcoracoid loose bodies. The same arthroscopic sequence was then repeated using both a 30° and 70° arthroscope. No loose bodies were found in the subacromial space. The specimens were sent for gross diagnosis to pathology and were described as multiple well-circumscribed gray-white portions of firm nodular tissue that was 3.5 cm in greatest dimension when aggregated .
At 2 weeks postoperatively, the patient reported 0 out of 10 pain controlled with the use of naproxen only. The patient proceeded to discontinue all pain medications by 6 weeks postoperatively. Although the patient did initially note some discomfort with terminal flexion and abduction, this had completely resolved by 12 weeks postoperatively.
At the 7-month follow-up, the patient described aching within the shoulder and difficulty raising the arm over her head. The ache was recently aggravated as she was approaching her competitive cheer season. On physical examination, she had full range of motion, full strength, and no signs of instability. At this time, a diagnostic and therapeutic intra-articular shoulder steroid injection under ultrasound guidance was pursued.
At 10 months postoperatively, the patient maintained 0 out of 10 pain at rest. The patient had returned to POM practices with no limitations. She did have some symptoms during prolonged POM practices with extended periods of overhead movement. She denied any symptoms of instability. On examination, the patient had full range of motion of forward flexion to 180°, abduction to 180°, external rotation to 80°, and internal rotation to L1. Five out of five strength in abduction, internal rotation, and external rotation were noted. Follow-up X-rays demonstrated resolution of the chondromatosis; however, bony erosions along the anterior and posterior humeral head were seen .
At the 49-month follow-up, the patient maintained complete resolution of symptoms. The patient did not report any pain or subjective instability. The patient maintained forward flexion to 180°, abduction to 180°, external rotation to 80°, and internal rotation to L1. Special testing did not reveal any signs of instability. Repeat radiographs demonstrated resolution of the synovial chondromatosis, yet the priorly seen bony erosions were again noticed .