A 53-year-old male patient presented to our emergency department with the main complaint of abdominal pain and constipation for two days. His past medical and family histories were unremarkable. He had been smoking for 20 years (10-15 cigarettes a day). He denied having any allergies or previous illicit drug or alcohol use.
On physical examination, the patient’s body temperature was 36.8 °C, the abdomen was soft and slightly bulged, there were no apparent bowel movements, no apparent mass on palpation, negative shifting dullness, no auscultated sounds of an overactive bowel and a digital rectal examination was negative for any mass or blood. Laboratory tests suggested slight elevation in white blood cell count. An abdominal radiograph revealed multiple air-fluid levels in the intestinal gut . Abdominal ultrasonography showed a dilated bowel sharing a common continuous wall with the distal segment . Computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the small intestinal wall and cystic intestinal dilation proximal to stenosis with clear margins .
The patient was given symptomatic treatment consisting of antibiotics, antacids, antispasmodics and enema. After one day, he presented with noticeable abdominal swelling with unbearable abdominal pain, total abdominal tenderness, rebound tenderness and bowel sounds that had decreased in intensity.
Subsequently, exploratory laparotomy was performed. On surgical exploration, around 100 ml of transparent ascites fluid and torsion of a dilated small bowel loop with surrounding edema were noticed. Moreover, a large cystic mass was detected hanging from the wall of the small intestine into the pelvic cavity, which had led to formation of inflammatory adhesions with adnexa. The adhesions were then bluntly separated, and the mass was found to be located at around 150 cm distally to the Treitz ligament. The mass was ischemic, dark in color, and covered with pus. The basal wall of the mass was weaker than the healthy loops around it, and the basal diameter was around 4.5 cm. After relieving the twisted mass and the surrounding small intestine, we noticed inflammatory edema, and dilation of the proximal intestinal wall. Several adhesive masses with punctate ischemia and inflammation, 20 cm proximally to the lesion, was also noted .
We decided to loop-out the jejunum approximately 35 cm proximally and 5 cm distally to the base of the mass. After resection of about 40 cm of bowel, which included the mass and the ischemic small intestine, the remaining bowel segments were anastomosed using a stapler. An intraoperative diagnosis of intestinal duplication, obstruction and torsion of the small intestine was made. The pathological findings are shown in .
Postoperatively, the patient was kept under parenteral nutrition. He recovered well and began eating nine days after the surgery. He was discharged fifteen days after the surgery, and no sign of recurrence was observed after three months of follow-up.