A 3-year-old boy and his 4-year-old brother presented with their disabilities in walking independently after birth.
The younger brother stood and walked with assistance at the age of 15 mo. He has achieved no further motor milestones since that time. The elder brother could hardly stand, even with help, and could never walk independently.
The brothers were delivered by cesarean section at term after a simple pregnancy. They began to hold up their heads at the age of 3 mo and could sit by themselves at 8 mo. Their language and social communication abilities were normal.
The patients’ parents, a 35-year-old Chinese father and a 32-year-old Vietnamese mother, were unrelated, neither of whom reported a family history of neuromuscular diseases.
The younger brother had torticollis and scoliosis, could sit by himself, stand and walk with help, but could never walk independently. His muscle tone was generally decreased, and muscle power was graded as 3 or 4 in the extremities. Proximal joint contractures, such as at the shoulders, hips, and knees, were prominent bilaterally. Distal joints, including wrists, fingers, and toes, were markedly hyperextensible. Calcaneal protuberance was remarkable. Muscular atrophy was visible in the whole body. Knee reflexes were present. Pathological signs in the central nervous system were negative (-). The elder brother had similar clinical manifestations, with the degree more serious than that of the younger brother (-).
Creatine kinase levels of the brothers were normal. Basic lung tests were normal too. The IQ on the Gesell developmental diagnostic scale was 89.0 and 81.0, respectively.
Genomic DNA extracted from the peripheral blood of both the patients and their parents was analyzed by whole-exome sequencing. High-throughput sequencing was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 Series Sequencer (PE150). Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the mutations. Both brothers were found to carry a heterozygous frameshift mutation c.1353_c.1354insC (p.Arg453ProfsTer42) in exon 16 of the COL6A2 gene inherited from their mother and a heterozygous nonsense mutation c.2105G>A (p.Trp702Ter) in exon 26 inherited from their father.
Tissue sections obtained by muscle biopsy of the quadriceps femoris in the younger brother were examined after hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunostaining with anti-collagen VI antibodies. Muscle pathology showed the myofibers were of different sizes. They were atrophied, non-necrotic, or broken. There were no intracellular lipid droplets, glycogen vacuoles, bordered vacuoles, or rods in the myofibers. The endomysial connective tissue demonstrated slight hyperplasia. Histochemical examination showed that collagen VI stained positive at the sarcolemma but negative at the endomysium and perimysium of the myofibers ( and ).
Radiography showed cervical thoracolumbar scoliosis and right hip dislocation. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal.