A 12-year-old Thai girl who was previously healthy was referred to King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital due to behavioural change with fever and headache for 6 d.
Six day prior to referral to our hospital, the patient had bizarre behaviour. She had a conversation with herself and cried or laughed without explaining the reason. One day later, she had a fever and progressive headache. She has alteration of consciousness with waxing and waning in her consciousness. She had abnormal movements of her hands and could not write letters. She went to a nearby clinic and received roxithromycin, fexofenadine and paracetamol. She could not sleep at night and slept more during the daytime. Four days prior to admission, she started having aggressive behaviour with incomprehensive language. She did not sleep during the day or night. She had intermittent screaming with visual hallucination. Her visual hallucination was described as a moving snake or the death of relatives. She was admitted to Hua Hin Hospital. At the hospital, she still had a high-grade fever with intermittent episodes of screaming with aggressive behaviours. She underwent computed tomography scan (CT) brain and lumbar puncture. She received high-dose ceftriaxone, acyclovir, azithromycin and oseltamivir before referral to our hospital.
The patient did not have any other medical illness or history of any drug or substance abuse.
There was no history of contagious diseases or neuropsychiatric conditions in the family. There was no history of consanguinity in the family.
On admission, the patient was well-grown and confused and had a low-grade fever with a body temperature of 38.4°C, a pulse rate of 110 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute. The general physical examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination showed confusion with disorientation to time, place and person. Her Glasgow coma scale was E4M5V3. Her cranial nerve examination revealed 3 mm pupils that reacted to light bilaterally. She was incorporated with extraocular movement. Nasolabial folds were symmetric. The uvula was in the midline with a gag reflex present. She did not cooperate for motor examination. When she had aggressive behaviour, she moved all four extremities equally; oromotor dyskinesia and choreoathetosis were noted in bilateral extremities, reflex 3+ was noted in all extremities, Babinski's sign was equivocal and clonus was absent.
Laboratory investigation revealed hemoglobin 123 g/L, white blood cell count (WBC) 4.83 × 109/L (N 65, L28, M7%), platelet count 310 × 109/L, sodium 140 mmol/L, potassium 3.8 mmol/L, chloride 104 mmol/L, bicarbonate 21.4 mmol/L, calcium 2.32 mmol/L, phosphorus 1.12 mmol/L, magnesium 0.97 mmol/L, glucose 5.1 mmol/L, TSH 3.35 µU/mL, FT4 18 ng/L, anti-thyroglobulin < 10, anti-thyroid peroxidase < 9 IU/mL, C3 1.25 and C4 3.8 g/L. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed colourless fluid with WBC 13 cells/mm3 (100% mononuclear cells), protein 20.1 g/L and glucose 4.2 mmol/L. Gram staining and culture from CSF did not reveal any evidence of microorganisms. Infectious work-ups were all negative from nasopharyngeal swabs for respiratory syncytial virus and influenza A and B (Polymerase chain reaction, PCR); mycoplasma immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG; scrub typhus IgM and IgG; CSF for herpes simplex virus and enterovirus (PCR). Serum and CSF analysis showed that the patient was positive NMDAR autoantibodies. Electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring showed an absent sleep-wake pattern with generalized slow waves 1-3 Hertz with maximum amplitude at the bilateral frontal area with a delta brush pattern. Ictal EEG demonstrated an abrupt onset of generalized rhythmic delta waves accompanied by clinical screaming and visual hallucination.
The CT brain scan from the local hospital showed small hypodense lesions in the left lentiform nucleus, and follow-up CT scans 8 d later were unremarkable.
This patient presented with fever, behavioural dysfunction, sleep-wake disturbance, oromotor dyskinesia, seizure and visual hallucination. These clinical symptoms suggest infection or inflammation of the central nervous system (CNS), especially in the limbic system, which includes the hypothalamus, hippocampus and amygdala. Based on our patient’s clinical symptoms, the dysfunction also involved the frontal area and basal ganglia. The differential diagnoses were (1) infectious causes from viral, rickettsial or mycoplasma encephalitis or (2) noninfectious causes from autoimmune encephalitis or toxin/metabolic/Hashimoto’s encephalopathy. Oromotor dyskinesis and delta brush EEG patterns are the key features leading to the suspicion of anti-NMDAR encephalitis, and CSF autoantibody results later confirmed our preliminary diagnosis.
The patient received pulse methylprednisolone 10 mg/kg per day for 4 d on the first day after she arrived at our hospital because of EEG delta brush patterns along with antimicrobial agents, phenytoin and risperidone. Her clinical condition did not respond, and she received 2 g/kg intravenous immunoglobulin divided into 5 d followed by plasmapheresis for a total of 10 d. After the first-line regimen, she received a maintenance dose of prednisolone of 1.2 mg/kg per day. During the hospital course, she developed superrefractory status epilepticus and was sent to the paediatric intensive care unit for close monitoring and seizure control. Second-line regimen, such as cyclophosphamide or rituximab, was not given due to septicaemia.
On day 42 of prednisolone 1.2 mg/kg per day, her neurological status did not improve, and she developed upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The vomit was composed of coffee-ground content of 60 mL and bilious content of 30 mL. Her body temperature was 37.8°C. Abdominal examination revealed a distended and soft abdomen with hypoactive bowel sounds. She was consuming nothing orally, so a nasogastric tube was inserted, and intravenous fluid infusion and omeprazole intravenously 80 mg per day were initiated.
On days 43-50, the nasogastric fluid content remained bilious, with a volume of 250-1000 mL per day, and drooling occurred, with saliva content of up to 850 mL per day. There was a large volume of stool with an amount of 1-4 L per day despite no enteral feeding. The content was mostly greenish, watery and minimally mucous. The stool was sometimes mixed with old blood. Regarding the investigations, the haemoculture from the central line and arterial line revealed no microorganism growth. Stool examination revealed no white blood cells, red blood cells or evidence of suspected parasites. Stool culture revealed positive results for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Imaging modalities were performed. The plain film acute abdomen series revealed decreased bowel gas from the fluid fill loop, and CT of the whole abdomen revealed circumferential wall thickening with mucosal hyperenhancement of the whole intestine, particularly the colon. The drooling from the saliva content could be inhibited with sublingual administration of atropine eye drops. Meropenem 120 mg/kg per day was started for Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Regarding intractable diarrhoea, antidiarrhoeal drugs were administered, including cholestyramine 80 mg/kg per dose every 8 h and octreotide 2 mcg/kg per dose subcutaneously every 12 h for many days without any improvement.
On day 50, the patient developed lower GI bleeding with a one-time amount of 400 mL.
Then, we performed other stool test that revealed negative results for Clostridium difficile toxin, but the serum CMV PCR viral load revealed 5473 copies/mL. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and a colonoscopy showed whitish plaque on erythaematous and breaking mucosa at the mid-distal oesophagus, erythaematous mucosa in the stomach and first part of the duodenum, erythaematous friable mucosa with debris and multiple aphthous ulcers at the terminal ileum, and multiple small shallow ulcers on mild erythaematous mucosa in the caecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid and rectum . CMV viral load of the colonic tissue was > 500000 copies/mL.
The oesophageal, gastric, ileal and colonic biopsies show mixed inflammatory cells, including neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. There were scattered viral-infected cells characterized by enlarged cells with intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions in the oesophagus, ileum and colon. Immunohisto-chemistry for CMV was positive in these cells .