The patient was an 82-year-old female who is a nursing home resident presented to an outside hospital with a two-week history of jaundice that had progressively worsened. She was brought to the emergency department and found to have hyperbilirubinemia with a total bilirubin of 10.7 and a direct bilirubin of 8.7. She was afebrile, and white blood cell count was 8.9. A CT scan of her abdomen and a MRCP were diagnostic for Mirizzi syndrome, revealing large stones compressing the common bile duct (CBD) with proximal dilation. She was transferred to our hospital for a higher level of care with hepato-pancreatico-biliary surgeons. Of note, her past medical history was significant for morbid obesity with a BMI of 42, dementia, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), depression, anemia, tobacco use, and congestive heart failure (CHF). Her surgical history consisted of an appendectomy.
Upon arrival at our hospital, the patient underwent an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with the removal of small stones in the common bile duct, sphincterotomy, and two stent placements with ends terminating in the distal right and left hepatic ducts. However, despite this, there was still tapering in the common hepatic and common bile ducts noted from extrinsic compression from the large stones in the gallbladder and a significant filling defect through the cystic duct . Additionally, the patient developed a fever and leukocytosis and persistently elevated bilirubin, with the most likely cause being an obstruction of the biliary stents causing persistent cholangitis and cholecystitis. The ERCP was repeated, and a third stent was placed. The patient's fever was controlled, and the bilirubin began to trend down.
Once the patient was stabilized, she was taken to the operating room for a cholecystectomy. The procedure began laparoscopically, but dense adhesions in the right upper quadrant involving the liver, gall bladder, omentum, and transverse colon prevented the development of adequate and safe dissection planes, and thus, the procedure was converted to open. The lysis of adhesions continued to be difficult, but once the gallbladder was dissected out, two large, firm masses were palpated within the fundus and the neck of the gallbladder. Given the difficulty with the anatomy to safely do a cholecystectomy with the gallstones en bloc, the decision was made at this time to do a partial cholecystectomy with the removal of the stones. The anterior gallbladder wall was first opened near the fundus, and the gallbladder wall was first dissected off the stone and then the stone from the posterior wall. When removed, the stone measured approximately 3.5 centimeters , and pus and necrotic tissue were found within the gallbladder.
Attention was then turned to the neck of the gallbladder where the anterior wall of the gallbladder was again incised, revealing another a large 4-centimeter stone that was dissected off the posterior wall and removed. It was noted at this time that there was significant arterial bleeding with a loss of approximately 300 cc of blood and the development of mild hypotension and tachycardia. Given the new symptoms and the patient's baseline hemoglobin of 8.4, the patient received two units of red blood cells intraoperatively. The arterial bleeding was controlled with sutures, and attention was turned to the biliary tree upon which a defect in the common hepatic duct and the common bile duct was noted, presumably where the cystic duct previously entered and from the cholecystocholedochal fistula formation. The defect measured approximately three centimeters in length and eight millimeters in width after debridement of necrotic tissue.
Given the fragility of the tissue and the size of CBD defect, it was not closed primarily. However, the patient's hemodynamic instability and overall health status made a biliary-enteric anastomosis a very high-risk operation with significant morbidity and mortality for the patient. Thus, the decision was made to use a dissected, viable gallbladder wall piece to form a free flap to repair the defect in the biliary tree . The mucosal surface of the gall bladder wall was juxtaposed to the lumen of the common ducts and secured in place with a running 5-0 PDS suture. The remnant gallbladder stump was closed and oversewn in a continuous fashion. The area was extensively irrigated given the pus and necrosis that was discovered during the cholecystectomy. One drain was placed within the closed gallbladder remnant and the second one outside the closed gallbladder remnant. The abdomen was then closed in the usual manner.
Immediately, postoperatively, the patient was managed in the intensive care unit given her instability during the operation but was transferred to a step down unit shortly after on postoperative day two. She was observed off of antibiotics with normalization of leukocytosis, remained afebrile and hemodynamically stable, and had continuously down trending bilirubin levels throughout the remainder of her hospital stay. Clinically, she recovered well and was stable for discharge on postoperative day seven with drains remaining in place and to be removed on a follow-up as an outpatient. On a subsequent follow-up, the patient was noted to remain clinically stable and follow-up CT scans revealed no intrahepatic biliary duct dilation, a normal caliber common bile duct, no intraluminal filling defect, a patent stent, and no biliary leak . Laboratory evaluation revealed no leukocytosis and normalization of liver enzymes and total bilirubin levels. Given these results, her surgical drains were removed, but her biliary stents remained in place, and despite multiple contact points and counseling to have a follow-up with the gastroenterologists for ERCP and removal, she was noncompliant and the stents remain in place to date. She however remains stable and healthy during her one follow-up appointment as of this writing and continues to be monitored closely with phone check-ins with no evidence of further hepatobiliary symptoms or complaints of incisional hernias.