A 44-year-old Caucasian woman, who had a 6-year history of BD, presented with two different types of vulvar lesions, papillomatous and ulcerated lesions. Her medical gynecological history was compatible with persistence of long-term genital high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV), including excision of a previous large loop of the transformation zone, followed by a hysterectomy because of recurrent cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3, 10 years ago.
During the 6-year period, she had typical manifestations of BD, such as recurrent panuveitis, vitreous body hemorrhage, occlusive vasculitis, and oral aphthous lesions. Laboratory genetic analyses by PCR were negative for human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27 and positive for HLA-B51 (PCR-SSO typing using Luminex™, Luminex®, Austin, USA).
The patient received various immunosuppressive therapies with prednisone in association with either methotrexate or cyclosporine and infliximab since the initial diagnosis in 2008 . In 2012, treatment with interferon alpha-2a was introduced and stopped in April 2013 after complete clinical remission of the disease. One year later, she had recurrence, and colchicine was introduced.
Clinical assessment revealed a highly remodeled vulva with scar formation following recurrent BD . At the right side, on the labia majora, we observed a slightly indurated and ulcerated nodule, suggestive of a malignant lesion. We also noticed multiple white prominent areas on the labia minora and in the clitoridian region, compatible with a high-grade vulvar neoplasia. Anoscopy under colposcopic vision was normal.
Under general anesthesia, multiple biopsies were performed to exclude an underlying invasive pathology, and the dysplastic lesions were treated by laser vaporization. A partial right vulvectomy of the labia majora containing an indurated nodule was removed in toto with a margin. Anatomopathological analysis showed an ulcerated Malpighian mucosa. Multifocal biopsies of the labia minora and periclitoridian region confirmed the diagnosis of VIN3 with diffuse and strong p16 immunostaining . Fresh material from biopsy specimens (VIN3 areas) was analyzed for detection of HPV by a semi-quantitative real-time PCR assay (Anyplex™ II HPV 28, Seegene®, Seoul, Korea) that detects 19 high-risk types and nine low-risk types. The HPV 33 genotype was identified.
The whole intervention was anamnestically well tolerated by the patient.