This is a case of a 66-year-old Vietnamese man who was admitted to the Oncology Department at Hanoi Medical University Hospital on 3 December 2018 for severe lower back pain. He had no past medical history or family history. On examination, an initial lumbosacral spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed enlarged lytic lesions of sacral segment 1 with ilium, soft tissue invasion, and compression of the nerve roots from L5 to S2 .
At admission, initial laboratory results exhibited only a mild thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 93 × 109/L (normal range, 150–450 × 109/L); his liver and kidney function were normal. Subsequent chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) images showed no mass or abnormalities except a lytic lesion . On the ninth day of admission, a surgical decompression was performed but the tumor could not be totally removed. Pathology results suggested two distinct diseases including CCRCC and parathyroid carcinoma metastasis . Therefore, an immunohistochemistry (IHC) test was undertaken to acquire a confirmed diagnosis. During a period of days, while waiting for the IHC results, 2 weeks after admission, our patient complained of moderate fatigue and his laboratory data indicated thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 78 × 109/L (from 93 × 109/L at baseline) and anemia with a severe hemoglobin level of 69 g/L (from 142 g/L at baseline). The calculated DIC score by the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) was 4 , the non-overt DIC with D-dimer level strongly increased to 4.94 μg/mL (normal range, < 0.5 μg/mL), fibrinogen level was 2.16 g/L, and prolonged prothrombin time was 1.5 seconds. Therefore, a bone marrow biopsy was performed to rule out bone marrow involvement and the result was negative. Four days later, after 20 days of admission, our patient presented with moderate subcutaneous hemorrhage and platelet count of 51 × 109/L. According to ISTH criteria, the diagnosis of DIC was confirmed with score of 5. The laboratory results associated with DIC are summarized in Table . Following the definitive diagnosis of DIC, he received immediate initial chemotherapy despite lack of the IHC results. Paclitaxel (175 mg/m2 over 3 hours) plus carboplatin (AUC = 6) regimen was indicated and repeated every 3 weeks without a transfusion of platelets or other anti-DIC therapies. One day following the first course of treatment, IHC results exhibited that tumor cells were positive for PAX, RCC, and vimentin and negative for CD10, S100, and chromogranin , which supported the diagnosis of bone metastatic CCRCC.
After the first cycle of systemic chemotherapy, the platelet cell count of our patient recovered to the normal range with 168 × 109/L and his subcutaneous bleeding completely disappeared. He tolerated treatment well without severe adverse events during the period of chemotherapy. After four cycles of paclitaxel plus carboplatin, he was evaluated with an abdominal CT scan and he had achieved a stable disease response at that time and 3 months later, according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 system . He has been receiving maintenance therapy with sorafenib (400 mg twice daily) up to now. Recently, 11 months subsequent to the diagnosis of DIC, he was still alive and had a good performance status with sorafenib treatment.