A 13-year-old male, with a history of autism, mild developmental delay, and remote cardiac surgery, presented with the sudden onset of severe headaches and vomiting. He was febrile, but remained hemodynamically stable (e.g., normal Glasgow Coma Score) without a neurological deficit.
WBC and CRP levels were elevated, and the blood cultures were positive for S. viridans. The echocardiogram was normal; there were no vegetations. The brain computed tomography (CT) and CTA (angiogram) showed a right subdural hematoma and a focal right subarachnoid hemorrhage with a large mycotic aneurysm in the right occipital lobe without midline shift. There were also small mycotic aneurysms in the left frontal lobe, right parietal temporal junction, and right supraclinoid internal carotid artery (ICA) distributions .
He was started empirically on intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and vancomycin; this was later revised to ceftriaxone and gentamycin. The next morning, while awaiting right occipital aneurysm surgery, he woke up with a sudden recurrent headache. The right pupil became dilated and fixed; immediately, intubation with hyperventilation and hyperosmolar therapy was instituted. The brain CT showed a large right occipital, parietal, and posterior temporal lobe hemorrhage with uncal herniation . He underwent an emergent right craniotomy for the evacuation of the subdural/intraparenchymal hematoma and resection of the aneurysm that had rebled.
After 48 h, the repeat CT/CTA showed no new hemorrhage or aneurysm formation; the largest aneurysm in the right occipital lobe was no longer evident, and there was no evidence of significant brain edema or midline shift. He was extubated on postoperative day 3 and recovered to baseline neurological function.
Two weeks later, however, the follow-up CTA demonstrated enlargement of the left frontal aneurysms and a new right frontal aneurysm . Blood cultures were negative, and the repeat echocardiograms were normal. He electively underwent a left frontal craniotomy for resection of the aneurysm . Pathologically, the aneurysmal wall was markedly inflamed and attenuated, indicating the heightened potential for imminent rupture.
One week later, the follow-up CTA demonstrated an increase in the size of the right deep frontal aneurysm (e.g., 2–4 mm), which was partly thrombosed, plus a small area of surrounding edema. The CTA one week after that confirmed further growth of the right frontal aneurysm to 6 mm, but no changes in the 4 mm aneurysm in the right parietal temporal junction or in the 2 mm focal bulge/nipple on the lateral wall of right supraclinoid ICA . A formal angiogram showed both middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysms had a reasonable morphology for clipping. Therefore, the patient underwent a third craniotomy for trapping and excising both MCA aneurysms. The patient did very well after all surgeries and had no focal residual neurological deficits. Two months later, the CTA confirmed no further growth of the 2 mm focal bulge on the right supraclinoid carotid artery.