An 83-year-old male with a history of CSDH, previously treated with surgical drainage twice, presented with transient right hemiparesis. Head computed tomography showed the expansion of the left CSDH over 2 years [ and ]. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed multiple brain infarctions in the left cortical border zone between the anterior and middle cerebral arteries . Subsequent MR angiography demonstrated the severe stenosis with an unstable plaque in the bilateral cervical internal carotid artery (ICA) (85% in the left, North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial method), to which the brain infarctions were attributed [-].
The transient right hemiparesis obviously resulted from the acute cerebral infarctions, which first required aspirin administration of 100 mg/day. Meanwhile, as the left CSDH expansion was expected under antiplatelet therapy, surgical drainage of the CSDH was concurrently performed. Furthermore, to avoid hematoma recurrence after upcoming carotid artery stenting (CAS) with long-term antiplatelet therapies, we conducted the left middle meningeal artery (MMA) embolization with platinum coils and n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) 13 days after the evacuation [-]. Then, 7 days after MMA embolization, the left CAS was successfully performed under dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel [ and ]. Since the right carotid stenosis had been considered asymptomatic, we decided to conservatively observe the patient at that moment.
The patient was discharged with no complications. The left CSDH, though still asymptomatic, gradually expanded in 2 months [ and ]. At the same time, the antiplatelet therapy was reduced to aspirin alone mainly because 2 months had passed since the left CAS, while paying attention to the growing hematoma. However, 2 months later, he presented with the left transient hemiparesis, and MR imaging on admission revealed the occlusion of the right ICA [ and ]. The emergency right CAS was required [-]. The symptom gradually improved and he was discharged with a modified Rankin scale score of 3. The left CSDH remained stable in size and also asymptomatic without any further treatment.