The patient was a 62-year-old Asian male construction worker who worked in a dusty environment. Debris made up of cement hit his left eye during work on the 22nd of November 2014. He experienced intense, sharp, and constant pain. Blurred vision, red eye and foreign body sensation were the main clinical manifestations. Photophobia, swelling and watery discharge were also noted. He was referred to our hospital from a local medical clinic 4 days after the incident. His integumentary system was intact without signs of fungal infection. According to the patient’s statement, he had hypertension and diabetes mellitus under medical control for years. He was not a user of contact lenses. The patient claimed that he had a fungal keratitis in his left eye 10 years ago after trauma. Natamycin was used for more than 3 months during that episode.
The ocular examination showed his visual acuity to be 20/40 OD and 20/400 OS. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 15 mmHg OD and 15 mmHg OS. There was a 3×3 mm2 epithelial defect with stromal infiltration on the inferior medial area of the left cornea . The corneal ulcer was found with feathery margin and Descemet’s membrane folding. Ring infiltration was also present. Few fine pigmentary keratic precipitate (KP) and flare were found behind the area of cornea ulcer. The anterior chamber was deep and clear without hypopyon. There was mild nuclear sclerosis of cataract. The vitreous was clear without signs of endophthalmitis. Corneal scraping was done for smear and culture. Under the direct microscopic examination with lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) wet mount preparation, yeast was present. Repeated cultivations were done on 5 % sheep blood, chocolate, anaerobic blood agar, inhibitory mold agar (IMA), IMA supplemented with chloramphenicol and gentamicin (ICG) agar, and thioglycollate medium. LPCB mount revealed pigmented septate hyphae. Dislodging oval conidia with dark attachment scars characteristic of Cladosporium sp. were seen on microscope. Initially the patient was prescribed with natamycin (5 %, QID, Alcon Inc. Texas, USA) and amphotericin B (1mg/mL, Q2H, BMS New York City, U.S. ) for yeast infection and levofloxacin (0.5 %, Q2H, Santen Inc. Japan) for possible concomitant bacterial infection. Topical fluconazole (2mg/mL, Q2H, Pfizer Inc., New York City, U.S.) and oral ketoconazole (200mg/tab, BID, Swiss Co., Taiwan) were then added to the prescription after culture results. Due to the persistent infection, the anti-fungal agent was shifted to voriconazole via topical (1mg/mL, Q2H, Pfizer Inc. New York City, U.S.) and oral routes (200 mg/tab, BID Pfizer Inc. New York City, U.S.) on the 6th day of admission. For better drug penetration, soaking was done on the area of the corneal ulcer with voriconazole for 3 min everyday under local anesthesia. It is then followed by bullous irrigation of Balance Salts Solution (Alcon Inc. Texus, USA) to prevent medicamentosa. The symptoms improved 10 days after admission and the patient was discharged 14 days later. The patient was discharged with topical voriconazole (1mg/mL, QID, Pfizer Inc. New York City, U.S.) for 2 weeks to prevent reactivation. 3 months post-treatment visual acuity was 20/30 OD and 20/40 OS. The IOP was 14 mmHg OD and 14 mmHg OS. Slit lamp biomicroscopy of the left eye showed corneal opacity with minimal infiltration .