A 78-year-old male presented with decreased visual acuity in the right eye. The patient had undergone an uncomplicated right cataract surgery performed with phacoemulsification 5 years earlier at another hospital, as well as panretinal photocoagulation for diabetic retinopathy. The patient had no medical history other than diabetes mellitus. At the initial examination, his corrected vision was 0.15 in the right eye and 0.9 in the left eye, and his intraocular pressure measured using a noncontact tonometer was 7 mm Hg in the right eye and 5 mm Hg in the left eye. The refractive power was −1.50 Dcyl Axis 90 in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed no anterior segment inflammation or neovascularization in the iris; other ocular findings were unremarkable. Fundus examination showed macular hemorrhage in the right eye, and fluorescein angiography (FAG) identified macular leakage in early and late phases (shown in ). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed a disruption in the arrangement of the photoreceptor layer (shown in ). The patient was diagnosed with AMD and administered intravitreal injection of ranibizumab in the right eye. One day postoperatively, no abnormalities were observed in the anterior segment examination. However, 1 week later, his corrected vision decreased to 0.08 in the right eye and 0.8 in the left, and his intraocular pressure measured using a noncontact tonometer was 5 and 6 mm Hg in the right and left eyes, respectively. The refractive power was not measured in the right eye. A slit-lamp examination of the right eye revealed normal IOL positioning but showed residual cataract cortical fragments, numerous inflammatory cells, and liquid retention between the lens and the posterior capsule. Anterior OCT revealed an adhesion between the capsulorhexis margin and the anterior surface of the IOL, based on which the patient was diagnosed with capsular block syndrome (shown in ). Nd:YAG laser capsulotomy was performed in the right eye. One week later, the patient’s uncorrected vision improved to 0.15, and his intraocular pressure measured 10 mm Hg. Subsequent slit-lamp examination confirmed the loss of the previously observed cortical fragments and inflammatory cells within the lens capsule.