An 89-year-old man was brought to our hospital with right-sided abdominal pain and signs of hypoglycemia. He had a history of hypertension, interstitial pneumonia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and dementia. He had undergone mesh plug hernioplasty for a right-sided inguinal hernia 14 years ago. On physical examination, no redness or swelling was observed in the groin region. Laboratory tests showed no evidence of elevated inflammatory markers. Initially, appendiceal abscess formation due to perforation of the appendix was suspected; however, computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a peri-appendicular abscess . Thus, upon admission, we administered empiric cefalexin orally. It was impossible to visualize the abscess on ultrasound examination due to acoustic shadows caused by the inguinal mesh, indicating that the mesh and abscess were close to each other. As a result, mesh infection was suspected; however, it was difficult to distinguish between abscess formation and perforation of the appendix. Upon evaluation of the pre-operative CT, our radiologist revealed that the findings on the central portion of the appendix were suggestive of phlegmonous appendicitis and not severe appendicitis that can cause perforation. The radiologist also indicated that an abscess was formed in the plug mesh. In comparison to CT findings from 6 years ago , the latest CT showed fluid collected around the mesh and an enhanced peripheral halo. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with mesh infection, as opposed to perforation of the appendix. On day 3 of admission, his white blood cell count and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels increased to 38,000/µl, and 28 mg/dl, respectively. A full-body CT was repeated and showed no apparent source of infection except for the peri-appendiceal abscess. In addition, urinalysis did not reveal pyuria; echocardiography screening was negative for endocarditis. Hence, empiric treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam (TAZ/PIPC) was initiated, and CT-guided drainage was attempted but was unsuccessful. On the fifth day of admission, Escherichia coli (E. coli) was detected in both sets of blood cultures. Although he was taking hypoglycemic agents, including a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor and sulfonylurea, his blood report revealed HbA1c 7.0 mmol/mol. While investigating interstitial pneumonia, partial pressure of oxygen at rest was found to be 73 mmHg at room air, and CT showed a diffuse honeycombing pattern throughout both lung fields. According to the Japanese classification, this is categorized as mild to moderate interstitial pneumonia. Therefore, general anesthesia and surgery were considered high-risk interventions in our case. Hence, we continued conservative management with antibiotics. On day 7 of admission, the patient began complaining of back pain radiating to the lower limbs; CT taken on day 10 demonstrated a peri-appendicular abscess. This was visualized as a soft tissue shadow in front of the vertebral body, extending from the 8th/9th thoracic intervertebral space . Thoracic discitis, as a result of bacteremia due to the mesh abscess, was suspected. Accordingly, we decided to perform surgical drainage of the mesh abscess.
Laparotomy with a midline incision was performed under general anesthesia. A single mass was observed, containing the underlay mesh (plug) and the appendix. Pus oozed out, and a sample was obtained for bacterial culture. The plug mesh encompassed the appendix; thus, removal of the plug and an appendectomy were indicated. An on-lay mesh was tightly adhered to the internal oblique muscle. The operative time was 78 min, and the volume of blood loss was 10 ml. The pus culture revealed growth of Citrobacter freundii and Bacteroides caccae, both indigenous bacteria found in the human intestinal tract. Macroscopic examination showed the plug mesh and appendix to have formed into a single mass . Histologically, the appendiceal mucosa was relatively normal; however, thickened fibrotic changes were observed on the serosal side . Furthermore, hemosiderin was deposited on the mesenteric surface, suggesting chronic inflammatory changes within the abdominal cavity. These findings suggest that the patient suffered from chronic secondary appendicitis accompanied with fibrotic thickening and peritonitis. Blood culture taken on the 13th day after surgery was negative for bacteremia. TAZ/PIPC was administered for 9 days, followed by sulbactam sodium/ampicillin sodium (SBT/ABPC) for 38 days. Later, minocycline was also incorporated into the treatment plan. The complication of discitis indicates a long-term course of antibiotics, requiring at least 6 weeks. It is to be noted that the inguinal hernia had not recurred, and the patient was transferred to the orthopedic ward on the 30th day for continued treatment. On day 50 post-surgery, the patient’s back pain was alleviated; however, CT performed on day 60 showed the findings of discitis to be unchanged. Eventually, a repeat CT taken on day 79 showed some resolution of discitis. Unfortunately, our patient died on the 80th day post-surgery due to aspiration pneumonia.