The patient was a 69-year-old male, referred to our hospital with a right lobe thyroid mass and mediastinal mass. He had no family history of thyroid cancer or radiation exposure. His anamnesis revealed stroke, angina pectoris, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. Physical examination revealed no mass in the neck. Cervical ultrasonography revealed a 12-mm hypoechoic nodule with internal calcification in the right lobe of the thyroid and a 40-mm hypoechoic mass in the superior mediastinum. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed an 11-mm solid tumor with internal calcification in the right thyroid lobe and a 40-mm solid tumor with contrast enhancement in the superior mediastinum, without evidence of distant metastasis . Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology of the right thyroid lobe nodule showed loose cohesiveness to isolated tumor cells with varying nuclear sizes, coarse granular chromatin with focal distribution, and relatively abundant cytoplasm. Amyloid-like substances were observed in the background, leading to the diagnosis of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Due to the difficulty in performing ultrasound-guided biopsy, the mediastinal tumor could not undergo cytological analysis. Blood tests showed elevated calcitonin (1036 pg/mL, normal: < 5.15 pg/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (48.2 ng/mL, normal: 0.6–3.8 ng/mL). thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (FT3), free thyroxine (FT4), thyroglobulin, and thyroglobulin antibodies were within normal limits. Due to the cytological results and elevated calcitonin and CEA, the diagnosis of MTC was made. The mediastinal tumor was suspected to be either ectopic thyroid tissue or lymph node metastasis from MTC. Thus, surgical plan included intraoperative rapid diagnosis of the mediastinal tumor to determine the extent of thyroidectomy. Germline RET mutations were not detected.
The patient initially underwent right lobe thyroidectomy with central node dissection, but intraoperative biopsy of the upper mediastinal mass confirmed the presence of malignancy. Therefore, total thyroidectomy and open mediastinal tumor resection were performed.
Macroscopically, a 9 × 6 × 6 mm partially indistinct grayish-white tumor was identified in the right thyroid lobe . The mediastinal tumor measured 45 × 24 × 21 mm and appeared yellowish-white to grayish-white in color. Microscopically, the right lobe thyroid mass and peritracheal lymph node metastasis had two coexisting components. One component showed features of MTC, such as nests of short spindle-shaped or polygonal cells with nuclear atypia and eosinophilic granular cytoplasm with amyloid deposition in the background. The other component resembled follicular structures composed of glandular epithelial cells with swollen nuclei and distinct nucleoli. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the MTC component was positive for calcitonin and CEA and negative for thyroglobulin, whereas the follicular component was positive for thyroglobulin and negative for calcitonin and CEA . A final diagnosis of MMFCC was made. The mediastinal lymph node showed only medullary carcinoma components.
Postoperatively, thyroglobulin levels remained below the measurable sensitivity, whereas calcitonin and CEA levels remained elevated. At 11 months postoperatively, CT scans revealed enlargement of the right cervical and upper mediastinal lymph nodes . FNA cytology of the right cervical lymph node confirmed metastasis of the MTC. The Oncomine Dx Target Test system, a gene panel test using a next-generation sequencer, of mediastinal lymph node metastasis was positive for RET somatic mutation (M918T). At 15 months postoperatively, treatment with selpercatinib at a dose of 320 mg/day was initiated. However, after 5 days, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) increased (grade 3, Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0) was observed, which led to temporary discontinuation and subsequent resumption at a reduced dose of 160 mg/day. Because of the recurrence of AST increased (grade3) and development of arthralgia (grade1), the dose was further reduced to 80 mg/day, and prednisolone at 60 mg/day was initiated to consider the possibility of hypersensitivity reaction. After 18 weeks of treatment, the patient developed bacterial pneumonia and discontinued selpercatinib for 4 weeks, after which it was resumed . At 9 weeks after initiation, both the cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes showed a reduction in size, indicating a partial response, which was maintained at 33 weeks after initiation .