In March 1984, a 3-year old girl was admitted to Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) for suspected RFS. She had been born at 35-weeks gestation and spent the first 2 weeks of life in hospital because of jaundice and recurrent hypoglycaemia. Investigations at the time included urine amino acid concentrations, which were considered consistent with a diagnosis of Hartnup disease, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by defective neutral amino acid re-uptake in the proximal tubule and which can be associated with a skin rash and neurological problems . Over the next 2 years, she was noted to have delayed gross motor milestones, especially walking, thought to be secondary to the disorder and avoidance of sunlight was recommended and treatment with nicotinamide commenced. She developed bowing of her legs, which did not improve with cholecalciferol supplementation. At this point, her paediatrician suspected a diagnosis of RFS, rather than Hartnup disorder, commenced treatment with 1,25-OH cholecalciferol and referred her for further investigations. There was no family history of renal disease.
On examination, she had genu varum and hepatomegaly, but no other dysmorphic findings. Her height was well below and weight on the 3rd percentile. Laboratory investigations revealed a metabolic acidosis, hypophosphataemia and markedly raised alkaline phosphatase (ALP: 2323 IU/l, normal for age < 280) with generalized aminoaciduria, glycosuria and tubular proteinuria, consistent with RFS. Leukocyte cystine content was normal and slit lamp examination did not show corneal cystine crystals, excluding a diagnosis of cystinosis, the most common cause of RFS in childhood. Radiological examination showed healing rickets with normal appearance of liver and kidneys on ultrasound. A diagnosis of autosomal recessive RFS was made and she received treatment with 1-OH cholecalciferol, phosphate, calcium and bicarbonate supplementation with clinical improvement of her rickets and good catch-up growth. Fasting glucose levels were repeatedly low. She was admitted again age 4 years for further investigations. A liver biopsy was normal, with no evidence for a glycogen storage disorder, tyrosinaemia or Wilson disease. A fructose–free diet had no effect, excluding fructose intolerance. Over the following years she was admitted multiple times for investigations, including 2 kidney biopsies (age 4 and 16 years), a bone marrow aspirate and serial measurements of glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Despite only moderately decreased GFR (47 ml/min/1.73m2), a DMSA scan of the kidneys age 5 years showed essentially no accumulation of tracer in the kidneys . A mild degree of nephrocalcinosis was noted first age 9 years, which remained stable thereafter.
She was transferred to adult services age 17 years with ongoing supplementation with 1-OH cholecalciferol, calcium, phosphate and bicarbonate. Another kidney biopsy was performed age 25 years, which now showed abnormal mitochondria . She reported episodes of fainting, especially if fasting for prolonged periods of time and consequently maintained a strictly regular dietary intake.
The patient had a first child age 34 years with normal pregnancy and postnatal examinations. She was counseled that due to the presumed autosomal recessive inheritance of her disorder, recurrence of the disease in her children would be unlikely.
Her second child was born at 30-weeks gestation with a weight of 1.53 kg after an uncomplicated pregnancy. He was noted to have recurrent hypoglycaemia in the neonatal period and transferred to GOSH. Investigations revealed hyperinsulinism, as well as highly raised ALP (2730 IU/l), glycosuria, tubular proteinuria, hypercalciuria and renal phosphate wasting, consistent with RFS. A screen of genes involved in hyperinsulinism revealed a heterozygous mutation c.187C > T; p.Arg63Trp in HNF4A, encoding Hepatocyte Nuclear factor 4A. The mutation was subsequently also confirmed in the mother. At last follow-up in December 2015 she remained clinically stable with ongoing biochemical features of RFS. Continuous glucose monitoring revealed prolonged overnight hypoglycaemia and post-prandial hyperglycaemia.