A 59-year-old Sri Lankan woman, recipient of an ABO matched, living donor kidney transplant performed in 1997, presented with a 3-day history of fever, a fall, mild headache, arthralgia, myalgia, abdominal pain, and progressive drowsiness. She was on tenofovir, azathioprine 75 mg daily, and prednisolone 5 mg daily. She denied respiratory, bowel, or urinary symptoms. We did not find a contact history of fever. She did not have any seizures during the illness. Her primary renal disease was membranous glomerulopathy diagnosed in 1989. She had diabetes and developed end-stage disease in 1996 and was commenced on hemodialysis. She received a transplant in 1997 and enjoyed an uncomplicated post-transplant period with creatinine values between 84 and 104 umol/L (50–110), and an excellent quality of life.
In 2013, she presented with progressive abdominal distension due to ascites and with stigmata of liver disease and was diagnosed as having cirrhosis. She was diagnosed as having hepatitis B infection, where the viral load was in the order of log 9, and renal function was within normal range. Serology for hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Therapy was initiated with lamivudine, but an inadequate response led to replacement with tenofovir 330 mg daily, which brought down the viral loads to order of log 2. She was very compliant in all her medications and did not have major adverse effects to any of her medications.
On examination she was drowsy, with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 12/15, and had flapping tremors. She was pale, anicteric, and was well hydrated. No skin rashes, cutaneous bleeding, or neck stiffness was noted. Her abdomen was soft on examination and tenderness noted in right iliac fossa overlying the graft. Her respiratory system and cardiovascular system examinations were clinically normal. Optic fundi were normal except for background diabetic retinopathy. Capillary blood sugar on admission was 7.7 mmol/L. Her initial investigations revealed pancytopenia on day 3 of the illness with hemoglobin (Hb) of 78 g/L (120–160), white cell count of 3.7 × 109/L (3.5–12), and platelet count of 52 × 109 /L (150–400). Blood picture showed normochromic normocytic red cells with reduced count, mild to moderate rouleaux formation, normal white cell count with hypersegmented and toxic-looking neutrophils. Severe thrombocytopenia was confirmed on the blood picture. We did not find any evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) level on admission was 108 mg/dL (< 6). Urine analysis showed 4–6 pus cells and 2–4 red cells, but no proteinuria. Serum creatinine was raised to 630 umol/L, from a background of 96 umol/L, checked 2 weeks ago on her routine clinic visit. Her serum creatinine phosphokinase level was normal. Urine and blood cultures were negative on day 3 of the illness. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of her brain was normal and a hip X-ray did not show evidence of any fracture. An ultrasound scan of her abdomen showed swollen kidney, with preserved corticomedullary demarcation, raising suspicions of acute renal parenchymal disease. She had no splenomegaly ultrasonically and portal vein diameter was 1.7 cm. She did not have oligo-anuria at that time. She developed metabolic acidosis, and with rising potassium levels, we decided to start renal replacement. Dengue non-structural protein 1 (NS1) antigen (day 2) was positive, but other viral studies such as cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus were negative. Subsequent blood counts revealed progressive decline in platelet and white cell counts. She developed an upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleed on day 6 (Hb, 52 g/L) and was supported with blood. From day 3 onward, of the illness, we empirically treated her with intravenously administered ceftriaxone for a suspected bacterial infection owing to her high CRP. Azathioprine and tenofovir were temporarily withheld due to possible marrow suppression and orally administered steroids doses were increased from 7.5 mg to 30 mg daily. Dengue IgM and IgG on day 6 were positive. Blood and urine cultures were sterile. Free fluid in the hepatorenal pouch was demonstrated on day 6 of the illness where she entered the critical phase. The lowest platelet count recorded was 5 × 109/L. Her conscious level gradually improved and she was fully alert by day 5. She was never oligo-anuric during the period of illness. Upper GI endoscopy revealed portal gastropathy, antral gastritis, and non-bleeding small esophageal varices. We reintroduced tenofovir from day 5 onward. We had already taken her off azathioprine, but pancytopenia persisted. Intravenously administered ceftriaxone 1 g twice daily was continued up to 14 days, until CRP returned to normal. Her fluid management was monitored clinically, rather than according to the National Dengue guidelines, due to acute kidney injury (AKI). She was discharged on day 16 with creatinine normalized, but her liver enzymes and thrombocytopenia took 6 weeks to correct themselves. A review of this patient 12 weeks later revealed normal serum creatinine level and return of her blood counts to baseline. Figure shows the case presentation in a timeline, while Fig. describes the changes in the biochemical parameters. Table describes pre-morbid, the most abnormal and convalescent values of important biochemical tests.