Our case was a 58-year-old African-American HIV-positive male originating from the Caribbean, who received a deceased donor renal transplant for presumed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, with a background of histologically-proven minimal change disease. He was diagnosed with HIV in 1993 and had a stable, normal, CD4 count (> 400 × 106/L) and an undetectable HIV-viral load. His antiretrovirals (ARVs) included lamivudine (3TC), didanosine (ddI) and lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/r). During the pre-transplant workup, he was diagnosed with latent tuberculosis (TB), and received 6 months of isoniazid. His Hepatitis B and C, and Stronglyoides serology, performed 4 years prior to transplant, were negative. At the time of transplant, he received standard induction immunosuppression with basiliximab and methylprednisolone, and maintenance immunosuppression of prednisolone, mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus. His post-transplant course was complicated by delayed graft function in the context of severe tacrolimus toxicity, as a result of a drug-drug interaction with LPV/r. His ARVs were subsequently modified to raltegravir, 3TC and ddI and his graft function improved. His CD4 count remained stable throughout, with an undetectable viral load.
Five months post-transplant, he presented with a two-week history of abdominal pain, anorexia, diarrhea and weight loss. He had an acute kidney injury with a rise in creatinine from baseline of 167 μmol/L (eGFR 38mls/min/1.73m2) to 228 μmol/L (eGFR 26mls/min/1.73m2), which resolved with intravenous fluid resuscitation. Initial investigations were non-diagnostic, with a normal eosinophil count (0.1–0.2 × 109/L), negative serum Cytomegalovirus DNA, and negative blood and stool cultures. Faecal PCR tests for Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, and Clostridium difficile and faecal culture for other bacterial pathogens were all negative, as were three samples for faecal microscopy for larvae and faecal helminth culture. Serum Strongyloides antibody testing was also negative, with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ratio of 0.74 (ratio < 0.8 negative). HTLV-1/2 serology was negative.
The patient continued to have watery diarrhea. A gastroscopy was performed demonstrating erosive duodenitis with active chronic inflammation. As shown in Fig. , there were frequent parasites and larvae within duodenal crypts and at the mucosal surface. The morphology of the parasites confirmed the diagnosis of strongyloidiasis; the patient was commenced on ivermectin 200 mg orally.
Despite anti-helminthic therapy, he developed increasing dyspnoea. A computerised tomography (CT) of his chest demonstrated infiltration of the right lower lobe. A bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage were non-diagnostic. Subsequently, a CT-guided biopsy of the affected area demonstrated inflammatory cells and a single helminth, consistent with Strongyloides hyperinfection, as shown in Fig. .
He continued ivermectin for Strongyloides hyperinfection. He exhibited deconditioning and required a period of total parenteral nutrition. Several weeks after completing treatment with ivermectin our patient began to slowly improve, with the resolution of the abdominal pain and diarrhoea. His repeat chest x-ray showed no consolidation. His oral intake increased, and he was eventually able to satisfactorily maintain bodyweight without supplemental feeding. He was subsequently discharged after a prolonged hospital admission of 54 days.