A 2-year-old female child was referred to our institute by a local hospital with an alleged history of fall on the buttocks while playing at home 12 days previously. She landed hard directly on a tapestry needle which was lying unattended on a cot, resulting in the needle penetrating the left buttock. At the local hospital, the child was given first aid care, tetanus prophylaxis, and broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics after admission. The needle was apparently deeply embedded in the gluteal muscles, and the end of the needle was not visible or palpable. 1 week later, they attempted surgical retrieval of the needle using a posterior undefined approach through the left buttock. However, with every attempt to grab the eye of the needle, the needle was inadvertently pushed further anteriorly, and the surgeon eventually abandoned the procedure. The child was referred to our institute 5 days later by the primary surgical team.
On presentation, the child complained of dull, aching pain in the left buttock region and the left groin region; tenderness could be elicited at the entry site of the needle. The pain was significant as the child avoided sitting or standing/walking due to the pain and preferred to lie still in the bed; hip range of motion was normal, and there was no distal neurovascular deficit. She had no history of fever, urinary, or bowel disturbances. An oblique scar, 4 cm in length, indicative of the previous surgery was seen in the left buttock region . Fresh radiographs of the pelvis including an antero-posterior view, Judet views, pelvis inlet, and outlet views were obtained to ascertain the current position of the needle. The needle was located well within the true pelvic cavity, lying just medial to the left obturator foramen . Computerized tomogram images with three-dimensional reconstruction were obtained to accurately locate the needle position inside the true pelvis .
We decided to operate and retrieve the needle from the pelvis due to 3 reasons. First, the needle was in close proximity to the urinary bladder and obturator neurovascular bundle, and chances of further migration of the needle could not be ruled out completely [, ]. For the same reason, minimally invasive computed tomography (CT)-guided removal of needle also was not considered safe by the radiologist. Second, the needle could act as a focus of infection leading to abscess formation and/or sepsis [, ]. Furthermore, the embedded needle could later present as a chronic source of pain and discomfort for the patient [, , , , ].
We used the modified Stoppa’s approach for the surgical retrieval of the impaled needle [, ]. A Foley’s catheter was inserted before surgery to improve the visualization. The patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent table. The entire left lower limb and the lower abdomen were aseptically draped for the surgery, and the left hip was flexed by placing a sandbag beneath the left knee to relax the iliopsoas and abdominal muscles and also the external iliac/femoral neurovascular bundle. A transverse, linear skin incision of around 8 cm was made 2 cm proximal to the pubic symphysis, just short of the external inguinal ring, and the incision was deepened to the abdominal fascia. The rectus fascia was incised transversely, and the exposed rectus abdominis muscle was split along the linea alba to approach the internal aspect of the pelvis. We then split the transversalis fascia to enter the potential space of Retzius .
The needle was located under fluoroscopic guidance in antero-posterior, inlet, and outlet views . It was found to be embedded within the substance of the obturatorinternus muscle, medial to the left obturator foramen with the sharp end of the needle lying around 2 cm lateral to the symphysis and around 1 cm inferior to the superior margin of the superior pubic ramus.
A small incision was given over the fascia of the obturatorinternus muscle over the needle; the needle was gripped firmly in the middle part using a needle holder forceps and not at its tip to prevent it from retreating back along the preformed tract . The needle was gently extracted upward, and it came out without much difficulty. The tapestry needle was carefully examined to check if it was extracted in its entirety. It was noted that the needle was 3.6 cm in length and there was a significant amount of corrosion on it which theoretically increases the risk of anaerobic infections . A thorough wash with 4L of normal saline was given, and the wound was closed in layers over a suction drain. Post-operatively, the child was started on triple intravenous antibiotics (cefuroxime, amikacin, and clindamycin) for 5 days. No signs of wound infection were noted, and the sutures were removed 12 days after surgery. Rest of the post-operative period was uneventful.