A 65-year-old man with a history of squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue with metastasis to the right axillary lymph node treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel was evaluated for decreased visual acuity in both eyes. The dose of carboplatin was 300 mg/mevery four weeks and the dose of paclitaxel was 135 mg/mevery three weeks for a total of three doses. The progressive decline in vision began around four days after his fifth round of carboplatin therapy. The last dose of paclitaxel had been received 11 weeks before the changes in his vision. Visual acuity was 20/70 in the right eye and no light perception in the left eye. On dilated fundus examination, disc edema was visible in both eyes with more severity in the left eye, flame-shape hemorrhages were observed around the optic nerve head in both eyes and cotton wool spots around the left optic nerve head [Figure 1]. Dilation of retinal vessels around the optic nerve head was present. Choroid examination was normal. There were no signs of retinitis, retinal vasculitis, metastasis to the choroid, and paraneoplastic syndromes, including leopard pattern or bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation. Opening pressure on lumbar puncture (LP) was normal. Additionally, LP was negative for malignant cells, but it was positive for primary inflammatory markers (high protein, albumin, and IgG index). The brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated enhancement of the bilateral optic nerve sheaths [Figure 2]. Complete work-up was negative for syphilis, Lyme disease, bartonella, sarcoidosis, toxoplasmosis, and tuberculosis. All inflammatory markers including anti-neuromyelitis optica (NMO) antibody, anti-myelin oligodandrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody, antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-strand deoxyribonucleic (dsDNA) antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) were negative; however, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP) were 41 mm/h and 28 mg/L respectively. Left temporal artery biopsy was negative. A diagnosis of bilateral carboplatin-induced optic neuropathy was made and treatment was started with the administration of 1000 mg methylprednisolone infusion daily for five days. On the sixth day, since there was no improvement in his left eye vision, he received an intravitreal triamcinolone injection and was started on systemic prednisone of 50 mg daily. Upon discharge from hospital five days after intravitreal injection, there was no improvement in his left eye vision; the right eye was stable.