An 18 year old virgin girl was referred to clinic of gynecology in a university tertiary hospital with constant low grade lower abdominal pain from 2 weeks ago. Dysmenorrhea, gastrointestinal, or urinary tract symptoms was negative. She had regular menstrual cycles and her body mass index was 26.6. Because of abdominal obesity, we couldn't touch any masses in abdominal exam.
Since she was virgin, vaginal exam was refused and in rectal exam a large cystic mass with mild tenderness in the right side of pelvis was palpable. Abdominopelvic ultrasonography revealed 14×10 cm complex multiseptate cystic mass containing solid components in the right ovary and a little free fluid in the cul-de-sac. Right ovary and uterus were normal. These data were confirmed in abdominopelvic spiral CT scan with and without contrast.
Complete laboratory tests including tumor markers requested. All laboratory tests were normal except Lactate dehydrogenase that was 253 (normal upper limit: 280 u/l). In tumor marker panel, alpha fetoprotein, β-HCG, carcinoemberionic antigen (CEA) were in normal range. The serum concentrations of CA-125 and cancer antigen 19-9 were 6484 IU/Ml and 1309 IU/Ml (reference range 35 IU/Ml). Human Epididymis protein 4 (HE4) was 50.7 and Risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm (ROMA) was 11%. CA-125 and CA 19-9 were measured by using appropriate chemiluminescent immunoassay kits (ROSHE Company, ELECSYS 2010 devices).
Although HE4 and ROMA were in low risk for malignancy, because of very high levels of other tumor markers, ovarian malignancies were in the top of the differential diagnosis yet and after achieving written consent about cancer surgery, laparotomy with midline incision was done. A unilateral 14×10 cm cystic mass with very fine adhesions of cyst on the right side of corpus of uteri was detected. There was no free fluid or seeding in peritoneal cavity and cul-de-sac was not obliterated.
Abdominal organs had normal view but the omentum was covered with many diffuse small endometriotic foci (black puckered lesions). In spite of chocolate-like content of the cyst and almost certain diagnosis of endometriosis frozen section confirmed the diagnosis. Then ovarian cystectomy was done and the biopsy from peritoneum was taken. Histological examination approved the endometriosis of omentum and endometrioma. The serum level of the CA-125 and CA19-9 decreased rapidly post operation.
Ethical consideration
The informed consent for reporting of the case was obtained from the patient.