A 58-year-old woman presented with right ischaemic stroke. On arrival at the emergency room, the stroke code was not activated because the time of evolution was longer than 48 h. Computed tomography (CT) angiography and cranial CT revealed a total anterior circulation infarction, with an atherothrombotic profile due to previous stent occlusion. Her clinical history included hypertension, dyslipidaemia, moderate ischaemic heart disease, with dyspnoea graded as II–III/IV according to the New York Heart Association classification, a lateral non-ST elevation myocardial infarction, and an episode of transient ischaemic attack in 2015. The cranial CT was repeated after 7 and 10 days, showing no significant changes, compared with the last control. At 14 days, cranial magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed, with similar findings to the initial CT. CMR revealed subacute ischaemic lesions in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery, suggestive of deep border infarcts secondary to ipsilateral carotid stenosis (. The patient was hospitalized and followed-up for the study. She had left hemiplegia and intelligible dysarthria, scoring 10 on the National Institute of Health Stroke Score (NIHSS). The patient scored 4 in the modified Rankin Scale (mRS), and 35 points in the Barthel Index. During hospitalization, the patient received early intensive rehabilitation treatment.
After 4 days of treatment, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for SARS-CoV-2 was positive, due to nosocomial contact. The patient developed asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection, being haemodynamically stable, afebrile and without respiratory symptoms. She was subsequently moved to the COVID-19 area in the hospital, where the rehabilitative treatment was maintained.
Subsequent monitoring was carried out between the rehabilitation, neurology and internal medicine departments. Despite clinical improvement during hospitalization, the patient developed early post-stroke spasticity (. Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS) was grade II in her left elbow and wrist flexors, and in the left gastrocnemius. The patient experienced pain on passive mobilization, scoring 8 points in the visual analogue scale (VAS) and 0.72 points in the European Quality of Life-5 Dimensions (EQ-5D)-5L questionnaire.
She was then injected with 330 units (U) IncoA (Xeomin®) under ultrasound guidance in the following muscles: biceps brachii (100 U, 2 sites 50 U); brachialis (50 U), flexor carpi radialis (40 U), flexor carpi ulnaris (40 U) and left gastrocnemius (100 U, 60 U medial plus 40 U lateral). The administration of IncoA was performed according to the standard indications, with adequate personal protective equipment (PPE) and aseptic protocols. PPE was used by the 2 doctors who injected IncoA, and operated the ultrasound equipment (screen, probe and probe cable). There were no complications after the procedure.
Two weeks later there was an improvement in strength and spasticity, MAS was graded I in the left elbow and wrist flexors, and II in the left gastrocnemius. VAS pain score was 3 points. After several positive PCR tests for SARS-CoV-2 infection and 20 days of isolation, a serology test detected immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. Consequently, the patient was discharged from hospital and continued the rehabilitative treatment on an outpatient basis. At the time of hospital discharge, the NIHSS score was 4 points. After 4 weeks, the patient was re-evaluated in consultation. The MAS was graded I in the elbow flexors, 0 in the wrist flexors, and I+ in the left gastrocnemius. The VAS pain score was 4 points. Disability and functional measures included an mRS of 4 and Barthel Index of 45 points. The EQ-5D-5L questionnaire score was 0.924 points. At the 12-week follow-up visit, the patient reported improvement at a global level, together with increasing independence and functionality (Barthel Index 65 points). Furthermore, her motor balance was almost normal in the left hemi body, and spasticity remained stable at all levels. The MAS was graded I+ in the elbow flexors, and I+ in the gastrocnemius.