A 70-year-old male patient who had been previously diagnosed with esophageal cancer revisited our hospital for follow-up. The patient had been diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by esophagoscopic biopsy 5 years ago, followed by radical radiotherapy and four cycles of combination chemotherapy. Two years ago, he visited our hospital for follow-up, and no tumor recurrence or metastasis was found. This time, the patient complained of slight swallowing discomfort and had no other symptoms.
The patient's current renal pelvic tumor was incidentally discovered on computed tomography (CT) examination after hospitalization and had no clinical manifestations.
The patient had been diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by esophagoscopic biopsy 5 years ago, followed by radical radiotherapy and four cycles of combination chemotherapy. Two years ago, he visited our hospital for follow-up, and no tumor recurrence or metastasis was found.
He has a history of radiotherapy for esophageal cancer.
Physical examination showed no positive signs.
In the male tumor markers combination (14 items), CA724 serum level increased to 23.45 IU/mL (normal range, 0-6 IU/mL), and all other markers were within the normal range.
The upper alimentary tract double-contrast barium examination showed that the wall of the upper esophagus was slightly rigid, which was considered to be a change after chemoradiotherapy. Esophagoscopy showed esophageal scarring. Abdominal enhanced CT scan showed soft tissue masses in the left renal pelvis and the beginning of the left ureter, with uniform density and moderate enhancement . The whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed a significant increase in fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake of this approximately 67 mm × 27 mm soft tissue mass , and the maximum standardized uptake value of routine and delayed imaging after 1.5 h was about 11.7 and 16.5, respectively. The PET/CT examination showed no abnormal FDG uptake in the esophageal wall.