A 39-year-old woman was referred to Firoozgar General Hospital15 days after having a head trauma in a car accident. Her initial symptom was occasional headaches which within 36 hours were followed by a thunderclap headache along with left side hemiparesis, diplopia and lethargy. The brain computed tomography (CT) scan at previous center revealed hypodensity in pons and cerebellum. Her history and medical findings were highly suggestive of right vertebral artery dissection, and she was actually referred to our center as a hospital due to the availability of cerebral artery angiography. On admission day in our center, she was lethargic and disoriented and her GCS was 9. Neurologic examination revealed conjugate gaze palsy to the left and impaired adduction in the left eye. Vertical eye movements were normal. Her muscle forces were 2/5 and 3/5 in the left upper and lower extremities, respectively. Her NIHSS score (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale) was 22 at the time of admission.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed hypersignality in paramedian of pons, vermis, right and left hemispheres of the cerebellum . She went on aspirin 80 mg daily, clopidogrel 75 mg twice daily and unfractionated heparin (UFH) 5000 units twice daily. Transcranial duplex sonography showed absent flow in right VA with normal flow velocity and direction in left VA, basilar artery, and bilateral carotid arteries.
Cerebral catheter angiography was done for her on the third day of admission. The left VA originated from aortic arch between the left subclavian artery and left CCA . Left VA prevertebral length was 35.6 mm and its diameter at origin was 5.5 mm. The right vertebral artery was seen arising from the right common carotid artery, a rare variation, and there was dissection in V2 part and sudden tapering at V4 part because of occlusion of the lumen . The length of the prevertebral part of right VA was 19.9 mm, and its diameter at the origin was 3.6 mm.
Other arteries including CCAs, internal and external carotid arteries, middle cerebral arteries, anterior cerebral arteries and posterior cerebral arteries were normal. After angiography, asprin and clopidogrel were discontinued UFH 1000 units per hour were infused intravenously. Control CT after angiography revealed no intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). The patient was discharged after 26 days with rivaroxaban 20 mg/daily, captopril 50 mg/daily, metoprolol 12.5 mg daily and atorvastatin 40 mg/daily. At discharge time, she was awake and alert, her gaze palsy and limb weakness improved but not completely resolved and NIHSS was 12. On the 9th month of follow up, left extremity forces were 4/5 and she was still complaining about diplopia. Her NIHSS was evaluated as 5.Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) at the time of discharge was 2 and after 9 months it was one.