A 13-year-old girl was referred to our Institute for growth delay. Her medical history was unremarkable, and she was asymptomatic. She was born at term, with adequate weight (3080 g, − 0.51 SD) and length (49 cm, − 0.51 SD).
At admission, her height was 146.8 cm (− 1.37 SD), weight 36 kg (− 1.71 SD), body mass index (BMI) 16.71 kg/m2 (− 1.39 SD), pubertal stage Tanner 3, with a growth velocity of 5.8 cm/year (− 2.11 DS). The mid parental height was 175 cm (1.69 SD) with no short stature in both parents.
Physical examination was unremarkable, with regular sitting height/height ratio (0.51, 0 SD), without pterygium, cubitus valgus, or forearm malformations.
Due to the marked growth failure, with the height velocity above the 25th percentile for age despite the girl did not exhibited short stature, we suspected a growth hormone deficiency. Therefore, a growth hormone (GH) stimulation test with arginine was performed, with normal values (peak 8.8 ng/ml). Also other common causes of delayed growth, such as hypothyroidism, chronic conditions, malnutrition, Cushing disease, Turner syndrome, celiac disease, were ruled out by laboratory tests. The left-hand X-ray, performed in order to determine the bone age (13 years according to Greulich and Pyle), ruled out GH deficiency because of correspondence of chronological age and bone age. In addiction, such test did not show deformities compatible with SHOX gene deficiency or Turner syndrome but revealed the presence of multiple osteochondromas . Such lesions were present not only in hand but also at the lateral side of the most active growth plate of a long bone highly suggestive for HMO.
During further investigation in family history, her mother reported a history of recurrent limb pain episodes and X-ray revealed multiple osteochondromas . The radiologic and anamnestic hypothesis of HMO was confirmed by the Sanger sequencing analysis of the EXT1 gene, which showed a c.138_139delinsTCT (p.Leu46Phefs*143) frameshift mutation, not previously described in literature, in the girl and mother.
The patient was further monitored, with the absence of spine radiological anomalies. Her growth velocity slightly improved to 6.2 cm/year, and the girl did not complain about any painful episode in the following year.