A 49-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital to be evaluated due to headaches, dizziness, slurred speech, and dyskinesia on May 7, 2021.
The patient’s symptoms started approximately 2 wk ago.
The patient had a 4-year history of invasive ductal cancer of the left breast and underwent surgery, adjuvant chemoradiotherapy, and endocrine therapy. The specific circumstances are unclear. There is no additional remarkable past medical history about the patient.
No specific cancer history was recorded on her pedigree.
During admission, she was pale, weak, and walking unsteadily. The other physical examinations were normal.
Tumor-related biomarkers, including carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, and CA199, were within the normal ranges. Other laboratory indicators were generally normal or slightly abnormal.
In May 2021, the computed tomography (CT) examinations showed multiple nodules in the brain, vertebral body, and both lungs, with multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the right hilum and mediastinum, which were considered metastases of breast cancer. No obvious mass was seen in the right hilum of the lung . Subsequently, the patient was subjected to four cycles of systemic chemotherapy [Abraxane 260 mg/m2 intravenously (IV) on day 1 of a 21-d cycle] combined with targeted therapy (Bevacizumab 15 mg/kg IV on day 1 of a 21-d cycle), endocrine therapy (oral Exemestane tablet 25 mg once a day), and palliative radiotherapy for the brain metastasis successively. After administration, the patient's headache disappeared, and her condition improved. However, she was admitted to our hospital again due to the occurrence of asthma, dyspnea, cough, and restricted activity in late November 2021. The CT scan indicated that the lesions in the patient’s brain, lung, and vertebral body had shrunk or disappeared, but a soft tissue density lesion appeared at her right hilum of the lung and blocked the bronchial lumen .
Since the patient presented symptoms of obvious dyspnea, a fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed, part of the mass was resected, and a stent was placed. The collected specimen was sent for pathological examination. Histologically, the three pieces of gray and taupe tissue of the right lung (2.5 cm × 2 cm × 1.8 cm in size) showed two kinds of tumor components. One part was a well-differentiated chondrosarcoma—the tumor cells were round or oval, with mild atypia, a mitotic appearance, thin cytoplasm, and cartilaginous pits. The other part was a poorly differentiated sarcoma—the tumor cells were fusiform, large atypia, rich in tumor giant cells, and mitotic images. In addition, the two tumor components were well demarcated without transition and with hemorrhage and necrosis . Immunohistochemistry staining showed that the tumor cells in both parts were positive for Vimentin, negative for Cytokeratin, and with a mutated p53 gene. S-100 tested positive in the chondrosarcoma, and h-Caldesmon, smooth muscle actin, cluster of differentiation antigen (CD) 99, and CD68 were partly positive in the dedifferentiated sarcoma . The positive rate of Ki67 in the dedifferentiated sarcoma was approximately 30%.