A 42-year-old woman of Wolofa ethnicity, who underwent eight pregnancies (of which one was aborted), with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), was admitted to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) 1 year before this report for a tonic–clonic generalized seizure 11 days after a normal vaginal delivery (sixth child). At this date, a clinical examination showed a blood pressure of 130/70 (mmHg), a fever of 37.6°C and a tachycardia of 125 beats per minute. Her Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was 13/15 (E4M5V4) with reactive pupils and without localizing signs; her reflexes were present and normal. For biological parameters, no albumin was found in her urine or at blood level; hypernatremia of 148mEq/L, hypokalemia 2.4mEq/L, anemia 11.6g/dL, thrombocytosis of 729,000/mm3 and a leukocytosis of 123,000 white blood cells (WBC)/mL (lineage not given). After symptomatic treatment including rehydration, her GCS returned to 15/15 and her serum electrolytes normalized, she was then referred to hematology for further investigation.
The diagnosis of CML was confirmed by a myelogram and a finding of Bcr-Abl fusion positive genotype (Philadelphia chromosome) a year prior to her ICU hospitalization. She was then treated with imatinib (mesylate) 100mg (Glivec®) under a standard protocol of two tablets two times a day. This treatment continued until the beginning of her subsequent, seventh pregnancy at an unknown time.
Two months after giving birth (eighth pregnancy), she was hospitalized again (day 0), with hepatomegaly, splenomegaly type IV according to Hackett’s classification, an anemic syndrome and an infectious syndrome with a temperature of 38.8°C. Her blood count showed leukocytosis of 275,000 WBC/mL cells with 40% of blast cells, therefore an acute crisis of her CML was suspected. An abdominal ultrasound confirmed a homogeneous hepatosplenomegaly without signs of portal hypertension. Blood culture and urine culture were requested, but not performed due to lack of finance. Glivec® (imatinib) was given at a dose of 600mg per day. Empirical antibiotic therapy of ceftriaxone 2g daily was administered. It is only on day 7 that a urine sample was taken for cytology and bacteriology examination at a laboratory. She did not recover, by day 8 she was in septic shock and she subsequently died on day 10 with severe sepsis.
The urine received from the day before her death was clear with a rich bacterial flora but few cells in cytology. Microscopy showed Gram-negative bacilli. Her urine was inoculated on cysteine lactose electrolyte deficient (CLED) agar in accordance with the usual techniques of medical bacteriology. The CLED agar grew yellow-colored, 1 to 2mm circular colonies (>107 CFU/mL) with regular margins. Similar yellow-pigmented colonies were also observed on Müller-Hinton Agar . The flexirubin type of pigment was confirmed by adding 1 drop of 10% sodium hydroxide solution to a bit of cell paste. The color of the colonies changed from yellow to red .
After culture, C. indologenes was suspected by microscopy examination and biochemical tests (Gram-negative bacilli that were non-motile, produced oxidase, catalase, and urease and indole). C. indologenes was confirmed using the Appareil et Procédés d’Identification 20NE identification system (bioMérieux, France; excellent identification % Id = 99.9 and T = 0.82). The genus Chryseobacterium was confirmed by mass spectrometry (Vitek MS matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, time-of-flight, bioMérieux) in an army teaching hospital . Antimicrobial susceptibility testing by disc diffusion and dilution on microplate for minimal inhibition concentration methods using Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853 and Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 for internal quality control was done and interpreted according to the Comité d’Antibiogramme de la Société Française de Microbiologie recommendations of 2013. This strain was susceptible to piperacillin, ceftazidime, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and quinolone including nalidixic acid and resistant to cefotaxime, aztreonam, imipenem, gentamicin, amikacin, tobramycin, and colistin . A test for metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) was done and the result was positive . Hydrolysis tests performed with imipenem (substrate) and a crude extract of a liquid medium culture of our strain, the objective being the production of beta-lactamase, by measuring the absorbance variation with a Cary 100 UV-visible spectrophotometer (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA, USA). Imipenem hydrolysis activity inhibited (>90%) after incubation with 5mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, revealed the presence of an MBL. To characterize the gene encoding MBL of the strain, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out using genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) obtained by phenol–chloroform extraction, as the template primers IND-INV/+ (5′-TTGGCAGAATATTCTTTACC) and IND-INV/– (5′-GAAAAAAAGACGGAAAAGCAAC) as described previously by Bellais and coworkers .