A three-month-old female infant born at term by caesarean section was prenatally diagnosed with meningomyelocele and congenital diaphragmatic hernia and was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for further management. Because of severe dyspnea, she was intubated and given mechanical ventilatory support. She had two surgeries for the repair of meningomyelocele and congenital diaphragmatic hernia on the 3rd and 14th days of life, respectively. VP shunt was inserted when she was one month old because of hydrocephalus. The patient had a bacteremia caused by Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. The pathogen was susceptible to ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin and treated with ceftazidime. After the completion of treatment period, the patient remained antibiotic-free for 7 days. While she was monitored on mechanical ventilation on the 3rd month of life, she clinically deteriorated with fever (38.5 °C). Gas exchange condition became worse than it was before. Respiratory secretions, oxygen requirements and ventilator demand increased. Her laboratory findings showed leukocytosis with increased number of neutrophils (WBC: 14,500/mm3, neutrophils: 8600/mm3) and high levels of acute phase reactant (C-reactive protein: 19.2 mg/dl). Chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates compatible with pneumonia. Blood, cerebrospinal fluid, urine and tracheobronchial secretion specimen obtained by sterile endotracheal aspiration were sent to microbiology laboratory for bacterial culture. Increased leukocytes were observed on smear of tracheobronchial secretion sample. Previous infection history caused by Stenotrophomonas maltophilia bacteremia was considered and empiric antibiotic therapy with vancomycin, ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin were started. Tracheobronchial secretion obtained by sterile endotracheal aspiration yielded yellow-colored colonies after 24 h incubation on sheep blood agar . Similar yellow-pigmented colonies were also observed on Müller-Hinton Agar . C. indologenes was identified by conventional methods, VITEK 2 ID-AST (bioM´erieux, France) fully automatized system and Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization time-of-flight, Mass Spectrometry(MALDI-TOF MS). Based on sequencing result of partial 16S rRNA gene, the isolate matched 99 % identities with the region from 852 to 860 bp of the 16S rRNA sequence of C. indologenes strain (GenBank sequence ID: LN681561.1). There was no other co-pathogen. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by both determining the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) value using microdilution method and measuring the inhibition zone diameter onto Mueller–Hinton agar (Oxoid Ltd., Basingstoke, UK) medium aerobically at 35 ± 2 °C for 18–24 h using Kirby-Bauer’s disk diffusion method according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines for non-fermenting microorganisms. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the organism revealed resistance to aminoglycosides, ceftazidime, meropenem, imipenem, colistin and was susceptible to ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, piperacillin–tazobactam and cefepime.
Her fever resolved and gas exchange condition improved after 72 h of treatment. The patient gave a good clinical response with the empiric treatment. For this reason, we did not want to change ciprofloxacin, and the treatment was continued with ciprofloxacin monotherapy. Blood, urine and cerebrospinal fluid culture test results were negative. Repeated endotracheal aspiration specimen culture was also negative after 72 h of antibiotherapy. The antibiotic treatment was given for a course of 14 days.