An 18-year-old Caucasian man presented in January 2019 to our Emergency Department (ED) for evaluation of sudden-onset right-sided chest pain while sleeping. He reported waking up with acute right-sided pleuritic chest pain underneath his ribs with radiation to his right scapula, which was made worse with inspiration and movement. He denied classic triggers, including excessive coughing, recent respiratory tract infection, or trauma prior to the onset of pain. However, he reported multiple episodes of vaping daily and rare intermittent marijuana use, but denied cigarette smoking or use of smokeless tobacco. He had no past medical or surgical history, history of vision changes, heart problems, or joint laxity. In addition, there was no family history of Marfan syndrome or lung disease. He reported no current medications, cigarette smoking, or alcohol consumption.
A physical examination revealed a height and weight of 54.9 kg and 180 cm, respectively with decreased breath sounds over his right lung. His calculated BMI had an underweight BMI of 16.9 kg/m2. His vital signals were notable for a temperature of 36.4 °C, heart rate of 64, blood pressure of 112/59 mmHg, respiratory rate of 19, and oxygen saturation of 95%. A neurological examination revealed he was alert and oriented to person, place, and time, and he moved all extremities equally. The remainder of the neurologic examination was non-focal. Laboratory examinations were all normal .
A chest X-ray (CXR) obtained in our ED demonstrated a large right-sided pneumothorax with evidence of tension . A chest tube was placed to suction with improvement in symptoms and our patient was admitted to the medicine service for further management. During admission, he received a lidocaine patch every 24 hours, acetaminophen (650 mg) every 6 hours, and ketorolac tromethamine (15 mg) every 6 hours, as needed. His pneumothorax resolved within the next few days and the chest tube was removed in a stepwise fashion. His presentation at the time was attributed to his body habitus. He was encouraged to quit vaping. He was scheduled for a follow-up CXR 2 weeks after discharge.
One week after discharge, he presented again to our ED for sudden-onset right-sided pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath. Upon being admitted for recurrent spontaneous pneumothoraces, he reported daily vaping after discharge, but no fever, chills, hemoptysis, cough, upper respiratory infection (URI) symptoms, trauma, or recent airplane travel. At this time, he described a 1.5-year history of vaping with multiple devices. In addition, he again described occasional marijuana use, although marijuana had not been used between episodes of pneumothoraces.
On physical examination, his vital signs were within normal limits. His pupils were equal and reactive to light, without evidence of lens subluxation. His vital signals were notable for a temperature of 37.2 °C, heart rate of 63 beats/minute, blood pressure of 118/56 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18, and oxygen saturation of 97%. A neurological examination revealed him to be alert and oriented to person, place, and time, and moving all extremities equally. The remainder of the neurologic examination was non-focal. Laboratory examinations were all normal . He had normal heart sounds without murmurs, rubs, or gallops. A lung examination was notable for decreased breath sounds over the right posterior chest.
A CXR revealed the presence of a large recurrent right-sided spontaneous pneumothorax without evidence of significant mediastinal shift . A follow-up chest computed tomography (CT) study without contrast after chest tube placement was notable for a small right residual pneumothorax with residual subsegmental atelectasis in his right lung and small right apical blebs . The spontaneous pneumothorax was recategorized as secondary after noting apical blebs. He was treated with a pigtail chest tube after the initial CXR determined the presence of the spontaneous pneumothorax. His chest tube was removed when imaging confirmed durable resolution of the pneumothorax. His lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally with symmetric breath sounds. During this second admittance, our patient was treated with lidocaine patch every 24 hours, acetaminophen (650 mg) every 6 hours as needed, and ibuprofen (600 mg) every 6 hours, as needed. A follow-up CXR 2 weeks after removal of the chest tubes confirmed resolution of the pneumothorax . At his follow-up appointment, he reported that he had quit using all e-cigarette products. A physical examination at this follow-up observed a temperature of 37.28 ºC, heart rate 79, blood pressure 110/72, respiratory rate of 20, and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. On physical examination, he was in no acute distress with lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally and good excursion. No rales, wheezes, or rhonchi were noted on examination. In alignment with British Thoracic Society (BTS) guidelines , he was offered chemical pleurodesis and/or surgical options; however, he declined the procedure. Written informed consent was provided by our patient for the publication of this case report.