A 57-year-old female complaining of masticatory and functional problems was referred by her orthodontist to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark, for surgical correction of a skeletal Angle Class I relation with a dental Class II malocclusion due to the lack of orthodontic treatment effect. The patient had begun an orthodontic treatment a year ago. The patient´s medical history was unremarkable. Clinical examination demonstrated a lower anterior facial height with the lower lip placed behind the Rickett's E-line and a deep labiomental fold . Intra-oral examination revealed an exaggerated curve of Spee with an overjet and overbite of 8 mm and 7 mm, respectively. Minor buccal gingival recessions without probing pocket depths were observed around the mandibular incisors . Radiographically, orthopantomogram and lateral cephalogram revealed mandibular dental retrusion in combination with a deep bite and a prominent chin . The treatment approach plan including AMSDO to create space for tooth alignment and later placement of dental implants was presented to the patient and accepted.
Preoperative orthodontic treatment involved fixed orthodontic appliances to increase the inter-root space between the canines and first molars for the planned vertical osteotomies. A rigid custom-made distraction device was fabricated . The distraction device consisted of an anterior segment and the posterior distraction segment. The distraction device was fixed in tubes on to the buccal surfaces of the molar bands and the expansion screws were positioned parallel to the occlusal plane of the lower arch.
The surgical procedure was performed in general anaesthesia with nasotracheal intubation, supplemented by local anaesthesia. An intraoral vestibular incision was made from the right mandibular first premolar to the mandibular left first premolar. The mucoperiosteum was reflected, exposing the mandibular symphyses and mental foramens. Two horizontal osteotomies were made with piezoelectric surgery from the right canine to the left canine, at least 5 mm below the dental apices. Vertical osteotomies were made with piezoelectric surgery between the two horizontal osteotomies and a bone block of approximately 4.0 x 1.0 cm was removed with care to maintain the lingual periosteum and mucosa intact. Then, incomplete vertical osteotomies were performed with piezoelectric through the outer cortex between the canines and first premolars without detaching the dental papillae from the alveolar bone. The osteotomies were completed with a fine chisel until the anterior dentated segment could be mobilized without any bony resistance. The dentated anterior segment was repositioned in a more caudal position to level the dental arch. Two T-plate 9 mm bone anchors (Orthodontic Skeletal Anchorage System, Stryker Craniomaxillofacial, USA) were contoured to the outer cortex of the tooth-bearing segment and fixed with 5 mm monocortical screws . The bone anchors were ligated to the distraction device with wires and tested to ensure that the tooth-bearing segment was moving in a parallel direction without resistance . The distraction device was activated until a 1 mm diastema was achieved between the canines and the first premolars. The wound was irrigated with saline and the mucosa was re-adapted and sutured with resorbable sutures (Vicryl 3-0, Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany). The patient was discharged later the same day. Postoperative x-rays disclosed satisfying osteotomies and placement of bone anchors . The postoperative period and healing was uneventful.
After a latent period of 5 to 7 days, the patient was instructed to activate the distraction device by 0.33 mm three times a day until the planned expansion was achieved. After the distraction phase was completed, a temporary composite tooth was bonded to the canines and first premolars, and the segment was retained by the distraction device for 6 months to allow callus ossification and stabilization of the tooth-bearing segment. Orthodontic treatment was continued to finalize the occlusion and preparing the interdental distance between the mandibular canines and the premolars for a later implant placement. The bone anchors were surgically removed after six months. Two dental implants (NobelActive NP 3.5 X 11.5 mm, Nobel Biocare, Goteborg, Sweden) were inserted without additional bone grafting. A fixed retainer was bonded between the first mandibular premolar and canine. A removable retention was applied to the maxilla. The total treatment period was 20 months .