A 27-year-old man was brought to the emergency room on account of agitation and bizarre behavior shortly after ingestion of K2. The patient arrived in the ED 2 h post ingestion. He had received 2 mg of lorazepam and 2 mg of midazolam before arrival in the ED with a resolution of behavioral symptoms. While in the ED, he denied any complaints and was unable to remember the events surrounding the reported episode. He denied syncope, seizures, or trauma to the head but said: “I felt like I was dying at the time.” He also denied co-ingestion of any other recreational drug or other medications. He denied suicidal intent, saying, “I was just trying to get high. It is embarrassing.” He noted a similar incident 3 months prior, also after ingesting K2 and said eyewitnesses told him that he had a seizure, but he never presented to the hospital. The medical history was significant for bipolar affective disorder (on fluoxetine and risperidone) and exploratory laparotomy 5 years ago for bowel obstruction. He was a current smoker, smoking one to two packs of cigarettes per day for the last 8 years but denied any other illicit drug use.
A review of systems was positive for sore throat, constipation, and headaches. Physical examination revealed a young male, who was calm, comfortable alert and oriented to time, place, and person. He was initially, tachycardic on presentation with a heart rate of 106, which improved to 75 after 30 min. Blood pressure on arrival was 119/84, and oxygen saturation was 98–100% on room air. The rest of his physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory results revealed markedly elevated serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK): 18,812 (laboratory ref range: 49–397 U/L) and mildly elevated aspartate aminotransferase: 160 (laboratory ref range: 10–42 U/L). The remainder of his metabolic profile, complete blood cell count, urinalysis, serum ethanol, acetaminophen and salicylate levels were essentially normal. A urine toxicology screen was positive only for benzodiazepines. An electrocardiogram (EKG) showed a sinus rhythm with concave ST elevations and J point notch in leads I, V4, V5, V6, a pattern considered a normal variant or commonly described as early repolarization without evidence of the left ventricular hypertrophy and normal QTc = 386.
He was diagnosed with synthetic cannabinoid intoxication and rhabdomyolysis and managed with aggressive intravenous (IV) hydration with normal saline, receiving 5 L of fluid while in the emergency department (ED). He was subsequently admitted to the medicine service for further management of rhabdomyolysis. Intravenous fluid hydration was continued at 250 ml/h and psychiatric medications were resumed. Over the next 2 days, CPK levels trended down from 18,812 to 8414, and renal function remained within normal limits.
He was discharged from the hospital after 3 days and counseled to avoid illicit drugs and synthetic stimulant ingestion.