We report the case of a 64-year-old male who presented with a 4.4 cm necrotic left adrenal mass found incidentally on imaging. The patient has a history of papillary thyroid carcinoma and underwent partial thyroidectomy in May 2010, followed by complete thyroidectomy in July 2010 and radioactive iodine ablation in September 2010. Our patient has been on suppressive and substitutive treatment with thyroid hormone since his surgery in 2010. However, increased treatment doses were required in 2020 due to challenges in maintaining optimal thyroid hormone levels.
In February 2022, the patient underwent a diaphragm fluoroscopy (fluoroscopic Sniff test) during a workup for intractable hiccups by his endocrinologist, which revealed multiple lung nodules. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax in August 2022 revealed suspicious solid lung nodules, with the largest being 1.5 cm, along with a 4.4 cm left adrenal mass with peripheral enhancement and central heterogeneous hypoenhancement suggestive of necrosis. The differential diagnosis provided by the attending radiologists at the time of imaging included adrenal myelolipoma, metastatic disease from the patient’s previous thyroid cancer, or primary adrenocortical carcinoma. However, there was no discernable macroscopic fat within the mass, making the diagnosis of myelolipoma less likely. The adrenal mass was better visualized on CT Abdomen from the month prior . A routine thyroid ultrasound to evaluate for potential recurrence, also in August 2022, demonstrated a benign 0.6 cm thyroid bed nodule classified as TI-RADS 2. As part of his workup for both the adrenal mass and lung nodules, he underwent a positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT), revealing a mildly hypermetabolic left adrenal mass but no activity in the thyroid region. Subsequently, a radionuclide iodine scan to assess for metastatic thyroid cancer was performed, which was negative. A CT-guided lung nodule biopsy was attempted to characterize these masses further but could not be completed due to proximity to the patient’s rib. As such, a bronchoscopy-guided biopsy was planned in November 2022. However, preoperatively, the patient experienced a syncopal episode and was found to have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The patient thus had an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) placed in January 2023 and underwent a lung nodule biopsy in March 2023, which was negative for malignant cells but considered largely non-diagnostic.
Our patient’s blood pressure was well-controlled by anti-hypertensive medications (beta blocker & calcium-channel blocker) and did not display any stigmata of Cushing’s Syndrome or pheochromocytoma, later confirmed by biochemical testing. Notably, the patient was also anemic during his clinical course, found to be 7.5 gm/dl in November of 2022. Our patient’s anemia slightly improved to 8.5 gm/dl one week before his operation. Before surgery, his laboratory studies were notable for a high aldosterone/renin ratio of >117.4 ng/dl per ng/ml/hr (reference range 0.0–30.0), with aldosterone at 19.6 ng/dl (reference range 0.0–30.0) and low renin at <0.167 ng/ml/hr (reference range 0.167–5.380) in April 2023. Plasma metanephrines collected simultaneously were within normal limits (normetanephrine 98.3 pg/ml, reference range 0.0–285.2; metanephrines 35.3 pg/ml, reference range 0.0–88.0), lessening the suspicion for pheochromocytoma.
The differential diagnosis remained broad, with options between metastatic thyroid carcinoma, adrenal cortical carcinoma, and functional adenoma. Our institution’s multidisciplinary tumor board decided to proceed with a left robotic adrenalectomy and left retroperitoneal lymph node dissection in June 2023. Intraoperatively, no visceral injury was noted, and there was no evidence of metastatic disease. Moreover, there was no suspicious renal hilar or para-aortic lymphadenopathy. A branching renal vein and a single renal artery were noted. The left gonadal artery was spared, and the left adrenal gland was removed with the mass intact without capsule rupture and injury to the adjacent kidney, splenic hilum, or pancreas. Postoperatively, the patient was discharged after one day.
The surgical specimen submitted as a left adrenal mass was examined microscopically to reveal a blood-filled vascular proliferation of thin-walled vessels with intervening stroma with focal thrombosis, consistent with a cavernous hemangioma . Thrombosis and calcifications most likely represent features of chronicity (,). Immunohistochemical stains were performed with adequate controls and showed CD31 (vascular marker) to be positive in the lesional cells and Ki-67 (proliferation marker) as low. Congo red special stain was also performed to rule out amyloid deposition .
The histopathological differential diagnoses include other morphologic variants of hemangioma, a lymphangioma (ruled out based on the presence of red blood cells in vessels; lymphangiomas usually show empty vessels), angiosarcoma (ruled out by the absence of cytologic atypia, mitotic figures, necrosis, and a low proliferation index).