A 49-year-old man presented to the emergency department with upper abdominal pain. His regular alcohol intake was 2–3 L daily. On admission, Glasgow Coma Scale was 15, heart rate 92 b.p.m., blood pressure 185/124 mmHg, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, SpO2 96% on room air, and body temperature 35.0°C. Physical examination revealed a moderately distended abdomen with epigastric tenderness. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 25,200/μL, hemoglobin 21.9 g/L, hematocrit 62.5%, platelet count 44.7 × 104/μL, blood urea nitrogen 13.6 mg/dL, creatinine 0.94 mg/dL, lactic dehydrogenase 303 IU/L, and amylase 1325 IU/L. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was consistent with acute pancreatitis with intact GDA pseudoaneurysms surrounded by a small hematoma . He was admitted to a regular ward and received 3 L of intravenous fluid.
On hospital day 2, he became tachycardic (heart rate 122 b.p.m.), febrile (body temperature 38.9°C), and hypoxemic (SpO2 91% on 10 L/min O2). The abdomen was more distended and diffusely tender. Laboratory tests were significant for leukocytosis (11,000/μL), anemia (hemoglobin 8.9 g/dL, hematocrit 42.0%), renal dysfunction (blood urea nitrogen 39.9 mg/dL, creatinine 2.1 mg/dL) and lactic acid 2.1 mmol/L. A contrast-enhanced CT scan was repeated and revealed a huge right-sided retroperitoneal hematoma. The GDA pseudoaneurysms seen on the previous CT scan had resolved. . There were no signs of active bleeding nor worsening of anemia. After discussion with the interventional radiology team, it was concluded not to perform angioembolization because the target to be embolized was no longer apparent on imaging. This patient did not require blood transfusions throughout this episode.
The patient developed respiratory failure and underwent an endotracheal intubation with mechanical ventilatory support and was transferred to the intensive care unit. Intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) monitoring was started by urinary catheter and was initially 20 mmHg. Intravenous continuous sedation, analgesia, and muscle relaxants were given. A nasogastric tube was inserted for gastric drainage. Intra-abdominal pressure then decreased to less than 20 mmHg and urine output was maintained at 1 mL/kg/h. On hospital day 8, the patient became oliguric. Serum creatinine level was 4.6 mg/L and IAP elevated to 30 mmHg. After initiating continuous hemodialysis and filtration, IAP temporarily decreased. On hospital day 10, IAP increased again to 30 mmHg. Respiratory failure worsened, and he became anuric. Repeat CT scan showed that the large hematoma still occupied the right retroperitoneal space, although there were no signs of active bleeding.
The Acute Care Surgery team was consulted, and decompressive laparotomy was carried out at the bedside in the intensive care unit because the patient was too unstable to transfer to the operating room. When the abdomen was opened, a moderate amount of serous ascites, swollen loops of bowel, as well as a retroperitoneal hematoma without active expansion were observed. Immediately, the patient's oxygenation and ventilation improved and IAP decreased to 13 mmHg. Due to the risk of massive bleeding, the retroperitoneal hematoma was left in situ and open abdominal management initiated. On hospital day 13 (postoperative day 3), tracheostomy was carried out, and mechanical ventilation was weaned off gradually over 2 weeks. On hospital day 33 (postoperative day 23), the abdomen was closed. Renal function gradually improved and hemodialysis was stopped on hospital day 48.
The postoperative course was prolonged because of a fungal infection in the large retroperitoneal hematoma, which was treated with antifungal agents and percutaneous drainage. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation hospital 3 months later in stable condition.