The proband, a two-month-old girl, was born as the second child of healthy non-consanguineous parents of Russian origin. The couple has an elder healthy son; another pregnancy ended in a miscarriage. During the 22–23 week of gestation, multiple congenital malformations were detected in the proband including a heart defect (double outlet right ventricle with pulmonary stenosis ), deformities of hands (post-axial polydactyly) and a single umbilical artery.
At birth, baby`s weight was 3150 g, body length—51 cm, head circumference—35 cm, chest circumference-33 cm. Routine clinical examination confirmed the limb pathology that included bilateral triphalangeal thumb with asymmetrical pre- and post-axial polydactyly and skin syndactyly of fingers IV/V . Lower limbs were not affected. Ophthalmological assessment revealed microphthalmia with severe coloboma involving the choroid, retina and the optic disc. In addition to physical malformations, the patient demonstrated psychomotor delay (MQ = 0.39; DQ = 0.5). The radical surgical correction of the heart defect was successfully carried out in two steps within the first year of life.
According to the medical history, as many as 10 family members presented with TPT-PS throughout 5 generations from the maternal side . Notably, a high degree of clinical heterogeneity was noted with the most severe phenotype being detected in the proband`s mother (IV-5). In particular, along with triphalangeal thumbs she demonstrated post-axial polydactyly with total skin syndactyly of fingers III-V of the hands as well as syndactyly of fingers IV/V of the feet . The proband`s grandmother (III-4) presented with hand pre-axial polydactyly with syndactyly of fingers III-V; family members III-6 and III-8 had multiple syndactyly; II-2—syndactyly of fingers IV and V; I-1 showed hand post-axial polydactyly with syndactyly of fingers IV and V. The limb malformations of the rest affected family members were also represented by triphalangeal thumb but could not be specified in details.
For standard karyotyping, routine cytogenetic analysis of GTG-banded metaphase chromosomes was performed on phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes. Standard cytogenetic analysis of the proband showed a normal female karyotype (46, XX), which excluded numerical or large-scale structural chromosomal rearrangements as a cause of the complex phenotype. Besides, bidirectional target Sanger sequencing did not detect any pathogenic point mutations in intron 5 sequence of LMBR1 (ID 64327) as well as in protein-coding regions of NKX2.5 (ID1482) and TBX5 (ID6910) genes earlier reported to be associated with triphalangeal thumb, structural heart defects, or combined heart-hand pathology such as Holt-Oram syndrome, respectively.
To screen for copy number variants (CNVs), oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) was carried out. As a platform, Agilent 180 K array with median probe spacing 13 kb was used (SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The sample preparation and hybridization procedure were performed following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The data obtained were processed and analyzed using Feature extraction (v9.5) and CytoGenomics (v3.0.1.1) Softwares (Agilent Technologies). CNVs (gains and losses) were called using an aberration detection statistical algorithm ADM-2, with a sensitivity threshold of 6.0. Clinical significance of the findings was evaluated based on the data from publically available databases of normal and pathogenic genome variants, including Database of Genomic Variants (DGV), Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database (OMIM), Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans using Ensembl Resources (DECIPHER). Array-CGH revealed an interstitial microduplication spanning 299 kb region at 7q36.3 cytoband (arr[GRCh37] 7q36.3(156385810_156684811) × 3) that encompassed three annotated genes (C7orf13, RNF32 and LMBR1) . The gain of 7q36.3 region was confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) using SYBR Green Master Mix (Evrogen, Russia) . The assay was performed for LMBR1 gene sequence (RefSeqGene NG_009240.2). The quantity assessment of the target sequence was carried out relative to a normal control DNA. The relative copy number was evaluated using the comparative ΔΔCt method with GAPDH and SHH genes being used for normalization. The qPCR primers were the following: F 5′-ATGCTTTGTGCGGGAAATCCA-3′, R 5′- GTCTCCTCCCTCCTGAATCCAT-3′ (LMBR1); F 5′- CTTAAAAAGTGCAGGGTCTGGC-3′, R 5′-TGCTGTAGCCAAATTCGTTGTC-3′ (GAPDH); F 5′- TGTTTGCTCTTCGGGCAGAT-3′, R 5′-CGTCTGTTACCGTCCTCACC-3′ (SHH). The samples were run in triplicate and the data were analyzed and illustrated in the GraphPad Prism software. The duplication was seen as a ~ 1.5 fold relative copy number. The CNV was submitted to the European Variation Archive (EMBL-EBI, ), accession PRJEB32845. The CGH and qPCR analysis of the probandʼs mother detected the same microduplication (the data not shown). No additional clinically-relevant copy number variants were identified in the proband and her mother. DNA samples from other relatives were not available for genetic analysis.
To exclude the possibility of presence of additional morbid loci underlying the cardiac and eye pathologies in the proband`s clinical phenotype, high-throughput whole exome sequencing was performed. DNA-library was prepared using the SureSelectXT Human All Exon v6 target enrichment kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States), design of which deeply covers protein-coding regions of the genome. Sequencing run was carried out with the Illumina HiSeq4000 genome analyzer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States). Average target region coverage was ∼ × 150 with 95% of the target regions being covered to a depth of 20 or more. The data was processed and analyzed according to a workflow earlier described [, ]. In brief, alignment was performed using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA-MEM-0.7.1) with GRCh37/hg19 genome assembly as a reference. The data processing and variant calling was performed according to Broad institute GATK Best Practice. Genomic variants were annotated using Annovar . Population frequencies and clinical significance of the variants were evaluated based on Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) resources and according to ACMG guidelines ; the functional prediction was made based on dbNSFP (v3.3a). Expression rank in the heart tissue (GTEx dataset) was used as an additional characteristic for variant evaluation.
The called variants were filtered according to their exonic function and population frequencies so that only rare protein-changing variants such as missense, nonsense, frameshifts or splicing variants with allele frequency < 0.001 were selected for further analysis (Additional file ). Then, the variants were evaluated based on gene functions, clinical annotations, and prediction of variant functional effect. Special attention was paid to genes known to be associated with isolated CHDs, microphthalmia/anophthalmia/coloboma (MAC) spectrum of ocular malformations or syndromic forms that combine cardiac and eye pathologies. Neither pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants nor variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS) were found in well-known morbid cardiac genes including DORV-associated loci such as NKX2-5, ZFPM2/FOG2, TBX5, NODAL, CFC1, GDF1, TDF1, ACVR2B, ZIC3, NPHP4. Besides, no possible candidate genes that are highly expressed in the heart tissue and involved in cardiogenesis or myocardial functioning were detected as well. Further review of the gene list did not reveal pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants or VUS in the genes commonly associated with isolated or syndromic MAC including VSX2, RAX, GDF6, BCOR, CHD7, HCCS, SHH, SOX2, OTX2, PAX6, STRA6, ALDH1A3, RARB, FOXE3, BMP4, BMP7, ATOH7, C12orf57, TENM3 (ODZ3), VAX1, SALL2, YAP1, GDF3, ABCB6, RARB, SMOC1, TFAP2A [, ]. Besides, we looked attentively at the LMBR1, C7orf13 and RNF32 genes located at the 7q36.3 duplicated genomic segment. Such analysis did not reveal any potential modifier variants that could contribute to the severe clinical picture of the proband. Thus, no genomic variants of interest that could explain the particular cardio-eye phenotype of the patient were identified.