Our patient was a 33-year-old male, who initially had presented to the neurologic clinic with left-sided lateral gaze restriction, horizontal diplopia, and retro-orbital pain for 8 days, but with no history of photophobia. The patient also had an 8-week history of left-sided otalgia that improved partially after receiving a 5-day course of oral azithromycin, but became aggravated again 3 days prior to admission. The patient’s hearing status was not changed subjectively. In terms of past medical history, the patient had no complaint of otorrhea or ear problems.
He had a history of head injury with an altered level of consciousness the previous year, improving after 3 days. On admission, a physical examination showed normal vital signs (including normal body temperature) with a left-sided red bulge on the tympanic membrane (TM), but no evidence of perforation, otorrhea, retro-auricular swelling or tenderness was noted. Eye movement was restricted in the left-sided lateral gaze, but corneal sensation was normal. The patient had normal symmetrical facial movement bilaterally. Other cranial nerves were also intact.
Due to abducent nerve palsy and gaze restriction, the patient was initially evaluated by a neurologist, and a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was taken. Because of MRI evidence of mastoiditis and petrositis, the patient was referred to our clinic for further evaluation and management (,). In concurrent MR venography, no evidence of lateral sinus thrombosis was detected . At that time our computed tomography (CT) scanner was not working, so a high-resolution CT scan was not performed on this patient.
Laboratory tests showed a white blood count of 10.7 × 109/L; 57.8% neutrophil; an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 10 mm/h and a negative C-reactive protein result.
Pure tone audiometry performed 2 months later showed mild left-sided sensorineural hearing loss that peaked at 4 kHz, but the patient did not complain of recent subjective changes in hearing status. This mild hearing loss may have been due to a previous head injury .
The patient was treated with clindamycin 600 mg intravenously (IV) every 6 hours and ceftazidime 1 g IV every 8 hours for 5 days. In addition, the patient received dexamethasone 8 mg IV every 8 hours for 3 days. On the second day in our institution, otalgia was improved. One day later the patient had no complaint of retro-orbital pain, and on the fourth day after admission, the left lateral gaze returned to normal without any restriction.
The patient was discharged on oral co-amoxiclav for 2 weeks. After 2 weeks of visiting the out-patient department, the patient was followed-up and found to have not complaints.
A follow-up temporal bone CT was taken approximately 6 weeks after discharge. This scan showed the disappearance of the left mastoid bone and petrous apex opacification with good aeration of both areas .