A 16-year-old girl presented to the emergency department due to complaints of fever, severe headache. Her physical examination revealed a fever of 38.1°C; and neurological examination revealed a stiff neck and positive Brudzinski and Kernig signs. The Glasgow Coma Scale score was 10.
Head computed tomography (CT) showed brain swelling. A lumbar puncture was performed, which revealed a high opening pressure (310 mmH2O). CSF analysis showed that the fluid was cloudy, having a high protein (544.1 mg/dL, reference range 15–45 mg/dL) and low glucose (0.88 mmol/L, reference range 3.3–4.5 mmol/L) content and an elevated white blood cell count with neutrophilic predominance (13,206 cells/mm3, polymorphs 80%). Meanwhile, her CSF sample was sent to laboratory for pathogen detection at low temperature. Briefly, the patient's parents had signed informed consent, the CSF sample was collected and stored at −20°C, and then sent to laboratory of BGI-Shenzhen within 12 h. DNA was extracted with a TIANamp Micro DNA Kit (DP316, TIANGEN BIOTECH, Beijing, China) following the manufacturers' instructions. DNA libraries were constructed via end-repaired adaptation added overnight, and application of polymerase chain reaction amplification to extracted DNA. A Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) in combination with quantitative PCR was used to quantify DNA libraries. DNA sequencing was then performed on the BGISEQ-50 platform (BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China) . High-quality sequencing data were generated after filtering out low-quality, low-complexity, and shorter reads. Then, the remaining sequencing data were aligned to the Date of BGI, which contains 6,350 bacteria, 1,798 DNA viruses, 1,064 species of fungi and 234 parasites, to identify the pathogenic sequences. An advanced data analysis was then performed, as for the mapped data.
Our hospital laboratory test results showed leukocytosis with neutrophilia (total leukocyte count: 25.4 × 109/L; neutrophils: 88.7%) and elevated levels of interleukin-6 (200.8 pg/mL) and procalcitonin (49.9 ng/ml). CSF and blood cultures were performed multiple times. However, brain magnetic resonance imaging performed the following day was reported to be normal. Intravenous ceftriaxone 80 mg/kg once daily and vancomycin 50 mg/kg twice a day were administered. Mannitol 20% and steroids was also administered to lower the intracranial pressure.
Over the next 3 days, fever and headache resolved. However, the Kernig sign remained positive. Blood bacterial culture and gram staining of the CSF on admission was normal. We decided to perform further investigations (chest and abdominal CT and abdominal ultrasonography) to identify the source of infection. Unfortunately, these investigations did not yield positive results. Meanwhile, thorough oral cavity, dental, ear, nose, and throat examinations were performed to identify a potential source of infection; and no tooth decay or pathological changes were identified. mNGS results showed anaerobic bacteria, namely, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella enoeca, Campylobacter rectus, Fusobacterium uncleatum, and Actinomyces israelii , which are all oral bacteria. We thought it may be a mistake of the laboratory or contamination during CSF collection. And, repeat CSF cultures were negative.
Lumbar puncture was performed again to detect the pathogens by mNGS 20 days later, which showed that the anaerobic bacteria were the same as before . At this time, we reviewed the patient's head CT findings again and found that the patient's clivus, bony part of the skull base, was eroded. Repeat head CT was immediately performed, and the bone quality was significantly better than that before admission. This patient had no history of cancer or trauma, and we speculated that sphenoid sinusitis had led to the destruction of clivus with subsequent infection of the meninges by oral anaerobic bacteria. Due to persistent elevation of white blood cell count on CSF analysis, we added metronidazole, which targets anaerobes, to the regimen. At 3-month follow-up, the patient appeared well and had returned to normal activity. Repeat head CT showed resolution of bone destruction .