A 34-year-old woman developed a sudden left temporal headache and an ipsilateral toothache. Her toothache was relieved after root canal therapy, but her headache remained unchanged with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and peripheral nerve blocks. A week later, she developed a completely drooping left eyelid. Then, she was admitted to a Level A tertiary hospital. Her blood routine examination and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis were normal . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed abnormal enhancement of the left cavernous sinus .
She was given steroid therapy for suspected THS (dexamethasone 15 mg intravenous once daily for 8 days and then oral prednisone 25 mg once daily). Her left blepharoptosis completely resolved, and her headache was completely relieved after 3 days. After 15 days of oral prednisone maintenance therapy, the patient failed to see a doctor for follow-up due to the COVID-19 outbreak and stopped taking medications. However, five days after the discontinuation of steroid treatment, she developed a headache on the right side, so she came to our institution for further evaluation and treatment.
On admission to our hospital, she had a severe throbbing pain in the right temporal region, which was followed by right unilateral blepharoptosis and diplopia and a complete inability to abduct the right eye. A neurological examination showed right abducens nerve palsy, smaller right eye cleft and right pupil, and hypohidrosis of the right hemiface. The patient’s routine blood examination, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, glycemic curve, and thyroid function tests were normal. Laboratory tests for autoimmune diseases and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) tests were negative. Serum and CSF antibodies against Treponema pallidum and CSF cultures for fungal infection were negative, but a CSF bacterial smear suggested the presence of gram-positive cocci, which were later confirmed to be Staphylococcus capitis . A subsequent brain MRI showed abnormal soft tissue signals in the bilateral cavernous sinuses, which were more pronounced on the right side, and there were also inflammatory signals in the right sphenoid sinus . A transsphenoidal approach sphenoid sinus puncture drainage and aspirate culture were completed, and the culture showed the presence of coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) . Guided by the results of her drug sensitivity test, vancomycin was chosen to be given intravenously for 6 weeks, followed by oral prednisone (started at 30 mg/day and decreased to 10 mg a week) for 4 months. One month after treatment, the patient’s headache completely resolved, and MRI showed a reduction in abnormal signals in the cavernous sinus . Two months later, the right ophthalmoplegia had significantly improved, and an MRI showed complete resolution of the inflammation in the bilateral cavernous and sphenoid sinuses . Three months later, her neurological examination was completely normal.