A 32-year-old woman was transferred to our service from an outside hospital emergency department after presenting with a new-onset complex-partial seizure with secondary generalization, headache, and emesis. The patient had a history of factor V Leiden mutation, cigarette smoking, and obesity (BMI 40.6). She had suffered a miscarriage and multiple prior episodes of venous thromboembolism with subsequent placement of an IVC filter. Six months before presentation, the patient had discontinued warfarin anticoagulation for stated financial reasons.
Five days before presentation, the patient awoke with a left frontal headache accompanied by nausea and vomiting. These symptoms persisted and, on the day of presentation, she experienced a complex partial seizure with secondary generalization. The seizure was manifested by expressive aphasia, right hand numbness, and left head deviation culminating in generalized tonic-clonic activity and a postictal state lasting several minutes.
At the outside hospital emergency department, she received levetiracetam 1500 mg BID and CT head imaging revealed two small areas of hypodensity in the left subinsular and frontal opercular areas. The patient was then transferred to our tertiary care institution for definitive management. On arrival, the patient’s neurological examination was intact and she reported a severe (8/10) headache. MRI imaging performed at our institution revealed increased FLAIR signal indicative of vasogenic edema. DWI and ADC findings in this area were thought to represent acute hemorrhage and not acute ischemia. CT head angiography was then performed, revealing CVT of the left sphenoparietal sinus. Imaging findings are shown in [ and ].
The patient continued to receive levetiracetam 1500 mg BID initiated at the outside hospital emergency department and began apixaban 5 mg BID with a recommendation to continue this medication lifelong. The patient was followed clinically, and no posttreatment imaging studies were performed. Following a 3-day hospital stay, the patient reported a significant reduction in headache severity and was discharged home.