A 49-year-old Caucasian male was evaluated at the Department of Adult Psychiatry Intensive Outpatient (IOP) Treatment Program for initial intake after having been referred from the Department of Neurology Outpatient Clinic. He had complaints of depressed mood, lack of enjoyment of pleasurable activities, sleep disturbances, poor concentration, and occasional passive suicidal thoughts. These symptoms were in association with ongoing progression of symptoms related to his diagnosis of SCA1. His neurologic symptoms included coordination problems and ataxia initially at diagnosis, but in recent years speech impairment, swallowing difficulties, some spasticity, and eventually muscle atrophy were presented. He had to utilize a motorized wheelchair as a result of his progressive disability. His current house was not fully wheelchair accessible. He lived alone but had siblings who visited at least several times per week. He also seemed to lack insight into the relationship between his thoughts, feelings, and physical limitations.
At the psychiatric evaluation, he expressed that his self-esteem was strongly affected by his limited physical mobility due to his SCA1, and he seemed extremely unhappy. He reported passive death wishes at least once a week, usually without a suicidal plan or intent. Laboratory evaluations including hemogram, liver function tests, total protein, vitamin B12, folic acid, T3, T4, and TSH were within normal limits. Baseline psychiatric evaluation with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) revealed scores of 23 (moderate depression). According to clinical evaluation as well as DSM-V criteria, the patient was diagnosed with major depressive disorder and he was started on sertraline 50 milligrams (mg) by mouth per day. He had never taken medications for depression before. Group cognitive behavioral therapy focusing on negative cognitions as well as aspects of dialectical behavioral therapy were initiated as part of the IOP protocol . These group sessions occurred three times a week for several hours a session totaling approximately 12 hours per week. Individual cognitive behavioral therapy with a psychologist also occurred weekly for the first several weeks of the IOP program. He also met with a psychiatrist weekly, then every two weeks, and finally monthly for medication management. His sertraline was increased over this time period to 100 mg per day. He reported compliance with medications and reported no side effects. He also participated in 3 family sessions whereby his family members were also engaged in psychoeducation and therapy. Partial response to treatment was observed at the 12th week with reduction of BDI-II score to 12 (mild mood disturbance). He participated in the IOP program for approximately 6 months in total, becoming increasingly more engaged, and eventually reported a subjective significant reduction in depressed mood, anhedonia, and suicidal thoughts. His sleep and concentration also improved. He reported improved insight into the mind-body connection between his physical and emotional conditions. He acquired new coping skills to limit counterproductive behaviors and irrational emotional responses to his occasional negative thoughts. With help of IOP staff and social workers, he found an assisted living accepting of his limited ambulation, moving to a better housing situation. He then was eventually scheduled for medication management and monitoring follow-up appointments in the Department of Adult Psychiatry Outpatient clinic once discharged from the IOP treatment program.