The patient was a 66-year-old man who underwent LVAD (HeartMate II, Abbott, Abbott Park, IL) implantation for ischemic cardiomyopathy as BTT 3 years prior. A blood test during a routine follow-up revealed severe anemia with hemoglobin level of 6.1 mg/dl. A colonoscopy revealed advanced ascending colon cancer. We diagnosed the cause of severe anemia in this patient as bleeding from the ascending colon cancer. Further investigation revealed no other causes of hemorrhage and no distant metastases. After discussions with cardiovascular surgeons and gastroenterologists, we concluded that the patient needed colectomy to treat his severe anemia. We planned colectomy for the ascending colon cancer with cardiovascular surgeons and anesthesiologists.
The LVAD pump was implanted in the epigastrium. The long C-shaped subfascial driveline tunnel was made, and driveline exit site was located on the left lateral abdominal wall. In the case of laparotomy, driveline repositioning surgery was considered if necessary. The positional relationship between the tumor and the driveline was evaluated using X-ray and three-dimensional computed tomography (3D CT) images, and we decided that we place the trocars in nearly the same positions as in a standard laparoscopic right hemicolectomy . Furthermore, in case the need to convert to open surgery arose, given the presence of a driveline across the lower abdomen, we also simulated driveline repositioning to the right side of the abdomen. Because the patient received anti-coagulation therapy with aspirin and warfarin, these drugs were interrupted at one week prior to surgery, and that with intravenous heparin infusion was started to maintain an activated partial thromboplastin time of 50–70 s.
The location of driveline was marked on the skin by a cardiovascular surgeon prior to surgery, and the port sites were decided upon carefully to avoid injury to the driveline due to trocar insertion . The first trocar was inserted using Hasson open technique via the umbilicus. Abdominal insufflation was initiated slowly and carefully because it has been reported pneumoperitoneum alters LVAD flow . A pneumoperitoneum was done at a pressure of 10 mmHg, and a sufficient operative field was obtained without altering the hemodynamics. Upon observing the inside of the abdominal cavity, we found the LVAD and the driveline were observable without severe adhesions . The trocars were carefully inserted checking both the driveline observed from the abdominal cavity and the mark of the driveline on the abdominal wall. Two 12-mm trocars were inserted into the left abdomen, and two 5-mm trocars were inserted into the right abdomen, respectively . The position of each trocar was nearly the same as the site marked before surgery and as a standard laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. The intraoperative position of the patient was basically in the reverse Trendelenburg position and temporally in the Trendelenburg position. As the reverse Trendelenburg position reduces venous return and the Trendelenburg position increases venous return, it was vital that changing of the operative position was performed slowly. Consequently, such actions led to minimal variation in the hemodynamics. During the operation, the LVAD and the driveline did not interfere with any trocars. Despite hemorrhagic tendency, we were able to perform laparoscopic right hemicolectomy uneventfully. The operating time was 204 min, and the amount of blood loss was 119 ml.
Intravenous heparin infusion was re-started 24 h after the operation was completed. Aspirin and warfarin were re-started orally on postoperative day (POD) 2. Because of high serum CRP level on POD3, the antibiotics were administered for 5 days until the patient’s serum CRP level was nearly normalized. A superficial incisional surgical site infection (SSI) was observed at the umbilical incision site on POD 5, but improved within a few days by washing alone. After oral warfarin management, he was discharged on POD 19 without any bleeding complications during the postoperative course. The histopathological examination showed that the tumor was classified as T3N2aM0 Stage IIIB (TNM classification, 8th ed.). We recommended adjuvant chemotherapy, but the patient refused due to social issues.