We present the case of a 61-year-old Caucasian male patient treated between 2018 and 2022 in our clinic. In 2015, the patient was diagnosed with chronic polyarthritis, and in 2017, he additionally received the diagnosis Charcot foot (Sanders and Frykberg type 3, Eichholtz type 1b , and ).
Consistent with this, MRI shows a bone bruise, soft-tissue edema, and joint effusion in stage 0. These increase markedly in stage 1, decrease again in stage 2, and leave residual edema and the resulting deformity in stage 3 (Chantelau E, Poll LW. [2006]. Evaluation of the diabetic Charcot foot by MR imaging or plain radiography – an observational study Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2006. 114(8), 428–431. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2006-924229).
The foot had been immobilized, but, in 2018, he could no longer cope with it. Clinically, the patient presented with polyneuropathy at the plantar side of the foot, the foot was swollen, slightly hyperthermic and showed instability of the midfoot. As X-ray and MRI could not clearly distinguish between septic arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and Charcot foot a surgical bone sampling talonavicular and calcaneocubioidal was performed in this case. Here, neuropathic osteoarthropathy was confirmed. The patient developed a post-operative local wound infection ending in talus osteitis with the need for 16 follow-up surgeries until the soft tissue was closed again. Seven months later, the foot showed an osseous collapse in the hindfoot and metatarsus (Sanders and Frykberg type 2-4, Eichholtz type 3, ). A two-stage procedure was carried out. Due to the tense soft-tissue situation, an arthrodesis by external fixator of the upper and lower ankle joint and the midfoot was performed. The fixator was removed 4 months later. Since instability remained in the hindfoot, the patient received a nail arthrodesis (Expert HAN, Depuy Synthes, Massachusetts, USA) ( and ) under the idea of preserving the mobility in the Chopart joint line. Eight months later, the patient was again able to fully bear weight on the foot without a walking aid. In the clinical and radiological follow-up 2.5 years later , the patient is pain-free and mobile with full weight-bearing in a custom orthopedic boot.
In patients with the need for a stable midfoot or hindfoot arthrodesis, a conscious effort is made to maintain mobility in the Chopart joint line.