A 39-year-old male, inhabitant of Mexico northeastern endemic area for Cryptococcus with a surgical history of hydrocephalus treated with ventriculoperitoneal shut 1 year before, he presented 3 months of progressive weakness in the four extremities evolving to be disabling with bilateral accessory nerve palsy and loss of sensation below his neck.
On physical examination, he had increased deep tendon reflexes and 2/5 muscle strength in his bilateral upper and lower extremities with a sensory level of C3, intact proprioception and vibration, with absent pain and temperature sensation.
The magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and craniocervical junction with and without contrast showed diffuse leptomeningeal thickening both supra and infratentorial and over the spinal canal up to C5, with great enhancement to contrast administration, with involvement in ambiens, interpeduncular, prepontine, sylvian, premedullary, and Magna cisterns. Cystic formation is also shown in the cranio-cervical union causing compression of the medullary bulb .
The patient was seronegative for HIV.
The patient underwent a medial suboccipital craniectomy with resection of the posterior arch of c1, intradurally found meningeal layer of the dura with multiple adhesions to the thickened arachnoid with multiple nodules on its surface with poor vascularization, opening of the arcanoid with partial resection on the cistern magna and on the bulbomedullary cistern with sampling for definitive pathological study, a sample of the pia mater was taken, which was thickened with the same characteristics of the arachnoid. Pathological cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) found in an arachnoid cyst formed by multiple adhesions, cerebellar tonsils were released with opening of the medullary velum until the IV ventricle was identified, choroid plexuses of calcified Lushka foramens with whitish granulations inside. Cerebellar hemisphere, biventral lobe as well as superior and inferior semilunar lobes with pial narrowing maintaining arterial integrity. Firm adhesions are observed on emergence of both accessory nerves as well as bilateral IX, X, XI, XII, and PICA . The histopathology revealed numerous spherical organisms that have a thick clear capsule and are surrounded by histiocytes forming a granuloma, multinucleated giant cells with spherical structures that have a clear mucoide capsule surrounding a central pale nucleus compatible with Cryptococcus . Postoperatively, the patient’s prior neurological deficits resolved.