We report the case of a retired Caucasic 84-year-old woman who required a VIV procedure due to the degeneration of a previously implanted aortic bioprosthesis. Her cardiologic history started in 2006 when she experienced syncope and was then diagnosed as having severe aortic stenosis (mean transvalvular gradient 44 mmHg) and severe mitral regurgitation. She reported no previous clinical events. She underwent aortic valve replacement with a Mitroflow number 21 bioprosthesis and a Carpentier-Edwards Physio mitral annuloplasty ring implantation. After surgery, she suffered from brady-tachy syndrome and needed a pacemaker implantation.
The initial signs of prosthesis degeneration were found at a routine transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) in 2011, with a transvalvular mean gradient of 26 mmHg. However, she was asymptomatic and meanwhile she was diagnosed as having an indolent myeloma, thus a conservative approach was chosen.
In January 2014, she started complaining of epigastric discomfort and dyspnea for minimal exertion. A TTE was repeated and showed a further increase of the mean transvalvular gradient (35 mmHg) and occurrence of moderate paraprosthetic regurgitation due to detachment of the anterior edge of the aortic prosthesis ring.
In February 2014 she was admitted to our department for an episode of pulmonary edema with angina. A physical examination revealed bilateral crackles, 3/6 systolic ejection murmur, and leg swelling. Neurological evaluation was normal. Her electrocardiogram showed transient diffuse ST segment depression and troponin values were slightly elevated (peak, 0.08 ng/ml; reference values, < 0.015 ng/ml). In addition, laboratory tests showed a mild anemia (hemoglobin values, 11 g/dl; reference values, 13–17 g/dl) and a stage 3 chronic kidney disease (serum creatinine, 1.1 mg/dl; reference values, 0.5–1 mg/dl; and glomerular filtration rate, 47 mg/dl). Her hepatic function was normal, as well as white blood cells and platelets count (white blood cells, 6500/ml; reference values, 4500–9800; and platelets count, 300 000/ml; reference values, 150,000–450,000).
A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) showed hypomobility of the non-coronary cusp, moderate paraprosthetic regurgitation, and severe intraprosthetic regurgitation. Due to the frailty of our patient, in consideration of age, previous cardiac surgery, and concurrent hematologic disease, after a Heart Team discussion, a VIV TAVI was proposed. Pre-procedural investigations included a coronary angiogram, showing absence of coronary artery disease, and a computed tomography (CT) angiography to calculate the diameter of the Mitroflow prosthesis (17 mm) and the LMCO height from the valvular annulus (11.6 mm).
VIV implantation was performed via right femoral artery using a CoreValve® prosthesis number 23 (Additional file ). A 6 Fr guide catheter, via right omeral artery, was used for the left main coronary artery cannulation as protection .
Post-procedural angiography confirmed maintained coronary perfusion , even after the removal of the guide wire. It also showed correct position of the prosthesis and its normal functioning with a transvalvular gradient of 12 mmHg and a mild intraprosthetic regurgitation .
Our patient was hemodynamically stable and was transferred to the cardiothoracic intensive care unit. Two hours after the end of the procedure, she experienced a sudden cardiac arrest with asystole and electromechanical dissociation. Resuscitation maneuvers were ineffective.
An autopsy was performed to investigate the cause of death. The CoreValve® prosthesis was removed from the aortic root with no signs of damage or thrombus formation . The underlying Mitroflow valve appeared free of calcium or thrombi, but its leaflets appeared higher than the LMCO . No other possible cause for the sudden cardiac death could be found. Our hypothesis was: a delayed occlusion of the LMCO by the Mitroflow leaflets, pushed upward by the late expansion of the CoreValve® prosthesis.