A 4-year-old male patient was admitted to Hospital Infantil Nossa Senhora da Glória – Vitória, ES, Brazil, for the correction of a cerebrospinal fluid fistula and removal of the VPS after evidence of bladder fistula and presence of a catheter inside the bladder. On admission, the child presented increased head circumference, neurogenic bladder, long-term dysuria, constipation, and chronic abdominal pain because of myelomeningocele, but no other associated symptoms. The past pathologic history showed that at 10 months of age, the patient underwent surgery to correct myelomeningocele and for implantation of the right VPS because of hydrocephalus associated with Chiari malformation and that at 3 years of age, after the evidence of ventricular dilatation, the left VPS was inserted. It also showed that after 7 months of this last procedure, the child presented signs and symptoms of meningitis, which grew Escherichia coli ESBL in culture of the left VPS catheter tip, being the urine culture also positive for this bacterium. Therefore, he was treated with meropenem, the left VPS catheter was removed and the external ventricular drainage implanted, followed by an endoscopic third ventriculostomy. During an outpatient follow-up with the neurosurgery team, at 4 years of age, asymptomatic, a detailed physical examination was performed, and new imaging tests were requested, which showed effective control of hydrocephalus. During the same follow-up with the nephrology team, routine ultrasonography of the urinary tract and abdominal X-rays was ordered. A bladder fistula with a VPS catheter in the bladder was found, requiring hospitalization for surgery. In this current hospitalization, the patient was approached by the pediatric surgery and neurosurgery teams through infraumbilical laparotomy with a section of the catheter’s distal end and removal of the entire VPS system. After unsuccessfully performing careful tractions to remove the distal portion of the VPS from inside the bladder, they opted for a vesicostomy, at which point was possible to observe the catheter coiled with about eight turns in itself, well intricate and firm, forming an intravesical tangle. No calculus formation was observed and there was no extrusion of the distal catheter through the urethra. He was treated with antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and indwelling urinary catheterization for 10 days. The tip of the right VPS catheter was sent for culture, which was negative. The patient follows up on regular outpatient follow-up with neurosurgery and nephrology, progressing uneventfully and without neurological sequelae.