A 70-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital to treat non-anastomotic stenosis of the proximal jejunum. Open total gastrectomy and R-Y reconstruction had been performed at another hospital 2 years previously for advanced gastric cancer (pT3N2M0, stage IIIA). No complications were observed during the postoperative course, and no recurrence of cancer was apparent for 2 years. She complained of anorexia and obstruction to the passage of food. Recurrence of gastric cancer was ruled out based on blood test results and various image findings. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed circumferential membranous stenosis of the jejunum 3 cm distal to the esophago-jejunal anastomosis . Upper gastrointestinal fluoroscopy showed that the length of the stenotic region was almost 0.5 cm .
EBD was performed three times. Symptoms improved after EBD in the early days, but restenosis occurred within 1 week and proved difficult to treat. MCA was planned because the stenosis existed near the esophago-jejunal anastomosis and re-operation is a highly invasive procedure requiring intrathoracic anastomosis. The protocol used for MCA was approved by the Ethics Committee for Biomedical Research of the International University of Health and Welfare Hospital, and the patient provided informed consent (approval no. 13-B-90).
Both the parent magnet (diameter, 17.5 mm; thickness, 5 mm) and daughter magnet (diameter, 17.5 mm; thickness, 5 mm) were cylinders made of samarium-cobalt (Magna Corporation, Shinjuku, Tokyo). EBD was performed to place the parent magnet on the anal side of the stenosis. A wire-guided balloon dilation catheter (CRE balloon catheter; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) was inserted and EBD (7 atm-17 mm, 3 min) was performed . Confirming the improvement of stenosis, the parent magnet was placed on the anal side of the stenosis using esophagogastroduodenoscopy . The parent magnet attached to nylon thread was fixed to the cheek to prevent migration. A week after placing the parent magnet, restenosis was confirmed and the daughter magnet was placed via nylon thread on the oral side of the stenosis using esophagogastroduodenoscopy . The two magnets were adsorbed in the end-to-end direction across the stenosis . Magnet position was confirmed on X-ray each day. The magnets adsorbed in the end-to-end direction moved to the anal side by 11 days after treatment and were passed from the anus 14 days after treatment . Wide anastomosis was confirmed by esophagogastroduodenoscopy . No complications were observed in the postoperative course of this patient. Oral intake was resumed on postoperative day 7, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 21.
EBD was regularly performed to prevent restenosis on an outpatient basis (first, every 1 week, 2 weeks, 1 month, 4 months). Eighteen months has passed after treatment, and no restenosis of MCA anastomosis has occurred. We judged that no further EBD was required. The patient has resumed eating normal food and has reintegrated into society.