A 44-year-old Asian male patient was referred to the outpatient department with an elevated IOP (52 mmHg) in the left eye that had occurred 3 days prior. He had a history of uveitis in his left eye 2 years ago. The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 and 20/25 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Keratic precipitates (KP) were accompanied by conjunctival injection and anterior chamber cell reaction in the left eye. Fundus examination showed superotemporal and inferotemporal retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) defects in the left eye, as confirmed by optical coherence tomography (OCT, Topcon Medical Systems Inc., Oakland, NJ, USA) examination. On the Humphrey visual field (HVF, Carl Zeiss Meditec Inc., Dublin, USA) test, a visual field defect was found; inferior nasal field scotoma extended to the arcuate scotoma in the left eye. The patient was diagnosed with uveitic glaucoma in the left eye. Topical anti-glaucomatic treatment using tafluprost/timolol fixed combination (Tapcom, Santen Pharm. Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan), brimonidine/brinzolamide fixed combination (Simbrinza, Novatis Co., Basel, Swiss) and topical treatment using prednisolone acetate 1%(Predbell, Chong Kun Dang Pharm. Co., Seoul, Korea) eyedrops were initiated, with close observation of glaucoma progression at the follow-up visits. Serial examinations, including blood test, OCT, and HVF test, were conducted. All factors including HLA-B27 were negative in the blood test. During the 2-year follow-up period, the IOP in the left eye intermittently increased to 60 mmHg, and enlargement of the scotoma and RNFL defect were noticed on HVF and OCT examinations, respectively, indicative of glaucoma progression. There was no evidence of cataract progression during the entire follow-up period which could affect the result of HVF test. Surgical intervention was considered to control glaucoma.
The patient requested surgical management for prompt recovery. Since patient wanted to minimize any incisional process during surgical procedure, XEN gel stent implantation was considered in conjunction with subconjunctival MMC and OVD injection. Regarding the intraoperative approach, gentian violet staining of the conjunctiva at 3.0 mm away from the limbus was performed first. A 30-gauge needle was superficially placed under the conjunctiva, which was connected to an air/OVD-filled syringe. Slowly, air was injected into the subconjunctival space for pneumatic dissection of the conjunctiva and Tenon’s capsule. Afterwards, the OVD was placed in the space created by the air, thus making a subconjunctival pocket for the XEN gel stent to be placed just above Tenon’s capsule . The injector needle was introduced into the anterior chamber and penetrated slightly anterior to the scleral spur, assisted by a gonioscopy lens. An approximately 1-mm length of the XEN gel stent was left in the anterior chamber, and the remnant was inserted at the superonasal quadrant of the subconjunctival area; a good stent position was confirmed. Diluted MMC (0.02%, 0.1 mL) was injected into the subconjunctival space where the prior air/OVD was injected. The patient was started on gatifloxacin (0.3% Gatiflo, Samil Pharm. Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea) and loteprednol (0.5% Lotemax, Bausch & Lomb, Bridgewater, NJ, USA) eyedrops four times daily; the anti-glaucoma agent was stopped.
One day after surgery, the IOP was controlled to 11 mmHg with mild conjunctival injection and subconjunctival hemorrhage. The bleb appeared well-elevated with underneath XEN gel stent visible. However, on postoperative day 18, diffuse conjunctival hyperemia and an avascular bleb was noticed, and the patient reported photophobia and ocular pain. We considered these signs and symptoms as MMC toxicity but not as those of recurrence of uveitis since the patient did not present any signs of anterior chamber reaction, hypopyon, infiltration or KPs from the early postoperative period, which are common signs of uveitis. Topical loteprednol was exchanged with prednisolone (1%, Predbell, Chong Kun Dang Pharm. Co., Seoul, Korea) eyedrop every 2 h to control the suspected MMC toxicity. The patient underwent close observation at weekly intervals. The left eye showed slight improvement in terms of conjunctival hyperemia at 1 month postoperatively. The IOP of the left eye was well controlled in the range of 16–18 mmHg, and prednisolone eyedrop instillation was adjusted to four times a day. However, diffuse conjunctival hyperemia persisted for several months, with surrounding injection around avascular bleb, mild corneal stromal haze, and the patient complained of continuous eyeball pain . Additionally, a mild to moderate degree of ptosis occurred on the left upper eyelid after 3 months . During this period, there was no signs of an infection or recurrence of uveitis, such as keratic precipitates, anterior chamber flare, hypopyon, infiltration, or discharge. The inflammation subsided only after 6 months, with the left eye showing a clear cornea and avascular bleb; the patient did not complain of any ocular discomfort. The IOP at 6 months after surgery was 15 mmHg. Topical anti-inflammatory eyedrops were changed to levofloxacin (1.5% Cravit, Santen Pharm. Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan), loteprednol, and BAK-free brimonidine (0.15%; Bridin-T, Hanlim Pharm. Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea) was added. The patient is still attending regular follow-ups to check for other possible complications .