A 31-year-old G4P1021 at 14 weeks gestation was referred by her primary obstetrician to otolaryngology for new onset debilitating headaches and persistent right-sided clear fluid rhinorrhea for nearly 4 months, slightly pre-dating conception of her pregnancy. Her nasal fluid tested positive for beta-2 transferrin, consistent with CSF leak . She was evaluated by neurosurgery, who obtained brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast. Imaging showed an osseus defect along the floor of the middle cranial fossa/roof of the right sphenoid sinus with a meningoencephalocele involving the right temporal lobe which extended through the bony defect . A partially empty sella was noted, and an air fluid level was visualized in the right sphenoid sinus suggestive of CSF. The patient was otherwise healthy, with a pregnancy complicated only by maternal obesity (BMI 38). and microcytic anemia requiring iron infusions. She had no other medical problems, history of trauma, or previous surgical history with otolaryngology or neurosurgery. The otolaryngology and neurosurgery consultants recommended postponing surgical intervention until after delivery. Management of her pregnancy was subsequently transferred to a Maternal Fetal Medicine specialist at 30 weeks gestation with plan to deliver at a tertiary care medical center. The patient’s headaches were treated with hydration, acetaminophen, caffeine, and butalbital-acetaminophen-caffeine with codeine as needed. Daily nausea was managed with ondansetron as needed. Due to the frequency and severity of her headaches and rhinorrhea, the patient was unable to work throughout her pregnancy and was placed on disability. After a multidisciplinary discussion with neurosurgery, anesthesiology, and Maternal Fetal Medicine specialists, and shared decision making with the patient, the decision was made to proceed with scheduled cesarean delivery at 38 weeks under spinal anesthesia to avoid Valsalva during labor. The patient underwent a planned, uncomplicated primary low transverse cesarean section, and delivered a viable female infant weighing 2850 g, with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Postpartum course was unremarkable, and patient reported significant improvement in the frequency and severity of her headaches after delivery, which was managed with ibuprofen. At last follow-up 8 months postpartum, the patient was neurologically stable, without symptoms of meningitis, and had planned on neurosurgical repair of her skull base defect; however, surgery was canceled due to improvement in her headaches and the patient’s desire to avoid a hospital setting during the COVID-19 pandemic.