A 29-year-old man with a history of chronic sinusitis was admitted to our hospital for an unidentified fever. He was diagnosed with malignant lymphoma (extra-nodal NK/T cell lymphoma nasal type), and two cycles of a dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, L-asparaginase, and etoposide regimen (SMILE regimen) were administered. After the first chemotherapy cycle, he suffered septic shock due to Staphylococcus haemolyticus and Corynebacterium striatum infections and progressed to multi-organ failure. Although he required temporary mechanical ventilation for respiratory support and hemodialysis, the anti-bacterial/fungal therapy (meropenem hydrate, vancomycin, sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim, and micafungin) controlled his bacterial infection and he recovered from his septic status. However, his fever persisted and nodular lung shadows (on day 27) along with new brain (on day 49), cervical, and myocardial abscesses (on day 53) appeared on computed tomography (CT). He underwent an aspiration biopsy of the cervical abscess on the 56th hospital day. Gene analysis of the cervical abscess revealed the presence of Aspergillus fumigatus. Although liposomal amphotericin B and voriconazole were administered, the patient remained febrile and CT on day 64 revealed increased sizes of brain abscesses. After articulatory and consciousness disorders (somnolence) appeared, burr hole drainage of the brain abscesses was emergently performed on the 70th hospital day. Aspergillus was not isolated from the burr hole drainage fluid. His neurological disorders immediately resolved after surgery.
Despite the antifungal/bacterial therapy, his spiking fever remained and echocardiography performed on the 78th hospital day revealed mobile mural vegetation in the left ventricle (22 × 8 mm). Previous transthoracic echocardiography had failed to identify any mural vegetation. As this large mobile vegetation was thought to be the focus of his systemic fungal infection and a source of mycotic embolization to the vital organs, he was referred for surgery .
On physical examination before surgery, his blood pressure was 113/91 mmHg, pulse 130 beats per minute and regular, and temperature 38.2 °C. Heart sounds were regular with no audible murmur present. He had no known history of treatment for chronic sinusitis, and especially no family history. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 5.7 × 103/μL, a low hemoglobin level of 7.5 g/dL, thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 98 × 103/μL, and increased C-reactive protein level at 4.72 mg/dL. Blood tests revealed an abnormally high serum β-D-glucan level (1120 pg/mL) and were positive for the Aspergillus antigen. A chest X-ray demonstrated consolidation in the left lower lobes. Contrast-enhanced CT showed multiple brain abscesses, an intramuscular abscess in the left posterior cervical region , intramuscular abscesses in the left ventricle , and left lung abscesses . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple bilateral rim-enhancing lesions with surrounding vasogenic edema . A transesophageal echocardiogram revealed a mobile mass measuring 22.0 × 8.0 mm in the left ventricle .
Elective surgery was performed on the 85th hospital day through a median sternotomy under cardioplegic arrest with standard cardiopulmonary bypass. We reached the mural vegetation on the left ventricle via a superior trans-septal approach. The mobile vegetation measuring 2.0 cm was positioned between the papillary muscle and the posterior wall and was resected. In addition to this vegetation, a small vegetation measuring 5 mm in diameter was observed on the septal and posterior commissure of the tricuspid valve. Although this vegetation had not been detected before surgery by echocardiogram, it was identified intraoperatively. As this vegetation extended towards the right ventricular wall, it was removed via wedge resection of the septal/posterior leaflet within the right ventricular wall . The defect in the tricuspid valve was repaired by 5-0 polypropylene. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Pathology and cultures demonstrated the growth of Aspergillus fumigatus .
Anti-bacterial/fungal therapy with intravenous teicoplanin (600 mg/day), voriconazole (600 mg/day), and micafungin sodium (300 mg/day) was started after surgery, and his condition was stabilized. This regimen was continued for 12 weeks until discharge. During this hospitalization, he received additional chemotherapy (GDP therapy: gemcitabine, dexamethasone, cisplatin) and was discharged on postoperative day 84 after surgery (168th hospital day).
Chemotherapy was continued in the subsequent hospitalization, during which he was treated with high-dose chemotherapy and peripheral blood stem cell autotransplantation and achieved complete remission at 7 months after surgery. Contrast-enhanced chest CT performed at 3 months after surgery revealed no nodular lung shadows in the left lower lobe . The brain abscesses in the left parietal lobe and cerebellum had healed as demonstrated on MRI at 1 year after surgery . At 28 months after surgery, he remained healthy and continued with oral voriconazole (300 mg/day).