A 46-year-old man with a month's history of urinary urgency and a jelly-like substance in his urine was admitted to a previous hospital. His medical history included AD and childhood asthma. The urinalysis results showed microscopic hematuria (many/HPF) and pyuria (30–49/HPF), while the urine cytology test was negative. Enhanced computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated an irregular and thick enhanced bladder wall with homogeneous hyperintensity relative to muscle on T1WI and hypointensity on T2WI; diffusion was slightly restricted on DWI . Based on these findings, the clinical stage was determined to be cT2N0M0 (VI-RADS 4). Thus, his previous physician suspected invasive bladder cancer and performed transurethral resection of the bladder. Pathological diagnosis was a pT1 urothelial carcinoma. As imaging findings indicated the entire circumference of the muscle-invasive bladder cancer, cystectomy was recommended. For radical surgery, the patient was referred to our hospital.
Cystoscopy revealed a raspberry-like mass lesion on almost all sides of the bladder wall ; however, urine cytology was also negative. These findings were irregular enough to confirm invasive bladder cancer; thus, we repeated transurethral resection. Pathological diagnosis was a pT1 urothelial carcinoma, which was observed in the entire circumference of the bladder . Additionally, there was no evidence of muscle layer invasion. After a thorough discussion of treatment options, the patient elected to undergo intravesical BCG rather than cystectomy. Intravesical BCG was administered once per week for 6 weeks. Subsequently, the patient's symptoms and imaging findings improved drastically . Three months after BCG treatment, cystoscopy suggested a complete response, and transurethral biopsy confirmed no residual disease . Following the BCG therapy, magnetic resonance imaging also demonstrated improvement in the thickening of bladder wall . No recurrence was observed on follow-up cystoscopy or urine cytology after 2 years.
Retrospectively, we present a patient with a history of AD and a high rate of peripheral eosinophils (12.3%). Bladder resection revealed moderate interstitial eosinophilic infiltration of the bladder subepithelial connective tissue . Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with coexisting eosinophilic cystitis and superficial urothelial carcinoma.