A 54-year-old woman had complained about a rapid progressive lump in the jaw for the past one year. She expressed there had been an alteration of sensation in the lower left teeth, slight malocclusion, and a growing pain since the past month. Food chewing and articulation were interrupted due to the lesion. A personal medical history of previous malignancy, radiotherapy exposure, allergy, surgery, and diabetes were denied. Physical examination revealed 5-cm diffuse hard swelling in the mandible body. Intraoral palpation showed a mandible lesion without protruded ulcerated lesion to the oral mucosa. Biopsy in the mandible lesion was performed in the previous hospital and revealed infiltration of papillary carcinoma to the bone. Head CT-scan revealed a 5.9×5.3×5cm amorphic mass in the left mandibular body and bone destruction in the angle. Neck ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic 1x1x1.4cm lesion in the left thyroid lobe, regular border, taller than wide, and increased intra-tumoral vascularization. A 1.97x2.31x2.34 hypoechoic lesion with regular clear border, and intralesional vascularization was observed in the right thyroid lobe. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy in the thyroid nodules revealed a benign follicular nodule with Bethesda System identification of Class II. Because sonography-guided needle biopsy in the thyroid showed benign follicular nodule, right isthmo-thyroidectomy was initially performed. After the frozen section showed malignancy, total thyroidectomy was then performed. Left hemi-mandibulectomy without bony reconstruction was performed afterwards. Histopathology examination showed follicular variants of papillary thyroid carcinoma both in the thyroid lobes and the mandible lesion. The patient was categorized in the high-risk papillary thyroid cancer due to histology with lympho-vascular invasion and manifestation of distant metastases. Thyroid ablation, TSH suppression, and chewing exercises were accomplished by the patient. She expressed an alteration in the ability to place food during mastication. The complaint improved with chewing exercises in the medical rehabilitation program. Four weeks after surgery, she was able to eat soft food. In the one-year follow-up, the patient was able to eat solid to hard food and to chew certain cooked vegetables. Neck sonography evaluation one year after surgery showed no thyroid remnant and TSH was maintained at 0.01 μIU/mL.