A 72-year-old male was referred to the Maxillofacial Surgery Department by his dentist because of pain and swelling of the right temporomandibular region. His medical history included hypertension and coronary heart disease. Four months earlier, he underwent elective stenting of his right coronary artery, followed by double anti-platelet therapy with clopidogrel and acetylsalicylic acid. He exercised regularly, did not smoke, and had no previous history of temporomandibular disease or immunodeficiency.
The patient reported sudden pain and a sensation of subluxation in his right temporomandibular region while yawning 3 weeks prior to hospital admission. This was followed by a gradual increase of swelling and tenderness in the TMJ region.
Upon examination, the patient was hypotensive with a blood pressure of 88/65 mmHg, the heart rate was irregular with a frequency of 90–120 per minute, and he had tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 31 per minute and temperature 37.7 °C. His skin was warm and sweaty, and he appeared disoriented and responded with latency. Swelling in the right pre-auricular area that extended to the angle of the mandible was noted. Pitting edema in the temporal region was also present as well as trismus, with a maximal mouth opening of 2 cm. There was no apparent fluctuation in the skin or mucosa. A CT angiography of the face and neck showed extensive temporomandibular joint effusion along with edema in the masseter, temporal, and lateral pterygoid muscles with signs of abscess formation . In addition, thrombophlebitis in the ipsilateral internal jugular vein (IJV) was seen.
Blood samples showed increased inflammatory markers with leucocytes at 18.8 cells per μL (3.5–10.0), sedimentation rate 58 mm (1–12), and C-reactive protein of 251 mg/L (< 4). Platelet count was low at 98 cells per μL (145–390), and creatinine was elevated at 172 μmol/L (60–105).
Aspiration from the temporomandibular joint revealed blood-tinged pus. A diagnosis of septic arthritis of the TMJ with peri-articular extension was made. Moreover, he had septic shock with a Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score (SOFA-score) of 12. Intravenous crystalloid fluid, norepinephrine, ceftriaxone, and metronidazole were administered, and the patient was taken directly to the operating theater. A pre-auricular incision was made with extension temporally making a hemi-coronal incision. Pus was evacuated from the temporomandibular joint, which was explored and debrided thoroughly with removal of necrotic tissue . The articular disc appeared grayish in color and was removed along with the joint capsule. Because of the extensive necrotic peri-articular tissue, an intraoral vestibular incision was made with further exploration of the masseteric and pterygomandibular space. No further necrotic tissue was found on the medial or lateral side of the ramus of the mandible. Intra-operative bacterial samples with direct gram staining showed gram-positive cocci and gram-negative rods. No change in antibiotic treatment was made. Low molecular weight heparin was administered postoperatively. Further revision was made the following day where the temporal muscle was now found to be avascular and therefore removed along with necrotic tissue in the masseter and lateral pterygoid muscle .
The patient required monitoring in the intensive care unit (ICU) for 11 days and underwent a total of six surgical revisions due to progression of the necrosis. Debridement of necrotic tissue in the pterygopalatine fossa, infratemporal fossa, the masseter muscle, and the pterygomandibular space was done. During the revisions, necrotic tissue was removed until viable tissue was encountered. The temporal muscle was removed in total due to development of necrosis. The coronoid process was removed to facilitate surgical access. During the ICU admission, the patient required norepinephrine to maintain adequate blood pressure in the first 8 days. Intercurrent atrial fibrillation was successfully treated with electrocardioversion at day 5. A tracheotomy was performed the same day.
Streptococcus constellatus was isolated from the TMJ aspirate and peri-auricular pus, sensitive to the prescribed antibiotics. All (four) blood cultures were positive for Streptococcus constellatus, and anaerobic blood culture was positive for Dialister pneumosintes prior to initiation of antibiotic treatment. Due to persistent fever despite adequate surgical and medical treatment, transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram was performed to rule out infectious endocarditis as the underlying etiology. This showed an incidental finding of a tumor adherent to the left atrial septum, measuring 2.3 × 2.5 cm, but no signs of endocarditis. The thrombophlebitis in the superior part of right IJV was also visualized, which extended 5 cm inferior to the jugular foramen. A tentative diagnosis of non-infectious myxoma of the heart was made. The valvular apparatus appeared normal without signs of endocarditis.
A cardiothoracic surgeon was consulted, and removal of the tumor was planned as soon as the patient recovered from the infection. A further thoracic CT was done, which in addition to the tumor in the left atrium showed signs of multiple septic emboli in both lungs. Cerebral MRI showed a cerebral abscess in the right temporal lobe, measuring 1.2 × 1.3 cm , as well as a narrow empyema anterior to the temporal pole. Because of the small size, the cerebral abscess was treated non-surgically. The infectious diseases specialist recommended 6-week intravenous high-dose ceftriaxone and metronidazole, considering penetration through the blood-brain barrier and into the abscess fluid. This was followed by 3-week oral amoxicillin treatment preceding MRI control and new evaluation of treatment length.
The patient gradually improved and the tracheostomy decannulation was performed on day 11. He was awake with intact cognitive functions. He had no neurological deficits. Follow-up MRI showed full regression of the abscess, and thus antibiotic treatment was discontinued.
The patient was transferred to the cardiothoracic department on day 24 after admission. He had persistent malocclusion with open bite in the left posterior segment, and only the second molar was in occlusion on the right side. Due to the multiple organ complexity, corrective treatment of the occlusion was pending further clinical stabilization. Cardiac surgery was performed on day 26 with full removal of the myxoma which appeared smooth and non-infected. The diagnosis was confirmed histologically. He was discharged to his local hospital for further convalescence 1 month after first admission.
Persistent cosmetic hollowing of the right temporal region was noted at the follow-up appointments at the outpatient clinic; however, the patient rejected further surgical correction. He had reduced occlusal contact on the right posterior segment, and CT showed a pathological fracture in the right mandibular condyle . Because there were no signs of persistent infection, the condylar process was not removed. He did not report any pain following hospital discharge. The occlusion was partially corrected with reduction of the cusp height on the opposite side. He had persistent reduced mouth opening but achieved an inter-incisal opening of 30 mm which was considered adequate by the patient. Owing to the absence of signs indicating persistent, chronic infection, joint replacement surgery has been suggested, but not yet scheduled.