A 75-year-old Japanese man with suspected PPA visited our clinic, accompanied by his wife. He was a university graduate. He had a history of atrial fibrillation, which was controlled by a pacemaker, and diabetes, which was under control. His family medical history was not particularly remarkable. His family had recently observed memory impairment and stuttering in the patient, which prompted his visit to our clinic. During the medical interview, his speech was effortful with stuttering; however, inconsistent speech sound errors were not obvious.
The following tests were performed four times in total, at baseline, half a year after base line, 1 year after baseline, and 2 years after baseline : Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale Japanese version (ADAS-cog), frontal assessment battery, digit span of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–Third Edition (WAIS-III), logical memory subtest I of the Wechsler Memory Scale–Revised (WMS-R), logical memory subtest II of the WMS-R, copy of the Rey-Osterrieth complex figure test (ROCFT), delayed recall of the ROCFT, and the Japanese reading test. The Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) was performed twice in interviews with his wife, both at 6 months and 2 years after baseline. The Japanese Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (RCPM) was performed 6 months after baseline. The results are shown in Table . The results of the logical memory subtest and ROCFT indicated that the patient’s verbal memory was severely impaired at baseline, and his visual memory impairment at baseline showed gradual worsening, respectively. The results of the MMSE and ADAS-cog showed worsening of general cognitive impairment. His behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia also showed progression, as revealed by the results of the NPI. The RCPM was performed once 6 months after the baseline; the patient scored 26 out of 36, which indicated nonverbal cognitive impairment .
The Japanese Standard Language Test of Aphasia (SLTA) was also performed at each of the four time points [, ]. The SLTA was developed in Japan and consists of 26 items for evaluating aphasia; the test kit is commonly used and easily available in Japan [, ]. The results of the SLTA are shown in Table . Scores worsened over the 2 years for all of the following subtests: auditory comprehension (ability to obey verbal commands), naming, verbal explanation of behavior of persons and movement of others in pictures, verbal explanation of Manga, verbal fluency, reading comprehension of short sentences (ability to point at pictures), reading comprehension (ability to obey written commands), writing words with Kana (ability to represent pictures), writing explanation of Manga, dictation of Kana letters, dictation of Kanji words, dictation of Kana words, dictation of short sentences, and four arithmetic operations on paper. All other subtest scores were stable throughout the 2 years. Scores for auditory comprehension of words (ability to point at pictures), word repetition, reading aloud Kana letters, reading aloud Kana words, reading comprehension of Kanji words (ability to point at pictures), and reading comprehension of Kana words (ability to point at pictures) showed no errors during the 2 years.
Briefly, the results of the SLTA showed impaired comprehension of syntactically complex sentences, whereas single word comprehension and object knowledge were spared. Additionally, the content of his speech during the SLTA subtest of verbal explanation of Manga showed that his agrammatism in language production had progressed. These clinical symptoms met the criteria for a clinical diagnosis of nfvPPA .
The results of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), [123I] iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (123I-IMP SPECT), 11C-Pittsburgh compound-B (PiB) positron emission tomography (PET), and 18F-THK5351 (THK5351) PET at baseline and 2 years are shown in Figs. and . The MRI results showed global cerebral atrophy, which progressed during the 2 years . PiB-PET and THK5351 PET, which indicated pathologic amyloid-β and tau protein deposition, did not show obvious laterality ; however, 123I-IMP SPECT imaging showed significant regional hypoperfusion dominantly in the left hemisphere, particularly in the bilateral parietal and temporal association cortex, the precuneus, the posterior cingulate cortex, the frontal association cortex, and the occipital lobe, which suggested CBD . These figures showed that pathologic amyloid-β and tau protein deposition progressed during the 2 years, and that hypoperfusion also progressed during this period. The finding of 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) PET at baseline was almost the same as that of 123I-IMP SPECT, that is, glucose uptake was decreased dominantly in the left hemisphere, particularly in the bilateral parietal and temporal association cortex, the precuneus, the posterior cingulate cortex, the frontal association cortex, and the occipital lobe, which also suggested CBD. There were no remarkable findings on either [123I] FP-CIT SPECT (DaTscans), which was performed twice.
Collectively, taking into account all results, the patient was diagnosed with nfvPPA with definite AD . The patient also met the DSM5 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition) criteria for AD . The patient’s clinical features included occasional urinary incontinence, progression of personality and behavioral changes based on the NPI, limb-kinetic apraxia at around 6 months after baseline, some inability to recognize grandchildren and old friends at around 18 months after baseline, and progression of ideomotor apraxia. A score of 3 was found on the modified ranking scale both 6 months and 2 years after baseline. These clinical symptoms did not meet the criteria for CBD . Neither the patient nor his spouse expected to receive any pharmacotherapy. We did not introduce speech and language therapy because it would have been painful for the patient. However, we advised the couple to use an elderly adult day-care center, and the patient regularly went to such a center near their home.