A 58-year-old man was referred to our hospital complaining of aching pain at the elbow associated with progressive swelling not related to a recent trauma. The patient referred a trauma to the upper extremity due to a fall on an outstretched hand 2 years before with local swelling at the proximal third of the forearm treated with local non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
The patient reported a medical history of diabetes and hypertension well controlled by oral therapies.
At clinical examination, the patient showed an oval mass localized on the dorsal side of the proximal forearm. He complained of pain equivalent to 4 at the 10-point visual analog score with exacerbation at palpation and at the maximum active flexion and extension of the wrist. Neither sensitive nor motor deficits were identified in the skin and muscles innervated by the radial and median nerves.
The forearm radiographs excluded a bone involvement. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined lipoma-like mass of 7 cm. hyperintense on T1- and hypointense on T2-weighted images limited to the antebrachial fascia of the proximal third of the forearm. The angio-MRI confirmed the diagnosis, excluded vascular malformations, and with normal vascular patency of the radial and ulnar artery. Due to the low mortality rate for tumors originating in the extremities that is near 0% , unlike ALT located in the retroperitoneum and mediastinum that result in a poor prognosis with multiple relapses that ultimately implicate important internal organs or dedifferentiation, chest computed tomography (CT) scan and bone scintigraphy were not prescribed.
A pre-operative biopsy of the mass was not undertaken due to the low accuracy of the pathologic assessment of a small tissue, the large differentiation, and because multiple samples have to be theoretically collected from several parts of the lesion.
Surgical excision was discussed in detail with our patient and a consent for the surgical procedure was obtained. Under axillary bloc with a supine patient a 8-cm long skin incision, for a dorsal approach over the proximal third of the left forearm, was carried out by a board-certified hand surgeon level IV according to the classification proposed by Tang .
Under × 3.5 loupe magnification blunt dissection was used to preserve the extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor digitorum communis, and supinator muscles in order to isolate the radial nerve and its bifurcation into the motor and sensitive branches. The lipomatous mass was marginally removed with no intraoperative rupture and sent for the histological evaluation . A compressive bandage was applied and an early active motion of the wrist and the digit was initiated under supervision.
The histological examination confirmed the presence of a lipogenic tumor composed of dismetric adipocytic cells in a lobulated pattern of growth with bundles of low cellulated stroma. The features were consistent with an ALT lipoma-like variant .
The case was discussed with the oncologist who did not recommend radio- and chemotherapy due to the lower local recurrence rate after the tumor marginal resection in superficial-like ALTs of the upper extremity and suggested a follow-up every 4 months with an MRI of the forearm, chest X-ray and blood test for the following 5 years after surgery according to the literature .
Post-operatively the patient reported a transient partial radial nerve palsy. No immediate electrodiagnostic studies were carried out due to the high rate of full nerve recovery after posterior interosseous neuropathies secondary to fractures or orthopedic procedures of the arm and elbow . In particular, a deficit in the extension of the wrist was shown with tingling and paresthesias of the left hand. This complication was treated with a palmar thermoplastic “custom made” splint, daily sessions of occupational therapy, and functional electrical stimulation (Compex®, DJO Italia, Italy). The patient recovered from radial nerve palsy 3 months later.
At 60-months follow-up no recurrence of the lipomatous tumor after simple resection was detected either by clinical or instrumental exams .