A British Caucasian female patient aged 10 years and 11 months presented to our institution with a thoracic and lumbar scoliosis. She was noted to have the phenotypic features indicative of Smith-Magenis syndrome at the age of three years and the diagnosis was confirmed with chromosomal studies. There was no family history of syndromic conditions or scoliosis.
The development of a scoliosis was first noted at the age of 4 years and the patient was treated with an underarm spinal brace in another spinal centre. The deformity remained stable up to the age of 10 years when the curvature progressed rapidly as the patient started going through her pubertal growth spurt. During that stage, the brace was discontinued as the patient's compliance was very poor and any brace effectiveness was limited due to the fact that the patient was significantly overweight. At presentation to our clinic, she remained premenarchal with a body weight of 63 kg which was above the 95th percentile for sex- and age-matched normal population. Her arm span was 142 cm which was between the 25th and 50th percentiles for stature and her BMI was calculated to be 31.2.
On clinical examination, the patient was found to be very hyperactive. Overall, she had a balanced spine with level shoulders and pelvis despite a mild thoracic translocation to the right and no leg length discrepancy. However, she had a severe thoracic and lumbar deformity with a significant rib hump adjacent to the convexity of the thoracic scoliosis, as well as a marked waist line asymmetry with prominence of the pelvis on the concavity of the lumbar curve. There were no skin or soft tissue abnormalities overlying the spine. The patient was a community ambulator and had no neurological abnormality. Neurological examination showed normal tone, muscle power, sensation and tendon reflexes in the upper and lower limbs, as well as symmetrically elicited abdominal reflexes. There were no upper motor neurone signs.
Radiographs of the spine during the initial assessment in our clinic revealed a right thoracic scoliosis extending from T4 to T10 and measuring 75° and a left lumbar scoliosis extending from T11 to L4 and measuring 65°. Both curvatures were rigid on supine maximum side-bending and traction radiographs. The radiological evaluation excluded the presence of congenital abnormalities in the development of the vertebral column and the chest wall. There were no features suggestive of congenital spinal stenosis and the interpedicular distance was within normal limits. The Risser grade was 0, indicating that the patient had a significant amount of remaining growth and this could result into further deterioration of her scoliosis.
An MRI of the spine demonstrated no intraspinal anomalies, normal appearance of the pedicles, no evidence of spinal stenosis, and normal kidneys. An ultrasound of the kidneys and the bladder did not elicit pathological findings. A cardiological examination showed normal cardiac function. A respiratory assessment did not identify any abnormality. An anaesthetic evaluation confirmed the fitness of the patient to undergo scoliosis surgery and excluded laryngeal anomalies that could complicate intubation. Blood tests demonstrated lower than normal immunoglobulin levels.
Our patient underwent a posterior spinal arthrodesis extending from T3 to L4 with a double pedicle hook/screw and rod construct six months following initial clinical assessment and while the scoliosis had further progressed . An interfacetal and intertransverse arthrodesis was performed bilaterally at every level across the instrumentation using iliac crest graft supplemented by allograft bone. Spinal cord monitoring was performed during the surgery recording somatosensory (SSEP) and motor (MEP) evoked potentials and there were no problems.
Continuous arterial line blood pressure, as well as ECG monitoring was performed throughout the procedure. Central venous access was also placed to allow for rapid administration of fluids and blood products. Intraoperative blood conservation techniques were applied with the use of a cell saver. Three doses of a first generation cephalosporin were administered immediate preoperatively, at completion of surgery and eight hours later as per routine protocol in our institution.
In order to avoid problems related to patient's hyperactivity, as well as her tendency towards a self-injurious behaviour, the period of sedation and assistive ventilation after scoliosis surgery was electively prolonged. The patient was extubated three days following the procedure. During this initial postoperative period nutrition was maintained with nasogastric feeding. She was fitted with a plastazote spinal brace in order to provide additional support to the spine and limit spinal mobility. Six days following surgery, our patient developed a superficial dehiscence of the distal third of the spinal wound; this was treated with resuturing and healed without further problems. There was no sign of a wound infection and both the blood and wound cultures were negative.
Postoperative radiographs showed correction of the thoracic scoliosis from 85° to 45° and the lumbar scoliosis from 80° to 40° with a balanced spine in the coronal and sagittal planes . The patient was discharged 10 days after the initial procedure. At the latest follow-up four years following surgery, the patient had no complaints of her back and had a good level of activities within the limitations of her condition. She was skeletally mature as determined by the Risser grade which was 5. There was no loss of scoliosis correction across the instrumented levels and no detected pseudarthrosis. There was also no evidence of add-on deformity either above or below the levels of the spinal fusion.