A 39-year-old housewife, a mother of two children, presented with a history of high intermittent fever (101-103 °F), chills and rigors for eight days. Apart from mild intermittent asthma, she had no other co-morbidities. The intensity and frequency of fever had increased despite treatment with oral co-amoxyclav by a general practitioner. She had associated severe frontal headache, nausea and vomiting. However, the most striking feature was that she developed progressively severe pain in almost all large and small joints of the body with backache and neck pain limiting her movements. As a result, at the time of presentation she was bedbound. In addition, she had noted yellowish discoloration of the sclerae and dark urine around the third day of fever. She did not have any similar clinical manifestations in the past or any clinical signs suggestive of a connective tissue disease. She had an intrauterine contraceptive device for one year. Although menstrual periods were regular, she complained of intermittent offensive vaginal discharge for the past few months. She denied history of recent pregnancy or gynecological interventions.
She had been a victim of floods two weeks prior to the onset of current illness. However, she had not travelled away from her residence. She had no contact with farm animals but had two pet dogs at home.
On examination she looked very ill, icteric, pale and dehydrated. She had severe neck stiffness and bilateral symmetrical large and small joint arthritis with distal interphalangeal joint sparing. Careful physical examination on admission did not reveal skin rash, oral ulcers or lymphadenopathy. Abdominal examination was unremarkable except for a non-tender enlarged liver 2 cm below the right costal margin. She had tachycardia of 100 beats/min and blood pressure of 110/60 mmHg with no cardiac murmurs. She was not tachypneic, and her lungs were clear. Vaginal examination was unremarkable.
The differential diagnosis included leptospirosis, a palindromic rheumatism with systemic involvement or severe bacterial sepsis with a meningitic process. Admission investigations revealed a WBC count of 12.7 × 103/mL (Neutrophils 80% Lymphocytes 16%) and c-reactive protein (CRP) of 327 U/L (Normal < 5 U/L). Blood picture showed toxic granules in polymorphonuclear leukocytes together with a left shift suggesting a bacterial infection. Urinalysis on admission showed 2+ proteinuria with occasional leukocytes and red blood cells. Serum creatinine was 229 μmol/L (normal 45-90 micromol/L), aspartate transaminase (AST) 92 U/L(normal 0 – 35 U/L), alanine transaminase (ALT) 45 U/L (normal 0 – 35 U/L), bilirubin 95 μmol/L (normal 5.0–17.0 μmol/L), Direct 40 μmol/l. Serum alkaline phosphatase was 255 U/L(normal 50-100 U/L), her ESR was 72 mm/1sthr, and anti-nuclear antibodies and rheumatoid factor were negative. Urine culture was negative, and the blood culture were negative.
While awaiting investigation results, she was treated as for leptospirosis or for severe sepsis with intravenous ceftriaxone, 1 g twice daily together with intravenous hydration, antipyretics and analgesics.
However, despite the above treatment, she continued to deteriorate rapidly with worsening of symptoms. On the 2nd day of admission (10th day of illness) the patient rapidly developed a painful rash over the breasts which progressed to involve the rest of the body, mainly on the abdomen, upper limbs & hands and lower limbs with sparing of the face. Examination of the rash revealed multiple subcutaneous hemorrhagic skin lesions in a ‘fern leaf’ pattern together with a vasculitic rash over the soles . She also had splinter hemorrhages, persistent tachycardia (120/min), tachypnea (33/min) and a high fever indicative of systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
At this stage, the blood picture showed fragmented red cells and thrombocytopenia suggesting early DIC. Her hemoglobin dropped to 8.6 g/dL from 10 g/dL and the platelet count was 76 × 103/mL, APTT 40 s with INR 1.3 and elevated D dimers of 1.2 ng/ml (normal < 0.5 ng/ml). However, she did not have active bleeding from elsewhere. The clinical picture together with the rash led to the clinical suspicion of infective endocarditis, meningococcal or gonococcal septicaemia, severe staphylococcal or streptococcal sepsis, acute flare of connective tissue disease with vasculitis, cryoglobulinemia, a hemorrhagic form of leptospirosis, or rickettsial infection.
Transesophageal and transthoracic echocardiograms did not show evidence of infective endocarditis or myocarditis. ASOT titre was <200 Units. Chest radiograph was normal, and ultrasound scan of the abdomen revealed mild hepatomegaly. Intravenous vancomycin, oral doxycycline and azithromycin were added on the 3rd day of admission to cover severe gram positive sepsis and rickettsial infections. The IFA-IgG titre against Rickettsia conorii Ag was positive at a titre of 1: 8192 and leptospira antibodies were negative by both Microscopic Agglutination Test and ImmuneMed Leptospira Rapid Immuno-Chromatographic assay for qualitative detection of IgM, IgG antibodies to Leptospira. The patient showed gradual improvement with reduction in fever by the 2ndday of doxycycline (5th day of admission) and had a complete recovery from acute kidney and liver injury by the 4th treatment day. However, her skin rash and the joints became very painful over the 2nd-4th days of treatment. All these resolved completely within 5 days of treatment (8th day of admission), and she was discharged on the 11thday of admission. On review after one week of discharge, her rash had started to desiccate and peel off . The timeline diagram of the evolution of illness is give in Fig. .