A 31-year-old woman presented to our clinic with the chief complaint of occlusion discomfort in the left mandibular posterior region for the past 5 years. During the course of disease, self-subsided gingival pustules occurred several times; however, no history of spontaneous or temperature-provoked pain was reported. The patient’s medical, dental, and family history did not contribute to her condition. Extraoral examinations revealed normal findings. Intraoral examinations revealed no caries, but a fractured DE was observed in the left second mandibular premolar (tooth #35). Mucosal swelling and the sinus tract were visible in the buccal region. It was tender to percussion and periapical palpation. Thermal vitality tests (1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane and hot gutta-percha bar) and electric pulp test (Pulp Tester, Denjoy, China) showed negative results. In addition, the periodontal examination revealed the presence of grade “I” mobility and deep periodontal pockets with probing depths of > 5 mm. An intraoral periapical (IOPA) (Carestream Health, USA) examination revealed large periapical radiolucency, thin dentine walls, and an open apex. Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) (J. MORITA MFG. CORP, Japan) images further confirmed the extent of the bony defect and the large diameter of the immature apex . Clinically and radiographically, tooth #28 had no dentine or periapical lesions, and it had no occlusal relationship with the mandible teeth; therefore, tooth #28 was recommended for extraction . The patient was diagnosed with DE, combined pulpal–periodontal lesion, pulp necrosis, and symptomatic apical periodontitis in tooth #35. Treatment procedures, including nonsurgical root canal with an apical plug, extraction, and REP, were provided. The patient was informed that the goal of REP was to restore pulp vitality and initiate continued root development, which may not be successful. A decision was made to perform REP via the transplantation of autologous hDPCs with LPCGF. Simultaneous periodontal surgery was also considered for the management of periodontal lesion. Written informed consent was obtained, and the patient was scheduled for treatment. Consensus-based Clinical Case Reporting Guidelines (CARE) were used as standard guidance to report the case flow and process of treatment .