The 71-year-old female was a healthy housewife with no record of medical interventions. She had a family history of cerebral cancer. August 4, 2018, marked the onset of a series of symptoms, including an altered state of consciousness, disorientation and sleepiness and no presence of fever. She first consulted a doctor in private practice and was diagnosed with transient cerebral ischemia. The onset of memory loss and the persistence of the previous symptoms led the patient to seek medical attention in a public hospital where she was admitted and blood analysis was performed. The only alteration in the basic blood panel was high blood pressure, with a value of 149/100 mmHg. Pallor was observed in the skin and integuments. Neurological examination only showed cognitive impairment with bradypsychia, disorientation in time and space and difficulty in carrying out simple calculations, with no fever or meningeal signs. Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging using gadolinium contrast (NMRI) of the brain revealed multiple bilateral cystic lesions containing varying amounts of fluid (white arrows in Fig. Ab). The lesions were detected in several brain locations: the frontal, temporal and occipital lobes and in the supra- and infratentorial zones . Since some of the lesions were compatible with a diagnosis of colloidal vesicular phase neurocysticercosis, because the hospital did not have a stereotaxic frame and due to the multiple locations of the abscesses, the patient was submitted to a right temporal craniotomy under general anesthesia on August 25, 2018. The layers of tissue were separated, working from the skin to the brain and through the superior temporal sulcus. A cyst (without capsule) was removed from the right temporal lobe, which had a diameter of approximately 5 mm, contents with a milky not suppurative aspect and a periphery composed of soft whitish tissue (see supplementary video). A fragment of biopsy-extracted tissue was fixed in formaldehyde at 10% to be processed for histopathological examination. The surgical lesion was closed in layers from the dura to the skin.
The patient was discharged on September 3, 2018 with a diagnosis of probable neurocysticercosis and possible hydatid cysts. The sample was not grown in bacterial culture, and the medical ethics committee decided to perform a histopathological study and ELISA to obtain a definitive diagnosis.
Brain biopsy tissue showed a large necrotic area with an amoeboid structure (red arrow) on the periphery of the brain tissue abscess . The presence of E. histolytica trophozoites in cerebral biopsy specimens was confirmed by immunohistochemistry using a rabbit polyclonal anti-E. histolytica antibody and mouse anti-140 kDa fibronectin (FN)-binding protein (EhFNR) . Furthermore, staining with rhodamine phalloidin revealed amoebic structures rich in actin filaments that formed adhesion plaques and macropinosomes . The rest of the brain tissue was positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) by immunofluorescence.
The presence of E. histolytica in the cerebral tissue was corroborated by PCR, and an 128 bp amplicon of the E. histolytica rRNA gene (NCBI Accession number X65163.1) was cloned from cerebral tissue with the CloneJET PCR Cloning Kit (Thermo Scientific). DNA sequencing was performed in the Unit of Molecular Biology of the Institute of Cellular Physiology (National Autonomous University of Mexico) . Interestingly, the ELISA of the patient serum did not find IgG antibodies against E. histolytica or amoebic proteins. Absorbance data analysis showed a cutoff for the negative control of 186.38; the median for amoebic cerebral abscess patients was 111.5, a number below that of the negative control; however, the median for the positive control was 477.3 . Based on a diagnosis of amoebic brain abscess, the patient was treated with ceftriaxone (2 g IV every 12 h), metronidazole (750 mg IV every 8 h), and dexamethasone (8 mg IV every 8 h) for 4 weeks, and no antiepileptic drugs were administered. A deteriorating condition led to her readmission to the hospital on October 14, 2018, and she died four days later.