A 24-year-old man was admitted to the ER with a large, painful (VAS 8), and recurrent bleeding mass in the right upper chest quadrant, increasing in size for two months before admission. Before the surgery, the mass dimension was 14 cm × 9 cm × 6 cm, with the pathological result of a grade II myxofibrosarcoma. The patient did not suffer from cough, dyspnea, or fever. There was no family history of malignancy in the family. MRI and CT Scan showed that the patient had a recurrent tumor.
The histology slides were examined, and the morphological features showed spindle cell sarcoma reminiscent of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma with extensive necrosis. Immunohistochemical staining was not entirely specific due to extensive necrosis, but as a low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma, the morphology could still be supported . We performed wide surgical excision with removal of the pectoralis major muscle and obtained a primary tumor measuring 22 × 13 × 18 cm with a non-tumor-free margin. A high-grade sarcoma of the spindle cell was the postoperative pathological outcome. Immunohistochemical staining revealed epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) focal positivity, and CD99, BCL2, and CD56 positive, smooth muscle actin (SMA) negative, and desmin and S100 protein-positive results. This staining pattern was mostly associated with monophasic synovial sarcoma along with the morphology . We then performed a PET scan with no tumor cells. Thereafter, the patient refused to receive radiation and chemotherapy for 2 months and chose to be treated by a medicine man for two months rather than receiving chemotherapy. Meanwhile, the mass reappeared in the right upper quadrant of the chest and in the right upper extremity, which had been growing in size as large as an adult head. The patients suffered from a swollen right hand and active hemorrhage in the masses . Multiple blood transfusions were needed, and several treatments, including corticosteroid injections, betadine dressing, flamazine, and cauterization, were considered to stop the bleeding. Hemostasis was achieved only by compression bandage, and bandage removal induced rebleeding. We performed external radiation for hemostatic purposes six times, which resulted in reduced hemorrhage. However, after the external radiation procedure, bleeding of the mass was still ongoing. Because of the large tumor size and extensive vascular and soft tissue involved, we planned a salvage surgery rescue procedure. PET did not reveal any other metastatic lesions.
After extensive consultations, a multidisciplinary meeting consisting of oncology surgeons, cardiothoracic and vascular surgeons, pathologists, and radiation oncologists agreed that amputation was the best alternative to treat pain, bleeding, lymphedema, and compromised patient function. A team of oncology surgeons and cardiothoracic and vascular surgeons performed the procedure. Based on a discussion with the patient and his family about the procedure’s radical nature, benefit, and potential complications, they agreed to undergo the operation. He had restricted arm mobility due to mass impact, chronic intractable pain, and lymphedema.
Preoperative embolization was advised by interventional radiologists during preoperative consultation. Due to the large tumor size at the proximal area and a previously irradiated bed mass position, we preserved the vascular function (subclavian and axillary vessels) and reduced wound bleeding during surgery. TACE was performed in the tumor artery, and the patient underwent right subclavian and axillary artery angiography with embolization of the right subclavian artery . The TACE procedure aimed to control bleeding, strengthen local surgical control, and decrease the morbidity of wide excisions.
Vascular access from the right femoral artery was achieved with introducer sheath 6 Fr, and a diagnostic catheter 5 Fr was inserted until the tip reached the right subclavian artery. This was continued with the mapping arteriography. Hypervascularization of the feeding artery originating from the superolateral right axillary artery neovascularization branch and the proximal inferomedial right brachialis artery neovascularization branch was demonstrated by this procedure. Then, microcatheter 2,4 Fr was inserted until the tip was selectively located in the neovascularization of these branches, and a chemoembolization agent was inserted. GS particles and microcoils were used in this procedure. The chemoembolization agent used in this procedure was doxorubicin (50 mg) and Lipiodol (10 mL), including the embolization agent, PVA (500–700 microns), and gel foam combination. The operation was performed from the neovascularization branch of the superolateral right axilla artery in the feeding artery and the proximal inferomedial right brachialis artery in the neovascularization branch.
Six days after the TACE procedure, we performed extensive surgery on the entire right upper extremity, scapula, and whole clavicula with 235 mL bleeding during the surgery, and the size of the mass was 30 × 24 × 10.5 cm from the right upper quadrant of the chest and shoulder girdle .