A 93-year-old man with a history of ischaemic heart disease with preserved ejection fraction, who had undergone left anterior descending angioplasty 20 years ago, was implanted with a dual chamber pacemaker (MicroPort Group) for sinus bradycardia with episodes of paroxysmal 2:1 atrioventricular block and heart failure. His preoperative blood cell count showed moderate asymptomatic inflammatory syndrome with leucocytes 10.4 × 109/L (normal 4.5–10.0 × 109/L), neutrophils 7.3 × 109/L (normal <5.9 × 109/L), lymphocytes 0.79 × 109/L (normal >1.07 × 109/L), and monocytes 2.23 × 109/L (normal <0.7 × 109/L). There were no immediate post-operative complications and the patient was discharged home 2 days later. On the 5th post-operative day, he had pain in the scar with bleeding on contact. On the 7th day after implantation, he presented with fever (39°C) and inflammatory syndrome (leucocytes 56 × 109/L, neutrophils 41 × 109/L, monocytes 13 × 109/L, lymphocytes 2.2 × 109/L, and C-reactive protein 247 mg/L). The wound had rapidly become very inflamed, painful, oozing, and necrotic, extending to a diameter of 7 cm and he was readmitted to our unit. The day after his readmission (8th day), he was taken to the operating room for device revision. After taking local samples, the pacemaker was extracted.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular hypertrophy, left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%, no signs of endocarditis, and no pericardial effusion. The patient was then started on antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanate and linezolid. As no growth was detected from the device, wound, or blood cultures, a clinical diagnosis of PG was suspected. Histological testing showed a major inflammatory infiltrate consisting of neutrophils—sometimes altered with small foci of connective necrosis—which was compatible with a diagnosis of PG. High-dose systemic corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) were started the day after the extraction and the antibiotics were stopped 3 days later. The patient’s general and cutaneous evolution were favourable after 1 week of systemic corticosteroid treatment and he did not have early recurrence of PG, including at the puncture sites of the intravenous lines. After 2 months of decreasing-dose corticosteroid therapy, complete healing and normalization of the inflammatory syndrome were observed .
Analysis of the patient’s blood cell count was indicative of an underlying unknown haematopathy [e.g. chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML)], but the patient refused further investigations. He also refused to have a new pacemaker implanted, including a leadless pacemaker. One year after his PG diagnosis, the patient is still alive. His heart failure is controlled by medical treatment and there has been no recurrence of the skin disorder.