A 38-year-old Brazilian man was admitted in our service with chief complaint of fecaluria and pneumaturia for eight months that started after an intense abdominal pain at the time. His occupation was teaching and he walked into the urology emergency by his own means. The patient evolved with repeated episodes of urinary infection associated with dysuria and hematuria. He was treated with several antibiotics with no resolution of the main complaint of fecaluria and pneumaturia.
On admission, the patient was stable, afebrile, acyanotic, anicteric, with normal vital signs and physical examination with globose, flaccid abdomen, painless, with no peritoneal irritation. After two days, he reported dysuria and mild pain in hypogastric area. He was treated with ceftriaxone and metronidazole with relief of dysuria and hypogastric pain, but persistence of fecaluria and pneumaturia. He reported no surgical history, drug allergy or similar disorder in his family, including relevant genetic information and psychosocial history.
Laboratory tests revealed normal serum values, including renal function (WBC 11.360; Hemoglobin 12.4; Urea: 40; Creatinine: 1.3). The patient was submitted to an abdominal and pelvic CT scan with oral and intravenous contrast that showed no evidence of enterovesical fistula. After six days, a new CT scan with oral contrast was performed but no evidence of fistula was detected in the exam .
He underwent exploratory laparotomy with supra and infraumbilical median incision with a urologist and a gastrointestinal tract surgeon. During the procedure, firm adherences between sigmoid colon and urinary bladder was identified . A careful dissection was performed separating the sigmoid colon from posterior wall of the bladder, which was with necrotic tissue later dissected and the bladder wall repaired in two layers with vicryl 4–0 and 2–0, respectively. An extensive necrosis area was present in sigmoid colon, associated with several diverticula. A rectosigmoidectomy of approximately 25 cm was performed with colostomy of the proximal segment . The surgery was performed by a general surgeon with digestive tract surgery specialization and by a urologist.
The dissected tissue of posterior bladder wall and sigmoid segment were submitted to histopathological analysis that revealed unspecific chronic inflammatory process compatible with colovesical fistula and colovesical fistula with diverticulitis, respectively. No malignant lesion was identified.
In post-operative recovery, the patient evolved painless, with a Foley catheter with discreet pieces of a white-yellow colored mass from the bladder. The intervention was nicely tolerable by the patient and he was discharged 12 days after surgery and oriented to remove the catheter in twenty-first day post-surgery. He was referred to a specialized service for gastrointestinal tract reconstruction, which was performed about five months later. In once a month follow-up, he evolved with absence of pneumaturia and fecaluria.