A previously well nine-year-old Caucasian boy was admitted to the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) after having a severe hypoxic brain injury following a near hanging. Recovery was complicated by recurrent, persistent dystonic extensor spasms. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) six days after admission showed widespread infarction in the watershed areas of both hemispheres and abnormal signal changes within the thalami. Bouts of spasticity were associated with tachycardia, pyrexia and hypoxia. An EEG did not demonstrate an association with cortical activity. Two weeks after admission our patient was discharged to the general ward, apyrexial and normotensive with normal inflammatory markers and measures of renal and hepatic function. His GCS was 5. His medications included lorazepam 1.3 mg PO/IV QDS, baclofen 20 mg PO TDS, chloral hydrate 1 g QDS and paracetamol 390 mg PO/PR QDS (his weight was 26 kg).
Five days after discharge from PICU he was noted to have a temperature of 39.5°C. Nystatin (100,000 QDS) was started for oral candida but no other source of infection was clinically identified. Blood cultures were negative and C-Reactive Protein (CRP) was 2.8 mg/L. Routine haematology and tests of renal and hepatic function were unremarkable apart from an elevation of aspartate transaminase (175 IU/L).
Our patient continued to deteriorate over the next 24 hours, becoming more agitated and experiencing episodes of haematemesis. Lorazepam was increased to 2 mg PO/IV QDS and chloral hydrate to 1.3 g QDS. Ranitidine (75 mg BD) was also started. He remained cardiovascularly stable (respiratory rate 20 rpm; heart rate 132 bpm; blood pressure 114/75 mmHg) but experienced progressive hypoxia and continued spasticity. Trihexyphenidyl (0.5 mg BD) was started.
Spasticity, fever (up to 40.4°C), and hypoxia (88% oxygen saturations) accompanied by haematemesis and diarrhoea continued over the next six days. The patient became tachycardic, tachypnoeic and hypotensive (respiratory rate 28 bpm; heart rate 190 bpm; blood pressure 110/40 mmHg) Chest radiographs excluded a chest infection and there was no evidence of urinary tract infection on urine analysis. There was still no elevation of CRP.
Eight days after the start of this episode the patient developed a cough and his CRP was found to be elevated (14.4 mg/L). Broad-spectrum antibiotics were started for a presumed lower respiratory tract infection. Extensor posturing and hyperpyrexia continued and the patient was noted as having spasmodic hypertensive episodes. His urine was also noted to be very dark and nine days after the start of the episode his serum creatine kinase (CK) was found to be 55,869 IU/L. His fluids were changed to a bicarbonate drip of 2 mmol/kg of NaHCO3 per day.
Over the next few days, our patient became apyrexial and episodes of dystonia became less frequent. Serum CK started to fall. Liver function tests, however, were noted to be deranged (Alanine aminotransferase 621 IU/L; Aspartate transaminase 411 IU/L; Albumin 30 g/L). Screening for inbuilt errors of metabolism revealed no abnormalities. The patient's condition steadily improved and, although he continued to have exacerbations of spasticity, he did not experience another dystonic crisis of similar severity. He was finally discharged from hospital nine months after his first admission. Seven months after his hypoxic injury, the patient underwent elective placement of a programmable pump device for continuous ITB with good result. At a five-month follow-up he weighed 35.9 kg with an intrathecal baclofen infusion of 100 micrograms per day. He was also prescribed Trihexyphenidyl 5 mg TDS but no oral baclofen. He continued to have a good response to the ITB.