An 80-year-old female was referred to our clinic, mainly complaining of a loss of visual acuity in her left eye, which had lasted more than 4 months. She had a history of bilateral uveitis of unknown cause, but the inflammation had not been active for more than 10 years. The patient had no significant history of systemic disease. At her initial visit, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in her right eye and 20/285 in her left eye. The anterior segments of both her pseudophakic eyes were normal and no inflammatory cells were observed. A fundus examination showed slightly pale optic discs in both eyes and a full-thickness MH in the left eye . In both eyes, patchy chorioretinal atrophy and retinal degeneration with hyperpigmentation extended from the posterior pole to the mid-periphery including the juxtafoveal region.
Swept source optical coherence tomography (SS-OCT; DRI OCT-1 Atlantis, TOPCON Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) confirmed the presence of a full-thickness MH, with a minimum aperture diameter of 569 μm, in the left eye . Epiretinal membrane (ERM) formation, the thinning of the retina and choroid corresponding to chorioretinal atrophy and retinal degeneration, ellipsoid zone defects, and irregularities in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) were observed in both eyes. The central retinal thickness was 276 μm in the right eye and the MH height was 244 μm in the left eye.
Since the SS-OCT results described above indicated that stretching the retina sufficiently to close the MH would be difficult, we decided to perform a vitrectomy using the inverted ILM flap technique, based on the method reported by Michalewska et al. , but with slight modifications . After performing a 25-gauge micro-incision vitrectomy, using intraocular forceps, the ILM was peeled away from the periphery towards the MH in 4 directions , but was not completely detached from the retina, leaving the attachment to the edge of the MH in place, so that a bowl-shaped ILM flap was created . The radius of the area of the ILM peeled away was approximately 2.5 times the diameter of the MH. We initially used Coomassie brilliant blue G250 solution (CBBG; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) to visualize the ILM, but we re-stained the ILM with indocyanine green (ICG) to further improve visibility. As shown in Fig. , we then trimmed half of the peeled ILM using a vitreous cutter, to facilitate the inversion of the ILM. The remnant ILM was inverted to cover the entire MH and 1 % low molecular weight hyaluronic acid (Opegan; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan) was placed over the inverted ILM flap to stabilize it. We performed fluid-air exchange, leaving the hyaluronic acid in the eye and at the end of surgery the vitreous cavity was filled with 20 % SF6 gas. The patient remained face-down for 3 days after surgery.
Six hours after surgery, the SS-OCT image of the gas-filled eye showed that the diameter of the MH had decreased. Twenty-four hours after surgery, the borders of the MH were even closer together. Three days after surgery, the SS-OCT image showed closure of the MH and 12 days after surgery, the foveal contour showed further improvement . Although the MH was successfully closed 6 months after surgery, leaving a U-shaped depression , the ellipsoid zone remained defective and the patient’s BCVA was 20/400.