A 23-year-old Japanese woman consulted a local physician for fever and headache of recent onset. She was treated with oral antibiotics, but had no response. Seven days after the onset of fever, she noticed lower abdominal distention and visited the emergency department of our hospital. Transurethral catheterization revealed residual urine, and an indwelling balloon catheter was inserted into the bladder. She was not constipated. On admission, her main symptoms were fatigue and unsteadiness on walking.
The physical examination was unremarkable except for mild fever of 36.8°C. Neurological examination showed mild confusion and unsteady gait when unassisted, but no definite signs of meningeal irritation or mucocutaneous lesions, including in the perineal region. Patellar tendon reflexes, plantar reflexes and abdominal wall reflexes were diminished bilaterally. Blood chemistry and urine analysis showed no abnormalities. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination gave a normal cell count of 1/mm3, a slight increase in protein content (60 mg/dL; normal range 15-45 mg/dL) and a slight decrease in glucose level of 29 mg/dL (30.5% of serum glucose; normal ranges 50-90 mg/dL and 50-70%). Bacterial smears and cultures prepared from CSF were negative. There were no increases in oligoclonal bands, IgG index (0.56) and myelin basic protein in the CSF. The CSF enzyme immunoassay was negative for IgM antibodies against Epstein-Barr viral capsid antigen, herpes simplex virus type-1, varicella zoster virus, mumps virus and measles virus. PCR of the CSF sample was negative for herpes simplex virus type 1 and tuberculosis. Serology tests were negative for anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-phospholipid, anti-SS-A/-B antibody, perinuclear-anti neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and cytoplasmic ANCA. Serum antibody tests against gangliosides (GM1, GM2, GM3, GD1a, GD1b, GD3, GT1b, GQ1b, GA1, galactocerebroside) were all negative. Electroencephalography and abdominal ultrasonography were unremarkable. An ovarian cyst was detected by pelvic ultrasonography.
Cranial MRI scans taken on admission showed abnormal signals in the SCC and bilateral cerebral white matter, which were hyperintense on T2WI and FLAIR imaging, and isointense on T1WI sequences with no contrast enhancement . Spinal cord MRI with no enhancement showed no abnormalities. Cystometry showed an underactive detrusor without hyper-reflexia, but bladder sensation was spared, with a first urge to void after intravesical injection of 91 ml of 0.9% saline. Neurophysiological studies revealed nerve conduction of the tibial and median motor nerves and sural sensory nerve that was within the normal range. F-wave was not elicited in the tibial nerves.
We diagnosed our patient with MERS with urinary retention. She was treated with 1 g of methylprednisolone intravenously for three days followed by 60 mg of prednisolone orally for seven days, together with distigmine bromide to treat the urinary retention. A follow-up MRI scan taken 14 days after the initial examination revealed no evidence of the lesions . Our patient's urinary retention and gait ataxia disappeared within four weeks.