29 years old normally menstruating female, non-smoker and non-alcoholic presented with fever for 5 days and abdominal pain for 1 day. Fever was continuous with a maximum temperature recorded of 102° Fahrenheit, break-bone type, associated with chills and rigors, and partially controlled by taking medications. There was a history of headache, body ache, decreased appetite, and multiple episodes of non-bilious, non-projectile, and non-blood-stained vomiting. She also had pain for a day in the right hypochondriac region, sharp in nature, non-radiating aggravated by taking deep inspiration, and relieved by taking analgesics. There is no history of loss of consciousness, bleeding from any orifices, rashes over the body, shortness of breath, or cough. Her bowel and bladder habits were normal.
On examination, she was looking ill, averagely built, and well oriented to time, place, and person. At presentation, her temperature was 100° Fahrenheit with normal blood pressure, pulse rate, and oxygen saturation. Icterus was noted over bilateral bulbar conjunctiva with no other significant findings on general examination. There was tenderness noted over the right hypochondriac region, however, there was no guarding or rigidity. No organs could be palpated and her bowel sounds were heard. Murphy's sign could not be elicited. Examination of respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurosensory systems was non-revealing.
On investigations, her hemoglobin level was 12.8 g/dl, hematocrit was 36.5% with total leukocyte counts of 2100 cells/cubic millimeter and platelet count of 108,000 cells/cubic millimeter. Liver function tests revealed raised bilirubin levels (total serum bilirubin of 6.5 mg/dl and direct serum bilirubin level of 3.5mg/dl) with raised liver enzymes (ALT 224U/L, AST 412U/L, ALP 710U/L). Renal function tests were within normal limits. As there was a dengue outbreak in the city, her NS1 was positive for dengue but serology was non-reactive. Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) for COVID-19 and malaria was negative. Serology for hepatitis B, C, and ELISA for HIV was non-reactive. Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed normal sized gall bladder with increased wall thickness (5.7mm) and no space-occupying lesion, features suggestive of acalculous cholecystitis as shown in . Further, there was mild splenomegaly with spleen size measuring 14.2 cm with normal outline and echotexture but no focal lesions. Based on clinical, pathological, and radiological parameters, a diagnosis of dengue fever with acute acalculous cholecystitis was made.
With this diagnosis, the patient was admitted and managed conservatively with intravenous fluids, paracetamol and ceftriaxone to prevent secondary bacterial infections. She was advised for soft diet and multivitamins were added to improve liver function. Her daily complete blood count was monitored. With the resolution of fever and dengue symptoms, icterus also decreased, right hypochondriac pain subsided and liver functions started to reach baseline. She will be followed up with an USG to look for resolution of acalculous cholecystitis in 1 month.