The patient was a 14-year-old refugee boy from Syria who had been playing outdoors in his hometown at the age of 10 years. A battle begun during his play, and after the cessation of fire, he was found lying on the street unconscious. After admission to the local hospital, a low-resolution CT scan was taken. A bullet was seen intracranially close to the inner surface of the bone in the area of the sinus confluence. Due to high complication risks, it was decided not to remove the bullet. The patient gained consciousness within a couple of days and was discharged in approximately 10 days. Thereafter, the patient’s family sought their way to the refugee camp in Turkey and 3 years later to Finland.
In Finland, the patient suffered from headaches and mental health problems. He had short-lasting headache attacks several times a week ever since the accident. The episodes usually lasted 5–20 min with pain starting in the occipital region and radiating behind the right eye. During these headaches, the patient usually went supine due to the devastating pain. In clinical investigation, no neurological deficiencies were found. Neither were there any abnormal findings on skull palpation. On ophthalmological investigation, myopia, requiring correction with glasses, as well as borderline reduction of an upper medial visual field were found. The later finding was interpreted as a possible result of the damage to the occipital cortex. A 3D skull CT scan was performed. According to the scan, the bullet seemed to be preserved in one piece and located close to the inner surface of the skull bone near the lambdoid suture, in contact with the tentorium just above the sinus transversus. Compared to CT scans 4 years earlier, the bullet had moved approximately 29 mm laterally .
The patient and his parents wished the bullet to be removed because of the pain located precisely at the bullet area, in the hope of headache cessation after successful surgery. The decision to remove the bullet, in addition to the wishes of the patient and his parents, was based on the following considerations. At first, the removal of the ferromagnetic foreign object would allow performing MR imaging whenever needed. Second, the bullet had already moved almost 3 cm away from primary location during the follow-up time, and further dislocation of the bullet risked causing new damage. Third, the relatively superficial location of the bullet supported the decision to proceed with operative treatment.
Prior to the operation, up-to-date images of the bullet’s location and vascular structures in its proximity were necessary. The 3D CT scan done previously in a central hospital was not suitable for navigation due to slice thickness . In addition, preoperative images revealed the movement of the bullet, leading to the decision to use neuronavigation with intraoperative O-arm imaging and automatic direct registration to the navigation system.
We used the StealthStation S7 (Medtronic Inc., Louisville, CO, USA) with optical localization method for navigation. Due to the lack of O-arm navigation implementation in Cranial software, we used the Spine software to allow an automated registration of the O-arm images.
The intraoperative imaging was done with O-arm (Medtronic Inc., Louisville, CO, USA) and 3D images (slice thickness was 0.833 mm, tube voltage 100 kV, tube current 80 mA and imaging time 13 s) were automatically transferred into navigation system.
The patient was set in a prone position with his head fixated using the carbon fibre frame . After the O-arm imaging and navigation , an L-shaped skin opening was made in the midline extending to the right side. After opening of the soft tissues, the lambdoid suture and the bullet were located using navigation . Craniotomy was done in a conventional way with its lower line going just above the sinus transversus edge. The dura was preserved intact during the bone removal and its appearance was normal. After opening of the dura the encapsulated bullet was found lying on the surface of an apparently normal-looking cortex. The capsule was opened sharply, and the bullet was removed . The capsule wall was calcified, and it was adherent to the venous sinus wall and to the cortex. For this reason, it was decided not to remove this fibrotic capsule. The dura was sutured with continuous suture. Hemocoagulate patch (Tachosil, Takeda Austria GmbH, Austria) and tissue glue (Evicel, Omrix Biopharmaceuticals Ltd., Israel) were used to ensure watertight closure. The bone was fixated with Matrix low-profile titanium alloy plates and screws. The skin was closed in a conventional way.
Postoperative testing of the removed bullet showed that it was not ferromagnetic. The bullet appeared to be a 9 × 19-mm Parabellum pistol cartridge . The calcified residual of the capsule was seen in the postoperative CT images. The postoperative CT showed no signs of any complications. The recovery after surgery was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient had made a full recovery and had neither headaches nor any other symptoms.