We report the case of a 70-year old Caucasian woman who was referred to the thoracic oncology unit of our hospital for the management of a retrosternal mediastinal mass. She had been well 8 weeks before admission when she experienced the sudden onset of sharp left anterior chest pain. The pain was worse in the area adjacent to the sternum and also worsens when she takes a deep breath. In 1999, she underwent radical left side mastectomy followed by CEF (cyclophosphamide, epirubin and fluorouracil) chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The clinical and histological characteristics of the primary breast cancer revealed a Stage IIIa adenocarcinoma with positive axillary lymph node metastasis. Her estrogen receptor assay, as well as the amplification of the human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER 2/neu) was negative. Expression of her progesterone receptors was defined as low (Reiner score for staining of tumour-cell nuclei). On admission our patient's vital signs were normal. She had neither jugular venous distension nor cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. Her chest was clear on auscultation. There was no tenderness on palpation of her ribs or sternum. The remainder of her examination results was normal.
Computed tomography (CT) scanning and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of our patient's chest revealed a 74.2 × 37.7 × 133.6-mm mass in her anterior mediastinum adjacent to the main pulmonary artery, the right ventricle, and ascendens aorta contiguous to the pericardium . There was no specific direct evidence of vascular invasion but we raised the question of pericardial invasion. Our patient was vigorously scrutinized for metastatic disease, which included routine blood chemistries and the determination of lipid associated sialic acid, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 15-3 serum markers. CT scan of her neck and abdomen for restaging revealed no other foci of metastatic disease. A bone scan showed uptake only in her sternum.
Our patient was anaesthetized and ventilated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube. An epidural catheter was also inserted for pain control during the peri-operative period. Our patient was placed at first in a right thoracotomy position with soft rotation of the coxa towards the surgeon. Standard thoracotomy incision was used to expose the serratus anterior muscle (SAM). The SAM was identified and mobilized by separating it from the chest wall and then carefully dividing its attachments to the first 4 to 5 ribs, with a periosteal elevator at first and then with a cautery. As dissection proceeded upward toward her axilla, the contribution of the lateral thoracic artery was seen entering the muscle on its anterior cephalic border. The blood supply to the serratus anterior may come from the thoracodorsal pedicle, from the subscapular pedicle, or directly from the axillary artery. In our case, our patient's blood supply came from the serratus anterior branch from the thoracodorsal artery, which originates as the largest branch from the subscapular artery. During the procedure these branches were identified and preserved. The harvested SAM was advanced and transposed within its arc of rotation towards the midsternal line to cover the defect.
The sternal incision started at the level of our patient's manubriosternal joint and extended inferiorly to her xiphisternum. The surgical resection was a vertical elliptical incision of the visible mass. Total sternectomy was performed at all layers encompassing our patient's skin, subcutaneous tissues, right pectoralis major muscle, all her costal cartilages of the first five ribs , and the anterior part of her pericardium. Mobilization began first on one side of her sternum with exposure and section of the ribs. The ribs were divided laterally. Her right internal thoracic artery and the intercostals neurovascular bundle were ligated with absorbable suture. Lastly, the critical point of mass attachment to the heart was approached. Immediate closure of the defect was performed without cement but with a single 0.6-mm Gore-Tex cardiovascular mesh (W. L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, Arizona) which was cut to a size smaller than that of the defect. The mesh was thus effectively stretched when it was sutured to her chest wall so that any laxity in the reconstruction was alleviated . The serratus anterior myocutaneous flap was then secured with heavy non-absorbable suture over the Gore-Tex mesh.
Pathology revealed a poorly differentiated invasive carcinoma infiltrating our patient's sternum with the involvement of the pericardium . The amplification of the human factor margins was clear, while immunohistochemistry was negative.
Epidural analgesia was employed in the immediate postoperative period. Postoperative respiratory function tests revealed satisfactory results and our patient could be relieved from endotracheal intubation a day after the operation. She did not have any problems in her daily activities or any occurrence of chest flailing or paradoxical movement of the chest. Scapular winging occurred although any effort was made to preserve the a third of the lower part of her serratus anterior muscle. No flap infection or wound dehiscence was noted, and she was discharged from the hospital nine days after the operation.
She received two additional cycles of CEF chemotherapy consisting of 2 cycles of oral cyclophosphamide at a dose of 75 mg/m2 on days 1 through 14, 60 mg/m2 of epirubicin on days 1 and 8, and 500 mg/m2 of fluorouracil intravenously on days 1 and 8. During her CEF therapy she also received antibiotic prophylaxis with ciprofloxacin at a dose of 500 mg orally twice daily. She is well 18 months after the diagnosis, and she exhibited no evidence of recurrent disease on serial CT and MRI scans of her chest, abdomen, and brain. She remains asymptomatic and the stability of her chest wall is well-preserved.