The patient was an 86-year-old woman who suffered neoplasia on the right cheek and right frontotemporal area for 2 years. The patient had a history of lacunar infarction, cerebral insufficiency, hypertension, and diabetes. The facial neoplasm grew slowly for 2 years and accelerated in the last month before she was seen, with ulceration and crusting. The size of the neoplasia was 4.0 cm × 4.0 cm, 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm and 2.5 cm × 3.0 cm .
Enhanced CT and MRI of the maxillofacial region were performed preoperatively. The surgery area was simulated using 3D image technology for the virtual surgery design and operation to be implemented. A safe resection range of 1.5 cm on the outer edge of the lesion was designed. One day before the surgery, the shape and range of the perforating branches were determined by Doppler ultrasound. The size and shape of the SCAIFP were designed to be elliptical and 15 cm × 7 cm in size.
The maxillofacial tumour extended resection and supraclavicular flap repair operation was performed. The neoplasia was completely resected, and the facial nerve was preserved. The defect was approximately 18.5 cm × 7.5 cm. Pathological analysis of the frozen tissue showed low-medium differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with negative margins. Based on the position of the transverse carotid artery, the final flap size was 19.3 cm × 8.3 cm, which was larger than the initial flap design (15 cm × 7 cm). The larger size was a result of the defect being larger than initially expected and due to flap tension . On the surface of the deltoid muscle, the flap was dissected from distal to proximal, and the superficial layer of the deep cervical fascia was reserved. The transverse carotid artery was cut off and ligated to enter the deep branches of the trapezius muscle to extend the reach. We used fluoroscopy to identify and protect the perforating branches. After the flap was harvested, a warm saline gauze was used for cover and protection, and the blood supply of the distal end of the flap was evaluated.
No complications were observed after the reconstruction. The flap survived entirely, and the donor area healed well. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 , and at the 10-month follow-up coverage was stable with no tumour recurrence and the scar from the incision was natural. Upper limb abduction was 90° without dysfunction. Facial nerve function was well preserved, and facial expressions were natural and satisfactory for the patient .