A 24-year-old male presented with diffuse skin lesions on the chest and abdominal walls from the age of 8, accompanied by pigmentation and epidermal nodular hyperplasia. Because of sudden spontaneous swelling and pain in the left upper abdomen that could not be relieved by rest or changing body position, he went to the emergency department of our hospital. The main vital signs of the patient were body temperature of 37.8℃, blood pressure of 140/93 mmHg, respiration of 24 beats/min, heart rate of 115 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 96%. The emergency chest and abdominal enhanced CT scan showed the following: possible left diaphragmatic hernia; partially inflated left lung; massive left abdominal mass with hemorrhage, with the left 9th/11th ribs partially absorbed; left chest and back subcutaneous soft tissue thickened with an abnormal density; and bleeding nodules (shadow) on the chest and back skin .
Physical examination showed that the breathing sound in the left lung was not clear, very large diffuse skin lesions with brown pigment spots in the left chest and abdomen, a large number of fibromatous hyperplasias on the epidermis, very large skin masses protruding outward, left abdominal compression pain (+), and abdominal muscle tension.
Based on the patient's condition and CT findings, the possibility of a diaphragmatic hernia caused by spontaneous diaphragmatic rupture was not ruled out. After communicating with the patient's family members, we decided to perform thoracotomy. We selected the left 7th intercostal incision site, from the skin to the subcutaneous tissue there were a lot of neurofibroma tissue, brittle tissue and easy to bleed. The tumor covered a wide area, including the lateral chest wall, the back, and the whole abdomen. Because large areas of tumor tissue cannot be completely removed, only the thorax and abdominal problems can be dealt with. The left pleura and diaphragm were found to be invaded by tumor during the operation. The left diaphragm appears dark green with thinning tissue and reduced elasticity. The left diaphragm is significantly elevated, but not ruptured. Compression atelectasis was observed in the left lung. A small amount of bloody effusion was found in the abdominal cavity, and a portion of the bowel was embedded in the very large, twisted subcutaneous neurofibroma without necrosis. The bloody effusion was considered to be bloody exudation caused by intestinal cantun, and there is no obvious active bleeding in abdominal cavity. We found no obvious bleeding and necrosis in the abdominal cavity, and then a drainage tube was been placed. Diaphragmatic folding was performed. A portion of subcutaneous tissue and various diaphragmatic muscle tissues were removed during the operation and sent for rapid pathology. The diagnosis was neurofibroma . The patient was admitted to the surgical ICU for care and treatment after surgery. The endotracheal intubation was removed 1 day after surgery, and the patient returned to the general ward 3 days after surgery. The patient had fever in the first 5 days, the highest temperature was 38.6 °C, other vital signs were stable, and then the temperature gradually dropped to normal. The postoperative abdominal pain disappeared and the incision healed well, and the patient was discharged 10 days after surgery.