Patient is a 49-year-old woman with a medical history of situs inversus with levocardia. She became aware of her condition ten years ago when she needed emergency surgery due to pain in her upper left abdomen; cholecystitis was detected, and she was successfully treated. During these last years, her weight has become a problem that has made it difficult to exercise or even walk. Therefore, she was admitted to our bariatric clinic. The patient had a BMI of 49.1 kg/m2, and fortunately, she didn't have any metabolic problems like diabetes, hypertension, or reflux. In addition, she did not suffer from other issues like bronchiectasis or sinusitis. Complementary exams (hematocrit and blood chemistry) were requested and came back normal; thus, she entered our bariatric program, and a gastric sleeve was planned. A preoperative CT scan of the abdomen confirmed the reversed position of the organs, and several adjustments were made to perform this unusual surgery (A and B). The surgical team handled the operation using a mirror image of the usual laparoscopic technique with the patient's reversed anatomy knowledge. The monitor was placed on the patient's right side, the surgeon stood on the left side, and the assistant on the right. We set a 10mm supraumbilical port for the staples and three 5 mm ports, one on the midclavicular line on the left side of the abdomen, one on the midclavicular line on the right side of the abdomen for the camera, and the last 5mm port on the right anterior axillary line for the traction of the omentum. As per routine, a 36-French Bougie was inserted under direct observation to achieve stomach decompression and then withdrawn upwards into the gastroesophageal junction. The incisura was identified, and a small window was opened on the lesser sac 5 cm away from the incision. Using a 5 mm ultrasound energy device, the omentum was detached from the greater curvature, and the dissection continued upwards, taking care of the short vessels and mobilizing the fundus. The bougie was advanced up to the first part of the duodenum, and under direct observation and using a surgical stapler (Waston Medical, Jiangsu Province, China), the sleeve was completed (A and B,2C and A). The staple line was then reinforced using a non-absorbable monofilament suture. A methylene blue test was performed, and no leaks were identified. Her postoperative course was uneventful; another leak test was performed on her second postoperative using fluoroscopy, which was negative, and she was discharged without any complications (B). On follow-up controls, the patient is doing well.