A 38-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with history of high- energy road traffic accident, with injury to his right foot. He had pain and swelling over the medial aspect of the foot with being unable to bear weight and with typical equinovarus deformity.
Neurovascular deficit was not found. He denied of any past medical history of diabetes mellitus, inflammatory arthropathy, or any other medications. Routine radiographs of the ankle and foot in anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique views were taken which showed medial dislocation of the talonavicular joint with subtalar subluxation without any associated fracture . Radiographs did not show any evidence of Charcot or inflammatory arthritis. CT scan was done which showed intact calcaneocuboid joint with no fracture; and subluxated subtalar joint with medial dislocation of the talonavicular joint .
Under spinal anesthesia, close reduction was attempted by flexing the knee joint so as to relax the gastrosoleus complex, with ankle in maximum plantar flexion and axial traction given to the calcaneum with counter traction at knee joint. Deformity was first exaggerated by adducting the forefoot and then reduction attempted by forceful abduction of the forefoot and simultaneous medial pressure applied to the head of the talus and lateral pressure over the dislocated navicular; maintaining the traction and counter traction . Successful reduction was appreciated by the click with correction of the deformity and confirmed under the image intensifier . During the stress examination, the reduction was maintained; thus, no internal fixation was attempted and the leg was immobilized in below knee cast for 4 weeks . After 4 weeks, the cast was removed and stability was again checked on stress views. Found to be stable, physiotherapy of the ankle and subtalar joint was initiated with partial weight- bearing. After 6 weeks post- trauma, full full-weight- bearing was started. At 1 year follow- up, the patient had full range of motion with no radiological evidence of instability, arthritis, or avascular necrosis .