A 90-year-old male of low socio-economic status presented in the emergency department with acute urinary retention and a 3-day-long history of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). More specifically, he complained of steadily worsening urinary frequency, intermittency, post-micturition dribbling, urge incontinence, and constant pain at the tip of his penis. His past medical history was significant for acute myocardial infarction, diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and mild dementia.
Clinical examination revealed a nontender, palpable distended urinary bladder. The foreskin appeared swollen and was painful on examination, and a round, about 1 cm in diameter, ulcerative lesion was noted on the left side of the tip of the foreskin. Intermittent, spontaneous leakage of small amounts of urine could be easily noticed through the tight preputial opening. We tried to retract the foreskin in order to identify the external urethral meatus and proceed with catheterization. After insertion of the index finger in the preputial cavity, tight adhesions were felt and a single, oval stone impacted beneath the foreskin was seen. A 1 cm in maximum diameter yellow-gray colored nonobstructing stone was eventually removed and the external urethral meatus was identified (. Despite the stone’s firm embedment underneath the prepuce, the urethral meatus appeared intact hypothesizing that benign prostate hyperplasia could have triggered LUTS’s exacerbation. Moreover, no congenital urethral abnormalities could be detected.
Subsequently, a 20-Fr Foley catheter was inserted and 1100 ml of urine was drained. Serum creatinine was mildly elevated (1.9 mg/dL, normal values 0.6–1.2 mg/dL) while blood chemistry and urinalysis were within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasonography showed mild bilateral dilatation of the upper urinary tract. Plain X-ray of the kidney, ureter, and bladder did not reveal any radiopaque shadows.
During hospitalization, the patient was managed conservatively with hydration, antibiotics, and topical application of antifungal cream. The urine culture obtained during catheterization was negative. Following an uneventful recovery, he was discharged on the second-day post-admission and listed for circumcision. Nevertheless, he refused surgical treatment and opted only for the treatment of LUTS with alpha-blockers.