A routine cataract extraction (via phacoemulsification) and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation were performed under general anaesthesia in the left eye of a 65-year-old female who was otherwise fit and well, with no recent dental procedures. She had previously undergone uncomplicated right phacoemulsification and IOL insertion. Intracameral antibiotic (cefuroxime; Aprokam) was used according to the national guidelines. The intended postoperative treatment was guttae (g.) dexamethasone 0.1 % and g. chloramphenicol 0.5 %, each 4 times a day for 4 weeks. The vision improved immediately following the operation.
Two days later the patient reported reduced vision, mild conjunctival hyperaemia and an ache over the eyebrow in the left eye. She was seen in our hospital out of hours.
The vision in the left eye was perception of light. Clinical examination revealed no relative afferent pupillary reflex (RAPD) bilaterally and a quiet, pseudophakic right eye. The left eye showed mild conjunctival hyperaemia with ciliary flush, a 0.5 mm hypopyon, 3+ cells in the anterior chamber and 2+ flare. There were conglomerates of fibrin around the pupil, limiting fundal view. Also present was 360° of posterior synechiae; this was successfully broken nasally with a stat dose of g. tropicamide 1 % and g. phenylephrine 2.5 %. The intra-ocular pressure (IOP) was 18 mmHg. Ocular B-scan (ultrasound) showed a flat retina and vitreous opacities.
The diagnosis of post-operative pan-endophthalmitis was established and the patient was admitted for a vitreous tap and injection of intravitreal antibiotics, which was performed within 90 min from admission; 0.1 ml ceftazidime (2 mg/0.1 ml) and 0.1 ml vancomycin (2 mg/0.1 ml) were injected. The scleral wound was sutured with 8.0 Vicryl. Subconjunctival cefuroxime was injected at the end of the procedure.
Gram staining of the vitreous sample revealed Gram-positive long-chain cocci. The patient was prescribed oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day. The left eye received g. dexamethasone 0.1 % 6 times a day, g. moxifloxacin 5 % every hour and g. atropine 1 % twice a day.
The second day after admission, the clinical appearance deteriorated with a 1 mm hypopyon and increased cells in the anterior chamber; this was felt likely to indicate a post-treatment inflammatory reaction. Oral prednisolone 60 mg once a day was initiated.
A second intravitreal antibiotic injection was performed on the third day of admission, on day five post-operatively. The patient was counselled of a guarded prognosis. The microbiology department reported moderate growth of , sensitive to ceftriaxone (MIC 1 mg l−1). The species was identified after growing on fastidious anaerobic agar, though not on blood or chocolate agar. Direct disc testing also revealed resistance to metronidazole. The MALDI-TOF MS technique (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) gave a good identification of 2.219 (with a score ≥2.3 being ‘highly probable’ for species identification, and≥2.0 but<2.3 suggesting probable identification according to the manufacturer’s instructions).
The patient was discharged the following day with the above treatment, to reduce g. moxifloxacin 5 % to 6 times a day. Follow-up was arranged in the patient’s original hospital, where the cataract surgery was performed. The vision was hand movements and fundal view remained limited.
Over the next 3 months, the clinical appearance improved. The antibiotics (oral and topical) were stopped at 2 weeks following discharge. The oral prednisolone was reduced by 10 mg/week, then by 5 mg/week and was stopped at 8 weeks following discharge. A similar strategy was adopted for the topical dexamethasone 0.1 %.
The vision in the left eye reached 6/12 (0.34 LogMAR) unaided, 6/9.5 (0.2 LogMAR) with pinhole at 9 weeks after the cataract extraction. Excluding a mild posterior capsular opacity, the anterior segment was quiet. Fundus view was now possible, though some vitreous condensations persisted. A mild intra-retinal haemorrhage was visible in the inferior quadrant, but otherwise the retina was flat and unremarkable. The optic disc and the macula had a normal appearance.