A female in her 70s was admitted to our hospital with the suspected diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke after acute onset of a right-sided hemiparesis. Amongst others, the medical history revealed a short bowel syndrome after ascendojejunostomy with the necessity of diet therapy and parenteral nutritional supplementation via venous port catheter. The percutaneous implantation of the venous port catheter in the left subclavian vein was performed in a different hospital a week before hospital admission. Over recent years, several ports had already been removed due to catheter-associated complications like lumen occlusion and port-related infections. The port currently inserted had not been used for parenteral nutrition previously.
The patient underwent a standard acute stroke diagnostic workup consisting of non-contrast cranial computed tomography (CT), a 24-h Holter electrocardiography without indications for atrial fibrillation and transthoracic echocardiography revealing normal heart structures. The laboratory results from the patients blood were all within normal paramters, especially the coagulation test (INR, PTT). Extracranial and intracranial duplex sonography indicated marginal atherosclerosis without hemodynamically effective stenoses.
Secondary prophylaxis with antiplatelet (aspirin) and statin medication was initiated. Low-dose enoxaparin was also prescribed to minimise the risk of venous thrombosis. The patient benefited considerably from regularly performed physical therapy, and arm function improved during the first 48 h. Two days after admission, the patient showed an acute onset weakness of the left upper and lower limb, including mild cerebellar signs on the left side.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 2 days post stroke showed multiple small ischemic lesions bilaterally in the cerebellum as well as in subcortical and cortical areas of the cerebral hemispheres, affecting the supplying territory of arteries in the anterior and posterior circulation on both sides . With regard to the cardioembolic pattern of the infarct lesions and - until this point - missing cardiac source of emboli, a bubble test by transcranial color-coded duplex sonography (TCCD) was performed, which couldn’t determine a right-to-left cardiac shunt.
Before injecting a small amount of saline solution into the port, the patency of the system was verified by cautious aspiration. As the blood returning to the syringe appeared moving pulsatile, an arterially misplaced port catheter was suspected.
The patient was transferred immediately to a vascular surgery department. Conventional angiography showed an arterially placed catheter which was later removed during an open surgical exploration. Here, the catheter was found to be entering the left subclavian artery with an organized clot surrounding the catheter tip.
The patient’s neurologic status improved missing clinically overt signs of recurrent stroke, and she was able to be transferred to a rehabilitation center after implantation of a new central venous access port device. The patient recovered completely without any neurologic deficit 3 weeks after admission to our hospital.