A 72-year-old man was referred to our hospital for bradycardia and hypotension during haemodialysis. He had started maintenance haemodialysis 10 years earlier because of diabetic nephropathy. On physical examination, his consciousness was clear and his blood pressure was 144/80 mmHg, pulse was 27 beats/min with regular rhythm, body temperature was 36.4°C, and oxygen saturation was 94% in room air. Auscultation revealed normal respiratory sounds and a grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur at the 2nd intercostal space of right border of the sternum, and lower extremity oedema was not observed. Laboratory results indicated an elevation in brain natriuretic peptide levels at 1076.1 pg/mL (normal range: ≤18.4 pg/mL), but no increase in creatine kinase (CK) at 43 U/L (men: 59–248 U/L, women: 41–153 U/L), CK-MB fraction at 8 IU/L (≤12 IU/L), and high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T at 0.074 ng/mL (<0.10 ng/mL). Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly without pleural effusion. Twelve-lead electrocardiography showed a heart rate of 34 beats/min with complete atrioventricular block. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed left ventricular hypertrophy, but no wall motion abnormality (ejection fraction of 68%), along with a mild level of aortic stenosis, mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. His bradycardia was caused by paroxysmal atrioventricular block. Given the possibility of myocardial ischaemia as the cause of paroxysmal atrioventricular block and hypotension during haemodialysis, a temporary pacemaker was implanted, and simultaneous coronary angiography (CAG) was performed. Coronary angiography showed severe stenosis with eccentric calcified lesions in the proximal LAD ( and ). The stenotic lesion in the LAD was considered stable because there were no chest symptoms or findings on clinical examination that suggested acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
Blood pressure did not decrease during haemodialysis after temporary pacemaker implantation, and dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and prasugrel [the standard regimen in percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) at our hospital and throughout Japan] was initiated after permanent pacemaker implantation. The patient was treated with DAPT for at least 2 weeks, and after confirming the condition of the pacemaker wound and the tolerability of DAPT for bleeding complications, treatment of the stenotic lesion of the LAD was initiated.
The first step involved functional ischaemia evaluation of the LAD stenosis, which revealed a resting full-cycle ratio of 0.79 and a pressure gradient of 0.1 at the site of the eccentric calcified lesion . PCI was performed using a 7 F guide catheter. Pre-intervention OCT (Dragonfly OpStar; Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) showed semi-peripheral NC in the stenotic lesion (see , ; ). Debulking with the Diamondback 360 coronary orbital atherectomy system (OAS) (Cardiovascular Systems, St. Paul, MN, USA) was performed three times at low speed (80 000 rpm). After OCT evaluation, an additional atherectomy was performed at a higher rotational speed (120 000 rpm). Optical coherence tomography images after high-speed atherectomy showed that the NC lesions were effectively resected, with discontinuity of the overlying superficial cap. Surprisingly, however, new granular and filamentous structures were observed proximal to the target lesions, which resembled sea anemone tentacles (a CN-like OCT finding; see , ; ).
The electrocardiogram was unchanged, the TIMI flow grade was 3, and there was no evidence of slow flow or distal embolization. These very unusual tentacle-like structures appeared to be continuous from the debulked small NC lesion proximal to the target site, and OCT observation after dilatation with a 3.0 mm diameter scoring balloon (NSE Alpha; Goodman, Nagoya, Japan) revealed that although the lumen was fully dilated, extensive medial dissection had occurred and the structures appeared to have migrated somewhat distally (see , ; ). A DES (Xience Skypoint 3.0 mm × 23 mm; Abbott Vascular) was implanted to cover the entirety of these structures, with no resulting complications. Optical coherence tomography showed adequate stent expansion and granular filamentous-like structures crimped to the outside of the stent (see , ; ). Because of the TIMI3 flow without distal embolization, no additional anticoagulation agents or vasodilators were administered post-operatively, and there were no perioperative elevations in myocardial enzymes. The patient was discharged uneventfully.
At a 4-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic but showed in-stent restenosis (ISR) on CAG . Optical coherence tomography and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) were performed to evaluate the mechanism of ISR (–5 and E1′−5′). The granular and filamentous sea anemone tentacle-like structures seen at the time of initial PCI and crimped by the stent were no longer present on follow-up OCT (see , ). Heterogeneous severe intimal hyperplasia and organized thrombi were observed from the proximal to the mid portion of the stent, where the nodule protruded from the stent strut, and balloon dilation caused medial dissection. The distal stent sites with the crimped sea anemone tentacle-like structures contained distal NC lesions that became elliptical stent expansions. However, no restenosis was observed. Reintervention with a 3.0 mm diameter scoring balloon (Aperta NSE; Goodman) and a 3.0 mm × 25 mm drug-coated balloon (SeQuent Please; B.Braun, Berlin, Germany) was performed and successfully dilated the ISR lesion.