A 45-year-old female presented with slurred speech and left-sided twitching and weakness with rapid decline to becoming unresponsive. She had a past medical history of methamphetamine abuse and hypertension. Physical examination showed an intubated patient with a Glasgow Coma Score of 8T. She opened her eyes to noxious stimulation and had reactive pupils and purposeful movements of her left upper and lower extremities with minimal movements of the right upper and lower extremities. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the brain revealed an 87 cc (6.5 × 6.2 × 4.3 cm/2 using the A × B × C/2 estimation) ICH in the left frontal region (extending to the basal ganglia with intraventricular hemorrhage and effacement of the ventricles [ and ]. She underwent subsequent craniotomy with minimally invasive evacuation of the ICH. A quad lumen bolt was placed at the time of surgery in the left frontal region, resulting in the monitor tips in the peri-hematoma zone. The post-operative CT scans of the brain showed adequate evacuation of the hematoma with a small residual hematoma [ and ]. Following surgery, increases were observed in L/P ratios, and PbtO2 was persistently below 20 mmHg. ICP remained below <22 mmHg. A right frontal ventriculostomy drain was placed to address the occult regional ICP crisis. Following placement of the drain, L/P ratios lowered toward normal thresholds, and PbtO2 improved to above >20 mmHg [ and ]. The Hemedex CBF values also improved from values of 5–10 mL/100 g-min to the more normal range of 25–30 mL/100 g-min. These monitors remained in place until all of the monitors were removed on post-operative day #5. She subsequently had a tracheostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy, followed by weaning and removal of the ventriculostomy. She did not develop hydrocephalus . She was eventually discharged to a skilled nursing facility with a Modified Rankin Scale of 4, residual aphasia, and right-sided weakness.
The left basal ganglia hemorrhage was approached through a minimally invasive parafascicular surgery (MIPS) approach with the BrainPath™ Cannula (Nico Corporation, Indianapolis, IN) using a trans sulcal approach along the long access of the blood clot.[,] The brain was decompressed based on visual inspection after the evacuation. A separate incision on the same side was made over Kocher’s point, where a quad-lumen bolt was placed through a twist drill hole. The four lumens of this bolt were used for the following probes: Hemedex (CBF) (Hemedex, Waltham, MA), CMD (M-Dialysis, Chelmsford, MA) catheter, brain oxygenation through Licox catheter (Integra, Princeton, NJ), and a Camino ICP (Natus, Middleton, WI) probe.