The patient was an 85-year-old man who was followed after colonic surgery for rectal carcinoma. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) had been performed once every six months. An abdominal CT scan revealed a cystic mass in the pancreatic head and further examination was done. The patient had hypertension, hyperlipidemia, benign prostate hyperplasia, and a herniated disc in lumbar spine, but no history of chronic pancreatitis. He had surgical resection for rectal cancer at age of 83 years old. The patient did not smoke or drink alcohol. His brother had stomach cancer. Physical examination results on admission were as follows: height, 152 cm, weight, 50 kg, body temperature 36.4℃. His abdomen was soft and flat with no palpable mass. His relevant laboratory data were glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 34 IU/l, glutamic pyruvic transaminase 45 IU/l, and carcinoembryonic antigen 5.5 ng/ml. Carbohydrate antigen 19–9 and pancreatic enzymes were within a normal range. Contrast enhanced CT revealed an early enhanced round mass sized 15 mm surrounding with a slight amount of fluid and the mass was not clearly detected in the equilibrium phase . A T2 weighted intension picture in magnetic resonance imaging showed a 20 mm cystic lesion with an internal mass of 15 mm and the internal mass had a high intensity in the diffusion weighted intention picture . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) also revealed a cystic lesion of the pancreas head with an internal mass and slight and diffuse dilatation of MPD and cystic lesion suspicious for branch duct type IPMN in the pancreatic body . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a 15 mm round hypo echoic mass with fluid collection in its margin and the mass had iso or high vascularity . Positron emission tomography revealed high accumulation of 2-[18F] fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose as 4.53 of the max standardized uptake value . Duodenal papilla were slightly opening and endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) revealed mild and diffuse dilatation of MPD and mucus in the MPD and examination of the pancreatic juice showed no atypical cells. Fine needle biopsy was not performed because the lesion was intraductal. Considering all the image examinations, we diagnosed the tumor as an IPMN with carcinoma because of its large mural nodule (> 10 mm in size) in the cyst. Although the patient was very high age (85 years old), we performed a pancreatoduodenectomy because of his fair general condition and the possibility of tumor invasion to pancreatic parenchyma.
Macroscopically, a white solid tumor sized 2.5 × 1.8 × 1.0 was identified in the head of the pancreas. The cut surface of the resected pancreas showed a side-branch type intraductal tumor with a tubulopapillary architecture without mucus secretion . The excision margin was negative. Although the tumor had an extraductal invasion of only 1 mm in length , there was no vascular invasion and no lymph node metastasis (0/24). Immunohistochemical staining was positive for MUC1, and negative for MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and trypsin . The final diagnosis was determined to be pancreatic ITPN from the branch of the pancreatic duct with minimal invasion to the pancreatic parenchyma. Ki67 index in this case was 3.98%. At the time of this report (48 months post-surgery), the patient remains disease-free without evidence of recurrence. The mucus at ERP was thought to be from the cyst suspicious for branch duct type IPMN in the pancreatic body.