A 39-year old, Caucasion, multigravida female was admitted for induction of labour at 42 weeks' gestation at obstetric unit of a peripheral hospital. In her past history, she gave birth to her five children by vaginal delivery without any complications. She was a non-smoker and had no chest disease. Artificial rupture of membranes demonstrated heavily meconium-stained liquor, and cardiotocograpy showed repetitive late decelaritons with diminished beat-to beat variability and emergency caesarean section was planned. Preoperatively she was oriented. She had pulse 115 beats/min, respiratory rate 12/min and blood pressure 160/90 mmHg. Airway assessment identified class 3 Mallampati. Examination of the chest revealed normal vesicular breathing without any added pathological sounds. As we learned from her obstetrician, following a rapid sequence induction, intubation was performed in the second attempt by using stylet with number eight low volume-high pressure endotracheal tube by a very junior medical officer and was considered difficult. General anesthesia was maintained by isoflurane end-tidal concentration 0,8–1% in oxygen and N2O. Although no complication was observed during the operation, she suddenly developed respiratory distress and persistent hypoxia soon after extubation. Within the next 3 min, the patient's saturation declined to 65% in spite of 100% O2 support, and her blood pressure dropped to 65/40 mmHg with a pulse of 158 beats/min. She was reintubated and was refered to our hospital as intubated and ventilated with transport ventilation for further investigation and management.
On the first examination, she had Glasgow Coma Scale of E2M3V3. Her blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg with a pulse of 145 beats/min, and her O2 saturation was 65% with pulse oximeter. Breath sounds was not heard on auscultation on the left hemithorax while cardiovascular examination was normal except for tachycardia. Extensive subcutaneous emphysema was noted by palpation mainly on the left side of the thorax and neck. Immediately diagnostic pleural puncture was performed and air was aspirated from the left apical region of pleura.
The tube-thoracostomy was performed and 28 French sized chest tube with an under water seal drain was inserted into the chest wall at the 5th intercostal space in the left mid axillary line. A portable chest X-ray revealed the left pneumothorax together with minimal right pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema. The mediastinum was enlarged and thoracostomy tube was observed to reach the left hilar region . Computerized tomography (CT) of the thorax revealed the presence of excessive air around cervical soft tissue, in the thorax and mediastinum . In the second day, her oxygenation deteriorated suddenly and it was seen on chest radiography that pneumothorax involved the right hemithorax. completely. A second chest-tube was also inserted into the right chest wall. The fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed due to extensive atelectasia seen on chest X-ray. Bronchoscopic examination revealed diffuse hemorrhage in trachea and thrombothic plug obstructing the left bronchus almost completely. The plug was removed from the left main bronchus. Since clinical and radiological findings of pneumothorax improved, the right and left intercostals drains were removed on the fifth day. The patient was also extubated on the same day, as the oxygen saturation was persistently greater than 97% on room air. The nutrition was provided enterally with nasogastric tube until the 5th day, and then she was orally fed with water and clear liquids on the first extubation day. She complained of serious throat ache and coughing during intake of food, however throat and indirect larynx examination revealed no problem explaining this condition. So, bronchoscopy and endoscopy was repeated, and TEF was diagnosed. The fistulous tract was located approximately 3 cm inferior to vocal cords, 25 cm distant from the teeth and 5–6-cm over the carina level. Following the diagnosis of TEF, percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy was performed. Two weeks later, TEF was repaired by cervical approach. Postoperatively, the patient received parenteral nutrition for 7 days and on postoperative 9th day, she had a gastrografin swallow study, which showed no evidence of TEF. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative 14th day.