The case was a 26-year-old Iranian female presented to the endocrinology clinic of Loghman Hakim Hospital because of amenorrhea, polyuria, polydipsia, and morning nausea. She mentioned that her oligomenorrhea started in her first menstrual period at the age of 13 followed by amenorrhea after some time. She was diagnosed with polycystic ovarian disease (PCOD) and prescribed oral contraceptive agents (OCP) for 5 years. After the treatment period, the patient continued to suffer from menstruation disorders. Therefore, she underwent new tests ordered by the endocrinologist and the results were as follows: FSH: 0.4(normal range: 2-11) mIU/ml; LH: 0.3(normal range: 2-11) mIU/ml; PRL: 85 (normal range: 5.2-26.5) ng/ml; TSH: 0.1(normal range: 0.3-4.2) μIU/ml; and FT4: 12.7 (normal range: 15-23) ng/ml. Due to a high prolactin level, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was requested.
The MRI results showed a multilobar sellar mass (approximately, 30×27×24 mm3) with heterogeneous enhancement and suprasellar growth .
She was primarily misdiagnosed as macroprolactinoma and treated with cabergoline (dostinex) 0.5 mg twice per week. Despite at least 4-month treatment and prolactin normalization, not only menstruation was not managed but also the symptoms of polyuria, polydipsia, dry mouth, frontal headache behind the eyes, blurred vision, and morning nausea appeared. Therefore, dostinex 0.5 mg was discontinued and the patient was referred to the our endocrinology clinic by a neurosurgeon. Brain MRI, laboratory tests, and DI assessment tests were repeated at admission. Physical examination results indicated normal weight, height, and secondary sexual characteristics. The neurologic examination and visual field test showed mild superior hemianopsia. Paraclinic test results indicated normal CBC, BUN: 9 mg/dl, Cr: 0.8 mg/dl, Na: 148 meq/lit, K: 4 meq/lit, FBS: 97 mg/dl, urine output, 24 hours: 3500 cc, and U/A: SG: 1005.
The laboratory test results and response to desmopressin acetate nasal spray (DDAP) confirmed the presentation of DI; T4: 4.1 μg/dl; TSH: 0.47 μIU/ml; LH: 0.1 IU/l; FSH: 0.6 IU/l; PRL: 33 ng/ml (dilation 1/10: 1/00); Cortisol: 1 μg/dl; ACTH: 9.4 pg/ml; IGF1: 98 ng/ml. The MRI results four months after the treatment indicated an increased tumor size. The uterus and ovaries had normal conditions based on the ultrasound results and the endometrium’s thickness was 1 mm. We suspected craniopharyngioma, germinoma, and other parasellar tumors, and thus requested for the serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG); that undetectable. Finally, the patient became a candidate for endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery (ETSS).
After the ETSS, the pathology report showed germinoma . The immunohistochemical results revealed tumor cells positive for PLAP and CD117 and negative for CK, LCA, and GFAP.
In this figure, the hematoxylin and eosin, at a magnification of X100 (A) and X400 (B), show that the cells have clear cytoplasm arrangement in a lobular pattern traversed by thin fibrous septa infiltrated with small mature lymphocytes. The patient received 30 sessions of radiotherapy and hormonal agent therapy, including hydrocortisone, levothyroxine (LT4), estrogen and progesterone, and DDAVP nasal spray. The MRI reports 3-month and 1-year post-operation were normal .