A previously healthy 37-year-old male arrived at the emergency department (ED) of Notre Dame des Secours University Hospital Center, through the emergency medical services (EMS), following a suicide attempt. He reported ingesting five pesticide tablets an hour before seeking medical attention. On arrival, he displayed anxiety, alertness, and abnormal vital signs, including a heart rate (HR) of 65 beats per minute, a blood pressure (BP) of 90/50 mmHg, a respiratory rate (RR) of 28 breaths per minute, pulse oximetry reading of 92% on room air, and a body temperature of 36.8 °C. He exhibited agitation and had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 10. Pupils were bilaterally mid-sized and reactive, and his skin was warm and dry. An electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated atrial fibrillation, ST depressions, and T wave inversions . An intravenous fluid bolus was initiated and oxygen was administered. The toxicology service at AUBMC was consulted and activated charcoal (1 g/kg) was given due to recent ingestion of the pesticide.
Shortly after, the patient’s condition deteriorated, leading to hypotension (70/50 mmHg), desaturation (57%), and a GCS score of 4. Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis on 5 L per minute of oxygen showed: pH 7.17, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) 26.2 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) 143 mmHg, and bicarbonate (HCO3) 9.6 mmol/L. The patient was intubated to protect the airway, connected to a ventilator operating in A/C mode, with a tidal volume (TV) of 600 ml, respiratory rate (RR) of 28/min, a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) set at 100%, and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH2O. Sodium bicarbonate was also administered. Subsequent ABG readings still indicated severe metabolic acidosis (pH 7.27, PCO2 19.8 mmHg, HCO3 9.2 mmol/L). Additional vials of sodium bicarbonate were administered, followed by a drip. Despite multiple normal saline boluses, the patient remained hypotensive, necessitating vasopressors. Repeat ABGs after 2 h also showed severe metabolic acidosis (pH 7.35, PCO2 19.7 mmHg, HCO3 11 mmol/L).
Initial blood tests showed high anion gap acidosis (AG 31, CO2 9 mmol/L), a creatinine level of 1.3 mg/dL, and sodium (Na) at 131 mmol/L . A urine drug screen was not performed due to anuria since the presentation. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) scans of the brain, chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed no visible intra or extra-axial cerebral hemorrhage, bilateral posterior-basal atelectasis with a small pleural effusion, multiple air bubbles in the anterior chest wall and mediastinum, infiltrates of mesenteric area, peripancreatic fat, and hepatic hilum, and thickened gallbladder wall containing dense content.
The patient was then admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where aggressive fluid resuscitation was initiated, along with multiple vasopressors. Despite receiving over 15 L of 0.9% NaCl, the maximum dose of adrenaline, and more than 50 vials of HCO3, the patient remained hypotensive (systolic BP of 80 mmHg) and anuric, with continued severe metabolic acidosis (pH 7 and lactic acid level at 35 mmol/L). Cardiac ultrasound revealed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40% with paradoxical septal wall movement. After several hours, the patient developed significant bradycardia.
The following morning, the patient’s condition further deteriorated, resulting in multiorgan failure, including liver and renal failure (serum creatinine of 3.9 mg/dL, international normalized ratio (INR) of 3.4, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 820 μ/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) of 432 μ/L, bilirubin total/direct ratio of 1.9/1.5, ammonia level of 80 μmol/L, amylase of 798 u/L, and lipase of 253 μ/L). Despite withholding sedation, 100% FiO2, multiple vasopressors, and stress dose steroids, the patient remained comatose and hypotensive. Ultimately, he developed asystole and was pronounced dead 49 h after presentation.
One day after the presentation, bystanders accompanying the patient in the ED confirmed that the ingested pesticide contained 56% of the toxic substance, narrowing it down to aluminum phosphide tablets .
Gastric, urine, and blood samples were collected from the patient and sent to the environmental core laboratory at AUBMC for toxicological quantitative analysis. To analyze aluminum in samples, 2 mL of blood, urine, and gastric fluids were digested in an Anton-Paar Multiwave 5000 microwave digester with 9 mL nitric acid and 1 mL hydrogen peroxide. Quality control measures included blank spiked, dried oyster CRM, duplicate, and spiked samples. Post-digestion, aluminum content was analyzed using Agilent 7900 ICP-MS following EPA Method 200–8 (Determination of Metals and Trace Elements in Water and Wastes by ICP-MS-atomic emission spectrometry). Analysis results confirmed high levels of aluminum and phosphide in the serum and urine . The serum aluminum level was significantly elevated compared to the normal levels (3440 μg/L; normal level is < 12 μg/L) .