An 82-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital due to vomiting on April 19, 2021. Our hospital, Minami Osaka Hospital, has 310 beds in the acute phase general ward (including 8 beds in the High Care Unit), 42 in the convalescent rehabilitation ward, and 48 in the community-based comprehensive care ward. Approximately 10 years before admission, he was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. However, he had recently developed cognitive dysfunction and needed full support for activities of daily living. This prompted his wife to take charge of administering his insulin injections. Ten days before administration, he developed diarrhea. Eight days after this event, his glucose meter displayed “high,” which indicated a glucose level of > 600 mg/dL. As his wife was unable to check his precise glucose level, she could not administer an insulin injection. We diagnosed the patient with diabetic ketoacidosis. After his recovery, we initiated intensive insulin therapy for glycemic control.
Further discussion revealed that the patient had a past history of ischemic stroke (14 years prior), myocardial hypertrophy (11 years prior), and effort angina pectoris, for which he received stent placement therapy 11 and 5 years prior. He had been regularly taking aspirin, β-blockers, diuretics, donepezil, and insulin injections for maintenance treatment.
Laboratory tests after recovery from diabetic ketoacidosis revealed a brain natriuretic peptide level of 600–800 pg/mL and a hemoglobin A1c level of 7.1%. His recent electrocardiogram (ECG) showed numerous PVCs, and echocardiography results were consistent with cardiomyopathy (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter, 22 mm; left ventricular end-systolic diameter, 16 mm; left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF], 55%; left atrial dimension, 25 mm; interventricular septum, 17 mm; and left ventricular posterior wall, 15 mm). Computed tomography of the head revealed an old cerebral infarction in the right middle cerebral artery region . His Mini-Mental State Examination score was 14 out of 30, which corresponded to cognitive dysfunction.
Since the patient exhibited excessive daytime sleepiness and his ECG monitor displayed numerous PVCs despite an absence of hypoglycemia, we suspected SDB. Therefore, we performed portable PSG (Smart Watch PMP-300, Philips, Japan), which revealed CSA. The AHI value was 37.6. Since AHI was > 5, the type of apnea and hypopnea was central, and the patient had daytime sleepiness; therefore, we diagnosed him with CSA. The AHI value of 37.6 meant that he had severe CSA. We chose portable PSG instead of traditional PSG because attaching multiple PSG sensors may have been difficult for this patient given his cognitive dysfunction. We decided to perform ASV and observed its effects using portable PSG and Holter ECG (SCM-8000 Holter electrocardiogram analyzing system, Fukuda Denshi Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Before ASV, the total number of PVCs was 5,187 times/day. The patient had no cardiac symptoms. Ventricular arrhythmia was completely asymptomatic. We attached ASV (AutoSet CS-A Type TJ, Teijin Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and performed both Holter ECG and portable PSG again. The ASV (AutoSet CS-A Type TJ, Teijin Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) is a simplified ventilator, which can also be used at home. It was developed for patients with CSA with heart failure. This ASV machine is for patients who meets the following criteria: 1) CSA-dominance with chronic heart failure (LVEF ≤ 45%), 2) obstructive sleep apnea-dominance with heart failure or SDB with an LVEF of > 45%, or 3) demonstrated efficacy of ASV for congestive heart failure. The device cannot be used if the patient has inflammation in the upper airway, pneumothorax, dehydration, and any other disease dangerous for ASV. The items that can be manually adjusted with this device are expiratory positive airway pressure (2–15 cmH2O), minimum pressure support (0–6 cmH2O), and maximum pressure support (0–20 cmH2O). We used the default settings, which were as follows: expiratory positive airway pressure, 5.0 cmH2O; minimum pressure support, 3.0 cmH2O; and maximum pressure support, 10.0 cmH2O. We started by carefully checking the patient if there were no discomfort or difficulty in breathing, monitored the saturation of percutaneous oxygen to ensure there was no issue, and checked the alarm system, which activates when the airway circuit is unattached.
Following ASV, the patient experienced a decrease in the number of PVCs and apparent improvement in AHI values. The total number of PVCs decreased from 5,187 to 695 times/day. Meanwhile, the AHI score decreased from 37.6 to 0. The total numbers of apnea and hypopnea episodes decreased from 284 to 0 times/day and from 92 to 0 times/day, respectively . A histogram showing the number of PVCs with and without ASV use is shown in Fig. . It is evident from this figure that the PVCs during sleep had mostly disappeared.
Although the patient experienced cognitive failure and might have disliked attaching the ASV, he could spend the night without trying to remove the equipment. Possible side effects, such as nose bleeding, dried mouth, nose or eyes, discomfort of chest or nose, and skin rashes, were not observed. The patient did not appear to notice any physical change, such as less fatigue or drowsiness, although objectively, he was more awake and alert compared with his previous state. The patient stated that the ASV equipment was not uncomfortable, although he added that he did not want to wear it every day.