A 27-year-old Pakistani, Asian man, a medical student, with no previous comorbidities and no past history of tobacco smoking and alcohol intake, presented with 3 months’ history of frequent bouts of lower respiratory tract infections associated with exertional dyspnea, arthralgias, gradual weight loss, low grade fever, easy fatigability, and anorexia. His family history was also insignificant for any respiratory or other systemic pathology. In the fourth month of his illness, his fever became high grade associated with profuse sweating. All the baseline investigations were carried out on an out-patient basis. His white cell count was raised and a chest X-ray showed basal consolidation. A suspicion of pneumonia was made and he was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. His condition improved temporarily but the symptoms re-emerged after a few days. He also received a course of orally administered fluoroquinolones but there was no improvement. A subsequent high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of his chest revealed bilateral ground-glass haziness with areas of traction bronchiectasis, more so in the posterior basal segments of both lower lobes, suggestive of ILD . He was given dexamethasone which improved his respiratory symptoms. In the sixth month of illness, he developed progressive proximal muscle weakness. He had difficulty in rising up from a chair and had difficulty in rising up from a squatting position. Throughout this period he had progressive weight loss (19 kg lost in 2 months) and profuse sweating. He was admitted to our hospital and thoroughly investigated. With time his proximal muscle weakness became severe and defined. It now involved his upper limbs as well and he had difficulty in combing his hair. He also gave a history of painful and cyanosed finger tips in winter.
He had lost muscle bulk (19 kg lost in 2 months) and was pale. He was febrile with recorded fever of 39.4 to 40.0 °C (103–104 °F). There was symmetric arthralgia but no arthritis. A chest examination still revealed bi-basal inspiratory crackles.
Routine and specialized investigations were carried out, which are tabulated in Table .
A bone marrow biopsy was done to exclude any myeloproliferative disorder that could have been responsible for the continuously raised total leukocyte count (TLC). It turned out to be normocellular with no evidence of leukemia or lymphoma. His 25-hydroxy vitamin-D was deficient with a value of 4.9 ng/ml (normal value, 30–100 ng/ml; severe deficiency, < 20 ng/ml). An ultrasound of his abdomen was suggestive of only cholelithiasis, with no pleural or pericardial effusions. Bronchoalveolar lavage for acid-fast bacilli (AFBs), GeneXpert, and AFB culture/sensitivity and cytology was negative. A muscle biopsy was consistent with inflammatory myopathy.
Since his musculoskeletal features could not be explained by ILD alone, a full autoimmune profile was sent: extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) profile. Anti-Scl 70 immunoglobulins G (IgG), anti-SRP IgG, anti-Mi2 IgG, anti-PL-7, and anti-PL-12 were negative. Anti-Jo-1 antibodies turned out to be positive in titers of 81 AU/ml (normal range 6–12 AU/ml). The clinical features in conjunction with elevated muscle enzymes like creatinine phosphokinase (CPK), anti-Jo-1 positivity, muscle biopsy, and HRCT findings led to a presumptive diagnosis of ASS. He was commenced on pulsed intravenous methyl prednisolone 1 gm daily for 3 days followed by orally administered prednisolone (1 mg/kg body weight), and vitamin D3 and calcium supplements at our hospital. He responded to the treatment. His CPK reduced and symptoms improved. He was discharged on orally administered glucocorticoids, orally administered azathioprine, proton pump inhibitors, and vitamin D3 analogs (to prevent corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis). Six months later, he is on a maintenance dose of orally administered steroids and azathioprine and is symptom free. The case is being presented after informed consent from the patient.