A 25-year-old male patient visited our Department of Orthodontics with a chief complaint of anterior open bite. Clinical examination revealed a class I molar and canine relationship. The overjet and overbite were 1 mm and -2mm, respectively, and open bite was limited only to the incisors. The exposure of maxillary anterior teeth in a smile was adequate, and lip competence could be achieved with some mentalis strain. Reverse smile arc and excessive exposure of mandibular teeth were observed in facial photographs . The cephalometric analysis showed a skeletal class II relationship with a prognathic maxilla, normovergent pattern, and labioversion of maxillary and mandibular incisors (details are shown in Table ). All third molars were fully erupted and well occluded.
The patient was diagnosed as skeletal class II and dental class I with normovergent pattern, anterior open bite, and proclination of the upper and lower incisors.
The first treatment option was a segmental Le Fort I osteotomy. This procedure can immediately reduce the large amount of posterior vertical dimension and correct two occlusal planes. Since the patient was unable to be hospitalized, he rejected orthognathic surgery under general anesthesia.
The second treatment option was orthodontic intrusion of maxillary teeth using a skeletal anchorage system. A large amount of intrusion of all maxillary teeth except central and lateral incisors was needed for optimal esthetic results in this patient. We thought that miniplates were more suitable than mini-implants because miniplates can be placed apically enough and provide stable intrusive forces. Along with miniplate placement, the supplementary surgery was considered to reduce the treatment time. A surgical impaction of posterior segments had the advantage of shortening the treatment time and retention of treatment results. Since the patient wanted treatment to end quickly, he agreed to this plan with PMSO and informed consent was obtained.
A fixed tongue crib was delivered to control tongue posture. 0.018-inch standard edgewise brackets were bonded, and 0.0175-inch twisted stainless steel wires were inserted in both arches. Brackets on maxillary canines and premolars were bonded to specially designed position to widen the inter-radicular space, and step bends were added between maxillary canine and premolar to prevent extrusion of anterior teeth.
Four months later, the wires were changed to 0.016-inch stainless steel wires, and open coil springs were inserted between maxillary canines and premolars. After 12 months of alignment, 0.016 × 0.022-inch sectional stainless steel wire was inserted in the maxillary arch, and the patient was referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery for the PMSO.
The surgery was performed under local anesthesia by dividing the left and right sides in consideration of dining convenience . After full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap was elevated, buccal bone cutting was initiated from inter-radicular space between canine and first premolar, taking care not to damage the root surface. The horizontal cutting was extended to pterygopalatine junction at 5 mm above the apices of molars. A bone fragment of 3 mm in width was removed from the horizontal osteotomy line for posterior impaction. The palatal bone was cut by curved osteotome without flap elevation to maintain the blood supply. The bone segment was moved apicolaterally, and T-shaped miniplate was placed on the zygomatic buttress. Posterior teeth were ligated with 0.012-inch dead soft wire to miniplates to hold the bone segment on the place. After surgery, antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were prescribed.
The patient was followed up 2 days after the surgery. Moderate facial swelling and ecchymosis on his maxillary area were identified, but they were relieved after medication and wound irrigation of 2 weeks. A second surgery was performed at the opposite side after a month from the first surgery. The anterior open bite improved immediately after the surgery .
A month later from the second surgery, the brackets on maxillary canine were repositioned to normal position, and 0.016-inch nickel-titanium archwire was placed in the maxillary arch. A mini-implant was placed at the center of the mid-palatal suture for further intrusion of posterior teeth. Elastic threads were applied from the lingual button on posterior teeth to mid-palatal mini-implant.
The additional intrusion of posterior teeth was continued for 9 months after the surgery. The maxillary right miniplate was loosened after 6 months from the first surgery, so we replaced it with a new miniplate. The archwires were subsequently changed to 0.014-inch, 0.016-inch, and 0.016 × 0.022-inch stainless steel wire in this period. During the finishing stage, the torque of the left maxillary canine and dental midline was corrected.
After 28 months of treatment, a favorable occlusion was obtained, and orthodontic appliances were removed. Fixed retainers were bonded on both arches, and the activator was delivered for retention. A schematic flow of the treatment is shown in Fig. .