A 67-year-old woman with a history of asthma presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with chest pain lasting 3 hours before admission. The 12-lead ECG revealed myocardial infarction with ST segment elevation (STEMI) (elevation present in the inferior and V5/V6 leads) . The patient was hemodynamically stable with normal blood pressure and Killip status I. After applying a bolus dose of acetylsalicylic acid (300 mg) and ticagrelor (180 mg) orally, an urgent coronary angiography was performed which showed a middle segment left circumflex artery (LCx) occlusion and a collateralized total occlusion of the proximal segment of RCA. Three drug-eluting stents (DES) were implanted in the LCx, and due to unsatisfactory postprocedural TIMI flow (TIMI I), GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor eptifibatide was applied after the procedure (180 mcg/kg as a IV bolus—15,3 mg, followed by a continuous infusion of 2 mcg/kg/min up to 75 mg of eptifibatide in total) . Postprocedural ECG revealed satisfactory ST segment resolution, and the patient had no chest pain. Laboratory tests revealed elevation of cardioselective markers (admission values: hsTI 51 ng/L and creatine kinase 106 U/L; peak values during hospitalization, 18 hours after the intervention: hsTI 24100 ng/L and creatine kinase 1348 U/L). Echocardiography during the first day after procedure showed a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (50%) with a inferoposterior wall hypokinesis, with no other significant pathology. The patient was treated with beta blocker, ACE inhibitor, and statin permanently as well as with a 100 IU/kg dose of low-molecule heparin (enoxaparin) twice a day during the first 4 days. On the 5th day of the hospitalization, the patient reported nonspecific chest discomfort, without cardioselective enzyme reelevation, but due to nonspecific changes in the inferior leads of the ECG, the new onset of the ischemia could not be excluded, so the coronary angiography was repeated. The second coronary angiography revealed CTO of the RCA and an in-stent thrombosis with occlusion of stents in LCx . Due to unsuccessful recanalization of the LCx using the guidewire and the TIMI I flow at the end of the first procedure, optimal anti-ischemic therapy was proposed including isosorbide-mononitrate, trimetazidine, ranolazine, in addition to ticagrelor, acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), nebivolol, ramipril, and atorvastatin. After the following four days of uneventful hospitalization, the patient was discharged with chronic therapy which included all the abovementioned medications. Three months later, at the planned outpatient follow-up visit, the patient presented with stable angina pectoris symptoms during moderate physical activity and a new coronary angiography was scheduled. After admission, coronary angiography was performed showing a spontaneous recanalization of the RCA, with a nonsignificant stenosis of the proximal-to-middle RCA segment, a 50% stenosis of the posterior descending artery, and no collaterals from left anterior descending artery (LAD) as well as persistent in-stent occlusion in the LCx with new collaterals from the first marginal artery . Dobutamine stress echocardiography was performed the day after the coronary angiography, showing no ischemia progression during testing in the RCA- and LCx-supplied myocardium. Due to stress echocardiography finding, no coronary intervention was indicated. Medical therapy was continued after dose optimization (80 mg of isosorbide-mononitrate daily instead of 40 mg and 1000 mg of ranolazine daily instead of 750 mg). Before discharge, an optimal ECG stress test was performed and no pain or ECG signs of ischemia were reported.