A 9-year-old male patient with a history of backache was referred from a district hospital to the Dr George Mukhari Academic Hospital, Gauteng province, South Africa, due to severe upper back pain and gibbus (kyphosis) deformity that emerged over 8 months prior to admission. He had no history of tuberculosis contact or constitutional symptoms (cough or fever, loss of weight or loss of appetite).
Upon physical examination at admission, the patient was ambulatory but limping, had tenderness at the gibbus area, with pain in the waist. He was cooperative and appeared to have a normal skin condition. There was no Bacillus Calmette-Guerin scar observed. The neurological examination was normal and intact.
X-rays revealed kyphosis at the bottom of the thoracic spine (T12 vertebra) and the first vertebra of the lumbar spine (L1 vertebra). His T12 had vertebral destruction with preserved posterior elements. The L1 upper end plate and T12 lower end plate destruction with a peri-vertebral shadow were indicative of an abscess .
Plain radiography of the chest was unremarkable . Furthermore, the haemoglobin was low (11.5 g/dL), with a normal-range white blood cell count and an elevated C-reactive protein level of 18 mg/L. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was a bit high at 20 mm/hour; alkaline phosphatase was 211 U/L. The alanine aminotransferase (19 U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase (31 U/L) were within the normal ranges. A serology test for HIV enzyme linked immunosorbent assay was negative. A superficial pus swab microscope analysis was acid-fast bacilli-negative when stained with auramine-O. An MGIT 960 culture was also negative after 42 days.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the entire spine revealed features suggestive of tuberculosis infection . There was kyphotic deformity and pre-vertebral fluid collection at T12/L1 extending to the epidural space. The fluid collection was low on T1, high on T2 and became enhanced post-contrast. There was also an abnormal signal of L1 and T12, as well as associated involvement of the superior end plate of L1. The T12/L1 intervertebral disc was not clearly delineated with the distortion of normal anatomy. Spinal canal stenosis was observed at the level of kyphotic deformity with cord compression, although there was spinal cord edema. Posterior elements were preserved and facet joints were normal .
A second set of the magnetic resonance images of the entire spine, which was done eight months later, revealed progression of the disease (infective process), increased kyphosis, and a paravertebral abscess, as well as complete destruction of lower and upper end plates of T12 and L1 with cord compression .