A 79-year-old Japanese woman was transported to our hospital soon after falling off a bicycle. She had fallen after running into a young man riding another bicycle. The young man had called an ambulance after she appeared unresponsive to stimuli and she was transferred to our hospital. The patient had a medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease and hypoacusis requiring hearing aids, and had been prescribed esomeprazole at 10 mg once daily and mosapride citrate hydrate at 5 mg three times daily. Her habitual activities and familial history were unremarkable. She was a part-time cleaner and lived with her husband. On arrival at the emergency room, vital signs were: temperature, 35.8 °C; heart rate, 58 beats/min with regular rhythm; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; blood pressure, 150/79 mmHg; and oxygen saturation, 100% with supplemental oxygen at 10 L/min via simple oxygen mask. Glasgow Coma Scale score on arrival was 11 (E3V3M5), indicating affected consciousness due to brain injury. On examination, the patient was drowsy but responsive to pain stimuli. The trachea was central, and neither crackles nor decreased breath sounds were heard on auscultation. The abdomen was not distended. Examination of cranial nerves was difficult due to drowsiness. Bruising was seen around the right eye. Pupil diameters differed, at 4.5 mm on the right and 3.0 mm on the left. Both eyes showed reactivity to light. Automated infrared pupillometry (AIP) and neurological pupil index (NPi) were applied as objective means of assessing the pupillary light reflex (PLR) using an NPi-200 pupillometer (NeurOptics, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA). It showed anisocoria with dilated right pupil .
Examination of the limbs showed no abnormalities other than bruising over the right clavicle.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed hemorrhagic contusion in the left temporal lobe and left pretectal area of the midbrain, shaped by the cerebellar tentorium . Right clavicular fracture and pulmonary contusion with fractures of the 3rd and 4th ribs were also seen. CT the following day and on hospital day 5 showed no enlargement of hemorrhage . Cranial examinations showed normal results other than anisocoria (right pupil, 4.5 mm; left pupil, 3.0 mm; reactive to light) the following day. Ocular motility was normal (Supplemental Fig. ).
On observation with an infrared pupillometer (NPi-200; NeurOptics, Inc.), the NPi was 3.2 on the right and 4.4 on the left, with pupil diameters of 5.66 mm and 3.57 mm, respectively. Abnormal pupillary findings persisted, with a difference in NPi of 2.0 on hospital day 5 and 1.5 on hospital day 7 . Open reduction and plate fixation were performed to treat the right clavicular fracture on hospital day 7.
The postoperative course was uneventful and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head was performed on hospital day 13. MRI confirmed contusion in the left temporal lobe and left midbrain . The patient was discharged on hospital day 17 and left hospital able to walk unaided. Follow-up visits showed anisocoria remaining at 4 days and 32 days after discharge and she complained of dizziness and weight loss, but she was able to resume her normal lifestyle without visual disturbance. The NPi of the right eye recovered to 3.8 and pupillary size returned symmetry between both pupils as of the last follow-up visit (Supplemental Fig. ).