An otherwise healthy 34-year-old woman with a body mass index of 20.2 has been referred to the emergency room for complaints of epigastric pain, dyspnoea, diaphoresis, nausea, and vomiting for the last 2 days. She had also lost 10% of her weight in the last 6 months. Abdominal examination revealed left flank pain and mild abdominal tenderness with ascites. A palpable painful mass was detected in the left upper abdomen. Pulse examination in all extremities was normal and no signs of cyanosis were observed. No murmur was heard during cardiac auscultation. On arrival, she was found to be hypotensive, with a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg and a heart rate of 75 b.p.m. Moist rales were audible in the basal lung fields. Electrocardiogram was performed on the patient with discomfortable angina. Electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in the inferior limb leads (see , ).
The patient with hypotension received dopamine infusion and bolus saline replacement. As per standard protocol, she underwent an emergency coronary angiogram , which showed high thrombus burden in the distal right coronary artery (RCA) [Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Grade 0 flow], while all other segments of the epicardial coronary arteries (TIMI Grade 3 flow) were normal . Due to no evidence of plaque formation, the lesion was considered spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD). Initially, medical treatment was planned due to SCAD but cardiac arrest occurred during angiography linked with hypotension and ventricular fibrillation. The patient was defibrillated with 360 J, cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 5 min due to asystole, 1 mg adrenaline was administered subcutaneously, and sinus rhythm was achieved. Therefore, predilatation with 2 × 15 mm balloon was performed to RCA lesion. The distal flow was not achieved despite the injection of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (tirofiban) inhibitor and repeated balloon predilatation. Due to haemodynamic instability and no reflow, a 2.75 × 36 mm drug-eluting stent under pressure 14 atm was implanted into the RCA lesion. Tirofiban infusion and no-reflow protocol was planned for the patient who developed no reflow after stent deployment and was referred to the coronary intensive care unit. Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction Grade 3 flow was achieved in control angiography after 2 days infusion of tirofiban .
An echocardiogram (ECHO) showed regional wall motion abnormalities hypokinesia of the inferior, posterior, and septal segments, an ejection fraction of 40%, and a 31 × 33 mm right atrial mass adhering to the inferior vena cava ( and ). To exclude paradoxical embolism due to patent foramen ovale (PFO), we also performed a contrast ECHO. However, there was no evidence of a paradoxical embolism.
The intracardiac mass was thought to be a thrombus and anticoagulation with rivaroxaban was initiated in addition to dual antiplatelet (acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg p.o. qDay plus clopidogrel 75 mg p.o. qDay) therapy to prevent further embolic events. The diseases that may predispose to thrombosis were investigated in the patient without a past medical history. Haematological parameters, biochemical parameters, lipid profile, tumour markers, connective tissue markers, and thrombophilia panel were studied to explore rheumatological, hereditary, and thrombogenic diseases (see , ). All parameters were within normal limits except cancer antigen 125 (48.3 U/mL). Possible cancer-induced thrombosis was suspected because of the palpable mass and ascites in her abdominal examination and a computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis was obtained. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed an 11.3 cm enhanced necrotic mass in the left adrenal gland bed ( and ). Additionally, CT scan revealed tumour thrombus extending proximally up to the confluence of hepatic veins immediately inferior to the right atrium with distal extension to iliac vein bifurcation ( and ). Venous Doppler of the bilateral lower extremity was unremarkable. Twenty-four-hour urine analyses revealed normal vanillylmandelic acid, 5 hydroxy indole acetic acid, and homovanillic acid levels (see , ). Image-guided tissue sampling was obtained and histopathological analysis confirmed the final diagnosis of PHEOs ( and ). Tumour cells with large, abundant, fine granular cytoplasm , large, polygonal, nuclear pseudoinclusions , granular, amphiphilic cytoplasm, pleomorphic nucleus, and marked nucleolus , round-oval nucleus, prominent nucleolus , and atypical mitosis support the diagnosis of PHEOs. Positive immune reaction with vimentin antibody , positive immune reaction with CD56 antibody , positive immune reaction with synaptophysin antibody , and positive immunoreaction with MelanA antibody confirm PHEOs.
The surgical procedure was not planned due to the presence of metastatic foci in both positron emission tomography (PET) and contrast CT. In addition, the persistence of intense thrombus in the right heart and inferior vena cava despite intensive anticoagulant therapy.
Based on the above data, our patient was diagnosed with malign PHEOs. 177Lu-DOTATATE-based peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) is a promising therapy for metastatic and/or inoperable PHEOs and paragangliomas (PPGL). Treatment with 177Lu-DOTATATE-based PRRT was initiated. However, the patient did not respond to treatment and died of septic shock due to nosocomial infections caused by vancomycin-resistant enterococci.