A 72-year-old male presented with dyspnea and leg edema. The patient previously had four catheter ablations for atrial fibrillation, but there was persistence of irregular rhythm. There was no history of spinal canal stenosis or carpal tunnel syndrome. Additionally, orthostatic hypotension and numbness symptoms in the extremities were not evident. The blood pressure and heart rate were 123/73 mmHg and 92 beats per minute, respectively. Oxygen saturation was 96% in room air. Physical examination revealed leg edema and jugular vein distention.
Chest radiography showed cardiothoracic enlargement with a cardiothoracic ratio of 0.56 and mild pulmonary congestion. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation rhythm, low QRS amplitude in limb leads, poor R progression in V1 to V3 leads, and ST depression in V5 and V6 leads. Symmetric left ventricular hypertrophy and mild systolic dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40.0% were observed on echocardiography . Echocardiographic apical sparing strain patterns were also documented.
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) and troponin T levels were 3,310 pg/mL (normal: < 125 pg/mL) and 0.073 ng/mL (normal: < 0.015 ng/mL), respectively. The estimated glomerular filtration rate of the patient was 69.0 mL/min/1.73 m2 and urine protein excretion of the patient was 0.16 g/day; thus, the staging of chronic kidney disease was G2A2. The patient was treated with loop diuretics and tolvaptan for symptoms of heart failure (New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class III). In the serum free light-chain assay, the kappa/lambda ratio was 23.4 (374 mg/L, (normal: 3–19 mg/mL) / 16 mg/L (normal: 6–26 mg/mL)) and different chain level was 358 mg/L. In addition, the Bence Jones proteins and serum immunoelectrophoresis were positive. According to Mayo AL stage 2012 , the patient was classified as stage IV, and the 6-month prognosis was estimated to be approximately 50%.
For a more rapid and accurate definitive diagnosis, a pathological evaluation by endomyocardial biopsy, which is invasive but has high detection accuracy, was favored. Coronary angiography revealed no evidence of ischemic stenosis. The pathological findings of the myocardial samples taken from the right ventricle showed positive Congo red staining, which provided a definitive diagnosis of CA. Bone marrow aspiration revealed 7.8% plasmacytes, which was consistent with the diagnosis of MGUS. The proportion of plasmacytes doubled in 6 months. In addition, the hemoglobin level decreased from 10.6 to 9.1 g/dL. Initially, AL-type CA associated with myeloproliferative disorders was clinically suspected; however, the scarcity of autonomic symptoms, mild renal dysfunction, and slow progression of heart failure led us to re-examine the possibility of non-AL CA.
99mTechnetium and pyrophosphate (Tc-PYP) scintigraphy revealed grade 3 uptake of Tc-PYP in the myocardium . Although ATTR might be deposited in the myocardium, we were concerned that MGUS could potentially progress to multiple myeloma, which might be associated with the advanced stage of AL-type CA in the near future. Hence, chemotherapy with bortezomib and dexamethasone was administered. Immunostaining showed that the myocardium was stained with anti-TTR, but not anti-kappa, anti-lambda, or anti-AA . Genetic testing revealed no mutations in TTR-related genes. Therefore, the final diagnosis was wild-type ATTR CA with MGUS, and the patient was treated with 80 mg of oral tafamidis per day. Three years after starting treatment, NT-proBNP remained unchanged at 3,131 pg/mL and left ventricular ejection fraction at 40%, but he experienced only one heart failure hospitalization and his symptoms improved to NYHA functional class II.