A 49-year-old previously healthy woman complained of gradually progressive left buttock swelling together with intermittent low fever for 1 year. She felt numbness and pain radiating to the posterior part of the left leg without obvious weakness. Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the outside hospital showed dural thickening with homogenous gadolinium enhancement and tissue swelling of the left buttock. The patient was treated with antibiotics empirically without symptomatic improvement.
Four months before being admitted to our hospital, she experienced severe headache and diplopia, accompanied with episodes of generalized tonic seizures and intermittent psychiatric symptoms, including hallucinations and disorganized thinking.
On examination, the patient was alert. She presented with bilateral exophthalmos with conjunctival congestion. Slit lamp examination showed peripheral ulcerative keratitis and uveitis, which were indicative of systemic inflammatory disease. Cranial nerve examination revealed incomplete bilateral third and sixth nerve palsies and left peripheral facial palsy. The muscle strength of the distal left lower limb was grade 4/5, while other limbs were normal. Achilles tendon reflexes were reduced bilaterally, and Lasegue sign on the left side was positive. Sensory tests revealed decreased pinprick sensation at L5 to S1 level in the left leg. The rest of the neurological examination and systemic examination were normal.
Brain MRI demonstrated linear dural thickening and diffuse pachymeningeal enhancement over both cerebral convexities, with abnormal signal in the subcortical region of the right frontal lobe, which might have resulted from obstruction of venous reflux caused by the diffuse lesions of dura mater.
Routine blood tests were normal except for mild thrombocytopenia. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were both elevated. Antinuclear antibodies showed 1:640 positive and anti–double-strand deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibodies were detected as well as the presence of hypocomplementemia (C3 0.666 and C4 0.082 g/L; normal range >0.73 and 0.1 g/L). Angiotensin-converting enzyme, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and rheumatoid factors were negative. Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG)4 level was within normal ranges. Infectious workup including syphilis, HIV, tuberculosis, and brucella were negative as well. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was elevated (>330 mmH2O). CSF analysis revealed 82 leukocytes/mm3 with lymphocytic predominance, protein of 1.89 g/L, and normal glucose level. Bacterial, fungal, and acid-fast bacilli cultures were all negative. No malignant cells were found on CSF cytology.
Sacrococcygeal vertebrae resection was performed for decompression, and surrounding tissue was obtained for pathological diagnosis. There was a large amount of firm tissue adherent to the ventral dural sac, compressing the lumbosacral nerve roots. Histological examination revealed chronic inflammation in spinal dura mater with extensive fibrosis, dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, and focal vasculitis. Immunostaining for IgG4 was positive. The IgG4-to-IgG ratio was 10%.
Based on the clinical, serological, and imaging findings, a diagnosis of hypertrophic pachymeningitis associated with SLE was made . The patient was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone followed by maintenance treatment with oral prednisone 60 mg daily. Intrathecal injection of dexamethasone was given simultaneously, and immunotherapy was intensified with cyclophosphamide. The patient showed improvement in clinical symptoms, as well as a significant reduction of CSF leucocytes and protein content. Dural thickening was greatly resolved . There was no recurrence.