A 75-year-old man was admitted to a clinic with mild dysphagia. His past and family histories were unremarkable. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) at the clinic revealed a tumor of the thoracic esophagus. He was referred to our hospital for further examination. His physical findings were normal. All laboratory data were within normal limits. Tumor marker levels were all within normal limits. An EGD revealed a type II tumor, 20 mm in diameter, of the thoracic esophagus. The histological findings of biopsy specimens from the tumor showed squamous cell carcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) showed swollen lymph nodes and mediastinum metastasis without invasion to the adjacent organs. The esophageal carcinoma was clinically diagnosed as T2N1M0 (StageII) according to the eighth edition of the Union for International Cancer Control . The patient underwent preoperative chemotherapy, followed by minimally invasive esophagectomy with regional lymph node dissection and gastric conduit reconstruction by the retrosternal route following the Esophageal cancer practice guidelines 2017 edited by the Japan Esophageal Society . The esophageal carcinoma was finally diagnosed as ypT1bN0M0 (ypStageI) . The patient did not developed hoarseness. However, pharyngoesophageal dysphagia developed, and he was unable to swallow anything immediately after the esophagectopmy. In laryngoscopy, there was no paralysis of the vocal cords, although left vocal code weakened on postoperative day (POD) 7. In EGD, there was no stricture around the anastomosis. In CT scan, there was also no compartmental tissue around the anastomosis . Severe supraglottic penetration with cricopharyngeus muscle dysfunction was revealed in videofluoroscopic examination . Although balloon dilations around the pharyngoesophageal junction had been performed several times, cricopharyngeus muscle dysfunction remained, and the patient developed aspiration pneumonia. Bilateral cricopharyngeal myotomy was performed for cricopharyngeus muscle dysfunction on POD 43. Access to pharingoesophageal region was obtained through an oblique cervical incision bordering the anterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The region was exposed by retracting the carotid sheathes laterally and the trachea and larynx medially. The incision lines were placed in bilateral cricopharyngeus muscles without the injury of the recurrent nerves. The incisions to the cricopharyngeus muscle were carried down to the mucosa and were extended caudally by 30 mm on to the esophagus . A disposable plastic endotracheal tube (Inner diameter: 5.5 mm) was inserted in pharingoesophageal region, and the cuff was gradually dilated in the myotomy. The myotomy allowed the dilated mucosa to protrude freely through the incision . The histological findings revealed atrophy and fibrosis of the cricopharyngeus muscle fibers . Pharyngoesophageal dysphagia improved immediately after myotomy. Supraglottic penetration with cricopharyngeus muscle dysfunction was improved in videofluoroscopic examination . The patient swallowed solid food easily without dysphagia 12 months after myotomy.