A 53-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital because a thyroid nodule was found 2 mo prior.
A thyroid nodule without any symptoms was found 2 mo prior in a physical examination.
The patient had no past medical history.
The patient did not have any family history of other diseases.
At admission, the patient was conscious. Her body temperature was 36.5 °C, with a regular heart rate of 70 bpm, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 118/70 mmHg. The physical examination was normal.
When the patient was admitted to the hospital, blood biochemistry and urine analysis were normal. Preoperative thyroid function was normal, and no hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism was observed. Parathyroid hormone and serum calcium were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas were also normal. Preoperative calcitonin was 345 pg/mL (typically less than 6.4 pg/mL), and CEA was 6.44 µg/L (typically less than 3.0 µg/L).
Thyroid ultrasound (US) suggested hypoechoic nodules located in the right lobe of the thyroid, with a size of 5 mm × 5 mm and clear boundaries. The patient was then treated conservatively, and she exhibited no symptoms during long-term follow-up monitoring. On December 18, 2018, the patient visited our hospital again for re-examination, and thyroid US indicated multiple hypoechoic nodules located in the right lobe, the largest of which was approximately 10 mm × 6 mm, with clear boundaries, uneven internal echoes, and punctured blood flow signals. The left lobe showed cystic-solid mixed hypoechoic nodules with a size of approximately 22 mm × 11 mm, clear boundaries, mainly cystic features, and cord-like blood flow signals around the nodules. On both sides of the neck, multiple solid hypoechoic nodules, with clear borders and flat shape, and a clear boundary between the cortex and medulla were detected. She was diagnosed with bilateral thyroid nodules, thyroid imaging reporting and data system (TI-RADS) grade 4 . Subsequent further thyroid contrast-enhanced ultrasonography still suggested that the bilateral lymph nodes in the neck were more likely to be reactive hyperplasia . To confirm the diagnosis, FNAC of bilateral thyroid nodules was performed, and cytopathology showed the following: Suspicious PTC [the Bethesda system for reporting thyroid cytopathology (TBSRTC) V] in the right thyroid nodule Left thyroid nodule cytology suggested a malignancy (TBSRTC V); however, its type could not be determined .