A 66-year-old man was referred to our surgical outpatient clinic because of an endoscopic report that was indicative of a small irregular ulcerative lesion in the fundus of the stomach. The histopathological report was consistent with gastric squamous carcinoma (AE1/AE3+, p40+, Chromogranin A−, Synaptophysin−, c-erB-2/HER2−). The patient complained of epigastric pain and abdominal cramps for the last 2 months with no incident of hematemesis, melena, or hematochezia. He had an unintentional weight loss of approximately 10 kg during the last 4 months. He was suffering from type 2 diabetes with a past medical history of smoking, 100 packs per year approximately. The patient had never undergone a surgical operation before.
His blood tests showed chronic anemia and his tumor markers (CEA, CA 19-9, aFP, and PSA) were within normal limits. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed no other sites of tumor location or other primary sites of squamous malignancy . Maximum diameter of the tumor was 3 cm in the fundus of the stomach with no suspicious lymph nodes, while the chest CT was normal. The multidisciplinary team decided to proceed to surgery. Three weeks after the multidisciplinary team meeting due to the high volume of the patients, the patient underwent total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction, along with splenectomy and D2 lymphadenectomy. The postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 12.
Pathological assessment of the specimen revealed a 4.7 × 3 × 2.5-cm mass located in the fundus of the stomach invading the subserosa. Out of 48 lymph nodes resected, 9 of them were positive for tumor infiltration. Perineural invasion and extramural venous invasion were also found. The resection margins were free and the final TNM stage was T3N3aM0 (WHO 2017). Microscopically, the tumor was a poorly differentiated gastric squamous cell carcinoma with clear cell characteristics, chronic inflammatory, and desmoplastic stromal reaction . Immunohistochemistry of gastric tumor confirmed the diagnosis with positive CK14 stain, cyclin-D1 stain, p53 stain, EGFR stain, co-expression of CK5/6, and p63 stains . In order to rule out other possible diagnoses or other occult primary tumors, extensive immunohistochemistry check including MUC1, uroplakin III, PAX8, RCC, and PAS was performed without positivity.
Because of the rarity of this specific type of tumor in the stomach, the tumor board decided to rule out other possible primary sites of squamous malignancy. The patient underwent a cranial, abdomen, and chest CT, which revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum, in right and left paratracheal area, as well as 4 small bilateral possible secondary lung lesions . Interestingly enough, these findings were not apparent in the preoperative CT scan. However, they were evident 3 weeks after surgery, while preoperative chest CT scan was unremarkable, a fact that underlines the aggressive behavior of this malignancy. Following that, the patient also underwent bronchoscopy which did not reveal any lesion. Endobronchial brushing results were normal. Full-body FDG PET/CT scan showed multiple metastatic chest lesions of maximum diameter 11 mm . The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. To date, 12 months after the initiation of the chemotherapy, there is no progression of the disease, with minor regression of the metastatic chest lesions.