A 26-year-old male with unremarkable past medical, family, and psychosocial history sought consult for a painful right shoulder at the previous hospital. Plain radiographs revealed a medullary sclerotic lesion in the right proximal humerus with foci of calcifications . On magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, the lesion showed primarily low to intermediate signal intensities with some small foci of high signal intensity on T1-weighted and T2 fat-suppressed sequences and primarily high signal intensities with some streaks of low signal intensity on T2-weighted and contrast-enhanced sequences. The patient was advised watchful observation of the lesion; however, the patient was eventually lost to follow-up.
After 3 years, the patient sought consults at the authors’ hospital, again for pain on his right shoulder. He admitted to sustaining hits to his right arm and shoulder during sparring, although other alleged information when he was lost to follow-up were unremarkable. Limited range of motion was observed, although no signs of deformity or inflammation were noted on the right shoulder. Plain radiographs revealed the lesion had enlarged, transforming to a well-defined, geographic, radiolucent lesion with endosteal thinning but no periosteal reaction . No fracture was detected on computed tomography (CT) scan. MR images showed a homogenous low signal intensity lesion on T1-weighted and contrast-enhanced sequences , but a high signal intensity one on T2-weighted sequences . This lesion was diagnosed as simple bone cyst from the imaging studies.
At the operating room, with the patient’s informed consent, the authors performed diagnostic aspiration of the lesion before the surgical incision, revealing straw-colored fluid and thereby confirming a working diagnosis of simple bone cyst. The authors proceeded with thorough intralesional curettage of the lesion, sampling of curetted tissue for final histopathological analysis, and reconstruction of the lytic defect using alpha-tricalcium phosphate filling paste (Biopex, HOYA Technosurgical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Final histopathological examination revealed “amorphous” pink fibrinoid substance typical of a simple bone cyst .
Postoperatively, the patient had full active range of shoulder motion on the affected side by the first week, with no wound complications or infection. Follow-up radiographs showed no progression of the lesion. Latest follow-up at 3 years postoperatively revealed Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) and visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores of 30/30 and 0/10, respectively.