We report the case of a 64-year-old woman who was diagnosed with left breast cancer in June 2011. The comorbidities were multinodular goitre of the thyroid gland, obstructive pulmonary disease (i.e. emphysema), left atrial enlargement with severe pulmonary hypertension, carotid stenosis (60–65%) and severe obesity. Clinical staging by chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound and bone scan was negative, except for CEA = 10.7 (normal value < 5). The patient underwent wide excision of the breast lesion with axillary node dissection. Histology revealed a G2 invasive lobular carcinoma with lymph node metastasis, stage pT1cN3 (21/24 nodes), with positive staining for oestrogen receptor (ER 90%) and progesterone receptor (PgR 80%), a very low proliferation index (Ki67 < 10%), and without amplification of HER2-neu, suggesting a luminal A phenotype. Adjuvant chemotherapy with docetaxel and cyclofosfamide was administered, followed by endocrine therapy with aromatase inhibitor. At the first follow-up, clinical examination showed enlarged thyroid lobes with a multinodular structure; a thyroid function test was normal. Ultrasound revealed an enlarged thyroid with retrosternal development; the glandular structure was finely inhomogeneous in the right lobe, and the entire left lobe was occupied by a large nodule that had a mixed echo-pattern and areas of cystic and colloid degeneration and calcifications.
Fine needle cytology was performed with a 23-G needle without suction. Smears taken from both lobes were Diff-Quik-stained and evaluated on-site. Cellularity was deemed to be satisfactory, and additional smears were taken and alcohol-fixed for Papanicolaou stain and for ancillary techniques. The right lobe smear was moderately cellular and showed only colloid and benign thyrocytes. Conversely, the left lobe smears revealed a second cellular population in a colloidal background mixed with small groups of benign thyrocytes . This second population was constituted by small cells, dispersed or aggregated into small, loosely formed groups; individual cells had a plasmacytoid-like aspect and occasionally a secretion vacuole. Given the patient’s history, we decided to use two smears fixed in alcohol to evaluate oestrogen receptor expression in the second cell population. Immunocytochemistry revealed positive oestrogen receptor staining , which suggested a diagnosis of metastases of the breast cancer to the thyroid. Positron emission tomography and total body tomography did not reveal other metastatic sites, and showed only enlargement of the left thyroid lobe and an inhomogeneous pattern of colloid and cystic degeneration and calcifications. Therefore, the patient underwent left hemithyroidectomy in February 2012. Histology revealed thyroid tissue with a colloid goitre containing dispersed neoplastic cells constituted by small atypical cells with eccentric nuclei . Immunohistochemistry revealed cytokeratin-19 and oestrogen receptor , but not tireoglobulin, e-cadherin or cytokeratin-7, thereby suggesting metastases from a lobular breast carcinoma. Thirty-two months after hemithyroidectomy, the patient is alive, although in May 2014, there was evidence of recurrence in bone. Hormonal treatment with fulvestrant is ongoing. She died in July 2015.