A 35-year-old Hispanic female presented with a 3 month history of lower back pain after sustaining a fall on her sacrum/coccyx. Her constant, localized lower back pain was accompanied by occasional urinary retention without incontinence. General physical examination demonstrated tenderness to palpation over the posterior elements of the distal lumbo-sacral spine, as well as antalgic gait. Neurologic examination demonstrated gluteal hypesthesia with diminished sensation to light touch and pressure below the gluteal crease in an S2 dermatomal pattern. Although limited by pain, the patient demonstrated, at least, 4+/5 muscle strength in bilateral hip flexion and knee extension. The rectal examination was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the sacrum with and without gadolinium demonstrated a large, expansile enhancing soft-tissue lesion involving/replacing the sacrum, distal to the S2-3 disc space, displacing the rectum ventrally. The lesion was T1 hypo and T2 hyperintense and demonstrated heterogeneous enhancement on the postcontrast sequences . As the imaging was suggestive of locally aggressive pathology such as chordoma, computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy was discussed but ultimately discouraged due to the inherent potential risk for tumor seeding along the biopsy track.
Rather, the patient elected to proceed with partial sacrectomy for en bloc resection of the mass, with possible nerve sparing. As is routine at our institution for large sacral tumors, surgery consisted of a collaborative approach with neurosurgery, colorectal surgery, and plastic surgery, through a standard posterior approach. At surgery, intra-operative findings revealed a largely white, encapsulated mass, observed to replace largely the sacrum/coccyx distal to S2-3. The mass was found to displace ventrally both the sigmoid colon and rectum. The tumor was removed en bloc, and sent to pathology as a permanent section, with great care taken not to violate the tumor capsule. The bilateral S2 nerves and left S3 nerve were spared during surgery, yet the remainder of the lower sacral nerves had to be sacrificed to achieve en bloc resection as they were found to course through the tumor itself. No bowel injury was noted. There were no intraoperative complications. Postoperative MRI/CT confirmed gross total resection .
Pathologic specimens demonstrated a well differentiated chondroid lesion, composed of scattered, relatively bland, stromal cells/chondrocytes . The dispersed chondroid matrix, was devoid of entrapped bone, as would be expected in chondrosarcoma. Higher power fields demonstrated focal areas of increased cellularity, but no other hallmarks of malignancy, such as atypia, mitoses, or pleomorphism. In addition, pathognomonic physaliferous cells were not present to suggest chordoma. Immunohistochemistry for pancytokeratin was negative, whereas smooth muscle actin was positive. Additional stains for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CD34 and desmin were all negative. Ki-67 demonstrated a low proliferative index. Ultimately, the final pathology returned CMF.
At discharge, the patient did have partial saddle anesthesia involving the lower sacral dermatomes, but was able to ambulate with assist device, and demonstrated no focal motor weakness. The patient was initially discharged with foley catheter in place and aggressive bowel regimen. She was able to ultimately wean from the foley without significant difficulty. At her recent 2 year follow-up, the patient was found to have recovered fully with regards to bowel and bladder function, ambulating independently, with minimal saddle anesthesia. Follow-up MRI showed no recurrence at 1.5 years postoperative .