A 4-year-old Filipino girl was referred to our hospital due to increased frequency of daytime urinary incontinence and foul-smelling urine since the age of 3. She was diagnosed with a lumbosacral myelomeningocele at 21 weeks of pregnancy and born to non-consanguineous parents at 37 weeks of gestation, weighing 2908 g. She underwent myelomeningocele repair 2 days after birth and did not have hydrocephalus. She was able to walk unaided 11 months after birth. Although she had a history of recurrent UTIs, she did not visit a urologist office regularly after surgery. At her first visit to our hospital, her physical and neurological examination was normal, that is, she had a maximum Glasgow Coma Scale score, steady gait, and no paralysis in her legs, and could run as much as other healthy children of the same age. She had a normal bilateral reflex knee jerk and Achilles tendon reflex. Clinical examination revealed constipation and no flexion contractures of her legs. Urinalysis revealed bacteriuria. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tethered spinal cord (TSC) and syrinx at the S2–3 levels . A pediatric voiding cystourethrography revealed an enlarged and trabeculated bladder without any vesicoureteral reflux. A urodynamic study (UDS) showed detrusor overactivity and low bladder compliance (1.8 mL/cmH2O). The maximum cystometric bladder capacity was 67 mL, with no specific bladder sensation, and the detrusor leak-point pressure was 77 cmH2O. She was unable to void. She was diagnosed with overflow incontinence . Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) was performed and 10 mg of propiverine (0.8 mg/kg body weight/day) was administered orally, and her urinary incontinence resolved. She underwent repeated UDS annually. A UDS at 6 years of age (she had been receiving propiverine for 2 years and 5 months) showed detrusor overactivity and low bladder compliance (3.7 mL/cmH2O), in spite of receiving 10 mg of orally administered propiverine per day. The maximum cystometric bladder capacity was 101 mL, and detrusor leak-point pressure was 50 cmH2O . She had no urinary incontinence or UTI. However, the cystometrogram showed that her bladder pressure was persistently high. To reduce pressure on the urinary bladder, and avoid the risk of upper urinary tract damage, treatment was switched from propiverine to vibegron, a beta-3 adrenoceptor agonist. After obtaining the patient’s and parental informed consent, a single daily dose of 25 mg of vibegron (Beova; Kissei Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) (1.4 mg/kg/day) was administered. After 5 weeks of once-daily vibegron treatment, UDS was performed and showed disappearance of detrusor overactivity, increased maximum cystometric bladder capacity (251 mL), and improved bladder compliance (9.0 mL/cmH2O) . She has continued to receive vibegron that has been well tolerated and to perform CIC for 7 months so far, and no UTI, incontinence, or drug-related adverse events have been observed. No abnormalities were found in blood pressure (98/60 mmHg) or heart rate (72 beats/min) or on the blood tests after a month of receiving vibegron. Her detailed laboratory data (before and after taking vibegron) are presented in Table .