A 15-year-old, previously healthy girl presented with a 2-day history of headache, fever and vomiting. On admission to another hospital, she had meningeal stiffness and pyrexia (body temperature 39°C). Lumbar puncture showed 137 white blood cells (79% lymphocytes)/mm3.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed high-intensity signals in the splenium of the corpus callosum (SCC) on T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images . She received intravenous acyclovir and methylprednisolone pulse therapy for a suspected diagnosis of virus encephalitis. However, her consciousness deteriorated and she was transferred to our hospital.
On the day of admission, she presented with disorientation and pyrexia (39.5°C) and could not respond to simple orders. The Glasgow coma score (GCS) was 12; eye opening, verbal response and motor response were 4, 3 and 5, respectively. The heart rate was 118 beats per minute with sinus rhythm. Blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. Blood cell counts and the results of routine biochemical analysis were normal except for hyponatremia (121 mEq/liter). The osmotic pressure in serum and urine was 277 and 668 mOsm/liter, respectively. Meningeal stiffness was present. The deep tendon reflexes were non-pathological. Lumbar puncture showed 151 white blood cells (89% lymphocytes)/mm3, a protein concentration of 78 mg/dl and a glucose concentration of 49 mg/dl, with negative bacterial and tuberculosis cultures. On polymerase chain reaction amplification, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus DNA were all negative in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Infection with various other viruses, such as influenza, parainfluenza, measles and mumps, were excluded by negative serum or CSF antibody titers (or both). Electroencephalography revealed no epileptic discharges. The patient received intravenous acyclovir, dexamethasone and immunoglobulin therapy.
On day 4 after admission, the GCS dropped to 3 (eye opening, verbal response and motor response were 1, 1 and 1, respectively), and ataxic respiration and apnea appeared, leading to respiratory failure requiring ventilatory support. The patient was given intravenous vidarabine and a continuous infusion of propofol, but fever (body temperature >40°C) developed with remarkable tachycardia. The body temperature was decreased with the use of a forced-air-cooling blanket and head cooling. The core temperature, measured in the bladder, was maintained between 36° and 37°C for 5 days. During the period of normothermia, thiopental sodium was given continuously for 3 days. Glycerin and dexamethasone were also given intravenously. After normothermia, the level of consciousness increased and the GCS for eye opening and motor response increased to 4 and 6, respectively, without the development of fever. Verbal response could not be evaluated because the patient had undergone a tracheotomy; however, she could respond to simple orders. Synchronous intermittent mandatory ventilation was decreased from 16 to 8 breaths per minute.
Thirty-six days after admission, ventilatory support was withdrawn. Forty-eight days after admission, cranial MRI showed increased signals in the pontine on T2-weighted images, suggesting osmotic demyelination , and the high intensity in the SCC had disappeared. At that time, the level of consciousness was normal and the manual muscle test (MMT) scores, based on a 0 to 5 point scale, were 4 and 1 in the upper and lower extremities, respectively. The spinal MRI from the Th3 to L2 level showed no abnormal intensity. Three months after admission, the patient was discharged, with no mental disturbance. The MMT scores were 5 and 1 in the upper and lower extremities, respectively.
Figure shows the serial changes on computed tomography (CT) scans of the brain. A CT scan performed on day 5 , before normothermia, showed remarkable meningeal enhancement and brain swelling. In contrast, CT scans obtained on day 12, during normothermia , and on day 29, after normothermia , showed reduced meningeal enhancement and brain swelling. CSF opening pressure decreased from 160 mm/H2O on day 6 (before normothermia) to 130 mm/H2O on day 20.
On transcranial Doppler ultrasonography, systolic flow velocities in the right and left middle cerebral arteries before normothermia decreased from 370 to 139 cm per second and from 265 to 140 cm per second, respectively. White blood cells, protein concentrations and interleukin (IL)-6 concentrations in CSF decreased from 101/mm3, 74 mg/dl and 69.9 pg/ml on day 6 (before normothermia) to 13/mm3, 52 mg/dl and 2.3 pg/ml, respectively, on day 20. The aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase and serum sodium concentrations changed from 344 IU/liter, 497 IU/liter and 128 mEq/liter to 159 IU/liter, 320 IU/liter and 132 mEq/liter, respectively, after normothermia. Other laboratory findings were normal after normothermia.