A 57-year-old woman had acute abdominal pain for 1 d, which worsened in the last 12 h.
The patient had developed persistent severe upper abdominal pain 1 d previously, which could be relieved by rest. The upper abdominal pain worsened in the last 12 h, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and transient syncope, prior to her presentation at the emergency center of a tertiary hospital.
She had hypertension and denied a history of surgery and/or trauma.
The personal and family history of patients are unremarkable.
When she arrived at the hospital, she was conscious but unwell and her face was pale. Her body temperature was 35.5 ℃, blood pressure was 13.2/10.2 kPa, heart rate was 105 beats/min, breathing rate was 26 beats/min, and blood oxygen saturation was 99%. There was no ecchymosis in the abdomen, obvious tenderness in the umbilical area and upper abdomen, and no rebound pain or muscle tension. Abdominal percussion was dull, and no bowel sounds were heard.
Preoperative blood test showed that white blood cell count was 11.76 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage was 85.8%, hemoglobin was 77.00 g/L, and the D-dimer quantification was 1.54 mg/L.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormalities in the soft tissue and bone structure of the abdominal wall. There was a large amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity, and some of it had a slightly higher density. Multiple round-like density shadows with clear borders could be seen in the liver parenchyma, and the larger ones were about 39 mm in diameter; the intrahepatic bile ducts were not dilated. The pancreas was not clearly displayed, large-scale exudation could be seen in and around the pancreas , the surrounding fat gap was blurred, and multiple clusters of high- and slightly low-density shadows could be seen around the pancreas, the larger of which was about 8.8 cm × 6.4 cm in size . The adjacent peritoneum and bilateral prerenal fascia showed thickening. Pelvic CT showed a small amount of effusion in the pelvic cavity, and there was no obvious abnormality in the uterus and appendages. Chest CT showed mild emphysema in both lungs, and no pleural effusion was seen on either side.