A healthy 1-month-old female was referred to Pediatric Endocrinology for bilateral inguinal masses. She was the product of a non-consanguineous conception between parents of English and English/German descent.
Physical examination revealed a healthy child with female external genitalia. She had prominence of the labial folds with palpable masses in the inguinal canals. There was a urogenital opening without clitoromegaly. Pelvic ultrasound demonstrated inguinal gonads and absence of uterus and ovaries.
Due to the presence of inguinal gonads but absence of Müllerian structures, investigations were pursued for causes of undervirilization. Cytogenetic analysis confirmed a normal 46,XY complement. Baseline Luteinizing Hormone, Follicle Stimulating Hormone, and cortisol concentrations measured at 6 weeks of age were 1.5 U/L, 1.6 U/L, and 621 nmol/L, respectively. Anti-Mullerian Hormone levels were appropriate for an infant male, implying the presence of functioning Sertoli cells. At 6 weeks of age, baseline androstenedione level was 4.5 nmol/L and testosterone 1.1 nmol/L. These levels in themselves were elevated, and the baseline testosterone:androstenedione (T:A) ratio of 0.2 hinted at the etiology of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 (17βHSD3) deficiency. However, even during the mini-puberty of infancy, hormonal values of various causes of 46,XY undervirilization can significantly overlap. The patient subsequently underwent a short βHCG stimulation test 1500 IU daily for 2 days . The diagnosis of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 (17βHSD3) deficiency was further suspected based on the low stimulated T:A (testosterone 2.1 nmol/L, androstenedione 5.4 nmol/L, T:A 0.4). These results directed genetic testing for 17βHSD3 deficiency. At the same time, the minimally increased value of the stimulated androstenedione level compared to the baseline (5.4 and 4.5 nmol/L, respectively) called into question the adequacy of the stimulation testing. Other causes of 46,XY undervirilization, such as 5-alpha reductase deficiency, remained possible. Additionally, approval for genetic testing was not a given. Taking into consideration the parents’ desire to cement a diagnosis, a prolonged βHCG stimulation test (1500 IU twice weekly for 2 weeks) was undertaken when the baby was 18 weeks old .
The evaluation and management of an infant born with a DSD should be conducted in interdisciplinary teams with experience in caring for these very rare conditions, including endocrinology, genetics, urology, social work, and clinical chemistry. At the same time, the particulars of the local socio-political and geographic environment dictate the distribution of medical resources and, in our case, the availability of genetic testing. While the prolonged βHCG stimulation test was transpiring, our multidisciplinary clinical team pursued genetic testing for 17βHSD3 deficiency as the most likely diagnosis on the basis of the clinical evaluation and initial low T:A. This effort involved actively petitioning for government funding to cover genetic testing as per routine in our medical jurisdiction when genetic testing is performed in a lab outside the province. We could not be assured funding for genetic testing and pursued prolonged βHCG testing during the limited time frame of neonatal puberty. The prolonged βHCG stimulation testing proved overwhelming for the family due to the multiple injections, cost of βHCG, and the practicalities of their having to travel back and forth from their remotely located home to the laboratory. In addition, the parents were committed to raising the baby as a girl and experienced considerable anxiety over the presence of testes and the delays in diagnosis.
DNA sequencing analysis for the HSDB173 gene was conducted in a commercially available, FDA accredited laboratory (Prevention Genetics, Marshfield, WI, USA) by Sanger sequencing of the full coding regions of exons 1-11, as well as ~20 basepairs of flanking non-coding DNA on either side of each exon. This revealed a homozygous mutation, previously reported as pathogenic with complete loss of enzymatic activity (c.389 A > G) . Genetic analysis of the parents revealed that both were heterozygous for the same mutation in the HSD17B3 gene. Array CGH analysis was completed using the CytoSure TM ISCA 8x60K V2.0 Oligonucleotide array (Oxford Gene Technology) and showed normal dosage across the genome.
The genetic analysis was reported before the prolonged βHCG protocol was completed. Once funding was approved, the prolonged testing was discontinued. The cost of genetic testing was comparable to prolonged βHCG stimulation testing. With the genetic diagnosis, our team was able to provide focused, anticipatory guidance and allay many of the parents’ anxieties.