A 43-year-old right-handed man presented to our emergency department with acute onset fever and headache accompanied by impaired hearing comprehension, auditory hallucination, and mild paraphasia. No focal weakness or meningeal irritation signs were noted. The functions of naming, speech fluency, writing, and reading were preserved. He could communicate well with his family through handwritten notes but could not understand what others were saying. Although the patient experienced auditory speech recognition problems, he could recognize and distinguish music and environmental noises. According to his medical history, he had been diagnosed as having diabetes mellitus 2 months prior to this event. Vildagliptin 100 mg/day and metformin 1,700 mg/day were prescribed for glucose control.
Laboratory analysis revealed elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) (280 IU/L) and lactate (5.6 mmol/L) levels. The patient's leukocyte and C-reactive protein levels were within the normal range. Brain CT revealed a hypodense lesion at the right temporal lobe. Brain MRI revealed lesions at the bilateral superior temporal gyrus and right inferior temporal gyrus, with hyperintensity on a T2-weighted image, hypointensity on a T1-weighted image without gadolinium enhancement, and restricted diffusion on a diffusion-weighted image . Pure-tone audiometry revealed mild hearing impairment bilaterally across all frequencies, which would not affect the performance of activities of daily living. Finally, the brainstem auditory evoked potential has shown a poor wave pattern.
Due to the presence of fever, headache, and verbal auditory agnosia, as well as bitemporal lobe involvement on brain images, acute viral encephalitis was suspected. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies revealed a cell count of 2 cell/μL, a glucose concentration of 88 mg/dL (serum 182 mg/dL), a protein concentration of 33 mg/dL, and elevated lactate (5.9 mmol/L). We empirically prescribed a regimen of intravenous acyclovir for 14 days. On the 14th day, CSF studies were followed by acyclovir treatment which revealed an increased lactate level (4.6 mmol/L). The patient's serum lactate level returned to being abnormally high (5.7 mmol/L). A follow-up MRI after the acyclovir treatment revealed a progression of prior lesions across the bilateral temporal lobes .
During this hospitalization, the patient complained of chronic diarrhea since he started taking metformin during the previous 2 months. Because of this, we switched vildagliptin/metformin to linagliptin under the suspicion that metformin had an adverse effect. After metformin was ceased, a decrease in serum lactate (2.4 mmol/L) and CPK (135 IU/L) levels was noted in the follow-up data, and the patient's condition gradually improved.
Based on our clinical findings, mitochondrial etiology was considered. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy revealed an apparent lactate peak . Direct sequencing analysis of the blood sample was performed by a polymerase chain reaction to screen the mitochondrial MT-TL1 gene and revealed a mitochondrial DNA point mutation at position 3243 (m.3243A > G) with 25% heteroplasmy, which is compatible with MELAS syndrome. No condition related to MELAS syndrome was noted in the patient's family history . We discharged him, and with no further metformin use, the follow-up MRI 5 months later revealed a decreased lesion volume , with communication function returning to baseline 7 months later.