A 65-year-old man with untreated hypertension and a history of smoking was admitted to our hospital with a chief complaint of sudden back pain. He had undergone regular check-ups but had no history of taking any oral treatments, including antihypertensive or anticoagulant medications. Furthermore, he had never been diagnosed with aortic aneurysm or cardiovascular disease, nor had he ever undergone any invasive procedures such as catheterization. At the time of admission, his blood pressure was markedly elevated at 237/149 mmHg, and there was a livedo in the left lower limb, but no apparent heart murmurs or rales were noted. Blood tests showed a mildly elevated C-reactive protein of 0.45 mg/dL (normal range: ≦0.30 mg/dL) and an elevated d-dimer of 12.5 µg/mL (normal range: <1.0 µg/mL) . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a type B dissection with a patent false lumen from the distal aortic arch to the abdominal aorta. The arteries to the major organs including the kidneys were all derived from the true lumen, and no obvious occlusion was detected. However, we confirmed bilateral heterogeneous contrast-impaired areas in the kidneys on contrast-enhanced CT . After the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, antihypertensive therapy and heart rate control with intravenous nicardipine 4.3 µg/kg/min and transdermal bisoprolol 4 mg were initiated immediately along with mild sedation. On the second day, as the back pain worsened again, blood pressure rose with decreased oxygenation. We again performed contrast-enhanced CT which showed no obvious progression of aortic dissection but only pleural effusion and atelectasis. Hypotension and decreased oxygenation occurred, leading to invasive mechanical ventilator management. The cause of the rapid respiratory failure and worsening inflammatory reaction could not be identified. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone pulses 500 mg/day for 3 days, based on the hypothesis that the patient had a cytokine storm associated with inflammation of the aortic dissection itself. We also suspected the coexistence of cholesterol embolization based on the livedo and the decline in complement and expected that steroid therapy would have favourable effects on both sides. We were able to perform a skin biopsy on the fifth day but could not find any obvious sign of cholesterol embolization in the skin tissue. Continuous haemodiafiltration (CHDF) was also initiated due to persistent anuria and progression of acidosis on the second day. However, the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate, with worsening of multiorgan failure and unfortunately died on the sixth day. Pathological autopsy was performed, which revealed that the lumen of the aorta from the entry of the descending thoracic aorta to the re-entry of the abdominal aorta was narrowed due to thrombus and disrupted atherosclerotic plaque . In addition, the presence of cholesterol crystal occlusions in the kidney, spleen, and soft tissue arteries of the left lower leg led to the definitive diagnosis of cholesterol embolization . Moreover, the bilateral lower lobes of the lungs showed neutrophilic infiltration, pulmonary haemorrhage, and destruction of some alveolar structures, all indicative of an inflammatory response, but no obvious pathogens were detected.