A 37-year-old woman complained of foreign body sensation in the eyes and difficulty in opening her eyes for 6 months. The involuntary movements of her eyelids worsened, and she could not keep her eyes open. At the local clinic, she was diagnosed with refractory dry eye disease because artificial tears and other conventional dry eye treatments more than 6 months were ineffective. Intense pulsed light (IPL) was attempted once at the local clinic, but there was no improvement in her symptoms. She had been treated for schizophrenia for 5 years with blonanserin and had no other medical histories.
On ocular examination, her corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. There were no specific findings, except scattered micropunctate corneal staining in the inferior area on slit-lamp microscopy. Schirmer’s test was performed at 7 mm/5 min in the right eye and 10 mm/5 min in the left eye. The ocular surface staining score was 1/33 in both eyes (National Eye Institute grading scale, 0–33), and the tear breakup time (TBUT) was 4 s for both eyes. Her ocular surface disease index (OSDI) questionnaire score was 80.00, and stage 1 meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) was noted. According to the dry eye severity grading system (Dry eye workshop (DEWS)), the patient’s sign was of level 2–3 severity and the symptoms of dry eye disease were of level 3–4 severity. Hence, the patient was diagnosed with moderate-to-severe dry eye disease.
Extraocular eye movements were normal, and there was no evidence of nystagmus or relative afferent pupillary defect. However, she showed symmetric and involuntary movements of the eyelids accompanied by pursing of the lips, which was presumed to be oromandibular dystonia .
We consulted the neurology department regarding the involuntary movements of the eyelids with oromandibular dystonia, and no abnormal findings were revealed on brain magnetic resonance imaging/angiography. Electromyography test revealed that bilateral facial nerve conduction and blink reflex were normal. The lateral spread response test was positive at the orbicularis oculi muscle when the mandibular branch of the facial nerve was stimulated.
We consulted the psychiatry department for the suspicion of drug-induced Meige’s syndrome. The dose of blonanserin was reduced and the anticholinergic (procyclidine) and the anticonvulsant (clonazepam) were added to relieve the blepharospasm. Two months after dose reduction and discontinuing blonanserin treatment, involuntary movements of the eyelids with oromandibular dystonia were completely resolved. Procyclidine and clonazepam were discontinued after short-term administration, because her symptoms resolved after discontinuing blonanserin.
Three months after discontinuing blonanserin treatment, there was no recurrence of involuntary movements of the eyelids with oromandibular dystonia, and she had no exacerbation of psychotic symptoms. Her dry eye symptoms were alleviated (OSDI: 24.00) and the TBUT was 6 s for both eyes, and the other ocular surface status parameters did not change.