A 25 year-old male presented to his urologist with an acute onset of urinary frequency and nocturnal incontinence of 2 months duration. Additional symptoms included chronic fatigue and suprapubic and lower abdominal pain. He did not have any associated dysuria or hematuria. He denied notable bruising, bleeding, fevers, or chills, but did experience occasional night sweats.
The patient smoked marijuana twice daily and was a former tobacco smoker. He had an unremarkable past medical history, and a family history significant for two uncles diagnosed with lymphoma.
Physical exam was significant for a large mass extending from the anterior midline to the left costovertebral angle in anterior-posterior dimensions, and from the left subcostal margin to the pelvis in length. Manipulation incited suprapubic discomfort. There was no associated lymphadenopathy. His initial complete blood cell count (CBC) showed isolated lymphocytosis of 6.1 × 109/L and thrombocytopenia with platelets of 115 × 109/L. The peripheral blood smear demonstrated rare atypical binucleated lymphocytes. His initial work-up included an abdominal ultrasound (US) and subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis that demonstrated massive splenomegaly approximating 35cm. The lower pole of the spleen was significantly compressing the bladder. A PET scan revealed isolated uptake in the enlarged spleen with an SUV of 6.6. These findings prompted a bone marrow biopsy for lymphoma staging that demonstrated binucleated lymphocytes indicative of a B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder/lymphoma. Flow cytometry, surface markers, and molecular studies of bone marrow lymphocytes did not demonstrate evidence of clonality by either method.
Given his progressive symptoms, thrombocytopenia, abdominal discomfort, massive splenomegaly, and concern for splenic lymphoma without definitive pathology, the patient underwent a splenectomy for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes following scheduled meningococcal, pneumococcal, and H. influenza vaccinations. He had an uncomplicated post-operative course with resolution of his fatigue, pain, and urinary continence.