A 30-year-old pregnant woman, gravida 1, para 0, was admitted from emergency room for premature rupture of membranes (PROM) at 26 weeks and 2 days of her gestation. She established menarche at the age of 13 and has had regular menstrual cycles at a 30-day interval and a duration of 2–3 days since then. Despite of scrimpy menses, she had no dysmenorrhea since its onset. The patient was considered hyperprolactinemia and pituitary microadenoma due to hypomenorrhea after a brain MRI scanning conducted at a local hospital. The patient was treated with endocrine drugs for years but there was no substantial improvement in her period.
This is a natural pregnancy and the patient visited our hospital periodically for prenatal check-ups. The first obstetric ultrasonography at 7 weeks of gestation showed splayed endometrium and an intrauterine septal echo, indicating the probability of a dysmorphic uterus with the pregnancy sac and embryo in the right uterine hemicavity . The subsequent NT ultrasonography at 12 weeks of gestation suggested low risk of fetal chromosomal abnormalities, and all the other pre-pregnancy examinations were normal. During the middle pregnancy, at 22 weeks of gestation, the patient did an ultrasound screening for fetal macrostructural malformation. The result showed an intrauterine septum dividing the uterine cavity into two asymmetric hemicavities, indicative of Robert’s uterus. The result also indicated oligohydramnion in the right hemicavity with a depth of 16 mm, and fetal growth restriction at 3.5 percentile of normal weight at the same age due to the rare pregnancy in the uterine hemicavity . We performed confirmatory transvaginal ultrasound and pelvic MRI to verify that the fetus was confined to the right blind hemicavity by the septum, surrounded by little amniotic fluid, whereas the umbilical cord was floated in the contralateral hemicavity with quadruple amniotic fluid, achieved by a 10 mm-wide hole at the septum.
The occurrence of PPROM at 26 weeks and 2 days of the patient’s gestation has no obvious incentive with minimal vagina bleeding, slight abdominal pain, and no bloating or vomiting. The vulva, vagina and cervix were anatomically normal by gynecological examination, and so was the development of the gravid uterus. Considering the outflow of amniotic fluid and grade II polluted amniotic fluid, she was reevaluated by an obstetric ultrasonography after admission. According to the ultrasonography, there was hardly any amniotic fluid in the amniotic sac and the fetus was presented in a transverse position in the right hemicavity. More alarmingly, we found the umbilical cord was huddled in the left hemicavity directly above the internal cervical os . The next day, at 26 weeks and 3 days of gestation, the patient had irregular contractions. Despite temporary normal inflammatory indicators, we took into account of the drained amniotic fluid, the piled-up umbilical cord above the cervix opening and the contraction, and suggested an immediate termination of pregnancy in order to avoid severe complications such as umbilical cord prolapse, intrauterine infection, and even maternal death. The patient and her families were informed of the developmental immaturity of the very preterm infant, great rescue expenses and a probable failure of rescue, but they still expressed a strong wish to save their baby. We sought for the pediatric consultation and confirmed the medical care capacity to support the rescue of the premature at this gestational age. Thus, after fetal lung maturation with dexamethasone and cranial nerve protection with magnesium sulfate injection, an emergency cesarean was performed. During the laparotomy, we found the uterus was deviated to the right side with a normal external shape. Into the uterine cavity, the fetus was located in the right hemicavity in the transverse position. We delivered the fetus rapidly, and found the placenta was mainly implanted on the fundus of the right side of the uterus, while a small part of the placenta was located in the septum. After removing the placenta manually, we confirmed a longitudinal septum which extended from the fundus to the middle-lower uterus. It was about 10 mm thick near the anterior uterine wall and presented as a membrane at the rear, dividing the uterine cavity into two asymmetric hemicavities. With the delivery of the infant, the septum was squashed against the left uterine wall. Considering the membrane-like tissue was completely ruptured at the weak spots during delivery, our intraoperative gynecological evaluation came to the decision of leaving the asymmetrical uterine septum alone and we suggested postoperative follow-ups. Postpartum ultrasonography did not find any significant abnormal echo in the uterine cavity, and the mother was discharged three days later. The extremely premature infant scored 4–7 for the 1–5 min newborn Apgar test and was transferred to an authoritative pediatric hospital for further treatment. After 128 days of positive rescue and hospitalization, the baby girl was discharged with all the indicators of body health being normal, which is indeed a great gratification.