A 36-year-old Caucasian woman with no past medical history presented to the emergency department with progressive, diffuse musculoskeletal pain that was dull in character. Initially the pain was localized to the right shoulder, but over 6 months progressed to her back, arm, and knee.
Radiographs showed multiple lytic lesions , and subsequent computed tomograms (CT) revealed extensive lytic lesions to bilateral humeral heads, iliac bones, ischial bones, thoracic spine and lumbar spine with pathologic fracture of T9. Due to new-onset numbness and tingling of her leg, emergent magnetic resonance image (MRI) was obtained which confirmed extensive metastases to the left femur with distal non-displaced diaphysis pathologic fracture, in addition to metastases to the humerus, scapula, clavicle, 4th and 5th ribs, throughout the pelvis, and the spine with pathologic T9 fracture and mild spinal canal stenosis but no cord compression . She underwent left femur fixation by retrograde intramedullary nailing. Whole body positron emission tomography CT (PET/CT) showed extensive hypermetabolic metastasis to the bony skeleton , however a non-osseous primary was never identified despite thorough clinical and radiologic evaluation.
Histopathologic examination of a biopsy from the T9 lesion revealed proliferation of spindle cells with hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei, and irregular nuclear contours organized in swirls giving a nested appearance . Occasional mitoses but no confluent necrosis can be seen. Focal areas of osteoid production and large amounts of reticular substance production can be seen . This morphology and activity of the spindle cells was suggestive of a mesenchymal origin of the tumor. However, immunohistochemical staining showed the atypical spindle cells to have scattered staining for OSCAR cytokeratin, with weakly and patchy positivity for pankeratin, hallmarks of an epithelial origin . CK7 was negative ruling out synovial sarcoma, metastatic carcinoma of the thyroid, breast, gastrointestinal, pancreatic, renal, bladder, urothelial, cervical, and ovarian origins. GATA3 was negative further ruling out metastatic carcinoma of the breast and urothelium; and excluding sarcomatoid mesothelioma, choriocarcinoma, and gestational trophoblastic tumors. SOX10 did not show any staining excluding soft tissue tumors of neural crest origin and melanoma. S100 staining was absent eliminating the possibilities of melanoma, dendritic cell tumors, myoepithelial tumors, neural tumors, chondroid tumors . These findings were suggestive of a malignant sarcomatoid neoplasm, which could represent the process of metastasis to the bones due to patient’s clinical presentation of multifocal lytic bone lesions. But after thorough clinical correlation and review of all available imaging studies, sarcomatoid carcinoma of a visceral organ was excluded and a final diagnosis of primary sarcomatoid carcinoma of the bone was favored. Histopathologic examination of the intraoperative femur biopsy showed a similar cytomorphologic profile to the T9 biopsy . Additional stains performed on this section showed the neoplastic cells to be positive for OSCAR and negative for CD99 and EMA, further ruling out epithelioid sarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma. Staining for AE1/AE3, CD45, and CD138 were negative . These findings were also congruent with the diagnosis of sarcomatoid carcinoma.
Due to the multifocal nature of the disease, the patient was not a candidate for curative resection. External beam radiotherapy was employed to prevent worsening of the spinal stenosis. Systemic chemotherapy with eight cycles of gemcitabine 600 mg/m2 and docetaxel 25 mg/m2 every 2 weeks was planned, however the patient only received infusions every 4 weeks due to delays. At 6-month follow-up, she had completed four cycles of chemotherapy and showed a positive treatment response with decreased hypermetabolism of bony lesions . However, at 9 months follow up following six cycles, PET/CT showed progression of the lesions, with multifocal areas of increased metabolic activity throughout the spine, sacrum, and pelvis . Salvage therapy was attempted with paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin 250 mL every 21 days however the patient only completed one cycle before passing away 1 year after her diagnosis. An autopsy was not performed.