A 49-year-old lady presented with subacute onset, gradually progressive painful weakness of proximal muscles of bilateral upper and lower limbs for two years. During the same period, she also developed inflammatory polyarthritis of small joints. Later the same year, she developed progressive dyspnoea and biventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction 34%). Dilated cardiomyopathy could explain the cardiac symptoms. However, she continued to have pedal oedema and transaminitis despite diuretics, leading to a suspicion of chronic liver disease. Anti-smooth muscle antibody came positive; and with a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, 50 mg oral prednisolone was initiated 16 months after the onset of the first symptom.
Myalgia and arthritis improved with glucocorticoids over the next 8 months. However, 6 months after glucocorticoid initiation (2 months before her presentation to our hospital), she developed a painful ulcer on the left lower eyelid, which gradually extended to the corneal surface with resultant vision loss. Steroid-induced diabetes was likely, given an Hba1c of 6.5%. A fortnight later, a similar ulcer developed on the right lower eyelid though without corneal involvement. Fifteen days before presenting to us, she noticed numerous painful nodular lesions on arms, thighs and upper back, alongside worsening myalgia and as well as proximal muscle weakness.
At the time of presentation, she did not report a history of oral ulcers, rashes, photosensitivity, alopecia, Raynaud’s phenomenon, dry cough or intake of drugs known to cause muscle weakness, thyroid dysfunction, weight loss, dysphagia, dysphonia, or bleeding manifestations. Upon examination, she had a punched-out ulcer which exuded purulent secretions on left lower eyelid margin, with lid oedema and corneal opacity. A punched-out ulcer was present below the right eyelid. Lagophthalmos was present on the left, and only the projection of light was present. Vision was preserved on the right side. Numerous (n=6) tender erythematous nodules were present on both forearms, arms, thighs and upper back. Proximal muscles of all limbs were exquisitely tender to touch, excluding the feasibility of a formal muscle power examination. Examination of joints and other systems was largely non-contributory.
At this point, the differential diagnosis was broad-ranging from lupus and inflammatory myositis to undifferentiated connective tissue disease, accounting for the two-year illness manifesting as arthritis, muscle weakness and ANA positivity. However, given the disabling muscle pain and nodules, and ulcerative eye lesions, an infective pathology could not be ruled out.
Investigations revealed mild anaemia with elevated transaminases (Aspartate aminotransferase>Alanine aminotransferase) and normal alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated, although serum creatinine kinase (CK) was normal. Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) was 2+ coarse speckled and cytoplasmic by indirect Immunofluorescence (IIF). Anti-dsDNA antibodies were negative, and complements were normal. A smear of the pus from the left eyelid ulcer revealed pus cells without bacterial or fungal elements.
Aspiration of nodular lesions on the forearm yielded pus, Giemsa stain of pus showed numerous budding yeast cells suggestive of Histoplasma Capsulatum. The skin biopsy from the lower eyelid ulcer yielded granulomatous inflammation. Giemsa stain again showed numerous budding yeast cells suggestive of Histoplasmosis . Ultrasound of both thighs and arms at the sites of tenderness suggested multiple hypoechoic lesions with loss of standard fibrillar architecture of muscles . Thus, the patient had pyomyositis, and sonographic drainage confirmed the presence of pus. A Giemsa stained smear showed numerous budding yeast cells suggestive of Histoplasma capsulatum.
Thus, the patient had disseminated Histoplasmosis. The patient received intravenous liposomal Amphotericin B (0.75 mg/kg) for two weeks, and oral Itraconazole (200 mg BD). However, despite the best efforts, her vision in the left eye could not be salvaged, as the cornea was involved with the formation of a false cornea and exuberant pus in the anterior chamber.
After antifungal therapy, muscle tenderness and nodular skin lesions resolved over eight weeks. The differential diagnosis for the underlying connective tissue disease included, idiopathic inflammatory myopathy (IIM), specifically anti-synthetase syndrome with significant muscle involvement, overlap myositis, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). She had normal dsDNA and complements, and ANA was 2+ cytoplasmic with coarse specked nuclear pattern. She did not have any other features to suggest a diagnosis of SLE. Underlying autoimmune hepatitis was suspected due to the presence of anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA). However, muscle disease seemed more likely with a normal echogenicity of the liver (on ultrasound) and the observed pattern of transaminitis (SGOT>SGPT) in this patient.
After being discharged from the hospital at the six-month follow-up visit, despite antifungal therapy, she had significant proximal muscle weakness, raised muscle enzymes, and manual muscle testing (MMT) score of 61 out of a total of 80. The myositis antibodies and extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) were tested at this juncture (by Line immunoblot), and turned out to be positive for anti-Jo-1 and anti-Ro-52. Muscle biopsy suggested mild perifascial lymphomononuclear inflammatory infiltrates, and fungal elements were negative. Thus, the diagnosis was revised to IIM, specifically anti-synthetase syndrome with significant muscle involvement. High-resolution CT of the chest was normal, excluding interstitial lung disease (ILD). The dilated cardiomyopathy in this patient could be attributed to Histoplasma myocarditis or cardiac involvement related to the anti-synthetase syndrome. A cardiac MRI showed dilated ventricles (left>right) suggesting dilated cardiomyopathy, without (abnormal) late gadolinium enhancement. However, the study was suboptimal due to poor breath-holding and irregular heart rate precluding a definite conclusion.