Here, we present the case of a 55-year-old non-immunocompromised male patient born in Vietnam and living in France who had no history of travel abroad since 2010. His main past medical history included type 2 diabetes, treated with metformin (HbA1c < 7%), well-controlled high blood pressure with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (perindopril) and calcium channel blockers (amlodipine) and dyslipidemia treated with atorvastatin. He had no history of surgery, smoking, alcohol or drug abuse. He was retired in 2017 (former archivist), had no children and lived in the Paris area in an apartment with his wife. He had no pets at home.
During his vacation in the New Aquitaine region (southwest side of France), he developed fever (up to 39 °C) with chills. The patient had no other symptoms throughout 4 days. Once back home, he consulted his general practitioner for persistent fever. The biological analysis prescribed showed biological inflammation with CRP = 121 mg/L and leukocytes = 19 G/L with polynuclear neutrophil predominance, acute kidney failure (creatinine = 255 µmol/L) and cytolysis up to 5 times normal (ASAT = 178 UI/L, ALAT = 250 UI/L) with anicteric cholestasis (PAL = 216 UI/L and GGT = 190 UI/L). The patient was then referred to the emergency department of our hospital. The clinical examination was normal apart from the persistence of fever, he had no signs of severity and the qSOFA score was 0. An abdominal ultrasound was performed, which showed no renal abnormalities and no dilation of the intra- or extrahepatic bile ducts. Two blood cultures were drawn, and the patient was admitted to the hepatology department, where no empiric antibiotic therapy was initiated in the absence of signs of severity.
The evolution was marked by the persistence of an isolated fever with chills. At the same time, renal function improved with rehydration, and the liver function test improved spontaneously. Blood cultures taken at entry and on subsequent days were positive for wild-type Acinetobacter pittii (3 blood culture samples taken 24 h apart). Standard MALDI-TOF (Bruker®) identification from bacterial colonies on solid media culture was confirmed with rrs gene sequencing (Molzym®, Germany) and identified A. pittii, a species belonging to the A. baumannii-calcoaceticus complex. The strain displayed a wild-type antibiotic resistance phenotype according to the disk-diffusion method on Mueller-Hinton agar, as recommended by the French Committee for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing .
HIV, HAV, HBV, HCV and HEV serologies were negative. EBV and CMV serologies showed a pattern of previous infection. SARS CoV-2 PCR on nasopharyngeal swab was negative.
Antibiotic therapy with cefotaxime was started when the blood culture was positive for gram-negative bacilli (time to positivity 11, 9 h in aerobic environment) and then changed to cefepime 2 g/8 h after bacteriological identification. The exploration of the portal of entry and staging for extension included a thoracic-abdominal-pelvic CT scan on day 5, which showed alveolar consolidation with air bronchograms in the middle lobe associated with a right pleural effusion of moderate size . No other abnormalities were detected. Because the patient had already received 5 days of antibiotic treatment and did not show any pulmonary symptoms, no sputum culture was performed. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed on day 7 and did not show endocarditis signs. The evolution was rapidly favorable with antibiotic treatment: the patient became afebrile within 48 h, the biological inflammatory syndrome decreased, and the control blood cultures were negative. Antibiotic treatment with cefepime was continued for 7 days. The patient was discharged home at the end of the antibiotic treatment. At 3 months, the evolution of the pulmonary infection was favorable at the clinical, biological and radiological levels .
To further understand this unusual infection, we confirmed bacterial identification with whole-genome sequencing (Illumina®). Pair-end reads were de novo assembled with the SPAdes-based Shovill algorithm . Species identification was performed using the KmerFinder approach in combination with phylogeny within the bacterial species belonging to ABC. We identified two beta-lactamase-encoding chromosomal genes, blaADC− 25 and blaOXA− 500, by querying the Resfinder database , which is consistent with phenotypic data. We computed the core genome using Roary using a MAFFT alignment. Maximum-likelihood phylogenies using Generalize Time Reversible model were set with PhyML into (i) ABC isolates (data not shown) and then (ii) A. pittii isolates , including external genomes previously published.