A 29-year-old Iranian female, presented to infectious disease services with chief complaints of recurrent fever since past five months and productive cough, of 20 days duration. Five months ago, while being evaluated for fever her complete blood count (CBC) had revealed thrombocytopenia. For evaluation of thrombocytopenia, a bone marrow examination was done which showed erythroid hyperplasia. A provisional diagnosis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura was made, and the patient underwent 55 sessions of plasma exchange, over next two months. Her fever had subsided by this time. Three months later (five months after onset of her initial symptoms), she presented with fever, nocturnal sweats, productive cough, weight loss, weakness and generalized aches and pains, productive coughs. Her body temperature was 39°C, Pulse rate: 108, Blood Pressure: 110/70 mmHg. On physical examination, she had pale sclera, oral thrush, neck stiffness, crackles on lung fields, hepatosplenomegaly and tender right upper quadrant of abdomen. A repeat CBC showed pancytopenia (WBC: 2400/μl with 66% PMN, 34% Lymph, Hb:5.6 g/dl, PLT:64800/μl), ErythrocyteSedimentationRatewas68.BUN/Cr, haptoglubolin and billirubin (total, direct and indirect) were in the normal range.
Coomb's test was also negative. On reviewing the history again we found that four years ago patient's sexual partner was an intravenous drug user. This prompted us to do an HIV test in her, which was found to be positive. Her CD4 counts were low (26/mm3). Subsequently we performed a bone marrow biopsy and bone marrow aspiration, which were normal. Her cerebral spinal fluid analysis was normal with negative smear and culture. Abdominal ultrasonography showed hepatosplenomegaly and presence of a renal stone. Bilateral para-hilar infiltrations were seen on chest X-ray. Broncho-Alveolar Lavage smear was positive for Pneumocystis Jirovecii antigen. Antiretroviral drugs (Zidovudine, Lamivudine and Nelfinavir) were started in combination with Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole for the patient. Her fever subsided and was discharged with a diagnosis of HIV associated thrombocytopenia. On follow up her platelet counts improved (WBC: 3500/μl) with 62% PMN, 38% Lymph, Hb: 9.0 g/dl, PLT: 105000/μl, CD4: 102/mm3) and lesions on her chest x-ray resolved.