A 67-years-old Syrian male was referred from another city hospital to our thoracic surgery department due to 4-month history of hemoptysis and productive cough. The patient was a non-smoker and non-alcoholic. There was no history of traveling. His medical and family history were unremarkable apart from HTN. The symptoms were not associated with fever, chest pain, dyspnea or weight loss. Physical examination revealed normal breath sounds in both lung fields. The abdomen was soft and non-tender with no palpable masses. Laboratory tests showed HGB 11.7 g/dL, RBC count 4.31 × 106/μl and WBC count 12.7 × 103/μl. A chest X-Ray and unenhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest were ordered and demonstrated a soft-tissue mass within the left main bronchus and atelectasis of the anterior segment of the left upper lobe . Subsequently, a flexible bronchoscopy was carried out for further assessment and revealed a hypervascular lesion occluding thoroughly the left upper lobe bronchus . Biopsies of the lesion could not be obtained due to severe hemorrhage. The lesion was initially suspected as carcinoid. Therefore, the thoracic surgeon performed an urgent open left upper lobectomy to control the bleeding and establish the diagnosis. Pathological assessment of the mass tissue exhibited abundant cells with clear cytoplasms and hyperchromatic nuclei . Subsequent immunohistochemistry showed positivity for CD10 (proximal tubular marker) . Based on these findings, the diagnosis of endobronchial metastasis from clear renal cell carcinoma was suggested. Consequently, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was ordered and revealed a well-defined mass measuring approximately (45 × 40) mm arising from the lateral aspect of the right kidney . Therefore, the patient underwent a right radical nephrectomy three weeks later. Pathological examinations of the renal tumor showed abundant cells with clear cytoplasms and hyperchromatic nuclei without invasion of the renal capsule . Based on the detailed microscopic findings along with radiological correlation, the patient was diagnosed with clear cell renal cell carcinoma with endobronchial metastasis (stage IV: T1N0M1) and was classified as having an intermediate prognosis according to the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium (IMDC system).
The patient is currently well and is being monitored with CT scan every 6 months to detect potential metastases. No chemotherapy or radiotherapy was given to the patient.