A 51-year-old female was transferred to our institution after the discovery of a large right temporal and insular lesion on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient initially presented with a few months of headaches and smelling odd odors to her primary care physician, who then prescribed the patient levetiracetam (Keppra, UCB Pharmaceuticals, Belgium) and referred her to our institution. The patient had no deficits on gross physical examination. Contrasted computed tomography (CT) with contrast revealed a large mass with irregular enhancement and MRI revealed moderate perilesional edema with mass effect .
The patient underwent an uncomplicated right frontotemporal craniotomy for tumor resection. At the anteromedial extent of the tumor, the Sylvian vessels were encountered and preserved. The dissection of the tumor was performed with preservation of the pial demarcation of the Sylvian fissure. The anterior choroidal artery and MCA branches were met and not manipulated as this indicated the anterior extent of the tumor. An amygdalohippocampectomy was also performed. Intraoperative monitoring, with somatosensory evoked potentials, motor evoked potentials, and electroencephalography, was performed throughout the course of the operation and remained at baseline. Frozen pathology confirmed the presence of high-grade glioma, and at that time, the decision was made to line the surgical cavity, including exposed Sylvian fissure and large cerebral vessels, with four carmustine wafers. Two wafers were placed along the cephalad resection cavity in direct contact with the exposed portion of the Sylvian fissure and the remainder along the posterior resection wall . The wafers were secured with oxidized regenerated cellulose. There was minimal intraoperative bleeding.
Postoperatively, the patient experienced no worsening deficits. Immediate postoperative CT revealed small volume hemorrhage within the posteromedial aspects of the resection cavity, measured to be about 1.7 cm3 per volumetric analysis through OsiriX software (Apple, California) . MRI on postoperative day 1 revealed subtotal resection with improved mass effect but persistent edema . She was eventually discharged from our care on postoperative day 5.
On postoperative day 8, the patient experienced new left lower extremity weakness, which progressed to include slurring of speech and left facial weakness. Over the course of the next 24 h, this evolved to plegia in the left upper extremity and severe hemiparesis in the left lower extremity. MRI revealed stable edema and an acute ischemic stroke in the right posterior limb of the internal capsule . CT angiography and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) on postoperative day 9 revealed moderate vasospasm in the right supraclinoid internal carotid artery (ICA), the carotid terminus, A1 of the anterior cerebral artery, and M1 of the MCA . After intra-arterial injection of 20 mg of nicardipine and angioplasty of the right MCA and supraclinoid ICA, there was some improvement in vessel diameter and caliber . The patient remained in the hospital for several days for medical management of vasospasm (fluids, oral nimodipine, and permissive hypertension) and intensive rehabilitation. Histopathology was finalized, showing features consistent with those of the World Health Organization Grade IV GBM, and the patient went onto receive concomitant temozolomide and radiation. At 36-month postoperative follow-up, the patient had resolution of dysphasia but had persistent left upper extremity plegia and left lower extremity paresis.