A 73-year-old female patient with prior history of hypertension and dyslipidemia was admitted with a 2-week history of dysarthria, gait imbalance, nocturnal vomiting, and progressively worsening headache. She gave a history of recent weight loss. She had no history of chronic cough, breast lump, or blackish discoloration of stools. General physical examination was normal. There was no breast lump. Abdominal and chest examinations were normal. On neurological examination, she was conscious and oriented. Cranial nerve examination was normal. She had a power of Grade 5 in all limbs. She had gait instability with a slight tendency to sway toward the left. Soft pyramidal signs were absent. Sensory examination was normal. Reflexes were normal bilaterally. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed two intracerebral lesions with mild perilesional edema, involving the right temporal and frontal lobes. The temporal lesion was larger and was partly cystic and solid, involving the neocortex and mesial temporal structures. The smaller one was in the frontal region. These lesions were hypointense on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on T2-weighted and FLAIR sequences, and showed heterogeneous enhancement with contrast.
Our preoperative radiological diagnosis was multicentric glioma. She was started on phenytoin sodium as a preoperative antiepileptic. Injection ceftriaxone 2 g was given intravenously as perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis. With neuronavigation guidance, she underwent right frontotemporal craniotomy, right anterior temporal lobectomy, amygdalohippocampectomy, and excision of the right frontal lesion. At surgery, the temporal lesion was found to be firmly attached to the dura with infiltration of the neocortex, hippocampus, and amygdala. The lesions were moderately vascular, suckable, and had cystic change, evidence of necrosis, and thrombosed veins within it. The surgery was uneventful with no intraoperative complications such as hypoxia or hypotension. The entire lesion in the frontal region, temporal neocortex, and hippocampus was removed. The lesion in the amygdala was only partially removed. The patient did not wake up fully after surgery. However, since her breathing was normal, she was extubated.
The following causes of delayed awakening after surgery were considered: (i) NCSE, ii) hypoglycemia, (iii) operative site hematoma, (iv) thromboembolic cerebral infarcts, (v) electrolyte imbalance, (vi) metabolic encephalopathy, and (vii) extensive brain tissue resection. Considering NCSE as a probable cause for the delayed awakening, we administered an additional loading dose of phenytoin sodium in the immediate postoperative period in the operating room. We also added levetiracetam as an add-on antiepileptic. An emergency MRI brain done in the immediate postoperative period confirmed total excision of the right frontal and temporal lesions with no postoperative hematoma or infarcts that would explain her altered sensorium. Blood tests were done to rule out all possible causes of encephalopathy including liver function tests, renal function tests, and serum electrolyte panel, all of which were normal. A bedside electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a background activity of 4–5 Hz over posterior head regions. Triphasic waves with anteroposterior lag were seen , suggestive of encephalopathy. Hence, CIE was presumed to be the cause of delayed awakening. Ceftriaxone and levetiracetam were stopped and the dose of phenytoin sodium was reduced to preoperative status. The patient showed gradual improvement in neurological status within 48 h and she went back to normal sensorium in 4 days.