A 11-year-old boy presented to our hospital because of two epileptic attacks in the last 7 mo, and he was found pituitary hormone deficiency since birth.
The patient came to our hospital in December 2021, and he had two epileptic attacks in the last 7 mo. In May 2021, the child had convulsions without obvious inducement, no fever, manifested as stiff limbs, oral cyanosis, loss of consciousness, no salivation, maintained for 30 min, and the seizures stopped after sedation. In August, he had similar convulsions, maintained for 10 min, and had remission without treatment. In the last 8 d, he began to develop dizziness. His cognitive function was normal, but he could not control falling on two occasions.
The patient was diagnosed with hypopituitarism aged 2 mo because of jaundice and pituitary hormone deficiency for > 1 mo. He was treated with oral levothyroxine (Euthyrox) and hydrocortisone and GH, and followed up regularly, and now has stopped GH treatment for > 7 mo. He had intermittent oral treatment with testosterone undecanoate.
The patient was G2P2, had normal delivery at 41W+3, with body weight of 3350 g. There was no history of asphyxiation and resuscitation. His parents were clinically normal, but had another, 15-year-old son with hypopituitarism. There was no intermarriage or family history. The history of vaccination was normal, and the history of trauma, infectious disease, blood transfusion, and drug allergy were denied.
On physical examination at the patient’s visit in August 2021, his weight was 33.0 kg and length was 133.1 cm, with head circumference of 57 cm. The occipital bulges and forehead were prominent, with blepharoptosis. Neurological physical examination was normal. Reproductive system examination showed the scrotum was hypogenetic, while the testicular volume was 1 mL, and the penis length was 2 cm, in no pubic hair period.
In August, 2021, the patient was subjected to a detailed laboratory examination. Insulin-like growth factor-1 was 66.10 ng/mL. Sex hormone levels were: estradiol < 5.0 pg/mL, follicle-stimulating hormone < 0.10 IU/L, luteinizing hormone < 0.10 IU/L, testosterone < 0.025 ng/mL, prolactin 0.1 ng/mL, progesterone < 0.050 ng/mL, and cortisol 572.0 nmol/L. Thyroid function was evaluated as follows: triiodothyronine 4.07 pmol/L, free thyroxine 16.20 pmol/L, and TSH 0.02 mIU/L. In addition, the biochemical examination of this patient was generally normal.
In December 2021, we examined the patient. Electrocardiography showed incidental atrial premature beats. Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that intracranial space occupying lesion, located in the sellar region of the brain, though the nature of the pathology was unknown. It was accompanied by agnogenic cystic lesions and signs of an irregular pituitary gland. Electroencephalography was abnormal, showing medium amplitude spike, slow wave sporadic or paroxysmal in the left occipital area. Computed tomography of the head showed: Signs of skull base depression, combined with a cerebellar subtonsillar hernia the foramen magnum was narrow the brain anterior and posterior diameter was widened small dense nodules in the anterior margin of the pituitary gland and no calcification signs of typical craniopharyngioma. The patient underwent a skeletal examination, which showed that the bone age was 11 years.
DNA samples were extracted from peripheral blood taken from the child and his parents to detect whole-exome sequences and whole-genome copy number variations. The results revealed two novel heterozygous variants of c.613G>C (p.V205L) and c.220T>C (p.C74R) in the LHX3 gene. Application of the human gene mutation database (and the OMIM database confirmed the reported pathogenic gene locus. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) sequence variation interpretation standards and guidelines were used for a comprehensive evaluation of the pathogenicity of mutation sites. Informed consent was obtained from the guardian for all information collection and publication involved in this article.
WES showed that there were two novel variants of c.613G>C (p.V205L) and c.220T>C (p.C74R) in the LHX3 gene in this patient, which were both unreported variants, and may lead to change in gene function. According to the ACMG guidelines, the mutations were both uncertain. The patient’s older brother also had the same variants. c.613G>C (p.V205L) is a low-frequency variation, with a frequency in the normal population of 0.0003676. According to Sanger sequencing, the patient’s father did not have this mutation, but his mother had the heterozygous mutation . c.220T>C (p.C74R) is also a low-frequency variation. According to Sanger sequencing, the patient’s mother did not have this mutation, but his father had the heterozygous mutation .