We report the case of a 22-year-old Caucasian man with a 10-year history of Crohn's disease. He had recently undergone a small bowel resection and ileocecal anastomosis. On his fourth post-operative day, he experienced a breakdown of his anastomosis and underwent surgical repair. He had no other medical co-morbidities and was not being treated with immunosuppressive agents. On post-operative day three, he developed symptoms of lightheadedness, headache, and blurred vision that progressed to visual loss. An emergent ophthalmology evaluation revealed poor visual acuity (he was only able to count fingers at 3 inches bilaterally) but no fundoscopic or ocular abnormality. His neurologic examination was otherwise unremarkable. Shortly thereafter, he developed a tonic-clonic seizure that abated spontaneously after approximately one minute. His blood pressure throughout the episode was 150-160/80-90 mmHg, up from a baseline of 100-130/70-80 mmHg. His serial electrolytes (including calcium), arterial blood gas, cardiac enzymes, urine analysis, and electrocardiogram were within normal limits. A head computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated subtle, ill-defined regions of low attenuation involving his bilateral posterior temporo-occipital lobes . A head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan confirmed patchy T2 hyperintensities in his bilateral temporo-occipital subcortical white matter, consistent with vasogenic edema . There were no diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) or apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) signal abnormalities to suggest an acute infarction. Given our clinical and classical radiological findings, he was diagnosed with PRES.
His symptoms and the imaging findings resolved with an aggressive blood pressure control. A subsequent ocular examination showed him to have a visual acuity of 20/40 OD and 20/30 OS. A follow-up MRI was performed three days after his symptoms had resolved. This MRI showed the complete resolution of his bilateral temporo-occipital subcortical white matter T2 signal abnormalities. He continued to do well at his two-year follow-up examination.