A 66-year-old Caucasian man presented to the hospital with positional sharp chest pain at rest, which was worse on lying flat and was associated with shortness of breath and cough. Medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus, depression, and previous transient ischaemic attack. He had no documented drug allergy or previous allergic reaction. He received the first dose of Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine 7 days prior to developing the described symptoms.
On admission, he was tachycardic and hypotensive, with heart rate 116 and blood pressure 85/60. The rest of vital signs were within the normal range—respiratory rate 16, oxygen saturation 97% on room air, and he was afebrile. Clinical examination was unremarkable with normal heart sounds, non-raised jugular venous pressure, and no pericardial rub were heard on auscultation. Chest X-ray was normal. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed tachycardia, with widespread concave ST elevation in most leads (lead I, II, AVL, AVF, and V4–V6) and the Spodick’s sign—down-slopping TP segment best-visualized in lead II and V2–V6 . The laboratory investigations were as follows—borderline leukocytosis and neutrophilia—white cell count of 10.4 × 109/L (4–10 × 109/L) and neutrophils of 8.08 × 109/L (2–7 × 109/L), elevated C-reactive protein of 94 mg/L (0–5 mg/L), urea 9.8 mmol/L (2.5–7.8 mmol/L), and creatinine 107 µmol/L (62–106 µmol/L). COVID-19 swab was negative. Blood culture showed no significant growth. First serum troponin was negative <0.01 and the second level 3 h later was slightly raised 0.08 µg/L (<0.04 µg/L). Atypical and serology screen including viral hepatitis, Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and Aspergillus were unremarkable except for previous past Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. QuantiFERON and Autoimmune screen were negative.
Echocardiogram showed pericardial fluid around entire heart measuring up to 1.5 cm with no evidence of cardiac tamponade, and good left and right ventricular function with mild basal septal hypertrophy . Patient was treated with paracetamol and ibuprofen three times daily as inpatient, and showed clinical improvement after 2 days. Patient was discharged home after 3 days of hospital admission. Repeat echocardiogram a month later showed resolution of pericardial fluid , and repeat ECG showed normal sinus rhythm . Patient’s case was discussed with an immunologist, who advised the patient not to receive the second dose of the vaccine, due to his possible susceptibility to immune-related vaccine reaction.