A 21-year-old Arab Jordanian male patient had a history of Hirschsprung’s disease and surgery at the age of 2 years. During his surgery, he had an iatrogenic urethral injury initially treated with Foley catheter conservatively. Later, he started to have symptomatic recurrent urethral stricture because he underwent multiple optical urethrotomies.
In September 2019, the patient redeveloped symptoms of urethral stricture, and cysto-urethroscopy showed bulbomembranous urethral stricture, fibrosis in the external sphincter, and mild urinary bladder trabeculation.
Optical urethrotomy was performed, followed by catheter insertion for one week. Postoperative recovery was smooth, and the patient reported mild improvement in the urinary stream. Two months later, the patient presented to the Emergency Room (ER) with urinary retention. Suprapubic catheter (SPC) insertion was complicated by massive frank haemorrhaging at the site of catheter insertion with a large amount of pure blood seen in the urine bag. The patient was pale and anxious, and low blood pressure (100/50 mm Hg) and tachycardia (110 beats per minute) were recorded. The physical exam showed abdominal distention. He was immediately transferred to the operating room; under general anaesthesia, abdominal exploration was performed through a midline incision; the bladder was severely distended with blood clots, and after the evacuation of clots, an arterial bleeder was seen near the bladder neck over the trigon midway between the two ureteric orifices. After detailed visualization of both ureteric orifices, bleeding was controlled with multiple sutures followed by insertion of a suprapubic catheter and a Foley catheter for ten days.
Eleven days after his discharge, the patient returned to the ER with gross haematuria. Cystoscopy revealed blood oozing at the bladder neck; electrocoagulation was successful in controlling his bleeding . One week later, he came to the ER with gross haematuria; a 3-way Foley catheter was inserted and kept on continuous irrigation with normal saline; he received three units of packed red blood cells; after two days, he failed conservative treatment, and bleeding persisted.
Angiography was performed and identified bleeding from a pseudoaneurysm in the left inferior vesical artery at the base of the urinary bladder. Selective embolization of the feeding artery led to immediate control of bleeding .