Here, we report the case of a 16-year-old young Caucasian man suffering from lumbar pain that irradiated to the right thigh and was associated with painful urination and right testicle tenderness. There was no previous history of medical or surgical illness, or traveling outside of Belgium. The patient was admitted to the emergency room in January 2020, three weeks after the start of the symptoms. Physical examination, urinalysis, and abdominal echography were negative. Blood analysis showed slightly elevated inflammatory parameters [white blood cell count (WBC) 10.47 × 109/L; C-reactive protein 44.9 mg/L]. Paracetamol, tramadol, and diclofenac were prescribed for pain management. Diazepam was prescribed as a muscle relaxant. The patient was discharged.
The patient’s clinical situation worsened at home, leading to severely impaired stance and gait. One week after the first admission, the patient was readmitted to the emergency room. Physical examination was unremarkable except for a positive straight leg rising test at 15° on the right side. No red flags were retained (despite the patient’s young age). No further technical investigations were performed. The patient was discharged on the same day and an appointment was scheduled 1 week later at the outpatient clinic of physical medicine and rehabilitation.
Upon examination by the specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation (5 weeks after initial symptoms), the patient was markedly pale and described shooting pains in both legs in lumbar flexion. He presented with camptocormia and decreased walking perimeter. Urogenital issues had disappeared. Palpation and percussion of the lumbar spine were painless. Neurological examination showed sharp and symmetrical osteotendinous reflexes of the lower extremities and a normal plantar flexion reflex. Straight leg rising test was positive at 30° bilaterally. Sensory testing for touch was normal. Despite high levels of pain (especially in the calves when walking on tiptoe), muscle strength was considered as normal in the lower extremities (motor research council scale: 5/5).
A septic discitis was suspected and a whole spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed . No abnormalities of the lumbar spine were found. However, a formation of vascular venous aspect was observed in the laterovertebral right area adjacent to the L2 vertebral body, long axis measuring 60 mm, with flow anomaly and increased signal on T1- and T2-weighted images. At the level of L2, there appeared to be a narrowing of the lumen of the inferior vena cava with a thickening of the adjacent tissue-like wall (thickened by 6 mm on a 30 mm height). It was noted that this thickening encompassed the lower duodenum genu. The patient was hospitalized for further management.
Abdominal computed tomography angiography with contrast highlighted a thrombosis of the infrarenal inferior vena cava extending to the iliofemoral veins with thrombosis of a right paralumbar vein in L2. The suprarenal vena cava was permeable but thin. No points of venous compression were seen. Multiple anterior retroperitoneal and parietal venous collaterals (epigastric) were present, suggesting a certain chronicity of the lesion.
Doppler echography of the lower extremities showed the presence of endovascular echogenic material in the entire deep venous network of both lower limbs (femoropopliteal and infrapopliteal stage). This indicated diffuse bilateral deep venous thrombosis of the lower extremities.
Complementary laboratory testing showed elevated D-dimers at 17,633 ng/ml. The further workup for thrombophilia, autoimmune disease, or viral disease was negative. Complementary investigations included upper digestive tract echo-endoscopy, flourine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography, thrombophilia screening including protein S, protein C, and antithrombin deficiency, Factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210A mutation, homocysteine plasma level, and antiphospholipid antibodies including lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipins. Serum electrophoresis, blood flow cytometry, and autoimmune serology (Antinuclear Antibody (ANA), Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (ANCA)) as well as viral serology for cytomegalovirus were negative.
Though structurally unconfirmed by the radiologists, several indirect clues suggested a hypoplasia of the inferior vena cava: young age, thin aspect of the suprarenal vena cava, and the presence of multiple venous collaterals. However, the thrombosis of the inferior vena cava remains idiopathic in the present case because no direct imagery abnormalities of the inferior vena cava were observed.
Final diagnosis was idiopathic inferior vena cava thrombosis extending to both legs. Treatment was initiated with therapeutic low-molecular-weight heparin (enoxaparin 6000 UI 2×/day) relayed by rivaroxaban at day 5. The patient was discharged from the hospital after a 6-day stay and recovered fully. The patient until now is following up at the outpatient clinic of internal medicine to monitor anticoagulant treatment. Therapeutic guidelines in case of unprovoked severe thrombosis in children advocate for long-term anticoagulant therapy . The reason for qualifying the thrombosis as severe and unprovoked was presence of a life-threatening extensive deep venous thrombosis with all known structural and functional and inherited and acquired risk factors excluded.