A 52-year-old female with a 20-year history of type 2 DM, was referred to us in the rheumatology clinic with reported numbness, pain and stiffness in both hands of one-year duration after 19 years of from the onset of type 2 DM. She denied any history of hand trauma, joint pain, swelling, sicca symptoms, or photosensitivity. She was on insulin therapy, and her glycemic control was poor, with her last (HbA1c) reading was 9.5%.
Hand examination revealed a fixed flexion deformity at the distal interphalangeal joints, accompanied by skin tightening; also, she has evidence of Duputren’s and thenar atrophy for both hands. In 2020, she was diagnosed with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and underwent surgical decompression for her right hand after the failure of conservative measures and local corticosteroid injection. Additionally, she is married and has not had a live baby, and she had three first-trimester miscarriages in her 30s; at that time, the cause of the miscarriages was unclear for her abortions (antiphospholipid antibodies tested twice were negative), and her miscarriages were unexplained. It was suggested that these miscarriages might be linked to her uncontrolled diabetes. Furthermore, the patient has impaired vibration, two-point discrimination, and pinprick sensation in gloves and stock distribution, indicating peripheral neuropathy.
Diabetic cheiroarthropathy was diagnosed clinically based on history and positive prayer sign and tabletop sign. Furthermore, absent evidence of other underlying rheumatic disorders, particularly scleroderma and other autoimmune diseases, for example osteoarthritis. Under normal circumstances, the palmar surface of each hand can fully oppose the corresponding surface of the other hand when the hands are pressed together, resembling a prayer sign. If this action cannot be performed as seen with this patient, the sign is considered positive . In addition, she was not able to lay her palms completely flat on the table at a certain spot; this indicates that there are finger flexion contractures, suggests a positive tabletop sign .
Her investigations showed a negative serology for rheumatoid factor (RF) and ACPA; Despite the negative immunological markers and ANA profile, this patient has positive ANA global (ANA by IIF 1/320 a nucleolar pattern). Other laboratory investigations, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were 46 mm/hr. The liver function test was normal. Thyroid function test showed a slight increase in free T3, which was 7.43 pmol/l (reference lab value is 3.1–6.8), with normal free T4 and TSH, 11.56 pmol/l and 4.4 µIIU/ml, respectively. These thyroid laboratory findings may be due to the lab error as the patient denies any symptoms related to thyroid disease, and we can’t find any clinical interpretation for the slight increase of free T3 level. Additionally, the thyroid examination was normal. Radiographs of both hands were normal .
Systemic sclerosis was ruled out owing to the absence of the Raynaud’s phenomenon. Furthermore, the tightness is not just confined to the hands. As for another differential, which is hand osteoarthritis, there were no Heberden’s nodes or Bouchard’s nodes and no radiological evidence of osteoarthritis. One of the differentials for carpal tunnel syndrome is cervical radiculopathy, especially in C6; however, she has no neck pain, and there is no limitation in her cervical mobility. Furthermore, her pain is distal to her wrists, and she has weakness in her median nerve distribution (weak thumb abductor). Spurling manoeuvre was used to rule out cervical radiculopathy. We performed this manoeuvre by turning the patient's head to one side and extending her head posteriorly, then applying downward pressure to the top of the patient. The test was negative because she did not feel pain in her arm. There was evidence of carpal tunnel syndrome, which was confirmed by positive Tinel’s and Phalen’s tests.
Flexor tenosynovitis was ruled out due to the absence of palpable crepitus. Finally, there was no evidence of trigger finger and adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder. Further assessments of the other diabetic complications revealed microalbuminuria, indicating diabetic nephropathy, while blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and electrolytes were normal. She did not have evidence of diabetic retinopathy on Fundoscopy.
Regarding the management plan, the patient was placed on regular glucose monitoring, and the patient was advised to restrict with diet control and do regular exercises. We also educate the patient about diabetes and its complications. Additionally, we referred her for follow-up with an endocrinologist to improve her glycemic control, and then came to us in the rheumatology clinic for follow-up visits. The endocrinologist increased the dose of insulin and did serial fasting blood glucose measurements, which showed readings within a normal range after six months. Furthermore, we referred her for physiotherapy to do joint and muscle stretching exercises for the hand to reduce the pain and improve mobility. We did not give the patient a local corticosteroid injection because of its side effects and controversial results. We planned for her to visit the rheumatology clinic every 6 months to assess the outcome of treatment in terms of hand symptoms and glycemic control (to do HbA1c and compare it to previous reading) and to do a full work-up for other micro and macrovascular complications DM as well as other autoimmune diseases related to the positive ANA. Regrettably, the patient could not come to do these investigations, and we just followed up with her by telephone due to the ongoing conflict in Sudan. Regarding the outcome, our patient was placed on regular glucose monitoring, adjustment to her insulin dosages, dietary modification, and regular exercise, which led to improvement in her glycemic control. She also underwent stretching exercises, and her hand symptoms improved.