A 58-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital complaining of worsening exertional chest pain. He had developed acute coronary syndrome (ACS) 2 years previously. At that time, emergent cardiac catheterization demonstrated an occlusive lesion in the mid portion of his RCA and severe stenosis of both the high lateral branch and left circumflex (LCX) artery. The culprit lesion of ACS was considered to be the RCA. However, because the RCA originated from the left sinus of Valsalva, RCA cannulation with a guiding catheter was difficult, and RCA reperfusion in the acute phase could not be achieved. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA ) demonstrated that the RCA coursed anteriorly between the aorta and pulmonary artery, the so-called ‘interarterial course’, and then in the atrioventricular (AV) groove to continue its normal distribution. He then underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). The left internal thoracic artery (LITA) was sequentially grafted from the high lateral branch to the LCX posterolateral branch, and the gastroepiploic artery (GEA) was grafted to the right postero-descending (PD) artery. Routine coronary angiography after surgery demonstrated complete graft patency and unexpected spontaneous reperfusion in the culprit lesion of ACS. Blood flow from the GEA graft and native RCA supplied the proximal lesion of the PD artery. He subsequently remained free from chest symptoms for almost 2 years postoperatively.
In the emergency room of our hospital, his blood pressure was 146/88mmHg, and pulse was 64 beats/minute and regular. A 12-lead electrocardiogram demonstrated small abnormal Q-waves in II, III, and aVF limb leads and no marked ST-T change. Echocardiography showed a slight wall motion abnormality localized in the left ventricular inferior wall with preserved ejection fraction (60.5%). A laboratory study showed no significant abnormal findings. He was suspected of having unstable angina pectoris and underwent cardiac catheterization.
A 5Fr Amplatz left 2 catheter (Goodman Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan) could be engaged in both the right and left coronary arteries. Blood flow both in the left anterior descending artery (LAD ; Fig. ) and from the LITA to LCX artery was favorable. Grade 2 collateral channels from the second diagonal branch to the distal right AV branch were also visualized . The RCA originated from the left coronary cusp just below the ostium of the left coronary artery (LCA; Fig. , arrowhead). A subtotal occlusive lesion in the mid portion of the RCA was observed . The graft from the GEA to right PD artery was patent, but it had markedly reduced in size. Therefore, blood supply for the area perfused with the right PD artery was very limited. Because collateral blood flow to the distal right AV branch was also insufficient, the area distal to the subtotal occlusive lesion in the mid RCA was considered to be at risk. However, because the patient had never felt chest symptoms before his ACS episode 2 years previously, the anomalous interarterial course of the RCA in this patient was not thought to have been involved in the etiology of myocardial ischemia. As stated above, the atherosclerotic subtotal occlusive lesion in the mid RCA was eventually considered to be the cause of his chest symptom this time, and we decided to perform PCI for this lesion.
On the previous PCI for ACS, we failed to cannulate the guiding catheter to the anomalous RCA orifice. Therefore, we decided to use the GuideLiner catheter for stable back-up support from the beginning. We started the PCI procedure with a right transfemoral approach while inserting a temporary pacing catheter from the right femoral vein, because we were concerned that PCI might cause distal embolization and bradycardia if the target lesion consisted of vulnerable plaque or fresh thrombi. First, a 7Fr Sherpa NX Judkins left (JL) 4 guiding catheter (Medtronic Inc., MN, USA) was inserted through the LCA and Sion blue (Asahi Intecc Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan) was passed through the LAD artery. Then, we slightly disengaged the guiding catheter from the LCA ostium and attempted to direct the catheter tip towards the anomalous RCA ostium by rotating it clockwise. Sion (Asahi Intecc Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan) with the Mizuki microcatheter (Kaneka Corp., Osaka, Japan) could then pass into the anomalous RCA and was deposited in the right ventricular (RV) branch . Then, a 6Fr GuideLiner catheter was introduced into the RCA by anchoring it coaxially with a 2.0-mm semi-compliant balloon catheter in the RV branch . We could not pass Sion with the Mizuki microcatheter through the subtotal occlusive lesion , so we changed the guidewire to Fielder XT-A (Asahi Intecc Co., Ltd., Aichi, Japan), and then finally passed the lesion .
After 2.0-mm semi-compliant balloon inflation from the mid RCA through to the proximal AV branch , we attempted to advance an Eagle Eye® Platinum intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) catheter (Volcano Corp., CA, USA) to the lesion. However, resistance to its insertion was so marked that we could not entirely advance the IVUS catheter over the first curve of the JL4 inside the GuideLiner . We tried to change the position of the GuideLiner, but ultimately failed to deliver the IVUS catheter into the RCA. From the angiographical findings, we predicted the vessel size and initially deployed Xience Xpedition® (Abbott Laboratories, IL, USA) 2.5/28mm by crossing over the PD artery. We additionally deployed Xience Xpedition® 3.0/38 mm slightly overlapping the proximal edge of the first drug-eluting stent. Final angiography demonstrated favorable dilatation from the mid RCA through to the proximal AV branch, and native blood flow in the RCA was completely recovered .
The patient effectively tolerated the entire procedure and we successfully completed the treatment. Total procedure time was 180 minutes. Irradiation time was 110 minutes and accumulated irradiation dose was 73.8mGy-m2. Consumed volume of contrast medium was 287.3mL. Pre-procedural estimated glomerular filtration rate was 64.7 mL/minute/1.73m2, and worsening renal function was not observed after the procedure. His chest symptom fully resolved after this intervention. He followed an uneventful hospital course and was consequently discharged; no adverse events requiring hospitalization have been observed for almost 1 year since this intervention.