A 15-year-old girl presented to us with a dull pain in the left knee for 3 months and difficulty in squatting. On clinical examination of her left knee joint, there was no mass palpable. The terminal range of movement at the knee joint was restricted. There were no signs of inflammation.
Laboratory investigations revealed C-reactive protein to be raised to 7.1 mg/dl, a normal alkaline phosphatase of 363U/L, and a raise derythrocyte sedimentation rate of 40.
Radiographs of the knee joint showed an eccentric epiphyseal metaphysealosteolytic lesion of the left proximal tibia with anterolateralcortical breach. This lesion was graded as a Campanacci Grade 3 tumor . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)showsa well-defined fairly homogenous hypointense lesion involving the proximal tibia with infiltration into surrounding soft tissue. Heterogeneously enhancing lesion with central non-enhancing hypointense areas was observed on T1W. A few central hyperintensities may represent cystic/hemorrhagic areas .
An anterolateral approach to the proximal tibia was chosen for this patient keeping the possibility of knee joint involvement in mind. The iliotibial band was incised, and the proximal tibia explored to delineate the boundaries of the lesion. The lateral cortex of the proximal tibia was nibbled out to enter the cavity . A thorough curettage was done using a bone gouge. The cavity was washed with hydrogen peroxide repeatedly to induce thermal necrosis of the remnant tumor cells. A final curettage of the inner margins was done using a burr. Subchondral bone was observed to be normal, and hence, joint was preserved. The cavity was washed again with hydrogen peroxide, and antibiotic-coated bone cement was used to fill up the entire dead space in the cavity. Once the cement was set, a local wound wash was given at the incision site and wound closed in layers. The curetted material was sent for histopathological studies
Post-operative radiographs confirmed that the cavity had been completely packed with cement and no dead space was evident . The post-operative period was uneventful. Weight-bearing was initiated 10 days after surgery. She achieved full range of motion of her knee joint in 3 weeks.
Multiple sections showed many multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells, uniformly distributed in sheets of spindle to polygonal cells. There was no cellular atypia. Spindle-shaped tumor cells were seen having elongated ovoid nuclei with bland nuclear chromatin and scant to moderate amount of amphophilic cytoplasm. Features were strongly suggestive of GCT .