A 52-year-old Han Chinese woman who worked as a teacher was presented to our emergency department complaining of headache and vomiting accompanied by postural changes. She had no respiratory symptoms and denied other discomfort. Computed tomography (CT) of her chest showed multiple nodules and masses in her right lower lung lobe . Laboratory data, including results of routine blood tests and tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA] 4.1 ng/ml), were all normal. Finally, she was diagnosed with posterior circulation ischemia and received symptomatic treatment. She did not take the abnormalities in her lung seriously and declined to undergo further examination.
After nearly 7 months, the patient came to our respiratory outpatient department and underwent enhanced CT so that we could observe the changes in her lung, which showed scattered multiple nodules and masses in her right lateral basal and posterior segments, more serious than the previous time . Hospitalization was recommended for further examination and treatment. She had cough as her only respiratory symptom and denied sputum, fever, chest pain, wheezing, malaise, weight loss, or other symptoms. She had not recently traveled or had contact with pigeons’ droppings or with soil, and she had no smoking or alcohol consumption history. Her family members included a healthy husband and a daughter. Her medical history included thyroid adenoma resection 13 years earlier. She had not taken any medicine before she was admitted to our hospital.
Physical examination revealed slightly decreased breath sounds at the right base upon auscultation. The result of the neurological examination was normal. On admission, her pulse was 106 beats/min, blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, and temperature 36.6 °C. Laboratory data, including results for blood cell count, platelet count, renal and liver function, C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin, urinalysis, and stool routine and tumor markers, were all normal, except that CEA was 9.0 ng/ml, higher than the previous measurement. According to the patient’s CT results, we considered that she might have pulmonary bacterial infection and prescribed moxifloxacin and ceftizoxime as empirical treatment. After 2 weeks of antibiotic therapy, another CT examination was performed to evaluate the therapeutic effects. Unfortunately, the lesions shown on the previous CT studies had not resolved, and patchy consolidation was reported, suggesting that another diagnosis, such as pulmonary cryptococcosis, secondary pulmonary tuberculosis, or malignant tumor, should be taken into consideration. After that, a tuberculosis infection T-cell spot test (T-SPOT.TB; Oxford Immunotec, Marlborough, MA, USA) and tests for autoimmune antibodies were performed, but the results were all negative. A histopathological examination of percutaneous lung biopsy from the right posterior segment revealed granulomatous inflammation, and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining showed red-colored yeast walls, suggesting pulmonary cryptococcosis . The patient was then treated with fluconazole 0.2 g twice daily, and her condition was monitored with regular CT examinations.
During 6-month treatment with fluconazole, the patient underwent CT examination a total of four times, showing great improvement in her lesion of the right lateral basal segment, but the lesion in her posterior segment remained almost the same as before . Two months after her drug withdrawal, she had surgery for a femoral neck fracture with cannulated screw internal fixation as an incidental event. CT performed as a routine preoperative examination showed that the multiple nodules and masses in her right posterior segment still had not resolved.
Another 2 months after the operation, she was admitted to our respiratory department for further examination. An enhanced CT study showed that the lesion in her right posterior segment had increased, though the lesion in her right lateral basal segment was decreased . She denied any clinical symptoms, and her laboratory test results were normal. This extraordinary phenomenon led us to think about another diagnosis in this case. Another histopathological examination of percutaneous lung biopsy from the nodule in the right posterior segment was performed. Finally, the result, as we suspected, was adenocarcinoma .
Two days later, the patient turned to our department of thoracic surgery. Thoracoscopy-assisted radical surgery of the right lower lobe was performed. Postoperative pathology showed the adenocarcinoma in her right lower lobe and metastasis in groups 2, 4, and 9 lymph nodes, suggesting stage IIIA (pT1bN2M0) cancer. Four cycles of chemotherapy (pemetrexed 800 mg and carboplatin 500 mg) were administered. Illness evaluation was stable disease. In consideration of the metastasis in the mediastinal lymph nodes, the patient received radiation treatment (50 Gy in 25 fractions) after chemotherapy. The patient’s CEA reduced to 1.12 ng/ml after that. She was regularly followed until January 2018, when a CT examination showed multiple nodules in her right middle lobe. She then received gefitinib 250 mg daily, and the nodules had disappeared in May 2018 when she came to a visit for disease assessment. Gefitinib has been continued.