A 69-year-old female (140 cm/55 kg) complained of poor appetite, nausea and vomiting.
The patient had persistent abdominal fullness with intermittent nausea for several years. She visited our hospital for further evaluation because of a recent exacerbation of gastrointestinal symptoms. The gastric emptying scan showed a significantly prolonged oatmeal-based gastric emptying time, particularly in the first hour. The percentage of gastric retention after one hour (93%), two hours (50.25%), three hours (25.10%) or four hours (14.40%) was higher than the normal limit. Due to gastroparesis, the patient was admitted in our hospital for gastric peroral endoscopic myotomy.
The patient had history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) and α-thalassemia. She regularly took antihypertensive drugs and oral hypoglycemic agents.
The patient was neither a drinker nor a smoker. No family history of myasthenia gravis, neuromuscular disease or autoimmune diseases was recorded. Her surgical history included laparoscopic cholecystectomy, lumbar spinal surgery and functional endoscopy sinus surgery.
Physical examination revealed dry eye and dry mouth, which may be DM-related, and pale conjunctiva that may be a sign of anemia. Hypoactive bowel sound and mild epigastric tenderness were also noted. Raynaud's phenomena or arthritis-related symptoms were not observed. Notably, non-specific involuntary movement of mouth and twitching of the tongue for years were reported by the patient herself. Since these hyperkinetic movements did not cause any daily functional impairment, she did not seek any medical consultation. Slow movement while changing position and poor hand grip muscle strength were found at the bedside.
Before the surgery, routine examinations including levels of electrolytes (potassium 4.1 mmol/L and sodium 140 mmol/L), coagulation function and liver function (alanine transaminase 9 U/L) were all unremarkable. The complete blood count test showed anemia (Hgb 7.8 g/dL). Furthermore, preoperative laboratory findings displayed an increased level of creatinine (1.52 mg/dL) and blood urea nitrogen (26 mg/dL). A low estimated glomerular filtration rate, 34 mL/min/1.73 m2, was noted during this admission.
Preoperative chest X-ray revealed normal heart size with no significant lung lesion. Electrocardiography revealed a normal sinus rhythm. Abdominal sonography showed bilateral renal cysts and parenchymal renal diseases. Panendoscopy revealed a gastric ulcer scar in the deformed antrum. No obvious obstruction or gastroesophageal reflux was observed in the subsequent barium study.