A 56-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital because of a right renal stone, with no stone-related symptoms. CT revealed the middle and lower calyx stones, without hydronephrosis . He had a history of treatment for renal stone and had been in a stone-free status for a while.
Because he had developed coronary spasmodic angina as a postoperative complication of the previous percutaneous lithotripsy, we decided to perform URS without cessation of antiplatelets in multiple sessions, if necessary. The stone was found to grow further and extend into the renal pelvis . The renal pelvic stone was crushed with a Ho-YAG laser under an 8.4-Fr. flexible ureteroscopy through a 12/14-Fr. ureteral access sheath. We retrieved some fragments, but the others remained in-situ because of the limitation of operation time. A 6-Fr. 26-cm double pig-tail ureteral stent was placed in the right ureter. The operation time was 2 h and 8 min.
The patient developed a fever and right back pain on POD 1. Blood testing showed persistent leukocytosis and elevated CRP. Therefore, contrast-enhanced CT was performed on POD 5, and a subcapsular renal hematoma and grade 3 hydronephrosis were observed. There was no active bleeding; however, an infected hematoma was suspected . Several residual stones formed a stone street in the mid-ureter, obstructing the stent and resulting in hydronephrosis. CT-guided percutaneous drainage was performed on POD 9 because the infection persisted despite antibiotic treatment. After drainage, the patient's fever, back pain, and leukocytosis and elevated CRP improved rapidly, but not completely. Therefore, percutaneous nephrostomy was performed on POD 12. Thereafter, his fever disappeared, and blood testing showed normal. He was discharged on POD 19. During the postoperative course, the patient had never developed coronary heart disease. One month later, all residual stones were removed by ECIRS. All these procedures were performed with cessation of the antiplatelets.