A 73-year-old man with a long history of hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and coronary disease, who had never accepted the COVID-19 vaccine, was diagnosed with COVID-19 on December 21, 2021. A real-time polymerase chain reaction results (RT-PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 were negative on January 1, 2022. However, he was admitted to the ICU and required advanced life support due to a series of severe complications of the SARS-CoV-2 infection and existing chronic comorbidities. The laboratory test results are presented in Table .
On January 4th, as chronic diabetic nephropathy progressed to acute renal injury, and oxygenation worsened, the patient received mechanical ventilation (MV) and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). Considering the potential for microthrombosis and the need for blood purification therapy, clinicians initiated anticoagulation therapy with a therapeutic dose of Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin sodium (LMWHs). The primary dosage was 2500 IU and the interval was q12h. Regional citrate anticoagulation was combined with CRRT. The LWMHs dosage was adjusted to 5000 IU q12h from January 9th and was finally regulated to 7500 IU q12h from January 11th, according to laboratory test results.
However, on January 20, 2022, his blood pressure dropped to 80/50 mmHg (with norepinephrine), and the heart rate rose to at least 140 bpm on a real-time monitor. Before the patient experienced a disturbance of consciousness, the nurse found early symptoms and signs of shock, including irritability, thirst, and a weak pulse. Soon after, he lost consciousness, the skin and mucus turned pale, and the extremities felt cold. Laboratory test results are seen in Fig. . The patient then underwent a contrast-enhanced whole body CT scan, revealing hepatic hemorrhage, right spontaneous retroperitoneal hematoma, and iliopsoas hematoma. On January 22nd, as the hemodynamics were steady, he underwent digital subtraction angiography and interventional embolization treatment. Anticoagulants were discontinued to prevent rebleeding. Owing to persistent renal insufficiency, an anticoagulant (nadroparin calcium, 4100 IU) only was administered on the day of intermittent kidney replacement therapy from January 29th. The cumulative discontinuation days of LMWHs were 11. On February 3rd, point-of-care ultrasound showed that the area of fluid within the hematoma was reduced compared to previously, considering thrombus mechanization . The laboratory test results are also presented in Fig. .
Overall, the patient received a total volume of 16 u red blood cell transfusion, and the plasma transfusion volume was 1200 ml and the platelet volume was 20 u. On February 18th, the patient recovered and was discharged. However, he will require kidney replacement therapy for the rest of his life due to his chronic renal insufficiency.
The second patient was a 90-year-old male, with chronic hypertension and atrial fibrillation who was receiving warfarin anticoagulant therapy. He had never received the COVID-19 vaccine and was diagnosed with COVID-19 on December 17, 2021. His RT-PCR results were negative on December 31, 2021. Due to severe respiratory symptoms, the patient was admitted to the ICU on January 1, 2022. MV was induced via tracheal intubation. The doctors arranged for daily monitoring of respiratory mechanics and intermittent alveolar lavage under fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Laboratory test results on admission are presented in Fig. .
Anticoagulation therapy was initiated on the patient’s admission to the ICU due to atrial fibrillation and the prevention of microthrombosis for COVID-19. The anticoagulation regimen was LMWHs, 2500 IU, q12h. The routine blood test results were closely monitored. On January 10th, as both the D-dimer and fibrin degradation products (FDP) levels increased, the LMWHs were adjusted to 5000 IU at q12h. Unfortunately, on January 21st, the patient experienced an episode of fibrillation, and D-dimer and FDP levels increased again. Amiodarone was administered to restore the sinus rhythm, and heparin nebulization anticoagulation was added. To prevent thrombosis and reduce the risk of bleeding, the anticoagulation regimen was changed to continuous pumping of nadroparin calcium (3264 IU, qd). During treatment, the patient was closely monitored for coagulation function and other relevant laboratory indices in case of gastrointestinal bleeding. The patient’s occult blood test results remained positive on January 31st. On February 7th, a point-of-care ultrasound examination detected an 8.0*3.3*9.8 cm hematoma in the soft tissue of the left scapula and a 7.6*3.2 cm hematoma in the left retroperitoneum . The drainage fluid in the gastrointestinal decompression tube turned red, indicating bleeding from the upper alimentary tract.
Therefore, anticoagulation therapy was discontinued immediately, with urgent transfusion of red blood cells and plasma. Six days later, the left subscapular hematoma was reduced to 1.5*1.7 cm, and the left retroperitoneal hematoma had disappeared. During the entire process, the patient received a total volume of 16 u red blood cell transfusion and the plasma transfusion volume was 800 ml. Unfortunately, the patient died from severe respiratory failure.