A 52-year-old Japanese male was admitted to the gastroenterology department of a local hospital with suspected food poisoning. He presented with nausea and vomiting and had to be transported via an ambulance because he was unable to walk. On admission, he was awake, and his blood pressure and renal function were normal. During the next 24 hours (h), his condition rapidly deteriorated, with worsening conscious level, respiratory distress requiring mechanical ventilation, decreased blood pressure, and severe acute kidney injury. Thus, he was transferred to the university hospital. Laboratory data in the first hospital were shown in . He developed anuria and his initial arterial blood gas analysis showed a high anion gap metabolic acidosis, with the following results: pH, 6.92; pCO2, 20.6 mmHg; pO2, 538 mmHg; bicarbonate, 4.1 mmol/L; base excess, −30.3 mmol/L; anion gap, 15.9 mmol/L; and lactate, 21 mmol/L, under mechanical ventilation. Physical examination showed that his body temperature was 38.9°C, blood pressure was 80/50 mmHg, and pulse rate was regular at 106 beats/min. No remarkable findings were observed in his chest and abdomen, but his legs showed cyanosis. Laboratory tests revealed an increased white blood cell count of 36800/μL. Serum creatinine (Cr) levels were elevated at 3.27 mg/dL, and potassium levels were 7.0 mEq/L. In order to improve hyperkalemia and severe metabolic acidosis, hemodialysis (HD) was initiated within 1 h on arrival. HD was performed under norepinephrine infusion for 4 h and followed by continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF). Metabolic acidosis was dramatically improved, and on day 2 of admission his respiratory condition improved and he was extubated. On recovering consciousness, he said that he ingested antifreeze solution 6 to 12 h before the admission to the first hospital because it was sweet. He denied having committed suicide. We also referred him to the psychiatrist, and mental illness was denied. He denied simultaneous ethanol ingestion. Thus we suspected that his illness was caused by ethylene glycol intoxication. Anuric phase was persistent for the next 7 days; therefore, he had been on CHDF during his stay in the ICU. On day 9, he was shifted from ICU to the general ward, and intermittent HD was initiated three times a week for 4 h. HD was discontinued on day 26 of admission because his Cr levels had decreased to 2.3 mg/dL and urine volume had increased. The patient was discharged on day 37 of admission. Later, serum ethylene glycol level on admission to our hospital turned out to be 15 mg/dL. In 3 months, his Cr levels returned to normal.