A 5-year-old girl was referred for further cardiac evaluation, as she was found to have a systolic murmur on routine cardiac examination by her general pediatrician. Her family did not give any history of recurrent pneumonia or cyanosis, although she was underweight for her age. Her dysmorphism and the mild developmental delay were under evaluation by the concerned experts. She weighed 10 kg and was 90-cm tall. On cardiac examination, she had mild cardiomegaly and a machinery murmur.
There was mild cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary blood flow on chest radiograph with ECG not showing any major abnormalities. An echocardiogram showed hemodynamically significant PDA of size 3.5 mm and normal pulmonary artery pressures. As the child had otherwise normal intracardiac findings and was not very cooperative, we could not appreciate the exact course and drainage of the IVC. Because of these findings and the fact that we did not anticipate any major systemic venous anomalies, the child was electively posted for percutaneous transcatheter closure of PDA.
As per our unit’s policy, catheterization and the device closure were performed under intravenous sedation. The standard digital palpation was used to establish the right femoral vein (max 6Fr) and right femoral artery (max 5 Fr). A descending thoracic angiogram (DTA) using 5 Fr pigtail in lateral view showed a 3.5-mm PDA with L → R shunt with good aortic ampulla , decided to use 6/4 ADO I device through standard venous approach to close the defect. When we were unable to enter the right atrium (RA) using a 5 Fr multipurpose (MPA) catheter, we suspected IVC interruption. An IVC angiogram showed interrupted infrahepatic IVC with azygous continuation into the superior vena cava (SVC) . The option of internal jugular venous access was considered difficult due to short neck and we did not have any experience of transhepatic access then. We thought to proceed with the standard approach using soft hardware rather than arterial approach to avoid arterial trauma. Arteriovenous loop formation was our back up plan. A 5.0 Fr multipurpose (MPA) (COOKTM) catheter was used to enter the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary artery pressures were normal (30/12, mean 18 mmHg). The same catheter was used to cross PDA using straight tip guidewire (TERUMOTM) which was exchanged with extra stiff exchange length wire (AMPLATZERTM). This was followed by implantation of 6/4 ADO I (COCOONTM) through a 6 Fr delivery system manipulated with the utmost care, avoiding injury to the various chambers especially at azygous vein—SVC junction and pulmonary artery to PDA vessels on the way. As there was no residue on repeat DTA angiogram and echo did not show any flow acceleration in the pulmonary artery (LPA) and DTA, device was released. Post device release echo did not show any flow acceleration in the pulmonary artery (LPA) and DTA . The procedure was uneventful. Hemostasis was achieved with digital compression and was monitored in the ICU for 12 h with subsequent uneventful stay.