A 58-year-old female was admitted to the intensive care unit with severe hypoxaemic respiratory failure caused by the SARS-CoV-2 infection. She had been implanted 6 years ago with a Medical Medtronic ATS 27 mm mechanical mitral valve for severe mitral stenosis and was treated with acenocoumarol. International normalized ratio (INR) over the past 3 months was mostly in the therapeutic range of 2.5–3.5. Upon admission, she presented new-onset atrial fibrillation (AF). Laboratory results showed electrolytes in normal range, normal renal and liver function. Troponin T hs was 16 ng/L (n < 14 ng/L), N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide 3146 ng/L (n < 300 ng/L), D-dimers 6893 mcg/L (n < 350 mcg/L), INR 2.7. The thoracic CT-scan showed typical alveolar coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID 19) lesions, indirect signs of pulmonary hypertension (dilated pulmonary artery) without pulmonary embolism, and a massively dilated left atrium (LA). Because of the critical patient’s condition, initial treatment upon admission included mechanical ventilation, discontinuation of vitamin K antagonist (VKA) treatment for the benefit of enoxaparin (80 mg 2×/day SQ).
The respiratory state quickly improved allowing the patient to be transferred to the cardiology department for further investigation regarding the new-onset AF.
Upon arrival in the cardiology department, clinical findings included: heart rate (HR) 125 b.p.m., blood pressure (BP) 103/65 mmHg, pulse oximetry 95% with 2 L/min nasal oxygen therapy, irregular heartbeats, normal mechanical valve clicks, and a diastolic murmur and bilateral pulmonary crackles. The neurological status was normal. A transthoracic echocardiography showed reduced mobility of the two leaflets of the mechanical mitral prosthesis with an image suggestive of thrombus. Transprothetic mitral Doppler peak velocity was elevated (254 cm/s), pressure half time was prolonged (213 ms). The mean transprosthetic gradient (TPG) was 16 mmHg. The LA was severely dilated (90 mL–59 mL/m2). Pulmonary hypertension was likely (tricuspid insufficiency speed 341 cm/s and interventricular septal D-shaping) with an estimated pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 57/32-39 (s/d-mean) mmHg. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 55%. Initial fluorography of the mechanical valve showed complete immobility of one of the leaflets and hypo-mobility of the other. A transoesophageal ultrasound showed the presence of a 9 mm × 6 mm hypoechogenic mass attached to one of the leaflets. At this point, the differential diagnosis was obstructive valve thrombosis or infectious endocarditis. Given the context and the negative blood cultures, infectious endocarditis was unlikely.
Therapeutic anticoagulation by intravenous (IV) heparin was initiated to treat the suspected valve thrombosis. However, a control valve fluorography performed after 1 week did not show any improvements in leaflets mobility. Therefore, low dose IV thrombolysis alteplase (rtPA) was administered (10 mg bolus followed by 1.5 mg/kg IV infusion over 2 h). Valve fluorography the next day showed normalization of mobility of one of the valve leaflets, the other remained immobile. Follow-up transthoracic echocardiogram showed a decrease in TPG of 4 mmHg and a functional mitral valve area of 1.8 cm2. Pulmonary arterial pressure was estimated at 39/8–18 (s/d-m) mmHg. The following day VKA treatment with phenprocoumon was initiated and heparin was continued until therapeutic INR was achieved.
A rate control strategy was chosen for AF management using beta-blockers and digoxin. The clinical course was favourable, and the patient was discharged home a week later. At 1 year follow-up, a transthoracic echocardiogram showed a TPG of 4 mmHg, mitral valve area of 4.25 cm2, and PAP estimated at 26 mmHg. Asymptomatic permanent AF at 72 b.p.m. was diagnosed.