A 43-year-old right-handed male with no significant medical history presented to our facility complaining of intermittent left-sided headaches associated with blurry vision in the right eye and episodes of transient word finding difficulty for 1 year. The patient stated that he had lived in Saudi Arabia, where he was seen by a neurosurgeon who ordered a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain which, as per the clinicians notes, showed an “atypical meningioma;” however, no images or official reports were available. The patient was started on levetiracetam 500 mg BID. He continued having headaches with no further episodes of blurry vision. Consequently, the patient presented to our emergency department for a second opinion. On physical examination, the patient was neurologically intact with no deficits. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed multiple ring-shaped lesions with significant perilesional vasogenic edema suspicious for abscesses or necrotic masses. The patient endorsed a 20 lb weight loss due to decreased appetite over the past year. Blood work revealed hemoglobin (Hb) of 10.8 g/dL as well as an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and prothrombin time.
The patient was admitted, and MRI of the brain showed an isointense T1 and hyper-intense T2 avidly enhancing extra-axial mass near the posterior edge of the tentorium cerebelli on the left side extending superiorly and inferiorly to the tentorium . Multiple small cystic foci were visualized within the mass, and a large amount of vasogenic edema above and below the tentorium with mass effect and mild midline shift of the third ventricle to the right was appreciated. A CT angiogram of the brain was also performed showing obliteration of the left transverse sinus likely from the extra-axial mass extending on both sides of the left tentorium cerebelli. The patient was discharged a day later to follow-up in clinic to discuss surgical resection and was continued on levetiracetam 500 mg BID.
One month later, the patient underwent a left occipital and suboccipital craniotomy for resection of the mass. Using the navigation, two separate craniotomies were made, one above the transverse sinus and one below. The supratentorial opening demonstrated an obvious tumor that was adherent to the sinus. Although preoperative imaging suggested sinus occlusion, care was taken to not violate or injure the sinus due to preserved turgor suggesting continued flow. The supratentorial portion was 95% debulked with a small amount of residual abnormal tissue not resected due to firm adherence to the surrounding parenchyma and a large neighboring vein. The second craniotomy was opened infratentorially, and the tumor was resected between the supra and infratentorial compartments along the transverse sinus. Postoperatively, the patient remained intact with improvement in his headaches and blurry vision at 6-week follow-up with MRI demonstrating significant debulking with a small possible residual tumor in operative bed. A multidisciplinary tumor board recommendation was for repeat MRI in 6 months .
Microscopic examination revealed a dural-based multinodular tumor with a fibrous capsule . The fibrous capsule showed chronic lymphohistiocytic inflammation (B cells, T cells, plasma cells, and a few eosinophils) with hemosiderin deposition. The neoplastic cells had a histiocytoid morphology with significant mitotic activity (up to 8/10 HPF) and MIB-1 proliferation index of 20%. No vascular spaces or myxoid areas were seen. The neoplastic cells were immunoreactive to vimentin, desmin, and cytokeratins (cam 5.2 and AE1/AE3, respectively) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). The neoplastic cells were negative for somatostatin receptor 2A, Stat 6, PR, CD163, CD20, Pax-5, CD3, CD138, MyoD-1, S-100, Myogenin, MyoD1, CD21, and ALK . The expressions of INI-1 by the tumor nuclei were retained. Archer Multiplex Solid tumor panel showed an in-frame EWSR1 (ex 7) – ATF1 (exon 5) fusion with breakpoints at chr 22:29683123 and chr12:51207793.