A 20-year-old female presented to our center with a telangiectatic osteosarcoma of the humerus. There was no history of malignancies within the family.
MRI examination and open biopsy were performed by the previous physician. At the time the results were thought to be malignant lymphoma. After several diagnostic trials, the patient visited our center to seek advice about her telangiectatic osteosarcoma (A).
We observed a circumferential mass on the distal part of the right arm with a slight deformity of the arm, with marked venous engorgmnt and distal edema. The mass was warm and solid on palpation. Function of the right hand was still preserved. From the laboratory findings, there were marked elevation of the alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase. From humerus X-ray, there was mixed lesions along the humerus with pathological fracture on the midshaft (A). T2-weighted MRI showed iso-hyperintense and expansile lesions along the humerus (A). For the metastatic workup, chest X-ray showed no coin lesions or metastatic characteristics. Patient also had a PET scan and the result was unremarkable. From the Clinico Pathological Conference (CPC) forum, it was concluded that the diagnosis was osteosarcoma of the right humerus stage IIB according to the Enneking classification.
Patient took neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen with Doxorubicin and Cisplatin for three cycles from January to March 2016. At the end of the third cycles, clinical and radiological evaluations were performed. Clinically the mass was not getting bigger compared to before chemotherapy (B). From x-ray, the mixed lesions became more marked compared to the previous x-ray (B). MRI showed that the mass was slightly became larger compared to the previous MRI with no involvement of neurovascular bundle (B).
Six months after the initial complaint, the surgery was performed. We used extensive deltopectoral approach with anterolateral extension through the proximal part and curved backward to complete the posterior distal humerus and elbow approach. This approach was used because of the previous biopsy tract was in the posterior aspect of the distal humerus. The vascularity, rotator cuff tendons, biceps and triceps muscle, and majority of the nerves (musculocutaneous, radial, median, and ulnar nerves) were spared during the total resection of the humerus. Axillary nerve was sacrificed during the tumor resection. To reconstruct the humerus, both long shoulder hemiarthroplasty and total elbow prostheses were used. These two prostheses were joined using two long one-third tubular plate that worked as the long stem augmentation. Extension cerclage wire was used to make the implant as one unit (A). Finally, the stem was augmented with a bone cement from proximal through the distal. Prolene mesh then was sheathed to the bone cement, and then the preserved rotator cuff tendons and biceps and triceps muscle were sutured back with the Ethibond sutures (B). The resected tumor and humerus were then sent to the lab for histopathologic analysis (C).
From the post-operative x-ray, the modified prosthesis sat well on the shoulder and elbow joint . Function of the hand was excellent post-operatively. Patient also could immediately flex her elbow. Post-operative histopathological examination showed telangiectatic osteosarcoma with HUVOS IV . After the wound healed without complication, patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy. Two months after the surgery, patient could start writing with her right hand without marked difficulties. Further follow up of three years post-operatively, patient already came back to work and were able to perform daily activities without difficulties. Patient’s shoulder abduction and elbow flexion was shown on the pictures . The MSTS functional score for the upper limb scored 83% which was excellent. There were no post-operative complications and the immunohistochemical workup used to rule out lymphoma (CD20, CD15, CD 30, and CK) would be planned.