A 21-year-old man was seen by the inpatient endocrine consult service for hypothyroidism. He had been found at birth to have congenital heart disease. At 4 years of age, he received orthotopic heart transplantation. At the age of 21 years, he underwent a second orthotopic heart transplantation. His thyroid function had been normal (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] level, 1.8-3.6 μIU/mL) from age 9 to 19 years. Six weeks after the second heart transplant, while still in the intensive care unit for renal insufficiency and recurrent ascites and pleural effusion, he developed cold intolerance, fatigue, and depressed mood; thyroid function was tested and TSH level was 10.6 μIU/mL (normal range, 0.3-4.7 μIU/mL), free thyroxine (T4) 0.6 ng/dL (normal range, 0.8-1.7 ng/dL), and free triiodothyronine 80 pg/dL (normal range, 222-383 pg/dL) ; thyroid peroxidase antibody level was normal. He had been taking pantoprazole 40 mg daily for 2 months for gastric reflux. There was a history of hypothyroidism in his maternal grandmother and possible hypothyroidism in his mother. His weight was 57.1 kg. No goiter or thyroid nodules were found by physical examination. He was diagnosed with primary hypothyroidism with likely coexisting euthyroid sick syndrome and started intravenous LT4 50 μg daily due to ongoing tube feeding. Nine days later, LT4 was switched to oral administration at various doses . At the time of discharge after a lengthy inpatient stay of 9 months (2.5 months after starting LT4), LT4 dose was 100 μg every Sunday and 88 μg on all other days of the week, and TSH level was 14.3 μIU/mL and free T4 level was 0.5 ng/dL; LT4 dose was increased to 100 μg orally daily. The patient missed an endocrine outpatient appointment due to intercurrent end-stage renal disease and hemodialysis. Six months later, he was admitted for sepsis. Before discharge, although the patient had largely recovered from sepsis, TSH level was >200 μIU/mL and free T4 level was 0.3 ng/dL. The inpatient endocrine service was consulted again. The patient maintained that he regularly took LT4 100 μg every morning while fasting and did not take any other medications or supplements with it and waited for at least 1 hour before eating breakfast and taking other medications or supplements, which was corroborated by his mother who had been very closely involved in his care. He felt cold and fatigued. His weight was 62.5 kg. LT4 dose was increased to 200 μg orally daily. Two months later, TSH level was 33.35 μIU/mL and free T4 level was 1.2 ng/dL. LT4 dose was further increased to 200 μg alternating with 300 μg every other day. Another 2 months later, TSH level was 3.1 μIU/mL and free T4 level was 1.1 ng/dL .
Malabsorption of oral LT4 was initially suspected. The patient was thin all his life. He had chronic intermittent nausea and vomiting due to congenital foregut malrotation and gastric reflux. He did not have diarrhea and was not edematous. The patient, however, did not exhibit malabsorption of other medications or supplements. His 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels were 28 to 42 ng/mL (normal range, 20-50 ng/mL), while he took only 1000 units of cholecalciferol daily. Stool pancreatic elastase-1, stool neutral fats (monoglycerides, diglycerides, and triglycerides), and stool split fats (free fatty acids) were all normal, indicating normal pancreatic enzyme secretion and nutrient absorption. His albumin levels had been low since the age of 18 years except for a brief period when he received intravenous albumin infusion . The hypoalbuminemia was not addressed in depth before the second heart transplant as it was considered a low priority. Albumin levels after initiation of LT4 treatment were mostly <2.5 g/dL (normal range, 3.9-5.0 g/dL). Total protein was also low concurrently . Between 18 and 20 years, his renal function was normal with negative urine protein. Protein-losing enteropathy was suspected. Stool calprotectin levels were 70, 55, and 82 μg/g (≤49) on multiple measurements and α-1-antitrypsin 0.95 mg/g (<0.50); 24-hour stool α-1-antitrypsin was measured twice, and the levels were 185 and 295 mg/dL (<55), respectively. Colonoscopy (with biopsy) results were unremarkable, and esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated normal esophagus and largely normal gastric mucosa except for mild antral erythema. White pinpoint villi and a chain of nodular mucosa with dilated lymphatics consistent with lymphangiectasia were found in the second portion of the duodenum. Gastric biopsy showed mild chronic gastritis with focal minimal activity, and duodenal mucosa biopsy revealed lymphangiectasia and prominent eosinophilia. Protein-losing enteropathy due to plausible eosinophilic gastroenteritis was diagnosed. The high LT4 dose requirement was attributed to gastrointestinal loss of protein-bound thyroxine, analogous to renal loss of protein-bound thyroxine in nephrotic syndrome.
Despite a high protein diet, his albumin and total protein levels remained low . He continued the average LT4 dose of 250 μg daily in the next 2 years, and TSH levels remained largely normal (range, 0.31-3.6 μIU/mL) with occasional fluctuations (range, 0.29-12.72 μIU/mL) and free T4 levels of 1.1 to 1.2 ng/dL. His weight remained stable. He underwent renal transplant 2 years after presentation, which normalized renal function; his urine protein examination results remained negative.