A 29-year-old female, gravida 1 para 0, at 45 days of gestation, was admitted to our department with sudden onset of fever and widespread erythematous pustules for 9 days. The erythematous rash initially appeared under bilateral breasts, with subsequent extension to the torso and extremities. Pin-sized pustules formed at the margin of the annular erythematous rash and gradually merged into pustular lakes. The skin eruptions were accompanied by chills, fever, and vaginal bleeding. The patient had severe pain and burning sensation in areas affected by the eruption, interfering with her sleep.
Before pregnancy, she was suspected of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome at the local hospital. She was prescribed oral aspirin enteric-coated tablets 25 mg three times daily initially. Two weeks later, after initiation of the treatment, she was found pregnant. Then the regimen was augmented with hydroxychloroquine 100 mg three times daily, cyclosporine 50 mg three times daily, and prednisone 7.5 mg once daily. At onset of symptoms, she was given dydrogesterone tablets 10 mg three times daily due to vaginal bleeding. Two days prior to admission, she received empiric treatment of three doses of cefoperazone and sulbactam sodium injection 2 g per dose, and the prednisone dosage was augmented to 10 mg twice daily on that and 20 mg twice daily the next day. Her rash continued to progress despite the above treatments. There was no personal or family history of skin diseases. She denied any history of infectious diseases or blood transfusion.
On admission, the patient was febrile at 38.7 °C and tachycardic, with widespread confluent erythematous plaques studded with tiny peripheral pustules, worse in the intertriginous areas. Some pustules had merged into larger pus-filled bullae . Her palms, soles, nails, and oral mucosa were spared. The laboratory findings at admission showed significantly elevated inflammatory markers, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate (49 mm/h), C-reactive protein (99 mg/L), leukocytosis (21.3 × 109/L), and neutrophilia. Repeated blood cultures and swabs from the pustules were sterile. Other significant laboratory parameters were hypoalbuminemia, elevated fibrinogen (6.4 g/L), d-dimer (3750 μg/L), and CA125. The rest of her blood tests results, including serum calcium level, were within normal limits.
Initial differential diagnosis of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) with PPP was considered; thus, hydroxychloroquine and cyclosporine were discontinued as they were added a week prior to the eruption and were suspected as possible culprit drugs. Oral prednisone 20 mg twice a day was given. Aspirin enteric-coated tablets and dydrogesterone tablets were continued with the same dose at admission. Additional therapy was implemented with intravenous gamma globulin 20 g daily, azithromycin injection 0.5 g daily to prevent infection, enoxaparine 4000 u subcutaneous injection daily to correct coagulation status, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (acetaminophen). The lesions showed rapid exacerbation in the first five days, with more erythematous pustules developing over the neck, face, and limbs. Older lesions dried up and become desquamative with large scales . Then she had generalized swollen erythema covered with plenty of scales . The patient experienced severe pain and persistent fever. We replaced oral prednisone with intravenous methylprednisolone 30 mg twice daily because of rapid exacerbation on the sixth day.
Moreover, intravenous human albumin was infused as she had severe hypoalbuminemia (22 g/L). A diagnosis of pustular psoriasis of pregnancy was supported by histopathological investigation of the lesions on the right shin, which showed focal acantholysis subcorneal pustules with aggregation of abundant neutrophils. The papillary dermis was edematous with perivascular lymphocytes infiltration . Direct immunofluorescence of the perilesional skin IgG, IgA, IgM, Fp, and C3 were all negative. As her skin rash gradually relieved and her general condition improved, the dosage of intravenous methylprednisolone was gradually tapered. Transvaginal sonography and β-hCG levels were checked repeatedly to monitor the fetus. Her β-hCG levels on the 4th, 6th, 11th, and 18th day of hospitalization were 26,045.0 IU/L, 31,618.0 IU/L, 50,854.0 IU/L, and 70,787.0 IU/L, respectively. On the 8th day of hospitalization, transvaginal sonography showed an intrauterine pregnancy sac with size of about 2.2 × 1.7 × 1.7 cm3, the embryo length was about 0.28 cm, and the original heartbeat was noticeable. On the 17th day of hospitalization (gestational age of 8 weeks), sonography confirmed stillbirth by reporting an intrauterine pregnancy sac size of about 3.1 × 2.3 × 2.4 cm3, the embryo length was about 0.5 cm, and the original heartbeat could not be observed. As her rash largely alleviated and general condition was stable, after consulting the gynecology and obstetrician department, she was transferred to the OBGYN department for dilation and curettage of the uterine. She was discharged one day after the procedure.
After discharge, her skin lesions gradually subsided completely. There were no new eruptions or any signs of relapse. Methylprednisolone was gradually tapered off. The latest follow-up was about 2 years after her admission. She reported delivering a healthy baby about 1 month prior. During her second pregnancy, she only received heparin injection, and there was no rebound of the skin lesions as she had during her first pregnancy.