A 62-year-old man was beginning to run a short distance race when he felt a pop in his calf while coming off the starting block. He felt a short intense pain and did not finish the race. He went home to ice and rest his leg, but his pain and swelling continued to increase. He presented to the emergency department but left due to long wait. He returned 2–3 hours later when the pain became “unbearable.” His physical exam revealed firm swelling of the posterior leg, with taut skin and significant pain with palpation. His foot was held in resting plantarflexion and he demonstrated pain with passive movement of the ankle but no significant increase in pain with flexion or extension of the toes. He had no neurological deficits and distal pulses were intact. He had no history of injury to that leg previously, no history of coagulopathy, and was not taking any anticoagulants.
Clinical suspicion for ACS was high despite the lack of high energy mechanism or fracture. Compartment pressures were measured and found to be significantly elevated in all four compartments of the leg, with a diastolic BP 95 mmHg, anterior compartment 58 mmHg (Δp = 37 mmHg), lateral compartment 63 mmHg (Δp = 32 mmHg), superficial posterior compartment 70 mmHg (Δp = 25 mmHg), and deep posterior compartment 86 mmHg (Δp = 9 mmHg). He was promptly brought to the operating room for exploration and four-compartment fasciotomies.
Based on clinical presentation, the superficial posterior compartment released first. After incising the superficial fascia and releasing the compartment, there was evacuation of approximately 400–500 cc of hematoma proximally between the gastrocnemius and the soleus ( and ). After decompression of the hematoma, the tension in the leg compartments was significantly improved to palpation. The deep posterior, anterior, and lateral compartments were then released. All muscles were noted to be contractile and viable; however, there was contusion noted of the soleus and gastrocnemius. The medial and lateral wounds were left open with vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) device. He returned to the operating room 2 days later for irrigation and debridement, at which time there was a visible medial soleus tear noted. Both medial and lateral wounds were closed primarily, and incisional wound VACs were placed. On post-operative day four from fasciotomies, the incisional VACs were taken down and the patient was discharged home. At his 8-week post-op appointment, he was doing well with no functional deficit when compared to contralateral side. At his 1-year follow-up, he continued to do well. He reported little to no pain and was only bothered by a mild persistent swelling of the leg and ankle that would occur after a full day of being on his feet. He is back to all of his previous activities, although he now mountain bikes instead of running as his main exercise as it is easier on his joints. He reported no functional limitations and is overall very pleased with the outcome of his operation.