A 60-year-old Caucasian man presented to our hospital with a history of episodic confusion over the course of 1 year. Specifically, he described intermittent disorientation and difficulty concentrating at work with brief amnesic spells. At home, he would episodically speak to his wife in an incoherent manner. In retrospect, his symptoms went back 7 to 8 years, although these initial episodes were more often preceded by hunger, blurred vision, and occasionally paresthesias. Further history taking revealed that all episodes happened after a prolonged fast or in the absence of food for at least 4 to 5 hours. The symptoms would predictably and almost immediately resolve with eating food or drinking juice. He had no associated tremor or diaphoresis. He did not report any history of seizures or syncope. Notably, he had experienced a weight gain of almost 10 pounds over the last year. He also complained of persistent abdominal discomfort and bloating.
His past medical history included lymphedema, gout, and intraocular lens replacement. He was not receiving any prescription medications. He was taking supplements of vitamin D, fish oil, vitamin B complex, and probiotics. His family history was significant for pancreatic cancer in his mother.
Prior to his referral to endocrinology, he was also being investigated for vague abdominal symptoms. During a lactose tolerance test, he began having a symptomatic episode and was found to have a very low serum blood glucose of 1.2 mmol/L. The lactose tolerance test checks for glucose levels rising as lactose breaks down. After being provided a glucose meter to check his blood sugar, he recorded many days of consistently low fasting morning capillary glucose readings ranging between 2.2 and 3.2 mmol/L. He noted that his cognition would improve after oral glucose ingestion and normalization of his glucose values to between 5 and 7 mmol/L. He was referred to endocrinology for further assessment.
Investigations performed after an overnight fast revealed a morning serum glucose level of 1.9 mmol/L, insulin level of 141 pmol/L (normal range, less than 20.8 pmol/L [3 mU/L] during hypoglycemia), and C-peptide level of 1106 pmol/L (normal reference range, 260–1730 pmol/L). Results of laboratory tests for his serum ketones and anti-insulin antibodies were negative. A sulfonylurea drug screen was not performed, because this testing is not available at our local laboratory. However, he denied exogenous use of oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin. He had no history of liver disease or alcohol abuse. His liver transaminase levels were all within normal range. His lipase level was minimally elevated at 73 U/L (reference range, 13–60). Results of all other investigations were within normal limits, including serum creatinine (estimated glomerular filtration rate > 60 ml/minute), thyroid-stimulating hormone, morning cortisol, total calcium, albumin, and complete blood count. His hemoglobin A1c was 4.9%.
An initial computed tomographic (CT) scan of the abdomen reported no significant abdominal or pancreatic pathology. However, using a pancreatic enhancement protocol, we identified a 1.3 × 1.2-cm mass lesion in the tail of the pancreas . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his abdomen confirmed a similar-sized area of mild enhancement in the arterial phase, which was better visualized on subtraction sequence imaging. He had no evidence of metastasis. An octreotide scan was done but failed to show enhanced uptake in the area of the tail of the pancreas. He was subsequently referred to surgery and underwent successful laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy.
Sections of the resected tumor, which measured 1.2 cm in greatest dimension, showed a nested and trabecular proliferation of neoplastic cells separated by sclerotic stroma. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the neoplastic cells strongly expressed synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and insulin, confirming neuroendocrine differentiation and supporting the clinical diagnosis of insulinoma . The mitotic rate and Ki-67 proliferation index were 2 per 2 mm2 and 3%, respectively, in keeping with a well-differentiated (grade 2) pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor . The tumor was completely excised, and neither lymphovascular invasion nor lymph node involvement was identified.
Surgical resection resulted in normalization of the patient’s glycemic values, resolution of episodic neuroglycopenic symptoms, and, interestingly, significant improvement of lymphedema. He continued to do well 5 years later with no evidence of recurrence, but he described some mild, persistent memory and cognitive deficits, which may be related to his previous hypoglycemic episodes. Given the association between insulinoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1), he underwent genetic testing, but no known mutations were identified in MEN1.