We describe the case of a 73-year-old male patient, Caucasian ethnicity, never smoker, former office worker, suffering from systemic arterial hypertension and diabetes mellitus. At 43 years of age, he received liver transplant for cirrhosis, secondary to hepatitis B virus infection. At transplant time, patient did not referred pulmonary symptom. No signs of pulmonary disease were found at physical examination. Pulmonary functional tests were normal. CT scan did not reveal abnormalities. ABGs showed normal oxyemia and normal acid–base balance. Alpha 1 antitrypsin serum level was normal (153 mg/dl); it was dosed with a nefelometric methods (Atellica®Siemens).
The orthotopic liver transplant was performed without complications and subsequent clinical follow-up was normal.
Approximately 20 years after liver transplantation, the patient started pneumological check-ups due to the appearance of symptoms characterized by mild dyspnea on exertion and sporadic episodes of bronchitis. For many years, the patient was followed in a general practice clinic and treated with therapy as needed during exacerbations. Due to the progression of symptoms, he received a specialist visit and underwent pulmonary function tests.
Pulmonary function tests revealed mild obstruction, air trapping, with no significant bronchodilator response and reduced diffusing capacity with forced vital capacity (FVC) 4.20 L (119%), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 3.01 L (112%), 8% improvement in broncho dilatory response to drug challenge, FEV1 / FVC ratio 70.6%, total lung capacity (TLC) 11.69 (180%), residual volume (RV) 7,17 L (273%), diffusing capacity (DLCO) 14.12 mL /min/mmHg (58%). The 6 min walking test showed a reduced performance and a modified Medical Research Council (MMRC) dyspnoea of 2. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed areas of emphysema in the left lower lobe .
The serum AAT level resulted below normal (74 mg/dL with normal values 90–200 mg/dL). Therefore, suspecting an AAT deficiency, a blood sample from the patient was sent to the specialized laboratory in Pavia for further analysis.The phenotype obtained by isoelectrofocusing (IEF) was MZ, showing the presence of both M and Z proteins . This data was consistent with the plasma value of AAT previously reported, in accordance to a condition of intermediate AAT deficiency. However, SERPINA1 gene sequencing did not reveal the presence of Z variant, corresponding to a G to A transversion at nucleotide 1096 of cDNA of SERPINA 1 gene (rs28929474) and reported the PI*MM genotype.