A 60-year-old Asian male with past medical history of glaucoma presented to the emergency department (ED) after a syncopal episode. The patient was seated at his workplace when he suddenly felt moderate epigastric pain and slumped down in his chair, after which he lost consciousness. The bystanders caught him while falling to the ground from his chair. He denied a previous episode of syncope and denied having chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, nausea, or vomiting. He was a nonsmoker and had occasional alcohol intake.
In ED, his blood pressure was 125/58 mmHg, heart rate 55 beats per minute, regular, he was afebrile, and saturated 100% on room air. His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia at 53 beats per minute, peaked T waves, 1 mm ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF, and 2 mm ST elevation in V3 . With the concern for ST-segment elevated myocardial infarction (STEMI), he was given aspirin 324 mg and was taken for left heart catheterization (LHC) emergently. His LHC showed nonobstructive coronary artery disease (CAD). His laboratory workup was remarkable for lipase of 25,304 IU/l (normal level 8–78 IU/l) and white blood count 11,800/mcl. His liver function test, serum electrolyte level, and triglyceride level were unremarkable. Troponin was <0.01 ng/ml. A computed tomographic exam of the abdomen revealed acute interstitial pancreatitis with a small discrete fluid collection in the uncinate process . The ultrasound of his abdomen ruled out biliary etiology, showing a normal appearance of the gallbladder and biliary tree, without evidence of calculus or obstruction. His echocardiogram revealed normal ejection fraction with no regional wall motion abnormality.
He was admitted to the telemetry floor and treated with aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation. He was symptomatically better the following day and could tolerate a diet on day 3. He was discharged on day 3 with adequate follow-up. The discharging ECG is shown in . His initial syncopal episode was thought to be a vasovagal response either due to epigastric pain or intravascular volume depletion from having severe pancreatitis.