A 86-year-old man, with no known comorbidity,
presented with a five-day history of colicky abdominal
pain, worsening abdominal distension, and associated
constipation which progressed to obstipation. The pain
worsened significantly but with no associated vomiting.
His last bowel movement was 4 days before presenting
to the hospital. There was no history of fever, jaundice,
early satiety, spurious diarrhea, the passage of pelletlike
stools, or weight loss.
Past medical history revealed a similar presentation
fourteen months prior to the onset of present problem
with clinical and radiological features revealing a
sigmoid volvulus, and a one-stage sigmoidectomy with
end-to-end anastomosis was performed. Examination findings included palor, tachycardia (pulse
rate of 120 per minute) and an elevated blood pressure
even though he has never been diagnosed as
hypertensive. He has severe abdominal distension with a midline longitudinal scar and hypoactive bowel
sounds. There was no rebound tenderness. A digital
rectal examination revealed scanty hard feces.
On this current admission, a provisional diagnosis of
adhesive bowel obstruction was made and he was
resuscitated with intravenous fluids and antibiotics
while a nasogastric tube passed for immediate
decompression of the abdomen and a trial of enema
done with minimal improvement. Further evaluation
of the patient was done to rule out the possibility of a second volvulus or Ogilvie syndrome as a second
alternative.
Laboratory investigations revealed a normal white cell
count with a neutrophil predominance of 80.6%,
hematocrit of 39.3% and hypokalaemia of 3.0mmol/L which was corrected before surgery. Viral markers
were all negative and the clotting profile was not
deranged. Urinalysis showed proteinuria, ketonuria,
and haematuria. Erect plain abdominal radiograph
revealed multiple air-fluid levels and a gasless pelvis
while a supine view revealed massively dilated (>10cm)
bowel loops peripherally located, with haustra markings
.
He underwent an exploratory laparotomy and findings
included a massively dilated transverse colon that was
twisted 540° in the anticlockwise direction, A
perforation was noted in the descending colon at the
distal point of the torsion with spillage of intestinal
contents . The transverse and descending colon
were viable and a left hemicolectomy was performed
with one-layered end-to-end anastomosis. The post-operative
recovery was uneventful and he was
discharged home 8 days after surgery.