A 30-year-old woman with a 5-year history of refractory occipital neuralgia, who had been under ONS therapy for 2 months, presented with a sudden onset of severe unilateral pain, originating in the right upper nuchal region and spreading to the occipital and parietal regions. The pain was described as stabbing, sharp, lancinating, and occurred in paroxysms. The patient also described spasms and myoclonus that occurred in the right trapezius, scalene, and supraspinatus muscles, a new symptomatic component that had not accompanied her typical occipital neuralgia pain before.
The patient had a history of microvascular decompression surgery 6 years before as a treatment for trigeminal neuralgia, with full remission of symptoms. She developed cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and mastoiditis as immediate postoperative complications, but they were appropriately and successfully managed.
Due to the failure of medical therapy for occipital neuralgia (pregabalin and duloxetine), the patient had been submitted to three percutaneous radiofrequency rhizotomies (1, 3, and 4 years ago) which provided immediate symptomatic relief and yielded significant pain control, but for a limited time. She had also received two occipital nerve blocks through local anesthesia, but with poor effect in long-term pain management.
The pain had become progressively more severe, more frequent and associated with nausea. As a result of the unresponsiveness to less invasive procedures, the patient underwent ONS 2 months ago.
ONS was employed through surgery. The patient was placed in prone position under anesthesia. A right paramedian incision was performed in the level of C1 vertebra and a pathway was carefully dissected over the muscle fascia, toward the mastoid region. Once the correct position was asserted through fluoroscopy, a lead containing 16 electrode contacts was inserted and anchored over the muscle fascia. The IPG was placed in the infraclavicular region, in a subcutaneous pocket, and connected to the lead extension, which was inserted through subcutaneous tunneling. A stress relief loop was produced with the lead cable extension in the subcutaneous pocket, alongside the IPG, forming a circular coil to minimize tension on the lead . The technique provided adequate pain management after optimization of the IPG settings.
Two months after ONS were implemented, the patient suddenly started with the symptoms and manifestations described. When the ONS system was turned off, the spasms and myoclonus ceased. A skull radiography showed lead migration .
The patient underwent surgery for lead repositioning. During surgery, extensive fibrosis was identified throughout the lead extension loop, which was deemed as cause for the lead migration. The fibrosis produced numerous points of constriction along the stress relief loop, which provided tension over the lead during head-and-neck movement and caused its migration.
We conducted thorough dissection of the fibrotic tissue, releasing the stress relief loop, and removing the IPG from the infraclavicular subcutaneous pocket . A low cervical incision was made over the dislocated lead position guided by fluoroscopy and new tunneling was performed due to important fibrosis in the subcutaneous that restrained the lead from being removed. The lead and cables were then removed through the infraclavicular incision. The lead was repositioned through the former occipital incision and the system was reinserted as described previously .
After lead repositioning, the patient did not experience any muscle spasms or myoclonus. The pain intensity significantly decreased and the IPG settings are still being managed to optimize pain control.