A 66-year-old woman had undergone caudal lobectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma. The posterior segmental branch of the bile duct was injured and repaired intraoperatively. A cystic duct tube (C-tube) was placed into the common bile duct, and a drainage tube was placed in the foramen of Winslow. Three months after the surgery, the patient presented a fever and increased levels of total bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase. Computed tomography (CT) showed biliary leakage and dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct of right lobe around the intraoperatively repaired site .
A posterior segmental bile duct was percutaneously punctured under sonography, and a 7-F pigtail percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) catheter (Hanako Medical, Saitama) was inserted. Simultaneous cholangiogram via the catheter and the C-tube showed complete obstruction 15 mm in length in the right hepatic duct . Conventional endoscopic and percutaneous approaches with a guidewire failed to recanalize. The recanalization using the stiff edge of a 0.035-in. hydrophilic guidewire (Radifocus, Terumo, Tokyo) failed as well. Therefore, we proposed to use a transseptal needle to create the extraluminal tract after careful inspection that intrahepatic vasculature did not intervene between the extraluminal route on the contrast-enhanced CT images.
The procedure was performed under fluoroscopic guidance and local anesthesia. Firstly, a 6-F balloon catheter (Selecon MP Catheter II, Terumo, Tokyo) was placed at the end of the obstructed right hepatic bile duct through the initial PTBD route . Then, the left lateral inferior segmental duct was punctured using 21-gauge needle (PTCD needle; TOP Corporation, Tokyo) under cholangiogram guidance, and an 8-F transseptal sheath (SwartzTM; St. Jude Medical, Minnetonka, MN) was introduced into the ostium of right hepatic duct. A transseptal needle (BRK Transseptal Needle; St. Jude Medical, Minnetonka, MN) was advanced through the transseptal sheath, and the right hepatic duct was punctured by targeting the inflated balloon that was placed at the end of the obstructed right hepatic bile duct . After confirming successful puncture using contrast agent injected through the needle, a 0.014-in. guidewire (CHIKAI; ASAHI Intecc, Nagoya) was advanced into the right hepatic duct through the transseptal needle. The 0.014-in. guidewire was grasped with a loop snare catheter and pulled out through the right PTBD route, constructing a pull-through system . A 4.2-F Berenstein catheter (Hanako Medical, Saitama) was inserted along the pull-through guidewire from the right PTBD route through the created tract, and advanced to the common bile duct. After introducing a 0.035-in. stiff guidewire (Amplatz Extrastiff; COOK, Bloomington, IN), an 8.5-F drainage catheter (Dawson-Mueller Multipurpose Drainage Catheter, COOK, Bloomington, IN) with side holes was placed at the common bile duct through the tract . Finally, an internal–external PTBD catheter was successfully placed without complications.
One month after the procedure, the drainage tube was replaced with a 10.2-F drainage catheter (Dawson-Mueller Multipurpose Drainage Catheter) to maintain and dilate the created tract. Subsequent endoscopic internalization with a 7-F drainage catheter (Gadelius Medical K.K., Tokyo) was performed 5 months after the procedure. At the 1-year follow-up examination, there were no signs of biliary obstruction without recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma.