A 22-months-old female was born at 39 weeks of gestational age by cesarean section, for a suspect fetal macrosomia during the pregnancy. At birth weight was 4720 g, length was 54 cm, occipito-frontal circumference was 40.5 cm, and diagnosis of hip dysplasia was made. There was no family history of neurologic disease or developmental delay. During the perinatal period she was hospitalized due to macrosomia and hypotonia. A brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) performed in the first weeks of life showed micropoligyria. The patient also underwent physiokinesitherapy to treat evolutionary delay, diffuse articular laxity with instability of the knees. Her hip dysplasia was treated with blunt retractor. A radiography revealed partial agenesis of the vertebral body that corresponded to a swelling at lumbar spine level. A karyotype analysis was performed detecting a paternal pericentric inversion of chromosome 2. On physical examination, macrocephaly and hypotonia were present associated to hyperextensible joints, overgrowth of the lower limbs and syndactyly of II and III toes. Capillary malformations were visible all over the body. They appeared diffuse reticulated on the limbs and the back, and on the medial area of the face, involving the forehead and glabella, as a V-shaped stain, the upper eyelids, the nose, the filter and the lower lip. Bilateral linear hypopigmented macules distributed along the Blaschko lines were observable on the back surface of the thighs. On the basis of these clinical signs, we suspected a PROS disorder, ruling out other overgrowth syndromes (e.g. Sotos, Beckwith-Wiedemann. Pallister-Killian). Thus, we performed molecular analysis with next generation sequencing of selected genes involved in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway on DNA extracted from peripheral blood and from cutaneous biopsy of affected tissue. The analysis revealed a pathogenic mosaic mutation c.344G > C in PIK3CA gene with a frequency of the mutated allele of about 12% on DNA extracted from peripheral blood and about 15% on DNA extracted from tissue biopsy. At the protein level it determines the p.Arg115Pro variant. The variant in PIK3CA gene was previously described [, ]. The histological findings on punch biopsy specimens showed the presence of small ectatic blood capillaries (CD31+, CD34 +, GLUT1-, D240-) compatible with the clinical diagnosis of capillary malformation. The patient is in follow up and she still presents macrocephaly, macrosomia and hypotonia. Thus a multidisciplinary management, including physiokinesitherapy is ongoing.