A 60-year-old man presented to our institution with paroxysmal AF that was highly symptomatic and refractory to antiarrhythmic medication. The patient had a history of cold-induced urticaria without occurrence of systemic reactions to date. The first onset of cold-induced urticaria occurred at the age of 40 years after contact with cold water and included localized wheals at the exposed areas. The wheals appeared minutes after exposure and resolved within hours. After first onset, the patient reported recurrent localized symptoms including wheals and angio-oedema at exposed areas after contact with cold water and cold air below 15°C. The patient reported no urticaria-associated hospitalization to date.
At physical examination, the patient presented in good physical condition. The blood pressure was 116/85 mmHg, basal oxygen saturation revealed 99%, and laboratory tests showed no pathologies. He reported no current gastrointestinal disorders or symptoms.
Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) were performed directly prior and the day after PVI as part of the protocol for the MADE-PVI trial, in which the patient was included. Pre-interventional OGD and EUS revealed no pathology of the oesophageal mucosa or the mediastinum. Pulmonary vein isolation was performed using Medtronic 2nd generation ArcticFront Cryoballoon guided by an Achieve mapping catheter. Pulmonary vein isolation was achieved in the left superior and inferior pulmonary veins employing a single freeze of 180 s per vein. Temperature was decreased during balloon cooling to −43°C and −42°C, respectively. Subsequent PVI of the right inferior pulmonary vein (RIPV) and the right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV) was performed. Balloon cooling was stopped in the RSPV after 124 s and in the RIPV after 149 s of cooling time due to low temperature of −60°C and −64°C, respectively. Pacing manoeuvers confirmed complete electrical isolation of both right pulmonary veins.
Post-interventional OGD, performed 18 h after PVI, revealed two longitudinal oedema with fissurated configuration in the middle oesophagus at 37–35 cm from the incisors . Additional EUS demonstrated that each oesophageal oedema included all layers of the oesophageal wall and was accompanied by small mediastinal oedema, which was strictly restricted to peri-oesophageal tissue . Hereby, the localization of the oedema correlated with the anatomical altitude of the posterior wall of the left atrium. No oedema could be detected in the pericardial tissue surrounding the pulmonary vein ostia. The patient reported no gastrointestinal or systemic symptoms after PVI. Aetiologically, due to missing peri-atrial lesions, activation of cold urticaria during cryoablation rather than direct procedure-associated complications was suspected.
Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy and EUS 4 weeks later revealed a complete remission of all lesions without evidence of residual oedema in the oesophagus or mediastinum. During 6 weeks, 3 and 6 month of follow-up, the patient reported neither gastrointestinal symptoms nor recurrence of AF.