A 38-year-old non-smoker, non-alcoholic previously healthy woman presented with a complaint of bilateral ankle pain, with the left ankle being more affected, which had been present for the past 5 years. Medical history is positive only for 10 years of hypothyroidism treated with Euthyrox. Her pain started intermittently and gradually became constant, radiating to both feet and knees and was exacerbated by ambulation, with partial relief with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The patient also reported severe night pains. Physical examination revealed tenderness over the left distal tibia with a painful range of motion of both ankles, more so on the left. No swelling, redness, or edema were observed. Bilateral ankle radiographs were obtained, which showed a small radiolucent circumferential area suggestive of ON of the left distal tibia . Radiographs of the right distal tibia were unremarkable .
Bilateral ankles magnetic resonance imaging (MRIs) was then ordered showing a 3 × 2-cm area of ON involving the left distal tibia/tibial plafond with extension of edema onto the medial malleolus , as well as a patchy subchondral well-delineated geographical low T1 and high T2 fat sat signal ON involving the right distal tibia posteriorly and laterally measuring 1.5 × 1.1 cm of transverse axis and around 2.5 cm of length . Thorough investigations were conducted to rule out the presence of any systemic disease. Comprehensive laboratory tests, including sickle cell screening, lipid profile analysis, and screening for coagulopathies, all yielded negative results.
The patient, having failed conservative management including partial weight bearing and analgesics, opted for surgery for her left ankle due to severe pain and a painful ambulation.
Using an anteromedial approach to the left distal tibia , and after careful dissection, a window was made on the anterior aspect of the distal tibia (-) through which the AVN was debrided with curetted . The bone defect was then irrigated using normal saline solution and hydrogen peroxide. Synthetic bone graft was then inserted into the defect for remplissage followed by reapplication of the window that was previously cut . The distal tibia was then fixed with a Mesh Plate and eight screws with satisfactory radiologic control . A below-knee posterior splint was applied postoperatively on the left lower limb.
The pathology report came back positive for ON, with an absence of malignancy.
At 6-month follow-up, the patient was pain-free, walking full weight bearing with a below-knee boot. Radiographs show satisfactory bone growth at the level of the surgery .