A 37-year-old Persian male was referred to a private clinic of periodontics complaining about mobility of the upper teeth and purulent discharge within 1 month ago . About 3 months ago, he had been hospitalized due to the severe COVID-19 with lung involvement (40%). No other systemic disease was reported, other than a long history of controlled chronic sinusitis. The patient had taken antiviral medication (remdesivir) and glucocorticosteroid (dexamethasone) in the hospital for three consecutive days. Following dexamethasone administration, serum glucose level increased up to 400 mg/dl. Thus, insulin was administered to control the high serum glucose level. However, the drug-induced diabetes could not be controlled even after administration of insulin (NovoRapid 6 units subcutaneously before lunch, Lantus 16 units subcutaneously every night, and metformin 500 mg two times daily). The patient was discharged from the hospital after resolution of COVID-19 symptoms and continued insulin injection according to the prescribed protocol.
After a few days, the patient complained of headache and pain in the maxillary region. He noticed gum swelling and gingival abscess drainage. A general dentist prescribed antibiotics [penicillin 800,000 IU intramuscularly two times a day, oral co-amoxiclav 625 mg (amoxicillin 500 mg + clavulanic acid 125 mg) three times a day, and oral metronidazole 250 mg three times a day for 1 week] and chlorhexidine 0.2% mouth rinse. No clinical improvement was noted after the administration of the antibiotics.
The patient was referred to the ear–nose–throat (ENT) department (Amir-Alam Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences) for further assessments in terms of sinus involvement. According to multidetector computed tomography (CT) images without contrast enhancement, severe and moderate opacification of right and left maxillary sinuses, respectively, and mild opacification of right ethmoidal sinus with ostiomeatal complex involvement was evident. To discover more details about the brain and para nasal sinuses, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with multiplanar images and pre- and post-paramagnet injection was performed. This modality showed right maxillary sinusitis with pre-antral, retro-antral, and infra-temporal soft tissue infiltration without obvious necrosis. There was bilateral nonspecific white matter high signal lesion without any orbital infiltration . The ophthalmology consult revealed normal visual acuity. Therefore, at that time, there was no sign in favor of mucormycosis and “partially treated acute sinusitis” was diagnosed by the clinicians. Thus, wide-spectrum antibiotics were administered again.
After 3 days, the patient was referred to the periodontist complaining about severe pain in the maxillary region and purulent discharge from the gingiva. Almost all maxillary teeth showed grade III mobility. Vitality test was negative for all suspected teeth. The periodontal pockets around the maxillary teeth were about 10–12 mm. There was multiple abscess and fistula tract in the apical site of all maxillary teeth. Pus discharge was noted from the gingival sulcus. Blood sugar test and cone-beam computer tomography (CBCT) from maxillary area were ordered. The blood tests showed high level blood sugar (HbA1c 10.5 and Fasting Blood Sugar 400 mg/dl). Based on the CBCT of the area, generalized rarefaction was observed from right tuberosity to left edentulous area in mesial aspect of second molar that had caused alveolar destruction and buccal and lingual defect around the teeth. Opacification was evident in both right and left maxillary sinuses. Perforation was observed in nasal floor and maxillary sinus walls, as well. Sclerosis was detected in bilateral maxillary sinus walls, due to the patient’s previous sinusitis history. Ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal sinuses were clear .
Mucormycosis- and diabetes-related osteomyelitis were the most probable differential diagnosis. To alleviate pain, the clinician drained the abscess with curettes . Despite the initial resolution and significant pain alleviation, an increasing level of pain and purulent discharge was noted during the follow-up visit. The patient was referred to a maxillofacial surgeon.
The patient was admitted at hospital. Ophthalmologist and ear–nose–throat (ENT) specialists were consulted to assess the involvement of other paranasal sinuses and orbits. Inferior subtotal maxillectomy was performed for the patient under general anesthesia, and 12 maxillary teeth were extracted (sparing both maxillary second molars). The black necrotic tissue was removed from both maxillary sinuses. The lower nasal conchae were necrotic and thus were removed on both sides . The buccal and palatal soft tissue was relatively healthy, so complete closure of the defect was possible. The entire resected specimen was sent for histopathology.
According to the histopathology report, there was a portion of sinonasal tissue with severe acute-on-chronic inflammation, granulation tissue formation, presence of fibrinoleukocytic exudate, and infiltration of some multinucleated giant cells, and few small portions of dead and alive bone were also noted. Microscopic evaluation revealed the presence of rectangular-shaped aseptate hyphae in the specimens, so the diagnosis of mucormycosis was confirmed. On histopathologic analysis of right middle concha, there was no preserved fungal element in multiple cut section of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining. Portions of respiratory mucosa with marked active inflammation, fibrinoleukocytic exudate, and necrosis were observed in analyzed specimen.
Immediately, antifungal therapy was started for the patient [intravenous amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day) for 6 weeks]. Levofloxacin 500 mg (Tavanex) and nasal spray (beclomethasone) were also administered for sinusitis.
The patient underwent multiple sinonasal endoscopy to evaluate the course of treatment. The healing was uneventful, and there was no sign of oroantral fistula. He was discharged in good condition. We followed up the patient for 6 months, and there were no signs of reinfection. The right maxillary second molar was extracted due to severe mobility . Reconstruction of the residual defect with patient-specific implants is scheduled for the patient.