A 5-year-old female patient presented to the orthopedic surgery clinic in October 2020 for initial consultation of painful bilateral hip subluxation in the setting of AFM diagnosed in September 2018. She had a medical history of AFM sequalae including quadriplegia, scoliosis, bilateral shoulder subluxations, and recently diagnosed low bone mass treated with pamidronate. Surgical history included nerve transfers for her right upper limb (median to musculocutaneous, radial to axillary, and spinal accessory to suprascapular nerves) and bilateral lower limbs (sciatic to inferior gluteal nerves). Her parents began noticing popping sounds in her hips approximately 1 year before presentation to the clinic. On physical examination, passive hip range of motion was 0 to 110° with abduction to 50° and mild degree of discernable subluxation. Flexion contractures were observed and estimated at 30° on the right and 20° on the left. Muscle strengths were as follows: quadriceps 4/5, thigh adductors 4/5, thigh abductors 3/5, and hamstrings 4/5. Mild lumbar spinal asymmetry was noted without obvious pelvic obliquity. The patient used a manual wheelchair for community mobility but was able to ambulate short distances with the assistance of a crocodile posterior walker with forearm support and bilateral ankle foot orthoses (AFOs). Radiographs revealed evidence of bilateral hip dysplasia and coxa valga with superolateral subluxation –>75% uncovering of the right femoral head and >50% of the left . On abduction views, both hips reduced and appeared located . Due to the extent of hip pathology and pain with weight-bearing, surgical correction was recommended.
The patient underwent bilateral Dega osteotomies with autogenous tricortical structural bone graft and varus derotational osteotomies, fixed with blade plates and cannulated screws, respectively. The procedure achieved a 35° correction in femoral neck angle and 30° reduction of anteversion from 50 to 20° bilaterally. During the same procedure, the patient also underwent bilateral adductor lengthening. Subsequently, she was admitted for inpatient rehabilitation as planned preoperatively.
At 6 weeks post-operative, the patient presented for a follow-up visit without reported complications and negligible pain. Surgical sites and osteotomies were well-healed. Radiographs demonstrated improved alignment of the bilateral hips, with located femoral heads, greater acetabular coverage, and decreased coxa valga . At 2 years post-operative, the patient presented without reported complications or complaints of pain. Residual flexion contractures were estimated at 5° on the right and 11° on the left, reduced since before surgery. Functionally, she was able to transition independently from sit to stand as well as into and out of her wheelchair with minimal assistance, and she could ascend a flight of stairs by sidestepping with use of a railing. She maintained her ability to ambulate short distances with her walker and AFOs. Her radiographs were unchanged from the early post-operative period .