A 19 year old nulliparous, British Caucasian woman was admitted with a sudden onset of right iliac fossa pain. Urine pregnancy test was negative. This pain was sharp and stabbing in nature with no radiation. There was no associated vomiting or fever. She denied any urinary urgency, frequency or dysuria and her bowels were normal. On examination there was minimal guarding and no rebound tenderness. No distension was seen and bowel sounds were heard. Transvaginal pelvic ultrasound demonstrated two small simple cysts within the right ovary. She was managed conservatively with analgesics only and the pain resolved within 24 hours. Following this acute episode she developed intermittent pelvic pain. Her subsequent scan showed 9.8 × 4.5 cm complex cystic mass in right adnexa with features suggestive of a dermoid cyst with no colour flow on Doppler examination. Interestingly her CA 125 was markedly elevated at 657; CEA, ∝ FP, HCG, white cell count (WCC) and CRP were all within normal limits. Her periods were regular and she was using condoms for contraception. She was in a new relationship and they had been together for the last 4 months.
Past medical history included well controlled asthma, a negative laparotomy at the age of seven for abdominal pain but no previous pelvic infections. Pelvic examination revealed a normal size uterus with a right adnexal mass which appeared fixed to the pelvic side wall.
A subsequent CT scan one week later suggested a right adnexal dermoid cyst 5.4 × 4.8 cm with abnormal soft tissue 3.0 × 2.6 cm deep to right rectus muscle and abnormal irregular soft tissue along pelvic side wall extending from left common iliac bifurcation to left adnexa and an enlarged 10 mm precaval lymph node was also seen. These features were thought to be highly suspicious of malignancy during the case review at the Gynaecology oncology Multidisciplinary Team (MDT) meeting.
A further CA 125 level was measured pre-operatively and had fallen to 342. A provisional diagnosis of either pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriotic cyst or an ovarian malignancy was made. She underwent a midline laparotomy that revealed right ovarian cyst (7 × 6 × 6 cm), with associated hydrosalpinx. The tubo-ovarian mass was adherent to the terminal ileum, caecum and omentum with appendix buried in the mass. The left ovary was normal, although there was evidence of a left pyosalpinx, which was drained to conserve left tube. A right salpingo-opherectomy, appendicectomy and omental biopsy was performed and an intraoperative swab from the mass was sent for culture and sensitivity. She had high vaginal, endocervical and Chlamydia swabs postoperatively and her recovery was uneventful.
Histology revealed a benign cystic ovarian teratoma, the fallopian tube showed acute on chronic salpingitis and the appendix was normal. The post operative endocervical swab was positive for Chlamydia. Both the partners were then subsequently referred to Genito- urinary clinic for ongoing treatment and contact tracing.