A 58-years old man with the known history CD consulted his gastroenterologist due to upper stomachache, postprandial bloating and involuntary weight loss (15 kg within one month).
Nine years earlier the previously healthy man was diagnosed with CD (histologically Marsh-Oberhuber type 1, genotype HLA-DQB1*02, elevated immunoglobulin Atissue transglutaminase (tTG-IgA) antibodies) after a period of severe diarrhea. The patient swiftly recovered upon starting a strict gluten-free diet and went into histological and clinical remission.
Apart from CD, the patient had no relevant previous illnesses.
Family history was inconspicuous.
At the actual consultation the patient presented in normal nutritional, but slightly reduced general condition. Physical examination revealed diffuse tenderness of the abdomen, but otherwise no abnormal findings. Clinical neurological examination was unsuspicious.
Laboratory studies, including total blood count, kidney, liver as well as inflammatory parameters did not reveal any abnormalities. Fecal analysis showed a calprotectin above 1000 µg/g (normal count < 50 µg/g). Serologic tTG-IgA antibodies were normal and suggested dietary well controlled CD.
As initial gastroscopic evaluation was inconspicuous, contrast MRI of the abdomen was performed exposing prominent mesenterial lymphadenopathy in the left upper abdominal quadrant. Capsule endoscopy revealed ulcerative lesions in the proximal jejunum and ileum, which were consequently biopsied via push-endoscopy.
Histological examination of the jejunal biopsies revealed ulcerative jejunitis type II with an increased population of immunophenotypically abnormal intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) . Diagnosis of RCD type II was made and an immunosuppressive therapy with methylprednisolone and azathioprine initiated. The patient´s condition slightly improved within weeks.
Six months later, the patient suffered from subacute gait ataxia, undirected dizziness, double vision and cognitive impairment with aggravation over the course of four days. A cranial MRI revealed multifocal T2 hyperintense partially ring-enhancing lesions cortical, subcortical, periventricular, in the basal ganglia, mesencephalon and cerebellum. The cell count in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal. No malignant tumor cells, pathogens or oligoclonal bands were detected. Neurotropic pathogens were ruled out via polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Electroencephalography (EEG) showed moderate diffuse cerebral dysfunction but no epileptiform abnormalities. Onconeural antibodies and antibodies to neuronal surface antigens in serum and CSF remained negative.
Due to rapid worsening of the patient’s neurological condition, particularly progression of the cerebellar syndrome, an empiric therapy with intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone (1 g daily for five days) was initiated and clinical improvement followed promptly. Yet, repeated cranial MRIs showed the intracranial lesions stable in size and location.
For further evaluation, an 18FDG-PET/CT scan was performed revealing a hypermetabolic lesion in the left upper abdomen. Recurrent endoscopic biopsies of the respective jejunal ulcerations indicated the known diagnosis of RCD type II. Due to high clinical suspicion of lymphoma, the patient consequently underwent surgical resection of the affected jejunal part.
During the period of diagnostic testing, the patient´s neurological condition worsened with permanent dizziness and progressive right-sided hemiparesis. Recurrent cranial MRIs revealed progressive multifocal supra- and infratentorial lesions with diffusion restriction as well as inhomogeneous and circular contrast enhancement, morphologically compatible with central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma . Once more, CSF analysis did not reveal any remarkable findings, especially no malignant cells.