Electrical stimulation of the right posterior insular cortex was performed in a 24-year-old right-handed man who developed medically intractable epilepsy at the age of 17 years and who was referred for invasive electroencephalographic monitoring and pre-surgical mapping. He was suffering from stereotyped nocturnal hypermotor seizures nearly every night. His neurological examination was normal. MRI of the brain showed a well-circumscribed tumor (18 × 12 × 11 mm) in the right posterior insular cortex .
Pre-surgical electric stimulation was performed using depth electrodes that were implanted in the right posterior insular cortex, above and below the tumor (1 mm diameter size; Ad Tec Medical Instrument Corp., Racine, WI, USA) . The depth electrodes were inserted stereotactically using a Leksell stereotactic frame and a Stealth station planning system (Medtronic-Sofamor Danek, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The depth electrode lines had 8 contacts (each 2 mm long) separated by 2 mm. A transopercular approach was used to implant the depth electrodes in the right insular cortex above and below the lesion. The distal electrode contacts of each depth line were located within the right posterior insular cortex. Location of the electrode contacts was confirmed by fusing a pre-implantation MRI to a post-implantation CT scan with the aid of a volumetric mutual information algorithm using the Atamai software (Atamai, Inc., London, ON, Canada; Figure ).
High frequency (50 Hz) bipolar electric impulses were applied at four different intensity levels (1, 2, 3 and 4 mA) with a pulse duration of 0.3 ms over 2 s (Grass Technologies, West Warwick, RI, USA). To assess the potential impact of surgery on swallowing, the patient swallowed a continuous water infusion (1 ml/s) delivered manually to the mouth via a catheter-tipped syringe. During water swallowing, electrodes S-pIC (superior posterior insular cortex) and I-pIC (inferior posterior insular cortex) were stimulated individually with increasing stimulation intensities. Swallowing was recorded from the output of a laryngeal movement sensor.
Stimulation with electrode I-pIC at 4 mA was associated with a dysrhythmic pattern of swallowing as indicated by irregular and delayed swallows . Moreover, at all intensity levels of stimulation with electrode I-pIC, the patient spontaneously reported a perception of a "stutter in swallowing". In contrast, swallowing was not impaired during stimulation with S-pIC, regardless of stimulation intensity . EEG recordings revealed that all epileptic spikes and seizures originated from the right inferior posterior insular cortex.
The tumor was surgically removed after invasive electroencephalographic monitoring and diagnosed as a ganglioglioma, a mostly benign neoplasm arising from ganglion cells. Gangliogliomas are often located in the medial and lateral temporal lobes, superior and middle temporal gyri, parahippocampal gyrus and amygdala , but can be found anywhere in the brain. Gangliogliomas are a frequent cause of intractable epilepsy . The patient has been seizure free after removal of the ganglioglioma.