A 52-year-old woman with a 3 month’s history of cough and hemoptysis consulted a nearby clinic. Chest X-ray showed atelectasis of the right upper lobe caused by locally advanced lung cancer with mediastinal invasion. Bronchoscopic biopsy showed squamous cell carcinoma. Chest computed tomorgraphy (CT) showed atelectasis of right upper lobe tumor invasion into the right main pulmonary artery. The SVC was compressed and narrowed but remained patent . No significantly enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes were seen. Bronchoscopy revealed an exposed tumor in the right upper bronchus which completely obstructed the lumen. Brain and abdominal CT, and bone scintigraphy revealed no signs of distant metastases. On the basis of these findings, the tumor was evaluated to be resectable by intrapericardial pneumonectomy. The surgery was performed through a right thoractomy. The pericardial was opened from SVC to the level of right upper pulmonary vein 2 cm posterior and parallel to the phrenic nerve. The SVC was isolated from the atrium to the brachiocephalic trunk, which involved SVC denudation at the point of its connection with pericardium. Then the right pulmonary artery was dissected and ligated between the ascending aorta and the SVC. The right upper pulmonary vein was ligated intrapericardially. The right lower pulmonary vein was dissected and ligated outside of the pericardium. Finally the right main bronchus was manipulated using a stapler to complete the right pneumonectomy. No direct tumor invasion into the SVC was detected. The lower part of pericardium was closed interruptedly and the upper defect was left open. The chest was drained using an intercostals tube that was kept clamped and released for half an hour the next morning. The patient was transferred postoperatively to Intensive Care Unit, and the tracheal tube was withdrawn 2 h after operation. About 18 h after operation, the patient was transferred to an ordinary room. Immediately after a short period of hard coughing, the patient developed tachycardia arrhythmias, hypotension, followed by loss of consciousness. After resuscitation, the patient was conscious but developed cyanosis of the SVC drainage area, uropenia, and hypotension (80/30 mmHg). She felt more comfortable in the right decubitus position. Emergency bedside-echocardiography showed that the SVC was obstructed due to thrombus formation. Cardiac herniation into the right pneumonectomy space was detected on repeated chest radiography which showed a shift of the heart into right hemithorax . Rethoracotomy was performed on the second day after the intrapericardial pneumonectomy. At operation it was found that the heart had rotated into the right hemithorax along the axis of the vena cava, and the SVC was strangulated. The heart was placed back into its normal position. The pericardium was torn from its initial incision to cardiac apex for about 8 cm and this was repaired using a Gore Tex patch. About 5 min after the heart was returned to its normal position, the syndrome of SVC disappeared. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient has been followed up as tumor-free for more than 3 years.