A 42-year-old premenopausal woman attended our emergency department with acute urinary retention. She also had complaint of swelling in the vulval region since five years ago, which was painless and gradually progressive. On local examination, there was an 11 × 9 cm fungating, nontender, solid mass arising from the clitoris . Pelvis magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was requested at the former hospital where she had gone for treatment of her vulval mass; the imaging revealed a large 11 × 9 × 8 cm clitoral mass with a characteristic finding of low signal intensity on T2-weighted images mimicking that of smooth muscle, which was the key to the diagnosis . Patient was initially managed in the emergency department with urethral catheterization relieving urine retention. On laboratory evaluation, her hemoglobin was 10 g/dL with normal renal function tests (serum creatinine, 0.9 mg/dL; urea, 21 mg/dL). On abdomen ultrasound evaluation, bilateral kidneys were normal. Hormonal assay showed normal values of testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate, follicular stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), parathormone (PTH), and prolactin. The 24-hour urinary excretion of free cortisol and ketosteroids were within normal limits. Beta-hCG level was also in normal range. Thyroid function tests and chest X-ray findings were insignificant. Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the abdomen showed normal adrenals. There was no pituitary enlargement on brain MRI. Afterwards, decision for surgery was made and the mass was excised completely with preserving the tip of clitoris. Resected tumor mass was sent for histopathological assessment . Postoperative course was uneventful with no voiding difficulty. On gross examination, the mass was well encapsulated and section cuts showed fleshy tumor. Microscopic examination showed spindle-shaped tumor cells arranged in fascicles with few areas of myxoid degeneration; moreover, hyalinization was seen without any atypia or mitotic figures . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for smooth muscle antigen (SMA) and estrogen and progesterone receptor (ER/PR). Overall features were suggestive of clitoral leiomyoma. Our regular follow-up showed that the patient was doing well without any recurrence of lesion or any difficulty in voiding.