A 35-year-old Sri Lankan female presented with sudden onset painless visual loss leading to complete blindness in the left eye and partial visual loss in the right eye accompanied by sudden onset bilateral frontal headache for 1 week.
On questioning, multiple features of Cushing syndrome were revealed including recent onset weight gain, darkening of skin, widespread acne and difficulty in getting up from the squatting position over several months. She had not sought any medical advice. There was secondary amenorrhoea for 10 years. During the few medical consultations she had for mild acute illnesses, the possibility of Cushing syndrome had not been considered.
Personal medical and family history was unremarkable. There was no history of exposure to any psychoactive substances or glucocorticoids. She was single; and a preschool teacher.
She was alert and oriented, having central obesity with a weight of 67.6 kg and height of 148 cm. Her Body mass index was 30.86 kg/m2. She had pigmentation, multiple monomorphic acne over the face and upper chest . There were dorso-cervical and supraclavicular fat pads and thin skin over the extremities.
Complete blindness of the left eye and ability to count fingers from the right eye with temporal visual loss were noted . The rest of the cranial nerve functions were normal including normal eye movements. She was unable to stand from the squatting position without support. Blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg. The rest of the examination was normal.
Investigations on presentation are summarized in Table . Serum potassium remained less than 3 mmol/l persistently despite replacement. There was metabolic alkalosis. Serum cortisol throughout the day was over 1000 nmol/L. Free T4 was 1.04 ng/dL (0.89–1.76) with TSH 0.116 mIU/L (0.5–4.7) whereas LH and FSH levels were low (< 0.007 IU/L and < 0.03 IU/L respectively).
Cortisol day curve prior to surgery is shown in Table .
MRI pituitary showed a heterogeneously enhancing mass in the sellar region (4.7 cm × 1.9 cm × 5.3 cm) extending to the suprasellar region with high T1 fluid level. The pituitary gland was not seen separately . Features were in favour of a pituitary tumour with bleeding into it. She underwent trans-sphenoidal excision of the tumour 8 days after presentation. Histology was compatible with a pituitary neuroendocrine tumour. On H&E staining, there were cells with basophilic, granular cytoplasm and round nuclei and cells with homogeneous pink cytoplasm. The Ki 67 index was < 1% and p53 staining was 3%. Immunohistochemical staining with ACTH revealed margination of ACTH reactivity to the cell periphery and perinuclear region. The cytokeratin stain (AE1/AE3) showed ring like positivity in most of the cells. These findings were suggestive of a Crooke cell tumour .
She was started on hydrocortisone and levothyroxine following surgery. Hypokalaemia improved gradually. Her 9 am cortisol after surgery was 261 nmol/L without replacement. Cortisol day curve 2 weeks after surgery without replacement is shown in Table .
She improved gradually with regards to pigmentation, acne, facial appearance and proximal weakness . Blood pressure normalized to 130/80 mmHg. Fasting blood glucose was 98 mg/dl. She regained vision in the left eye with ability to count fingers . Three months after surgery, the MRI pituitary showed no evidence of a residual tumour . Cortisol value in overnight dexamethasone suppression test was < 15 nmol/L. Twenty four hour urinary cortisol excretion was 71.93 μg (55.8–286) and morning cortisol was 181 nmol/L.
Levothyroxine was continued. She was advised to keep stress doses of hydrocortisone. Cyclical oestrogen and progesterone replacement therapy was initiated. The 1 year follow up MRI did not show evidence of tumour recurrence. Twenty four hour urinary free cortisol was 75.07 nmol/24 h (55.5–286). The patient was satisfied with her clinical outcome. The timeline of events are summarised in Table .