A 19-year-old gentleman presented to our centre with complaints of non-productive cough and dyspnoea on exertion for the past 4 months. Clinical examination was unremarkable while a chest X-ray was significant for a small right sided pleural effusion. Laboratory investigations showed neutrophilic leucocytosis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 30 mm/h (0–20 mm/h) and fasting blood sugars within the normal range. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed which showed a soft tissue mass with diffuse infiltration of the right and left atria along with multiple pedunculated masses attached to the lateral and superior wall of the left atrium (, , Video S1 and S2). The mass was also seen to be infiltrating into the ostia of the superior pulmonary veins. On colour Doppler, he also had moderate tricuspid regurgitation with severe pulmonary hypertension.
Computed tomography (CT) chest showed extensive mediastinal infiltration by a soft tissue mass, encasing both bronchi, superior vena cava, pulmonary veins and was seen extending into and enveloping the arch of the aorta . The mass was also seen infiltrating the right atrium and extending through the interatrial septum into the left atrium .
The differential diagnosis considered included lymphoproliferative disorders and other primary cardiac tumours, IFI, sclerosing mediastinitis due to tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, aspergillosis, and clots. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) from the mediastinal mass showed broad, thin walled, aseptate fungal profiles with right angle branching consistent with Mucormycosis .
Blood cultures were sterile. He had no underlying risk factors like iron overload states, diabetes mellitus, intake of steroids, or other immunosuppressive drugs. There was no evidence of neutropenia, while the CD4 count was 670/µL. Serum galactomannan index was 0.63 and there was no histological evidence of aspergillosis. Nasal scrapings were negative for fungal hyphae. He was started on Amphotericin B and was initially considered for surgical debridement, which was later deferred in view of diffuse infiltration into and around the heart and great vessels. During the course of hospitalization, the patient developed right sided hemiparesis, facial palsy of the upper motor neuron type, and loss of vision in the left eye. A CT angiogram of the neck vessels showed occlusion of the left common carotid artery likely due to embolization. Pulmonary vein involvement led to pulmonary oedema with worsening respiratory failure and the patient eventually succumbed to the illness.