A 77-year-old man was transferred to our emergency department by ambulance due to shock; he had a mild disorder of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale, E3V4M6) and restlessness on arrival. He presented with comorbid hyperglycemia and hypertension; however, he had not been medicated for approximately 10 years. He had experienced a low-grade fever and malaise for 5 days before admission, and his oral intake had decreased. He had a blood pressure of 82/60 mmHg, a pulse rate of 116 b.p.m., a respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min, and a body temperature of 36.0°C. The abdominal findings were obscure due to the disorder of consciousness; although he complained of mild pain in the left lower quadrant, no peritoneal sign was evident. The laboratory data on admission showed a plasma glucose concentration of 1,407 mg/dL (normal range, 70–109 mg/dL) and a hemoglobin A1c level of 13.4% (normal range, <6.0%). His sodium concentration was 123 mmol/L (normal range, 138–145 mmol/L), blood urea nitrogen level was 88.2 mg/dL (normal range, 8.0–20.0 mg/dL), creatine level was 3.44 mg/dL (normal range, 0.46–0.79 mg/dL), and white blood cell count was 14,400 cells/μL (normal range, 3,300–8,600 cells/μL). The C-reactive protein concentration was 8.39 mg/dL (normal range, <0.14 mg/dL), and the concentration of procalcitonin was 23.0 ng/mL (normal range, <0.05 ng/mL). The serum osmolality was 356 mOsm/L (normal range, 270–295 mOsm/L). Arterial blood gas data (O2 10 L/min) showed a pH of 7.38, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 188, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 28.5 mmHg, an HCO3− concentration of 16.6 mmol/L, a base excess of −6.4 mmol/L, and a lactate concentration of 41 mg/dL. The analysis was negative for urinary ketones.
Computed tomography without contrast was carried out due to renal insufficiency; it revealed a small amount of HPVG in the left lobe . No remarkable acute mesenteric ischemia finding, such as bowel dilatation or pneumatosis intestinalis, was observed . Hepatic portal venous gas was classified using the classification from a retrospective analysis. In addition, we suspected intestinal ischemia/necrosis due to the high lactate concentration and small amount of HPVG on the CT. We initiated a continuous intravenous infusion of regular human insulin and Ringer’s acetate solution to treat the HHS; however, the pulse increased to 128 b.p.m. The noradrenaline dose was increased from 0 to 0.33 μg/kg/min to maintain the mean blood pressure of 60 mmHg, and the elevated lactate concentration persisted (46 mg/dL) for 5 h postadmission. We administered extracellular fluid at a rate of 2,500 mL/4 h before noradrenaline was started. The pain in the left lower quadrant had worsened and peritoneal signs became evident. Thus, we carried out contrast-enhanced abdominal CT, as intestinal necrosis was suspected. The HPVG had spread within the left lobe compared with the initial CT scan . The CT also revealed remarkable bowel dilatation and pneumatosis intestinalis in the absence of contrast‑induced bowel wall enhancement . No occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery or superior mesenteric vein due to thrombus or embolism was observed. Based on the physical examination, laboratory data, and CT findings, we suspected NOMI, requiring emergency laparotomy. At the initial operation, necrosis was observed within the small bowel, with segmental and skip lesions . The necrotic portion of the small bowel, 170 cm in length, was resected using an automatic suture instrument; the remaining small bowel was 20 cm from the ligament of Treitz and 210 cm from the terminal ileum. No anastomosis was carried out. The initial surgery ended with open abdominal management to allow for a second-look operation on the third hospitalization day, at which time no bowel necrosis was observed; an anastomosis was performed, followed by abdominal closure. We initiated treatment with a vasodilator with continuous intravenous prostaglandin E1 infusion after terminating vasopressor treatment from the third to the seventh hospitalization day, after which the patient was extubated. On the 10th hospitalization day, the patient initiated oral intake. Insulin therapy was substituted by an oral diabetes medication (a dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitor), as his plasma glucose concentration was reduced. He was discharged on the 21st day of hospitalization.