We describe the case of a 69-year-old female admitted to the Infectious Diseases department with a 3-week history of multiple cutaneous masses. She denied fever, chills, headache, neurological deficits, or weight loss. She reported recurrent falls weeks earlier due to antidepressant-related dizziness periods, resulting in several skin wounds on her face and limbs. The first noticed lesion was a tender nodule in the pre-auricular area, which led her to contact her general practitioner, who prescribed doxycycline 100 mg bid for 1 week. As there was a progression of the lesions, with extension to the parotid and cervical regions, she was then medicated with levofloxacin 500 mg qd, without clinical response. She also recalled being in close contact with her pet cat (namely being licked and scratched by him) prior to the appearance of the lesions and denied contact with other animals. Her medical history was remarkable for a history of treated latent tuberculosis, persistent depressive disorder medicated with mirtazapine 30 mg qd and lorazepam 2.5 mg qd, and ulcerative colitis medicated with azathioprine 100 mg qd and mesalazine 3 mg qd. On physical examination, numerous tender cutaneous masses were visible on the right cervical region, frontal area, forearms, and knees bilaterally, some of them with a spontaneous discharge with the presence of yellow grains and loss of integrity of deep skin layers .
Laboratory results showed a normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin 8.2 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume 89.7 fL) and elevated inflammatory markers (C reactive protein 25.59 mg/dL and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 83 mm/h). Serological tests were negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, syphilis, and Bartonella henselae. Cervical computed tomography (CT) showed a 43 × 55 mm cystic lesion medial to the right parotid, as well as smaller abscesses in the submandibular area and posterior pharynx wall . Soft tissue ultrasound confirmed the presence of abscesses in forearms and knees, with the larger one measuring 79 mm in the major axis. Turbid pus was drained percutaneously from both cervical and forearm abscesses. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, acid-fast staining, mycobacterial and fungi culture of this material were negative, as well as blood cultures. Gram staining revealed Gram-positive rods, surrounded by polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Bacteriological culture of the pus from the forearm in CDC Anaerobe Agar with 5% Sheep Blood, kept at 37 ºC, isolated Actinomyces bovis.
Histopathological examination of skin biopsy (performed 2 weeks after antibiotic treatment were started) revealed unspecific inflammatory infiltrates comprising macrophages and neutrophils, without evidence of neoplastic infiltration.
To rule out other foci of actinomycosis, head, thoracic and abdominal CTs were performed, with no further lesions detected. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed generalized hypermetabolic cutaneous lesions in the forehead, submandibular area, neck, forearms, and knees bilaterally, as well as cervical and axillary adenopathies.
Parenteral penicillin G 3 million units 4-h was given for 6 weeks, with significant reduction of the abscesses and recovery of skin integrity . The patient completed 6 months of treatment with oral amoxicillin 1 g tid, with complete resolution of cutaneous lesions supported by follow-up PET scan, not requiring additional surgical correction (considering the significant deep tissue damage due to the infection at diagnosis); Fig. shows the PET scan at the diagnosis and after the treatment. No recurrence of the disease was observed after 18 months of follow-up.