The case involves a 4-month-old female infant, with no pathological symptoms since birth nor perinatal findings, who presented sudden respiratory difficulties after breastfeeding. The infant reportedly died during transport to pediatric emergencies; thus, no resuscitation maneuvers could be performed at the emergencies arrival. As a result of the unclear cause of death, a medicolegal autopsy was ordered by the prosecutor, and the body was thus transferred for autopsy. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for Covid-19 has been performed (postmortem), which was negative.
External examination found marked cyanosis with no evidence of trauma. The body measurements were as follows: bodyweight 7000 g, body length 64 cm, and head circumference 41 cm. Upon opening the chest cavity, the stomach, markedly distended, was occupying much of the left pleural cavity . The left lung was compressed and displaced superiorly, and the heart was also compressed and deviated to the right. This mediastinal deviation was due to an ascension of the stomach into the chest cavity through a 2 × 1.5 cm defect in the posterior left hemidiaphragm . A white creamy material was found (150 mL) within the stomach, supporting the history of breastfeeding when the episode occurred. The right hemidiaphragm was intact with no evidence of laceration or hemorrhage of the diaphragm, and no pleural or pericardial effusions were present. Further examination remarked an ecchymotic appearance of the stomach portion entrapped in the hernia defect suggesting recent strangulation of the stomach. The left lung weighed 30 g, and the right lung weighed 50 g. No heart (weighing 35 g) defect was found at dissection nor any other defect on the remaining autopsy findings.
The histology study showed alveolar collapse with the presence of a polymorphic inflammatory infiltrate of the left lung consistent with atelectasis associated with signs of pulmonary infection. The diaphragm histology study showed normal muscle cells component, while chronic inflammatory changes of the gastric mucosa with vascular congestion were found . No toxic substances were detected in the toxicology study, ruling out the possibility of poisoning which could explain the death.
The cause of death was concluded as a consequence of acute respiratory failure related to a diaphragmatic hernia with severe mediastinal deviation.