A 14-year-old male with history of alopecia areata presented with a 2-month history of progressive fatigue, 5 kg weight loss, muscle weakness, and painful swollen joints. Physical examination revealed arthritis in the wrists and several finger joints, myalgias with initially normal strength, and a small patch of alopecia on his head. He had no rash, and his lungs were clear. He underwent an extensive evaluation for malignancy, infections, and systemic rheumatic diseases. Evaluation was notable for cytopenias (nadir leukocytes 2.7 × 109/L, lymphocytes 0.9 × 109/L, hemoglobin 10.5 g/dL, platelets 137 × 109/L), but examination of the bone marrow was normal. Anti-platelet antibodies were not detected. Parvovirus titers demonstrated past exposure. He had intermittently elevated muscle enzymes (AST 83 U/L [reference range 0–50 U/L], aldolase 10.9 U/L [reference range 3.3–9.7 U/L], CK 318 U/L [reference range 30–225 U/L], LDH 694 U/L [reference range 0–337 U/L]), and normal von Willebrand factor antigen at initial presentation.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his pelvis and proximal thighs revealed both myositis and fasciitis . Examination of his hands showed no cutaneous disease . Computed tomography of the chest was normal . A muscle biopsy from his left quadricep muscle demonstrated findings consistent with inflammatory myopathy similar to dermatomyositis . The patchy distribution of myositis found on MRI and muscle histology correlated with his mild myositis on exam. A myositis autoantibody panel revealed high positive anti-MDA5 antibodies but no other specific antibodies. Intermittent, asymptomatic high-grade second-degree heart block was identified via electrocardiogram and telemetry . Cardiac laboratory evaluation was notable for transiently elevated N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide 820 pg/mL [reference range 0–240 pg/mL], but troponin I ES was normal. No additional cardiac testing was done.
He was diagnosed with JIIM and started on oral methotrexate (15 mg weekly) and oral prednisone (20 mg daily). After 2 weeks of treatment, he continued to have active myositis. Therefore, he was started on intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g weekly) in addition to increased oral methotrexate (25 mg weekly) and oral prednisone (40 mg daily). One month into therapy, he had mild improvement in his myalgias and improvement in his heart block from second- to first-degree. His cytopenias resolved and muscle enzymes improved but remained slightly elevated. His von Willibrand factor antigen was now mildly elevated. Pulmonary function testing was normal with DLCO of 72%. Monthly intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was added due to persistent weakness and myalgias. His myositis improved more significantly with the addition of IVIG, allowing tapering and eventual discontinuation of the corticosteroids. Five months into treatment, the patient continues to lack the cutaneous or pulmonary features characteristically associated with anti-MDA5 seropositivity. His arthritis has resolved, strength is normal, and muscle enzymes have normalized. His most recent pulmonary function tests were again normal with an improved DLCO of 83%.