A 40-year-old Japanese male patient presented with acute paraplegia after extending his trunk during bathing. Before onset, he was doing well without any paralysis. He had untreated diabetes. The patient was admitted to a local hospital and then transferred to our department for surgery.
On admission, the patient was awake and alert, and did not complain of either headache or neck pain. There were no signs or family history of von Hippel–Lindau disease. Initial physical examination revealed that muscle strength and sensation of his upper extremities were normal. There was complete loss of sensation to pinprick below the 7th thoracic vertebral level (T7) including the perineal region; however, touch sense was preserved except for the feet bilaterally. There was complete motor loss in his right lower extremity and severe weakness in his left lower extremity, which had a manual muscle testing grade of from 1 to 2. Patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes were absent bilaterally. There was no apparent Babinski reflex.Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the spinal cord revealed a syrinx extending from the bulbs to the lumbar spinal cord, and intramedullary hemorrhage . An intramedullary mass lesion was detected at the level of T8 in a gadolinium enhanced-MR image . Spinal angiography revealed an intramedullary tumor stain at the level of T8 with a feeding artery branch from an intercostal artery into the tumor and a dilated and tortuous draining vein mainly located on the dorsal surface of the spinal cord .
Therefore we diagnosed the problem as intramedullary hemorrhage caused by the hemangioblastoma. We planned to perform tumor extirpation as elected surgery in the subacute stage of hemorrhage, and we decided to wait for at least 3 to 4 weeks after the onset.
After admission, the patient showed slight motor and sensory recovery. The patient was treated conservatively with physiotherapy under hospitalization. One month after the onset, he could extend his right knee and ankle, and he recovered sensation to pinprick on his trunk.
One month after the onset, the patient underwent surgery. Under general anesthesia, a T7–T9 laminectomy followed by extirpation of the intramedullary hemangioblastoma was performed. The tumor was completely removed. Pathological findings revealed a typical hemangioblastoma. At his final follow-up visit, the patient showed no apparent neurological recovery.