A 55-year-old man had undergone initial tumor resection for a parasagittal meningioma, defined as World Health Organization (WHO) grade 1, at another hospital . He had no significant medical history or family history of meningioma. After gamma knife radiosurgery for recurrence at the age of 61 years, a second resection had been performed at 65 years of age due to progressive tumor growth with histological transformation to a WHO grade 2 atypical meningioma . At 68 years of age, he had been treated again with stereotactic radiosurgery for local recurrence. Due to tumor regrowth, he was referred to our hospital for a third surgery at 71 years of age . On preoperative physical examination, he showed mild paralysis of the right lower limb. Manual muscle testing (MMT) of the right lower limb showed grade 4. His postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological specimen of the tumor indicated a diagnosis of malignant progression to anaplastic meningioma, WHO grade 3, with overt anaplasia and a high Ki-67 index (,). Postoperative adjuvant radiation therapy was administered at a dose of 54 Gy. Two years later, a fourth surgical resection was required with progressive gait disturbance, and the patient was again diagnosed with an anaplastic meningioma (–). After the surgery, his paralysis of the right lower limb worsened to MMT grade 3. With rehabilitation, his paralysis improved MMT grade4. He was able to walk with a cane and lead a largely independent life. Another recurrent lesion progressed toward the eloquent motor area at the posterior aspect of the tumor removal cavity ; however, surgical resection of the lesion was associated with a high risk of postoperative paralysis, and additional radiotherapy was ineffective. Considering that standard therapies were not viable, the patient wanted to explore the possibility of targeted molecular therapy. After thoroughly explaining that discovering a new treatment for meningioma with our panel analysis has yet to be established, he requested our genetic testing. Therefore, we performed comprehensive panel testing to elucidate whether this refractory meningioma possesses actionable gene aberrations suitable for targeted molecular therapies.
We conducted comprehensive panel sequencing using TOP after obtaining the appropriate informed consent from the patient. The study was performed in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the ethics committee of the University of Tokyo. The method of analysis has been reported previously . Briefly, this unique custom-made panel includes DNA and RNA components. The TOP DNA panel targets 464 genes to detect single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), small insertions/deletions, and copy number variations (CNVs). The TOP RNA panel detects 463 fusion genes using the junction capture method. In addition, various probes detect single nucleotide polymorphisms. By comparing tumor and normal reads, chromosomal gains and losses are visualized as a chromosomal copy number graph (, ). The tumor resected in the fourth surgery (Tumor S4) was mainly used to detect actionable gene aberrations, whereas the tumor resected in the third surgery (Tumor S3) was used for comparisons with Tumor S4. The detected genetic and transcriptional alterations were reviewed and classified according to the level of evidence and potential treatments by an expert panel consisting of physicians, pathologists, genetic counselors, molecular biologists, and cancer genome researchers.
Both tumors were sequenced at a high depth in the TOP DNA panel (mean depth: 1196.4× for Tumor S3 and 1390.5× for Tumor S4). No significant difference was found in tumor purity (53.0% for Tumor S3 and 55.0% for Tumor S4, respectively; data not shown). Also, tumor cell compositions were similar in both histopathological images. We identified five non-synonymous mutations and one splice-site mutation in Tumor S4, with a detection threshold of variant allele frequency (VAF) > 5% . The TRAF7 mutation c.1168G > A (p.Gly390Arg), a frequent mutational hotspot in meningiomas, was detected. ARID1A, a component of the SWI/SNF complex that acts as a driver in high-grade meningiomas, was also mutated. We also found multiple chromosomal copy number losses, including 1p/22q co-deletion . A 1q gain, which is associated with poor outcomes in meningiomas, was also observed. In addition, we identified various genetic CNVs, including CDKN2A deletions . TOP RNA testing revealed no fusion transcripts. We could not identify actionable gene aberrations that could be potential targets of approved drugs or clinical trials in expert panel reviews.
Next, we compared the genomic abnormalities of Tumor S3 with Tumor S4 to explore the differences that emerged during tumor progression. Tumor S4 showed six non-synonymous mutations with a VAF > 5%, whereas these mutations were detected with VAF less than 5% in Tumor S3. One mutation that was not detected in Tumor S4 was detected in S3 with VAF > 5% . Genetic CNVs, including those in CDKN2A, were partially shared throughout tumor progression without notable changes . Although the profile of the chromosomal CNVs of Tumor S3 was similar to that of Tumor S4, some chromosomal changes, such as the gain of 1q, 6p, and 14q and the loss of 4q and 10p, were additionally observed in Tumor S4 , suggesting that Tumor S4 exhibits a pattern of branched clonal evolution from Tumor S3 . Unfortunately, as no suitable molecularly targeted therapeutic agent exists for the patient’s course, conservative follow-up was continued despite the continuously growing tumor.