In 2020, an 85-year-old woman presented to her family doctor with a complaint of anal pain that had persisted for months. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 53 × 58 × 75 mm mass on the left side of the rectum. She was admitted to our hospital for further examination and treatment. She had a medical history of open appendicectomy for appendicitis, open total hysterectomy for uterine fibroids, femoral head replacement for right femoral neck fracture, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. None of her family had a clear history of cancer. A hematological examination showed no elevation in tumor or inflammation markers, with the exception of CA125 (55 U/mL). On visual examination, there were no obvious abnormalities of the anus. On digital anorectal examination, an elastic hard mass was palpated on the left side of the rectum, and tenderness was present in the same region. Colonoscopy showed submucosal elevation and reddening of the mucosal surface in the central and lower rectum, but no obvious exposure of the tumor to the mucosal surface . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 53 × 58 × 75 mm mass lesion on the left side of the rectum with well-defined margins and heterogeneous contrast enhancement. Fluid accumulation was observed in the center of the mass, which suggested necrotic tissue . No lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis was observed. Contrast-enhanced pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the tumor was continuous with the muscular propria on the left side of the rectum . According to the imaging findings, we suspected that the tumor was a gastrointestinal stromal tumor, and we planned to obtain a pathological diagnosis by endoscopic ultrasound fine-needle aspiration. However, since the anal pain worsened rapidly and was uncontrollable despite the introduction of opioids, we decided to perform early surgery without a preoperative pathological diagnosis. A laparoscopic Hartmann’s operation was planned.
After administering general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the lithotomy position and underwent laparoscopic surgery using 5 ports. As in rectal surgery, the retroperitoneum was dissected caudally from the promontorium using a medial approach, and the rectal mesentery was mobilized. The tumor was located caudal to the peritoneal reversal and occupied the pelvic cavity . The tumor was so large that the rectum was pushed to the right side, and the border was unclear due to the surrounding inflammation .
Therefore, dissection of the right side of the tumor was so difficult that the right ureter was misidentified and accidentally separated. The ventral side of the tumor was firmly adherent to the bladder, and the tumor was damaged at the region, causing the leakage of dark red tumor contents . The lower rectum with 6 cm of the anal verge was dissected using a linear stapler (Signia™, Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan) . The rectum was elevated outside the body, and the sigmoid colon was resected at a distance of 10 cm from the tumor. A sigmoid colon colostomy was constructed in the left lower abdomen. Finally, the right ureter was reconstructed, and a double-J catheter was placed. The operation time was 6 h and 3 min, and the amount of blood loss was small. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 25th postoperative day.
Macroscopic observation of the resected specimen revealed that the rectum and sigmoid colon were 300 mm in length. On the serous aspect, there was a 110 × 83 × 30 mm solid tumor with intraoperative damage and no obvious exposure to the mucosal surface . The cut surface was white solid with necrosis and hemorrhage in the center . Histopathologically, tumor cell growth was mainly observed in the muscularis propria to the subserosal layer of the rectum with inflammatory cell infiltration, hemorrhage, and necrotic tissue at the center . The tumor cells were composed of pleomorphic spindle cells and giant cells, and many typical and atypical mitotic figures were observed . On immunostaining, the tumor cells were focally positive for cluster of differentiation (CD) 117/KIT, α-smooth muscle actin, AE1/AE3, and EMA and negative for CD34, DOG1, h-caldesmon, desmin, S100 protein, and CD45. Ki-67/MIB1 proliferation index was very high . Immunostaining indicated that the tumor was composed of highly heterogeneous cells with no specific differentiation traits. Therefore, the diagnosis of UPS was made with the exclusion of diseases such as epithelial malignant tumor, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, melanoma, atypical lymphoma, and other undifferentiated/unclassified sarcoma. Lymphatic and venous invasion of the tumor was observed, but no lymph node metastasis was found.
Contrast-enhanced CT performed 2 months after surgery showed bilateral pelvic lymph node enlargement and recurrence . Considering the patient’s age, we performed radiotherapy (50 Gy/25 Fr targeting the pelvic region). At present, 20 months have passed since the surgery, and 16 months have passed since the completion of radiotherapy. CT shows that the recurrent lymph nodes have disappeared, and no new distant metastasis has been observed .