A 42 year-old Italian man diagnosed with HIV-1 infection since 1993, was admitted at our hospital in April 2011 complaining about an acute pain at the right zygoma. At medical examination he had a vegetated lesion of the gingiva, arising from the superior maxilla, and an enlargement of right supraclavear lymph nodes. Examination of the other organs was normal. CD4+ cell count was 243/mm3 and HIV-1 RNA in plasma was 68 copies/mL.
At clinical history, cutaneous and pulmonary KS had been diagnosed in 1993 and at that time successfully treated with interferon alfa and chemotherapy. CD4+ cell count nadir was 52/mm3 and hepatitis C virus coinfection was documented. In recent years, only occasional bacterial pneumonia had occurred. cART was started in 1997 and changed to various regimens up to 2008, since when the current cART based on co-formulated tenofovir-emtricitabine, raltegravir, and darunavir/ritonavir had been prescribed. This salvage therapy was chosen after HIV genotypic resistance test that documented mutation associated with multidrug resistance. CD4+ cell count had stably risen above 200/mm3 since December 2008 and HIV-1 RNA level was constantly below 500 copies/mL since October 2009.
During hospitalization a total body computerized tomography (CT) showed multiple nodular lesions in both lungs, minimal right pneumothorax, pathological soft tissue in the right maxillar sinus, and enlargement of supraclavear lymph nodes. CT scan of the brain was normal. Biopsy specimen from gingival lesion revealed squamous cell carcinoma, while tissue taken from supraclavear lymph node showed histological features of KS. HHV8-DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative on blood. Four cycles of chemotherapy using liposomial doxorubicin (20 mg/m2) were performed, and after only two cycles an improvement of CT findings was documented. Then, ten sessions of radiotherapy on maxillofacial site for carcinoma were performed (total dose 30 Gy).
In October 2011, the patient showed bilateral spontaneous pneumothorax and was treated with chest drainage. After 25 days, he presented generalized seizures. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed three focal brain lesions, two that involved the right frontal lobe (20 and 14 mm) and one the right cerebellum hemisphere (16 mm). On FLAIR T2-weighted images the lesions of the right frontal lobe were hyperintense, with hypointense halo and surrounding edema. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed restricted diffusion and low apparent diffusion coefficients (ADCs) in the lesions (range avg 0,458-0,566x10(-3)mm(2)/s). A new total body CT displayed a worsening of the previously described pulmonary lesions and the development of new intestinal lesions. A multi-disciplinary consultation excluded the possibility to carry out a cerebral biopsy, because of the lesion high risk of bleeding. CD4+ cell count was 142/mm3 and HIV-1 RNA in plasma was 225 copies/mL. HHV8-DNA by PCR on blood was repeatedly negative and IgG anti-Toxoplasma gondii antibodies were absent. Nevertheless, empiric anti-Toxoplasma treatment with pyrimetamine plus sulfadiazine, combined with steroids and phenobarbital, was prescribed. Brain MRI after 26 days of treatment showed worsening of the CNS disorder, with the appearance of a new lesion in the left frontal lobe displaying the same radiological characteristics. There was no change in signal intensity or size of the lesions already described in the previous examination. The lesions appeared as inhomogeneous masses, hyperintense on T1- and on T2-weighted images (Figure A, B, C), with halo hypointense sign and surrounding edema, minimal mass effect and faintly ring enhancement. DWI of the lesions showed restricted diffusion (Figure D) and lower ADC (avg 0,285×10(-3)mm(2)/s). Thallium-201 single-photon emission computed tomography (201Tl SPECT) of the brain did not show an increased uptake in the brain. 18 F-2-Fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) of the neck, thorax and abdomen showed hyperperfused tissue in the right cervical lymph nodes, skeleton, right adrenal gland, lungs, right maxillar sinus, duodenum. On the 1st of December a cycle of paclitaxel (100 mg/m2) was administered, and then ten sessions of whole brain radiotherapy were performed (total dose 30 Gy). At the end of December a massive right spontaneous pneumothorax occurred and pleural drainage was necessary again. The patient died on January 6th, 2012.
A full autopsy, including neuropathological examination, was performed. Tissue samples were taken from all organs. KS was found in the lungs, the ampulla of Vater, the pancreas, the duodenum, the adrenal gland and the cerebrum. Macroscopic examination revealed hemorrhagic nodules, variegated in appearance, with cystic degeneration in the organs involved. Multiple bilateral areas of consolidation with cavitation and necrotizing nodular lesions were present in the lungs. Cavities were extended to the pleura. Coronal section of the brain showed multiple hemorrhagic nodules with swelling of the cerebrum without displacement of midline structures. Lesions were localized in the frontal lobes at the gray/white matter interface, near the falx and in the cerebellum. Microscopic appearance of the tumor nodules was composed of monomorphic spindle cells arranged in ill defined fascicles (Figure A) and separated by slit like vessels containing erythrocytes. Brain parenchyma of both cerebellar and cerebral hemispheres was invaded by the tumor cells directly or through the perivascular space (Figure B). Neoplastic nodules showed hemorrhagic necrosis with pigmented macrophages (Figure C). Immunohistochemical staining of the tumour cells revealed strong expression of CD34 (Figure D). Real time PCR assays revealed HHV8 DNA sequences in the tissue samples from the duodenum, the lungs and the brain. Quantitative evaluation of HHV8 DNA in the lungs, the Vater’s papilla and the brain showed: 15872 copies/106 cells, 7789 copies/106 cells and 2316 copies/106 cells respectively.