A 59-year-old woman presented with a palpable mass with occasional pain in her right breast for 3 months. She had received a silicone oil injection in both breasts over 30 years ago. She subsequently underwent CE-MRI, which showed a 3.1-cm irregular enhanced mass and a 1.1-cm circumscribe enhanced mass in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast . The former mass revealed a persistent dynamic enhancement curve (type 1), and the latter was enhanced with a plateau (type 2). Silicone-induced inflammatory masses and breast cancer were also suspected. She was then transferred to our hospital for an MRI-guided biopsy.
Due to the tight schedule of MRI examinations in our hospital, the CE-MRI-guided biopsy needed to wait for a month. After a discussion with the patient, we decided to perform CESM to examine whether a new CESM-guided biopsy could be used as an alternative to an MRI-guided biopsy.
The CESM (Pristina; GE Healthcare, Buc, France) examination was routinely performed with intermittent exposure (approximately 2-s intervals) to low and high energy during a single breast-compressed position. The image acquisitions were obtained in the sequence of craniocaudal and lateral views of both breasts within 2–6 min after the start of a single bolus injection of non-ionic contrast medium (Omnipaque 350 mg I/ml; GE Healthcare, Dublin, Ireland) at a rate of 3 ml/s for a total dose of 1.5 ml/kg body weight via an intravenous catheter inserted into the forearm prior to the examination. In the same position of the breast, a low-energy mammogram (LM) and recombine enhanced image (REI) were provided for interpretation. LM showed numerous silicone droplets with rim calcifications diffusely in both breasts . The masses in the right breast could not be identified. However, the REI revealed an enhanced irregular mass and circumscribed mass in the right breast , which were compatible with the CE-MRI findings. CESM-Bx was then arranged a day after the CESM examination.
In correlation to the CESM, we marked the approximate locations of the targets with a red pen on the skin. We utilized the same mammographic unit and injection protocol of contrast medium prior to the CESM-Bx. Vacuum-assisted biopsy (7-gauge biopsy needle with Encor biopsy system; Bard) was used with the patient lying in decubitus position, and the biopsy needle was set up in a vertical approach from lateral to medial into the breast. Two minutes after the start of contrast medium injection, the marked target was localized and compressed within the biopsy window. With stereotactic localization of the three imaging exposures at +15°, 0°, and −15°, the computer provided the co-ordinations of the chosen targets. After confirmation that the needle was in front of the target, it was fired through the lesion, and four multidirectional suction samplings were performed in complete clockwise allocation . The biopsy was performed on the two enhanced masses individually, and it took 9 min from the start of the contrast medium injection.
The specimens from the two targets were separately sent for pathological study. Microscopic examinations revealed invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) with an irregular enhanced mass and fibroadenoma for the circumscribed enhanced mass. The patient finally underwent a total mastectomy, confirming invasive lobular carcinoma and fibroadenoma.