An 83-year-old man (weight: 65 kg, height: 167 cm) was scheduled to undergo open reduction and internal fixation of a pertrochanteric fracture of the right femur. His past medical history was nonspecific. He had no history of allergy to drugs or food. Preoperative assessment including blood biochemistry, chest X-ray, and electrocardiography showed results within the normal range. Two hours before arriving at the operating room, the patient was administered 1 g of cefotetan sodium (Yamatetan®, Jeilpharm, Korea) intravenously (IV). Preoperative skin test to the Yamatetan® was negative.
Upon arriving at the operating room, the patient was monitored using noninvasive blood pressure (BP) measurement, electrocardiography, and pulse oximetry (SpO2) equipment. The pre-anesthetic BP, heart rate (HR), and SpO2 values were 172/108 mmHg, 94 beats/min, and 95%, respectively.
Spinal anesthesia was administered in the left lateral decubitus position using hyperbaric bupivacaine (13 mg) and fentanyl (10 μg) while oxygen was supplied at 6 L/min via a facial mask. After 5 min, sensory blockade of T10 was checked. For sedation, 1 mg of IV midazolam was administered. During the 50 min of the spinal anesthesia, that is 25 min after the start of surgery, the systolic blood pressure was between 110 and 120 and pulse rate was maintained in the early 100 s, and these were stable. By then, the patient had received 0.4–0.5 L of crystalloid (plasma solution), the estimated blood loss was about 50 ml, and the urine output was about 1.5 ml/kg/h.
After 25 min from the start of surgery, BP, HR, SpO2 values were 116/72 mmHg, 94 beats/min and 100%, respectively. The HES 130/0.4 (6% Volulyte®, Fresenius Kabi Korea, Korea) infusion was started through a peripheral IV route to replace the expected post-operative bone bleeding and an additional 2 mg of IV midazolam was administered. Five minutes after the administration of 50 ml of HES, the BP suddenly dropped to 84/52 mmHg, and the HR increased to 111 beats/min. SpO2 was reduced to 95%. To restore the BP, 100 μg of IV phenylephrine was administered immediately. Subsequently, the patient exhibited confusion and agitation. For further sedation, 1 mg of midazolam was administered, but the patient did not calm down and tried to move his fixed arms. Skin rash was observed on the face and neck first, which then spread to the entire body. The rechecked BP, HR, and SpO2 after phenylephrine administration, were 84/45 mmHg, 117 beats/min, and 97%, respectively. Additional 100 μg of IV phenylephrine bolus was administered. Immediately, the test for skin sensitivity to Yamatetan® was re-performed, and the result was negative. The patient’s agitation was reduced and the vital signs were maintained after multiple phenylephrine bolus were administered. The surgery was nearing completion; hence, general anesthesia was not considered.
Clinical signs including hypotension, tachycardia, and mild hypoxemia, as well as the appearance of a skin rash were consistent with the clinical criteria for an anaphylactic reaction. Other antibiotics or blood components were not administered during the surgery, and the anaphylactic reaction occurred within 5 min of HES exposure. The infusion of HES was terminated within 10 min, as it was considered the cause of the anaphylactic reaction. Subsequently, 5 mg of IV dexamethasone was administered. The total amount of IV injected phenylephrine was 400 μg. The patient received 1 L of the crystalloid (plasma solution) and 50 ml of the colloid (HES). Estimated blood loss and urine output were 100 ml and 200 ml, respectively. The total anesthesia time was 2 hours and the operation time was 46 min.
In the recovery room, laboratory tests including immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels and tryptase assessment were performed. The patient was taken chest X-ray due to observation of mild hypoxemia; however, the radiologist interpreted no unusual findings compared with the preoperative examination. The skin rash on the entire body persisted while the patient stayed in the recovery room; hence, IV dexamethasone 7.5 mg and chlorpheniramine 6 mg were administered along with 800 ml of crystalloid fluid for symptom relief.
The patient was transferred to the general ward with stable vital signs (BP: 111/78 mmHg, HR: 96 beats/min, SpO2: 100%) after close observation in the recovery room for 75 min. The patient’s urine output was sufficient (1–2 ml/kg/h) for 24 h after operation.
The result of the skin test to detect a reaction against HES performed on the next day was negative. Testing of a blood sample drawn in the operating room revealed the presence of 13.9 ng/ml of tryptase (normal range: < 11.4 ng/ml) and 211 IU/ml of total IgE, as determined using paper radioimmunosorbent test (PRIST) (normal range: 0–100 IU/ml). On the twenty-first day after the surgery, the patient was discharged without any complications.