A 58-year-old man presented to the emergency room with 5 h of chest pain, which now has been aggravated (profuse sweating) and persistent for 0.5 h. An ECG was obtained in the emergency room which showed a sinus rhythm at a rate of 64 bpm, tall and positively symmetrical T waves in leads V2–6, J point depression in leads V4–6 (2- to 3-mm) with upsloping ST-segment depression and in leads II, III, aVF with ST-segment depression 1-mm, suggesting acute myocardial ischemia. Troponin-I was increased, which was suggestive of acute extensive anterior wall MI. The patient was immediately transferred to the catheterization laboratory for percutaneous coronary intervention. However, the patient refused underwent percutaneous coronary intervention. According to acute MI, oxygen inhalation, ECG monitoring and conventional drug therapies were adopted. 1.5 h later, the chest pain relieved and the ECG demonstrated the amplitude of tall and positively symmetrical T waves was slightly deceased in leads V2–6. There still existed J point depression in leads V3–6 with upsloping ST-segment depression. Obvious q waves appeared in leads V3–5, indicating that it has entered the acute phase MI. Then, the ECG recorded 5 h after admission showed that q waves in leads V3–6 increased, the T wave, the J point depression and ST segments in V2–6 leads reverted to normal, indicating the pseudo-improvement of ST-T change. The next day, the ECG revealed ST-segment elevation of leads V2–6 followed by T wave inversion, consistent with an ECG evolution from acute to subacute phase in patient with ST segment elevation MI (a large area). The patient agreed underwent coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention. A coronary angiogram demonstrated a 100% occlusion of midshaft LAD artery. The patient and his family members chose drug therapy. The next day after coronary angiography, the ECG revealed the amplitude of ST-segment elevation decreased in leads V3–5. The patient revealed symptom-free 5 days after admission and then was discharged from the hospital.