A 37-year-old Ecuadorian male (Subject A) with familiar history of bradycardia; his father, two paternal aunts, and paternal grandmother underwent cardiac pacemaker implantation because of the bradycardia. Additionally, a cousin (father of subject B) was diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and a half-brother from his father's side suffers an unknown cardiac condition . The patient went to the physician at the first time when he was 23 years old because of symptoms such as tachycardia, dizziness, shortness of breath, and a feeling of fainting at any time of the day. He was referred to the cardiologist, and electro and echocardiogram were performed. The diagnoses of WPW and HCM were based on the electrocardiogram, which showed a sinus rhythm with a short P-R interval accompanied by a prolonged QRS complex with a delta wave. A complete right bundle branch block with a significant increase in R wave voltages in the anterior, septal, low lateral, and high lateral (DI and aVL) regions was observed. A deep T wave inversion was identified in this same plane, and a low level in the segment ST-T V3-V6 . The echocardiogram confirmed a structurally normal heart. Carvedilol was initially prescribed at a dose of 6.25 mg per day. However, four months prior to the publication of this case report, the dose increased to 12.5 mg daily.
Fourteen years later after the initial diagnosis, a genomic test was performed.
Moreover, 3 years ago, his cousin's son, an 18-year-old Ecuadorian male (Subject B) with the same familiar history of cardiac conditions , was referred to the cardiologist after suffering from migraines and tachycardia at any time of the day, especially after a sudden movement. Subject B underwent an electrocardiogram, and the results showed a systolic overload compatible with hypertrophic myocardiopathy, no association with WPW was found. Bisoprolol was prescribed at a dose of 1.25 mg daily, and the subject reported a significant reduction in the frequency of migraines. Similar to Subject A, a genomic screening was done. The timeline regarding subject A and B is presented in .
Patients A and B self-identified as “mestizo” and signed the informed consent to participate in the study.
A peripheral blood sample was collected in an EDTA tube. The DNA was extracted with PureLink Genomic DNA Mini Kit (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer's protocol .
The DNA quantity and purity were measured by spectrophotometry and fluorometric methods; the quality was analyzed with an agarose gel. The sample was then diluted to 5ng/μL according to the sequencing protocol.
The genomic procedure was performed at Centro de Investigación Genética y Genómica, using the commercially available kit TruSight Cardio kit (Illumina), covering 174 genes (575 kb of cumulative target region size) with known association with 17 Inherited Cardiac Conditions (47 genes for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy). The samples were processed according to the manufacturer's protocol and run for 315 cycles in MiSeq System (Illumina).
For ancestral proportion analyses, PCR amplification was done with 46 ancestral informative INDEL markers in one multiplex reaction, according to Pereira et al. . Fragment separation and detection were executed on the 3,500 Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The results were collected on Data Collection v 3.3 and analyzed in Gene Mapper v. 5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Genomic data analysis was done following the pipeline: 1) the alignment to the reference genome (hg38) and variant caller with DRAGEN Enrichment v. 3.9.5; 2) the annotation with Annotation Engine v.3.15; 3) the consequence prediction by PolyPhen and Sift; 4) the variants were filtered in the software Variant Interpreter v.2.16.1.300
The ancestral inference analysis was done with STRUCTURE v.2.3.4 using the option for an admixture model.