In September 2010, a 58-year-old male palm oil worker from Perak state, western Peninsular Malaysia, presented with a one-week history of fever and right-sided neck swelling. No other systemic symptoms were reported and he gave no history of weight loss. On admission to hospital, his temperature was 38°C and examination revealed a 5 cm × 4 cm mass on the right side of his neck with overlying erythema. 2 mL of pus was aspirated from this fluctuant mass prior to more definitive irrigation and debridement. Though the patient had no known co-morbidities his fasting blood glucose was found to be elevated at 9.9 mmol/L.
On day 2 of admission there was preliminary identification of B. pseudomallei from the aspirate. He was commenced on intravenous (IV) ceftazidime 2 g 3×/day and subcutaneous insulin for newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus. Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen was performed which revealed micro-abscesses in the liver and spleen. These lesions were attributed to infection with B. pseudomallei. The patient completed a 2-week course of ceftazidime and was discharged on doxycycline 100 mg 2×/day and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (cotrimoxazole) 400 mg/ 80 mg 2 tab 2×/day.
One month after discharge he was seen in clinic with a 10-day history of new left sided neck swelling. On examination, there was a 4 cm × 4 cm mass and fine needle aspirate (FNA) was performed. There was no growth from the specimen sent. The patient continued on doxycycline and co-trimoxazole with no improvement in the left sided-neck swelling.
Three months after initial presentation he was re-admitted and irrigation, debridement and biopsy of the neck abscess and left cervical lymph node was performed. While awaiting biopsy results he was commenced on intravenous imipenem and co-trimoxazole was increased to 4 tabs 2×/day. Doxycycline was ceased.
Biopsy of the neck abscess showed a partly ulcerated wedge of skin with pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia of the epidermis. The underlying dermis was infiltrated by aggregates of lymphoplasmacytic cells admixed with neutrophils and eosinophils, mostly congregating around the blood vessels and adnexae. In areas, necrotizing epithelioid granulomata were seen. Langhan’s giant cells were also present. Histochemistry stains with Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) and Gomori Methanamine Silver did not reveal any acid-fast bacilli or fungal organisms. The specimen from the lymph node was revealed to be a wedge of inflamed granulation tissue.
Unfortunately, despite the need for a full microbiological diagnosis, mycobacterial culture was not requested on this specimen. However, the pus and stool cultured Salmonella species. This was later identified as Salmonella enterica serovar Stanley via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the pus. The patient did give a history of eating imported nuts. As he had full dentures, poor oral hygiene was not thought to be a contributing factor to this infection. He received imipenem 500 mg 4×/day for 10 days followed by ciprofloxacin 750 mg 2×/day. He was discharged on this and co-trimoxazole was continued. Of note, trans-thoracic echocardiogram did not reveal any vegetation on the heart valves. CT of the neck, thorax and abdomen showed that the initial right-sided neck collection had resolved, while there was a new collection in the posterior region of the left side of the neck. In addition, the liver and splenic abscesses appeared unchanged. He was negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
Despite treatment for the S. stanley infection, and continuation of high dose cotrimoxazole, there remained a residual left-sided neck collection. Antibiotics were ceased and a repeat FNA was performed a week after cessation of antibiotics to investigate for tuberculosis. When this did not identify an aetiological agent, a biopsy was performed which showed only acute on chronic inflammation. The ZN stain and mycobacterial culture were negative but PCR identified M. tuberculosis. The patient was commenced on isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol in combined tablet form to treat tuberculous lymphadenitis. His HBA1C was 7.1% on oral hypoglycaemic agents.
At review, after 1 month of treatment for tuberculosis, the left neck swelling had resolved but CT Abdomen did not show any change in the liver or splenic lesions. He completed 6 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment with no recurrence of symptoms but, despite treatment for B. pseudomallei, S. stanley and M. tuberculosis, there was no change in the liver or splenic lesions on repeated imaging.
At follow-up, more than 4 months after completion of all antibiotics, the patient was clinically well with no fevers or recurrence of neck swelling.