A 16-year-old female patient was admitted to the emergency room with severe epistaxis and increased bleeding for 5 days. The patient was diagnosed with SLE 6 months ago due to facial malar rash, oral ulcer, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), low complement levels and positive anti-Smith antibody. The laboratory test results revealed blood count, urinalysis, immunology and biochemistry . SLE disease activity index 2000 (SLEDAI-2K) of the patient was 6. She had not taken hydralazine, thioridazine or propylthiouracil, known to induce SLE and/or AAV. The patient was initially given intravenous methylprednisolone 80 mg per day for 3 times. After leaving the hospital, she was treated with prednisone 40 mg daily with subsequent dose tapering, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) 0.2 g twice daily, and intravenous cyclophosphamide (CYC) 0.4 g half a month until remission was achieved and maintained. However, she stopped taking the medicine when prednisone was tapered to 20 mg.
The intraoral examination identified a 1*2 cm ulcer on the hard palate. Laboratory assessments revealed severe pancytopenia, elevated ESR and serum ferritin, decreased serum levels of complement C3 and C4, proteinuria and hepatic insufficiency. Compared to the last hospitalization, anti-Smith antibody turned negative, anti-U1-RNP, anti-SS-A, anti-SS-B and anti-ribosomal P protein (anti-P) antibodies were still positive by line-immunoassay (LIA). Meanwhile, our patient had c-ANCA positivity with a titer of 1:100 (<1:10) by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF). P-ANCA was negative. The titer of anti-PR3-ANCA antibody was >400.00 RU/mL (NR <20 RU/mL) by magnetic particle based chemiluminescent immunoassay (MPCLIA). Anti-MPO-ANCA antibody was <2.00 RU/mL (NR <20 RU/mL). We excluded pancytopenia caused by hematological diseases by performing bone marrow puncture. Cranial computed tomography (CT) scan showed soft tissue densities in paranasal sinuses and nasal cavities, and no bone destruction was found in the maxillary area and oral cavity. Chest CT scan revealed no evidence of numerous pulmonary nodules. SLEDAI-2K was 18.
Based on the above manifestations and examinations, we considered that the patient had recurrence of lupus. We gave methylprednisolone pulse therapy, intravenous immunoglobulin, together with immunosuppressor. The patient’s rash, blood count, liver enzymes, serum levels of complement C3 and C4, and ESR improved, but the palatal ulcer worsened, resulting in perforation of the hard palate . CT showed the palatal perforation . A nasal endoscopic biopsy was performed and histopathology showed an inflammatory polyp with chronic suppurative inflammation and inflammatory granulomatous hyperplasia . The cells within these lesions consist of fibroblasts, epithelioid cells, giant cells, surrounding scattered infiltrates of lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, plasma cells and neutrophils. Palatal perforation, a rare condition, can be seen in infections (eg syphilis, tuberculosis), autoimmune diseases (eg IgG4-RD, GPA), drug abuse (eg cocaine), malignancies (eg oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma, extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma), and trauma., First, the syphilis antibodies and t-spot detection results for the patient were both negative, we ruled out syphilis and tuberculosis. Second, our patient had no previous history of drug abuse and trauma. Third, pathologists did not detect greater than 50 IgG4-positive plasma cells under high-power microscopy in the nasal histopathology. Furthermore, squamous cell carcinoma was not found in the nasal histopathology. Extranodal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma confirmatory histopathological and immunohistochemical tests with features of CD2+, cytoplasmic CD3+, CD56+, and EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER) positivity in situ. So we performed immunohistochemical tests of CD3, CD56, CD2, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD79a, CD8, CD19, CD20, PAX5, TIA-1, Ki-67, EBER, and Granzyme B were negative . According to Chapel Hill Consensus Conference definitions and 2022 ACR/EULAR classification criteria, the clinical, biological, radiological, and histological findings of our patient substantiated the diagnosis of GPA. At follow-up visits, the patient’s anti-PR3-ANCA antibody turned negative and the palatal perforation did not continue to enlarge. The patient was given low-dose maintenance steroid treatment and then referred to the Department of Otolaryngology for the evaluation of surgical repair of palatal perforation.