A 63-year-old male patient had been suffering from long-term neck pain and limb numbness. The dynamic flexion-extension view revealed the C1-C2 instability, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine revealed hypertrophic ossification at the odontoid process, resulting in tight stenosis at C1 level and spinal cord edema . C1 laminectomy and OC fixation using the screw-rod system were performed by an orthopedic surgeon in another hospital. To avoid the risk of VA injury, the surgeon chose occipito-C3-C4 fixation instead of C1-C2 fixation. The patient was discharged after 1 week, but a few days later, he began to experience persistent intolerable dizziness and vomiting. He went to the emergency department of our hospital. Physical examination revealed that his consciousness was clear and alert and had no change in muscle power compared to the status before surgery. He had no fever. However, the blood test showed a slight increase in leukocytosis (11,800 per mm3) and C-reactive protein level (< 5 mg/dl), indicating that the infection was in the early stage. Furthermore, the patient has symptoms of unsteady gait and right-sided dysmetria, suggesting that the patient may have a cerebellar lesion. Computed tomography (CT) further revealed a significant signal enhancement around the occipital screw (arrow in Fig. a) and a hypodense lesion in right cerebellar hemisphere (circled area in Fig. b-d). Although the presence of the screw interfered with CT image, it is still found that the position of the screw was the origin of brain abscess. In addition, the screw of inappropriate length were observed to penetrate through the occipital bone (Supplementary Figure ). Since the CT image showed only a mild patchy enhancement, the lesion is more likely to be a cerebritis rather than a neoplasm. Therefore, we speculated that it should be a central nervous system (CNS) infection, and the patient was initially prescribed broad-spectrum antibiotics, including Vancomycin and Ceftazidime. Although the local metallic implants interfered with the interpretation of MRI, subsequent MRI confirmed the lesion as a 2.5 cm faint ring-enhanced cerebellar abscess based on the T1-weighted images with contrast medium and on the diffusion weighted imaging sequences . A few days later, the patient became drowsier, so we decided to perform emergent external ventricular drainage (EVD) first to divert CSF and release intracranial pressure. When the wall of abscess is firmly formed, a second stage of suboccipital craniectomy will be performed to drain the brain abscess, and the implants will also be readjusted at the same time. One week after EVD surgery, the patient underwent an elective operation to drain the cerebellar abscess, debride the necrotic tissue, and inspect and readjust the hardware. Preoperative CT angiography (CTA) was conducted to evaluate the relationship between the VA and the planned trajectory, and it excluded a high-riding VA, demonstrating a safe trajectory for bilateral C2 transpedicular screws. In addition, the CTA scan also revealed that additional surgical changes in the positions of the left C3 and C4 screws may not be appropriate as it may breach the transverse foramen and damage the VA . Moreover, the CT sagittal images further showed dislodgement of the occipital screw and oversized diameter of the screw hole , indicating the failure of the instruments. Considering that the infectious status was limited to only around the occipital and cerebellar area and the persistent C1-C2 instability, therefore, in addition to the debridement and drainage of the abscess, the next step is to remove the previous hardware and reintroduce the C1 lateral mass and C2 transpedicular screws. In order to avoid the risk of VA injury when removing C3 and C4 screws, we left these screws in position. Next, we enlarged the hole of the right occipital screw and confirmed the abscess by echography. No purulent discharge was found, but necrotic tissue was found and debrided. The C1 lateral mass and C2 transpedicular screws were safely introduced under fluoroscopic guidance without VA damage . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the symptoms of dizziness, unsteady gait, and dysmetria improved gradually. A few days later, the EVD was removed. No pathogens were detected from the final tissue and CSF cultures, antibiotics were prescribed for the patient for 8 weeks, and the patient was discharged uneventfully. An MRI examination at 3 months postoperatively revealed that the cerebellar abscess almost completely subsided .