The proband (II: 3, male, 57 years old) had a history of diabetes mellitus and found multiple intracranial calcifications for 3 years. More than 6 months before admission, the patient began to consciously walk unsteadily, and the symptoms gradually worsened, with obvious shaking when standing and mild weakness of limbs. Two weeks before, the patient showed decreased language fluency and conscious unresponsiveness. Nervous system examination revealed involuntary eyelid movement, weakened limb muscle strength, normal muscle tone, absence of limb tendon reflexes, positive sign of difficulty in standing with eyes closed, inability to walk in a straight line, and wide-based gait. The rest of the physical examination was negative. Complete clinical blood tests showed no obvious abnormalities. Head CT showed multiple calcifications in the head of the bilateral caudate nucleus, bilateral thalamus, bilateral cerebellum, and bilateral parietal lobes . Symmetrical abnormal signals in the bilateral dorsal thalamus, basal ganglia, and dentate nucleus of the cerebellar hemisphere were observed on plain MR scans of the head, suggesting that paramagnetic deposition was considered .
Supplementary examination of serum calcium, inorganic phosphorus, parathyroid hormone, free metanephrine, and free methoxynorepinephrine were normal. Tracing the patient’s medical history, we learned that the proband’s father (I:1) also had similar extrapyramidal symptoms while the proband’s mother (I:2), eldest sister (II:1), second sister (II:2), and younger brother (II:4) did not have any clinical symptoms. We further improved the head CT of this family, and the results showed that multiple intracranial calcifications were seen in the proband’s father , second sister and younger brother , while the head CT of his mother and elder sister showed no obvious abnormalities. Combined with the patient’s clinical symptoms, family history, head CT findings of the bilateral caudate nucleus head, thalamus, cerebellum, parietal lobe and other symmetrical calcification foci, and no obvious abnormality in the clinical blood test, our preliminary diagnosis was considered familial basal ganglia calcification. To confirm the diagnosis, we mobilized the patient to improve the genetic testing of the family. The test revealed that the proband had a disease-causing mutation in the SLC20A2 gene. The chromosome position of this mutation is CHR8:42294933 (genome version: HG19), transcript NM_001257180, located in the 8th exon, which is a frameshift mutation . This heterozygous mutation came from the father of the proband , and this mutation was also detected in the second sister and younger brother , who had calcifications on head CT, while the gene detection of the mother , and the elder sister was wild-type. The SLC20A2 gene-related reported disease is an autosomal dominant inheritance, and this heterozygous mutation is consistent with the disease-dominant inheritance pattern . The gene-related disease was consistent with the clinical manifestations of the patient, and the second sister and brother also had calcifications on head CT. Although there are no clinical symptoms, this heterozygous mutation may lead to the occurrence of the disease.