A 53-year-old woman experienced choking, chest tightness, and back pain.
The patient had experienced choking and chest tightness 2 years prior without any causation and had experienced back pain 1 year ago. Recently, the above symptoms had gradually been aggravated. The patient underwent gastroscopy that showed normal findings.
The patient had no other past illness except choking, chest tightness, and back pain.
The patient had no remarkable personal and family history.
The physical examination was unremarkable.
The patient was previously healthy and showed no abnormalities in the laboratory examinations.
CT revealed a soft-tissue mass approximately 4.2 cm × 3.7 cm × 2.6 cm in the right posterior mediastinum, for which the boundary between some areas and the esophagus was unclear, and the trachea was also compressed . In the enhanced CT scan, a contrast agent was injected into the right upper limb. In the early arterial stage, the superior vena cava and the azygos vein arch were filled with the contrast agent, and the azygos vein arch was nodular. The density did not decrease in the venous phase, and there seemed to be a blood shadow during coronary reconstruction. The posterior mediastinal tumor showed delayed enhancement, and its internal density was not homogeneous. No definite filling defect was found. The tumor was connected to the superior vena cava, whose degree of enhancement was the same as that of the superior vena cava, and the boundary between the tumor and the esophagus was clear. The azygos vein valve was observed. The esophagus was compressed by an azygos vein aneurysm . These findings indicated that there was a giant hemangioma originating from the azygos vein arch.
The tumor was dissected, which revealed enlarged and dilated thin-walled blood vessels with intact endothelial cells on the wall, in which the medial muscle layer was thinned; a large number of red blood cells were found outside the lumen. Multiple red blood cells were observed in the expanded blood vessel wall, composing the mural thrombus. Postoperative pathology confirmed hemangiomas .