A 65-year-old female was admitted to the emergency room. The patient had a medical history of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) diagnosed at the age of 18, refractory to steroid-based treatment. A splenectomy was performed, and she remained with normal platelet counts. She was diagnosed at 60 years-old with chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML), and received treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-Imatinib. The diagnosis was confirmed by bone marrow aspiration and fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH), in which 22% were negative cells and 78% positive cells for the Philadelphia chromosome. The qPCR for BCR-ABL/ABL was 40.22% (15,420.24 ABL copies, and 6202.4 BCR-ABL copies). On admission, she admitted to voluntarily had stopped the Imatinib treatment 6 months before due to a major depression, had fever and worsening eyesight (later diagnosed as acute uveitis) . She had no history of travelling to leptospirosis endemic areas, nor alcohol, drug or tobacco abuse, neither other medications intake. Nevertheless, she had close contact with her pet cat. She was admitted to the hospital with acute respiratory failure, bacteraemia and uveitis.
Laboratory tests showed leukocyte count of 144.6 × 103/ml, hemoglobin 12.4 g/dl, platelets 763 × 103/ml, glucose level of 116 mg/dl, and albumin level of 3.0 mg/dl. Liver function test showed malnourishment and low protein level. Renal function test showed high creatinine level indicating an acute kidney injury mainly associated with the inflammatory response, and electrolytes were within normal limits. Additionally, the levels of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin were moderately high (Supplementary Table ). Due to respiratory deterioration, a sputum culture was performed, and E. coli was isolated. In México, at the time the patient was treated, there was an outbreak of influenza, reason why a diagnostic qPCR for the influenza virus was performed; the result was negative. The chest X-Ray revealed multiple pneumonia foci . She was started on empirical broad antibiotic regimen. Blood and urine cultures collected on admission showed no microorganisms grown from conventional medium or seen on Gram, Ziehl-Nielsen, and Giemsa stains. The blood cultures in the BacT/ALERT® FA medium (bioMérieux, Durham NC), after 2 days of incubation at 34 °C, were positive. Unstained spirochaete-like microorganisms were observed by dark-field microscopy. Due to clinical and microbiological finding, the antimicrobial treatment was changed to penicillin 20 million UI/ IV, plus doxycycline 100 mg twice a day. Subsequently, two blood samples were tested by Microagglutination test (MAT) separated from each other by 10 days (Supplementary Methodology Document). Differential diagnosis were performed, and negative results were reported. After the successful treatment, the CML treatment was resumed with a second-generation TKI (Dasatinib). A year later, the FISH analysis showed 35 negative cells and 65 positive cells for the Philadelphia chromosome. The aspiration of bone marrow showed an adequate maturation, compatible with CML in chronic phase.
Microagglutination test (MAT) was performed as previously described by the Pan American Health Organization . The patient’s sera were diluted to 1/50 for a screening test and 50 μl of live cultures of 4 to 7 days in EMJH medium of twelve L. interrogans serovars were used as antigens (Autumnalis, Bataviae, Bratislava, Canicola, Celledoni, Grippotyphosa, Hardjoprajitno, Icterohaemorrhagiae, Pomona, Pyrogenes, Tarassovi, Wolffi and Mini) (Supplementary Table ). Each serovar was added into a column of a 96-well flat end microtitre plate (Nunc, Maryland, USA); a negative control was included for each serovar. The plate was gently stirred and incubated 1 hour at room temperature. Reading was performed in dark-field microscopy (Carl Zeiss, Germany). The patient’s sera were serially diluted from 1/25 to 1/1600, and the microagglutination was observed for each serovar. The final titre represents the maximum dilution in which the agglutination grade two was noted.
From the patient’s blood sample, three drops were seeded into EMJH liquid medium and maintained at 30 °C. Cultures were periodically observed in dark-field microscopy to spot spirochaetal forms and maintained for 6 months before being considered negative cultures. In parallel, the patient’s blood sample was inoculated to a Syrian golden hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) for bacterial isolation (Supplementary Methodology Document and Supplementary Table ).
DNA was extracted from the patient’s blood samples and the hamster’s tissues with the DNeasy Blood &Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Cal, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions and suspended in 50 μL of nuclease-free water. DNA was quantified using an Epoch microplate spectrophotometer (Biotech) and stored at 4 °C.
The Leptospira genus-specific PCR based on the 23S rDNA was used to amplify a 482 bp fragment . A second PCR was performed to identify only pathogenic strains based on the amplification of the insertion sequence IS1500 of L. interrogans (sensu lato) (Supplementary Methodology Document). The electrophoresis of the amplified products were stained with ethidium bromide on 1.6% agarose gels and visualised. Further genus identification was performed based on sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene, using the primers 27f (5′-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3′) and 1492r (5′-TACGCYTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′) with DNA extracted from the first blood sample as template . A PCR product of 1432 bp was amplified, purified, and DNA was sequenced in both directions. Nucleotide sequence was determined with Taq FS Dye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Fluorescence-Based Sequencing, and analysed on an Applied Biosystems 3730 DNA sequencing system (Foster City, CA, USA). The sequence was registered in Genbank under the accession number MN545905. It has 100% homology with Leptospira interrogans strains (CP011410.1, AE016823.1, AE010300.2, and CP018146.1) and variable homology with reference sequences (Supplementary Methodology Document and Supplementary Table ).
In summary, the results support the diagnosis of leptospirosis; abundant spirochaetal forms, at least 106
Leptospires/mL were observed in dark field microscopy, The MAT results (Supplementary Table ) indicated the serovar Bratislava as the most probable causing serovar because the patient’s serum reacted with Bratislava (Jez Bratislava) in titres of 1/320. This titre was the highest in the first sample and stayed in a steady-state in the second sample. There was no other serovar with titres at this level. Titres to Serovars Bataviae (Van Tienen); Canicola (Hond Utech IV); Grippotyphosa (Moska V); Hardjo (Hardjoprajitno), and Pomona (Pomona) were lower than 1/80 in both samples, and those for Pyrogenes (Salinem) fell from 1/160 to 1/80 in the second sample. During the Leptospira isolation attempt, its survival was sustained for about a month in the EMJH medium, but it did not flourish. The PCRs based on the23S rDNA and the IS1500 identified the presence of the bacteria DNA in the patient’s blood samples, in the hamster tissues (Supplementary Table ), and the Leptospira genus was identified by the 16S based sequencing.