A 63 year old male with renal cell carcinoma underwent nephrectomy in 2015. He was under active surveillance until 2017, when he presented with metastatic disease in lymph nodes and lungs. The patient received nivolumab combined with ipilimumab, a CTLA-4 inhibitor, for 3 months followed by nivolumab monotherapy at a dose of 250 mg every 2 weeks. After 6 months of treatment, he developed immune-related type I diabetes, starting insulin, and continued immunotherapy. After receiving 14 infusions of nivolumab, 253 days after the first infusion, he developed acute left knee pain and swelling and was referred to the rheumatology clinic. Patient denied any prior similar episodes, but had a remote history of injury to his left knee, decades before, with ligament damage, for which he underwent arthroscopy.
Past medical history included hypertension, hypothyroidism and stage 2 chronic kidney disease, all diagnosed prior to immunotherapy. He had no history of recent trauma. One of his children had gout.
Physical exam revealed a large effusion in the left knee with erythema, tenderness, and limited range of motion. Arthrocentesis was performed and synovial fluid analysis showed 6715 white blood cells per μL, 72% of neutrophils, and numerous intracellular and extracellular calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals . Gram, acid-fast bacilli (AFB), and fungal stains, and cultures were negative. Anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody were negative. Knee x-ray showed tricompartmental degenerative changes without fractures or bony metastases. Although very subtle, the x-ray showed chondrocalcinosis of fibrocartilage, hyaline cartilage and suprapatellar bursal synovium. Patient received an intra-articular injection of 40 mg triamcinolone, with an excellent response. Nivolumab was held, and restarted 3 weeks later as the patient had complete resolution of his left knee arthritis. A few days after the infusion, the patient had another flare of left knee pain and swelling. Knee arthrocentesis followed by intra-articular triamcinolone injection was performed with an excellent clinical response within 2 weeks. Synovial fluid again showed CPPD crystals. Two weeks later, after complete resolution, nivolumab was resumed, however, once again, a few days later, he developed left knee arthritis with CCPD crystals in the synovial fluid, and patient received intra-articular triamcinolone. Of note, his thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels were elevated during the 2nd and 3rd pseudogout flares. Tumor staging showed stable disease, and the patient decided to continue nivolumab therapy despite the recurrent pseudogout flares. He initiated colchicine 0.6 mg orally daily as prophylaxis. After resolution of his knee symptoms, he resumed nivolumab treatment. Patient has continued nivolumab treatment with colchicine prophylaxis and has received three additional nivolumab infusions at the same dose without pseudogout flares. He is now receiving nivolumab 480 mg monthly with good tolerance and only mild pain after the infusions. As of last follow-up he had minimal knee effusion with no pain, tenderness, or limitation in the range of motion. He was able to ambulate and perform activities of daily living. He has had one additional episode of left knee arthritis, but much milder than previous ones, and no arthrocentesis was performed. His magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knee showed primarily partial meniscal tears and damage to his anterior cruciate ligaments.