A cardia mass was found in a 67-year-old male patient in May 2012, and surgical resection was performed. Postoperative pathological examination showed moderately to poorly differentiated ulcerative gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) adenocarcinoma. In March 2015, the patient complained of frequent dizziness in the mornings, which improved after eating. On the morning of May 4, 2015, he presented limb convulsion unconsciously and could not be awakened. The patient’s blood glucose level was 0.9 mmol/L. Five minutes after 50% glucose treatment, he recovered consciousness. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed pulmonary, adrenal, intracranial, intrahepatic, retroperitoneal and thoracic vertebral lesions.
On May 11, the patient underwent CT-guided biopsy of a lesion in the left lung . Pathological examination showed lung adenocarcinoma (LA), and he received stereotactic radiotherapy in the whole brain, lungs and abdominal cavity. He and his family refused chemotherapy and further surgery. During the treatment, hypoglycemia occurred many times. At first, extra meals could maintain normal blood glucose. Later, continuous intravenous infusion of glucose injection was required, while the glucose concentration and infusion rate progressively increased. To prevent hypoglycemia, the maximum infusion rate for 50% glucose injection was 100 ml per hour. Dynamic enhanced MRI did not show any clear lesion in the pancreas. Adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, growth hormone, glucagon and five thyroid function parameters were within normal ranges. An insulin autoantibody test was negative. IGF-1 was 222 (96-212 ng/ml) and IGF-2 was significantly lower than normal according to western blotting. The patient was unresponsive to diazoxide (125 mg, three times a day for 10 days), and at that time, his blood diazoxide concentration was 13.4 µg/ml. The treatment was subsequently changed to tacrolimus capsules (10 mg, once a day), but the patient died five days later. The patient’s family refused to allow an autopsy.
Immunohistochemical staining for insulin showed that LA samples were stained positive and GCA samples weakly positive . The results from immunohistochemical staining on GEJ adenocarcinoma were as follows: CgA (+), syn (+), GPG9.5 (+) and MAP2abc (+) .