Our patient was a 24-year-old Albanian man who was admitted to the Emergency Department of the University Hospital in Kosovo in severe hemorrhagic shock due to a massive hematuria. The patient is a farmer, does not smoke, and does not consume alcohol. He has no significant family and social history of medical relevance. Ten years ago, he had sustained a third-degree burn injury over approximately 70% of his body surface area and had been treated in a specialized center in a neighboring country. During that hospitalization, the patient had multiple venous lines placed in the groin and developed an infection that led to the rupture of the common femoral artery. To treat it, an autogenous vein extra-anatomic iliofemoral bypass was constructed. Since then, he had never been seen by a vascular surgeon.
Prior to his admission to our emergency department, he had two episodes of gross hematuria for which he was treated at the regional hospital. Diagnostic evaluation during earlier hospitalizations did not reveal the cause of bleeding. AUF was not considered on either of the occasions. The treatment was conservative and involved bladder lavage and blood transfusions. He was discharged on antibiotics, uroseptics, and iron supplements.
The possibility of communication between the arterial and urinary tracts was suspected on the basis of cystoscopy performed in the outpatient setting 2 days before the current admission . The finding of the source of the bleeding at the right upper corner of the bladder, very close to the ureteral opening, raised the suspicion of possible AUF. The diagnosis was confirmed the next day, when contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed proximity of a small pseudoaneurysm located at the proximal anastomosis of the enlarged extra-anatomic right iliofemoral autogenous vein graft and bladder . The patient, who was free of bleeding, was referred to a vascular surgeon and admitted to the vascular surgery department. Several units of red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were ordered, along with antibiotics, and the patient was scheduled for elective surgery on the next day. Unfortunately, during the night, he experienced a third episode of exsanguinating bleeding and was transferred to the emergency department.
At the emergency department, he was confused and anxious, and his skin was pale, cold, and clammy. He was sweating and was breathing rapidly. His pulse on the peripheral arteries was weak, rapid, and thready. His fingernails and lips were blue, and his capillary refill time was 5 seconds. His blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg, heart rate 130 beats/minute, and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation 92%. His hematocrit was 19%, and his hemoglobin was 7 g/dl. His platelet count was normal, and his white blood cell count was slightly elevated (11.7 × 109/L). His glucose, cholesterol, urea, and creatinine concentrations were within normal range. His total bilirubin was moderately elevated (30.6 μmol/L), and his transaminase level was normal. He had a significantly high level of C-reactive protein (55.8 mg/L). His urine was full of blood cells. No serology or microbiology was performed. Hemodynamic resuscitation was initiated immediately. Two large-bore (16-gauge) intravenous catheters were inserted. Crystalloids and colloids were rapidly administered, and red blood cells and FFP were ordered.
Induction agents etomidate (0.3 mg/kg), fentanyl (3 μg/kg), and rocuronium (1.2 mg/kg) were administered. The patient was intubated and escorted to the operation room. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (0.7–1.3 minimum alveolar concentration), atracurium, and fentanyl. To achieve hemodynamic stability, vasopressors (dopamine 5–7 μg/minute) were used until several units of red blood cells and FFP were brought from the transfusion desk. To minimize the possibility of rebleeding, permissive hypotensive resuscitation was maintained.
The abdomen was opened employing a right extraperitoneal approach. After obtaining vascular control, the rupture site was reached through the native aneurysmal part of the venous graft and was closed with simple sutures . Because of the severe scars on the skin and varicosity of the saphenous vein, we decided to perform a new bypass using a synthetic graft. The proximal anastomosis of the synthetic graft was placed on the iliac artery 5 cm above the site of the rupture, and the distal part of the graft was anastomosed in an end-to-side fashion with the existing autogenous vein graft, several centimeters before the site of the original distal anastomosis. The graft above the distal anastomosis was ligated .
At the end of the operation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. On the next day, he was extubated and transferred to the ward. The patient recovered completely, and postoperative cystoscopy showed no signs of pathological communication . He was free of hematuria episodes for the whole postoperative period. Computed angiography performed 2 years after the surgery showed correct position of the graft with no complications .