A 47-year-old male with diabetes and hypertension had complained of recurrent ocular pain in his left eye during HD sessions. He had a history of kidney transplantation due to end-stage diabetic nephropathy seven years previously, but he had undergone regular HD three times weekly for two years due to post-transplant failure. Five years prior to this presentation, he had also undergone uncomplicated phacovitrectomy with intraocular lens implantation at another hospital, due to proliferative diabetic retinopathy in both eyes. Recently, he had become aware of a dull pain and blurred vision in his left eye during HD. His left IOP had reached levels of up to 54 mmHg over three weeks at a local eye clinic. Accordingly, he was referred to our glaucoma unit for management of uveitic glaucoma.
A slit-lamp examination showed diffuse corneal epithelial edema with several white keratic precipitates and inflammatory cells (Grade 3+) in the anterior chamber of the left eye . No sectorial iris atrophy or iris heterochromia developed during the follow-up period, which suggests herpetic keratouveitis or Fuchs’ heterochromic iridocyclitis. The gonioscopic findings showed a wide open-angle status (Grade 4, using Shaffer’s classification) and mild pigmentation (Grade 1 + ~2+) of the trabecular meshwork without angle neovascularization or peripheral anterior synechiae in both eyes. A more densely pigmented trabecular meshwork was observed in the left eye than in the right eye. Fundus examination revealed a clear vitreous, a slightly pale optic disc, a cup to disc ratio of 0.8, and well-applied photocoagulation scars in the left eye. The unaffected fellow eye did not show abnormal findings from the full ophthalmic examination, except for laser photocoagulation scar due to diabetic retinopathy. Serologic test for uveitis (include ESR, CRP, ANA, ANCA, HLA-B27, and VDRL etc.) and radiologic findings (chest X-ray and sacroiliac X-ray) were normal.
The patient was initially treated with a fixed combination of dorzolamide-timolol eyedrops (twice a day), brimonidine eyedrops (twice a day), oral methazolamide (100 mg/day) to control his IOP, and 1% prednisolone acetate every two hours to manage inflammation. However, despite the glaucoma medications, recurrent IOP elevation with intolerable ocular pain occurred in the left eye about two hours after HD initiation forcing discontinuation and was not relieved by intravenous mannitolization. These events were subsequently repeated several times. Topical glaucoma eye-drops and intravenous mannitol before HD did not prevent subsequent painful IOP spikes in the left eye. At the end of HD, IOP averaged ~40 mmHg (range, 34–47). Accordingly, we decided on glaucoma filtering surgery. After trabeculectomy with mitomycin C in the left eye, his IOP stabilized in the low-teens (range, 10–14 mmHg) and no painful IOP spikes occurred during HD over the first postoperative year . Furthermore, the patient did not develop again signs of uveitis after the trabeculectomy during his hemodialysis.