Our patient was a 58-year old female, diagnosed with CLL in 2002. Abnormal lymphocytes showed expression of CD5, CD19, CD20, CD22, CD23 and immunoglobulin kappa light chain by flow cytometry. Ubiquitous enlarged lymph nodes were detected. The patient was asymptomatic. First line treatment was required 2003 due to increasing leukocytosis and lymphocytosis accompanied by advancing anemia and thrombocytopenia. The patient was treated with chlorambucil and prednisone (Knospe protocol) according to local standards and therapeutic possibilities at that time. After achieving a partial remission persisting approximately one year, the patient was retreated with continuous chlorambucil for one month but showed no response. Four cycles of oral fludarabine were administered achieving a partial remission for four years. The following two relapses of the disease were treated again with fludarabine, of which the latter course was mainly due to patient’s preference. After documenting resistance to fludarabine the patient agreed to administration of five cycles rituximab in combination with bendamustine. A partial remission could be achieved. Rituximab and bendamustine were used for treating the following relapse 1.5 years later, achieving a partial remission for another eight months. Afterwards the patient received ibrutinib within a clinical trial, but showed progression of disease after only four months of treatment. Massive progression of lymphadenopathy was apparent at that time. Therefore, a lymph node biopsy was done showing a diffuse infiltration with small lymphocytic cells partially resembling centroblasts or immunoblasts, though transformation to an aggressive lymphoma could not be demonstrated. According to the clinical behavior of the disease, rituximab plus CHOP were administered but progression occurred after three cycles of treatment. Alemtuzumab was then administered achieving stabilization of the disease for another year. Ultimately, the patient was treated with lenalidomide but showed no significant response and died 2014 due to pneumonia. Informed consent for studies performed and for publication of the results was obtained from the patient. All methods used are described in detail in Additional file .
Patient material was first sent to our laboratory eight years after the initial diagnosis of CLL. In the next four years, karyotyping and FISH studies were performed seven times in intervals of six to twelve months. The detailed cytogenetic findings in the seven samples of the patient, analyzed between 2010 and 2014, are summarized in Table . Consistent findings in all patient probes included the t(12;14)(q23.2;q32.3), a partial trisomy 12 due to duplication of der(12) chromosome and a submicroscopic deletion of the 13q14 region. Signal splitting of the Cytocell IGH Breakapart probe confirmed the involvement of the IGH locus on chromosome 14 in the translocation . The duplication of der(12) indicates that the t(12;14)(q23.2;q32.3) preceded trisomy 12. Since trisomy 12 is considered to be an early driver clonal event in CLL , we propose that the translocation occurred early in CLL evolution. Nevertheless, it is not possible to experimentally confirm that, since no sample was available at the time of diagnosis.
Sequencing of LDI-PCR-generated IGHJ bands varying from the expected germline bands revealed a productive VDJ recombination with an unmutated V1–69 gene (100% sequence homology) fused to D3–3 and J5 sequences and a D-J recombination between D2–21 and J5 on the other allele. Sequencing of the aberrant IGHS bands revealed sequences from chromosome 12 integrated into the Switch μ (Sμ) region. A second round of sequencing with a reverse primer from chromosome 14 (IGH der12 Rv) was necessary to read over the breakpoint on der(12), which was located 86.5 kbp downstream of the achaete-scute family bHLH transcription factor 1 (ASCL1) gene. Primer sequences are listed in (Additional file : Table S1). The IGHJ-Cμ enhancer was translocated in the proximity of ASCL1, while the more distal gene C12orf42 was translocated to der(14). The breakpoint on der(14) was localized within the pentameric repeat region of Sμ. There were no deletions or insertions of sequences at the breakpoints of both chromosomes .
The expression of ASCL1 in the BM of the patient bearing the translocation (90% infiltration) was compared to that in normal and CLL BM samples (mean infiltration >70%). CLL samples were subdivided in four groups according to their cytogenetic findings . ASCL1 was highly overexpressed in the sample of the patient bearing the translocation as opposed to all other groups with average fold change (FC) values greater than 5600 in all samples (ANOVA p-value = 5.12E-10) . Immunohistochemistry with a monoclonal anti-ASCL1 antibody on peripheral blood cytospins of the patient and two CLL control samples confirmed the ASCL1 overexpression at the protein level .
ASCL1, also known as hASH1 or mASH1, is the human homolog of the Drosophila achaete-scute complex. It encodes for a basic pioneer helix-loop-helix transcription factor (TF), which is a master regulator of vertebrate neurogenesis . In order to further explore the possible downstream effects of the ASCL1 upregulation in the aberrant B-cells of the patient, we compared the gene expression of these cells to that of sorted B-cells from seven healthy donors, using the GeneChip® PrimeView™ Human Gene Expression Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). We found 176 significantly deregulated genes (FC ≥ 2, FDR p ≤ 0.01) (Additional file : Figure S1) and (Additional file : Table S2). Deregulation of 55 genes in our gene set was concordant with at least two CLL expression studies comparing CLL cells to peripheral CD19+ B-lymphocytes of healthy individuals (see also Additional file ) [–].
We then focused on the genes with the strongest deregulation in our gene set (FC ≥ 10, FDR p ≤ 0.001) . Seven of the top 18 deregulated genes (ABCA9, KCNJ11, FHDC1, KSR2, EBF1 and RGS2) were part of the above-mentioned CLL gene expression signature. The deregulation of three further genes from this list (RGS1, APP, GABRB2 and FGF2) was concordant with CLL versus normal comparisons from the Oncomine Database [–]. Among the residual eight highly deregulated genes the overexpression of ASCL1 and also PAH, localized 40 kbp proximal to the ASCL1 locus, could be explained by their proximity to the IGH enhancer due to the translocation. PAH encodes for phenylalanine hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in phenylalanine catabolism. To our knowledge, no oncogenic properties have been assigned to the PAH gene so far. Binding of ASCL1 on promoter sequences of the MRO, EDNRB and RNF150 genes has been demonstrated by ChIP in adult hippocampus-derived neural stem cells . The overexpression of GLDN and PAX9 has not been previously described in CLL and these genes are also not listed among the direct ASCL1 targets. INSM1, the gene with the highest upregulation and the third most significant in our gene set, is a well- established direct ASCL1 transcriptional target in neural and neuroendocrine tissue as well as in SCLC [–].