A 75-year-old woman was transferred to our Emergency Department from a nearby hospital with a 10-day history of intermittent fever, general fatigue, and progressive dyspnea. She did not have cough or hemoptysis. She had no history of immunosuppression, contact with a tuberculosis patient, or treatment for tuberculosis. On admission, she presented with the following signs: body temperature, 37.9°C; heart rate, 106 beats/min; blood pressure, 109/80 mmHg; respiratory rate, 23 breaths/min; and coarse inspiratory crackles over the bilateral lower lungs. Laboratory admission tests revealed low platelets, elevated levels of hepatobiliary enzymes and KL-6, and hypoxemia . Chest computed tomography revealed a nodule in the apical segment of the left lower lobe and bilateral diffuse ground-glass shadows, which were severe, particularly in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe . Because of her severe respiratory condition on admission, bronchoalveolar lavage or histopathological examination could not be carried out. She was managed with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation and treated with piperacillin–tazobactam, azithromycin, and immunoglobulin to address the possibility of a community-acquired pneumonia. Furthermore, a diagnosis of moderate ARDS was established based on the ratio of PaO2/FIO2 (P/F) being 137, with no evidence of left atrial hypertension, as determined by ultrasonic cardiography. Therefore, sivelestat sodium hydrate (0.2 mg/kg/h) and low-dose methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) were given. However, her condition worsened, and invasive mechanical ventilation was initiated on hospital day 2. In addition, pancytopenia occurred on day 6. As we suspected that the pancytopenia was drug-induced, the antibiotics were changed from piperacillin–tazobactam to biapenem, and sivelestat sodium hydrate was discontinued. Despite aggressive fluid management and treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, there was no improvement in respiratory function for 1 week. As the KL-6 values were elevated on admission and diffuse ground-glass shadows worsened, as indicated by chest computed tomography on day 6 , we suspected acute interstitial pneumonia, and PMX-DHP was given at a flow rate of 80 mL/min for 24 h once daily for 2 days from hospital day 7 without continuous renal replacement therapy. Following this treatment, the P/F ratio improved to over 200 , and the levels of inflammation-related substances, including neutrophils, in blood decreased . Acid-fast bacilli, which were not detected in sputum collected for examination on admission, were detected in cultures from sputum, and a real-time polymerase chain reaction assay confirmed the presence of M. tuberculosis DNA on the hospital day 9. We then recognized that PMX-DHP was incidentally used for tuberculosis-related ARDS. Antituberculosis therapy (isoniazid, rifampicin, and streptomycin) was immediately initiated, and the patient was transferred to a hospital specialized in treating tuberculosis. Cultures from the sputum, urine, bone marrow specimens, liver biopsy specimens, and blood samples (these cultures were collected on day 9 or 10 in hospital) later established the presence of M. tuberculosis, thus confirming miliary tuberculosis. Despite the P/F ratio improvement, KL-6 levels of 5,442 U/mL, which were high compared with the data on admission, were recognized on day 14 in hospital. Although the patient was still severely ill at the time of hospital transfer, she was discharged after the 3-month in-hospital treatment for tuberculosis.