A 48-year-old woman, married with a below high school diploma educational level, a housekeeper, living in a northern city of Iran, who has suffered from some symptoms including depressed mood, loss of appetite, insomnia, and mutism that started two months ago without any significant stressor.
Some medications including fluphenazine decanoate, venlafaxine, sodium valproate, duloxetine, olanzapine and trihexyphenidyl had been prescribed by a neurologist in an outpatient clinic. Gradually, in addition to ataxia, slowness of movements, dysarthria, rigidity, uncontrollable movements of the limbs, and loss of performance occurred to the extent that she was unable to do her own household chores. Sometimes, she stares at a point and screamed horribly. Following the receipt of modecate, symptoms such as rigidity have exacerbated; and due to the decreased levels of consciousness, the patient was referred to the emergency department of a general hospital; thereafter the patient´s treatment was interrupted and she was referred to a psychiatric hospital following consultation by a psychiatrist. In the psychiatric ward, considering the patient's cooperation, cranial examinations were normal. Muscular strength was symmetrical and paratonia was observed in all four extremities.
Deep tendon reflexes (DTR) was 2+. Serum therapy and urine catheterization was conducted to modify the patient´s inadequate fluid intake and low urine volume. Counseling with a cardiologist and anesthesiologist was performed to start electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) for the patient. Diazepam was administered four times before the ECT. Regarding the diagnosis of catatonia, the patient was administered two ECT. Paraclinical assessments showed some abnormal findings including leukocytosis (WBC= 12600, PMN=70%), CPK=1129, LDH=723, and P=4.7. Other routine tests including thyroid function tests, sodium, potassium and liver function tests were in normal range; and the diagnosis of malignant neuroleptic syndrome (NMS) was made due to long-term antipsychotic medications, rigidity, fever, and elevated CPK and LDH.
She was referred to a subspecialized hospital for further investigation and the probability of NMS. In the general examination, the apparent age was greater than the chronological age and self-care was impaired. The most important findings were 38ºC fever, mydriatic and reactive pupils to the light with inability to follow the movements of the hand, lack of visual and verbal communication, rigidity, negativism and echolalia. The patient did not have a history of organ transplantation and had no occupational exposure to livestock and raw animal products. In the past medical history, she reported being referred to a psychiatrist in 1988 because of distress and depressive symptoms following a stressor which was treated with drug use for three years. The history was negative for other psychiatric disorders. She underwent splenectomy following a car crash 17 years ago. A positive family history of depressive symptoms was reported in her mother who was under treatment for many years. No cognitive and motor symptoms were reported in her close relatives.
Routine analysis of lumbar puncture was normal. Laboratory tests for inflammatory and some infectious diseases (including Herpes Simplex Virus 1, 2, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr Virus, Varicella-Zoster Virus, Enterovirus, Human Herpesvirus VI, VII, VIII) were negative. In brain MRI, hypersignality in caudate and putamen has been reported (, ).
Generalized high frequency sharp waves were observed in EEG . The patient was admitted to ICU because of decreased consciousness, and levebel 500 mg BID and sodium valproate 400 mg BID was prescribed to resolve muscle spasms and myoclonus of the patient which was associated with reduced symptoms. Following evaluations, protein 14-3-3 was identified in the cerebrospinal fluid, and the diagnosis of CJD was confirmed in the patient.