This case is about a 56-year-old man where the only prior medical history was a syncope during a football game at 18 years of age. At that time, he was advised to avoid vigorous physical activity; no further examinations were performed. After almost 40 years, while resting at home, he experienced sudden onset of severe palpitations, associated with acute chest discomfort and dizziness. The ambulance team found atrial fibrillation with a frequency above 200 b.p.m. . The patient was haemodynamically unstable, and an electrical cardioversion was immediately performed. Electrocardiogram after cardioversion showed normal sinus rhythm, with ST-depressions in inferior and anterolateral leads . After stabilizing, he was admitted for further management.
During hospital admission, the patient sustained normal sinus rhythm and was symptom free. ST-segment changes on the electrocardiogram normalized and afterwards resembled that of a routine electrocardiogram, which had been taken years before this admission. Blood tests were normal. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction and no structural heart disease. A standard physical examination including stethoscope of the heart and lungs was conducted; no abnormalities were found. After a brief hospital admission, the patient was discharged with betablockers. Due to chest pain, ST-depression in the electrocardiogram and the unusual presentation of atrial fibrillation, an elective coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was scheduled. Surprisingly, an anomalous right coronary artery (RCA) originating from the pulmonary artery (ARCAPA) was diagnosed . The CCTA also showed mild coronary atheromatosis with a non-significant stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD). Supplementary contrast dynamic CCTA was performed, to anatomically display coronary flow directions. This showed retrograde contrast filling of RCA from LAD through collaterals, with a unidirectional flow into the main pulmonary artery (video link ). Dynamic CCTA was performed at rest—to delineate the magnitude and direction of blood flow in the RCA ostium. This was a request from our surgeons, to understand and describe the physiology of the condition. Dynamic CCTA was performed using a Canon Aquilion One 320 slice multidetector CT scanner. The scan was performed with similar pre-sets as a standard CCTA, to define transit of contrast in high quality anatomical detail. After reviewing the original CCTA, the z-axis and field of view was narrowed considerably, to only contain the RCA and surrounding structures. The scan was initiated a few seconds after contrast administration, with one image acquisition conducted during diastole per RR interval for every heartbeat, and it was terminated manually after contrast had passed.
To exclude possible myocardial ischaemia in RCA territory, an adenosine stress rubidium positron emission tomography was also performed and showed no reversible myocardial ischaemia. Due to possible risk of SCD, the patient was offered surgical intervention, but he declined and chose clinical follow-up. After 1½ years of follow-up, the patient had no recurrence of hospitalization and was well.