A 37-year-old female presented to the oral and maxillofacial surgery department with a painless mild expansion of the right posterior mandible and gradually increasing swelling for 6 months. There was no history of trauma or infection. The past medical and dental history was noncontributory. Extraoral examination revealed a swelling measuring ~3 cm in size, extending from the right mouth commissure to the corner of the mandible and inferiorly to the lower border of the mandible. The color, texture, and temperature of the overlying skin were normal and there was no complaint of paresthesia. Intraoral examination showed a firm, nontender swelling with lingual plate expansion involving the molar and premolar region. The overlying mucosa was normal. A panoramic radiograph displayed a large well-defined multilocular radiolucent lesion with a soap bubble appearance on the right posterior mandible. There was an impacted right lower canine out of the surgical field .
Some tumors that can be suggested based on radiological appearance include odontogenic keratocyst, ameloblastoma, central giant cell granuloma, aneurysmal bone cyst, intraosseous haemangioma, etc. About the multilocular appearance in the current case, ameloblastoma was considered a differential diagnosis. A final diagnosis can only be arrived at based on clinical, radiological features and histopathology.
A segmental resection of the posterior mandible was planned under general anesthesia. Under sterile and aseptic conditions, a submandibular approach was performed. The entire lateral surface of the mandibular ramus and body was exposed. Segmental resection of the posterior mandible was performed with a safety margin of 1 cm and a reconstruction plate was applied . Maxillomandibular fixation was maintained for 30 days using intermaxillary screws. The patient was discharged from the hospital after 5 days and the postoperative course was without complications.
The specimen was sent for pathological examination . A loose arrangement of spindle-shaped stellate cells was seen during the pathological examination, which confirmed an odontogenic myxoma . Post-surgical clinical and radiographic follow-up was done at 1 week, 4 months, 7 months, and 14 months . There was no evidence of recurrence observed during the follow-up period.