The patient discussed in this report is a 37-year-old African American male with a body mass index (BMI) of 18.6 and a past medical history including refractory Crohn's disease complicated by multiple small bowel obstructions, several bowel surgeries, left lower quadrant colostomy placement, short bowel syndrome (SBS), severe protein calorie malnutrition, PN dependence, and elevated liver function tests (LFTs). He is an ambulatory non-smoker without alcohol or illicit drug use and only has a family history of paternal hypertension. He initiated PN in May 2019, began to have elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels >200 U/L in July 2019, and sustained ALP levels >1000 U/L since June 2020. He presented to our facility in October 2021 for nutritional optimization before a planned takedown of chronic lower abdominal enterocutaneous fistulas (x3) and a perianal fistula.
His baseline ALP level upon admission was 1746 U/L. This patient also had significant challenges maintaining central venous access, as his only access site was a femoral line. Prior to admission, pre-intervention measures taken to reduce the inflammatory burden on the liver was to decrease the dose of SO-ILE and condense the PN infusion time to 12 h. However, due to elevated nutrition needs for multiple fistulas and severe malnutrition, more calories from dextrose were provided to compensate for reduction of SO-ILE, and the infusion was transitioned back to 24 h to replace fistula losses. His home PN order provided an average of 33.5 kcal/kg with 69 % of calories from dextrose and only 11 % of calories from SO-ILE .
There was no delay from presentation to intervention, and the primary type of intervention strategy was nutritional via modification of PN composition. Other peri-interventional strategies included vitamin D supplementation for a baseline deficiency (12.8 ng/dL) and initiation of 3 weeks of ursodeoxycholic acid by the hepatology team. Pertinent medication use throughout admission is outlined for review .
Upon admission to our facility for nutrition optimization, the Registered Dietitian increased the protein to the maximum level tolerated (2.7 g/kg, 37 % kcal), decreased the dextrose by 62.5 %, and changed the SO-ILE to SMOFlipid with a goal of >1 g/kg/day as a total nutrient admixture (amino acids, dextrose, and lipids in the same bag) . For the first 22 days, TPN was provided as a 24-h infusion to replenish fistula losses. However, on day 23 the infusion was transitioned to cyclic over 12 h to allow for liver rest. To ensure consistency in administration, the patient received PN and lipids daily throughout admission.
Over 44 days (about 1.5 months), ALP levels decreased by about 62 % from 1746 U/L to 659 U/L . Prealbumin (PAB) levels increased by about 56 %, and c-reactive protein (CRP) levels decreased by about 62 % . Vitamin D levels also increased by about 71 % . There were no complications or adverse/unanticipated events, and the patient tolerated treatment without laboratory abnormalities. Serum triglyceride levels peaked at 115, renal function remained within normal limits, normoglycemia was maintained throughout admission with no episodes of hyperglycemia (>180 mg/dL) or hypoglycemia (<70 mg/dL), and body weight remained stable.