A 26-year-old healthy man visited our outpatient clinic with presenting symptoms that included recurrent jerky movements, which had been occurring for the previous 3 days. Asynchronous jerky movements appeared in his left face and neck area and lasted approximately 5 minutes, with irregular frequency, over the 3 days before his first visit to the hospital. The jerky movement was observed to be a form of myoclonus. He also complained of an episode of paresthesia that had occurred 10 days previously, starting in his left hand and gradually spreading up and over his left arm, trunk, face, and leg for approximately 2 minutes. He was an office worker with no history of headache, stroke, or seizure. There was no reported family history of headache or other neurologic disorders. A neurological examination revealed no focal neurological deficit between jerky movements. Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography had normal findings. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal (opening pressure, 15 cmH2O; white blood cell count, 0/mm3; red blood cell count, 0/mm3; protein, 26.4 mg/dL; glucose, 63 mg/dL). Electroencephalography (EEG) findings were normal for both the awake and sleep-deprived conditions. The jerky movements spontaneously disappeared less than 1 day after admission without specific treatment.
The patient revisited the clinic 7 days after discharge, presenting with excruciating headache on the right orbitotemporal area. He had never experienced this type of headache previously. He reported that the headache occurred around the times of sleep onset and waking, and lasted for 1-2 hours. Unilateral autonomic symptoms including lacrimation, rhinorrhea, eyelid edema, and ptosis appeared on the same side as the headache focus. However, symptoms of nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and phonophobia were absent. Thus, we diagnosed this patient as having cluster headache and referred him to the outpatient clinic for commencement of the following medical treatment: verapamil (40 mg tid), valproate (300 mg tid), and zolmitriptan (2.5 mg prn).
The patient developed a third cluster headache attack, which was associated with dysarthria and hemiparesis. The clinical features of this headache were the same as for the previous two. The hemiparesis was contralateral to the side of the headache, lasted 3 hours, and occurred within 30 minutes of cluster onset. During hemiparesis, the left upper limb was Medical Research Council grade 3 and the left lower limb was grade 4. His deep tendon reflex was normal and the Babinski sign was negative. Repeat brain Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography revealed no abnormal findings. Echocardiography and laboratory tests such as lipid profile and autoimmune antibodies, including lupus anticoagulant, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, and anticardiolipin antibody, were normal. Using 24-hour video EEG monitoring, we detected lateralized slow waves on the right hemisphere during a headache accompanied by hemiparesis . The slow-wave activity normalized after the headache subsided with the aid of oxygen inhalation . Overall the patient experienced a total of 16 headache attacks over a 4-week period, each of which lasted from 15 minutes to 3 hours, and with a frequency of one to five times per day. The headaches occurred mainly at night (6 p.m. to 8 p.m.) and during the early morning (4 a.m. to 6 a.m.). He experienced daytime headache attacks only occasionally, two of which were accompanied by hemiparesis and lasted for 3 hours and for 30 minutes. During headache attacks, the patient's pain was relieved by oxygen inhalation. In addition, 60 mg of prednisone was prescribed to reduce the severity and frequency of headache, and this proved to be effective.
The patient was discharged without any neurological deficit. He was prescribed verapamil and valproate for 2 months th-rough the outpatient clinic, and prednisone tapered over 5 weeks. He did not complain of further headaches and did not want to continue this treatment due to gastric side effects, so we inst-ructed him in the use of zolmitriptan and oxygen therapy for acute treatment. No headache episode occurred after his discharge.