A 12-year-old girl was referred to our clinic in April 2023 after experiencing flushing, hives, vomiting, fainting, and syncope within 30 minutes of having breakfast (including milk, egg, wheat bread, and blueberry) while walking to school. Upon admission to the emergency department (ED), the patient presented with hypotension (BP, 89/52 mmHg). Prompt treatment with epinephrine and fluid therapy led to full recovery within 24 h. She menstruated during this episode. Additionally, six months before this episode (October 2022), she had experienced similar symptoms during fast walking outdoors, but she did not remember the specific foods she had eaten before the episode. The patient had a history of rhinoconjunctivitis due to pollen sensitization since the age of 5 years, and was being treated with oral antihistamines on demand. The patient’s father and mother had a history of recurrent urticaria, and her father experienced anaphylaxis, although the cause was uncertain. Specific IgE were measured using ImmunoCAP (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sweden), The patient exhibited sensitization to several pollens, mainly Japanese hop (74.3 kUa/L), mugwort (26.5 kUa/L), mountain juniper (2.23 kUa/L) and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (2.89 kUa/L), Dermatophagoides farina (13.2kUa/L), but that for common foods (including soybean, egg, milk, wheat, peanut, crab, shrimp) was negative . Regarding specific IgE to allergen components, the patient showed sensitization primarily to LTP components from mugwort Art v 3 (79.7 kUa/L), wheat Tri a 14 (12.4 kUa/L) and peach Pru p 3 (2.15 kUa/L), but tested negative for omega-5 gliadin. Prick-to-prick testing (PPT) was performed on 22 fruit and wheat allergens (salt-soluble proteins and gliadins). Histamine and normal saline were used as the positive and negative controls, respectively (Beijing Macro-Union Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Beijing, China). The prick test results were positive for blueberries (wheal size 9.5 mm), cherries (wheal size 6.5 mm), kiwifruits (wheal size 6 mm), and pears (wheal size 4.5 mm) ( and ). Challenges were not performed due to ethical and safety concerns, considering the high clinical suspicion of blueberry hypersensitivity based on the patient’s clinical history and confirmed blueberry sensitization on skin testing. Our patient was provided with an epi-pen and advised to avoid consuming relevant fruits. After four months of follow-up, the patient had not experienced any episodes of anaphylaxis since these recommendations were implemented.