A 14-year-old male patient presented with chest pain for 2 months and hemoptysis for 3 days. There was no clinically relevant medical history, and no family history of malignancies or autoimmune diseases. The patient showed no signs of infection and the physical examination results were normal. A non-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed a soft tissue mass in the anterior superior mediastinum, but the structure was not clear. Laboratory tests showed the C-reactive protein (CRP) was slightly elevated (0.94 mg/dL, normal: < 0.8 mg/dL) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was within the normal range (9 mm/h, normal: 2–15 mm/h). There were no meaningful findings in the laboratory indicators of infectious diseases, tumors, or autoimmune diseases . Echocardiography showed that the left and right pulmonary arteries and pulmonary veins, aortic root, proximal left and right coronary arteries, left and right atria, base of the left ventricle, and both sides of the atrial septum were surrounded by masses with medium level of echogenicity, some of them not clearly separated from the myocardium. The pulmonary arteries and pulmonary veins were narrowed, and blood flow velocity was increased in the left and right pulmonary arteries. There was a mild enlargement of right heart chambers, mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation with a gradient of 53 mmHg, and small pericardial effusion . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated slightly longer T1 and longer T2 signal lesions in the same area as the echocardiographic abnormalities. We considered inflammatory granulomatous lesions and malignant tumors in the differential diagnosis . Because diagnosis could not be determined based on these findings, we scheduled the patient for thoracoscopy and biopsy of the mediastinum and myocardium.
During thoracoscopy, we observed bulging lesions around the left superior and inferior veins of the left atrium (3 × 2 cm), lateral wall of the left atrium and left ventricular (4 × 3 cm), and the top of the left atrium (3 × 2 cm). The lesions were hard/brittle and bled easily upon touch. The same lesions were present in the transverse pericardial sinus and around the pulmonary arteries. The pathological examination revealed the lesions consisted of hyperplastic fibrous tissues with infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells, a blurry lesion boundary, and involvement of the surrounding adipose tissue, with a surrounding of small nerves and blood vessels. There was no evidence of granuloma or malignant cells, and the IgG4 staining test was negative. Fungal culture and acid-fast staining tests were also negative. After multidisciplinary discussion, we made a diagnosis of idiopathic FM based on the highly suggestive radiology, definitive pathological results, and the exclusion of other diagnoses.
Glucocorticoid is a standard treatment for FM. Thus, we initially prescribed 6 prednisone tablets (total dose: 30 mg) per day. We initially reduced the dose by 1 tablet every 3 months; when the dose was 15 mg per day, we reduced the dose by 1 tablet every 6 months. Eventually, we maintained the dose at 1 tablet (5 mg) per day. During the 4 years of follow-up, there was no recurrence of symptoms, the imaging findings revealed significant improvement , and the laboratory results for CRP, ESR, and autoimmune indicators were all normal.