A 36-year-old woman at 9 weeks' gestation was transferred to our facility with severe posterior neck pain. She presented with a four month history of severe pain from the back of both ears to the ridge of the shoulder with symptoms gradually worsening at eight weeks of pregnancy. She also complained of numbness in fingers of both hands and difficulty in raising the right upper extremity. No significant muscle weakness in the lower extremities was identified. No unusual findings on cervical radiographs and computed tomography (CT) images were found. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an oval-shaped tumor (size: 30 × 15 mm) in the intradural space with a T1 – weighted image (WI) low and a T2 – WI high at the level from the C2 to C3 vertebrae. MRI showed that the spinal tumor severely compressed the spinal cord . The initial diagnosis was an intradural extramedullary tumor.
Because of the patient's severe pain and progressing neurological symptoms, the patient felt that it was difficult to wait for the surgery until after delivery. The therapeutic strategy was determined by consulting with obstetric and anesthesia teams. Based on the results of consultations, the spinal cord tumor resection under general anesthesia at 12 weeks of gestation was planned. The patient and her family received sufficient explanation for the necessity of surgery, the method of general anesthesia, possible risks of the surgery, and complications. With an adequate understanding of the surgical treatment, the patient provided informed consent. Under general anesthesia with the use of intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring, a hemi-laminoplasty of C2 to C3 was performed in a prone position, and the spinal tumor was resected totally under microscopy . Inter-lamina spacers (Centerpiece®, Medtronics, City, State, USA) were placed at the C2 and C3 lamina, followed by a dura suture . Motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) were monitored continuously during surgery; no significant changes in MEP amplitude were observed.
Histology (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining) of the removed tumor showed spindle-shaped cells in multiple directions in a myxoid collagenous background . The pathological diagnosis following surgery was schwannoma. The patient's neurological symptoms were significantly improved post-surgery. The post-operative MRI showed no residual tumor and the spinal cord was released . The post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on post-operative day 14. Six months following the operation, she delivered a healthy baby in her 40th week of pregnancy. At a 12-month follow-up, the patient had no neck pain or neurological findings and no abnormalities were observed during medical examinations of both mother and child.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues, as previously reported. In short, following endogenous peroxidase inactivation and heat-induced epitope retrieval, the sections were stained with estrogen receptor α antibody (M7047: Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), estrogen receptor β (M7292: Agilent) and progesterone receptor (MA5-14505: Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA). Mouse IgG (Agilent) was used as the isotype or negative control. The sections were visualized using the universal immuno-enzyme polymer method (Histofine Simple Stain MAX-PO; Nichirei Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan) and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB; Dojindo, Tokyo, Japan), followed by counterstaining with Mayer's hematoxylin. Weak immunoreactivity against the estrogen α receptor was found on the nuclei and in the cytoplasm of schwannoma cells . On the other hand, intense immunoreactivity against the estrogen β receptor was clearly identified on the nuclei and in the cytoplasm of schwannoma cells . No significant immunoreactivity against the progesterone receptor was identified . No immunoreactivity was found in the isotype (negative) control .