An 89-year-old caucasian female presented to the emergency department at an outside hospital with a 12-hour history of right medial thigh pain that radiated to the right buttocks and down the right leg. She reports that she was in the attic that morning when she stepped over a box and felt a sharp pain in her groin. The patient also reported the appearance of small bulge in her groin that had disappeared prior to her presentation. The patient’s medical history was significant for atrial fibrillation and transient ischemic attack. She also had a history of breast cancer 30 years ago and is now cancer free. Current medications were significant for Eliquis 2.5 mg twice daily. Surgical history was significant for laparoscopic cholecystectomy, double mastectomy, and total abdominal hysterectomy. There was no pertinent family history relating to this case. She has had two pregnancies and has two living children, which were born via standard vaginal delivery. Socially, the patient is widowed, retired, lives at home, and does not smoke or drink alcohol.
Physical examination revealed a pleasant frail female in no acute distress. Her heart had a regular rate and rhythm, and her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. She exhibited mild distention of the abdomen and no peritoneal signs. Neurologically, she was intact with no focal deficits; her sensation and strength were intact and equal on both sides. She had no lymphadenopathy, edema, or cyanosis. Blood pressure was 158/70, pulse was 80 with regular rate and rhythm, and temperature was 97.8℉. BMI was 16.46 kg/m2. Inguinal and femoral hernias were not found on light or deep palpation. Rectal examination revealed no frank blood, fissures, or palpable masses. Complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, hepatic function panel, magnesium, phosphorus, and prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (PT-INR) were all within normal limits. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis identified a loop of small bowel in the right obturator canal that appeared to be causing a small bowel obstruction .
Patient was made nil by mouth, given Rocephin 1 g intravenous and Flagyl 500 mg intravenous, and taken to the operating room emergently for diagnostic laparoscopy with transabdominal extraperitoneal obturator hernia repair, and possible small bowel resection. On initial laparoscopic exploration, several loops of dilated bowel were visualized. A loop of bowel was found within the right obturator canal, was reduced, and displayed an obvious transition point. The bowel was pink and appeared healthy; therefore, resection was not performed . A flap of peritoneum was dissected back to expose the pelvic floor and obturator hernia. A piece of polypropylene mesh was placed over the entire inguinal floor to include the obturator foramen. The pelvic floor was reperitonealized. Postoperatively, she resumed her normal diet without nausea or vomiting and began passing flatus. She was discharged on postoperative day 2 without any complications with five tablets of Roxicodone PO 5 mg for pain control. Because of the out-of-town location of the patient’s home address, further follow-up was not possible.