A 36-year-old man presented to the Neurosurgery Department of our hospital complaining of worsening headache, accompanied by fainting and numbness in his right upper extremities.
The patient’s symptoms started 2 years prior with intermittent headache, dizziness, and vomiting, without any obvious predisposing causes.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The clinical neurological examination revealed right upper extremities hypoesthesia and numbness. There were no seizures or disorder of consciousness.
The blood analysis, blood biochemistries, as well as urine analysis were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas were also normal. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal.
Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) and contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed before surgery.
CT showed an irregular hypodense and isodense mixed mass in the right frontal lobe, which had caused obvious peritumoral edema . The right frontal bone became thin . Subsequent brain MRI revealed a large cystic solid mass in the right frontal lobe . The solid part of the mass measured approximately 4 cm × 3 cm × 2.5 cm. Compared with gray matter, the solid part of the mass was slightly heterogeneous and hyperintense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and slightly hypointense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI). It showed isointensity on fluid attenuated inversion recovery and diffusion-weighted imaging. Several spots of hypointensity on T1WI and hyperintensity on T2WI in the solid part of the lesion were also found. Multiple cysts with nonuniform size comprised the cystic part, which showed hypointensity on T1WI and hyperintensity on T2WI. The signal was little higher than cerebrospinal fluid on T2WI. The cystic walls were thin. The solid part and cystic wall were strongly enhanced after gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid administration. The whole mass had an unclear boundary with adjacent brain issue, and heavy peritumoral edema. The dural tail sign was observed. The anterior horn of the right lateral ventricle was compressed, and the brain midline was shifted to the left.
Due to the aforementioned imaging findings, differential diagnosis mainly included meningioma (World Health Organization [WHO] grade II or higher), while the possibility of metastatic tumor and primary solitary intracranial malignant melanoma could not entirely be excluded.
With regard to this case, radiologic findings were more fit for meningioma due to the present of dural tail and significant enhancement. But the presence of heavy peritumoral edema and unclear boundary make it tend to be more aggressive and higher grade, which are different from typical imaging characteristics of benign meningioma. So, the diagnosis of meningioma (WHO grade II or higher) was suspected. Meanwhile, the possibility of metastatic tumor and primary solitary intracranial malignant melanoma could not entirely be excluded. However, the peritumoral multiple cystic with nonuniform size and thin wall does not tend to be necrosis, which does not fit the aforementioned tumors. The preoperative diagnosis is challenging.
The patient underwent right frontotemporal craniotomy to resect the lump. Intraoperative observation showed that the tumor was located on the surface of the right frontal lobe and involved the anterior cranial fossa. The mass was cystic solid. The solid part of the mass was flesh pink, with tough texture and moderate blood supply. The diameter of the solid part was approximately 3.5 cm. There were multiple cysts behind the solid part, and they were filled with yellowish fluid. The lump invaded the dura mater and grew towards the skull. Gross total resection was achieved.
After resection, the tumor was observed by hematoxylin and eosin staining (H&E) and immunohistochemical examination (including epithelial membrane antigen [EMA], vimentin, leukocyte common antigen [LCA], cluster of differentiation 3 [CD3], CD20, CD138, CD38, S-100, glial fibrillary acidic protein, PR and Ki-67). Histopathological examination revealed a gray–white and taupe appearance with tough tissue on the sections of the gross specimen . H&E staining showed that there were multiple nests of meningothelial cells and syncytial tumor cells arranged in sheets or weaving. The nuclei of the tumor cells appeared uniform in size with obvious atypia. Tumor stroma was infiltrated with large numbers of lymphocytes and plasmocytes, and local focus of lymphoid follicular formation. Immunohistochemical examination showed that the tumor cells were positive for EMA, vimentin, LCA, CD3, CD20, CD138 and CD38, and negative for S-100, glial fibrillary acidic protein and PR. The average proportion of Ki-67 positive cells was < 5%.