A 75-year-old male presented to the local emergency department exhibiting symptoms consistent with anaphylaxis. When found by his son in law he was flushed and unresponsive. On arrival of emergency medical personnel he was found to be hypotensive with blood pressure values of 80/60 mm Hg, hypothermic at 34.7 °C orally, and hypoxemic with a sPO2 of 88 % by pulse oximetry. He received a 500 cc IV normal saline bolus with EMS. In the emergency department he remained hypotensive with a blood pressure of 71/44 mm Hg. He was treated with 3000 cc of IV crystalloid, epinephrine 1:1000 0.3 mg IM once, diphenhydramine 25 mg IV with a second 50 mg IV dose, ranitidine 150 mg IV once, and methylprednisolone 250 mg IV once with improvement. He suffered a type 2 MI, which was felt to be related to anaphylaxis-associated hypotension after assessment by Cardiology. A serum tryptase value was not obtained by the emergency room physician at the time of his presentation.
He had no previous history of anaphylaxis, atopy, lymphoproliferative disorder or other neoplasm. His daily medications included aspirin 81 mg daily, and this, in addition to his other regular medications was continued post reaction. He did not take additional doses of aspirin, over the counter or herbal products on the day of reaction. He had not been started on any new medications. There was no family history of atopy. The Allergy and Clinical Immunology Service was contacted by the emergency physician, at which time the food intake history was unclear, and given his profound hypotension at presentation, a concern of a MCAS was raised. This is consistent with suggestions to investigate for MCAS in patient’s presenting with anaphylaxis with profound cardiovascular derangement and lacking documented urticaria, even if likely attributed to an IgE mediated reaction . He was therefore discharged on cetirizine 10 mg orally daily, prednisone 50 mg orally for 5 days, diphenhydramine 25–50 mg orally q6 h as needed, and an epinephrine auto-injector. He was subsequently assessed in the Adult Allergy and Clinical Immunology outpatient clinic.
Between the anaphylactic episode and his appointment at the Allergy Clinic [approximate time 1 month] he consumed Atlantic cod without reaction. A food history obtained at his first visit revealed his initial event had developed following ingestion of a mixed fish and shellfish stew, which he had consumed without reaction on a regular basis. Following the meal he was alone in his room, until being found unresponsive by his son-in-law 3 h later. The patient could not recall the timeline of onset of symptoms, as his recall of the entire event was limited. Due to the concern of a potential underlying MCAS and the severity of his initial reaction it was felt safest to continue H1 receptor antagonist therapy, and due to the interference of anti-histamines on skin prick testing this was deferred for use of ImmunoCAP® [serum specific IgE (Phadia, Sweden)] for shellfish, finned fish and Hymenoptera venom. He was given an epinephrine auto-injector to be used in the event of subsequent anaphylactic reaction. At follow up his serum specific IgE was high positive for Shrimp at 13.7 kUA/L, and Crab at 7.3 kUA/L, moderately positive for Lobster at 2.9 kUA/L and Clam at 0.9 kUA/L, while testing negative with values <0.35 kUA/L for Salmon, Walleye Pike and Whitefish .
While both skin prick testing and serum specific IgE demonstrate the existence of clinical sensitization, they do not provide evidence for clinical allergy. Serum specific IgE has been reported to be in agreement with skin prick testing from between 50 and 90 % of the time, with average values between 70 and 75 %, and similar values in agreement between supervised challenges . The interpretation of skin prick tests and serum specific IgE requires evaluation of historical features, physical examination and, at times, supervised challenge . Although a supervised oral food challenge would have provided definitive evidence of an IgE mediated food allergy rather than sensitization, this was not undertaken due to the severity of his presentation with development of a myocardial infarction, his baseline limited myocardial reserve, and multiple comorbidities. It is acknowledged this limits the definitive confirmation of IgE mediated food allergy, but was made on a risk–benefit decision in the best interests of the patient.
A serum tryptase level drawn during his first appointment at the Allergy Clinic was 15 ng/ml [with a normal range from 1 to 11.4 ng/ml], an elevation not diagnostic of systemic mastocytosis, but suggestive of a mast cell activation disorder . A creatinine obtained demonstrated a value of 92, corresponding to an eGFR of >60 ml/min, ruling out reduced renal clearance as a cause of accumulation of serum tryptase .
To further evaluate for a potential mast cell disorder, a 24-h urine methylhistamine level was obtained, demonstrating a value of 103 μg/g Cr (normal range 30–200 μg/g Cr). A serum protein electrophoresis demonstrated no evidence of an M protein. He was seen by the Adult Hematology/Oncology Service at Cancer Care Manitoba to definitively exclude a diagnosis of systemic mastocytosis, for which a bone marrow biopsy and c-KIT testing were completed. His c-KIT mutation testing was negative. A bone marrow biopsy demonstrated normal trilineage hematopoiesis with normal differentiation and maturation without definitive morphological evidence of mastocytosis or lymphoma, specifically revealing no large lymphoid aggregates, abnormal plasma cells, or spindle cells suggestive of mastocytosis. Accompanying flow cytometry demonstrated revealed a sample composed of 23 % lymphocytes, of which 84 % were T cells, 8 % NK cells, and there was a CD4/8 ratio of 0.9. Remaining cells were polyclonal B cells without evidence of lymphoma, plasma cell neoplasm, or mastocytosis. Tryptase was consistently elevated at 17 ng/ml on repeat testing.
Given his elevated tryptase, he was maintained indefinitely on cetirizine, and continued to avoid both fish and shellfish, but did require emergency department monitoring following administration of his epinephrine auto injector in January 2015 following ingestion of a perogy, of which the precise constituents were unknown, and development of a diffuse urticarial rash. He was treated with a 3 day course of 50 mg of oral prednisone.
He fulfills the proposed diagnostic criteria for diagnosis of a suspected MCAS based on guidelines published by Valent and colleagues, however we acknowledge the challenge of establishing the diagnosis in the context of a documented IgE mediated food allergy, and he may be best classified as a Secondary MCAS [IgE-dependent disease related] [, , ].