A 47-year-old female patient presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with a 14-day history of severe epigastric and left flank pain radiating to her groin. Seven days prior she was treated by her general practitioner with empiric amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for suspected pyelonephritis. At home, the patient reported ongoing subjective fevers, increasing abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. This patient’s past medical and surgical history was significant for benign idiopathic intracranial hypertension for which a lumbar peritoneal (LP) shunt was inserted 17 years previously, four cerebral aneurysms requiring coiling by interventional radiology with the past 10 years, a congential strabismus (Duane’s syndrome) and a 15-pack-year history of smoking. There was no history of recurrent or severe infections. There was a significant family history of vascular disease with the patient’s mother experiencing recurrent strokes commencing in her late 30s and brother an aortic aneurysm in his 50s.
On arrival to the ED, the patient was diaphoretic and mottled in her distant limbs. Her temperature was 39 degrees Celsius and her oxygen saturation was 94% on room air, heart rate was 117 beats per minute and she was tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 23. Physical examination revealed a soft but tender abdomen, worse in her left flank and epigastric area, without evidence of peritonism, guarding or rigidity.
Laboratory findings were significant for a venous lactate of 2.0 mmol/L, white blood cell count of 22.1 × 109/L, neutrophil count of 16.7 × 109/L, C-reactive protein level of 389 mg/L and d-dimer > 4 μg/mL. A urine dipstick demonstrated leukocytes without bacteria. This patient was resuscitated using supplementary oxygenation and intravenous (IV) crystalloid infusion before being commenced on broad spectrum IV antimicrobials (piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g every 8 h and gentamicin 320 mg stat dose). A urinary catheter was inserted, before the patient was made nil by mouth and an urgent surgical consultation was sought. Thereafter, dual phase computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was performed, which demonstrated large volume hypoattenuation involving the mid-to-upper pole of the spleen suggestive of subacute infarct, with rim enhancement and marked peri-splenic stranding, with associated localized peritonitis indicating superimposed abscess formation . A thrombosed 14 mm splenic artery aneurysm was noted and perceived to be the likely aetiology of the presumed splenic infarct. A small volume of free fluid was also noted in the pelvis with hazy attenuation in the omentum and mesenteric fat suggestive of generalized peritonitis.
The radiological diagnosis was splenic infarct secondary to splenic artery aneurysm with superimposed splenic abscess presumed. The local Haematology and Vascular surgery service were consulted and the patient was commenced on an unfractionated heparin infusion, which was stopped 4 h prior to the patient proceeding to theatre. Blood cultures collected on admission flagged positive for growth of Gram-negative bacilli in both bottles after 13 h incubation; antibiotic treatment was escalated to meropenem pending identification and susceptibility test results.
At surgery, this patient initially underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy with a Veress needle used to establish the pneumoperitoneum, before two 11-mm trocars and one 5-mm trocar were placed. An early decision was made for conversion to midline laparotomy, due to excessive free purulent fluid and dense adhesions limiting laparoscopy of the greater sac. Pus was suctioned from the pelvis and samples sent for culture. Adhesions were noted transversing from the greater omentum to the spleen. It was noted that the spleen was completely perfused, however there was an obvious primary abscess within the superior and middle poles of the spleen. Moreover, the superior pole of the abscess was firmly adherent to the inferior left hemidiaphragm, with fistulation into the left pleural cavity. A splenectomy was performed , with primary repair of the diaphragm using 0-prolene suture performed thereafter, leading to significant improvement in patient ventilation. This repair was then tested by filling the peritoneum with normal saline wash, combined with Valsalva manoeuvre, which was negative for any obvious fistulation or ‘air leak’. Care was taken throughout to preserve the LP shunt. Two Robinson drains were inserted into abdominal cavity, one in the pelvis and another transversing the splenic bed. The abdominal fascia was then closed with 0-loop polydioxanone sutures, with staples applied to skin.
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred back to the intensive care unit (ICU) intubated and ventilated. She remained on 20 mcg/min of noradrenaline which was slowly weaned over the subsequent 24 h. After 24 h she was successfully extubated on to high-flow nasal oxygen at 40L/40% and the remainder of her vasopressor support was weaned off. Thereafter, she was escalated to IV caspofungin 70 mg once daily (OD), Gentamicin 280 mg OD, continuous Vancomycin infusion at 6 mL/h and continuation of meropenem 2 g three times daily. Drain output was monitored closely in the postoperative setting and an expected pancreatitis was diagnosed due to a splenic drain serum amylase level elevated at 3700 U/L.
Blood cultures from admission and the intra-operative peritoneal fluid yielded Salmonella Typhimurium that was resistant to amoxicillin and co-amoxiclav and susceptible to all other agents tested. Taking the positive cultures and her LP shunt into account, her antimicrobials were rationalized to Ceftriaxone 2 g twice daily intravenously. Phenoxymethylpenicillin 666 mg OD orally was added for post-splenectomy antibiotic prophylaxis and immunization with Pneumococcal, Meningococcal, Haemophilus influenza type b, Influenza and SARS-CoV-2 vaccines was administered at intervals following surgery.
Thereafter, this patient continued to improve clinically. She had a left basal pleural effusion (attributed to the primary diaphragmatic repair) and a postoperative pancreatitis, both of which resolved within 14 days of surgery. HIV testing was negative. The patient was referred to the Infectious Diseases team after discharge from ICU for consideration of extended duration of IV antibiotics (up to 6 weeks) as outpatient in view of the LP shunt and aneurysmal coils and for consideration of genetic testing for possible occult immunodeficiency syndromes such as STAT-1 gain of function mutation.
The final macroscopic splenectomy specimen demonstrated a central ruptured abscess with abundant fibrinonecrotic material , with almost all the spleen covered in fibrin .
Microscopically, the local Department of Histopathology noted that there was a marked acute inflammatory infiltrate present in the spleen, with abundant fibrinoleukocytic superficial material identified on the splenic surface . It was also noted that there was abundant abscess formation , with no periodic acid Schiff (PAS)-positive organisms detected .