The 37-year-old male patient was a cook working in a restaurant close to a waste recycling station and a pond for recreational shrimp fishing. The patient was generally healthy and had suffered no major illnesses until 1 week before hospitalization. At that time, in late November 2012 (autumn), he presented with a low grade fever, nausea, and vomiting, which subsided rapidly within 2 days after taking prescription medicines containing no antibiotics or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. He returned to work shortly thereafter, but soon the abrupt onset of persistent diffuse headaches and a sensation of fullness resulted in disturbed sleep. He experienced unrelenting vomiting, and in addition he recalled that he had persistent neck stiffness, even when he lay down. He was then admitted to the emergency unit, at which time his blood pressure was 129/77 mmHg, body temperature was 37 °C, pulse rate was 93 beats/min, and respiratory rate was 20 times/min. The physical examination showed that he had an alert, distressed facial appearance, with anicteric sclerae and a supple neck without lymphadenopathy. He did not have any neurologic deficits or skin abnormalities. He did not show any abnormalities in other system examinations. The patient denied any history of recent travel, but mentioned that his working environment was infested with rats, which ran through the kitchen in the daytime.
The initial laboratory examination of peripheral blood showed that his serum haemoglobin level was 15.7 g/dl, platelet count was 338,000 cells/μl, white blood cell (WBC) count was 18,670 cells/μl with 81.2 % segmented neutrophils and 14.1 % lymphocytes, his C-reactive protein was 20 mg/dl, creatinine was 1.03 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 34 IU/l, and glucose was 117 mg/dl. The initial lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure of 24 cmH2O. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tested negative for the cryptococcal antigen test and India Ink test, and had a WBC of 254 cells/μl comprising 91 % mononuclear cells and 9 % segmented neutrophils, a red blood cell count (RBC) of 36 cells/μl, total protein of 91 mg/dl, and glucose of 64 mg/dl. Based on these initial laboratory results, the patient received 2 g of ceftriaxone q12h and 500 mg of acyclovir q8h for meningitis, including aseptic meningitis.
Despite the identification and treatment of aseptic meningitis, his clinical condition did not improve. He was further investigated for other pathogens that might cause aseptic meningitis. Upon re-evaluation of his clinical presentations, with a focus on his occupation and hobby of shrimp fishing, the causal pathogen was suspected to be microbes that could cause CSF pleocytosis, apparently as a result of aseptic meningitis. After undergoing additional tests for atypical pathogens in the serum, such as the latex agglutination test for cryptococcal antigen, particle agglutination assay for IgG and IgM antibodies to Mycoplasma pneumonia, and an electrochemiluminescence immunoassay for IgG and IgM antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii, he received additional minocycline, ampicillin and steroids for his unremitting increased intracranial pressure-induced headache and vomiting.
His clinical symptoms improved markedly after day two. The follow-up lumbar puncture on hospital day four revealed an opening pressure of 23.6 cmH2O, a WBC of 266 cells/μl comprising 99 % mononuclear cells, a RBC of 141 cells/μl, total protein of 33 mg/dl, and glucose level of 78 mg/dl, compared with a serum glucose level of 141 mg/dl. Other follow-up laboratory test results were unremarkable, except for a WBC of 14,840 cells/μl with 83 % segmented neutrophils and 12 % lymphocytes. Ceftriaxone was discontinued, despite no evidence of pneumococcus or enteric rods. The aforementioned serological tests for atypical pathogens revealed negative results for Cryptococcus, mycoplasma and toxoplasma. The particle agglutination assay for HIV antibody in the serum sample and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method for detecting tuberculosis and the herpes simplex virus also showed negative findings. The Taiwan Centers for Disease Control laboratory performed an indirect immunofluorescence assay for Q fever, scrub typhus and epidemic typhus with paired serum samples, and PCR testing of whole blood samples. These samples were collected on hospital days 2 and 16.
Acyclovir was discontinued on hospital day 10, since there was no evidence of a herpes simplex viral infection. On hospital day 14, the patient’s third lumbar puncture showed an opening pressure of 18 cmH2O, a WBC of 49 cells/μl with 99 % mononuclear cells, a RBC of 1 cell/μl, total protein of 32 mg/dl, and a glucose level of 81 mg/dl, compared with a serum glucose level of 153 mg/dl.
The patient was discharged on hospital day 16 after being treated with minocycline and ampicillin for 14 days. On the day after discharge, we received confirmation from the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control of the diagnosis of leptospirosis via a microscopic agglutination test (MAT), with convalescent titers of L. interrogans serovar bataviae and L. santarosai serovar Shermanii at a 1:100 dilution and a 1:800 dilution, respectively, although the titers were both negative in the initial acute phase. The patient was therefore diagnosed as having been infected by L. santarosai serovar Shermanii with meningitis.