A 29-year-old man with no previous history of cardiovascular disease (weight 76 kg; height 177 cm; body mass index 24) presented with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. The rhythm initially recorded was ventricular fibrillation. He was admitted to another centre where a complete cardiac study (echocardiogram, cardiac magnetic resonance, ajmaline test, and coronary angiography) was performed. The specific cause of cardiac arrest was not identified. According to European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation is recommended for survivors of idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (Class of recommendation I; Level of evidence B); therefore, an S-ICD (EMBLEM; Boston Scientific) was implanted using the two-incision technique. The secondary vector (distal-tip-to-can) was the chosen configuration, and the SMARTPass sensing filter was also activated. The patient was discharged and referred to our centre 13 days later for device and clinical follow-up.
At this 13-day follow-up, no clinical complications were revealed. Assessment of the S-ICD electrograms revealed unremarkable results . Neither arrhythmias nor oversensing episodes were identified, and the secondary vector continued as the configuration of choice to obtain adequate signal amplitude. The SMARTPass filter remained activated .
According to our institutional protocol, a chest X-ray was performed, which surprisingly revealed an important inferior lead displacement (by about 9 cm). This lead dislodgement had not been previously detected during device interrogation, because the distal electrode moved to the proximal electrode position, so the detection of the device remained unchanged .
The heart did not interpose between the coil and the ICD generator; therefore, the lead was replaced. During reintervention, an S-ICD lead was found to be stitched without sufficient firmness at the xiphoid level, allowing displacement of the distal electrode 2 cm above the xiphoid appendage. To reduce the risk of displacement of the new lead, the three-incision technique was performed, fixing the lead tip to the underlying fascia and muscle at the manubriosternal junction, 1 cm left of the midline. Further dislodgement was not subsequently observed .