A 30-year old woman presented with two weeks of left lower quadrant discomfort during her second month of pregnancy. Ultrasound revealed a mixed cystic and solid left adnexal mass measuring 8.6 × 6.7 × 8.3 cm. Left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed early in the second trimester. Grossly, the left ovary demonstrated an intact 7.5 cm complex cystic-solid mass, with nearly half involved by a friable, tan-yellow tumor with papillary excrescences, some of which were freely floating within the cyst cavity. Histologic sections demonstrated a struma ovarii with over 50% characterized by the classic features of a well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma . The periphery of the tumor impinged on the ovarian capsule and vascular structures; however, no definitive evidence of invasion was seen on the histologic sections reviewed . Typical histology for an ovarian mature cystic teratoma (such as areas of squamous differentiation) were present in other areas of the tumor . The tumor expressed positive immunohistochemical staining for thyroglobulin (Tg) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1, Fig. ), but was negative for BRAF V600E. Serum Tg was 83.5 ng/mL (reference range for euthyroid status in nonpregnant adults 0–35 ng/mL) seven days after surgical resection of the ovarian mass. The elevated Tg level is reasonably expected given the proximity to surgery and Tg half-life of 65 h and the known increase in Tg levels during pregnancy [, ]. Thyroid function tests (TSH 1.66 mU/L) and thyroid ultrasound were normal. Levothyroxine (L-T4) was started to suppress thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) to 0.1–0.5 mU/L although TSH ranged 0.86–1.41 mU/L during pregnancy. After delivery, Tg was 2.9 ng/mL (TSH 0.57 mU/L). With thyroglobulin levels in a reasonable range as above, the risk of additional studies during pregnancy in terms of radiation or hypothyroid exposure, unknown risk of metastatic disease, and unknown incremental benefit of intervention during pregnancy, the decision was made to delay further testing and therapy until after delivery. Two months after delivery, the patient underwent total thyroidectomy to permit evaluation for metastatic disease and monitoring for recurrence by Tg levels. The thyroid pathology was benign.
Several months after delivery and cessation of lactation, the patient underwent L-T4 withdrawal and her Tg unexpectedly rose from 0.8 ng/mL (TSH 5.8 mU/L) to 113.7 ng/mL (TSH 46 mU/L). A concurrent diagnostic I-131 scan (1 mCi) with planar and SPECT/CT imaging revealed focal central neck activity consistent with thyroid remnant and the presence of iodine-avid skeletal metastatic disease involving the left ninth rib, bilateral proximal femurs, and sacrum . Following 320 mCi I-131 therapy based on blood dosimetry calculations, post-therapy scan revealed the additional finding of miliary pulmonary metastases . Due to high-quality SPECT/CT images, separate dedicated CT and bone scan were not necessary. She was subsequently treated with TSH suppression resulting in an undetectable Tg < 0.1 ng/mL (TSH 0.02 mU/L). In order to assess the interval response to I-131 treatment, follow-up evaluation after L-T4 withdrawal protocol was obtained nine months later, demonstrating a stimulated Tg of 0.2 ng/mL (TSH 36.4 mU/L) and negative diagnostic I-131 scan without focal abnormal radioiodine uptake in the neck or skeleton. As she was planning for a second pregnancy and her pulmonary disease was not visible on the prior diagnostic I-131 scan but became apparent only on the post-therapy scan, a 100 mCi I-131 therapeutic challenge was performed to eliminate any microscopic residual disease and more accurately ascertain the treatment response. The post-therapy I-131 scan demonstrated complete resolution of pulmonary metastatic disease; however, faint residual foci of activity were demonstrated in the left ninth rib, sacrum, and left proximal femur, consistent with a partial therapeutic response in the skeleton . Eight months later, Tg was < 0.1 ng/mL (TSH 0.02 mU/L). The patient continues to do well, being conservatively managed with active clinical and biochemical monitoring during L-T4 suppression therapy.