A 23-year old female patient reported to the Department of Head and Neck surgery, with a chief complaint of cervical algia and left otalgia sinceone year. Patient also gave a history of mouth breathing, snoring, dysphonia and dysphagia associated with taking solid foods over the last 4 months. All evolving in a context of weight loss without been unencrypted.
During initial clinical examination, on inspection, a huge circumscribed growth at the posterolateral wall of pharynx. The swelling was covered by normal mucosa . The examination of cranial nerve was totally normal either the otoscopic examination.
Panendoscopy showed a regular bulge of the posterolateral wall of the oropharynx and the hypopharynx, approximate size 6*6 cm, without laryngeal involvement, covered by normal mucosa, and it was firm, well limited, and non tender on palpation.
The scan of face and neck revealed aheterogeneous mass of the left paropharyngeal space and retropharyngeal of the oropharynx6 cm wide, evoking a necrotic tumor .
The biopsy after incision of the mucosa objectified a fusocellular mesenchymal proliferation on slide review additionally to IHC (immunohistochemistry) showed:(anti-CD99+, anti bcI+, anti-vimentine+, anti-PS100-, anti-cytokine-, anti-desmine-, anti CD34-) , which suggested a synovialcell sarcoma or a spindle cell carcinoma.
Based on clinical examination, histopathological examination with IHC and radiological interpretation, the diagnosis of soft tissue sarcoma of the posterolateral pharyngeal wall was made.
The extension assessment includes a chest CT scan, abdominal ultrasound and bone scintigraphy, shows no evidence of any metastatic lesion.
The patient was put under chemotherapy while waiting for radiotherapy according to the decision of the multidisciplinary staff. The evolution was marked by the installation of typical respiratory symptomatology: dry cough, chest pain and dyspnea at rest, after the 2nd course of chemotherapy. The thoracic CT showed multiple metastatic lesions. So, the patient was put on palliative chemotherapy.