A 63-year-old Greek Caucasian woman was referred with symptoms of median and ulnar nerve compression and a prominent mass on her left palm and thenar eminence to the outpatient clinic of our upper limb and hand surgery unit. She already had had two operations for carpal tunnel release within the last three years in another hospital and despite that, her situation had worsened.
Physical examination revealed a soft tissue mass which was slightly tender on palpation, with a diminished range of motion of the wrist (extension 40°, flexion 60°). She was also unable to flex the distal phalanx of the thumb. The mass was apparent on plain X-rays and an MRI examination showed a well-orientated tumor, measuring 8.0 × 4.0 × 3.75 cm. It extended from the deep palmar space, between the tendons and the metacarpals leaving the periosteum intact . The mass was hyper intense in T1 and had low signal in fat suppression, which was suggestive of an inter-intra muscular lipoma, the so-called infiltrating lipoma which was confirmed by biopsy. A nerve conduction study performed on the anatomically involved nerves showed alteration of the normal values due to pressure on both the median and ulnar nerves.
Surgery was performed under axillary block and by tourniquet controlled hemostasis. A palmar zig-zag incision was made. The tumor was identified and found to compress all the surrounding tissues. Intra-operatively, the median and ulnar nerves were carefully identified and protected. Marginal excision of the tumor was performed which decreased inter-compartmental pressure which had previously affected all relevant anatomic structures . Intra-operatively, we discovered that the flexor pollicis longus tendon had been severed in one of the previous carpal tunnel release operations. We decided to reconstruct the tendon in a second phase operation, four months later with an intercalated palmaris longus autograft . Histopathological analysis of the resected tumor revealed a mature adipose tissue consistent with a lipoma, and no evidence of any malignancy.
At the final follow-up thirty months postoperatively, the hand was pain-free without neurological deficit and exhibiting full range of motion. Thumb motion exhibited no deficits.