In May 2018, a 50-year-old female with the diagnosis of morbid obesity (body mass index (BMI) 42.4 kg/m2 presented to our centre. Secondary illnesses were diabetes mellitus type II (non-insulin-dependent), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), hypothyroidism and oligoarthritis. A laparoscopic fundoplication after Nissen-Rossetti with mesh repair of a hiatus hernia (Bio A mesh, Gore®) had been performed for GERD in spring 2014 (patient BMI was 30 kg/m2). Due to recurrent reflux disease, an open refundoplication with gastropexy and simultaneous cholecystectomy had been performed in 2016. Both operations have been realized in an external hospital.
Biopsies of the esophagogastric junction taken in a control gastroscopy from 09/2016 showed inflammatory changes grade II after Elster, no Barrett epithelium (see Fig. a). Additionally, a hiatal hernia was detected. A gastroscopic control from May 2018 due to clinical symptoms of reflux confirmed a reflux esophagitis (Los Angeles (LA) classification grade B) (see Fig. b).
Because of distinct immobility and little prospect of improvement with conservative therapy, the decision for metabolic surgery was taken and confirmed after discussion in our obesity board. It was decided to perform a laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass due to persistent reflux disease despite a daily dose of pantoprazole 40 mg and the procedure was scheduled as for December 2018.
Intraoperatively, the hiatus was exposed after adhesiolysis of adhesions of the omentum and transverse colon to the abdominal wall and liver. No hiatal hernia was observed. The fundoplication was reversed. Due to adhesions and scary tissue of the proximal stomach, it was decided not to create a small pouch as suitable for Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Instead, we undertook an Omega-Loop gastric bypass,with a native gastric wall for pouch creation and gastroenteroanastomosis in the mid and distal stomach. A slim gastric pouch was created along a floppy 28fr bougie around 15–18 cm in length. Treitz ligament was identified and the biliopancreatic limb was measured 200 cm. Gastrojejunostomy was performed as a vertical isoperistaltic, antecolic, side-to-side 40 mm-gastrojejunostomy at the posterior pouch wall. The postoperative course was without complications.
At the 3 months follow up visit, the patient already complained about severe (bile) reflux despite 40 mg pantoprazole daily. In August 2019, bile reflux in the esophagus was confirmed by gastroscopy and a reflux esophagitis was detected (grade A after LA classification) (see Fig. a). Biopsies of the distal esophagus showed Barrett’s epithelium without intraepithelial neoplasia. An endoscopic control 6 months later confirmed Barrett’s oesophagus (C1M0 according to Prague classification), histopathological persistent without intraepithelial neoplasia (see Fig. b).
We therefore set the indication for conversion into a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass due Barrett’s esophagus in our obesity board. The BMI at this time was 31 kg/m2. The procedure was performed successfully and without complications in spring 2020 with a length of the biliopancreatic limb of 80 cm and the alimentary limb of 150 cm (the previous 200 cm biliopancreatic limb was now measured 150 cm). The postoperative course again was without complications; the patient was discharged 4 days after surgery.
In a follow up after 6 months the patient denied reflux and showed no signs of malnutrition. A regular endoscopic control because of Barrett’s metaplasia will now be implemented.