A 71-year-old man experienced chest pain and reduced blood pressure during maintenance dialysis. His ECG revealed coved-type ST-segment elevation in V1 and V2 leads and was transported to our hospital.
The patient underwent maintenance dialysis for chronic renal failure for 8 years. He had a history of diabetic nephropathy, hypertension, hyperuricaemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism but no history of cardiac disease or syncope and no family history of cardiac disease or sudden death. Three months ago, his ECG revealed no significant ST-segment changes .
He had received many drug prescriptions from the previous hospital, including furosemide, polystyrene sulfonate, lanthanum carbonate, bixalomer, cinacalcet, and ferrous fumarate for renal failure, secondary hyperparathyroidism, and anaemia and allopurinol for hyperuricaemia. Moreover, beraprost and clopidogrel were probably prescribed for peripheral circulatory impairment. Furthermore, many symptomatic drugs such as ambroxol, omeprazole, rebamipide, tramadol, nalfurafine, vitamins, and bowel regulators were prescribed.
When he was transported to our hospital, his vital signs were normal, but pitting oedema was noted in both lower extremities. However, clinical signs such as Kussmaul’s sign were not assessed. His blood test results revealed mildly elevated Troponin I and brain natriuretic peptide levels [0.83 ng/mL (cutoff, < 0.1 ng/mL) and 600 pg/mL (cutoff, < 18 pg/mL), respectively]. His potassium level was 3.6 mEq/L, and all other electrolyte levels were within the normal limit. Notably, the level of the soluble Interleukin 2 receptor was markedly elevated (17 000 U/mL). Electrocardiogram obtained after the patient’s arrival at the hospital revealed an improved ST-segment elevation . Moreover, emergent coronary angiography was performed to rule out acute coronary syndrome, and it revealed no significant stenosis or obstruction. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography and transthoracic echocardiography scans revealed circumferential pericardial effusion of 2–3 cm, pericardial thickening, formation of a mass adhering to the atria and ventricles of the visceral epicardium and mild collapse of the right atrium ( and ).
The patient exhibited no chest symptoms for a while after admission, and his vital signs and general condition were stable. Therefore, he was scheduled to undergo thorough examinations such as positron emission tomography (PET), and pericardiocentesis was considered as a standby procedure after these examinations. However, 8 days after admission, before performing the scheduled PET, his blood pressure dropped, and ST-segment elevation reappeared during dialysis . Moreover, his haemodynamic status did not improve despite the discontinuation of dialysis, and on Day 9, pericardiocentesis and drainage were performed. Further, 450 mL of exudative pericardial fluid was drained. Subsequently, pulmonary congestion and hypertension improved, but right atrial pressure remained high, and dip and plateau findings of right ventricular pressure remained . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with effusive–constrictive pericarditis. Moreover, pericardial fluid cytology and flow cytometry suggested B-cell lymphoma.
The circulation did not improve; thus, continuous haemodiafiltration was performed, and high doses of noradrenaline and dopamine were administered. However, the coved-type ST-segment elevation remained and subsequently worsened . Chemotherapy for lymphoma was impossible owing to unstable circulation, and the patient died on Day 17.
Autopsy revealed a markedly enlarged heart with white masses in the pericardial sac, pericardium, and epicardial side myocardium. Histological findings indicated diffuse proliferation of atypical lymphocytes, with prominent nuclear fission images. Immunostaining revealed the following: CD20 (+), CD3 (−), CD10 (−), BCL-6 (+), MUM-1 (+), CD5 (−), and EBER (−). Based on these findings, a diagnosis of non-germinal centre B-type DLBCL was made. Additionally, infiltration and metastasis were observed in the hilar region, right lung, adrenal glands, mesentery, and pancreas .