A 15-year-old girl with the characteristic face of Down syndrome (DS), who had previously documented trisomy 21, referred to the Clinic of Ophthalmology of Fatih Sultan Mehmet Education and Research Hospital . The funduscopic examination of the right eye revealed a funnel-shaped optic disc with a central glial tuft and thin radiating retinal vessels emerging at the optic margin , accordant with MGS and no abnormality in the left eye. . The patient underwent a complete ophthalmologic and systemic evaluation to explore associated findings.
Her mental status was adequate to communicate without trouble. Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Her best corrected near vision was J3 in the right eye and J1+ in the left eye according to Jaeger. Anterior segment examination and intraocular pressures were unremarkable and were within normal limits (Right eye: 13 mmHg, Left eye: 15 mmHg). There was a mild relative afferent pupillary defect in the right eye. There were isocoria and normal pupillary near responses. Ocular alignment was orthophoric, and extraocular muscle movement was not limited. Refraction examination revealed myopia of -3,00 D in the right eye. Corneal topography revealed a normal pattern excluding keratoconus. There was no refraction error in the left eye. Axial length was 24.35 mm in the right eye and 22.54 mm in the left eye. Keratometric values of K1/K2 were 41,25/41,50 D in the right eye and 41.00/41.50 D in the left eye.
B-scan ultrasonography showed a conoid excavation in the posterior pole with the optic disc in the base , where as the posterior pole of the left eye was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, 3-tesla) of the cranium and orbita were within normal limits. There was no encephalocele, agenesia of corpus callosum, asymmetry of optic nerve sheaths, or abnormality of carotid circulation bilaterally.
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Nidek, RS-3000, Japan) revealed reduced retinal nerve fiber layer and glial tissue in the center of the excavation in the right eye, where as it was within normal limits in the left eye . There was no determined break, contraction, or subretinal fluid in the posterior pole , and that was confirmed by fundus fluorescein fundus angiography .
The patient had no family history of any hormonal disorders or congenital anomalies. According to the information obtained from her parents, she was delivered vaginally at 40 weeks of gestation to a mother aged 34. Birth weight 3200 g, cephalic diameter 33 cm, and length 45 cm. She was clinically diagnosed at birth as DS and her karyotype was 47,XX,+21.