A 16-year-old adolescent male presented with the left hip pain and progressive limping for 4 days without any history of significant previous trauma. The limp was mild initially progressing slowly to the level of severe inability to bear weight and walk. On examination, the systemic examination was found to be normal. Anthropometric measurements revealed tall stature and a pear-shaped body with a waist-hip ratio of 0.96. There was severe tenderness in the left hip with gross restriction of movements. External rotation and flexion were more painful than the rest of the movements. The patient was unable to bear weight and was having aided gait with assistance from family members.
Basic blood investigations were found to be within normal limits. Radiographic evaluation showed a Southwick angle of 50° categorizing the patient into a moderate degree of SCFE, as shown in . The X-ray also revealed attempted callus and remodeling in the neck region due to a pre-existent slip which warrants subcapital osteotomy procedures. Hence, the modified Dunn procedure through Ganz safe surgical dislocation of the hip was planned. Acute onset of pain with total inability to bear weight could be due to fracture or SCFE. The assisted gait with pain on weight-bearing could be due to synovitis or Perthes disease. However, the absence of warmth, fever, and other constitutional symptoms ruled out synovitis of the hip joint. The adolescent age group ruled out Perthes disease considering that even late-onset Perthes has been reported only as late as 14 to 15 years. Furthermore, radiological evaluation clearly shows increased Southwick angle pointing toward SCFE. Neck remodeling substantiates the diagnosis of a chronic SCFE, in which an acute slip has occurred.
Through the lateral approach, the gluteus maximus was reached. Gibson interval between the anterior border of gluteus maximus and gluteus medius accessed. Piriformis tendon is identified and the interval between piriformis tendon and gluteus minimus is identified. This interval is sharply dissected for 1–2 cm. Trochanteric flip osteotomy is done with a fragment thickness of about 1.5 cm leaving behind at least a 5 mm cuff of the gluteus medius. Z-shaped capsular incision is made starting from the anterior edge of the osteotomy site and going longitudinally toward the acetabulum. Then, it is directed posteriorly along the edge of the acetabulum. Epiphysis and neck transfixed with a K wire. Then, the head is safely dislocated by flexion and external rotation of the hip, as shown in .
Vascularity of physis confirmed under direct vision. Remodeled callus trimmed. Epiphysis relocated after humpectomy, fixed with a guidewire, an anatomical position confirmed under fluoroscopy and fixed with a long 6.5 mm CC screw. Vascularity was confirmed again before the relocation of the hip joint. The capsular repair was done; the trochanteric flip osteotomy site was relocated and fixed with two 4 mm CC screws with a washer. The wound was closed in layers after achieving hemostasis.
The patient was on strict non-weight-bearing for 6 weeks after which partial weight-bearing was allowed. By 12 weeks, trochanteric osteotomy site was found to be united, following which full weight-bearing was started. At 2 years follow-up, the patient was able to sit cross-legged and squat comfortably, as shown in . Radiologically, there were no signs of slip progression or avascular necrosis (AVN) of the femoral head at the end of 2 years of follow-up, as shown in .