A 41-year-old G1P1 (C-section) Hispanic female immigrant from Central America presented to the MOC complaining of left breast pain gradually increasing in severity for approximately 3 months. This was accompanied by swelling, chills, and night sweats, along with skin changes and a self-detected mass.
She reported a previous episode 5 years ago, before her pregnancy, with pain and swelling in the left breast, resolving spontaneously. Three months before presenting to MOC, the patient had visited a physician (outside of MOC services) due to left breast pain and swelling. She was diagnosed with mastitis. She was prescribed meloxicam (7.5 mg/daily, orally) for inflammation and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) 160 mg/800 mg (orally) twice a day for presumed bacterial origin. She was also on birth control pills (norgestimate 0.25 mg/ethinyl estradiol 35 μg).
The patient is a married stay-at-home mom who has no history of smoking or alcohol use. Her mother and father are both alive and healthy, and she has no family history of any cancers.
The following were noted on her admission: height 136 cm (4′5"); weight: 49.9 kg (110 lbs). Vital signs: heart rate 80 bpm; respiratory rate 14 bpm; temperature 36.8 °C (approx. 98.3°F); blood pressure 100/80 mmHg; pulse oximetry 100% on room air.
General presentation: alert and oriented; healthy appearing and in no acute distress. Eyes: pupils equally round and reactive to light, extraocular movement intact. ENT: no nasal erythema, rhinorrhea, or postnasal drainage. Neck: no thyromegaly, no palpable lymphadenopathy. Cardiology: regular rate and rhythm, no murmurs. Pulmonology: lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally. Abdomen: soft, non-tender, non-distended, regular bowel sounds. Vascular: good peripheral pulses, no edema. Neurology: cranial nerves 2–12 grossly intact, no gross neurologic deficits. Motor: Muscle strength 5/5 in all extremities.
Breast: female chaperone present during the exam. Physical examination revealed a nodular mass in the outer quadrants of the left breast but currently without the presence of nipple discharge, fevers, or regional lymphadenopathy. Despite the presence of brownish discoloration and edema, the breast skin had no stigma of peau d’orange (timeline of the key information is summarized in Fig. ).
Complete blood count, liver function tests, and renal function, urinalysis, serology, and lipid panel were within normal ranges.
A 3D mammogram and targeted left breast ultrasound were ordered and reported as a grade of BI-RADS [Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System] 5, highly suspicious of malignancy. The patient was then referred to the McLaren Macomb General Surgery residency clinic. As the fastest and least invasive option, a percutaneous needle biopsy was agreed upon by the surgeon and the patient. The needle biopsy showed no evidence of invasive carcinoma, and instead showed fibrohistiocytic and florid inflammatory reactions with multinucleated giant cells.
The primary care team from MOC and the surgery clinic agreed that the needle biopsy result was inconsistent with the degree of abnormality seen on the patient’s left breast mammogram, ultrasound, and physical examination. Concerns for malignancy remained high. A collective decision was made; informed consent was obtained from the patient, and a full incisional biopsy was performed.
One week before the scheduled incisional biopsy, the patient's discomfort acutely worsened. She presented to McLaren Macomb’s emergency room (ER) complaining of discomfort, swelling, warmth, and redness at the site of the previous needle biopsy. Based on the physical exam and ultrasound, she was diagnosed with cellulitic mastitis with an underlying abscess. The surgical team was asked to see the patient in the ER, where incision and drainage of the abscess was performed, and a sample for culture was collected (anaerobes and Gram stain). Afterward, she was discharged from the ER with the same regimen of TMP/SMX (160 mg/800 mg, orally, twice a day) in addition to NSAID (meloxicam, orally, 7.5 mg/daily) as needed. Although the results of the culture were negative, she was kept on the antibiotic treatment regimen. In addition, diagnostic testing for tuberculosis (TB) was negative.
One week later, the patient presented to the MOC; the erythema and drainage from the site of the biopsy had improved. She was advised to continue with TMP/SMX. The patient was also seen by the General Surgery residency clinic team, who agreed that the cellulitis and its associated abscess had improved significantly.
An incisional biopsy of the original breast mass was performed at McLaren Macomb Hospital. A wedge resection of the left breast mass was performed along with multiple Tru-Cut biopsies. The remnant of the abscess initially treated during the patient’s ER visit was drained and thoroughly irrigated. A Penrose drain was installed. The patient tolerated the procedure well.
Evaluation of the patient’s multiple biopsies by a pathology team found granulomatous inflammation of the lobules with well-formed granulomas and multinucleated giant cells . A diagnosis of cystic neutrophilic granulomatous mastitis was made. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) and Grocott's methenamine silver stain stains were negative for fungal elements. A special stain for Acid-Fast Bacilli revealed no organisms, with no bacterial organisms on Gram stain. These findings were discussed among the primary care physician, surgical, and pathology teams.
Three days postoperatively, the surgical team confirmed that the wound was healing well, and after 10 days the Penrose drain was removed. The patient continued on the same regimen of TMP/SMX. Three weeks post incisional biopsy, she was seen at the MOC experiencing a swollen tongue with a decreased taste sensation. A diagnosis of glossitis was made as a potential reaction to TMP/SMX; the medication was discontinued and changed to moxifloxacin, orally, 400 mg daily.
Due to the continued pain and swelling of her left breast mass, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with and without contrast, was ordered and revealed heterogeneously enhancing masses along with mildly prominent axillary nodes. The right breast and unaffected areas of the left breast showed a mild, nodular background. Periareolar skin in the area of the biopsy showed thickening, which corresponded to her surgical site, consistent with an inflammatory process. To decrease the patient’s pain and swelling from her breast mass, a 6-day taper of methylprednisolone (oral) was prescribed (Medrol dose pack). Three weeks after initiating the steroid regimen, she reported decreased pain and swelling, and on physical exam, the mass presented with a significant reduction.
The patient’s case was still under consideration and was presented to the tumor board of McLaren Macomb Hospital. Since the breast mass tenderness, swelling, and size had decreased, the consensus opinion was to hold on any further surgical intervention at that time.
At the next follow-up, the patient revealed that response to treatment had plateaued. The pain associated with the breast mass was still present and fluctuating. She reported she had been taking acetaminophen to manage the pain. Mild erythema and drainage were still present. Prednisone (40 mg/daily, 5 days) was prescribed along with moxifloxacin (400 mg/daily, 10 days).
One month later, the patient presented to the General Surgery clinic for follow-up, reporting a significant decrease in the breast mass size, and pain had nearly resolved. The following week, the patient presented to MOC experiencing nonpurulent yellow fluid discharge from the operative site. This was replicable during the physical exam, and the biological material was sent for culture. The patient was prescribed another short course of prednisone (20 mg/twice a day, 5 days). Cultures were negative, and the drainage quickly resolved. Ultimately the drainage was thought to be serous.
The patient’s follow-up mammogram 6 months later was consistent with the continued presence of cystic neutrophilic granulomatous mastitis (GM). This mammogram did show improvement over prior imaging, including a decreased density of the left breast mass along with the resolution of the surgical site of the periareolar skin thickening. Radiology graded the mammogram at BI-RADS 2 with the now known diagnosis of GM. The patient’s future care plan includes regular clinical follow-up at the MOC as well as mammography and breast MRI for monitoring of disease progression.