A 15-year-old male patient, native and resident of the municipality of Guapi, Cauca, Colombia, was admitted to the emergency department of his local health center with a self-inflicted sharp-object injury to his left knee, sustained accidentally while working in the fields. Initially, he underwent superficial lavage with saline solution, wound suturing, and was treated with oxacillin and clindamycin for 7 days, with no initial blood count or culture taken. Twelve days later, he began experiencing progressive pain, inability to flex or extend the knee, limited range of motion, edema, and erythema of the left knee. A comparative knee radiograph shows soft tissue edema with no evidence of bony lesions. Leukocytosis (16.69 × 103/µL) with neutrophilia (12.54 × 103/µL) without elevated C-reactive protein (0.32 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (13 mm/h), as stated in Table .
He was referred to a level III facility, where the infectious diseases department doctor initiated treatment with cefepime and clindamycin. The orthopedic surgeon performed arthrotomy and debridement, revealing a wound with a moderate amount of seropurulent discharge, knee synovitis, and traumatic injury to the extensor mechanism in 70% of patients, with no evidence of distal motor deficits. A positive secretion culture for sensitive Pseudomonas aeruginosa was obtained, leading to the continuation of cefepime as monotherapy, as stated in Table .
During a second arthrotomy debridement conducted three days after the initial procedure, the seropurulent discharge persisted, and 70% of the extensor mechanism remained damaged. Subsequent culture reports revealed S. putrefaciens resistant to ertapenem and cefepime. Consequently, management was guided by the antibiogram provided in Table , initiating treatment with ciprofloxacin. A reevaluation of the initial culture was conducted, and the microbiologist confirmed that it was indeed S. putrefaciens.
During the third arthrotomy debridement, serosanguinous discharge was discovered without frank purulent material, alongside a persistent 70% lesion of the extensor mechanism at the distal third of the quadriceps and an osteochondral lesion on the lateral and upper aspect of the patella. A third positive culture for S. putrefaciens, resistant to ertapenem and cefepime, prompted an evaluation of meropenem, to which it demonstrated sensitivity upon expanding the antibiogram. Consequently, management was initiated with meropenem and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
The patient exhibited satisfactory progress with laboratory results, as shown in Table , and negative blood cultures. Consequently, the patient underwent the final surgical procedure for extensor mechanism reconstruction. Upon discharge, the patient was prescribed ciprofloxacin and oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for a total treatment duration of 21 days, as outlined in Table . Subsequent follow-up indicated an improvement in knee mobility.