A 78-year-old Pakistani man was brought to our clinic with a three-day history of epigastric and central abdominal pain associated with vomiting and abdominal distension. He had no history of any loss of weight or appetite. He had no significant medical or surgical history, except for recurrent, vague upper abdominal pain for the past few years that was treated as pain related to dyspepsia.
Upon admission, his blood pressure was 130/90 mmHg, his pulse was 100 beats/minute, and he was afebrile. An abdominal examination revealed fullness in the epigastrium and a vague, mobile mass with mild tenderness was palpable in the right hypochondrium. His bowel sounds were sluggish, and rectal examination revealed an empty rectum with no palpable mass. His laboratory investigation results were unremarkable. A supine abdominal X-ray showed a dilated jejunal loop in the left hypochondrium. Sonography of the palpable mass was suggestive of a possible abscess cavity with internal echoes.
On the basis of the clinical and radiological findings, a diagnosis of small-bowel obstruction was made. After resuscitation of the patient, an exploratory laparotomy was performed with the interesting finding of a 7 cm ×5 cm jejunal diverticulum arising from the antimesenteric border of the jejunum about 25 cm distal from the duodenojejunal junction . The diverticulum was inflamed and full of semi-solid material which was later found to consist of undigested apple pieces with whole maize grains forming a phytobezoar (Figure , Figure , Figure and . Because of the weight of the diverticulum, the jejunum had twisted at its mesentery, causing obstruction. The omentum was wrapped around the diverticulum, forming a phlegmon. Resection and end-to-end anastomosis of the jejunum were performed. The stomach and the rest of the small-bowel examination revealed no other synchronous phytobezoar.
Post-operatively, we noticed that the patient had near total loss of dentition. In response to our inquiry about his dietary habits, he said that he was a fast eater and did not chew food properly, the characteristic feature of an abdominal masticator. The patient had an uneventful recovery.
Histopathology showed a 7 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm diverticulum arising from the antimesenteric border of the jejunum with marked inflammation and necrosis of the mucosa. This was a true diverticulum containing all the layers. There was no evidence of any malignancy or any ectopic gastric or pancreatic mucosa in the diverticulum. Upon his discharge from the hospital, he was counseled about dietary habits and proper mastication to avoid future problems.