A 55-year-old male was referred for cardiology assessment after developing atrial fibrillation. Initial symptoms were palpitations and exertional dyspnoea. He was on treatment with anticoagulation and his heart rate was well controlled. There was no significant medical history other than erectile dysfunction. The kidney function was normal but there was evidence of proteinuria (albumin/creatinine 33.4 and protein–creatine ratio of 43). No family history of cardiac disease was reported. The patient had no offspring.
Electrocardiogram showed rate-controlled atrial fibrillation with prominent T-wave inversion in leads V3–V5 . Echocardiography demonstrated moderate, concentric LVH . The strain analysis was not performed as the quality of the images was significantly reduced. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was requested given the unexplained increase in left ventricular (LV) wall thickness. Cine images confirmed the presence of concentric LV hypertrophy and increased LV mass. Systolic function was preserved overall; however, there was obvious loss of long-axis function. There were not regional wall motion abnormalities in the inferior-lateral wall, as well as, no evidence of systolic anterior motion or LV outflow tract obstruction. The RV was not dilated nor hypertrophied or fibrotic. T1 mapping values (shortened modified Look–Locker inversion recovery sequences) were elevated in the basal-mid inferolateral segments and low in the remaining segments (798–859 ms; ). Late gadolinium acquisition showed non-ischaemic pattern of fibrosis in the inferolateral wall most suggestive of Fabry disease and not consistent of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or hypertensive heart disease. The T2 STIR (short-tau inversion recovery) sequence did not show any oedema. Genetic testing of the GLA gene by next generation sequencing revealed a null variant classified as pathogenic. The variant was found to be heterozygous rather than hemizygous as expected in a male patient. This raised the possibility of KS, which was confirmed by chromosomal microarray and karyotype showing a 47, XXY result. We then performed X chromosome inactivation studies by methylation analysis showing random inactivation patterns (77:23 at the AR locus, 70:30 at the FRAXA locus) and thus excluding skewed X chromosome inactivation (defined as ratios >80:20). The diagnosis of Fabry disease was supported by biochemical testing showing increased lyso-GB3 and decreased alpha-galactosidase activity (5.5 μmol/L/h; normal value ≥15.3 μmol/L/h).
The patient was then referred to Fabry clinic for consideration of enzyme replacement therapy and to the endocrine clinic for testosterone replacement. He was started on testosterone as transdermal gel with dose of one sachet topically daily (borderline low testosterone values) and alpha-galactosidase infusions 24.4 mg every 2 weeks. The patient remains currently reasonably well at follow up with NYHA Class I.