A five-year-old female presented to the pediatric ED with a chief complaint of vomiting. According to her parents, the patient had been having three days of fever and vomiting up to 10 times a day, which was non-bilious and non-bloody. She was also noted to have a sore throat, poor appetite, decreased sleep, and mild cough. The patient had seen her primary care physician the day before the pediatric ED visit; rapid streptococcal antigen test was negative, and she was sent home. The patient had no other past medical or surgical problems, no allergies, and was not taking any medications.
Her vitals on presentation was a temperature of 96.6°F orally, heart rate of 159 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 66 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 93/42 millimeters mercury (mm Hg), and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. The patient was lethargic on examination, had dry mucous membranes, weak peripheral pulses, and capillary refill of 3–4 seconds. She had no abnormal lung sounds or heart murmur, and no hepatosplenomegaly.
In the pediatric ED, she was immediately connected to a monitor, and point-of-care blood glucose was obtained (146 milligrams per deciliter [mg/dL]; normal range 90–130 mg/dL). The differential diagnosis was broad and included dehydration, viral gastroenteritis, sepsis, appendicitis, obstruction, and pneumonia. Due to poor perfusion, no blood tests could be obtained but a peripheral intravenous access was established through which a 20 milliliters per kilogram (kg) normal saline bolus was given rapidly. Her initial capillary blood gas showed a pH of 7.30 (7.35–7.45), partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 26 mm Hg (35–45 mm Hg), and bicarbonate of 12 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (22–28 mEq/L).
A POCUS was conducted (, , ) using a Sonosite 5-1 megahertz phased array probe (FUJIFILM Sonosite, Inc., Bothell, WA) to examine the cardiac function. The parasternal long-axis view demonstrated global hypokinesis with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) less than 30%. The right ventricle was mildly dilated. The apical 4-chamber view showed slight pericardial effusion and decreased LVEF. We then conducted the sub-xyphoid IVC view, which showed a plethoric IVC with small pericardial effusion and small pleural effusion posteriorly with B lines.
A chest radiograph and ECG were performed . The patient was diagnosed with myocarditis with cardiogenic shock based on physical examination and rapid POCUS. The cardiology team agreed with the diagnosis, and troponin later resulted at 30.40 nanograms/mL (normal is <0.03 ng/ml). In the pediatric ED, the patient had worsening mental status, increased tachypnea, and lethargy. Fluids were stopped and epinephrine drip was started, which resulted in improvement in her condition. She was transferred to the pediatric cardiac intensive care unit (PCICU).
The same day in the PCICU, the patient became bradycardic and lost pulses. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, and the patient was placed on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. She stayed in the hospital for 10 days and recovered almost completely. She was discharged with some left-sided weakness, and mild speech and swallowing difficulty for which she is undergoing rehabilitation. The final diagnosis was fulminant viral myocarditis (due to enterovirus) with cardiogenic shock.