An 11-year-old boy with ASD and moderate intellectual disability was taken to regional hospital because of dyspnea on exertion. The breath sounds were diminished, percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 89% and 97% on 5 L/min of oxygen. A chest radiograph showed diffuse pulmonary nodules and tracheal deviation to the right . A computed tomography scan of the chest and neck revealed innumerable small nodules throughout both lungs , a 2-cm nodule in the left thyroid lobe, and enlarged cervical lymph nodes. He was referred to our department for further examination and treatment. His parents were not consanguineous and there was no history of radiation exposure or family history of cancer. Laboratory data showed markedly increased serum thyroglobulin (Tg) concentrations (2206 μg/L, normal range: 0.0–32.7 μg/L) with negative Tg autoantibody (< 6.1 kU/L, normal range: < 13.6 kU/L). Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the thyroid nodule confirmed malignancy.
Total thyroidectomy and adjuvant RAI therapy is the standard treatment for such patients; however, these therapies were considered impracticable immediately because of his respiratory status and challenging behaviors (he frequently pulled his oxygen mask off and ran out of the room; therefore, he needed an attendant full time). Even though the safety and effectiveness of sorafenib in children have not been established, our medical team including pediatricians, pediatric surgeons, endocrine surgeons and radiologists discussed potential risks and benefits with his family. After obtaining written informed consent, we decided to prescribe sorafenib. Treatment was started at 200 mg (150 mg/m2/day) in two divided doses per day (BID) and increased to 400 mg (300 mg/m2/day) BID because his Tg concentration increased to 3600 μg/L. The dose was decided based on a Children’s Oncology Group phase 1 study of sorafenib in children with refractory solid tumors and leukemia . We performed physical examination including blood pressure measurement and weekly laboratory examination including serum proteins, bilirubin, aminotransferase, amylase, creatinine, electrolytes, and complete blood counts to evaluate the toxicity of sorafenib. An ordinary moisturizing cream was provided for skin care to prevent a hand–foot skin reaction . The adverse effects of increased aminotransferase concentration (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [CTCAE] version 4.0, Grade 1), mild diarrhea (CTCAE Grade 1), and hand rash (CTCAE Grade 1) occurred . After 2 months of receiving sorafenib, his dyspnea on exertion had improved and chest radiograph showed relief of tracheal deviation . Meanwhile, Tg concentrations had remained within the range of 1500–2000 μg/L. Then, total thyroidectomy and lymph node dissection were performed 1 week after cessation of sorafenib. The left lobe was excised as completely as possible, with tumor invasion to trachea preventing total excision. The left swollen deep lateral cervical lymph nodes were dissected but superior internal jugular lymph nodes were left in situ because of adhesions to the vagus nerve. His postoperative course was uneventful and there were no surgery-related complications. Histopathologic examination of the resected specimen revealed PTC of mixed unencapsulated follicular variant pattern, Stage T4a, N1b, M1 (American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging Manual 7th edition) with positive surgical margins .
An RAI whole body scan showed uptake in the thyroid remnant and lungs. We attempted to administer RAI therapy; however, abandoned it eventually because he had difficulty taking care of himself according to isolation room rules (e.g. drink 1.5 L of water per day, change clothes, and excrete in a designated area) because of his inflexible character and intellectual disability (Tanaka–Binet Intelligence quotient test showed his mental age was 5 years). Thyrotropin suppression therapy was therefore started and sorafenib treatment (400 mg BID) resumed. Two months after surgery, he was able to ambulate with oxygen at 1 L/min. Follow-up imaging revealed regression of pulmonary metastases . The metastases have remained stable for over 24 months on consecutive sorafenib treatment (400 mg BID) without serious adverse event including growth plate widening at his wrists and knees (his bone age was 14 years and consistent with chronological age). Tg concentrations declined to around 400 μg/L and have also remained stable for over 24 months. After receiving informed consent from the patient’s parents and with the approval of the Ethics Committee of Okayama University Hospital, we conducted genetic analysis. No common mutations seen in PTC were identified in BRAF, HRAS or KRAS.