A 28-year-old female presented to the National Affective Disorders Service/Maudsley Advanced Treatment Service (NADS/MATS) at Maudsley Hospital with a relapse of her TRD. She had a past psychiatric history of severe unipolar TRD, which had previously been successfully treated with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and medications. Her past medical history also included epilepsy, for which she was taking sodium valproate 600 mg with good effect.
She was already on a combination of antidepressant medications, mood stabilizers and an antipsychotic. Her medication regime included: Vortioxetine 20 mg, Lithium (Priadel) 800 mg, Valproate 600 mg, Quetiapine 500 mg and Levothyroxine 150mcg.
Up until this relapse, her mood had been stable, and she reported taking her medications as prescribed.
On assessment, she was well-dressed and well-groomed. She spoke slowly and monotonously with one-syllable words and appeared dysthymic in nature. On discussion, it was evident that she had negativistic cognitive distortions and ideas of worthlessness. She was at times not fully able to engage in the assessment but was generally coherent. There were no signs of hallucinations or abnormal sensory experiences, but she did appear more depressed than previously and more easily distracted.
Due to this relapse, ketamine augmentation therapy was started on 25/10/2021 in the form of sublingual lozenges 160 mg twice weekly. This was increased to three times a week on 10/01/2022 with good effect. However, she complained of nausea and vomiting from the sublingual preparation.
In September 2022, her depression began to decline again, and on 27/09/2022 the treatment was switched to oral capsules 240 mg and escalated to four times a week. She reported a significant improvement in the nausea and vomiting following this switch.
The ketamine treatment showed an excellent antidepressant response. However, she began to complain of symptoms of dysuria which initially began insidiously. She described this as “stinging during and after peeing”. This discomfort would occasionally last for a few hours after voiding. These usually happened 12–24 h after taking the ketamine dose. She was managing the pain with over-the-counter paracetamol and phenazopyridine hydrochloride, which she found very helpful. She was advised to stay well hydrated whenever taking the ketamine and to continue monitoring her symptoms closely. She reported taking the ketamine exactly as prescribed and denied taking ketamine recreationally. Further examination of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) in accordance with the International Continence Society (ICS) demonstrated no history of storage symptoms, voiding symptoms or post-micturition symptoms prior to the ketamine treatment.
Unfortunately, the frequency and severity of the dysuria progressively worsened. A urine microscopy, culture and stain demonstrated sterile pyuria, with positive inflammatory cells, but no growths, nitrites or blood, ruling out a urinary tract infection (UTI). As such, the patient’s symptoms of urgency and dysuria were attributed to the ketamine use. It is possible that these symptoms could have been idiopathic and unrelated to the ketamine. However, given the temporal relationship between starting the ketamine and the development of the symptoms, and the alleviation of symptoms on discontinuing the ketamine, in the absence of cystoscopic evaluation, the association was assumed to be causal.
There were no indications of a UTI or a sexually transmitted infection. No intimate examinations, including cystoscopy, were performed.
Since the patient’s urinary symptoms were detected early and the ketamine was subsequently withdrawn early, her bladder and renal tract symptoms did not progress to such a degree that she needed to be referred to urology for more advanced and invasive investigations and treatment.
Blood tests were unremarkable and renal function was normal. This included: Na 141mmol/L, K 4.7mmol/L, urea 3.2mmol/L, creatinine 80mmol/L, GFR 89, WCC 5.2 × 109/L.
Due to the concerns about irreversible bladder and renal tract injury, the decision was made to withdraw the ketamine. The patient reported that within 3 weeks, the symptoms of dysuria had completely resolved, but her mood had worsened. A repeat urinalysis carried out at this point yielded normal results. A decision was made to begin ECT and to rationalise her medications, which included discontinuing the ketamine.