A 24-year-old female presented with acute on chronic exacerbation of several months of back pain with new right radicular pain in the right thigh and lateral leg.
On physical examination, the patient was a well-developed, well-appearing young female in no acute distress. She did not have any cutaneous lesions, including axillary freckling, café au lait spots, or cutaneous neurofibromas. Her neurologic examination was unremarkable with intact nerve function; similarly, her motor examination was unremarkable with 5/5 motor strength in all extremities.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine with and without contrast demonstrated an enhancing mass occupying the majority of the spinal canal from L2-L3 . Because of the clinical impression of ependymoma, preoperative pan-imaging of the neuraxis was obtained, including MRI of the brain, cervical, and thoracic spine. These demonstrated additional lesions at the time of diagnosis, including bilateral internal auditory canal enhancement, a small focus of enhancement in the left tectum, and an apparent drop metastasis to the sacrum [Figure –].
A lumbar laminectomy at the level of L2-L3 was performed with gross total resection of the dominant lumbar tumor achieved. At surgery, the tumor appeared to be grossly necrotic, appeared to arise from the filum terminale, and had a solid component in addition to the soft or necrotic areas.
Low-grade areas of tumor have classic histology of ependymal cells surrounding blood vessels producing a somewhat papillary appearance. Perivascular myxoid material between the blood vessels and ependymal cells create the classic myxopapillary appearance.
High-grade anaplastic areas of tumor show hypercellularity, brisk mitotic rate, and vascular proliferation. Pleomorphic cells and atypical mitotic figures are frequently seen. The MIB-1 index is high. Immunohistochemical profile is as follows: Positive for vimentin and GFAP ; Negative for EMA, CAM5.2, CK7, CK20 (not shown); MIB-1 index (Ki-67) 8–38% .
The combination of areas of typical MPE-appearing tumor interspersed with areas of ependymoma with anaplastic or high-grade features was consistent with a diagnosis of MPE with anaplastic features.
Postoperatively, the patient did well without any new neurologic deficits; bladder and bowel functions were intact, and the patient had full motor strength in bilateral lower extremities. Postoperative MRI confirmed gross total resection of the tumor.
Given the presence of anaplastic or malignant-appearing tumor on histopathology, and the presence of disseminated metastases at presentation, craniospinal radiation was recommended. However, the patient refused, and proceeded with external beam radiation to the tumor bed in the lumbar spine only. Initially, she refused any treatment for her cranial metastases, until progression of intracranial disease was documented on follow-up MRI. Again, the patient refused craniospinal radiation, opting for stereotactic radiosurgery to the growing lesions. Ten months after her surgical resection, the patient therefore underwent CyberKnife radiosurgery to five intracranial lesions: (1) the lesion in the hypothalamus, (2) the lesion in the right internal auditory canal, (3) a new left pontine lesion, (4) the left tectum lesion, and (5) a new left medial temporal lesion. The hypothalamic lesion was treated with a dose of 25 gray in 5 fractions, and the remainder of the lesions were treated in 3 fractions of 8 gray each. The patient was followed with serial MRIs every 3 months and again demonstrated progression of both intracranial and spinal disease. At 18 months postoperation from her initial surgery, the patient underwent thoracic laminectomy for a large metastasis at T6 and T8 . At surgery, it was evident that multiple leptomeningeal metastases had coalesced into a larger tumor, however, there were also multiple additional leptomeningeal foci of disease noted. The patient was again referred for craniospinal radiation and/or potential chemotherapy.