A 50-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with fatigue and swelling of the parotid glands and inguinal nodes. His blood count was normal, and no major organ dysfunction was detected by biochemical tests. However, markedly elevated values of serum IgG (6188 mg/dL; normal range 870–1700 mg/dL) and IgG4 (2970 mg/dL; normal range 4.8–105 mg/dL) were noted. Soluble-IL2 receptor (sIL2-R) (2130 U/mL; normal range 124–466 U/mL) was also increased. A high level of EBV DNA was detected in the serum plasma (3.0 × 104 copies/mL), with elevated IgG antibodies to EBV viral capsid antigen (VCA) (detectable at a 1:1280 titer) and early antigen (EA) (detectable at a 1:160 titer). Anti-EB nuclear antigen (EBNA) antibody was also detected (detectable at a 1:80 titer), indicating a chronic active EBV infection. Antibodies to hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, and human T-cell lymphotrophic virus type I were negative. Systemic positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) with fluorodeoxy glucose (FDG) revealed an uptake of FDG in our patient’s enlarged parotid glands and kidneys, as well as the cervical, mediastinal, and inguinal lymph nodes . An inguinal lymph node biopsy was performed. Histologically, the lymph node architecture was almost preserved except for an expanded interfollicular zone. Both small- or medium-sized plasmacytoid cells and large lymphoid cells proliferated in the interfollicular zone with formations of small vessels . Most plasmacytoid cells were positive for IgG/IgG4 and CD20 , fulfilling the histological criteria for IgG4-related disease . In contrast, large lymphoid cells were positive for CD20 and CD30 . These large lymphoid cells were also positive for latent membrane protein (LMP)-1 and EBER , indicating latency III infection of EBV . Since EBV+ LPDs consist of EBV-associated reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, EBV-associated polymorphic lymphoproliferative disease, and EBV+ DLBCL , we evaluated the rearrangement of Ig heavy- and light-chains by polymerase chain reaction. This analysis did not show clonal rearrangement, suggesting that the B-cell proliferation of this patient belongs to a subtype such as EBV-associated polymorphic lymphoproliferative disease rather than EBV+ DLBCL. Thus, diagnoses of both IgG4-RD and polymorphous EBV-associated B-cell LPD were made. On the other hand, there was no evidence of EBV infection in the parotid gland specimen, although it was heavily infiltrated with IgG/IgG4-positive plasmacytoid cells, but not large lymphoid cells. Ig-kappa+ cells and Ig-lambda+ cells were similarly distributed, indicating polyclonal proliferation of these plasmacytoid cells. Thus, we worked up his baseline immunodeficiency, which can potentially contribute to the development of IgG4-RD or chronic EBV infection. However, the proportions of CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ lymphocytes were normal, and a review of the patient’s medical records did not show any evidence of genetic or inherited immunodeficiency in his family.
Considering the massive proliferation of EBV-infected large B cells with the IgG4+ plasmacytoid cells, he was treated with rituximab (375 mg/m2), oral cyclophosphamide (100 mg/day for 5 days), and prednisolone (40 mg/day for 5 days) biweekly. After eight courses of therapy, FDG uptake disappeared and the size of the parotid gland, as well as the lymph nodes, was normalized in PET-CT . In addition, plasma EBV DNA became undetectable and sIL2-R (395 U/mL) and IgG4 (655 mg/dL) were reduced . Despite our recommendation, our patient did not receive maintenance therapy, because he was concerned about potential adverse reactions due to the consecutive administration of steroids.