A 53-year-old Colombian male patient with history of ocular toxoplasmosis in his left eye (OS) with signs of posterior uveitis, a retinochoroidal lesion, IgG positive antibodies for Tg and negative results for other diseases such as sarcoidosis, syphilis and tuberculosis, was referred to the uveitis consultation. He was previously treated with Trimetroprim 160 mg + Sulfamethoxazole 800 mg twice daily, Clindamycin 300 mg every 6 h, and Deflazacort 30 mg per day, associated with topical therapy with 1% Prednisolone acetate in a tapering regimen. After 6 weeks the patient presented complete retinochoroiditis improvement. However, anterior chamber cellularity (Tyndall 3 +) persisted and new findings such as multiple areas of superficial circular atrophy in 360º, posterior iris synechiae and ocular hypertension were observed. Viral origin due to the presence of IA zones and hypertensive anterior uveitis, was suspected. Therefore, treatment with 1% Prednisolone acetate, 2% Dorzolamide + 0.2% Brimonidine Tartrate + 0.5% Timolol in his OS, and Acyclovir 800 mg five times a day orally for 10 days followed by Acyclovir 800 mg once a day as maintenance dose, was initiated. As a complication, the patient presented cortical opacities and posterior subcapsular cataract of the OS with surgery requirement.
The patient presented reactivation of the inflammatory activity in his OS, despite treatment. Thus, an exhaustive interrogatory and exam was performed, discarding systemic autoimmune disease history and signs. At the ophthalmological evaluation, the patient presented BCVA OD 20/20 and OS 20/30. OD examination was normal. Positive findings in OS were: temporal and nasal conjunctival vessel tortuosity, 0.5 + of anterior chamber cells, increased superficial circular atrophy zones in 360º of the iris, some with deeper atrophy stroma fibers visualization and a small punctate defect of transillumination at three hours, dyscoric pupil in medium mydriasis and pseudophakia. IOP was 16/18 mmHg. Fundus observation for OD was normal and OS revealed vitreous syneresis, posterior vitreous detachment, 0.5 + vitreous cells, 0.2 optic disc excavation, and a hypopigmented retinochoroidal scar on the inferior temporal vascular arch.
Laboratories and aqueous humor PCR were requested. They showed VZV IgG 1803.5 IU / ml (positive), CMV IgG 18.6 (positive), herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 2 IgG 16.2 (positive), Tg IgG > 650 (positive), and all IgM tests were negative. Aqueous humor PCR analysis revealed the presence of VZV and Tg genetic material. The multiplex PCR qualitatively used ruled out HSV type 1, HSV type 2, Epstein-Barr virus, CMV, HHV-6 (Human Herpes Virus), HHV-7, and HHV-8 etiologies.
Treatment with oral Pyrimethamine 25 mg + Sulfadoxine 500 mg 3 tablets each 8 days for 6 weeks and Acyclovir 800 mg five times per day for 10 days followed by Acyclovir 800 mg once a day as maintenance dose, 1% Prednisolone acetate in a tapering regimen and topical tropicamide every 8 h until the resolution of inflammation in the anterior chamber was given. After four weeks of therapy, the patient denoted subjective improvement, and resolution of the intraocular inflammation was clinically observed.