In April 2020, a 34-year-old man was admitted with an 8-month history of progressive numbness, weakness, and clumsy movements of the right limbs. Initially, right hemiplegia had appeared in August 2019, followed by slurred speech 2 months later. Shortly after the symptoms began, a white matter disease was discovered on brain MRI, MS was diagnosed, and a treatment trial by methylprednisolone pulse therapy was performed. Despite these treatments, his symptoms worsened. His medical history was unremarkable, other than smoking 20 cigarettes a day for 6 years. His family had a relevant medical history. His father developed dementia and epilepsy at around 50 years of age, developed limb palsy, became bedridden, and ultimately died at 55 years of age. Meanwhile, the patient’s sister had experienced cognitive decline (Mini-Mental State Examination = 23/30) at the age of 40 years and was found to have bilateral paraventricular white matter lesions with diffusion restriction on MRI.
Physical examination showed clear consciousness; dysarthria; memory, comprehension, and calculation impairment; dimpled right nasolabial sulcus; dysphagia; slowed pharyngeal reflex; high muscular tension in all extremities (spastic extremities); and decreased muscle strength in the left limbs (4/5), the right proximal limbs (4/5), and the right distal limbs (3/5). Our patient also demonstrated a positive Romberg sign, pain and tactile sensory disturbances in his right limbs, right patellar hyperreflexia, and right positive Babinski sign. His Mini-Mental State Examination score was 14/30, and his water swallow test score was 3/5.
Laboratory tests showed elevated total cholesterol (5.87 mmol/L) and triglyceride (1.63 mmol/L) levels. Syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, rheumatoid factor, anti-double-stranded DNA, anticardiolipin, antineutrophil cytoplasmic, and antinuclear antibody tests were negative. Alpha-fetoprotein (14.36 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen 72–4 (56.819 U/mL), and blood lactate (2.54 mmo1/L) levels were slightly increased. The initial cerebrospinal fluid pressure was 192 mmH2O, and the cerebrospinal fluid analysis results were normal. Brain MRI showed lesions concentrated in the corpus callosum and the deep white matter of the bilateral parieto-occipital lobes, periventricular areas, and corticospinal tracts. There was an enhanced lesion after the gadolinium-enhanced MRI scan . Genetic sequencing results showed a novel heterozygous missense mutation (c.2267 T > C p.L756P) in the CSF1R gene . Further testing showed that the patient’s sister had the same gene mutation. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics gene mutation guidelines, the mutation was classified as “likely pathogenic.” The mutation was not included in the specialized Human Gene Mutation Database, the Clinvar database, or the gnomAD database. The patient was diagnosed with CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathy. The patient was treated with citicoline and idebenone for 4 days to improve cerebral metabolism. Additionally, he received baclofen and gabapentin for muscle spasms, but his symptoms did not improve significantly. Nevertheless, he was satisfied with the treatment. On a visit 8 months after his discharge, he was bedridden without working ability and had epilepsy and visual impairment.