An 82-year-old woman presented with a 2-week history of a sudden onset of acute lower back pain and worsening mobility. She did not report any other significant medical history. A clinical examination revealed a patient who was clinically dehydrated. She was pyrexial (39°C), tachycardic (pulse rate of 105/minute) and hypotensive (blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg on admission). Abdominal, chest and musculoskeletal examinations and urine analysis did not reveal any significant findings that could be attributed to her worsening sepsis. She had a leucocytosis level of 19,600, which increased to 40,700 in 24 hours, accompanied by worsening pain and pyrexia. She was also noted to be oliguric. Her lower back pain worsened and resulted in her becoming bedridden within 24 hours.
Appropriate resuscitative measures were initiated upon admission. She was also commenced on broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics. An ultrasound scan and a computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen were performed. These revealed an abnormal infrarenal aorta with evidence of stranding of periaortic fat planes and a localised perforation resulting in a contained leak into the surrounding soft tissue . The iliacs were not involved and there was no evidence of an aneurysm. The blood cultures that were taken on admission confirmed the presence of Staphylococcal aureus. The overall findings were consistent with abdominal aortitis. A white cell scan was not performed as this would have caused a delay to the operation on this patient. She was classified as high-risk for a general or spinal anaesthetic, therefore an endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) was carried out under local anaesthetic. Her common femoral artery was exposed and punctured under direct vision and a sheath was introduced. A 20-mm tube stent graft (Zenith® Endovascular Graft Leg Extension) was then cantered over the site of perforation in the infrarenal aorta. The distal landing zone was proximal to the bifurcation. A check angiography was performed pre and post deployment. This confirmed the correct positioning of the stent and the exclusion of the leak.
After the procedure, our patient had a full complement of pulses in both lower limbs and minimal pain control was required. Added risks and complications of a general or spinal anaesthetic were avoided. Antibiotics (Linezolid ®) of 600 mg IV twice daily were started after the operation and continued for approximately 3 weeks. The antibiotics were selected following positive blood cultures and sensitivities.
Our patient's problem with sepsis was resolved and her overall clinical condition continued to improve with the signs of inflammation returning to normal levels. A CT scan performed 2 weeks after the operation revealed that the endoluminal stent had effectively sealed the aortic leak. The patient was asymptomatic and well at a follow-up check-up one year later. A CT scan revealed no evidence of aortitis or leak.