A 77-year-old man underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy for heartburn and retrosternal discomfort.
There was no complaint of abdominal pain or weight loss.
His previous history included hypertension that was well controlled with medication.
There was no significant personal or family history.
During physical examination, no specific physical signs were found.
Laboratory assessments including the evaluation of tumor markers revealed no abnormalities.
During esophagogastroduodenoscopy, a superficial lesion was found in the distal esophagus. White light endoscopy revealed a flat lesion of approximately 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm in size at a distance of 36-38 cm from the incisors, 2 cm away from the esopha-gogastric junction and slight reflux esophagitis (Los Angeles classification grade A) without Barrett’s esophagus. The central part of the lesion was uneven and slightly elevated. The lesion represented slight reddening of the mucosa with a coarse surface. Most of the lesion was covered by a scattered white membranous substance and mucous that was difficult to remove with water flow, and a normal vascular network could not be seen. Narrow-band imaging (NBI) showed a well-demarcated brownish area with background coloration . Magnifying endoscopy with NBI (ME-NBI) showed that under the membranous substance there were irregularly and dendritically branched abnormal vessels without loop formations, classified as type B2 according to the classification of the Japan Esophagus Society (JES classification). Additionally, intrapapillary capillary loops with morphological irregularities, including dilation, tortuous, and caliber changes, were observed in the peripheral area, classified as type B1 . Iodine staining (1%) allowed the visualization of the lesion as an unstained area with a comparatively clear boundary, and pink-color sign could be seen . A histopathological diagnosis of SCC was obtained by an endoscopic biopsy. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a hypoechoic mass confined to the mucosa layer, which did not seem to completely disrupt the muscularis mucosa, and the submucosa layer was intact . Moreover, computed tomography (CT) scanning was performed to rule out lymph node or distant metastasis.
Based on the findings on ME-NBI, the histopathological results of biopsy and the results of EUS and CT scanning, we considered the lesion to be superficial SCC of the lower esophagus with invasion into the muscularis mucosa.