A preterm 28 weeks and 3 days of gestational age male was born to a 42-year-old G7P4024 mother (Gravida 7, Parity- 4 full term, no preterm, two miscarriages, and four living children) with appropriate prenatal care. The mother had four previous spontaneous vaginal deliveries and no significant adverse medical history. She was transferred for management to Westchester Medical Center from an affiliated hospital due to preterm labor and flu-like symptoms for two days. She was not COVID-19 vaccinated. A nasopharyngeal swab for RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was positive on admission, and the genomic sequencing revealed a delta variant of the virus. A male infant was born via classical cesarean section due to a non-reassuring fetal heart tracing. The membranes were ruptured at delivery with clear amniotic fluid. The Apgar scores were 7 and 7 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The newborn was appropriate for gestational age; the weight was 1080 g (40th percentile), length 35.5 cm (26th percentile), and head circumference 26.5 cm (62 percentile). The placenta was collected for histopathological examination immediately after birth. The infant was admitted to the NICU and was placed in isolation due to maternal SARS-CoV-2 positivity. The neonatal nasopharyngeal swabs for RT-PCR were positive on days 1, 2, 13, 20, and 28 and became negative on the day of life 37. A viral panel including Influenza A + B, RSV, Adenovirus, Bordatella, Parainfluenza, and Rhinovirus was negative. The neonate developed respiratory distress syndrome after birth. His respiratory condition was similar to that of preterm infants of his age. He was intubated for surfactant administration for a short period and placed on non-invasive mechanical ventilation. On day 15 of life, he weaned to continuous positive airway pressure ventilation (CPAP) mode. His respiratory condition improved gradually, and he was placed in room air on day 45 of life. The baby had low white blood cells and platelet count for a week after birth. A three-day course of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor administration normalized the leukocyte count. The leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were attributed to SARS-CoV-2-associated viral illness. He got antibiotics for two days. No temperature instability, altered activity, nasal congestion, or worsening respiratory condition occurred. The rest of the neonatal clinical course was typical of other preterm newborn, including apnea of prematurity, jaundice, and feeding problems. His neurological examination and head ultrasounds were normal. There was no retinopathy of prematurity. He was discharged home at 35 weeks of post-gestational age in stable condition.