A 64-year-old male presented to the emergency department with left-sided facial numbness the morning of his admission, accompanied by a left-sided facial droop. Five days prior, he had noticed left ear swelling and purulent discharge, with worsening pain and subjective fevers despite being prescribed otic ofloxacin.
The patient underwent OHT 15 months prior. His course was complicated by an episode of grade 2 antibody-mediated rejection 8 months prior to admission, followed by grade 1R diffuse acute cellular rejection 2 months later, and persistently elevated levels of donor-derived cell-free DNA after resolution of these episodes. He had a history of latent VZV and had completed 14 months of post-transplant viral prophylaxis, 1 month prior to presentation. Immunosuppression was maintained with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and tacrolimus, a standard maintenance regimen typical at 1 year post-transplantation. However, due to several periods of non-therapeutic drug trough levels related to Clostridium difficile colitis malabsorption, he had underwent frequent dosing adjustments to his tacrolimus over the preceding 4 months. He had been on as much as 7.5 mg of tacrolimus twice daily, titrated down to his regimen on presentation of 3 mg during the day and 3.5 mg at night. He had been on a relatively stable dose of 1 mg MMF twice a day as well.
Vital signs on admission were significant for sinus tachycardia up to 110 beats per minute. Facial examination demonstrated a warm, tender, and severely swollen left auricle, parotid gland, and pre-auricular area, with serous drainage and erythema in the external auditory canal. Erythema encompassed the entire left face, with a fine crusting rash. Neurologic examination was significant for left facial droop with incomplete eyelid closure, an abducens nerve palsy, and mild trismus. His cardiac exam was unremarkable, and he denied any chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, or lower extremity swelling.
A brain natriuretic peptide level of 128 pg/mL was obtained; however, neither a troponin nor a creatine kinase MB was ordered. CT imaging of the face and temporal head identified oedematous otitis externa with infiltration of the pre-auricular and parotid region, suspicious for necrotizing infection . Follow-up MRI of the face revealed abnormal enhancement suspicious for neuritis, cochleitis, otomastoiditis, and petrous apicitis, raising the possibility of Gradenigo syndrome . Electrocardiogram was within normal limits, and echocardiography was without any significant abnormalities other than evidence of previous OHT, without lingering complications.
Bacterial culture and viral PCR of the left ear discharge were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and VZV, respectively. This confirmed a diagnosis of RHS with superimposed MRSA malignant otitis externa, complicated by Gradenigo syndrome. Given his severe infection, the patient’s 500 mg of twice daily MMF was held while continuing tacrolimus 3.5 mg at night and 3 mg during the day to maintain background immunosuppression. Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics, including 500 mg of vancomycin every 2 days, 1 g cefepime, daily, and four drops of intraotic ciprofloxacin twice daily, was initiated in combination with enteral valacyclovir 500 mg daily.
On hospital Day 4, the patient developed increased lethargy and neck stiffness. A lumbar puncture was performed, with cerebrospinal fluid studies suspicious of viral meningitis. A viral panel was positive for VZV, confirming the diagnosis of VZV meningoencephalitis. Intravenous acyclovir 5 mg/kg was started and continued through 14 days, with resolution of his encephalopathy. The swelling of his ear receded, and his facial rash resolved. Throughout his hospitalization, our patient did not demonstrate any cardiac complications and specifically was without signs or symptoms of acute rejection or vasculopathy. Despite residual left-sided facial droop and abducens palsy, he was successfully discharged in good condition with home antibiotics. His regimen included 500 mg of vancomycin and 1 g ceftazidime dosed every 2 days, along with continuation of 250 mg of MMF twice a day. At follow-up 6 months later, despite a persistent facial nerve palsy, he demonstrated complete resolution of his left ear infection and abducens nerve palsy, without any episodes of acute rejection.