A 60-year-old Caucasian female patient had a baclofen infusion pump implanted two years ago to treat severe spasticity and dystonia due to advanced MS. The patient had a medical history of a cesarian section 32 years ago and was diagnosed with MS 21 years ago. MS caused her severe urinary incontinence and neurogenic detrusor overactivity. During the past two years, she suffered from multiple episodes of lower urinary tract infections (UTIs) and required multiple hospitalizations. The UTIs, in conjunction with the history of cesarean section and bladder overfill, lead to the formation of a vesicocutaneous fistula (fistula connecting the urinary bladder to the skin) at the midline of the lower abdominal area 6 months ago . Two weeks before her admission to our Clinic, a second fistula was formed, which was in close proximity to the implanted baclofen pump . Thus, she developed a high fever and was admitted initially to an Internal Medicine Clinic, diagnosed with a recurring lower UTI. Her urine cultures were positive for three bacterial organisms, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabillis, and Escherichia coli, which were susceptible to first-line antibiotics. Hence, the patient was treated medically and underwent an abdominal computed tomography (CT)-scan, which revealed a collection of fluid surrounding the baclofen pump . Unfortunately, due to poor response to the conservative treatment, the patient was referred to our neurosurgical department and due to high suspicion of a pump pocket empyema, she was transferred to our hospital. Her physical examination revealed a tense baclofen pump pocket with overlying redness of the skin . Thus, the patient underwent an emergent surgical exploration of the pump pocket. During the operation, empyema was confirmed , and approximately 80 mL of inflammatory fluid were evacuated from the pocket . The baclofen pump and the catheter were removed and sent for cultures, along with a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample. During the operation, urological consultation was requested, but the attending urologist did not consider a surgical intervention for the fistulas in this instance. Thus, the subcutaneous tissues were thoroughly debrided, and the surgical incisions were sutured. The perioperative course of the patient was uncomplicated. She had a 14-day course of meropenem and colistimethate while the fever subsided and the inflammatory markers returned to normal levels. To prevent a sudden increase in her spasticity and baclofen withdrawal syndrome, oral baclofen and a short course of diazepam were administered. The culture of the pump and the proximal catheter developed the same bacteria as her urinary culture; however, the CSF and intrathecal catheter cultures were negative. Hopefully, a central nervous system infection (CNS) was prevented. After two weeks of hospitalization and assessment by the infectious disease team, she was discharged home in good overall condition but with an increased spasticity score measured in the modified Ashworth Scale.