A 65-year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with kidney large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (G3 grade, 52.1% Ki67-positive stained cells, PD-L1 TPS 70%), and had undergone total left kidney resection and descending colectomy 3 years prior to visiting our hospital. Three months after surgery, the tumor cells had metastasized to his liver and lymph nodes around the abdominal aorta. At the time, there was no established treatment against neuroendocrine cell carcinoma of the renal cells in Japan. The patient provided written informed consent and started chemotherapy. First, he was administered two courses of carboplatin plus irinotecan; however, the tumor size increased. The patient then started second-line treatment with sunitinib, which was discontinued after 3 months because he developed a taste disorder and watery diarrhea. Next, the patient was administered everolimus as a third-line therapy; however, the patient developed anorexia and general fatigue, and treatment with everolimus was discontinued. Because there were no other standard therapies for treating neuroendocrine kidney carcinoma, bi-weekly nivolumab (200 mg/body) treatment was administered to the patient. After nivolumab treatment, the tumor gradually disappeared, and no adverse events other than a mildly increased peripheral absolute eosinophil count (300–500/μL) were observed after 5 cycles of nivolumab treatment.
The patient experience his first bronchial asthma attack at 22 cycles of nivolumab treatment and was treated with a short course of corticosteroid burst therapy with 20 mg prednisolone along with inhalation therapy with budesonide/formoterol fumarate. This bronchial asthma attack was thought to be an adverse event associated with nivolumab; however, the patient continued the same dose of nivolumab treatment until 37 cycles because a good response against the kidney neuroendocrine carcinoma had been achieved. This clinical course is summarized in the Additional file : supplementary figure. Although nivolumab treatment had been discontinued until 37 cycles, the absolute eosinophil count remained high (26.6%, 1782.2 cells/μL) and his serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels were increased (924 IU/mL). Titers of anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies remained in the normal range. An IgE-radioallergosorbent test detected normal IgE levels, except against Japanese cedar and white cedar pollen. His fractional exhaled nitric oxide level was elevated to 107 ppb (normal range: 15–37 ppb). The patient had no history of allergy: however, all of his children had allergic bronchial asthma. He also showed dyspnea on exertion, developed sputum, and exhibited swelling and pain in his bilateral fingers. There were no other physical findings, including wheezing. Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scanning detected a bilateral linear shadow which was not detected at his first visit to our hospital , and paranasal sinus CT scanning showed inflamed ethmoid, frontal, and maximal sinuses, indicating sinusitis . Although he had a normal respiratory function before initiating nivolumab treatment (FEV1.0 = 3.08 L, FEV1.0/FVC = 71.0%), his respiratory function test indicated an obstructive ventilation disorder (FEV1.0 = 1.63 L, FEV1.0/FVC = 50.6%). These results suggested that he had either eosinophilic pneumonia or EGPA. To confirm our hypothesis, we performed a bronchoscopy; the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid collected from the right B5 contained 40% lymphocytes and 3% eosinophils. Histopathological examination of a transbronchial lung biopsy sample from the right B8 showed small blood vessel hyperplasia with neutrophil infiltration and thickening of the alveolar septa with prominent eosinophil infiltration. Large numbers of red blood cells were observed on the lung tissue along with intra-alveolar bleeding , suggesting distinct alveolar hemorrhage with eosinophilic pneumonia. However hemosiderin-laden macrophages were not detected by Berlin blue staining, suggesting that the alveolar hemorrhage was an occasional event. Because he had experienced several bronchial asthma attacks and was already being treated with medication, the representative clinical findings needed for the bronchial asthma diagnosis were likely masked. To confirm the pathological findings of bronchial asthma, transbronchial mucosal biopsy was conducted. A bronchial mucosal lesion of the secondary carina also showed smooth muscle hyperplasia and thickening of the basement membrane with eosinophil infiltration . These findings suggested that the patient had bronchial asthma, eosinophilic pneumonia, and small vessel vasculitis. Finally, nerve conduction analysis showed that his right ulnar nerve conduction velocity was slightly decreased. There were no brain metastatic diseases, cervical spondylosis, or abnormalities related to rheumatoid arthritis. Although we could not definitively diagnose his neurological abnormalities, EGPA was thought to be one cause of the neuropathy. According to these findings with small vessel vasculitis, the patient was diagnosed with EGPA as per the American College of Rheumatology criteria for EGPA . Distinct alveolar hemorrhage was not severe in the clinical setting and no heart involvement was detected; thus, treatment with 20 mg/day oral prednisolone was started. After 3 months, his bronchial asthma was improved, and bilateral infiltration had disappeared, as shown in Fig. . Steroid therapy was gradually tapered; during its discontinuation to less than 10 mg/day, a biweekly dose of mepolizumab (300 mg/day) was started to treat the EGPA. Currently, the patient is being treated with both nivolumab and mepolizumab, his peripheral eosinophilia has almost disappeared, and his respiratory function has improved (FEV1.0 = 2.94 L, FEV1.0/FVC = 71.2%), with paranasal sinus CT scanning showed normal findings after a year of treatment. He appears to be stable except for his neuropathy; to date, there have been no bronchial asthma attacks or CT scan abnormalities .