In 2016, a 63-year-old Caucasian French-born retired man was referred to our institution with a 3-month history of left testicular pain and swelling. He was afebrile and in no apparent distress. Detailed clinical evaluation revealed a tender and swollen left epididymis with associated hydrocele but without torsion, focal testicular mass, purulent discharge or pain on digital rectal examination. He was in a long-term exclusive heterosexual relationship and reported no active risk factors or past episodes of sexually transmitted diseases. Standard bacterial urine cultures following prostate massage were sterile. Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhea polymerase chain reaction assays performed on first-void urine were negative for both him and his sexual partner. Syphilis and HIV serology were also non-reactive.
Past medical history was unrevealing except for a similar episode which had occurred 6 years before and for which a right epididymectomy had been performed. At that time, results of the histological investigation had shown epididymitis with caseo follicular lesion whereas standard bacterial and mycobacterial culture had failed to identify a specific etiology. A surgical left epididymectomy and hydrocele repair was performed and per-operatory examination revealed pachy-vaginalitis and sub-acute epididymitis with multiple caseous purulent collections. Testes were macroscopically normal. On histological examination, necrotizing and granulomatous epididymitis with caseous abscesses were described but periodic acid Schiff and Ziehl stainings showed no microorganisms. The patient was therefore empirically treated for sexually transmitted diseases and bacterial epididymitis with initial intravenous ceftriaxone and oral azithromycin followed by a 3-week course of oral ciprofloxacin.
Three weeks following surgical intervention, mycobacterial liquid medium cultures came back positive. While awaiting final identification and anti-mycobacterial susceptibility testing, a standard anti-tuberculous therapy including isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol was initiated. The isolate was subsequently identified as M. bovis, a mycobacterial species known to be intrinsically resistant to the first-line anti tuberculous drug pyrazinamide . Identification to the species level was confirmed using partial 16S rRNA gene (primer fD1: 5′-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′; and primer rP2: 5′-ACGGCTACCTTGTTACG ACTT-3′) and partial rpoB gene (primer MycoF: 5′-GGCAAGGTCACCCCGAAGGG-3′; primer MycoR: 5′-AGCGGCTGCTGGGTGATCATC-3′) sequencing and mass spectrometry per local procedures [, ]. Differentiation between this clinical isolate and the attenuated M. bovis BCG strain was confirmed with subsequent multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay . Antimycobacterial susceptibility testing showed the isolate to be pan-susceptible to first-line anti-tuberculous drugs other than pyrazinamide and therapy was therefore modified for isoniazid and rifampin alone. Complementary investigation including mycobacterial blood cultures and a whole-body computerized tomodensitometry was also performed and showed no sign of concomitant pulmonary or disseminated disease.
Mycobacterium bovis is a recognized zoonotic disease of which genito-urinary infection presentations are rare. Therefore, potential epidemiologic expositions were further detailed. The patient reported numerous prolonged travels in north and sub Saharan Africa in the 80’s and 90’s. During these stays he was in close contacts with cattle and he regularly ingested camel milk in the Niger desert as Touareg habit. He had never received M. bovis BCG intravesical irrigations or anti-tuberculous vaccine and denied having ever had sexual relations with animals.
The patient stopped antimycobacterial therapy against medical advice 2 weeks after initiation and still refuses to be treated. Upon submission of this manuscript, 1 year after the initial diagnosis, no local relapse had occurred and urine control mycobacterial culture was negative.