A 79-year-old woman (height, 140.1 cm; body weight, 38.5 kg; body surface area, 1.22 m2; EuroSCORE II, 2.93%) with aortic valve stenosis, hypertension, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was referred to our hospital. Chest X-ray revealed concentric cardiomegaly. Electrocardiogram demonstrated regular sinus rhythm with 53 beats per min, and complete right bundle branch blockage. Transthoracic echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 69%, thickening and normal motion of the left ventricular wall, severe aortic valve stenosis, and severe tricuspid valve regurgitation. The aortic valve area, as calculated using the continuity equation, was 0.54 cm2, while the peak aortic velocity, and mean pressure gradient were 4.4 m/s and 37 mmHg, respectively. Coronary angiography did not demonstrate any significant stenotic lesions. Medications included amlodipine besylate (2.5 mg), azosemide (30 mg), carvedilol (2.5 mg), and apixaban (5 mg). She was scheduled to undergo surgical aortic valve replacement (AVR) and tricuspid valve annuloplasty (TAP) with MAZE procedure under CPB six weeks later. Her blood type was A RhD(+); however, antibody screening was positive, and the subsequent direct antiglobulin test was negative, indicating the presence of isolated antibodies in the plasma. Consequently, her Ok blood phenotype was revealed to be Ok(a−) and the antibody was anti-Oka.
The preoperative hemoglobin (Hb) levels fluctuated between 10 and 11 g/dL. Furthermore, since Ok(a−) is an extremely rare phenotype, obtaining sufficient amounts of Ok(a−) red blood cell products for the surgery, was a significant concern. From a regional blood center, eight units of frozen thawed red cells (FTRCs) and six units of red blood cells (RBCs) were collected on the day of surgery. The RBCs were donated by three discrete Ok(a−) individuals a few days prior to surgery. Apixaban was stopped two days before surgery. The results of blood tests performed one day before surgery, were not remarkable except for the Hb level being 10.7 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) 34.4% , and N-terminal pro-brain-type natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP) 3848 pg/mL (normal, < 55 pg/mL).
In addition to standard monitoring, regional cerebral oxygen saturation levels (INVOS™ 5100C, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, US) were monitored. An arterial catheter was inserted in the radial artery, and remifentanil was infused at 0.4 μg/kg/min, followed by administration of 500 μg fentanyl. General anesthesia was induced with 7 mg midazolam and 40 mg rocuronium. After tracheal intubation, transesophageal echocardiography was performed. A central venous catheter and a pulmonary artery catheter were inserted, and mixed venous oxygen saturation and cardiac output were monitored thereafter (VigilanceII™, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, US). Acute normovolemic hemodilution (ANH) was conducted; 400 mL of autologous whole blood was collected via arterial pressure catheter, and 300 mL of crystalloid was rapidly infused. The Hb and Hct levels after ANH were 10.3 g/dL and 31.9%, respectively . Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and continuous infusion of remifentanil. Blood pressure and systemic vascular resistance were maintained by norepinephrine (0.02 μg/kg/min) and dopamine (1–3 μg/kg/min) infusion with several boluses of ephedrine (4 mg) and phenylephrine (0.05 mg), until the initiation of CPB. The Hb and Hct levels, immediately after initiating surgery, were 9.7 g/dL and 30.1%, respectively , and pre-bypass fluid administration was restricted to 400 mL of crystalloid, including 300 mL for ANH. Tranexamic acid (2000 mg) was administered to suppress hyperfibrinolysis.
The baseline activated coagulation time (ACT) was 158 s. After administration of 12,000 units of heparin, an arterial cannula was inserted into the ascending aorta, followed by cannulation of both the superior and inferior vena cava. CPB, under mild hypothermia, was initiated with spontaneous beating retained. Thereafter, general anesthesia was maintained with a target-controlled-infusion of propofol and an effect-site concentration set at 1.3 μg/mL, along with remifentanil infusion, to maintain the bispectral index (BIS™, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, US) between 40 and 60. In advance, four units of FTRCs were loaded in the CPB priming solution to avoid excessive hemodilution, and the Hb and Hct levels immediately after CPB initiation were 8.0 g/dL and 25.0%, respectively . ACT was 1000 s, and no additional heparin administration was required during CPB (the shortest value of ACT was 401). After approximately 30 min, body temperature in both bladder and esophagus was stabilized at 30.0 °C. After 1 h from CPB initiation, the Hb and Hct levels decreased to 7.3 g/dL and 22.9%, respectively, and two units of FTRCs were transfused from the CPB circuit, which raised both to 9.0 g/dL and 27.8%, respectively . Pulmonary vein isolation and left atrial appendage closure were completed and the ascending aorta was cross-clamped, followed by cardiac arrest that was introduced via antegrade infusion of cardioplegia. After AVR with a biological valve was completed, re-warming was initiated, and TAP was conducted uneventfully. During the valve replacement, cardiac arrest was maintained with intermittent selective and retrograde infusion of cardioplegia. Spontaneous circulation was promptly restored after aortic de-clamping, and CPB was terminated with a dopamine infusion of 5 μg/kg/min. The aortic cross-clamp time was 111 min, and total CPB time was 170 min. Blood tests performed after aortic de-clamping gave the following results: Hb, 8.6 g/dL; Hct, 27.4% ; platelet count, 12.8 × 104/μL; international normalized ratio of prothrombin time (PT-INR), 1.81; and fibrinogen, 491 mg/dL.
After confirming that ACT had returned to 143 s by 120 mg protamine, two units of FTRCs were transfused. In addition, four units of FFP and ten units of PC, as planned prior to surgery, were intensively transfused, facilitating both prompt surgical hemostasis and stable hemodynamics. Oxidized regenerated cellulose (SURGICEL® FIBRILLAR™, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, US) and human fibrinogen (Beriplast® P Combi-Set Tissue adhesion, CLS Behring, King of Prussia, PA, US) were applied to minimize suture-line oozing of the aorta and right atrium. Minimal bleeding was observed in the surgical field, and 316 mL of salvaged blood, primarily collected from the residual blood in the CPB circuit, was subsequently transfused. Thus, the Hb and Hct levels were maintained above 8.0 g/dL and 27%, respectively, after CPB termination . Dopamine infusion was slowly tapered to 1 μg/kg/min, until the end of surgery. The operation duration was 319 min, and total time of anesthesia was 402 min with a total fluid balance of + 546 mL. After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit under intubation, wherein both carbazochrome sodium sulfonate hydrate (25 mg) and tranexamic acid (1000 mg) were administered. Approximately 400 mL of the autologous whole blood was returned to the patient, which raised the Hb and Hct levels to 11.0 g/dL and 32.6%, respectively . Patient was extubated at postoperative hour 6, with no neurological deficits. Until postoperative day (POD) 1, blood drainage from pericardium and anterior mediastinum were 80 mL and 50 mL, respectively. The Hct level was consistently maintained above 25%, and thereafter, no additional blood transfusion was conducted throughout the hospital stay. The patient had a good postoperative course, and was discharged on POD 17. We ensured that the six unused units of Ok(a−) RBCs were transfused to other hospitalized Ok(a+) patients within the expiration date.