A 24-year-old man had an accident involving a vehicle while walking and was transported to our emergency department. On arrival, his level of consciousness had deteriorated (Glasgow Coma Scale: 13 [E3V4M6]). He was not lethargic, and his pupils were equal and round, and reactive to light and movement. Computed tomography (CT) showed traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, a 1-cm thick VEDH overlying the SSS, and a parietal skull fracture reaching a diastatic fracture of the sagittal suture . Head CT 1 h (hour) later showed increased hematoma, but there was no enlargement another hour later and the patient had no exacerbation of neurological symptoms . Plasma fibrinogen concentration at admission (304 mg/dL) was within the normal range, but D-dimer concentration was high (56.1 μg/mL). Since abnormal coagulation and fibrinolysis are likely in the acute phase, and delayed neurological deterioration might be caused by a general increase in VEDH, we planned intentionally delayed surgery after coagulation and fibrinolytic factors stabilized. Six units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were administered and fibrinogen concentration at 3 and 6 h after injury was maintained at >150 mg/dL . There was no coagulation abnormality during the course and the decision was made to evacuate the hematoma 6 h after injury.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position with the head in a neutral position and fixed in a Mayfield clamp. A horseshoe skin incision overlying the lesion was sketched . Because the SSS was thought to be injured by diastatic fracture over the sagittal suture, we performed bilateral parasagittal craniotomy, while leaving a midline island of bone including the peritoneal fracture and diastatic fracture. Dural tenting sutures and Surgicel® (Johnson and Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) were used to avoid bleeding from the torn SSS. The bone flaps were removed and a large bifrontal extradural hematoma was identified. The hematoma was sucked out and evacuated with suction and irrigation. The bone flaps were replaced and secured with titanium miniplates. The skin flap was closed in two layers and a subcutaneous wound drain was placed.
After surgery, the patient was returned to the intensive care unit with intubation and sedation. Postoperative head CT showed no residual hematoma and no recurrence of hemorrhage and contusion . This suggested that sufficient decompression had been obtained by evacuation. The plasma fibrinogen concentration was within the normal postoperative range . The patient woke from anesthesia uneventfully and was extubated on the day after surgery. His level of consciousness was clear and the postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged to home 21 days after surgery with no neurological deficits.