A 53-year-old Caucasian British, right-hand dominant woman was involved in a road traffic accident while driving a car, involving a head-on collision with another vehicle at approximately 30 miles/hour. She sustained a closed injury to the left forearm against the steering wheel, resulting in obvious clinical deformity. No neurovascular deficit was evident.
Radiographs revealed a displaced and angulated trifocal fracture of the radial shaft in combination with a displaced two-part mid-shaft ulna fracture . Within 24 hours an open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture was performed.
Under general anesthesia, using a direct subcutaneous approach to the ulna, the ulna was reduced and fixed with a seven-hole titanium dynamic compression plate (DCP; Figure ); 1 mm compression was applied.
The radius was exposed using Henry's approach. The distal radius fracture was fixed using a five-hole titanium DCP while applying 1 mm compression. The proximal three radius fragments were fixed with a nine-hole DCP . Careful handling of the soft tissues was paramount and extra care was taken to avoid devascularising any of the bone fracture segments. We also applied 1 mm compression to the proximal fracture. The middle fracture was bridged because of inherent comminution.
After wound closure, an above-elbow back slab was applied with the elbow held in 90 degrees of flexion. The forearm was held elevated in a sling and our patient was monitored for signs of compartment syndrome. Our patient was discharged from hospital after 48 hours of observation in a broad arm sling; there were no immediate post-operative complications.
After two weeks, the back slab and the skin staples were removed. There was no neurovascular deficit; only a minor but improving subjective altered sensation over the dorsal first web space. The range of active supination was slightly reduced, but otherwise a good range of movement was demonstrated. Our patient was left free of a cast and advised to mobilize her forearm.
At six weeks follow-up, our patient showed further functional improvement. A weakened power grip was noted and physiotherapy initiated. Results as seen on radiographs were satisfactory.
After three months, our patient returned to work as a cashier. She was pain free but reported a weakness in the left forearm and occasional paresthesia over the dorsal first web space.
Our patient completed the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire and scored 49.1 (measures scaled on a zero to 100 scale: a higher score indicates greater disability). She was finding lifting tasks difficult and did not yet feel able to drive. She had good and equal active and passive range of movement of both wrist and elbow. Grip and pincer strength were measured and values revealed an objective weakness on the left, although this was confounded by dominant limb strength variation.
Our patient's final review took place six months after the initial injury. She had made a complete functional recovery with a full range of movement of elbow and wrist joints, equal on both sides. The altered sensation over the first dorsal web space of the left hand had continued to improve over time. She had resumed driving, remained pain free and her grip strength had been restored.
Radiographs revealed that the fractures had united and our patient was subsequently discharged. No plan was made to remove the plates in the future.