A 72-year-old male with a past medical history of ESRD, chronic atrial fibrillation (AF) and rheumatic heart disease (RHD) status post mechanical mitral and aortic valve replacements presented to his primary care doctor complaining of left thigh erythema with skin induration. The patient had been on warfarin therapy for anticoagulation of his mechanical heart valves as well as prophylactically for underlying AF for greater than 20 years. He was initially diagnosed with cellulitis and treated accordingly with antibiotics. Despite multiple antibiotic regimens, the skin lesions did not improve and instead progressed into painful, necrotic ulcers. The lesions were evaluated by his nephrologist 2 months later who deemed cellulitis to be a misdiagnosis and recommended a biopsy of the skin lesions. The biopsy revealed pathology consistent with calciphylaxis, a lethal disease typically associated with ESRD.
The disease is known to be exacerbated by certain medications including warfarin, vitamin D analogs, calcium-based binders and glucocorticoids . Other risk factors in ESRD patients include diabetes, hyperphosphatemia, obesity, hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia. The patient was on warfarin therapy and vitamin D analogs. He was also taking sevelamer, a non-calcium-containing phosphate binder, to prevent hyperphosphatemia.The vitamin D supplementation was discontinued but the cessation of warfarin was controversial.
Since warfarin contributes to the development of calciphylaxis, it should have been exchanged for another form of anticoagulation to avoid progression of the non-healing, necrotic ulcerations. It was not accomplishable in this circumstance since LMWH is not Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved in ESRD and is associated with serious bleeding and the need for frequent dose adjustments and monitoring . The only other option for long-term anticoagulation was UFH administered subcutaneously but this approach was not taken. It is difficult to maintain therapeutic levels with UFH as it requires massive doses to do so. Because it was believed that the risk of two mechanical valve thromboses outweighed the risk of the discontinuation of anticoagulation, the warfarin was continued. Unfortunately, the lesions progressed over 1 year and the patient suffered from the sequelae of calciphylaxis despite the addition of sodium thiosulfate infusions to each hemodialysis session. With the advancement of the ischemic ulcerations, the patient developed superinfections and debridement was not sufficient to control the sepsis. He eventually expired due to septic shock.