A 50-year-old female presented with 1.5 years of right, medial sided knee pain interfering with sleep, and sitting for long periods. She denied any history of injury but felt some gradually worsening medial knee pain with everyday activities despite use of over the counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Her history is significant in that she had the same symptoms on the left knee for which she had a lavage procedure 5 years ago which provided complete relief. In addition, she was treated similarly for calcific tendinitis in her left wrist following a traumatic fall onto her outstretched left arm 4 years ago. Imaging demonstrated a lobular radio-density along the extensor tendons of the dorsal wrist that was favored to represent calcific tendinosis and hydroxyapatite deposition. She was treated with splinting, US-guided lavage, and NSAIDs and her symptoms fully resolved. Her right shoulder was also imaged in 2019 and calcific tendinitis was present. Her symptoms were resolved with a course of physical therapy. She did not undergo any serological testing, renal panel, or further hormone workup.
On physical examination of the right knee, she had full, pain-free range of motion bilaterally without effusion, lower extremity edema, erythema nor ecchymosis. She did not have any patellar apprehension, crepitus, or tenderness about the patella. She had a stable ligamentous examination including varus and valgus stress at 0 and 30° of flexion. No motor or sensory deficits noted. Her right MCL was tender to palpation along its length, most pronounced near the proximal attachment.
We obtained standing PA, standing flexion (Rosenberg), lateral, and sunrise X-ray views demonstrating well-maintained joint space and no soft-tissue swelling. A lobular calcification within the proximal, medial periarticular region of the MCL origin was noted (-).
Given the history, physical examination, and radiographic findings, she was diagnosed with calcific tendinitis of the MCL. The patient demonstrated significant symptoms which were recalcitrant to activity modification, over the counter medications, and conservative measures for 18 months. The patient was interested in a procedural solution at this time. Given the potential morbidity of an open resection, the decision was made to proceed with a minimally invasive approach and the patient was sent for an US-guided injection/aspiration (lavage) for treatment.
The patient underwent evaluation using gray scale and color Doppler sonographic imaging where a large focus of calcium hydroxyapatite at the superior attachment of the MCL was found which measured approximately 2 cm in length with adjacent hyperemia. Utilizing local anesthesia, sterile technique, and ultrasound (US) guidance, an 18-gauge needle was advanced into the calcification within the right MCL. Following this, pump lavage and aspiration were performed with a solution of 5 cc of 0.25% preservative free bupivacaine and 5 cc of sterile saline. Three syringes were utilized. This yielded return of amorphous, chalky fluid. All needles were removed.
Subsequently, a 25-gauge needle was advanced superficial to the MCL utilizing local anesthesia, sterile technique, and US guidance. A mixture of 1 cc of 0.25% preservative free bupivacaine and 0.5 cc (20 mg) of triamcinolone 40 mg/mL was injected. The patient felt immediate pain relief and tolerated the procedure well.
At 4 months post-procedure, she continued to report no pain and was able to return to all activities without issue, sleep was no longer pain limited. In addition to resolution of symptoms in her knee, the patient reported no recurrence of pain or dysfunction in her wrist, contralateral knee, or shoulder at over 3 years follow-up.
Her physical examination was symmetric and unremarkable. She had full pain free range of motion without effusion or lower extremity edema. She remained stable to varus and valgus stress at 0 and 30° of flexion without discomfort. She had no tenderness about the medial or lateral aspects of her knee.
Standing PA, Rosenberg, and sunrise X-ray views of both knees demonstrated interval resolution of calcium deposits within the MCL ( and ).