A 31-year old Korean woman presented with a 4-day history of decreased bilateral visual acuity, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, fever, and bilateral angioedema-like eyelid swelling. She had persistent dry cough after being treated with medication for 3 months. She also had usual posterior neck pain, so a brain magnetic resonance imaging was taken 10 days later, but the results were normal and treated with analgesic medication and Asian medicines. There was no significant ocular disease history or family history.
On ophthalmic examination, best corrected visual acuity was 20/32 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye, with −5.00 spherical equivalent in both eyes. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 32 mmHg in the right eye and 34 mmHg in left eye, using a Goldman applanation tonometer. She also had bilateral edema-like angioedema in the eyelids, and facial and severe chemosis . Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed clear corneas in both eyes. Using the van Herick method, peripheral anterior chambers were shallow and classified as grade I, but chamber reactions were not found. Gonioscopy revealed 360° closed angle in both eyes . Using optical coherence tomography (OCT) and B scan ultrasonography, serous retinal detachment was detected in both eyes, in addition to choroidal thickening with effusion . Initially, we diagnosed secondary angle closure glaucoma due to drug induction or to uveitis of unknown etiology. We treated the patient with IOP-lowering medications (topical dorzolamide and timolol twice a day in both eyes, plus oral acetazolamide twice a day), and planned to consult with the internal medicine department concerning the angioedema and uveal effusion.
During evaluation of the drug-induced angioedema by the internal medicine department, a diagnosis of SLE was made, based on malar rash, photosensitivity, proteinuria (24-h protein, 682 mg), and positive anti-Smith and anti-DNA antibodies. She was given intravenous methylprednisolone, 250 mg per day. 9 days after treatment, the IOP decreased to 21 mmHg in both eyes. Periorbital swelling and conjunctival chemosis decreased, and symptoms of nausea decreased. She was discharged with a prescription of 20 mg of prednisolone, to be taken each day.
She returned 5 days later with increasing periorbital swelling, severe conjunctival chemosis, orthopnea, coughing, and headache. Chest computed tomography revealed bilateral pleural effusion and atelectasis. Cardiac sonography showed pericardial effusion. Using a brain MRI, SLE vasculitis was found in the thalamus and basal ganglia. She was treated with thoracocentesis that showed exudates, and also treated with high doses of intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g). At this time, IOP in both eyes was 18 mmHg with medication, and the peripheral anterior chamber was deepened. Using OCT, decreased serous retinal detachment was found in both eyes . Using fluorescein angiography (FAG), multifocal subretinal pinpoint foci were detected at the middle phase, and serous elevation was detected at the late phase . The diagnosis was changed to secondary angle closure glaucoma by choroidal effusion with lupus choroidopathy. After steroid pulse therapy, the patient’s systemic symptom was relieved, so she was discharged with a prescription of 60 mg prednisolone and 200 mg hydroxychloroquine.
One month after the first visit, her best corrected visual acuity was 20/32 in both eyes, with −2.75D for the right eye and −3.00D for the left eye. After medication, IOP was 17 mmHg in both eyes. FAG showed no leakage from choroidal vessels . Peripheral anterior chambers deepened, but OCT detected some subretinal fluid, which was not as severe as before treatment. Two months after the first visit, OCT detected no subretinal fluid, and visual acuity improved to 20/20 in both eyes, with IOP well controlled. Lupus choroidopathy was in remission, with no aggravation for 2 years, but systemic problems such as nephritis were not controlled. Although various medications such as steroids, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofeti, and cyclophosphamide were given, nephritis was still not controlled and was aggravated for 2 years.