A 55-year-old male patient, with a history of arterial hypertension and recurrent pulmonary infections, presented with symptoms of a bronchopulmonary infection. Chest X-ray did not reveal a pulmonary infection but was suspicious for a small retro-cardiac nodule. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed several enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. Subsequent mediastinoscopy revealed the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed mild concentric left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, preserved systolic and diastolic function, and absence of valvular abnormalities and pulmonary hypertension. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography-computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET-CT) revealed several foci of increased myocardial FDG uptake. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) showed normovolaemic and normokinetic ventricles with borderline increased septal wall thickness. At late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)-CMR, multifocal subepicardial enhancement was present in the basal anterior/inferolateral and mid to apical lateral LV wall . As LGE-lesions spatially correlated with PET lesions, they were considered to represent active inflammation. Electrocardiography (ECG) findings were not specific, exercise stress test did not induce any chest pain or ECG changes, Holter monitoring, and cardiac biomarkers were also unremarkable . On initial examination: blood pressure (BP)-140/80 mmHg, heart rate (HR)-66/min, oxygen saturation-98%, normal heart and lung auscultation, no ankle oedema, and no lymphadenopathy. Bronchoscopy, spirometry, and neurologic and ophthalmologic investigations were negative. Because of the lack of clinical symptoms and cardiac dysfunction, no treatment was initiated, but it was decided to closely follow-up the patient. Although a first follow-up CMR (2015) showed comparable findings, the 2016 CMR revealed new myocardial lesions in the RV outflow tract and inferior wall . The ventricular function was normal, and the patient did not experience cardiac complaints and tolerated physical exercise well. In 2017, patient was still asymptomatic, there was no evidence of disease progression and CMR was substituted with TTE.
In October 2018, the patient presented with onset of dyspnoea and dry cough. At physical examination: BP-145/95 mmHg, HR-74/min, low-pitched breath sound, the rest was comparable to the examination at initial presentation. Electrocardiography showed an atrioventricular (AV) block Grade 1 . A new CMR showed important disease progression with increase in myocardial wall thickness, increase in size of the LGE regions, and presence of several new lesions (i.e. anterolateral/anteroseptal LV wall, anterior RV wall, and left atrium). Total LGE volume (37% of LV-mass) corresponded to a nearly three-fold increase compared to 2014 CMR. The LGE regions showed prolonged T1-relaxation time (range 1060–1090 ms; normal values at 1.5 T 997 ± 19ms) and increased extracellular volume values (range 30–60%; normal values 22–28%; Figure ). Remarkably, the global ventricular function was still low normal (ejection fraction (EF) 50%) and cardiac biomarkers remained within normal limits . 18F-FDG PET-CT scan showed multifocal areas with increased FDG uptake, nicely matching with the LGE areas . Moreover, strongly increased FDG uptake was present in abdominal and thoracic lymphadenopathies and to a lesser extent in the pulmonary parenchyma as well, consistent with nodal and pulmonary involvement. Subsequent spirometry revealed decreased pulmonary diffusion capacity. Holter monitoring as well as electrophysiology (EPI) study could not reveal (inducible) ventricular arrhythmias. It was decided to initiate steroid treatment (start dose: 32 mg/day), which was reduced to 24 mg/day at the latest (4-month) follow-up. Although the patient still complained of dyspnoea, physical examination and laboratory investigations (NT-proBNP-201 ng/L, hs troponine-0, 007 mcg/L) were not remarkable. Echocardiography showed decreased systolic LV function (EF 45%). Although a new EPI study could not induce ventricular arrhythmias, Holter monitoring showed frequent polymorphic ventricular extrasystoles and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. Because of the increased risk of malignant ventricular arrhythmias the patient received implantation of cardioverter-defibrillator.