A 52-year-old woman came to the outpatient clinic with a week of severe pain in her right knee. The pain appeared after excessive walking and is aggravated when the patient stands up from sitting. The patient also had difficulty walking due to pain and stiffness when moving her knee in the morning but reported no clicking sensation. The NRS score was nine out of 10. Systemic diseases such as gout, or any metabolic or endocrine disorders such as diabetes mellitus were denied. There was no past injury recorded. Physical examination showed effusion, limited range of motion, and tenderness in the medial joint line of the right knee.
The patient was unable to flex her knee due to pain. A knee ultrasound revealed calcification on the medial retinacular, suggesting a calcifying lesion within the MCL. X-ray and MRI without a contrast agent of the knee confirmed the presence of calcified lesions located around the medial condyle of the femur and MCL hence confirming the diagnosis of Pellegrini-Stieda Syndrome .
In consideration of the acute pain, we opted to perform UGPL procedure. First, an ultrasound reexamination of the MCL was done and showed tremendous hyperechoic structure with an acoustic shadow appearance. After the ultrasound examination, the local anesthesia of 2% lidocaine was administered locally. The first percutaneous lavage attempt was done with a 10-cc saline solution pushed with pulsating pressure. On the first attempt, some “white liquid chalk” like calcific matter came into the syringe. The calcific matter came out more after the second attempt and slowly lessen until the saline solution was clear on the seventh attempt . Finally, 30 mg of triamcinolone was injected superficially around the MCL.
After the procedure, the patient was really satisfied and felt better with the NRS score dropping drastically to 3 out of 10, and managed to flex her knee up to 30°.
Follow-ups were done 1 week and 1-month post-procedure. The patient reported no pain when walking and bending her knee during the follow-up examination and there was no complication noted. Overall, she was very satisfied with the result. We also interviewed her for the lower extremity functional scale (LEFS) Score which the patient gave 64 points and 72 points out of 80 for week 1 and 1 month, respectively, indicating favorable results . We recommended physiotherapy to help ease the pain and help the return of function completely. We did a follow-up through a phone-call 6-month post-procedure, and the patient has been pain-free, without the additional physiotherapy, we recommended. The LEFS score at 6 month was 79.