A 68-year-old male presented localized pain of neck and ingravescent weakness in his right limbs for weeks in October 2019. This patient was diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in November 2017 by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and received concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy for 34 times until March 2018. Paclitaxel and carboplatin were planned to be used. Between May 2018 and August 2019, the reexamination showed pulmonary and hepatic metastases. He underwent two times of docetaxel and six times of 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin accompany with 15 times of lung radiotherapy.
Motor power of right upper limb is grade III, and grade II of right lower limb according to the British Medical Council grading system. The shallow sensation of the right side was weaker with no accurate sensory level. His bilateral patellar and ankle clonus and Babinski sign were positive. The power of his left limbs was nearly normal.
On day 2 of admission, the patient had difficulty urinating, numbness in the perineal area. Dyspnea was observed on that night. He was transferred to ICU for monitoring and life supports.
Between day 2 and day 5, respiratory rate and blood pressure fluctuations prevented the transfer to an MRI unit.
On day 5, his vital signs were stable but neurologic function worsened. Reexamination demonstrated the motion of right lower limb was lost at grade I and grade III of the left. His shallow sensation decreased below the T6 level on the left and below T10 level on the right. Blood tests, head MRI and regular cervical spine MRI were completed. No sign of infection was observed(white blood cell: 4.38*10^9; C-reactive protein: 10.64 mg/L). The CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen) level was 6.92ng/ml (normal range < 5.2 ng/ml); and the NSE (neuron specific enolase) level was 32.4ng/ml (normal range < 16.3ng/ml). Head MRI indicated metastases in the left temporal lobe and the right parietal lobe, but respective locations had no connection with any of the neurologic deficits. T2-weight imaging of the cervical spine demonstrated a hypo-isointense area in C4-5 with fusiform high intense of the surrounding spinal cord . Due to his rapid progression and poor general condition, methylprednisolone and mannitol were used; antibiotics and non-invasive respiratory support were provided in order to prevent secondary pneumonia.
Neurologists’ and radiologists’ consultation suspected the diagnosis of ISCM, but acute myelitis could not be excluded either.
The patient’s respiratory symptoms and the neurological function improved after treatments. The motor power of his right upper limb changed to nearly grade IV, and the distal motor power of his lower limbs turned to nearly V on the left and II on the right.
The patient was transferred back to the general ward on the 11th day. A quick cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination and an enhanced cervical MRI was performed. There was no obvious abnormality in CSF examination, except for the mild elevation of glucose (4.930 mmol/L; normal range: 2.2–3.9 mmol/L) and protein (512 mg/L; normal range: 150–450 mg/L). However, a 26 mm*10mm*15mm intramedullary patchy intense tumor was found in C4-5 levels, surrounded by a more intense thin rim of peripheral enhancement in post-gadolinium T1 weighted MR images . These results led to the diagnosis of ISCM.
Due to the multiple metastases and the instable condition of the patient, there was no indicates for surgery. The oncologists failed to perform a palliative radiotherapy because of a relapse of dyspnea and hypotension. As his family did not want any invasive respiratory supports, hospice care was offered.
The patient finally died of respiratory and circulatory failures one month after onset. An autopsy was refused by his family.