We present the case of a 27-year-old woman with personal history of marginal surgical excision of a tumor in the sole of her right foot in 2015, which received the histopathological diagnosis of hidradenoma . The patient did not refer other personal history of interest.
She had remained asymptomatic until August of 2019 when she noticed the appearance of an approximately 1 cm and non-mobile lump in the same place where the surgical scar was located at her right foot. It presented slow growth for months, causing her discomfort when walking. The only sign appreciated was the effusion of little amount of serous fluid through the lump. Finally, the reason why she consulted again at the beginning of the year 2020 was the recent appearance and increasing size of a painless lymphadenopathy in the right inguinal region.
First, we obtained plain radiographies of the right foot without finding signs of bone involvement . Afterwards, a magnetic resonance imaging was performed showing a new subcutaneous lesion in the right foot sole .
Given the patient’s personal history, it was decided to perform an open biopsy of the inguinal lymphadenopathy, obtaining the histopathological diagnosis of hidradenocarcinoma metastases .
For this reason, extension study of the disease was carried out with a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT), which confirmed the suspicion of malignant tumoral injury at the right foot and distant dissemination of the tumor at the right iliac and inguinal lymph nodes, without any another affected location .
Subsequently, the patient underwent surgery in collaboration with surgeons from the general surgery and plastic surgery departments. In the first stage, a laparoscopic right pelvic lymphadenectomy was performed followed by an open right inguinal lymphadenectomy. In the second stage, a wide circumferential excision of the tumor was performed at the sole of the right foot, including part of the plantar fascia, but without excising the flexor muscle compartment of the foot and fingers. Finally, the defect was covered with a split-thickness skin graft obtained from the right thigh of the patient. Since the defect was not located in a weight bearing surface, free flap or local flap reconstruction was not chosen .
The histopathological analysis of the surgical specimen revealed a neoplastic proliferation with variable cellularity (combination of squamous cells, spindle cells, and others with eosinophilic cytoplasm) and infiltrative growth pattern forming solid nests and cords of cells of variable size and morphology. Glandular structures with eosinophilic secretion were also found. Mitotic activity was low and there was neoplastic lymphovascular invasion but no perineural infiltration. Surgical margins were free of neoplastic involvement. All these findings were consistent with hidradenocarcinoma diagnosis. In the immunohistochemical study, there was no expression of estrogen, androgen nor human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) receptors. The lymph nodes samples revealed the presence of metastases in five out of six iliac and in two out of eleven inguinal lymph nodes.
After the intervention, non-weight bearing of the intervened limb was indicated for three weeks to ensure skin graft integration, and once the graft was secured in the sole of the foot, adjuvant radiotherapy was started. The defect was properly covered, and the patient started a normal life and daily standing work two months after completing radiotherapy treatment . Because of the lymphadenectomy, the patient developed lymphedema of the lower right limb that required treatment with and specific compression stocking. No other post-operative physiotherapy treatment was necessary to retrieve patient’s habitual daily activity. Close clinical controls and imaging tests with PET-CT were carried out during the first year postoperatively and recurrence-free survival has been achieved for at least one year with this treatment protocol.