A 62-year-old Japanese man visited our hospital complaining of edema in the legs and hands. Two months ago, he had had sexual intercourse with a professional sex worker, after which he had experienced eruption and itching in his inner thighs and lower legs. He was being treated with angiotensin receptor blockers and calcium channel blockers, and his hyperuricemia was being treated with selective urate reabsorption inhibitor and xanthine oxidase inhibitor, and hypercholesterolemia with statin; however, the results of urinalysis were almost normal.
One week before he recognized edema, his body weight had increased 5 kg from the usual body weight. A physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.4 ℃, blood pressure of 177/85 mmHg, pulse rate of 65/min, SpO2 of 99% (room air), and normal heart and lung sounds with dilated abdomen and legs edema. The eruption in his inner thighs and lower legs had disappeared, and no inguinal lymph node swelling was observed.
Laboratory data showed that proteinuria at 5.87 g/day with a selectivity Index of 0.305. Urinary sediments showed many red blood cells (RBCs)/high power field (HPF), 5–9 white blood cells (WBCs)/HPF, 1–4 hyaline casts/HPF, a few granular casts/whole field (WF), 1–3 lipid casts/low power field (LPF), and a few RBC casts/WF. A blood examination showed 9600 × 104 WBCs/μL, Hb 13.1 g/dl, 29.3 × 104 platelets/μL, serum albumin 2.9 g/dl, total protein 6.9 g/dL, urea nitrogen 23.5 mg/dL, creatinine (Cr) 1.33 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 43.2 ml/min/1.73m2, C-reactive protein (CRP) 0.94 mg/dL, immunoglobulin G (IgG) 1469 mg/dL, IgA 416 mg/dL, IgM 54 mg/dL, C3 170 mg/dL, C4 44 mg/dL, myeloperoxidase (MPO)-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) < 1.0 U/mL, proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA < 1.0 U/mL, anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibody 2.0 U/mL, rheumatoid factor 3.8 IU/mL, antinuclear antibody 20x, anti-streptolysin O antibody 131 IU/mL, RPR test positivity 20.5x, TP hemagglutination (TPHA) test positivity, hepatitis B surface (HBs) antigen < 0.05 IU/mL, ant-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody negativity, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) negativity. He was diagnosed with acute glomerulonephritis and nephrotic syndrome and admitted to our hospital for renal biopsy and treatment.
The renal biopsy showed 24 glomeruli, including 4 with global sclerosis (17%), 5 with crescents (21%), and focal tubular atrophy and fibrosis . The presence of fibrocellular crescents in 5 glomeruli with fibrinoid necrosis in one, and mesangial and endocapillary proliferation in 9 glomeruli with intraglomerular neutrophil infiltration . Immunofluorescence of C3 immunofluorescence was positive along the capillary wall , but immunofluorescence of IgA, IgG, IgM, kappa, lambda, C1q and C4 were negative. These findings in the light microscopy and immunofluorescence were consistent with the diagnosis of post-infectious glomerulonephritis. Electron microscopy showed no electron-dense deposits in the subepithelial area, excluding a diagnosis of membranous nephropathy . Interestingly, a string-like structure was observed in the subendothelial space, GBM, and subepithelial area .
A urinalysis showed WBC casts with glittering bacteria by dark-field microscopy , attached to tubular casts by Periodic acid-methenamine silver (PAM) and low vacuum scanning electron microscope (LVSEM) observation . Immunohistochemistry for anti-TP antibody was negative in most glomeruli but weakly positive in some interstitium, some casts, and one glomerulus . Western blotting revealed that the urinary protein at the renal biopsy showed a band for TP that disappeared after antibiotic treatment .
After treatment for TP by penicillin (12 × 106 U/day) for 2 weeks, the serum creatinine levels had not improved. A renal biopsy diagnosed post-infectious crescentic glomerulonephritis, so methylprednisolone pulse therapy (mPSL) was applied, followed by oral steroids at 40 mg. The serum creatine level finally turned to 0.96 mg/dl at prednisolone 1 mg with proteinuria of 0.49 g/gCr after 580 days .