The patient is a 35-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 0, abortus 0) who during the first trimester of pregnancy was diagnosed for bilateral ovarian cysts detected incidentally by ultrasound. She had no significant medical or gynecological history before and was clinically and biochemically euthyroid with normal serum TSH level. Four months after delivery of a healthy child without a complication she was admitted to the hospital for acute abdominal pain. Laboratory data showed normal biochemical parameters and complete blood count. The plasma level of CA-125 was slightly elevated to 42.72 U/ml (35 U/mL, the upper normal limit). An ultrasound scan showed an enlarged left ovary and cystic masses in both ovaries. The patient was operated in December 2008 in a regional hospital where laparoscopic left adnexectomy was initially performed. Intraoperative frozen section pathology revealed that the cyst was composed of mature teratomatous elements including epidermis, sebaceous glands, adipose, normal thyroid tissue (>50%) and a 10 mm non-encapsulated cancerous focus (which was confirmed later to be the FV-PTC on final pathology, Figure and ) [-]. Because of the finding of cancer the surgeon made a decision not to proceed with the right oophorectomy and to transfer the patient to specialized oncology clinic.
The tumor from the left ovary showed immunoreactivity to thyroglobulin and thyroid transcription factor-1 (all antibodies from Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA, data not shown). For molecular investigation 5 μm sections were taken, dewaxed, and lightly stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Normal thyroid tissue and PTC area were manually dissected from 3 serial sections. DNA was extracted using Gentra Puregene Tissue kit (Quiagen, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Total RNA was extracted using Recover All Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Ambion, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). DNA from the tumor and adjacent benign thyroid tissue was tested by PCR/direct sequencing of genomic DNA for genetic abnormalities that have been described in thyroid cancer originating in the neck, including a portion of BRAF exon 15 and codons 12, 13, 31, 60 and 61 of K-H- and N-RAS. RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 rearrangements were detected using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by Southern blotting. This tumor was found to harbor a KRAS codon 12 mutation, the GGT → GTT transversion, corresponding to the Gly → Val amino acid change . No mutations were found in adjacent benign thyroid tissue. All experimental techniques and primer sequences used were essentially as previously described .
Case was presented to the multidisciplinary committee at the Institute of Oncology and Radiology of Serbia who decided the patient should undergo reoperation for the right ovarian cyst measuring 80 mm, which was also present at the time of the first surgery. The patient was operated two months after the initial surgery and after median laparatomy a macroscopically enlarged right ovary was verified to contain two cysts. The larger cyst measured 50x45x25 mm and contained soft whitish material. Histology report confirmed benign ovarian cyst with no evidence of other abnormality. An intra-operative frozen section and final pathology of the second smaller cyst 30x25x20 mm in size revealed mature cystic teratoma with benign thyroid tissue. Other tissue components included hair, adipose tissue, cartilage, bone and skin. Both cysts were removed and the right ovary was preserved. Multiple biopsies of the greater omentum, iliac lymph nodes, peritoneum above the urinary bladder and cul de sac showed no signs of malignant spread. Postoperative thyroid function blood test showed normal TSH, calcitonin, thyroglobulin and thyroglobulin antibody levels. Neck ultrasonography revealed a solitary thyroid nodule (6x4 mm) located caudally in the left lobe without signs of enlarged central and jugulo-carotid lymph nodes. No evidence of distant metastases was found on abdominal ultrasonography and chest X-ray. The patient is currently well, without evidence of disease progression one year after the second surgery. She is closely followed up undergoing clinical, radiologic and laboratory examinations every 6 months. At present, the patient is planned for fine needle aspiration biopsy; total thyroidectomy is considered as a further treatment modality .