We present a previously healthy 10 year old boy, presented with history of on and off pain in the left foot for 3 months duration. He was treated with analgesics and observation. Later, patient presented with swelling in the foot, which progressed to rupture. On further evaluation into past history, he gives history of penetrating injury with wooden splinter 3 years back.
On presentation, there was discharging sinus over medial border of mid foot corresponding to navicular bone with mild swelling and tenderness over plantar aspect without any antecedent systemic symptoms. Plain x-rays revealed multiple osteolytic lesions involving the navicular bone with osteoporosis and intact articular surface without collapse . His laboratory values were within normal limits. Pre-operative ultrasound suggested fragments of foreign body with surrounding collection on plantar aspect of mid-foot. CT-scan was done rule out adjacent bone involvement Surgical exploration was done through two incisions. Through plantar incision, the wooden splinters with surrounding pockets of frank pus drained from deeper layer of foot and sent for cultures . There was sinus tract lined by granulation tissue extending from wooden splinter (foreign body) to the exterior on medial aspect on navicular bone perforating the bone itself. The sinus tract was excised completely through the medial incision and wodden splinters were removed . Navicular bone was curetted with small dental bur and debridements of wounds were done through the medial incision. The wounds were closed over suction drains. Patient was prescribed initial 2 weeks of IV cloxacillin followed 4 weeks of oral cloxacillin, as the pus culture yielded staphylococcus aureus sensitive to cloxacillin. Fungal culture was negative. Biopsy showed inflammed granulation tissue and foci of granulomatous inflammation. The foot was protected in plaster and non weight bearing for period of 10 weeks. Patient recovered well with no recurrence or collapse at 18 months follow-up.