The 51-year-old man reported right wrist pain accompanied by severe swelling that extended to the right distal forearm . His symptoms started 24 h before presentation.
The patient reported right wrist pain accompanied by severe swelling that extended to the right distal forearm. His symptoms started 24 h before presentation. He also reported numbness and reduced range of motion (ROM) in his wrist and fingers. He denied any recent trauma or engaging in strenuous physical activity, drug abuse, or alcohol abuse. The administration of intravenous ketorolac acid 30mg and tramadol 100 mg did not alleviate his symptoms at all. Physical examination revealed that his right wrist was extremely tense and swollen, which was accompanied by severe tenderness, excruciating pain, and limited ROM due to extensive swelling. The patient also experienced severe numbness in his radial fingers and weakness in his thenar muscle.
The patient had a history of poorly controlled hyperuricemia and hypertension presented to our emergency department with severe pain in the right wrist. He was using a beta-blocker and calcium channel blocker for hypertension but had no history of anticoagulant use; his gout flare-ups were managed with a Cox-2-selective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
The patient is a current smoker and frequently drinks beers. He has family history of gout.
Physical examination of the patient revealed that his right wrist was extremely tense and swollen, which was accompanied by severe tenderness, excruciating pain, and limited ROM due to extensive swelling. The patient also experienced severe numbness in his radial fingers and weakness in his thenar muscle.
Laboratory findings of the patient revealed leukocytosis and elevated levels of C-reactive protein and uric acid; however, no other abnormality was detected.
Wrist X-ray revealed no fracture or dislocation. The intravenous administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids did not ameliorate his symptoms.