A 61-year-old male Caucasian presented to the emergency department with 8 months of progressive dysphagia (liquids and solids) with intermittent vomiting, 50 pounds of unintentional weight loss, and progressive shortness of breath on exertion. He also had intermittent chest heaviness for 1 month when his symptoms started. There were at least four episodes at rest, lasting several hours each time. There was no history of fevers, chills, or night sweats. There was no pre-syncope, syncope, or palpitations. There was no overt evidence of gastrointestinal bleeding. Medical history included gastroesophageal reflux disease, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia. His medications were rosuvastatin 20 mg PO daily, irbesartan 300 mg PO daily, and rabeprazole 20 mg PO daily.
His vital signs were normal at rest. Cardiovascular examination revealed normal first and second heart sounds, a soft grade 1/6 holosystolic murmur at the left lower sternal border and apex, and a left parasternal heave. Jugular venous pressure was normal and bibasilar crackles were noted.
Laboratory investigations revealed a normal white blood cell count, a normocytic anaemia with haemoglobin 101 g/L [reference range (RR) 140–180], mean corpuscular volume 92 fL (RR 80–92), and thrombocytopenia with platelets 109 × 109/L (RR 150–250). Electrolytes, urea, creatinine, liver function tests, lipase, and gamma-glutamyl transferase were normal. C-reactive protein was elevated (51 mg/L; RR 0–8). Serial high-sensitivity troponin T levels were elevated (112, 117, and 121 ng/L, RR <14). N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was significantly elevated (13 440 ng/L, RR <300). Electrocardiogram showed low voltages in the limb leads with inferior Q waves, borderline inferior ST elevations, and T-wave inversions . Chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly, mild interstitial oedema, and small bilateral pleural effusions . He was admitted to hospital and treated with intravenous diuretics for new onset heart failure felt to be due to a late presentation MI.
TTE revealed a moderately dilated LV with an end-diastolic diameter of 6.7 cm and moderately reduced LV systolic function with an ejection fraction of 33% and end-diastolic volume index of 84.8 mL/m2. The inferior wall was akinetic and had a 3.5 cm basal inferior wall defect with a very large (∼11 × 8 cm) LVP (see , ). This was lined with 2.4 cm of echodense material suggestive of thrombus. The right ventricle was also moderately dilated with severely reduced systolic function. There was mild mitral regurgitation, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and severe pulmonary hypertension with a right ventricle systolic pressure of 60 mmHg.
The CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was arranged to rule out concomitant malignancy. There was no malignancy, but it showed a large LVP causing mass effect, displacing the diaphragm inferiorly, and partly distorting the liver, gastric fundus, and oesophagus . Upper endoscopy revealed no obvious intrinsic structural cause for dysphagia or anaemia. Coronary angiography demonstrated a dominant RCA with mid-third occlusion. The LCx also had mid-occlusion with small distal reconstitution. The left main, left anterior descending, and ramus branches had minor wall irregularities only .
In consultation with cardiovascular surgery, a decision was made for surgically management of the patient’s LVP by performing LV pseudoaneurysm resection and endoventricular circular patch plasty of the inferior wall. Cardiac surgery was performed with institution of cardiopulmonary bypass and hypothermia. The inferior LV showed transmural infarction with ∼1 L of clot near the inferior pericardium. The ventricular defect was ∼3 cm at the basal inferior wall. A door-type patch was sutured to create a neo-inferior wall and the aneurysm sac was resected.
Unfortunately the patient was unable to be weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass after surgery. ECMO was initiated in the operating room. The patient could not be weaned from ECMO due to ongoing biventricular failure despite successful surgical repair. In the cardiovascular intensive care unit, he had continuing refractory biventricular dysfunction and cardiogenic shock with worsening lactic acidosis and end-organ dysfunction. He unfortunately passed away 3 days after surgery.