A 55-year-old man with a past history of ITP and hypertension visited a local dental clinic. Four years earlier, the patient had undergone knee joint surgery and was diagnosed with ITP. Because his platelet count was maintained at 35,000/μL thereafter and no spontaneous bleeding occurred, the patient attended periodic follow-up visits to check his platelet level but was not treated with any medication. The patient underwent extraction of the left mandibular first molar because of chronic periodontitis. Post-extraction bleeding occurred for 1 week after the procedure, but the hemorrhage gradually decreased and was finally controlled by a suture at the extraction site. After the extraction, the patient’s platelet count was evaluated and maintained at 35,000/μL.
One month after the extraction, the patient underwent dental implant surgery at the same site (the left mandibular first molar) at the same local dental clinic. Bleeding started immediately after fixture installation and the mouth floor began to swell. Therefore, the patient visited the emergency room (ER) of the authors’ hospital. The patient was prescribed medication to control hypertension but no medication for ITP. The patient complained of severe swelling on the mouth floor and shortness of breath accompanied by marked dysphagia, which had also occurred immediately after the surgery. Bilateral submandibular swelling and mouth-closing difficulty were present .
Regarding vital signs, his blood pressure was 173/108 mmHg and the respiratory rate was 22/min. A laboratory blood workup revealed a white blood cell count of 4.38 × 103/μL, a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 11.7 g/dL, and an initial platelet count of 22,000/μL. Coagulation studies revealed that fibrinogen levels (114 mg/dL) were lower than normal, and D-dimer levels were elevated at 31.91 μg/mL. Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) were within normal limits. A diagnosis of exclusion for ITP was made by the hematologist after ruling out other conditions that may cause symptoms similar to those of thrombocytopenic purpura. Because the patient had no past history of other contributing medication or medical condition and the results of laboratory tests showed a low platelet count and normal PTT and aPTT values, he was diagnosed with refractory ITP.
Facial-enhanced computed tomography revealed severe narrowing of the pharyngeal airway space. Marked soft tissue swelling was observed with isodensity in the left masticatory and submandibular spaces and hypopharynx. The patient complained of worsening respiration in the ER. The expanding hemorrhage was deemed to potentially result in a compromised airway with a life-threatening outcome. Therefore, the surgical wound from the dental implant was opened to evacuate the hematoma and an emergency tracheostomy was performed under local anesthesia and intravenous sedation to maintain airway patency. The patient was then admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
After tracheostomy, the intubation site also bled heavily. The patient was treated with antibiotics, high-dose steroids, and intravenous (IV) immunoglobulin O with a platelet infusion (platelet concentration 11 pints, 3600 mL) continuously for 3 days. The aim was to elevate the platelet level to 80,000/μL. To compensate for the blood loss (Hb 8.7) associated with constant severe bleeding from a gingival surgical wound and tracheostomy site, a transfusion of filtered red blood cells and IV saline was performed.
Laboratory data after 3 days in the ICU showed a platelet count of 129,000/μL and other complete blood count (CBC) values within normal ranges. Follow-up CT 3 days later revealed that the hemorrhage had not expanded further. Moreover, diminished soft tissue swelling was noted along the superficial and deep neck spaces compared with the swelling shown on the previous CT images . Therefore, the patient was extubated without dyspnea. The patient showed resolution of the mouth floor swelling, and no additional bleeding was detected; thus, he was discharged 9 days after admission.
A follow-up visit 1 week after discharge revealed complete resolution of intra-oral and extra-oral swelling without superficial or deep neck infection. However, despite medication for ITP, the patient’s platelet count decreased after 1 and 3 weeks . Four months later, final prosthetic implant restoration was performed in the prosthetic department.