A 55-year-old female, a homemaker with no prior medical or surgical history, and no history of antiplatelet or anticoagulant use, presented at the Mahmoud El Matri Hospital in Ariana, Tunisia, at the emergency care clinic with asthenia and abdominal pain of one-day duration. She reported the sudden onset of a hypogastric swelling that had been evolving for the past two days. The thorough history did not uncover fever, nausea, vomiting, changes in bowel habits, cough, trauma, or minor concussion. Symptoms appeared suddenly and acutely after lifting a heavy object.
Upon physical examination, an elevated heart rate of 105 beats per minute and stable blood pressure of 120/75 mmHg were observed. The respiratory rate was normal. Cutaneous pallor of the mucous membranes was also noted. During the abdominal examination, a hypogastric mass measuring 20 cm in its largest dimension was palpated , and it was sensitive to touch. Additionally, another left lumbar mass of 10 cm was present, causing an irreducible leg bending.
Laboratory data revealed acute anemia with a hemoglobin level of 5 g/dL and hematocrit levels at 17.5 %. Blood group was A positive. Hemostasis assessment fell within the normal range. Serum electrolyte and kidney function test results showed no abnormalities.
Regarding the patient's hemoglobin level, it's important to consider whether bleeding occurred at other sites that might have contributed to the hemoglobin level reaching 5 g/dL. We thoroughly explored potential sources of bleeding, including transrectal, vaginal, and upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and found no abnormal findings.
An emergency computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, revealing a large hematoma in the left rectus muscle that communicated with the preperitoneal space and the ipsilateral para-rectal fossa. The hematoma measured 185 mm by 93 mm in axial dimensions and 220 mm in sagittal dimensions. Its density was heterogeneous with areas of spontaneous hyperdensity not enhanced and hypodense zones. The pelvic organs were displaced to the right side . Additionally, a second hematoma was identified in the left psoas muscle, with the same appearance as the first one, measuring 50 mm by 37 mm by 125 mm. There was no extravasation of contrast media . It's important to note that, due to the unavailability of angiography at our hospital, further assessment through this method was not conducted.
The patient received transfusions of packed red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma with a positive transfusion response. The course was marked by stable hemodynamic status, and the post-transfusion hemoglobin level reached 10 g/dL (after 10 units of packed red blood cells and 5 units of plasma). It was decided to proceed with observation.
The patient was discharged following a gradual recovery of leg function with the assistance of physical therapy. In the one-month follow-up, there were no unfavorable outcomes. Additionally, upon discharge, the patient was referred for further hematological evaluation to eliminate the possibility of an underlying cause for this hematoma, particularly a rare coagulopathy. The hematological assessment, however, did not identify any coagulopathy or other factors that could explain the occurrence of this hematoma.