A 65-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the First Hospital of Jilin University complaining of intermittent fever for 2 months with the highest temperature reaching 40 °C and chest pain for 10 days. The patient had no history of drug abuse, invasive examination, thoracic aortic surgery, or trauma. Upon physical examination, the patient presented with low-grade fever with normal blood pressure, heart rate, and heart rhythm. Additional imaging examination via computed tomography angiography (CTA, (Fig. ) revealed the formation of a pseudoaneurysm with a maximal diameter of 54 mm in the descending segment of the thoracic aorta. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed and showed mild mitral insufficiency without valvular vegetation. On additional laboratory tests, the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 106 mg/L, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 97 mm/h, the white blood cell count (WBC) was 7.6 × 1012/L with 83% neutrophils, and the hemoglobin (Hb) level was 106 g/L. The results of neurological and cardiovascular examinations were normal, and the patient had no significant medical history of hypertension, heart diseases, diabetes mellitus, blood transfusion, genital ulcer, and/or skin rash. Therefore, it seemed unlikely that the case was caused by complications of these diseases. However, the patient recounted that he had been employed in a family owned restaurant and exposed to cattle and raw meat for 2 years since he had retired from being a sailor 4 years previously. Considering this information, a blood bacterial culture was ordered. A definitive diagnosis was made by isolating the brucella in the blood culture, and the finding on the standard-tube agglutination test (SAT) was 1:400, which corresponded to a strong positive result. In view of an active brucellosis infection and the high vascular inflammatory reaction that can cause a series of complications if surgery or endovascular treatment were to be performed, a combination of anti-brucellosis treatment with 450 mg rifampin twice a day orally and 200 mg doxycycline once a day orally was started immediately. We advised the patient to continue the treatment for at least 6 months. However, the patient presented with aggravated chest pain and mild hemoptysis (bright red, nearly 10 ml) without obvious cause 2 days later, which were considered the result of pseudoaneurysm rupture and hemorrhage into the pulmonary alveoli. To minimize the risks of morbidity and mortality in the repair of the thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm, the Tag covered stent graft (W. L. Gore & Associates, USA) was implanted to isolate the pseudoaneurysm. Intraoperatively, a 15-cm, 6F sheath (Terumo Corporation, Japan) was advanced into the right common femoral artery in a retrograde fashion. The pseudoaneurysm was viewed on digital subtraction angiography (DSA) by a (Fig. ). Then a 28-cm, 22F sheath (W. L. Gore & Associates, USA) was advanced, and a 31 mm × 150 mm Tag covered stent graft (W. L. Gore & Associates, USA) was implanted to isolate the pseudoaneurysm through a Lunderquist extra stiff wire guide (Cook Medical Inc., USA). Finally, the angiography showed no contrast medium overflow in the thoracic aorta (Fig. ). Postoperatively, the anti-brucellosis treatment was continued, and the symptoms disappeared gradually over the first week. At the 24th week follow-up, the SAT result was 1:50, which corresponded to a negative result. The patient continued the anti-brucellosis treatment for 2 more weeks, and at the 26th week follow-up, the SAT was negative and the patient was well and asymptomatic.