An 80-year-old Caucasian male patient diagnosed with stage cT2/T3N1 rectal adenocarcinoma with neoadjuvant radiotherapy was scheduled for an anterior rectal resection hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery under the ERAS program.
The patient’s medical history included severe ischemic heart disease that required 4 drug-eluting stents after a STEMI event 12 months before this surgery and heart failure (ejection fraction of 52%) in NYHA Class I, permanent atrial fibrillation, stage 3 chronic kidney disease diagnosed 3 years earlier, hypertension, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and glaucoma. Patient’s medication included aspirin 100 mg id, furosemide 40 mg id, ramipril 1.25 mg id, bisoprolol 1.25 mg id, rosuvastatin 20 mg id, apixaban 2.5 mg id, tansulosine 0.4 mg id, finasteride 5 mg id, esomeprazole 40 mg id, and eye drops of brimonidine and tafluprost. His body mass index was 24.86 kg m−2 and relevant laboratory evaluation included HbA1c 5.5%, creatinine 1.12 mg/dL and urea 49 mg/dL. There was no history of gastroesophageal reflux or hiatal hernia.
He was admitted the day before surgery and started the institution’s ERAS protocol, which includes a 200 mL iso-osmolar, non-carbonated, 0.5 kcal/mL carbohydrate drink the night before and in the morning of the surgery, no less than 2 h before induction of anaesthesia. Bowel preparation included polyethylene glycol-electrolyte solution and metronidazole as per the institution’s protocol.
On the day of surgery, he was asymptomatic and received no pre-anaesthetic medication. After placing American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) standard monitors and pre-oxygenation, general anaesthesia was induced with fentanyl 2 mcg kg−1, propofol 2 mg kg−1 and rocuronium 0.6 mg kg−1. Immediately after loss of consciousness, there was regurgitation of a significant amount of clear fluid. The patient was placed in Trendelenburg position, the oropharynx was suctioned, and an endotracheal tube was placed and suctioned before starting positive-pressure ventilation.
Despite this incident, there were no signs of respiratory distress and, after discussion with the surgeon, the decision was to proceed with surgery. Throughout the procedure, there were no signs of bronchospasm, increased airway pressure or desaturation. At the end of the surgery, flexible bronchoscopy revealed no damage or content in the airway. The surgery was otherwise successful, a postoperative chest radiograph showed no alterations compared with the preoperative image and no prophylactic treatment for aspiration pneumonia was introduced. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged at the third postoperative day.