A 40-year-old Japanese woman underwent a right salpingo-oophorectomy with partial omentectomy under the diagnosis of multilocular ovarian tumor, accompanied with mature cystic teratoma . The patient’s medical history was uneventful, and her family history did not suggest any hereditary cancers. The ovarian tumor spontaneously ruptured leading to excretion of mucinous fluid in the abdominal cavity. The pathological diagnosis was a Stage IC2 mucinous ovarian tumor with borderline malignancy, accompanied by a mature cystic teratoma (pT1c2NxM0, Fig. b–d). Immunohistochemistry revealed that the ovarian tumor was positive for CK7, CK20, and CDX2, and negative for PAX8 , which suggested that the mucinous ovarian tumor was derived from the intestinal component of an ovarian teratoma.
Three years later, initial intraperitoneal recurrence was observed, accompanied with elevated tumor markers (CA125 and CA19-9). The patient underwent subsequent cytoreductive surgery, including total hysterectomy and resection of disseminations. Surgical findings showed that peritoneal dissemination had spread diffusely throughout the peritoneal cavity with the normal-appearing appendix . Pathological findings revealed recurrent mucinous ovarian tumors . One year later, a second recurrence was observed, accompanied with elevated tumor markers and massive ascites. The patient desired conservative management without any chemotherapies or surgeries for 8 years, as it was being confirmed that the component of pseudomyxoma could be effectively discharged through urination via a spontaneous fistula between the peritoneum and the bladder. However, repeated palliative paracentesis was required for the extensive pseudomyxoma fluid from multiple isolated intraperitoneal foci .
In order to identify the genetic variants of each tumor, TOP analyses of both the primary ovarian borderline tumor and the recurrent peritoneal dissemination were performed (Additional file 1). TOP DNA panel was also used to evaluate a genome-wide view of the allele-specific copy number variants, as well as the distribution of the variant allele frequencies (VAF) of each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the primary ovarian tumor (with a paired normal sample). TOP DNA panel identified KRAS (G12D), GNAS (R201C), and FBXW7 (R367*) variants in the primary tumor . The SNP genotypes (A/A-A/B-B/B) showed a clear imbalance of the VAF (apart from 0.5) in all the hetero (A/B) SNPs of the primary tumor sample, although not in those of the normal cells (all the A/B VAF at approximately 0.5) . The karyogram of the allele-specific copy number, according to the SNP genotypes, showed that the number of one allele was lower than that of the opposite allele throughout the genome (aneuploidy with LOH throughout all the chromosomes) (Additional file 2: Fig. S1). According to these findings, the primary ovarian tumor was considered to be derived from the germ cells (i.e. teratomas).
In contrast, no somatic variants with > 5% variant allele frequency (VAF) were detected in the recurrent tumor, due to the low tumor content ratio in the pseudomyxoma fluid. Therefore, it was difficult to evaluate the imbalance of the SNP genotypes in the recurrent tumor (Additional file 2: Fig. S2). However, all of the three pathogenic variants, KRAS (G12D), GNAS (R201C), and FBXW7 (R367*) remained positive in the recurrent tumor with VAFs ranging from 1.9 to 4.3% . Therefore, pseudomyxoma peritonei was genetically diagnosed as a recurrence of the mucinous borderline ovarian tumor. In addition, these three variants were also detected in the normal-paired DNA, from the peripheral blood sample obtained during the second recurrence (from whole blood, not from plasma), with allele frequency of 0.2% for KRAS (G12D) and 0.1% for GNAS (R201C) and FBXW7 (R367*) , which suggest either the existence of circulating tumor cells or highly abundant cell free DNA from the tumor. Because the primary ovarian tumor showed the general LOH pattern , the presence of a Barr body was also investigated to distinguish between haploid (with a single set of chromosomes and no Barr body) and uniparental disomy (UPD) (i.e. one Barr body with an inactive X chromosome from the duplication of a single chromosome and LOH of the opposite allele). Both the primary ovarian tumor and the subsequent peritoneal dissemination possessed one Barr body , suggesting that both tumors showed a UPD genotype, arising from the ovarian teratoma.
Due to disease progression, the pseudomyxoma peritonei became uncontrollable. In order to reduce dissemination, the patient received a third surgery 12 years after the first surgery. However, without sufficient and effective debulking, the patient expired due to colon perforation.
Informed consent for full body autopsy was taken from her family. The mucinous tumor was spread invasively to the intestine, colon, kidney, liver, bilateral diaphragm, and right lung . The pelvic organs including the rectum, bladder, intestine, and sigmoid colon coalesced into a single lump. Perforation was detected in the transverse colon. Microscopically, atypical mucinous epithelium was detected, which was diagnosed as recurrent mucinous borderline ovarian tumor. Intraepithelial disease was detected in the epithelium of the appendix, with massive invasion from the serosa of the appendix.
To confirm our molecular diagnosis where the ovary was identified as the main origin of pseudomyxoma, a detailed examination of the appendix was performed. Pathological findings alone were inconclusive in terms of identifying the tumor origin. Considering the low VAFs of the pathogenic variants of the three driver genes in the first recurrent tumor, droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) of the identified KRAS variant was performed (Additional file 1). ddPCR of KRAS variants (covering G12A, G12C, G12D, G12R, G12S, G12V, and G13D) by using the primary ovarian tumor, peritoneal dissemination at the initial recurrence, and appendix obtained from autopsy identified that all the three tumors were positive for the KRAS (G12D) variant with allele frequencies of 10.9–11.0% in the ovarian tumor (presumed tumor content ratio at 30% by hematoxylin and eosin staining), 3.0–3.5% in the peritoneal dissemination (presumed tumor content rate at 10%), and 2.1% in the appendiceal tumor (presumed tumor content rate at 10%), respectively . The presence of the KRAS (G12D) variant confirmed the metastatic nature of the tumors involving the appendix.