A 73-year-old woman presented with no symptoms after a liver tumor had been detected at an annual check-up. She had no past history of chronic hepatitis or blood transfusion. Admission laboratory tests revealed normal hemoglobin (12.4 g/dl), normal platelet counts (21.4 × 104/μl), normal serum total bilirubin (0.7 mg/dl), normal serum albumin (4.4 g/dl), and normal serum prothrombin time (100%). The tumor markers AFP, CEA and CA19-9 were 4 ng/ml, 6.7 ng/ml and 35 U/ml, respectively. The Child–Pugh classification was A, and the indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 6%. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 7-cm ICC of the mass-forming type in segments 4 and 8. The ICC invaded the suprahepatic IVC, the middle HV (MHV), and the left HV (LHV) confluence, while the tumor did not invade the right HV (RHV) and inferior RHV . 3D CT volumetry showed a left liver volume of 26% . There was no distant metastasis nor lymph node metastasis. We planned to perform left hepatectomy, suprahepatic IVC and MHV confluence resection, and suprahepatic IVC resection. For reconstruction of the suprahepatic IVC and RHV with an artificial graft, we discussed and considered various types of reconstruction of the IVC with V-A ECMO or V-V bypass in order to maintain blood pressure safely and adequately among cardiovascular surgeons, anesthesiologists, medical engineers, and gastroenterological surgeons .
At first, laparotomy was done, and ICC in the left liver was confirmed. ICC invaded the MHV, LHV, suprahepatic IVC, and diaphragm . The suprahepatic IVC below the right atrium was taped after dissection of the diaphragm . Left hepatectomy including suprahepatic IVC, MHV, and LHV resection was performed. After ligation of the left hepatic artery and left portal vein, the liver parenchyma was transected under the Pringle maneuver and IVC clamping below the liver. After the IVC and the root of the RHV were confirmed by the anterior approach, V-A ECMO was performed . The V-A ECMO circuit was established via a 15 Fr cannula inserted into the right femoral artery and a 19.5 Fr cannula inserted into the right femoral vein. Activated clotting time (ACT) reached 350 s after intravenous injection of 5000 units of heparin sodium. Although the tumor invaded the left wall of the IVC, the RHV confluence was not involved. By clamping the IVC diagonally, the RHV confluence could be preserved . The suprahepatic IVC was resected and reconstructed with a ringed extended polytetrafluoroethylene tube graft (20 mm). No congestion in the right liver was seen; therefore, there was no requirement for the Pringle maneuver, THVE, or in situ hypothermic portal perfusion during reconstruction . The total IVC clamping time, the total V-A ECMO time, and the total operation time were 42 min, 54 min and 6 h 15 min, respectively. The vital signs and blood pressure were stable, and circulation was well maintained with the assistance of 1600 ml/min flow of V-A ECMO . The total blood loss was 1200 ml (blood loss was 800 ml during hepatectomy and 400 ml during V-A ECMO). The tumor was of the mass-forming type macroscopically and cancer cells showed moderately to poorly differentiated ICC with invasion to the IVC, MHV, and diaphragm . After surgery, laboratory tests revealed an elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase level (255 U/l), aspartate transaminase level (153 U/l), and serum total bilirubin (2.9 mg/dl) on postoperative day 1. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged 11 days after surgery. She is alive 14 months after surgery without local recurrence around the IVC. However, she underwent chemotherapy for intrahepatic metastases in the remnant liver .