The patient is an 88-year-old female with a previous history of arterial hypertension, obstructive lung disease and bilateral total hip endoprosthesis. She was not drinking alcohol and was living well on her own in an asylum. While riding a tram on her way to a festival, she experienced a sudden onset generalized seizure with loss of consciousness and cloni of the upper and lower extremity with right-sided predominance. A dose of 15mg midazolam from the emergency physician stopped the seizure and when she arrived at the emergency department she was comatose and quadriplegic and the brain stem reflexes were absent, except for the pupils, which were widened and reacted slowly to light bilaterally. Deep tendon reflexes were generally absent and there was general muscle hypotonia.
Blood pressure was 130/80mmHg. Blood chemical investigations revealed moderate renal insufficiency, elevated liver function parameters, leucocytosis of 12.3/nl (n = 4.0–9.0/nl), slight anemia and a D-dimer of 20.0microg/ml (n <0.5microg/ml). Blood gas analysis revealed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.36, a base excess of −8.5, and a lactate of 2.4mmol/l. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the cerebrum 45 minutes after the seizure did not show ischemia or intracerebral bleeding. On MR angiography no major abnormality of the vasculature was detected. Her state of consciousness improved from coma to somnolence, and she started to move her extremities.
After awakening she complained about recurrent cramping pain in her right shoulder and right upper arm, which was accompanied by automatic flexion of the right upper limb. Aortic dissection was suspected and a computed tomography (CT) of the thorax initiated. Before carrying it out, however, she developed low blood pressure to non-measurable values and was transferred to the intensive care unit for suspected cardiac shock where hydroxi-ethyl starch and vasopressin helped to increased blood pressure. However, the right pupil widened and became non-reactive to light, and she developed left-sided hemiplegia. Echocardiography showed normal systolic function, a small right ventricle and a pericardial effusion with an embedded clot. Subsequently, a CT scan of the thorax and the aorta showed aortic dissection type A extending into the left descending aorta, the brachiocephalic trunk with occlusion of the right common carotid artery. For right-sided pain she received sufentanil with success. Carotid ultrasound eight hours after onset confirmed the complete occlusion of the right carotid artery. After two cardio-thoracic departments had refused surgical intervention the patient died without regaining consciousness, 16 hours after admission.