A 38-year-old nulligravida with no history of abnormal pap smears presented to her primary gynecologist with complaint of malodorous brown vaginal discharge. A pap smear was performed, which returned positive for adenocarcinoma and high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV). She was subsequently referred to gynecologic oncology and diagnosed with a Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IB2 cervical cancer. Biopsies revealed a high-grade small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) showed no evidence of metastatic disease. Plan was made for radical surgical excision followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation.
The patient underwent radical abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Pathology was negative for involvement of the surgical margins, parametria or pelvic lymph nodes. The primary tumor was 4.5 by 3.3 cm in size and involved half of the cervical stroma, with lymphovascular space involvement. Her postoperative course was complicated by a pelvic abscess requiring re-exploration and washout. Following recovery, she was treated with 6 cycles of cisplatin 80 mg/m2 intravenously (IV) on day 1 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 IV on day 1, 2 and 3. Chemotherapy was well tolerated with only grade 1 nausea and fatigue.
One month after completion of chemotherapy, surveillance pelvic exam was significant for a 1.5-cm, firm, smooth anterior vaginal wall mass. PET/CT demonstrated interval development of multiple hypermetabolic mesenteric deposits, largest measuring 21 mm with a standard uptake value (SUV) of 10.6. Shortly thereafter, she was admitted for small bowel obstruction, with imaging revealing multifocal progression of the pelvic lesions . Given disease distribution, systemic chemotherapy was favored over local radiotherapy, and she received 2 cycles of paclitaxel 135 mg/m2 IV on day 1 and topotecan 0.75 mg/m2 IV on day 1, 2 and 3. Following cycle 2 of therapy, the patient was admitted for progressive pelvic pain due disease progression resulting in obstructive uropathy . While hospitalized, a right percutaneous nephrostomy tube was placed, and palliative pelvic radiation therapy was initiated. The patient ultimately received a total of 37.5 Gy in 15 fractions directed towards the obstructive lesion along the right pelvic side wall. The original tumor was sent for molecular testing to help inform future therapy and approval for the off-label use of nivolumab was requested from her insurance provider.
Nivolumab was initiated at a dose of 3 mg/kg IV every 2 weeks prior to molecular characterization of her tumor, which showed absent PD-L1 expression. After 2 doses, radiographic imaging demonstrated a decreased in size of all target lesions . Concurrently, all cell counts began to decrease. After 4 doses, the patient reported vision changes and light sensitivity. She was evaluated by ophthalmology and diagnosed with severe dry eyes and pre-glaucoma. Despite standard topical therapies, her symptoms progressed and the decision was made to discontinue treatment for persistent grade 3 ocular toxicity after the 6th dose. PET/CT obtained 3 weeks after the final dose demonstrated complete resolution of all target and non-target lesions . Cell counts nadired (grade 2 lymphocytopenia and thrombocytopenia, grade 3 anemia) 5 weeks after cessation of therapy and began to show significant recovery by week 7. Hematologic evaluation, inclusive of bone marrow biopsy, failed to identify an alternate source of her pancytopenia, which was attributed to nivolumab.