A 77-year-old Japanese man was on medication for hypertension and dyslipidemia. His family and psychosocial history were unremarkable. Over a year before presentation, he had noticed a mass on the right side of his neck. He visited his doctor every 3 months for follow-up. However, no pathological examination was performed, because the maximum diameter of the right cervical lymph node was approximately 20 mm and it remained almost unchanged. A month before presentation, the patient experienced loss of appetite, and a week before presentation, he had persistent fever with a body temperature above 38 °C. He underwent polymerase chain reaction testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and the result was negative. Subsequently, his general condition gradually deteriorated and he was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital because of high fever and disturbance of consciousness.
His vital signs at the time of visit were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, E4V5M6; body temperature, 39.9 °C; blood pressure, 122/74 mmHg; heart rate, 148 beats per minute, regular; respiratory rate, 24 breaths per minute; SpO2, 98% on room air respiration. We speculated that tachycardia was due to the high fever and volume depletion due to poor oral intake. Swelling of the right cervical lymph node was painless and elastic. The maximum diameter of the right cervical lymph nodes was approximately 40 mm. A heart examination revealed normal findings and the absence of a murmur, and a chest assessment revealed normal bilateral sounds. Further, an abdominal inspection revealed tenderness in the right upper abdomen. He had no edema of the extremities. Blood test results showed high total bilirubin and hepatobiliary system enzyme levels, and the following parameters were noted: peripheral white blood cell count, 8600/µL with 90.4% neutrophils and 2.9% lymphocytes; hemoglobin, 16.7 g/dL; platelet, 18.6 × 104/µL; total bilirubin, 2.0 mg/dL; aspartate transaminase, 43 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 114 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 1055 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 216 U/L; lactic acid dehydrogenase, 239 U/L; C-reactive protein, 18.6 mg/dL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed mild dilatation of the extrahepatic bile duct with enhancement of the contrast effect. Considering these findings, we suspected acute inflammation of the bile duct .
We diagnosed sepsis due to an acute biliary tract infection. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was also performed, but a common bile duct stone was not observed. Transient cholestasis or biliary sludge was considered a cause of acute inflammation of the bile duct. Therefore, the patient was hospitalized immediately, and treatment with an antimicrobial agent was initiated. Cefmetazole displays a wide spectrum of activity against bacteria, including Gram-positive and Gram-negative aerobes and anaerobes, and is thus used in the treatment of intraabdominal infections. Therefore, we decided to use this antimicrobial therapy. However, the patient did not respond well, and his high fever persisted. On day 6 of hospitalization, edema at the extremities, pleural effusion, and ascites began to appear. Considering the swelling of the right cervical, mediastinal, and intraperitoneal lymph nodes and the splenomegaly detected on CT , we considered the diagnosis of malignant lymphoma. Additional blood test results revealed an elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor level (10,596 U/mL). We performed a needle biopsy of the right cervical lymph node, but there was no evidence of malignant lymphoma. Subsequently, we discussed the need for an external incisional mass biopsy; however, it was difficult to perform surgical intervention because of the patient’s unstable condition, including circulatory insufficiency and impaired consciousness.
On day 10 of hospitalization, the patient’s general condition temporarily improved. However, thrombocytopenia, anasarca, and renal insufficiency became exacerbated. His serum creatinine level increased to 3.01 mg/dL. We initially thought that these symptoms were complications of sepsis, but they also seemed to be typical of the five signs of TAFRO syndrome. To detect reticulin fibrosis, we performed a bone marrow biopsy to confirm the diagnosis of TAFRO syndrome. Although reticulin fibrosis was not detected, increased levels of macrophages were observed . An external incisional mass biopsy of the right cervical lymph node was then performed. Surprisingly, we identified Hodgkin and Reed–Sternberg cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the cells to be positive for CD30 and negative for CD20, CD5, and CD10 expression. CD30 is known to be strongly expressed in mononuclear Hodgkin cells and polynuclear Reed–Sternberg cells in Hodgkin lymphoma and anaplastic large-cell lymphoma tumors, while CD20 is widely expressed as a B-cell surface antigen. It has been documented that CD5 expression is positive in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, T-cell lymphoma, and mantle cell lymphoma and that CD10 expression is positive in follicular lymphoma and Burkitt lymphoma. In addition, Epstein–Barr-encoded RNA in situ hybridization results were positive, as observed in Hodgkin lymphoma .
We established a definitive diagnosis of Hodgkin lymphoma with lymphoma-associated hemophagocytic syndrome (LAHS). Unfortunately, as the patient had multiple organ failure at the time of diagnosis, it was difficult to administer induction chemotherapy. Therefore, steroid pulse therapy was administered. However, the patient did not respond well and died on day 22 of hospitalization.