A 61-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with complaints of intermittent cough, expectoration, and a stuffy feeling in the chest for the past 50 years, without chest pain, dyspnoea, fever, chills, sweating, nausea, vomiting, emesis, abdominal pain, weight loss, or loss of appetite. The above symptoms had been aggravated for the last 10 d.
The above symptoms appeared intermittently and always occurred after being cold during the past 50 years. She had no regular treatment in the past. She was diagnosed with OS (Sjogren’s syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis) three years prior and was mainly treated with glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants.
The patient had an appendectomy because of acute appendicitis approximately 30 years ago. She had swelling and pain of the bilateral knee, elbow, and wrist joints for more than 10 years, and the pain was intermittent. She also had manifestations of xerostomia, xerophthalmia, rampant dental caries, and chapped tongue for more than 10 years. She was diagnosed with Henoch-Schonlein purpura 10 years prior, and she was diagnosed with pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema, bronchiectasis, and autoimmune hepatic cirrhosis 3 years prior. She had parotid gland swelling when she was young, but she did not remember the details.
The patient denied a history of smoking, tuberculosis, and alcohol or drug use. Her father died of oesophageal carcinoma, and her sister died of breast cancer. No family members had any similar clinical manifestations or death from similar diseases.
Her vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.7°C; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; pulse rate, 79 bpm; and blood pressure, 17.5/10.1 kPa. Except for rough breath sounds without rales or rhonchi from both lungs, no obvious abnormalities were found in any other physical examinations.
A routine laboratory work-up showed white blood cell count, 2.90 × 109/L; neutrophil percentage, 71.4%; haemoglobin, 78 g/L; ESR, 114 mm/h; C-reactive protein, 9.6 mg/L; GGT, 110 g/L; ALT, 300 U/L; total protein, 87.1 g/L; and albumin, 32.9 g/L. Serum calcium and phosphorus were within normal ranges. The rest of the routine laboratory examinations at the time of admission showed no obvious abnormalities.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed an irregular mass located in the middle and inferior lobe of the right lung . The mass was nonhomogeneous and accompanied by spotted calcification, but without any area of necrosis on a CT plain scan . It was lobulated and spiculated with adjacent pleural retraction and thus caused bronchial obstruction of the lateral segment of the right middle lobe and the right lower lobe. Enhanced scanning showed that the mass displayed moderate ununiform reinforcement with multiple tiny blood vessels , and the pulmonary artery trunk was enlarged. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were found in the mediastinum. A bone survey revealed no abnormalities. Echocardiography showed mildly reduced left ventricular function.
The patient was further evaluated by sputum culture, and tests were negative. The full set of serum tumour markers, including CA-199 antigen (61.4 U/mL; normal range: ≤ 33 U/mL), and serum CA-125, CEA, NSE, and SCC were all in the normal range. Serum electrophoresis showed that albumin was 50.60% (normal range: 53.8%-65.2%) and γ-globulin was 29.20% (normal range: 9.2%-18.2%). Serum immunofixation electrophoresis revealed that IgG was 2520 mg/dL (normal range: 751-1560 mg/dL), κ-light chain was 2270 mg/dL (normal range: 629-1350 mg/dL), λ-light chain was 1260 mg/dL (normal range: 313-723 mg/dL), and monoclonal gammopathy was not found. The β2-microglobulin level was 6.07 µg/mL (normal range: 0.9-2.7 µg/mL). No Bence-Jones protein was detected in the patient’s urine.
Autoimmune examinations showed positivity for antinuclear antibody, anti-SSA/Ro60KD antibody, anti-SSA/Ro52KD antibody, anti-SSB antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. The rheumatoid factor was 4077 IU/mL (normal range: 0-54 IU/mL), and the anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody was 12.95 RU/mL (normal range: 0-25 RU/mL).
Emission computed tomography demonstrated that 99mTc-MDP was abnormally concentrated at the bilateral eight front ribs, the right lower edge of the acetabulum, and the right inferior pubic ramus. A bronchoscopy was subsequently performed, and pathological examination showed that the bronchial mucosa of the right lower lobe was infiltrated with acute and chronic inflammatory cells, but no tumour cells were found. The bone marrow examination was unremarkable, with less than 5% of plasma cells and no dyscrasia.