A 64-year-old man was referred to the Department of General Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Hebei University (Baoding, China) in July 2018, with a complaint of abdominal distension for 1 year.
Apart from abdominal distension, the patient was asymptomatic, without distinct medical, surgical, or medication history.
A physical examination revealed the presence of abdominal bulge with a flexible mass (dimensions: 24 cm × 20 cm) located in the abdomen. This mass had a regular shape, clear boundary, and was palpable with a rubbery medium-hard texture. There was no pain upon application of pressure on the mass.
The laboratory examinations, including the assessment of tumor markers (alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, CA15-3, CA19-9, and CA72-4), as well as routine blood, urine, and stool tests, did not reveal abnormalities.
Ultrasound examination showed a solid hypoechoic mass (dimensions: 18.5 cm × 15.5 cm × 8.8 cm) in the right middle abdomen. The upper and lower margins reached the subcostal region, and the subumbilicus, respectively. The boundary was clear, the morphology was irregular, and the internal echo was not uniform. Marked echo interheterogenicity was observed in the center, and blood flow signals were detected around and within it through color Doppler flow imaging; in the lower abdomen, there were several echo groups with strong echo intensity, and the boundary was unclear. The dimensions of the largest mass in the right and left lower abdomen were approximately 8.3 cm × 5.0 cm and 7.9 cm × 4.4 cm, respectively; both had a vague boundary and an irregular shape .
Abdominal-pelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple low-density masses in the abdominal cavity. The dimensions of the largest mass in the left abdominal cavity were approximately 14.7 cm × 13.2 cm, and the mass had a clear boundary and convoluted vascular course. After performing contrast-enhanced scans, the mass did not exhibit significant enhancement with a -65 HU value. Another mixed-density mass was observed in the right abdominal cavity, with dimensions of approximately 15.4 cm × 10.6 cm; following contrast-enhanced scans, its CT values during the three phases were approximately 28/31/50 HU .