The proband was a 36-week product of a twin pregnancy, born to a 39-year old female. Pregnancy was achieved by in vitro fertilization secondary to mother's history of endometriosis. His birth weight was 2.44 kg, (40th percentile), length was 47 cm (50th percentile), and head circumference was 34.5 cm (90th percentile). A cardiac murmur was noted soon after birth. An echocardiogram revealed severe juxtaductal aortic coarctation with near aortic arch interruption. He had a moderately dilated main pulmonary artery and branch arteries, severe septal hypertrophy, moderately depressed biventricular systolic function, biventricular hyprertrophy, and bicommissural aortic valve. He was also noted to have high arched palate, micrognathia, and low set ears with thickened helices. He had fair suck, normal muscle tone and strength. Renal ultrasound showed decreased corticomedullary differentiation, bifid right renal pelvis and moderate pelviectasis. Head ultrasound showed partial agenesis of corpus callosum (see ). He underwent surgery for juxtaductal aortic coarctation with end-to-end anastomosis and PDA ligation. At one year of age, his weight was 10.5 kg (50th percentile), length was 77.5 cm (80th percentile) and head circumference was 48.8 cm (95th percentile). He had prominent forehead, midface hypoplasia, thinned lateral eyebrows, intermittent strabismus, low set ears with thickened helices, carp-shaped mouth and retrognathia . He started walking independently at 16 months of age. His renal ultrasound was subsequently repeated and was found to be normal. He had a brief seizure episode at 16 months of age. Since then, he has been treated with Valproic acid and the seizures have not recurred. MRI scan of the brain following the seizure episode showed diffuse delay in myelination and partial agenesis of corpus callosum. EEG showed generalized paroxysmal activity with high voltage slow waves and some short spikes.
At a chronological age of 48 months, he is in a regular classroom with children, a year younger than him. He is able to throw and catch a ball, march to a song, and use a spoon. He is not yet able to walk down stairs using alternating feet. He is able to name body parts, identify some shapes. He speaks in simple phrases, understands prepositions, and can follow simple commands. He receives speech therapy for his speech/language delays. His current level of functioning was evaluated based on teacher's assessment of his development across the domains of gross motor, fine motor, social/emotional, speech/language, and functional skills. Using the Learn and Play questionnaire, his level of functioning was broadly assessed between 23–34 month level, depending upon the specific task, reflecting mild delays in some and moderate delays in other areas. His motor skills are estimated to fall at the 25–26 month-old level, reflecting mild to moderate delays in this area. His language skills are slightly more delayed, falling at approximately the 23–24 month level, reflecting moderate delays. Cognitively, he is able to count from 1–10 in a stable sequence (a 34-month skill).
Giemsa-banded chromosome analysis was performed according to standard procedures on peripheral blood lymphocytes. Twenty metaphases were examined at the 550-band level. Further delineation of the size and boundaries of the deletion was carried out by genomic array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and FISH. For array CGH, we utilized a high-resolution chromosome 15-specific BAC array developed in our laboratory that included 106 BAC clones across 15q. The highest density of clones is across the ~10-Mb 15q11-q14 interval encompassing the common Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome critical region including the common deletion/duplication breakpoints. Therefore a resolution of greater than 1 clone per megabase for 15q11-q14 and less than 1 clone per megabase for 15q14-qter was achieved in this version of the chromosome 15 array. Additionally the array included 38 clones specific for the subtelomeric region of 41 clinically relevant telomeres for chromosomes 1 to 22, including 12 clones for chromosomes X and 6 clones for Y chromosome. All clones were selected based on physical maps represented in build 34 (2004) of the human genome sequence . Standard protocols for DNA preparation, labeling and hybridization were followed as described previously . A single normal male DNA was used as reference control for analysis of the proband. All array-CGH experiments included dye reversal and two array hybridizations to obtain an accurate ratio . After quantification and normalization of data for each clone on each of the duplicate arrays, the data from dye-reversed pairs were combined, and inferences were made according to a clone-by-clone classification procedure to determine the gain/loss status of each clone for each subject. The clone by clone classification procedure is similar to the independent clone procedure published previously . From a number of test experiments, the overall mean across all clones for the gain state was +0.22, for the loss state -0.34, and for the no-change state -0.04 . These values were set as approximate values for predicting a loss or gain for a clone. BAC clones chosen for FISH analysis were those that mapped within, proximal and distal to the deletion boundaries predicted by the array CGH. These included RP11-485O10 [GenBank: ] and RP11-353B9 [GenBank:] proximal to and RP11-231A23 [GenBank:] distal to the deletion interval predicted by CGH (RP11-353B9 was not included in the array but was used for narrowing down the interval by FISH only) and clones RP11-105D1 [GenBank:], RP11-23N2 [GenBank:], RP11-215J7 [GenBank:], RP11-323F24 [GenBank:] and RP11-50C13 [GenBank:] within the interval . Additionally, FISH with RP11-69G7 [GenBank:] encompassing α-tropomyosin gene was carried out prior to the array-CGH analysis as this was an important candidate gene for the cardiac phenotype in the proband and was located within the broader interval as estimated by G-banding and karyotype. FISH analyses were carried out as previously described . At least ten metaphase preparations were scored for each hybridization.