A 72-year-old woman with Stage IV, Class IV rheumatoid arthritis of 10 years was undergoing treatment with Abatacept (500-mg IV every 4 weeks), only to fail adequate disease activity control. Three months before her admission, the patient had been hospitalized with a sacral and left lower extremity ulcer infection due to rheumatoid vasculitis. While we detected Escherichia coli, Raoultella ornithinolytica, and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in her left lower leg, Streptococcus anginosus and Peptostreptococcus anaerobius were detected in the sacral region. Hence, levofloxacin was selected based on antimicrobial susceptibility and administered for 1 month, with dosages adjusted according to renal function. Subsequently, the left leg ulcer and the sacral fistula also began to shrink gradually. Thereafter, she was admitted to the hospital because of hip pain, general malaise, and anorexia after a fall. On admission, she had a temperature of 39.0 °C, blood pressure of 83/68 mmHg, a pulse of 85/min, SpO2 of 98% (room air), an ulcer with purulent discharge in the median sacral region, and a chicken-egg-sized ulcer with black and yellow necrotic tissue on the medial side of the left lower leg. Furthermore, she had elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (19.7 mg/dL) and procalcitonin (12.6 ng/mL) levels, suggesting worsening sacral and left lower extremity ulcers and concomitant infection. As a result, rheumatoid vasculitis treatment was intensified by adding betamethasone (2 mg/day) and meropenem (MEPM) (1.5 g/day) was initiated. On the 2nd day, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was detected in a blood culture taken on admission, then MEPM was replaced with vancomycin (VCM, 0.75 g/day, after the initial 1-g dose adjusted based on creatinine value 1.04 mg/dL and body weight 41 kg for target trough value 10–15 µg/mL). Additionally, the same blood culture confirmed S. anginosus on the 5th day. Nevertheless, her fever resolved after the 2nd day, CRP decreased to 3.7 mg/dL, the course of the disease recovery was good, and treatment was continued, except that the dose of VCM was increased to 1 g/day due to a low trough value of 3.6 µg/mL upon returning to normal renal function. Subsequently, in the pus from the sacral ulcer collected on admission, MRSA, Streptococcus agalactiae, S. anginosus, Finegoldia magna, and Corynebacterium jeikeium were also detected, indicating that sacral ulcers were the entry of the bacteremia.
On the 8th day, she developed a fever of 40 °C and suddenly required 10 L of oxygen due to rapid deterioration of oxygenation. Since D-dimer was elevated to 29.3 µg/mL, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) was immediately performed from neck to pelvis investigating systemic thrombosis including pulmonary embolism, revealing thrombi at the right external jugular vein, bilateral internal jugular veins, and right small saphenous vein without previously inserted a central venous catheter or clinical manifestations . Although, there was no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Therefore, apixaban (20 mg) was started according to the American Society of Hematology Venous Thromboembolism Guidelines. Although CRP was re-elevated to 7.2 mg/dL, her fever resolved within a few hours, and oxygen demand improved to SpO2 of 98% at around one liter of oxygen. Subsequently, only blood cultures including both aerobic and anaerobic were collected from the bilateral upper limbs, and the antimicrobial therapy regimen was unchanged.
On the 9th day, however, clindamycin (CLDM) (600 mg/day) was initiated because she had an intermittent fever of 39.7 °C, and S. anginosus was continuously detected in the blood culture collected the day before. Then, on the 10th day, anemia progressed rapidly from hemoglobin 10.2 to 5.5 g/dL level, and a CECT scan revealed a left hemothorax , leading to discontinuation of apixaban and insertion of a thoracic drain. Moreover, in addition to an intermittent fever of 40.3 °C, worsening CRP elevation to 10.5 mg/dL was observed. Although swelling of the left parotid gland was not evident on a visual examination , CECT revealed an abscess formation at the left parotid gland, pterygoid muscle group, and masseter muscle . As a result, with the abovementioned jugular vein thrombus, Lemierre’s syndrome was diagnosed (right small saphenous vein lesion was considered a remote lesion of Lemierre’s syndrome or just a venous thrombosis due to hypercoagulation and immobilization), causing a change from CLDM to MEPM (3 g/day). VCM was also increased to 2 g/day because the trough value was 9.9 µg/mL, slightly lower than the target value. Then, transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography was performed to exclude infective endocarditis, revealing no evidence of vegetation. Due to the diagnosis-based treatment modifications, the fever resolved after the 11th day, CRP decreased gradually, and oxygen administration was terminated on the 14th day. However, the lower part of the left ear became swollen with delay , and ultrasonography revealed the formation of an abscess . Thereafter, MEPM was de-escalated to CLDM (600 mg/day) on the 22nd day based on antimicrobial susceptibility. Moreover, although VCM and CLDM were terminated on the 30th day, 4 weeks after the MRSA blood culture became negative, amoxicillin (750 mg/day) for S. anginosus and minocycline (200 mg/day) for MRSA were initiated orally on the 31st day and continued for another 3 months due to infection under immunosuppressive therapy. An improvement at the left hemothorax was observed, and the thoracic drain was removed on the 27th day. Furthermore, the CRP became negative (0.15 mg/dL), the left lower ear mass disappeared , and the sacral and left lower leg ulcers tended to shrink. On the 41st day, she was finally transferred to continue rehabilitation.