The 13-year- and 11-month-old male index patient was referred to our hospital by his general practitioner for treatment of his extreme obesity. At time of referral, he had a BMI of 47.4 kg/m2 corresponding to a BMI standard deviation score (BMI-SDS) of 3.44 .
Several family members were also overweight/obese (BMI mother 39.42 kg/m2; BMI father 29.22 kg/m2; BMI sister (8 years and 2 months old) 28.1 kg/m2, BMI-SDS 2.72). The brother was 11 years and 3 months old and of normal weight (BMI 18.7 kg/m2, BMI-SDS 0.32).
Upon referral to our child and adolescent psychiatric service, he was in a dysphoric state of mood, revealed signs of inattention, and was easily distractible. According to his parents and his teachers he was inattentive, but not hyperactive. His school performance was below average. He experienced frequent bullying at school and reported being physically abused at school, which he claimed made him feel anxious and nervous. His eating pattern had been abnormal since early childhood. Most of his food intake was between mealtimes. He got hungry soon after having finished a meal. He initially became obese as a toddler.
Physical examination revealed acanthosis nigricans in the neck, striae distensae, and Tanner stage 2. Total cholesterol was 241 mg/dl, HDL-cholesterol 46 mg/dl, and LDL-cholesterol 179 mg/dl; the oral glucose tolerance test showed a borderline value at 139 mg/dl after 2 h. The electrocardiogram on admission showed a subtotal right bundle branch block, and 24-hour blood pressure examination revealed an arterial hypertension. 90% of the measurements were above the 95th age-related percentile, pulse frequency varied between 50 and 80 beats/min.
A mutation screen of the MC4R (for details see [,]) revealed heterozygosity for Met281Val of both the index patient and his mother. The same mutation was also detected heterozygously in his 7-year-old sister. She also showed symptoms of inattention but no hyperactivity. The brother carried the wild type.
The Met281Val mutation has been shown to result in a reduced cell surface expression of the receptor and in slightly increased EC50 levels of α-melanocyte-stimulating-hormone (α-MSH) in comparison to the wild-type receptor , thus entailing a partial loss-of-function.
Clinical psychiatric assessment by an experienced child and adolescent psychiatrist on the basis of a structured interview with the parents and the child in succession (Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children – Present and Lifetime version (K-SADS-PL), Version 1.0 ) and the clinical impression obtained by reports from therapists and teachers of the hospital and school, respectively, revealed that the index patient fulfilled diagnostic criteria for the inattentive subtype of ADHD according to the DSM-IV TR criteria . The diagnosis was further underscored by neuropsychological assessments comprising subtests on inhibitory control (go / no go, incompatibility) of the Test Battery on Attentional Performance (TAP) and the d2 cancellation test .
His intelligence level was within the normal range (IQ 95; Culture Fair Test (CFT 20) ). The index patient also fulfilled the DSM-IV TR research criteria for binge eating disorder (BED) based on the results of a structured psychiatric interview with the mother and the adolescent (interview version of the Questionnaire on Eating and Weight Pattern (QEWP) by ).
At the age of 11, the boy took part in a 10-week inpatient weight reduction program during which he lost 13 kg. Back at home, he gained 38 kg in the following 6 months. At the current referral for renewed inpatient treatment, his weight was 135.5 kg, his height measured 169 cm (BMI 47.4 kg/m2, BMI-SDS 3.44). He started with a diet of 1,600 kcal/day; physical exercise was promoted. He lost 1–1.5 kg/week; however, during weekend holidays at home he suffered from binge eating episodes, and his weight increased between 1 and 3 kg during each weekend. The patient subjectively attributed his initiation of eating to a high arousal level and feelings of internal agitation associated with a loss of control over eating. He consumed up to 4 l of caffeinated, sugary softdrinks over a day.
In light of our clinical findings and the delineated difficulties of losing weight, we decided to initiate treatment with the selective noradrenergic re-uptake inhibitor atomoxetine during week 3 of inpatient treatment. The dose was increased stepwise to 120 mg/day. Inattention improved; in the attention test (d2 Test of Attention) he scored in the normal range (54rd percentile) after treatment for 3 weeks. The incompatibility standard deviation reaction time (T-scores) of the TAP indicated an improvement ranging from 42 at no dose to 54 at a dose of 120 mg/day atomoxetine.
After 8 weeks of inpatient treatment, he was referred to our outpatient lifestyle intervention weight reduction group program for overweight and obese children (FitKds) [,,]. The BMI at discharge was 42.9 kg/m2. He now was able to monitor and control his daily caloric intake, and his school performance improved substantially. During the first 6 months of this outpatient program his weight steadily decreased to a BMI of 36.0 kg/m2 (BMI-SDS 2.86).
The boy showed good compliance to the lifestyle intervention and also a significant improvement of attentional and learning problems. Therefore, we reduced atomoxetine dosage for 3 months and then completely discontinued the medication while the boy continued to take part in the lifestyle intervention. Three weeks after having stopped the medication the patient showed a weight gain (3 kg) for the first time in the observed period, although he reported a daily intake of 1,400 calories . Inattention worsened; in the TAP he scored 42 (reaction time). We thus began to treat him with atomoxetine again. Body weight again decreased rapidly . After 12 months, at the end of the program, his BMI was 33.1 kg/m2 (BMI-SDS 2.59). Six months after having finished the lifestyle intervention and under continuous medication, his BMI was 30.4 kg/m2 (BMI-SDS 2.25). At this time, he showed elevated pulse frequency, whereas blood pressure improved. He received no pharmacological antihypertensive treatment. Consequently, we reduced atomoxetine for a second time, which was followed by a slight increase in body weight (BMI 31.2 kg/m2; BMI-SDS 2.35) and a decrease of pulse frequency. Two months later, the atomoxetine dosage was elevated to 100 mg/day, and consequently his weight decreased again (BMI 29.6 kg/m2; BMI-SDS 2.11), whereas pulse frequency increased.