A nineteen-year-old female was referred for visual loss and superior visual field defect in her left eye (LE). Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 and 20/400 in the right eye (RE) in the LE, respectively. The anterior segment examination was within normal limits except for the detection of Shaffer sign in the LE. The results of the fundus examination revealed macula off inferior long-standing rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD), 3 h of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), retinal break, and lattice degeneration. The patient had no history of head or ocular trauma or any intraocular surgery. SB with 360 degrees encircling silicone band (silicone band type 240, FCI Inc., Paris, France) and inferior segmental silicone tire (asymmetrical silicone tire type 276, FCI Inc., Paris, France) with one spot cryoretinopexy at the break site, and SRFD due to chronicity of the RRD was performed. During this process, SRFD was not inadvertent. Scleral thinning was performed after passing the band and tire. Moreover, the needle of polyester spatula suture (Mersilene, Ethicon LLC, Johnson and Johnson Inc., USA) was used to drain the fluid after the cauterization of the choroid. BCVA was improved to 20/80 and the retina was totally attached 1 week after the operation. The patient was followed up receiving a topical antibiotic (Chlobiotic, Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran) and topical corticosteroid (Bethasonate, Sina Darou, Tehran, Iran) for 3 weeks.
The patient referred to the hospital with severe visual loss in both eyes 6 weeks later. On examination, BCVA of both eyes was counting finger at one meter and the anterior segment was within normal limits, except 1+ anterior chamber and anterior vitreous cells in both eyes. Bilateral multifocal serous retinal detachment (SRD) was obvious in funduscopy . The results of enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) (Spectralis HRA +OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed multilobular SRD, septated subretinal spaces, hyperreflective dot reflexes in subretinal fluid, choroidal thickening, and retinal pigment epithelium undulation . Chorioscleral junction was not detected due to diffuse severe choroidal thickening. According to the results of examination and imaging, as well as the absence of any other ocular trauma history except for SB surgery, the diagnosis of SO was presumed incited by SB surgery. Therefore, the patient was admitted and received high-dose (1 g/day) intravenous methylprednisolone treatment for 5 days. This five-day pulse therapy led to the control of inflammation and the significant resolution of SRD . The patient underwent all systemic work-ups for common causes of choroiditis, including sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, syphilis, and autoimmunity markers were inconclusive. Moreover, familial, drug, and past medical history were unremarkable. After pulse therapy, oral prednisolone (50 mg/day) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (2 g/day) were initiated. On the fourth day, fluorescein angiography showed no significant dye pooling except for mild leakage; also, it revealed mixed hypo- and hyper-fluorescent dots scattered at the posterior poles presumably due to choroidal hypoperfusion and abnormal leakage. Since indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) was not available at that time, it was not performed at the first presentation of SO. Prednisolone tapered rapidly due to the increased blood glucose, and subtenon triamcinolone acetonide (TriamHEXAL, Hexal AG, Holzkirchen, Germany) (40 mg/1 cc) was injected bilaterally. Induced diabetes was controlled with oral medication which was stopped after 1 month. Prednisolone was reached to 5 mg/d at the end of the second month with continuing MMF (2 g/d). The blood glucose was checked frequently, which was within normal limits during the follow-up and did not relapse during 6-months follow-ups. Following one-year treatment with MMF 2 g/d and prednisolone 5 mg/d, inflammation was reduced considerably and the retina was attached completely in both eyes. Final BCVA was obtained as 20/20 and 20/50 in the RE and LE, respectively. After 3 months of immunosuppressive treatment, ICGA disclosed only a few hypofluorescent dark dots in both eyes and mild background hyperflorescence at the posterior pole indicating a response to treatment with mild subclinical inflammation of choroidal stroma .