A 72-year-old European male with a medical history of arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and end-stage renal failure on hemodialysis presented to our university hospital’s emergency department with fever and dyspnea for the last 24 hours. The patient was hemodynamically stable, and had an oxygen saturation of 90% at rest in room air. However, the patient quickly deteriorated in the emergency department, developing severe hypoxic respiratory failure that required intubation and mechanical ventilation. He was then admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) as a case of COVID-19 acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
During the first 20 days in the ICU, the patient was evolving in a favorable manner, with supportive treatment, low doses of steroids, and on a prophylactic dose of subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin. The patient was being weaned gradually from mechanical ventilation until extubation on the 19th day. All his laboratory results during this period were within normal range. On the 21st day, the patient started to complain of abdominal pain and distention. He developed a fever around 39 °C with a tachycardia of 120 beats/min and no episodes of hypotension. His respiratory parameters were within the normal range without any signs of hypoperfusion. Clinical examination showed a generalized abdominal guarding.
His laboratory results were as follow: Hemoglobin: 117 g/L (reference: 130–170 g/L); white blood cells: 9.5 k/mm3 (reference: 4.0–10 k/mm3); platelets: 279 k/mm3 (reference: 130–400 k/mm3); lactic acid: 0.6 mmol/L (reference: 0.6–2.4 mmol/L); troponin: 0.04 ng/mL (reference: < 0.04 ng/mL); d-dimer: 1.0 μg/mL (reference: < 0.5 μg/mL); fibrinogen: 6.42 g/L (reference: 2–4.5 g/L); C-reactive protein: 361 mg/L (reference: < 10 mg/L); procalcitonin: 3.46 ng/mL (reference: < 2 ng/mL); international normalized ratio (INR): 1.06 (reference: 0.80–1.15); partial thromboplastin time: 26 seconds (reference: 22–31 seconds).
An abdominal X-ray showed signs of pneumatosis intestinalis of the right colon and his abdominal computerized tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast showed signs of pneumatosis intestinalis of the entire right colon without signs of visceral perforation, and showed a normal nonobstructed superior mesenteric artery and vein in their proximal part (distal parts were poorly visualized on the CT scan due technical issues) .
The patient was taken to the operating room, where laparoscopy revealed a well-demarcated ischemia of the right colon. The distal part of ileocolic artery was thrombosed and the patient did not have a right colic artery. We proceeded with a right hemicolectomy with a terminal ileostomy . The patient had a slow but favorable recovery, and was discharged from the hospital 2 weeks after surgery.
The final histopathology report concluded an acute ischemic colitis with transparietal necrosis and microvascular thrombosis, suggestive of COVID-19-related colitis.
The patient was readmitted to our unit 6 months later for an elective surgery, where he had has ileostomy taken down with a laparoscopic intracorporeal ileocolic anastomosis, with an excellent recovery, and was discharged home 4 days later.