A 67-year-old woman presented to the emergency department after being brought in by her family who described seven day symptoms of lethargy and marked deteroition. Collateral history revelaed the patient was housebound during this period, which was highly unusual for her. A dramatic decline in her consciousness leaving her unarousable at time of presentation pressed family to seek urgent medical attention. Retrospective history also revealed complaints of a five-day period of headaches steadily increasing in intensity. This was described as an ache radiating from her occiput to her forehead, with her unable to alleviate the pain with simple analgesia. She did not complain of visual disturbances, neck stiffness, or vomiting. Apart from a mild cough, runny nose, and slight nausea no other systemic symptoms were described. A timeline summarizing the events of this case is presented in Fig. ; which includes a summary of the patient’s relevant medical comorbidities, presenting symptoms, investigations, as well as details of diagnosis and management.
The patient had a background of well controlled type II diabetes mellitus, asthma, hypertension, iron deficiency anemia (IDA) and peripheral vascular disease, treated with angioplasty three years prior to admission. The patient was also known to have a history of obstructive sleep apnoea, treated with nocturnal CPAP. Interestingly, the patient also reported a left ear perforation two years prior to admission.
On admission, initial observations noted the patient to be hypoxic, tacypneic and tachycardia. The patient’s GCS was recorded to be 10/15 E3, M5, V2. Neurological examination, although complicated by the reduced consciousness, noted increased tone bilaterally in her upper limbs, clonus and hyper-reflexia throughout. Arterial gas carried out on high flow oxygen (10 l) identified a PaO2 of 24 kPa, PaCO2 of 5.2 kPa, and mildly raised lactate (1.5 mmol/L). There were no signs of opthalmoplegia or facial asymmetry. The patient was nevertheless significantly disorientated in time, place and person; AMTS at time of admission was 0/10.
Laboratory results indicated raised inflammatory markers. White cell count: 16 × 103/mm3, C-reactive protein: 22 mg/L, neutrophils: 13.8 × 103/mm3 however renal and liver function tests were normal. ECG revealed the patient to be in sinus tachycardia. Due to the presentation, initial diagnoses of encephalitis and meningitis were queried. The patient was empirically started on Cefotaxime, Acyclovir, and Vancomycin in the emergency department. An urgent CT scan was arranged. Please refer to Fig. for axial and sagittal CT images.
The CT imaging identified multiple loculi of intracranial air scattered in both cerebral hemispheres, which were not associated with an acute bleed or any midline shift. The images also display partial opacification of the right compartment of the sphenoid sinus as well as bilateral posterior ethmoid air cells. The imaging confirmed no evidence of fracture. Due to the absence of trauma or surgery, the appearances noted on the CT scan were reported to be secondary to sinus or middle ear disease.
The patient was discussed with our neurosurgical and neurology colleagues and deemed not to be for surgical intervention. In accordance with feedback from the neurosurgical team, the patient was stepped up to HDU management. This decision was based on the neurological indications for HDU admission. Metronidazole was subsequently added to treatment after advice by microbiology. Whilst in HDU the patient became acutely agitated and required sedation. Dexamethasone was started during stay in HDU. The patient did not receive ventilatory support in the form of CPAP, BIPAP, nor intubation whilst in HDU. Due to the severity of her intracranial symptoms, it was decided that the patient’s nocturnal CPAP management for sleep apnea was to be stopped during hospital stay.
Lumbar puncture revealed a turbid fluid with a white cell count (WCC) of 5600/ul (75% polymorphs 25% lymphocytes) and red blood cell count of 161/ul. The sample was found have protein >20.00 mg/dL and glucose of 3.9 mg/dL. The sample was positive for bilirubin and negative for both methaemoglobin and oxyhaemoglbin. Lab findings suggested no organisms were present in the sample in addition to no growth on extended culture.
S. salivarius was later isolated by PCR of the CSF. Blood cultures were negative. ENT review suggested a diagnosis of pneumocephalus with meningitis from a nasal source. The ENT assessment included a full history, clinical examination, nasoendoscopy, and careful review of CT imaging, where they noted no defects. The ENT team suggested the growth of S. salivarius, correlated with a diagnosis of sinusitis eroding back into the cranial vault. This was a diagnosis of exclusion after the growth of S salivarius was confirmed by PCR of the CNS fluid, suggesting a sinonasal source.
The patient’s recent history rhinorrhea in conjunction with the use of nocturnal CPAP and isolation of S.Salvarius on PCR led us to suspect this infection was due to osteomyelitis of the base of skull which may have precipitated a cranial defect, susceptible to the ‘one way valve mechanism’ often reported in cases of pneumocephalus. Thus without a defect noted on nasoendoscopy or CT imaging, it was believed the pneumocephalus was secondary to a cranial osteomyelitis - as suggested by the ENT and Microbiology team.
Outpatient treatment was started for likely osteomyelitis of the sinus wall. As the patient recovered, she was subsequently discharged on a continued 3-month regime of antibiotics consisting of oral Metronidazole, intravenous Ceftriaxone and Teicoplanin delivered via a PICC line. The patient’s CPAP was stopped for the duration of therapy for sinusitis and osteomyelitis. In addition a formal discussion was had with the patient about abstaining from CPAP during periods of sinusitis due to their previous susceptibility to infective pneumocephalus. Ensuring adherence and tolerability of the proposed management plan, the patient was reviewed bi-weekly in the hospital acute medical clinic. The ENT and neurosurgical team also carried out additional follow up appointments.
Repeat CT scan carried out two months after presentation revealed complete resolution of pneumocephalus. There was no intracranial haemorrhage, however mucosal thickening in the sphenoid and posterior ethmoid sinus was noted. No retro-orbital mass or sinus obstruction was found. Despite full resolve, the patient still complained of general lethargy and leg weakness at this point. There was however no change in personality or residual neurological deficit.