The patient is a 34 year old healthy primigravida with spontaneous dichorionic diamniotic twins and likely bicornuate uterus, with one fetus in each horn, initially diagnosed at 12 weeks gestation by two-dimensional ultrasound. Magnetic resonance imaging at that time reported bicornuate unicollis uterine anatomy, with symmetrical myometrial thickness in both horns. The left cervical canal was noted to communicate with the right lower uterine segment and not directly with the vagina. A thin amniotic band was noted in the superior left uterine horn. Bilateral normal maternal kidneys were noted.
The patient subsequently presented at 17 weeks gestation with new onset significant pelvic pain. An MRI at an outside hospital demonstrated a thin myometrial wall (thickness not reported) in the left uterine horn without myometrial disruption, but with moderate pelvic free fluid . The patient’s hematocrit was noted to decline from 32 to 26%, and she was transferred to our tertiary care center for further management. Three-dimensional ultrasound at our institution revealed two separate uterine cavities, each with a live appropriately-grown fetus with normal amniotic fluid. The anatomy of the cervices was difficult to delineate, but a vascular connection was noted between the medial surfaces of each horn. The myometrium over the left horn was noted to be “markedly thinned” superiorly . Moderate hemoperitoneum was documented, with a 3.6 cm clot adherent to the thinnest portion of the myometrium of the left horn. Concern was raised for rupture of a rudimentary uterine horn. A severe cardiac anomaly was incidentally diagnosed in the fetus in the right unicornuate uterine horn.
Given these imaging findings and the patient’s ongoing pain, the decision was made to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy and left hemi-hysterectomy with fetus in situ. The patient underwent ultrasound-guided selective reduction of the fetus in the left uterine horn using intracardiac potassium chloride. Immediately after this procedure, the patient underwent laparoscopy, at which point she was noted to have a right unicornuate uterus with a rudimentary left uterine horn, with 2 cm rupture on the superior surface with amnion protruding , and moderate hemoperitoneum. Due to intraoperative bleeding and suspected amniotic rupture during examination of the left horn, the procedure was converted to an abdominal hemi-hysterectomy. During this procedure, a fibrous but narrow band was noted between the uterine horns, which was ligated and transected using bipolar energy. The procedure and the patient’s recovery were uncomplicated.
The pregnancy in the right uterine horn continued postoperatively. At 19 weeks of gestational age, in the setting of a severe fetal cardiac anomaly and high likelihood of preterm delivery complicating surgical correction, the patient underwent laminaria placement and uncomplicated ultrasound-guided dilation and curettage of the right uterine horn.
The patient subsequently spontaneously conceived two singleton pregnancies. Normal anatomical surveys and fetal echocardiograms were noted in each. Both pregnancies were complicated by preterm contractions without cervical change. Eighteen months after her surgery, the patient delivered a healthy, small for gestational age (2,580 g) female infant, followed by a healthy 2,722 g male the following year.