We present the interesting case of a 7-year-old white girl with HLH in association with coeliac disease (CD). She first presented with a 2-week history of fever, associated with tonsillitis, which was not responding to antibiotics. She also had arthralgia and weight loss; an examination revealed a widespread maculopapular rash with no other specific features and no hepatosplenomegaly. She had previously been well, with no significant family history or long-term medications.
Blood tests revealed thrombocytopenia (64×109/L), anemia (80 g/L), liver function derangement (alanine aminotransferase 1038 IU/ml), and hypofibrinogenemia (1 g/L). She had a raised ferritin level (71,378 μg/L), and a bone marrow biopsy showed occasional hemophagocytosis. Her perforin expression was normal by flow cytometry, and cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) and NK cell granule release on stimulation by mitogens was normal. Genotyping of the PRF gene encoding perforin protein was wildtype. The result of an autoimmune screen, including rheumatoid factor, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA, and anti-citrullinated protein antibody was negative. The results of a viral screen including Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), parvovirus, human herpes virus 6, enterovirus, adenovirus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), human immunodeficiency virus, and hepatitis screen were negative.
She commenced treatment on the HLH-2004 protocol, with etoposide, dexamethasone, and ciclosporin given over 40 weeks for a diagnosis of HLH for which no underlying cause was identified. She completed her treatment with a good clinical and biochemical response. Ten months later, she re-presented with a history of fevers, headaches, and lethargy. Blood tests showed high ferritin (6702 μg/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (1002 units/L) levels. She had no cytopenia and a repeat bone marrow aspirate showed no evidence of hemophagocytosis.
Her subsequent clinical course was complicated by recurrent fevers, arthralgia, widespread macular rash, and weight loss. Her ferritin and lactate dehydrogenase levels remained markedly raised and the results of repeat virology investigations were negative. A repeat autoimmune screen revealed markedly raised tissue transglutaminase (tTG) antibodies of 108 Units/ml (normal range 0 to 6.9 Units/ml). A jejunal biopsy was deemed too high risk and a gluten-free diet was urgently commenced. Genetic testing revealed a susceptibility to CD, in the form of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ2 positivity, and she was therefore diagnosed as having CD.
She continued a gluten-free diet following which her clinical features improved and her biochemical markers, including tTG antibodies, gradually returned to normal. She had no further recurrences of her HLH symptoms since the introduction of a gluten-free diet. However, she continued to have intermittent episodes of macular rash and arthralgia, particularly associated with accidental ingestion of gluten. Two years subsequent to this she developed symptoms suggestive of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) without HLH or macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) and received treatment with systemic steroids in addition to methotrexate, with clinical resolution. Her autoimmune profile remained negative. Figure elucidates her clinical course.