A 50-year-old male patient with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and pneumonia thrice admitted to the respiratory department of our hospital over a period of 4 months in early 2020. Lung CT scan showed multiple lung masses. The pathological section on 03-Apr-2020 showed pyogranulomatous inflammation. However, because the patient was not treated systematically, the pneumonia had not been eradicated.
The patient had a history of atrial fibrillation and long-term use of methylprednisolone. A month later, he was admitted to the hospital with headache and vomiting for 4 days. Routine blood analysis at the emergency department showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 10.68 × 10^9/L, N%: 74.8%. A head CT scan showed multiple low-density shadows without bleeding .
After entering our department, the patient developed fever, with a temperature of nearly 39.0 °C, and accompanied by disturbance of consciousness but without seizures. Physical examination of his nervous system showed shallow coma and left hemiplegia with some signs of meningitis. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 7.
On the 2nd day following admission, a lumbar puncture was performed, and it showed turbid CSF. The CSF pressure was 380 mmH2O (normal range,80-180mmH2O) and the color of the CSF was light yellow, with slight turbidity. The WBC count was 350/μL. Analysis of the CSF revealed that the levels of glucose, chloride and protein were 5.61 mmol/L (normal range, 2.5–4.5 mmol/L), 118.2 mmol/L (normal range, 120–132 mmol/L). and 2087 mg/L (normal range, 150–450 mg /L) respectively. CSF stain including Gram stain, ink stain and acid-fast stain were negative.
Two days after admission, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multiple irregular lesions in the right temporal lobe and bilateral basal ganglia with significant edema and local mass effect. Following contrast, most of these lesions enhanced in a smooth ring fashion . Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) showed no cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. The procalcitonin (PCT) was 0.58 ng/ml and Endotoxin was 0.0444EU/ml. But the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; normal range 0 to 20 mm per hour) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level (normal range, < 10 mg/L) were elevated to 79 mm/h and 228 mg/l respectively. After treatment with meropenem and vancomycin for 3 days, the clinical symptoms of the patient did not improve. Serological tests and traditional CSF culture also did not detect possible infection aetiologies. Additionally, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, syphilis antibody, HIV antibody and tumor markers of serum were in normal range. (1, 3)-β-D-glucan and galactomannan testing were also negative.
On the 5th day following admission, considering the aggravation of the patient’s condition and sustained high fever, the lumber puncture was repeated. CSF examination showed a turbid CSF with 660 leukocytes/mm3, 2087 mg/L protein, 118.2 mmol/L chloride, 5.61 mmol/L glucose, and pressure was 400mmH2O. This time, the patient’s family agreed to perform CSF pathogen identification using mNGS. On the 7th day following admission, sputum smear indicated a Gram-positive bacilli and CSF mNGS analysis was suggestive of Nocardia farcinica with 104 sequence reads . Together with medical history, imaging data and pathological findings, we concluded that the patient had pneumonia and brain abscess caused by Nocardia farcinica. Subsequently, we immediately amended the therapeutic regimen to Meropenem plus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). Three days later, the level of consciousness, cough and sputum improved significantly. The temperature also obviously improved, fluctuating between 36.2 and 37.8 °C. Considering that it is difficult to afford high medical costs, the family chose to transfer the patient to the local hospital for treatment. Thereafter, we lost contact with the patient’s family.