A 21-year-old Han Chinese male finance officer first presented in China with weakness and unsteady gait, which progressed rapidly over months until he was wheelchair-bound. At age 23, he re-presented to our health service with seizures and ESRD requiring hemodialysis on a background of progressive weight loss, dysarthria and dysphagia. The cause of his ESRD was uncertain as a kidney biopsy was not performed prior to his migration to Australia.
His developmental history included a mild delay described in China at age 16; however, no cognitive impairment affecting his education or employment was noted. There was no family history of neurodegenerative or kidney disease. Physical examination showed a thin man (77 pounds and body mass index 14) with truncal imbalance, and generalised hypotonia, weakness and hyporeflexia.
To diagnose his neurodegenerative illness, investigations revealed normal serum lactate at 0.20 (0.05–0.24) mg/dL, however false negatives were possible as venous lactate is removed on hemodialysis. His cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal pyruvate level of 0.12 (0.06–0.13) mmol/L, reduced glucose at 32.1 (50–80) mg/dL and raised protein at 78 (15–45) mg/dL. MRI brain showed severe cerebellar atrophy and milder atrophy in the brainstem and cerebral hemispheres and patchy increased T2 signal in the right cerebral hemisphere and the medulla. Mutations in mtDNA m.A3243G > A, m.8344A > G and m.8993 T > G were not identified in China and further genetic sequencing detected mtDNA mutation at m.13513G > A with 25% mutation load. The diagnosis of a mitochondrial disorder, most likely LS was made without a muscle biopsy.
Three years after commencing dialysis, his physical function improved modestly after a period of rehabilitation and home modifications. He remained seizure-free and suffered only occasional myoclonic jerks after cessation of carbamazepine with no ongoing anticonvulsant therapy. As his neurological state was non-progressive with a more favourable prognosis, the possibility of transplantation was entertained. Specific perioperative risks related to his LS and possible negative effects of immunosuppressants on his neurological disease were considered and addressed as part of his pre-transplant evaluation .
The patient had asymptomatic but severe left ventricular hypertrophy with moderate diastolic dysfunction related to mitochondrial disease on transthoracic echocardiogram and ventricular tachyarrhythmia was not detected on Holter monitor. Offers of deceased donor kidneys with high risk of prolonged delayed graft function (donation after circulatory death and/or acute kidney injury) were declined to minimise cardiac risks early post-transplant.
An anesthetic review pre-transplant waitlisting was sought to evaluate the risk of cardiorespiratory and metabolic complications. The risks of potential metabolic disturbance including lactic acidosis, and malignant hyperthermia or rhabdomyolysis caused by volatile agents were considered. Anesthetics, including volatile agents, propofol and thiopentone pose a theoretical risk as they act on tissues with high energy requirements and decrease mitochondrial function. However, reports of mitochondrial disease patients having anesthetics indicate that they may generally be used without adverse outcomes . For example, in 122 patients with mitochondrial disease undergoing muscle biopsy with a mean operation time of 36 min, 83 of whom had measurable deficits of oxidative phosphorylation. However, there were no anesthetic complications following standard preoperative assessment, monitoring and induction . Seventeen of these patients received propofol as an induction agent. Although mitochondrial disease has been proposed as a risk for the propofol infusion syndrome - acute bradycardia progressing to asystole, lipemic plasma, fatty liver enlargement, metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis or myoglobinuria associated with prolonged high dose propofol infusions (> 4 mg/h for > 48 h) this has not been proven . Thus, we considered a short induction and limited propofol boluses would be safe for anesthesia in our patient. Malignant hyperthermia has not been proven to be a special risk in mitochondrial patients .
Calcineurin inhibitors may worsen neurological diseases by altering mitochondrial function [, ], myopathy from Fanconi syndrome [, ] and lowering seizure threshold . Devastating reversible neurotoxicity secondary to calcineurin inhibitors has been reported post-transplant . For our patient while on dialysis, a two-week trial of tacrolimus and mycophenolate caused no deterioration of mitochondrial disorder, and achieving adequate drug levels suggested his ability to swallow and absorb the immunosuppressants.
The patient’s low body weight was related to his neuromuscular disease, causing asthenia, early satiety and oropharyngeal fatigue. Optimising the quality of nutritional intake is known to improve mitochondrial health in patients with mitochondrial disorders and nutrition was optimised with dietetic input, education and liquid oral supplementations.
The patient underwent a deceased brain dead donor kidney transplant at age 27 with 3/6 HLA mismatches and no DR mismatch. He weighed 75 pounds (34 kg) and had 150 mg of propofol as induction and another 50 mg in small boluses as maintenance (200 mg in total) during a relatively short anesthetic of 2 h and 15 min. Suxamethonium was avoided and there was no complication of malignant hyperthermia or lactic acidosis. He was managed in intensive care post-operatively for hemodynamic monitoring and fluid management without inotropic requirements, and he required hemodialysis twice for delayed graft function. Standard immunosuppression included basiliximab induction and maintenance therapy with prednisolone, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil at a reduced dose of 750 mg twice daily given his low body weight.
Four months post-transplant, he developed acute on chronic diarrhoea and associated dehydration. Histopathology from colonoscopy showed features of mild pancolitis without features of cytomegalovirus infection. This was considered to be mycophenolate-related and his dose was reduced to 500 mg twice daily with partial symptomatic improvement. Therapeutic drug monitoring with mycophenolic acid area under the curve (MPA AUC0-12 h) was measured and reported as 104 (target range 30–60) mg.h/L and further dose reduction to 500 mg mane 250 mg nocte resulted in resolution of symptoms.
Graft function has remained stable at three and a half years with a serum creatinine between 1.0 and 1.2 mg/dL and no proteinuria. Twelve-month protocol biopsy showed no features of rejection or fibrosis. His severe left ventricular hypertrophy remained unchanged on transthoracic echocardiogram 5, 21 and 40 months post-transplant, consistent with his mitochondrial disease.
The patient’s weight increased to 88 pounds and he can now independently feed and toilet himself and stand for longer periods. His dysphagia and dysarthria were however unchanged. The patient continues to live in the community with improved quality of life and freedom from dialysis and he has recently returned to Australia following a vacation to China.