An 84-year-old Japanese woman with no history of hepatitis was referred to our institution because of a large solid mass in the right hepatic lobe that had been detected by computed tomography (CT) at another clinic. She had no specific symptoms, such as abdominal discomfort or jaundice. She was a non-smoker and a non-drinker, without obesity. The results of routine laboratory and liver function tests were within normal values. Her tests for serum hepatitis B surface antigen/antibody, hepatitis C antibody, and hepatitis C virus RNA were negative. Her serum alpha-fetoprotein level was high at 399 ng/mL (normal range, <20 ng/mL), and protein induced by vitamin K antagonist-II was slightly elevated at 43 mAU/mL (normal range, <40 mAU/mL). Other tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen19-9, were within their normal ranges. Plain CT revealed a single solid low-density mass at segment 5 in the liver. In contrast-enhanced CT, the lesion showed early hypervascularization and delayed hypoattenuation . Liver ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) showed some different features. The lower region and the periphery of the lesion showed low signals in T1-weighted out-of-phase images compared with in-phase images, which indicated that these parts of the lesion contained fatty tissue; this change was not observed in the left part of the lesion (upper and central parts on axial CT slice). Conversely, fat-suppressed T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images showed high signals within the upper and central parts of the lesion. The patient was preoperatively diagnosed with HCC. Although the patient was old, her liver function was good (Child–Pugh class A), and there was only one lesion, and thus curative resection was considered possible. She underwent a laparoscopic partial hepatectomy of S5 and cholecystectomy without additional lymph node dissection. Because the tumor was located on the edge of the liver, the resected specimen was not large, measuring 80 mm.
Macroscopically, the tumor seemed solid, well-demarcated, and encapsulated, and was whitish-yellow in color with hemorrhagic and necrotic changes . Microscopically, the tumor showed both HCC and NEC components. The largest part of the tumor showed atypical cells with trabecularly arranged eosinophilic cytoplasm . Immunohistochemically, these atypical cells were diffusely positive for glypican-3 , but negative for chromogranin A and synaptophysin . The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 10% . These histological and immunohistochemical features indicated moderately differentiated HCC. However, a grossly white-to-gray component was distributed from the center to the periphery of the tumor. This component was composed of a sheet-like arrangement of atypical cells with a high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio and many mitotic figures . The atypical cells in this area were immunohistochemically positive for synaptophysin and chromogranin A , but negative for glypican-3 . Their Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 80% . These histological and immunohistochemical features indicated NEC. The region of the tumor between the HCC and NEC components also showed atypical cells with enlarged nuclei and relatively broad cytoplasm , which were positive for both synaptophysin and glypican-3 , and seemed to be the transitional area between HCC and NEC. On the basis of these features and the absence of a primary NEC lesion outside of the liver, we diagnosed it as a combined PHNEC–HCC tumor.
The patient had a good postoperative course. One month after her surgery, she underwent somatostatin receptor scintigraphy to detect the primary NEC lesion. The examination showed no somatostatin accumulations in any other part of the body, which indicated that the NEC component was not metastatic. The patient was still alive 9 months after the surgery, with no sign of recurrence or metastasis.