A 35-year-old female complained of dyspnea during pregnancy with her second child. She had no obesity or complications during pregnancy. Stridor were heard on auscultation. Computed tomography (CT) scan was delayed after delivery despite symptom onset in the third trimester of pregnancy; it was believed that CT imaging would have little influence on the fetus. Cervical and chest CT scan showed upper tracheal stenosis, of a length of 18 mm (A). Video bronchoscopy revealed circumstantial cicatricial stenosis of the trachea at the level of the 2nd to 4th rings, with narrowing resulting in 75% constriction (i.e., leaving 25% of the tracheal lumen unobstructed). The tip of the bronchoscope could narrowly pass through the stenotic tracheal lesion, but resulted in her choking. The patient’s mother recalled that she was a low birth-weight infant (around 1000 g) and underwent neonatal resuscitation via endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation for a few weeks. No tracheostomy had been made. However, further detail, such as the size of the endotracheal tube was unknown.
The patient did not opt for surgical treatment because she had to take care of her baby; therefore, we chose endotracheal treatment. After topical anesthesia was achieved by spraying 3–4 ml of 2% lidocaine onto the pharyngolarynx, she was sedated with intravenous injection of midazolam (0.06 mg/kg) and placed in a supine position. A 3-mm flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope (Olympus Optical, Tokyo, Japan) was introduced orally; the tracheal stenotic lesion was visualized, and a 6-mm O.D. uncuffed endotracheal tube was guided over the shaft of the pre-inserted fiberscope. The tube could narrowly pass over the stenotic lesion, with some resistance. Thereafter the endotracheal tube was repeatedly changed to one-size larger tube, and finally, an 11.9-mm O.D. (I.D. 8.0 mm) tracheal tube was passed over the stenosis. A video bronchoscope (O.D. 6 mm; Olympus Optical, Tokyo, Japan) was used and a flexible probe of an endoscopic argon plasma coagulation (APC) system (ERBE Elektromedizin, Tübingen, Germany) was introduced via the forceps channel. The scar tissue on the 2nd to 4th ring was ablated until the tracheal lumen was satisfactorily dilated . Treatment was uneventfully completed in approximately 2 h.
Bronchoscopy showed that the tracheal lumen was adequately dilated, with slight erosion of the luminal wall at 2 months after the treatment. Pulmonary function tests and flow volume curves before and after treatment showed marked improvement of the expiratory peak flow. The patient was free of complaints at follow-up at three years after the treatment .