A 64-year-old female with history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and arthritis was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of incidental finding of a right ventricular mass. Due to a family history of coronary artery disease and a multi-slice computed tomography (CT) coronary artery calcium score>400, she underwent left heart catheterization revealing no significant coronary artery atherosclerosis. Subsequent chest CT showed a mass lesion anterior to the right ventricle and involving the ventricular wall . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a soft tissue mass along the superior aspect of the right ventricle extending anteriorly, with a size of 4053mm . Gadolinium enhancement of the mass could not exclude malignancy.
On admission, her physical examination was unremarkable. Vital signs were within normal limits. Routine laboratory examination was normal. A chest radiograph showed a normal heart configuration without evidence of acute cardiopulmonary pathology. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a large non-mobile echo-bright density in the right ventricular free wall . There was no pericardial effusion. Other cardiac structures were normal.
Surgical incisional biopsy of the tumor was performed through a lower hemi-sternotomy approach . The biopsy specimen was composed primarily of white firm tissue with a somewhat whorled appearance. Microscopically, the lesion was a spindle cell lesion with low overall cellularity. There was no noted mitotic activity and KI-67 index was zero. The nuclei of the spindled cells were bland without pleomorphism. No necrosis was noted. Marked dystrophic calcification was noted . The histopathological features were consistent with cardiac fibroma. She subsequently, underwent complete surgical resection of her tumor through median sternotomy under standard cardiopulmonary bypass, bicaval and aortic cannulation without aortic cross-clamping. A large glistening grey-red firm tumor (weight: 58g, dimension: 604235mm) arising from the right ventricular free wall was successfully excised with careful dissection. The outer surface was slightly lobulated. The cut surface was grayish white, fibrous and trabeculated with gritty calcified specks. Remaining extremely thin myocardial tissue of the right ventricular free wall was also excised to create a large defect . Tricuspid and pulmonary valves were carefully evaluated through the resultant right ventricular defect. Both valves looked intact and there was enough margin to repair the defect without compromising the valve functions. The defect was closed with double-layer patch technique by using a XenoSure biologic patch (LeMaitre Vascular, Inc., MA, USA) . Cardiopulmonary bypass time was 94min. The patient was easily weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass with a small amount of inotropic support. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated reasonable right ventricular function without tricuspid or pulmonary regurgitation. Microscopically, the complete resection specimen showed same characteristics as the biopsy specimen. In addition, the specimen demonstrated entrapped myocardium along the edge of the lesion and a marked epicardial inflammatory infiltrate that was rich in eosinophils suggestive of inflammatory reaction to prior biopsy, focally infiltrating the adjacent myocardium . Epicardial vessels in the area demonstrated mild intimal hyperplasia. The patient had an uneventful hospital course except for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and was discharged home on postoperative day 4. Cardiac MRI on postoperative month 9 showed mild septal hypokinesis although there are limitations created by artifact from the patch and sternotomy wires. There was no enhancing mass suggesting recurrent tumor or non-enhancing thrombus in right ventricle.