A 50-year-old woman was presented to our department with a thyroid nodule. She reported no dysphagia, respiratory compromise, hoarseness, chronic coughing, or loss of voice in high pitch ranges. Her medical history included breast cancer, and she had undergone a modified radical left mastectomy. She had no history of surgery or radiation to the head or neck. The patient was a farmer. She lived in the South-Central China and had not traveled outside. She was a nonsmoker and didn’t drink alcohol.
On physical examination, the patient was afebrile. The pulse was 76 beats per minute, the blood pressure 126/75 mmHg, and the respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute. The neck was supple, and a nodule was palpable in the thyroid on the right side. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy in the cervical region. The rest of the examination was normal.
The blood level of thyrotropin was 2.56 μIU per milliliter (reference range, 0.35 to 4.94). Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland revealed a solid and hypoechoic nodule measuring 18 × 16 mm, including cystic necrotic areas in the mid pole of the right thyroid lobe. The nodule had lobulated margins, scattered central calcification, and rich central blood flow. There was no enlarged lymph node in the cervical region. The result of fine-needle aspiration cytology showed papillary carcinoma. The preoperative laryngoscopy revealed left vocal cord paralysis . Right thyroid lobectomy was scheduled for the patient.
Thyroid lobectomy with Wu Gaosong’s procedure was performed and the nerve monitoring (NIM-Response 3.0 System, Medtronic) was applied during the operation [, ]. We resected the thyroid gland from the inferior pole to the superior pole to allow for a good visualization of the RLN, sternothyroid–laryngeal triangle and the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (EBSLN). The right RLN and EBSLN were identified and found to follow the usual course of the nerve. An electromyography activity with amplitude of 724 uV was recorded when the right RLN was stimulated by the nerve stimulator. After freeing and medially mobilizing the left thyroid gland, an exploration was made for the left RLN. The left RLN was identified below the inferior thyroid artery. When the left RLN was dissected superiorly toward the cricothyroid muscle and larynx, it was seen to ascend along the medial edge of the superior thyroid pole and finally disappear beneath the superior cornu of the thyroid cartilage without any tracheal, esophageal, or laryngeal branches . On electromyography monitorization, no electromyography activity was recorded when the left RLN and vagus nerve were stimulated. All the nerves were carefully preserved.
Postoperatively, the patient’s voice and serum calcium were normal. Left vocal cord paralysis was reported on the postoperative laryngoscopy of the patient. The final pathology was papillary thyroid carcinoma. The patient was discharged on the third postoperative day with the diagnoses of papillary thyroid carcinoma and congenital left vocal cord paralysis.