A 72-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital again for more than one year because of the recurrence of the tumor in the left scrotum and groin area.
3 years ago, the patient accidentally discovered a lump in his left groin area, which was about 4 cm × 5 cm in size at that time. No attention was paid to consult a doctor, and then it gradually enlarged and entered the scrotum, with a size of about 20 cm × 20 cm. The surface was not found to be swollen and tender, so it could not be absorbed into the abdominal cavity. 2 years ago, the patient first visited the general surgery department of our hospital. At that time, combined with B-mode ultrasound, he was diagnosed with indirect inguinal hernia, and agreed to undergo hernia repair for the patient. During the operation, there was no hernia sac bulge, but a solid tumor with the appearance of adipose tissue was found in the scrotum, most of which were soft, some of which were tough, yellow and wrapped around the testicles and epididymis. Therefore, we performed scrotal tumor resection for patients, completely removed the tumor base, spermatic cord as well as the testicular tissue, and performed high ligation of spermatic cord. It was extremely difficult to diagnose fast freezing pathology during operation. Postoperative routine pathology showed mixed liposarcoma, mainly WDLPS, accompanied by MLPS and DDLPS. The tumor size was 22 cm × 14 cm × 8 cm, and the blood vessels were rich in the tissues, which in the focal area showed tumor-like hyperplasia. The capsule was complete, and the surgical margin was observed to be negative. Immunohistochemistry revealed Ki-67(5%), P53(+), S-100(1+), CD68(−), CD34(−), SMA(−), PCNA(3+), CD56(−). Patients and their families refused further adjuvant treatment after the surgery. More than a year ago, the tumor in the left scrotum and groin area recurred. At present, he is admitted to the urology department of our hospital. Except the swelling of scrotum, he has no other major complaints.
The patient has hypertension for more than three years and is taking hydrochlorothiazide once a day for the same. He is also suffering from tipe 2 diabetes mellitus for laat three years and is on acarbose 50 mg once a day and glimepiride 1 mg once a day. The patient did not have any other surgical history.
The patient did not have any addiction to tobacco and alcohol. And he has no genetic history of cancer.
A lump of about 25 cm × 20 cm in size could be felt in the left scrotum and groin area, with tough texture and clear boundaries .
After admission, the blood routine, coagulation function, liver as well as kidney function, tumor index and other blood biochemical tests of the patients showed no obvious abnormality.
Two years ago, when the patient first visited a doctor in general surgery, abdominal enhancement computed tomography (CT) showed that there was a lumpy uneven density shadow in the left scrotum, and there was fat and soft tissue density shadow in it, which was not related with the contents of the abdominal cavity. After enhancement, some nodules were slightly enhanced, but the remaining enhancement was not found to be obvious. Soft tissue density nodules were found in the right groin area, but the enhancement was not obvious, and no enlarged lymph nodes were detected retroperitoneum . After the recurrence, the patient visited our department again, and then the abdominal enhanced CT showed that there was a lumpy uneven density shadow in the left scrotum again, which was about 18.5 cm × 14 cm in size. The appearance was observed to be similar as observed during the first time, but a slightly larger lymph node was found in the left groin area . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enhancement of the pelvic cavity showed irregular mass shadow in left groin and scrotum, lobulated, with some uneven fat signal in the center, about 20 cm × 13 cm × 17 cm in size. After enhancement, it was uneven and patchy, with arc-shaped enhancement, with no obvious changes in fat and cystic parts, clear edges, no connection between the mass and abdominal cavity, slightly larger lymph nodes in both the groins, and uniform enhancement .
Considering the recurrence of liposarcoma, radical tumor resection was performed. During the surgery, a tumor with a size of about 20 cm × 18 cm in the groin and scrotum was found, with a tough texture and a cystic mass, which was adhered to the surrounding tissues. After electrocoagulation with Ligsaure and separation, the tumor was completely removed . At the same time, we found that the lymph nodes along the left femoral vein were swollen and tough, so it was completely removed and sent for the pathological examination. About 50 ml of bleeding occurred during the operation, which lasted 2 h and 43 min, and the postoperative hospital stay was 12 days. Postoperative routine pathology showed that left inguinal scrotal liposarcoma was primarily WDLPS, some of which were MLPS (about 20%), with a tumor size of 26 cm × 17 cm × 13 cm, accompanied by chronic inflammation of three lymph nodes around the tumor, and spindle cell malignant tumor of left femoral vein lymph nodes, which was considered as liposarcoma . Immunohistochemistry suggested CD34(−), S-100(scattered+) , Des(partial+) , Actin(−), CK(−), Vim(+) , Ki-67(5%) , P53(±), SMA(−), Myogenin(±), catenin-β(−), STAT6(−).
There were no related complications in the patient after the surgery. We recommended that the patient should undergo further radiotherapy, but the patient and his family still refused. Therefore, we could only follow up the patient closely. At present, up to more than one month before submission of the manuscript, the last reexamination of the patient showed that there was no recurrence of the lump in the scrotum and groin area, and CT scan exhibited no regional soft tissue density shadow. Further follow-up is in progress currently.