A 46-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of fever and swelling in her neck. The swelling had been present for 2 days and was accompanied by skin redness and limited mobility in her neck. It was not associated with stridor, dysphagia, or odynophagia. There was no history of trauma, skin rash, weight loss, or night sweats. The patient had no significant medical history and reported no history of smoking, alcohol consumption, or recreational drug use. The family history was also unremarkable.
Prior to this emergency department visit, the patient had sought medical attention from several family medicine physicians for symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection, including severe sore throat and cough, which had begun 10 days earlier. As the presumptive diagnosis was acute viral pharyngitis, the patient had only received symptomatic treatment and had not been prescribed antibiotics. Despite the lack of improvement in symptoms, no laboratory investigations were performed during these visits.
During the physical examination, the patient appeared ill and was shivering. Vital signs revealed a fever of 38.5 °C, tachycardia of 110 beats/min, and tachypnea of 22 breaths/min. Blood pressure was normal at 115/80 mmHg, and oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. Intraoral examination revealed an erythematous pharyngeal wall with no evidence of tonsillar exudates. The left lateral aspect of the neck showed extensive erythema and swelling, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes were identified. Examination of the cardiopulmonary systems did not reveal any abnormalities.
Initial laboratory investigations were performed, revealing leukocytosis (17,500 cells/μL) with 80.5% neutrophils, a hemoglobin level of 13.2 g/dL, and a platelet count of 460,000 cells/μL. The C-reactive protein (18.5 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (85 mm/hour) were markedly elevated. The renal, liver, and electrolyte panels were within normal limits. Random blood sugar (105 mg/dL) and hemoglobin A1c (5.6%) levels were normal.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck demonstrated a distended caliber of the left internal jugular vein with an enhancing wall and intraluminal filling defect consistent with thrombophlebitis . This was associated with fat stranding within the left carotid sheath and the left lateral aspect of the neck, as well as inflammatory soft tissue tumefaction. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed bilaterally in the submental, submandibular, and internal jugular chain groups. Otherwise, both carotid arteries and the right jugular vein were normal in course and caliber.
The patient was placed on intravenous antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam and vancomycin, and anticoagulation therapy with heparin was started. Subsequently, the patient showed remarkable clinical improvement, with resolution of the fever. Both blood and throat cultures drawn at admission revealed positive growth of K. pneumoniae. Furthermore, the thrombophilia workup, including the activated protein C resistance test, antithrombin assay, protein C and protein S assays, lupus anticoagulant assay, prothrombin gene mutation test, and homocysteine level, revealed no abnormalities.
On the 5th day of hospitalization, the patient experienced a sudden decrease in oxygen saturation to 90% on room air. A CT pulmonary angiography scan was performed, which revealed wedge-shaped areas of consolidation in the upper lobes of both lungs located peripherally . Given the context of internal jugular vein thrombophlebitis, these findings were consistent with septic emboli. No filling defects were observed within the pulmonary vasculature to suggest acute pulmonary embolism. Furthermore, echocardiography revealed no evidence of thrombus or vegetation.
After 2 weeks of antibiotic therapy, the patient’s symptoms completely resolved. The white blood cell count and other inflammatory markers returned to normal levels. Repeated blood culture showed no significant bacterial growth. The patient was discharged with no active issues.