A 24-year-old male presented with 6 months of a progressive paraparesis that exacerbated over the past 2 months. Notably, he had a large cherry red cutaneous lesion on the left side of the thorax, (i.e. left side of the chest from sternum to mid line at the back), also involving the left arm/forearm (i.e. from the nape of neck to just below the scapula involving the lateral/medial arm/forearm) since birth [ and ].
On examination, he had 3–4/5 motor strength diffusely in the lower extremities and a relative sensory level below D4 level without sphincter involvement.
The thoracic CT showed irregular lytic lesions with coarse thickened trabeculae involving the D1 through D7 vertebral levels, also including the left 1st through 6th ribs. Axial studies showed the typical “polka-dot” pattern of vertebral involvement . There was also left sided paraspinal and intracanalicular enhancing soft tissue thickening adjacent to the involved vertebrae resulting in significant cord compression.
On the MR, tumor was hypointense on both T1W and T2W images and enhanced with contrast (i.e., encasing the cervicodorsal spinal cord from C7 to D8 with transforaminal extension). There was also a subtle increased intracord T2W hyperintensities seen at the D2-D3 vertebral levels [-].
The Thoracic CTA showed a highly vascular lesion extending from D1 to D7 that was mostly left-sided (i.e. extra and intracanalicular tumor), the major feeders were embolized before surgery (i.e., with gel foam and coils).
Following a D1–D7 laminectomy, a red brown, soft lesion was encountered a leash of blood vessels. Tumor was adherent to the dorsal thecal sac and demonstrated lateral, foraminal, and left-sided paraspinal extension . The blood vessels were coagulated and removed . Finally, the patient underwent a pedicle screw fusion from C7 to D5–D8 [ and ].
The frozen sections (i.e., from the epidural, lamina, paraspinal, and skin) were all consistent with a cavernous hemangioma [- and ].
The patient had an uneventful recovery; 1 week later, at discharge, he had improved and was able to ambulate without weakness. Two months later his muscle strength was 5/5 bilaterally.
The patient underwent postoperative radiotherapy to the tumor bed to treat surgically inaccessible tumor, and limit the chance of recurrence.