The patient, a 45-year-old male Caucasian German, born and residing in the German county of Bavaria, travelled to Thailand for holiday purposes repeatedly over the past years. The most recent journey started on 25 December 2016 with a flight from Munich, Germany to Muscat, Oman, where he had a 2-h stopover, before continuing to Bangkok, Thailand, where he arrived on 26 December. He spent the time from 26 December 2016 to 01 January 2017 in Chiang Mai in the north of Thailand where he visited the Doi Inthanon National Park. On 01 January he travelled to Bangkok where he stayed until 03 January, followed by a stay in Ranong city from 03 to 05 January. He then spent the time from 05 to 11 January on the island of Little Koh Chang in the Andaman Sea, which is part of Ranong Province. Via the city of Ranong he continued back to Bangkok where on 13 January he boarded a flight to Munich, Germany via Muscat, Oman .
The patient travelled together with his partner who remained without health problems. He did not receive a specialized pre-travel consultation and did not take any antimalarial chemoprophylaxis, which is conforming to current German travel recommendations for Thailand. Regular use of repellents and of bed nets was reported. He did not reveal a medical history indicative of previous malaria infections.
During the stay in Thailand the patient did not report any remarkable symptoms except painful and inflamed insect bites on two occasions while sleeping on the island of Koh Chang. On 14 January, the day after his return to Germany, he started to feel chills and developed fever up to 40 °C. He also developed profuse sweating, particularly at night time. Other symptoms such as arthralgias, myalgias or headaches were not present. He did not report any gastrointestinal, urinary tract or respiratory symptoms. After a brief consultation with the family physician in the patient’s rural area of residence in Bavaria on 16 January, he was referred to the Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine (DIDTM) of the Medical Centre of the University of Munich (LMU) for further investigation.
Upon presentation, the patient’s general condition was only slightly reduced, temperature by tympanic measurement was 38.8 °C. The physical examination did not reveal any other remarkable findings. On abdominal ultrasound no pathological findings could be established, particularly the spleen appeared normal in size and ultrasound pattern.
Laboratory analyses were conducted in-house on whole blood and plasma samples upon attendance of the patient at DIDTM on day 4 after onset of symptoms. Automated full blood count was followed by visual differentiation of thin smears. As stipulated by the malaria emergency diagnostics protocol of DIDTM, screening for parasites was initiated by microscopical examination of thin smears on 100 fields at 400-fold magnification following Diff-Quik staining (Dade-Behring/Medion Diagnostics, Duedingen, Switzerland). Subsequently, Giemsa stained thick smears were examined. Furthermore, the rapid diagnostic tests BinaxNow Malaria (Alere, Scarborough, Maine, USA) for the detection of antigens of P. falciparum and/or P. vivax/P. ovale spp./P. malariae, Dengue Duo (SD Bioline, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea) for the detection of the non-structural protein 1 (NS1)/IgM/IgG and the Afinion C-reactive protein (CRP) test (Alere) were conducted. The Plasmodium genus-specific real-time PCR FTD Malaria (Mikrogen Diagnostik, Neuried, Germany) was carried out followed by the multiplex PCR FTD Malaria differentiation (Mikrogen) for the detection of P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale spp. and P. malariae. In cases of positive amplification of Plasmodium genus-specific sequences and negative multiplex PCR FTD Malaria differentiation test results, the P. knowlesi nested PCR as first described by Imwong et al. based on a 410 base pair fragment of the species-specific P. knowlesi 18S rRNA gene is applied at DIDTM . For immunodiagnosis an in-house immunofluorescence test employing P. falciparum and P. vivax antigens was conducted.
In addition, a full blood sample was sent to the national reference laboratory for PCR-based malaria differentiation at the Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine (BNITM), Hamburg, Germany.