A 60-year-old man was admitted to the internal department of our hospital due to thoracic discomfort, vertigo, nausea, and ataxia. After excluding acute coronary artery disease, he was referred to us because of the progression of the neurological symptoms during his one-week stationary therapy in the internal department.
On clinical examination, he demonstrated a remarkable limb and truck ataxia, a rest, postural, and intention tremor, a severe dysarthria, nystagmus, and a mild cognitive impairment. The patient could not walk or eat unassisted. His current oral medication consisted of acetylsalicylic acid, pantoprazole 40 mg/d, atorvastatin, spironolactone, opipramol, Ferro Sanol, and ramipril.
His medical history included hypertension, coronary artery disease, an episode of gastrointestinal bleeding by angiodysplasia in 2015, and pulmonary embolism in 2013. In addition, he had a medical history of persistent diarrhea over the last two years without any organic etiology, a vitamin D deficiency in spite of substitution, and recurrent hypokalemia. The patient was a habitual drinker consuming two glasses of wine daily. Six months ago, he was hospitalized in another neurological department because of a one-week persistent dysarthria. An obtained cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at that time revealed a symmetric hyperintensity in both cerebellar hemispheres . To exclude a cerebellar paraneoplastic syndrome and viral or autoimmune encephalitis, a lumbar puncture was performed. The analysis result of the cerebrospinal fluid was normal. Antibodies against NMDA-receptors, AMPA1-receptors, AMPA2-receptors, and autoantibodies against Ma2 and M2, as well as herpes simplex antibodies (HSV1- and HSV2-DNA), were not detected in the cerebrospinal fluid. A computed tomographic scan of the thorax and abdomen was unremarkable. An empirical therapy with Rocephin and aciclovir was started, but after excluding herpes simplex in the cerebrospinal fluid, the antiviral therapy was discontinued. The blood pressure was slightly high during monitoring; therefore, an antihypertensive therapy was initiated. A further coloscopy and gastroscopy revealed only a Helicobacter pylori-negative gastritis. The dysarthria improved, and the patient was discharged with the diagnosis of a possible PRES according to the cranial MRI finding.
The laboratory investigations disclosed a severely low magnesium level (0.4 mg/dl; range: 1.7–2.55 mg/dl), a hypocalcemic level (1.7 mmol/l; range: 2.1–2.5 mmol/l), a normal potassium level (3.6 mmol/l; range: 3.5–5.1 mmol/l), a low hemoglobin count (12.3 g/l; range: 14–17.5 g/l), a low erythrocyte count (3.69 × 106/µl; range: 4.5–5.9 × 106/µl), a low 25-OH vitamin D level (7 ng/ml; range: 31–100 ng/ml) despite the replacement therapy, and a normal parathormone (PTH) level (22.3 pg/ml; range: 14.5–87.1 pg/ml). Sodium and phosphate levels were within the normal range. The creatine kinase level was high (450 U/l; range <174 U/I). The other laboratory tests including serum electrophoresis were within the normal range. During the stationary therapy, he developed a mild hypokalemia; an oral supplementation was started.
The cranial MRI displayed a weak residual hyperintensity in the right cerebellar hemisphere, probably as a residual indicator of the cerebellar bihemispheric hyperintensities described in the previous external MRI . The electroencephalography results were normal. To exclude a paraneoplastic syndrome, we performed a lumbar puncture, which revealed an unremarkable finding. Another possible cause for PRES such as high hypertension was missing. Thus, we suspected the cerebellar syndrome due to hypomagnesemia and started an intravenous magnesium supplementation and an oral calcium intake.
The patient received an intravenous supplementation of 1 g magnesiumsulfat-heptahydrat (equivalent to 4.05 mmol/mg) every two days, in addition to oral supplementation of calcium and potassium.
The magnesium level returned to the normal range after two weeks of supplementation, as did the calcium level within four days. The patient exhibited a clear clinical improvement of the ataxia; he could walk and eat unassisted . After 14 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged. The patient received poststationary magnesium intravenous supplementation three times per week for two months. Notably, excreted magnesium in the 24-hour urine specimen was normal excluding the renal waste of magnesium. However, fluctuations in magnesium levels and the clinical symptoms were still observed under the poststationary intravenous supplementation until the proton pump inhibitor (PPI) was discontinued and a therapy with ranitidine was started. Subsequently, the replacement therapy was discontinued. The patient has remained symptom-free for over five months.