A 46-year-old man sustained multiple injuries after falling from height while working. He was previously healthy and without comorbidities. An emergency physician intubated him on the scene due to consciousness disorder. The patient’s vital signs on arrival were Glasgow Coma Scale, 3; blood pressure, 93/85 mmHg; pulse rate, 156/min; respiratory rate, 22/min; and pulse oximetry of 99% at a FIO2 of 1.0 while intubated. Physical examination revealed subcutaneous emphysema over the left chest. A chest tube was inserted for left tension pneumothorax, and a large amount of air and bloody pleural effusion was drained. Thereafter, his blood pressure improved to 102/87 mmHg, but his pulse rate was still over 150/min. Although the patient was not hemodynamically stable, the CT scanner in the Hybrid ER was available. 6 min after admission, a CT examination was begun using the sliding CT scanner with the patient on the same trauma table without relocating him . CT revealed a grade IIIa thoracic aortic injury with pseudoaneurysm, left lung contusion with contrast agent leakage, left multiple rib fractures and haemopneumothorax, and right SDH and subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) with brain swelling . Generally, when treating a severely traumatised patient, torso haemostasis is given priority over the treatment of brain injury. However, the CT findings in this patient indicated that treatment for brain injury had the highest priority. At 38 min after admission, the SDH was punctured and an ICP of approximately 10 mmHg was measured . Following this surgery, the amount of air and bloody pleural effusion had clearly increased. In addition to CT findings of contrast agent leakage in the left lung contusion, and as bloody sputum was suctioned from the tracheal tube, we determined that a left lung injury was likely the primary source of bleeding. Thus, one minute after trepanation for SDH was completed, left thoracotomy was performed, again without relocating the patient . The upper left lobe of the lung was resected as this was the main source of bleeding. However, bleeding from the hilum persisted, which led to the performance of TEVAR for a probable aortic injury . Sixteen minutes after the thoracotomy was completed, TEVAR was initiated, with access for the delivery device obtained via the right femoral artery. A grade IIIa thoracic pseudoaneurysm of 13 mm in diameter was located at the isthmus of the aorta. As the left subclavian artery was near the isthmus injury, the stent graft was deployed to extend between the aortic arch and descending aorta, which covered the left subclavian artery, to obtain an adequate proximal landing zone. The proximal end of the stent graft was positioned 6 mm from the left carotid artery, which was preserved. Following these procedures, which the patient tolerated well, another CT scan was performed without relocating the patient and showed no signs of worsening brain injury. Because the amount of bloody pleural effusion continued to increase, repeat left thoracotomy revealed bleeding from the left lower lobe, which was subsequently resected. Thirty units each of whole blood and fresh frozen plasma and 10 units of platelets were transfused. At 5.72 h after initiation of the definitive surgeries and completion of all procedures in the Hybrid ER, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Decompressive craniectomy on postoperative day 2 and decompressive brain resection on postoperative day 3 were performed for refractory intracranial hypertension. The patient’s Injury Severity Score was 54, Revised Trauma Score was 4.09, and the probability of survival by the Trauma and Injury Severity Score method was 16.
A tracheotomy was performed on postoperative day 13, and he was weaned off mechanical ventilation on postoperative day 14. After undergoing in-patient rehabilitation, he was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation in postoperative month 5 with a Glasgow outcome scale of 4. At the transfer to the nursing facility, he no longer required mechanical ventilation.