An asymptomatic 51-year-old woman without significant past medical history was diagnosed with HIV-1 infection on April 06, 2010 after her spouse died of HIV. Her baseline Chest X-ray was reported as normal and physical examination did not revealed any relevant clinical signs. She presented with a CD4+ T-cell count of 51 cells/μL and HIV viral load of 5.8 log10 copies/mL. ART was initiated with stavudine, lamivudine and nevirapine as per Indian National guidelines . After 32 days on ART, she presented a clinical deterioration, with cough, afternoon fever, weight loss and night sweat, symptoms suggestive of pulmonary TB and subsequently confirmed to be drug-sensitive M. tuberculosis by sputum smear and culture . Standard ATT was started with Isoniazid, Rifampicin, Ethambutol, Pyrazinamide on May 08, 2010 with nevirapine substituted for efavirenz. Repeat laboratory results revealed a CD4+ T-cell count of 146 cells/μL and viral load of < 2log10 copies/mL (400 copies/mL) . A panel of independent physicians reviewed the patient’s history, radiographs and physical examination. This independent panel of clinicians used the INSHI definition of unmasking TB IRIS , composed by the following criteria: not receiving TB treatment at ART initiation; diagnosis of active TB after ART initiation; fulfilling WHO diagnostic criteria for TB; presentation within 3 months of ART initiation and heightened intensity of clinical manifestations once on TB treatment. The panel concluded that the patient had unmasking TB-IRIS at ART initiation.
After 48 days since ATT and efavirenz based ART were initiated, the patient presented with generalized pruritus and strong vague abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed fever, jaundice and left sided cervical lymphadenopathy. Laboratory tests were notable for high levels of total bilirubin 8.3 mg/dL (reference value [RV]: 0.2–1.0 mg/dL) with increases in aspartate aminotransferase AST, 72 U/L (RV: 5.0–40.0 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase ALT, 59 U/L (RV: 7.0–56.0 U/L). Abdominal ultrasound revealed enlargement and obstruction of the porta hepatis by periportal nodes with normal echotexture of the liver and gall bladder. At this crisis, ATT was modified to streptomycin, ofloxacin and ethambutol, second-line therapy , and ART was temporarily withheld, following advice from the panel of physicians reviewed, due to potential ART-induced liver toxicity. On July 19, 2010, with the liver function tests returning to normal , standard ATT regimen was re-introduced. After 11 days, ART was reinitiated as the HIV viral load was > 5.9log10copies/mL .
One week after ART reintroduction, the patient developed rapid clinical deterioration with focal complex partial convulsions prompting initiation of anticonvulsant therapy. Brain Computational Tomography (CT) scan revealed a frontoparietal space occupying lesion with peri-lesional, edema suggestive of tuberculoma . Following the CT scan results, cerebral spinal fluid was collected, and results excluded other potential opportunistic infections, such as neurocryptococcosis or toxoplasmosis. ART was again withheld temporarily while continuing ATT, because the independent clinical panel suggested the possibility of severe central nervous system (CNS) IRIS. Initially, she was treated with intravenous steroids and mannitol followed by acetazolamide to reduce perilesional edema. Oral prednisolone was gradually tapered over 8 weeks. Laboratory investigations demonstrated CD4+ T-cell count of 178cells/μL and HIV viral load of 2.83 log10 copies/mL. The patient recovered after 6 weeks, only to have a viral rebound (HIV viral load of 5.3 log10 copies/mL) . It was decided to reintroduce ART as an inpatient with stringent clinical monitoring while on oral steroids . In November 29, 2010, a repeat brain CT scan showed regression and calcification of the lesion. ATT was stopped on December 6, 2010 (total of 8-month duration) while ART and anticonvulsants were continued based on a consensus opinion from IRIS experts, TB experts and neurologists.
In May 2011, 5 months after completing ATT, the patient developed a swelling in the left iliac region. X-ray and CT of the spine were normal while ultrasonogram identified a localized intramuscular abscess which was drained under guidance, and the aspirate was negative for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in smear and cultures for mycobacteria and gram positive or negative bacteria, as well as fungi. Laboratory tests results showed CD4+ T-cell count of 323 cells/μL and HIV viral load < 2 log10 copies/mL . Other laboratory exams were normal . Repeat CT scan of the brain showed further regression and calcification of the tuberculoma. Thereafter, the patient remained clinically asymptomatic and was followed for 30 months. Smears and cultures 30 months post ATT treatment were all negative after she converted in the first month and viral loads were suppressed as well.