A 37-year-old Hispanic male presented to the Loyola University Medical Center Burn Unit after being transferred from an outside hospital with concern for necrotizing fasciitis. This man suffered from chronic, painless lymphedema of his right lower extremity for the past 10 years. His lymphedema had accelerated in recent months, and his leg started to accumulate numerous nodules and verrucae. He began having intense pain in his affected leg and swelling in his scrotum. He reported having fevers, chills, diarrhea, and persistent nausea and vomiting for three days prior to being brought to an outside hospital. He presented to their emergency room delirious, hypotensive, febrile, tachycardic, and in respiratory distress meeting the requirements for systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Erythema encompassed his entire right leg and spread across his genitalia and to his left groin. Concern for Fournier's gangrene brought him to the OR for an exploratory scrotal operation. Fournier's was ruled out, and his incision was left open to heal by secondary intention. His condition continued to worsen, and was subsequently transferred to Loyola intubated and maintained on continuous norepinephrine.
On initial exam, he was hypotensive at 94/32 mmHg, tachycardic at 132 beats/min, saturating 95% O2 on SIMV, and with a fever of 40.1°C. Arterial blood gasses demonstrated an anion gap metabolic acidosis. His leg was erythematous and hot to the touch, with blistering and pustular exudates. His scrotum and penis were markedly swollen and erythematous, and serous drainage came from his midline scrotal incision .
The working diagnosis was cellulitis superimposed on elephantiasis that led to a state of septic shock. His wounds were managed as per partial thickness burns care with twice daily debridement and application of silvadene and kerlix. His antibiotic regimen began with high dose penicillin drip, ciprofloxacin, and clindamycin for broad base coverage. His coverage was altered as cultures returned from both the outside hospital and Loyola. His leg wound cultures grew Proteus (pan-sensitive), MSSA, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, and Candida parapsilosis. His scrotum wound cultures grew Group G Streptococcus, Peptostreptococcus magnus, and anaerobic gram negative rods that were not able to be identified (Bacteroides fragilis was excluded). His blood, urine, and BAL cultures had no growth. A microfilariae test for bloodborne parasites was negative. Given the anaerobes and yeast involved, his antibiotic regimen was changed to fluconazole, metronidazole, and ampicillin/sulbactam. He spiked fevers through the first week of his hospital stay, but this resolved and the erythema on his leg gradually improved with continual systemic and topical antibiotics.
He was maintained on norepinephrine for the first two days to keep his mean arterial pressure above 60 mmHg, then was successfully weaned and hemodynamically stable for the remainder of his hospitalization. The patient was successfully extubated on hospital day 7, and began breathing on room air with good oxygen saturation on day 8. His case was complicated by acute renal insufficiency. He presented oliguric with rising BUN and Creatinine. Fractional excretion of urinary sodium was 10%, and gross blood and small protein was seen in his urinalysis all factors leading to a diagnosis of acute tubular necrosis secondary to ischemia suffered in septic shock. His acidosis was treated with serial amps of bicarbonate plus maintenance fluids of 1 liter 5% dextrose with 80 ml Sodium Acetate. While his acidosis steadily resolved and his urine output rose, his BUN and Creatinine continue to rise reaching a level of 117 and 8.27, respectively. He received dialysis on Loyola hospital day 4, and received 3 additional dialysis treatments over the next 7 days. After these treatments his electrolyte levels stabilized, and he began having large urine output indicative of post-ATN diuresis.
Additional therapy included nutritional support with 1/2 strength Novasource renal tube feeds at 100 cc/hr, glucose control with insulin lispro sliding scale, and physical therapy. He was malnourished at presentation (Albumin 1.4 gm/dl, Transferrin 99 mg/dl), but improved with continual tube feeds and general diet. The patient was discharged on hospital day 16 with his cellulitis resolved, renal function and electrolyte levels normalized, ambulating independently with physical therapy, and tolerating a general diet. His lymphedema had actually improved somewhat since admission, but he maintained significant edema in the extremity. He subsequently followed up in the burn clinic 2 weeks later without any signs of infection but still with difficulty ambulating secondary to his condition.