A 35-year-old Asian male presented at our institution with right asymptomatic scrotal enlargement. His past medical history was bilateral orchidopexy because of bilateral cryptorchidism at the age of 3 years old, and micro-TESE was performed at our institution because of nonobstructive azoospermia at the age of 29. Hematological examination showed high level of human chorionic gonadotropin (8.9 ng/mL; normal range <0.1), and normal levels of lactate dehydrogenase, α-AFP. Ultrasonography showed a well-defined mass with a heterogeneous appearance, measuring 76 × 40 × 53 mm, in the right scrotum . Abundant blood flow was detected in the tumor on color Doppler imaging . Scattered hyperechoic foci were also observed in the bilateral scrota, indicating testicular microlithiasis . Magnetic resonance imaging showed the enlarged right scrotum with mosaic-intensity on T2-weighted images and heterogeneous diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted images . CT revealed no sign of metastasis. Therefore, diagnosed as testicular cancer of cT1N0M0, after informed consent, right inguinal orchidectomy was performed. The tumor was well demarcated, homogeneous, solid cream . Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the tumor showed many atypical cells with clear cell bodies and prominent nucleoli with immunoreactive positivity for c-kit , PLAP , and negativity for AFP. Reflecting the testicular microlithiasis designated in US, multiple calcification was observed in the area with no malignant cells , and no germ cell was observed in the tubular section. Finally, he was diagnosed as seminoma pT1N0M0, and surveillance without additional treatment was selected. Two years after the operation, a follow-up CT revealed lymphadenopathy in the left inguinal region , demonstrating increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose on positron emission tomography-CT . Pathological findings of the specimen obtained by the lymph node dissection revealed the identical as the previous orchiectomy one . Therefore, as a lymph node metastasis of seminoma, he was treated with one cycle of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin, and two cycles of etoposide and cisplatin combination chemotherapy. Four years after the treatment, the patient has now been in remission without sign of recurrence .