A 65-year-old man with headache and apraxia was referred to the emergency department of our hospital. The patient had been followed up for asymptomatic moderate AR for more than five years. He presented with fever (> 38 °C) and fatigue lasting for two weeks. He received antibiotic treatment for two weeks at another hospital. On physical examination, his arterial pressure was 150/70 mmHg. Although he had apraxia, he was conscious and alert, without motor aphasia on neurological examination. He had a diastolic cardiac murmur at the left parasternal border. There were no specific risk factors for IE, including drug abuse or history of dental procedures. Laboratory data showed an elevated C-reactive protein level (1.56 mg/L; reference value: 0.0–0.14 mg/L) and neutrophilic (92.6%) leukocytosis (20,800/µL; reference value: 3300–8600). Brain computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed subcortical hemorrhage in the left occipital lobe with subdural hemorrhage . Magnetic resonance angiography did not reveal any blockage of the major vessels, and no mycotic aneurysms were observed . Chest radiography revealed cardiomegaly, without pulmonary congestion. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) in the emergency room showed a mildly dilated and well-contracting left ventricle (left ventricular ejection fraction: 60%). Moderate perivalvular AR with eccentric jet to the MAIVF caused by prolapse of the right coronary cusp was observed, although mitral valve regurgitation was trivial. In addition, the TTE showed no evidence of vegetation. He was admitted to the neurosurgical department with an intracranial hemorrhage and subdural hematoma. The patient’s neurological symptoms gradually improved. However, one week after admission, TTE and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed aorto-mitral discontinuity and protrusion with severe regurgitant flow from left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) to the left atrium . Absence of spike fever and negative blood culture results were observed after admission. There was not any sign of IE. Based on these findings, antibiotic treatment for neutrophilic leukocytosis was not administered. Thus, the patient was referred to us for surgical treatment. However, since the patient was not only accompanied with ICH but also stable hemodynamics, we decided to delay surgery.
The patient successfully underwent aortic valve replacement (AVR) with a 23-mm INSPIRIS RESILIA aortic heart valve (Edwards Lifescience, CA., USA) and mitral valve annuloplasty with a 26-mm MEMO 4D (LivaNova, London, UK) with P-MAIVF repair more than four weeks after the onset of ICH. Intraoperatively, there was no defect of AML but we found a rupture of P-MAIVF near the middle of the MAIVF. P-MAIVF was formed from LVOT toward left atrial side. There was no obvious vegetation in the cardiac chamber . The procedure consisted of ruptured P-MAIVF removal and closure by a bovine pericardial patch (Edwards Lifescience, CA., USA) . The histological findings of both removed aortic valve cusps and aneurysmal change with a perforation of MAIVF indicated myxoid degeneration without infiltrations of inflammatory cells and bacterial bodies. In addition, the bacteriological examination revealed no evidence of bacterial infection. The post operative TTE showed no evidence of vegetations, mitral valve regurgitation, and regurgitant flow from left ventricular to the left atrium.
The clinical course following the surgical procedure was uneventful, while the patient was discharged 15 days after surgery. The patient was followed without complications.