An 86-year-old Japanese man was admitted to a hospital on 27 May 2010, with anorexia, habitual temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dislocation, hypertension, and suspected lung cancer. He had history of dementia before hospitalization and had recurrent symptoms of TMJ dislocation and constipation. He had also been under observation every 3 months since a chest X-ray on 5 April 2010 indicated suspicion of lung cancer in his right lung.
After being admitted to a hospital mainly because of anorexia following TMJ dislocation repair, he took his food orally and was given suction care when phlegm was observed. However, he often swallowed even Jell-O meals after 20 July 2010. In August 2010, after a fever due to the onset of aspiration pneumonia, the patient was withheld from oral feeding and medications, and later given antibiotics. After the symptoms subsided and oral intake was resumed, the patient again developed fever due to aspiration and was treated similarly (oral feeding and medication were withheld, and antibiotics were administered). From August 2010 to March 2011, he repeatedly had these symptoms 14 times.
Before the FDNPP accident, his condition was stable, but he needed full assistance in basic activities of daily living (moving, excreting, and eating). His communication level was just enough to understand the conversation. Medical interventions included central venous nutrition and oxygen administration. Moreover, care was provided to prevent pressure ulcers, such as stretching wrinkles in clothing and sheets and changing positions every 2 h, skincare, and secretion suctioning from the trachea several times a day. On 4 March 2011, he had another episode of fever, decreased breath sounds, and increased sputum, which was considered a flare-up of pneumonia, so antibiotics were administered, and endotracheal suctioning was continued. His condition subsequently stabilized. On the morning of 11 March 2011, the patient’s temperature rose to 38.0 °C, and there was an increase in sputum production, but after suction care was provided, the fever improved in the afternoon when the GEJE occurred.
The FDNPP accident that accompanied the GEJE on 11 March 2011 caused power, gas, water, and telephone outages at a hospital. Because of the power outage, they had to manually adjust the intravenous drip rate, as well as perform manual suctioning with a syringe attached to the tube that resulted in cases where phlegm could not be removed; the required suctioning frequency was once every 30–60 minutes. On the morning of 12 March 2011, an area within a 10 km radius from the FDNPP was designated as an evacuation zone, and the hospital received orders for immediate evacuation. Details on the processes of the hospital evacuation and those who died during the evacuation process were described in previous literature [–].
After 12 March, when the first evacuation was implemented, the hospital contained up to 129 seriously ill patients who could not move independently. However, most of the medical staff accompanied the patients, and only a few people could provide health care in the A Hospital from 12 March to 15 and 16 March 2011, until the arrival of subsequent evacuation by the Japan Self-Defense Force (JSDF). The Fukushima Prefecture Nuclear Emergency Response Center (Off-Site Center), which was supposed to take the lead in on-site response to disasters, was damaged and was not fully functional. The Fukushima Prefecture Disaster Task Force was also busy dealing with the earthquake and tsunami damage .
On 14 March 2011, before his evacuation was implemented, he died of lung cancer, according to his death certificate. In contrast, a reexamination of the medical records revealed that besides lung cancer, the effects of non-use of antibiotics for aspiration pneumonia and lack of suction care due to lack of caregivers might have been related to the death.