A 32-year-old Chinese man presented to the emergency unit at midnight with obvious fatigue and inability to walk by himself. He denied fever, chest discomfort, or shortness of breath. He had a 10-year history of smoking and recurrent weakness of limbs accompanied by hypokalemia over the past 2 years, but no medical records could be accessed. A family history of similar diseases was denied. Physical examination did not provide any remarkable findings, and neurological examination revealed symmetric and decreased muscle strength of the limbs. The ECG on admission revealed decreased T-wave amplitude and prominent U wave . Initial serum potassium was 1.63 mmol/l (normal range 3.5–5.3 mmol/l). Serum potassium increased to 2.52 mmol/l after 13 hours of oral and intravenous potassium chloride supplementation of about 10 g/day at a rate of 10 mmol/h. Rebound hyperkalemia occurred (7.76 mmol/l) after potassium chloride supplementation by deep vein catheterization for another 5 hours. Treatment including calcium gluconate, insulin and glucose, and diuretic was administered to reduce serum potassium.
One hour later, the patient complained of gradually aggravated chest discomfort and dyspnea, immediately developing unconsciousness. The simultaneous ECG exhibited complete atrioventricular block (AVB) and elevated ST segment in the inferolateral leads, with instant serum potassium of 7.84 mmol/l . He was successfully resuscitated after active cardiopulmonary resuscitation but still with dyspnea. Complete AVB and elevated ST segment disappeared 15 minutes later, and the potassium disorder was corrected 10 hours later.
The instant level of high-sensitivity troponin T was 0.024 ng/ml (normal range 0–0.014 ng/ml), creatine kinase (CK) was 185 U/l (normal range 50–310 U/l) and CK-MB was 12 U/l (normal range 0–24 U/l), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) was 346 U/l (normal range 120–250 U/l), hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (HBDH) was 197 U/l (normal range 72–182 U/l), and glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT) was 71 U/l (normal range 15–40 U/l). Further coronary angiography indicated mild stenosis in the left anterior descending branch and the right coronary artery. Coronary vasospasm was thought to be the direct reason for transient complete AVB and ST-segment elevation. Intravenous diltiazem, oral aspirin, ticagrelor, and high-dose atorvastatin were prescribed. Renal function and arterial blood gas analysis on admission were all normal. Two days after admission, other laboratory tests including thyroid function, renin and aldosterone, cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone, glucose and insulin levels, and autoantibodies provided no meaningful clues for hypokalemia. The urinary electrolytes showed normal potassium excretion. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis was considered as the cause of hypokalemia, and genetic testing was subsequently recommended. However, the patient and his family members refused further examinations. One week later, the ECG and serum potassium remained normal, with no symptoms. The patient was eventually discharged on isosorbide mononitrate, diltiazem, aspirin, atorvastatin, and potassium magnesium aspartate to prevent coronary vasospasm and hypokalemia. Quitting smoke was also recommended. At 2-month follow-up, the patient had no chest discomfort or dyspnea, and no obvious abnormalities were found on ECG or 24-hour Holter monitoring.