In August 2020, a 44-year-old male patient presented after the first occurrence and documentation of a haemodynamically unstable sustained fast VT with a cycle length of 250 ms. The patient’s history revealed no pre-existing cardiovascular disease, he was not taking any medications or drugs of abuse. He only reported a suicide attempt with a self-made handgun aged 16 when he had shot himself in the thorax. At that time, he had undergone emergency cardiac surgery. The cardiac surgeons documented that a bullet had perforated the pericardium and touched on the anterolateral aspect of the left ventricle. The patient survived, underwent psychiatric therapy and has lived a healthy life thereafter. No psychiatric drugs were taken by the patient at any point. The patient exercises several times a week.
At the day of the initial admission, the patient was on a bike ride and suddenly experienced palpitations and fatigue. The patient rode back home slowly, where he laid down and tried to rest. Mild dyspnoea but no chest pain was reported. Because the symptoms persisted upon resting, the patient called an ambulance.
When the emergency medical team (EMT) arrived, a wide-complex tachycardia with a cycle length of 250 ms was documented and electrically cardioverted two times. VT was described by the EMT as haemodynamically relevant .
On admission in our clinic, the patient was asymptomatic and in stable sinus rhythm. Physical and cardiovascular examinations were inconspicuous. Blood tests showed an elevated Troponin (187 pg/mL; normal range: <14 pg/mL) with normal CK levels (149 U/L; normal range: <190 U/L), other than that they were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed a stable sinus rhythm with flattened or inverted T-waves in I, II, aVL, and V5–V6 .
His echocardiogram revealed a normal right and left ventricular function. Cardiac catheterization excluded coronary artery disease. Though the timeline between the initial chest trauma and the occurrence of the VT was very long we were unable to detect a precipitating factor that triggered the VT. Besides, a cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) study revealed a localized myocardial scar that correlated to the area that was described by cardiac surgery 28 years earlier ( and ). Other differential diagnoses (e.g. Sarcoidosis) were considered in this young patient presenting with VT and late gadolinium enhancement in CMR, but because of untypical patient history and findings, deemed quite unlikely ( and ).
During an electrophysiological study with programmed electrical stimulation with up to three extra beats, non-sustained monomorphic VT were easily inducible at all basic cycle lengths with one or more extra beats (e.g. 500 ms, 430 ms, and 370 S2) without and in the presence of orciprenaline (0.25 mg) .
In the presence of the fast haemodynamically relevant sustained VT, the patient’s history with the CMR findings and the results of the electrophysiological study, all therapeutic alternatives mainly VT ablation with endo- and epicardial substrate mapping/ablation and/or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation were extensively discussed with the patient and his family, who decided on ICD implantation. Therefore, the patient underwent single-chamber ICD implantation as secondary prophylaxis. Besides, beta-blocker therapy was started (bisoprolol 2.5 mg pd). During a follow-up of 5 months after discharge there were no other arrhythmic episodes documented.