A 59-year-old male with no medical history complained of chest pain a day after receiving the first dose of COVID-19 mRNA (BNT162b2) vaccination (Comirnaty, BioNTech/Pfizer) and was admitted to an affiliated hospital 3 days after this vaccination. On physical examination, the vital signs were shown as follows: body temperature 37.0°C, pulse 100/min, blood pressure 104/62 mmHg, and respiratory rate 20/min, and his oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. The results of cardiac and pulmonary examinations were normal. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia with ST elevation in Leads V1–V3, aVR, and aVL . An initial laboratory investigation showed a high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I concentration of 25.47 pg/mL (normal range < 0.047 pg/mL) and creatine kinase (CK) concentration of 549 U/L (normal range < 248 U/L). The result of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) polymerase chain reaction test of a nasopharyngeal swab was negative. Serological examination for viruses associated with myocarditis, such as coxsackievirus and influenza virus, revealed no evidence of active viral infections. The test results of autoimmune disease–associated autoantibodies were also negative. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a moderately reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 46% (normal range ≥ 55%) with slight pericardial effusion (see ). Urgent coronary angiography revealed non-obstructive coronary arteries. The clinical course suggested acute myocarditis accompanied by pericarditis, followed by an administration of loxoprofen sodium hydrate. On hospital Day 3, the patient’s haemodynamic state became unstable despite a maximum dose of vasopressor infusion. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin I and CK levels were elevated to 8.15 pg/mL and 1229 U/L, respectively. Electrocardiography showed a new-onset intra-ventricular conduction disturbance with a transient complete atrioventricular block . Repeated TTE showed severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 20% (see online). As pulseless ventricular tachycardia refractory to electrical defibrillation occurred, veno-arterial extracorporeal mechanical oxygenation (VA-ECMO), intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP), and temporary transvenous pacemaker were introduced. On hospital Day 6, IABP was replaced by a percutaneous left ventricular assist device (Impella CP), and simultaneously, right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) was performed. Histological and immunohistological findings showed a diffuse lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate with mild fibrosis in the interstitium with abundant T cells (CD3, CD4, and CD8) and macrophages (CD68) .
On hospital Day 7, the patient was transferred to our hospital because of the possible introduction of an implantable left ventricular assist device, which had not been available at the previous hospital. Electrocardiography demonstrated a low voltage in all leads . Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction decreased to an LVEF of 15% (see online). IgG antibody against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was detected at a titre of 1:320; immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody against anti-nucleocapsid was not detected, indicating that the patient acquired immunity through COVID-19 mRNA vaccination without a history of infection. We diagnosed fulminant myocarditis and pericarditis that developed after COVID-19 mRNA (BNT162b2) vaccination. His haemodynamic status gradually improved, without immunosuppressive or anti-inflammatory therapy. On hospital Days 8 and 13, the VA-ECMO and the Impella CP were withdrawn, respectively. After the patient was weaned off the vasopressors, he was transferred to the general ward on hospital Day 22: thereafter, bisoprolol, losartan potassium, and spironolactone were introduced sequentially and titrated. Follow-up TTE performed on hospital Day 29 showed that LVEF improved to 35% (see online). Contrast-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was performed on hospital Day 43 . T2-weighted image showed diffuse high signal intensity of the LV myocardium, specifically in the basal inferior wall . A serial serum sample analysis showed a marked increase in the serum concentrations of IP-10 (CXCL10), MCP-3 (CCL7), and MIG (CXCL9) at 3 days after vaccination and a non-significant increase in those of IL-4 and IL-13 and other cytokines (data not provided). On hospital Day 47, the patient was discharged on a course of bisoprolol (2.5 mg/day), losartan potassium (25 mg/day), and spironolactone (25 mg/day). He had no recurrence at 1-year follow-up from the day of discharge.