Present case deals with a 24-year-old Nepali female patient who presented with a 3-week history of low-grade fever, fatigue, headache, and lymphadenopathy. She reported no weight loss, night sweats and anorexia. The patient did not have a history of tuberculosis and other significant illnesses in the past. The patient complained of painful unilateral left-sided cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy. Enlarged lymph nodes were found to be tender and discrete. Largest lymph node was in the cervical region which measured 3 × 3 cm.
Laboratory investigations for complete blood count, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR), liver function tests, renal function tests, anti-nuclear antibody and rheumatoid arthritis factor were performed. ESR as measured by Westergren method was 64 mm/h (normal range: <20 mm/h in females). Platelet count was 120,000/µl (normal range: 150,000–450,000/µl). Other test findings were within normal limits, including hemoglobin and total and differential leukocyte count.
There was a dilemma in clinical diagnosis because lymphadenopathy was painful, but the patient had raised ESR and low-grade fever. Painful lymphadenopathy pointed to reactive (bacterial) lymphadenitis while increased ESR and low-grade fever pointed to tuberculosis. Therefore empirical treatment was started with a 1-week’s course of broad-spectrum antibiotic. But the patient did not show any improvement and therefore cervical lymph node was excised for histopathological examination.
Low power microscopic examination of section prepared from affected lymph node showed discrete necrotic area. Pathognomonic features of KFD were seen on higher power microscopic examination viz., paracortical foci composed of small to large lymphocytes, plasmacytoid monocytes and various types of histiocytes including crescentic type in the background of apoptotic bodies and abundant karyorrhectic debris . Ghost cell represented complete karyorrhexis . Neutrophils, eosinophils and plasma cells were conspicuous by their absence. Lymphocytes did not show atypia. Mitotic figures were not present. There were no granulomas. Microscopic features of lupus lymphadenopathy viz., follicular hyperplasia with interfollicular immunoblasts and Reed-Sternberg-like giant cells and paracortical necrosis with hematoxylin bodies were absent. On the basis of these histopathological findings, a diagnosis of Kikuchi–Fujimoto disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis) was made. Immunohistochemical analysis was not done on the sections because of confirmed diagnosis on the basis of light microscopic examination of Hematoxylin and Eosin stained sections.
During the evaluation after 6 weeks, the patient reported no systemic symptoms and her lymph nodes had regressed in size significantly and ESR and platelet count were restored to normal range, without any treatment.