A sixteen-year-old girl presented with rash, elevated fever and joints swelling. She was admitted to the hospital to make further examinations as the symptoms persisted for 15 days. A diagnosis of probable Still disease was made. In the following days, her clinical state worsened, with persistence of elevated fever. Serologic tests were negative for Bartonella, Parvovirus B19, Rickettsia, viral hepatitis (A, B and C), HIV, Toxoplasma, Salmonella and Yersinia. Blood cultures were also negative. No abnormalities were found in abdominal and cardiac ultrasonography and in cranial computed tomography (CT). A bone gammagraphy, showed enhanced captation in right tibial malleolus and in proximal interphalangeal joints of fingers 2 and 4 of the right hand, and finger 4 of the left hand. An abdominal CT showed a biliary bladder wall enlargement and a laparotomy was performed, but no signs of cholecystitis were found. A broad spectrum antibiotherapy was started with ciprofloxacin and imipenem. The patient was transferred to pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) as a consequence of progressive multiorgan failure including acute respiratory distress syndrome, liver failure, anemia, thrombopenia and increasing acute phase reactants (APR). On admission to PICU, the patient was on mechanical ventilation. Examination revealed generalized oedema, hypoventilation in both lung bases, abdominal distension and hepatoesplenomegaly. There was also active bleeding around puncture points and through nasogastric tube. Blood analysis on admission is shown in table .
A high positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) was set due to hypoxemia (up to 14 cmH2O), with a PO2/FiO2 of 141. Thorax radiography showed bilateral diffuse infiltrates, and slight cardiomegaly. Inotropic support was needed (dopamine at 15 μg/kg/minute) and a perfusion with furosemide (0.5 mg/kg/hour) was started. Laboratory analysis showed abnormal values for haemoglobin (7.7 g/dL), platelets (29,000/mm3) and coagulation times including hypofibrinogenemia (85 mg/dL). She received red blood cell concentrates, platelets and fresh frozen plasma. The same antibiotherapy was maintained and acute liver failure support treatment was started.
A bone marrow puncture-biopsy was performed. Activated macrophages with hemophagocytosis were found , which together with the clinical and analytical data (bicytopenia, and coagulopathy with hypofibrinogenemia, and afterwards a ferritin of 190594 μg/L and triglycerides of 677 mg/dL) confirmed the HFS diagnosis. Specific treatment for this syndrome was started, following Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) 2004 guidelines. She had a very good response, and at forth day from admission she was extubated to non invasive ventilation using a full-face mask. A progressive analytical normalization was observed and she was discharged after 12 days in PICU, without any sequelae.
She is currently being followed as an outpatient. She had two reactivations of her rheumatoid disorder, with a good response to corticoids.