A 45-year-old female patient presented with a history of fever, cough, and sputum production for 5 days. From February 6, she had a fever, accompanied by general weakness, chills, muscle aches, as well as a cough. After taking azithromycin orally for 3 days, the symptoms did not improve significantly. CT scans on February 7 showed bilateral, blurred patches, pleural thickening and adhesions. After being admitted into an isolation ward, she was intravenously administered levofloxacin for 3 days but a fever remained. Meanwhile, the results of two consecutive tests for COVID-19 nucleic acid were both negative. She was then transferred to the respiratory single ward on February 11. Upon closer examination of the patient and the medical history, the doctor noted said individual’s developing red, itching rashes on both hands in mid-January 2020. After topical use of miconazole clobetasol cream, the itching symptom reduced while the rashes remained. In this period, she had no muscle aches or myasthenia.
The patient’s previous surgical trauma history included a right lung nodule resection in November 2017 which’s tissue pathology alluded to carcinoma in situ, a thyroid adenoma surgery over 10 years ago and an ovarian cyst surgery in 1999.
At the end of January 2020, she had worked as a radiological technician in a fever outpatient department, but she had no obvious history of close contact with confirmed COVID-19 patients.
A general physical examination revealed smooth breathing with rough bilateral sounds, and wet rales that could be heard at the base of the right lung. Heart and abdominal examinations showed no abnormality. Dermatological examination showed erythema, a condition which mung-bean-sized pimples with scales and scabs could be seen on the palms, extensor and flexor of the knuckles and metacarpophalangeal joints. Periungual folds were diffusely red with angiotelectasis, hyperkeratosis, and petechia .
Laboratory examinations showed ferritin was 462 ng/ml (Ref. 13~150) and interleukin-6 was 70.05 pg/ml (Ref.0 ~ 7). Creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase were higher than normal limits . Myositis antibody spectrum examination and autoantibodies showed anti-Ro52 antibody was strongly positive. The examinations including anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (anti-MDA5) antibody, anti-Jo1 antibody, anti-Scl70 antibody, antinuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, anti-SSA/SSB antibodies, anti-Sm antibody and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were all negative. Pathogen examination of respiratory system produced no significant results.
After in-patient admission, above mentioned subject was given a combination of anti-infective therapy for 1 week, but afterwards she still exhibited hyperthermia. On February 17, CT imaging revealed progressive changes and the oxygenation index showed a sharp decline. After a multidisciplinary consultation, she was immediately transferred to the ICU quarantine ward. After 3 days of active treatment, she still had a 39.5 °C fever, and her oxygenation index continued to deteriorate. At this time, the third nucleic acid test for COVID-19 was administered indicated a negative result. Comprehensively considering the patient’s clinical manifestations and auxiliary examination results, she was diagnosed with CADM associated RP-ILD. The patient was immediately given non-invasive ventilator-assisted breathing, methylprednisolone (up to 120 mg/day), gamma globulin (0.4 g/kg/d), and cyclophosphamide. The body temperature began to dissipate and the condition exhibited improvement. However, after glucocotrticoids reduction the lung lesions continued to progressed dramatically over a few days and culminating in said patient’s mortality a month later.