A 32-year-old man presented with the symptoms of foreign body sensation and blurred vision in the left eye 3 days before presentation. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA, in decimal values) was 1.2 in the right eye and 0.6 in the left eye. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy (BX-900, Haag-Streit AG, Koeniz, Switzerland) of the left eye revealed an intracorneal foreign body, localized at the paracentral region, obliquely protruding to Descemet membrane with no penetration into the anterior chamber . The original entry path of the foreign body had sealed and epithelialized, leaving a sub-epithelial opacity and edematous stroma . The shadow effect shown in the anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT, RTVue XR, Optovue, Inc., Fremont, CA) corresponded to the location of the intracorneal chestnut . The corneal thickness was approximate 755 μm at the site of lesion, of which 152 μm distance from the sealed corneal epithelium to the chestnut . The white ulcers with feathery edges or satellite infiltrates were not observed. The intraocular pressure, anterior chamber, lenses and the fundi appeared normal. No signs of systemic disorders were found in the presented case.
This study conformed to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences. After discussing with the patient and informed consent was obtained, femtosecond laser was applied using the protocols of IntraLase Enabled Keratoplasty (IEK, iFS™ Advanced Femtosecond Laser System). Following parameters were used: 300 μm lamellar depth, 7.5 mm diameter, 1.20 μJ energy, and cut angle with 180 degrees from 12 o’clock to 6 o’clock in the left eye . Under strict aseptic precautions, IEK was performed to create an anterior lamellar flap according to the routine procedures. The lamellar flap was easily separated with a flap lifter to expose the superior side of the chestnut. As shown in Fig. , the chestnut was then removed entirely with a pair of forceps under a surgical microscope (OPMI LUMERA 700, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena, Germany). After removal of the chestnut, no fluorescein leakage was found with the Seidel test and the wound was washed with 250 mL normal saline containing 40 mg gentamycin. The edges were dried for 3 min using a surgical sponge, and a soft contact lens (Extended wear, PureVision. Bausch and Lomb, NY) was applied over the surface. No suture was applied. The chestnut, shown in Fig. , was inoculated onto Sabouraud glucose agar and chocolate agar to detect potential growth of fungi and bacteria.
Before the surgery, Levofloxacin (Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Japan) was prescribed for four times per day, and postoperatively, TobraDex (tobramycin 0.3% and dexamethasone 0.1%, s.a. Alcon-Couvreur n.v. Puurs, Belgium) was included and tapered weekly over a month. In 3 days after surgery, the patient complained of mild pain and blurred vision. These symptoms were relieved after treatment with the eyedrops. At three-month follow-up, a dot-like haze was noted in the cornea, which was corresponded to the scarring formation at the site of foreign body removal . As shown in Fig. , assessment with corneal topography (Oculus Pentacam Typ 70,700, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) demonstrated that there was no surgical induction of corneal astigmatism compared to the preoperative astigmatism (Pre-Op, K1 = 42.1D, K2 = 42.9D, Axis: 166.7o vs 3-month Post-Op, K1 = 41.4D, K2 = 42.7D, Axis: 160.6o), and the Post-Op decimal BCVA in the left eye was improved gradually from 0.3 to 1.2. The results in microbiological culture of fungi and bacteria were negative.