A retired 77-year-old Caribbean woman presented to the emergency department with general fatigue and lower extremity weakness. She is known for type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and a recent episode of small bowel obstruction that had resolved without surgery.
On examination, she had a bilateral severe axonal sensory and motor polyneuropathy (confirmed by nerve conduction studies and electromyography) which was manifested by severe bilateral lower extremity weakness. She also had diffuse anasarca. She did not have any skin findings nor any ophthalmologic symptoms.
She had a previously normal creatinine of 70 μmol/L (0.79 mg/dL), but on admission was found to have an acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine of 122 μmol/L (1.38 mg/dL). The creatinine peaked over 3 weeks to 231 μmol/L (2.61 mg/dL) . This was associated with a decreasing albumin and increasing urine protein . Urinalysis showed significant proteinuria and hematuria and urine microscopy showed active sediments including dysmorphic erythrocytes. Urine eosinophils were positive twice. A serological panel, which included cytoplasmic and perinuclear anti-neutrophilic antibodies anti-cytoplasmic (p-ANCA and c-ANCA), complement (C3 and C4), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), hepatitis B, hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serologies were all negative . Rheumatoid factor (RF), C-reactive protein (CRP) and the immunoglobulin profile (IMM) were consistent with inflammation. Both the urine protein electrophoresis and the serum protein electrophoresis were normal. Given the neurological symptoms and impressive proteinuria, a Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and Treponema pallidum particle agglutination test (TP-PA) were requested and both were positive. A peripheral electromyography (EMG) with nerve conduction studies, was also consistent with syphilis-induced neuropathy. The patient declined a lumbar puncture to confirm neurosyphilis and confirmed she had never been diagnosed with nor specifically been treated for syphilis before.
While waiting for the serological testing, a kidney biopsy was performed due to the increasing creatinine with an active urine sediment. The biopsy showed crescentic and necrotizing glomerulonephritis in 9/23 glomeruli . Some of the crescentic glomeruli even showed Bowman’s capsule rupture. Numerous plasma cells surrounded the crescentic glomeruli and some of the small blood vessels. There was also concomitant acute tubulo-interstitial nephritis with abundant plasma cells and occasional eosinophils . The plasma cells showed an increased proportion (50%) of IgG-4 versus IgG . There was moderate interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy as well as moderate atherosclerosis. No granulomatous inflammation was identified. Glomerular basement spikes or vacuolization were not found. No Treponema pallidum were found by immunohistochemistry and there was no evidence for monoclonality by kappa/lambda in situ hybridization. Immunofluorescence showed only minimal focal non-specific C3 mesangial staining (1+) and fibrinogen positive crescents (3+). IgA, IgG, IgM, C1q, kappa and lambda immunofluorescence were negative. Electron microscopy did not show any significant electron dense deposits in any of the glomerular compartments .
Overall, the case was diagnosed as a pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis with a concomitant acute tubulointerstitial nephritis. This was combined with atypical perivascular and periglomerular nonclonal, but significantly positive IgG-4 plasma cells infiltrates. The histological differential diagnosis would include a pauci-immune vasculitis, an atypical post-infectious glomerulonephritis, a secondary drug reaction or inflammatory reaction. Background vascular findings were attributed to the patient’s diabetes type 2 and hypertension. Our biopsy findings being similar to Nandikanti et al. and given the clinical context, this presentation was most likely due to syphilitic infection. Absence of hypocomplementemia and of other organ involvement (thoraco-abdominal and pelvic computerized tomography showed no abnormalities) made IgG4-related disease and tubulointerstitial nephritis unlikely based on the proposed diagnostic criteria for IgG4-related disease [, ]. Furthermore, IgG4-disease with a lymphoplasmacytic pattern could not be diagnosed in the presence of an infection such as syphilis . The immunoglobulin profile and RF were likely inflammatory given the C-reactive protein (CRP) of 174 mg/L. An elevated CRP is unlikely to be present IgG4-related disease . The patient had a negative ANA and no symptoms of Sjogren’s syndrome and thus this diagnosis was excluded.
Given that we did not have the confirmatory syphilis test nor the ANCA serology test results initially and given this crescentic pauci-immune picture suggestive of ANCA vasculitis, we gave this elderly patient both intravenous (IV) penicillin G for 2 weeks and half-dose pulse methylprednisolone (500 mg IV daily X 3 days) concurrently. Once the ANCA results were negative, we continued with only the IV penicillin and a fast Prednisone taper. With this treatment, the patient’s serum creatinine decreased from a peak of 231 μmol/L (2.61 mg/dL) to 134 μmol/L (1.51 mg/dL) within 1 week. The serum creatinine remained at a new baseline of 110 μmol/L 1 month afterwards and 97 μmol/L a year later.