A 48-year-old man without connective tissue disease received a neck massage 2 years before being admitted to our hospital. Two months after the massage, he experienced vertigo and underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at another hospital. MRI revealed bilateral cerebellar infarction; however, its cause could not be determined. One year later, he received another neck massage and experienced vertigo. He visited the same hospital, and a second MRI revealed left cerebellar infarction and poor flow to the left VA [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed dissection from the VA ostium to the V2 segment and anastomoses between the VA and collateral vessels distal to the VA dissection . The neurosurgeon initiated antiplatelet therapy (200 mg/day cilostazol) to prevent cerebral infarction. One month later, the neurosurgeon consulted our hospital.
MRI findings in our hospital were similar to those obtained previously, and treatment with 200 mg/day cilostazol was continued while disease progression was observed. Five months later, he experienced right tinnitus and bilateral right hemianopia. MRI revealed left occipital lobe infarction . DSA revealed partial VA ostial occlusion despite progressive stenosis. One month later, DSA revealed complete VA ostial occlusion and V2 segment dissection, in which the antegrade VA flowed slowly through collateral vessels [ and ]. We determined that the cerebral infarction risk was less than that of VA ostial stenosis. We continued 200 mg/day cilostazol treatment. Two months later, the patient experienced vertigo, and an MRI revealed left cerebellar and right occipital lobe infarction [ and ]. DSA produced a similar image as the one produced previously [ and ]. We strengthened the antiplatelet therapy (75 mg/day clopidogrel and 200 mg/day cilostazol).
Surgical PAO was planned because the patient requested surgery and experienced repeated cerebral infarction despite the presence of occluding VA ostium and enhanced antiplatelet therapy. We decided to clip the V3 segment, which was more distally positioned than the collateral vessels. He underwent surgery in the supine position with his head turned to the right. This position enabled access to the VA with fewer skin incisions and with less damage to the VA venous plexus. We exposed the VA V3 segment after identifying the suboccipital triangle and confirmed VA blood flow with Doppler ultrasonography and indocyanine green video angiography. We clipped the VA using Yasargil Titanium Mini Clips (FT720T) . After the surgery, the patient was neurologically intact. MRI revealed no cerebral infarction and flowed through the left VA. DSA revealed an absence of flow past the V3 segment and a good backflow from the right to left VA. No ischemic episodes occurred during the 20-month postsurgical follow-up period .
There was no requirement for IRB/ethics committee approval. The patient provided consent for the publication of this case report.