A 16 year old boy who twisted his left knee while trying to stand up at a brisk pace from a sitting position on floor. Instantaneously, he heard a popping sound associated with pain and swelling. At emergency department in our institute, initial examination was limited because of knee swelling and guarding due pain.
X-ray (AP and lateral) views as shown in “” were completely normal. Analgesia, instruction of ice padding, and orthopedic follow-up were the initial management. In clinic, detailed history was taking in which he reported improvement of his left knee pain and swelling. Unremarkable past medical and surgical history with no known allergies. Physical examination of his left knee showed tenderness at the lateral joint line, limited knee extension (from 15° to 130°) compared to the right knee (from 0 to 130°). Thessaly and McMurray tests were positive. Collateral and cruciate ligaments demonstrated no laxity with valgus stress, varus stress, anterior drawer, posterior drawer, Lachman and pivot-shift tests [, , ]. Plain radiographic images of his left knee were normal. MRI of left knee showed a long longitudinal tear of lateral meniscus extending from posterior horn to anterior horn. The medial meniscus, ligaments, and articular cartilage were normal. Coronal view of left knee showed entrapment of meniscal fragment in intercondylar notch represents “the fragment within the intercondylar notch sign” [,] and absence of lateral meniscal body in its anatomical position (A). On sagittal view, vertical tear in the peripheral zone of lateral meniscus (B). At the level of ACL on sagittal view, a meniscal fragment was seen posterior to ACL (C). These findings indicate displacement of lateral meniscal fragment toward intercondylar notch and entrapment behind and parallel to the ACL fibers which led to the appearance of double ACL. The patient consented for diagnostic arthroscopy of left knee which showed a bucket handle tear of lateral meniscus. The tear starts from the posterior horn of lateral meniscus extending to the beginning of anterior horn at the level of red-white zone . The fragment was reduced to its anatomic position and repaired. The procedure was done by the senior author with 15 years of arthroscopy experience The patient was followed for two years. In last visit at our clinic, the patient was asymptomatic and able to achieve full range of motion with complete participation in sports activities.