A 75-year-old man (height 157 cm; body weight 63 kg) was scheduled for robot-assisted gastrectomy for gastric cancer. His medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and emphysema. In addition, he suffered sudden circulatory collapse and bronchospasm in the ICU immediately after undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery for ischemic heart disease at 74 years of age. These symptoms were considered anaphylactic reactions caused by fresh-frozen plasma transfusion, while a severe drop in blood pressure requiring administration of noradrenaline was also observed during the induction of anesthesia. Midazolam was the only drug used during both events, but it was not considered to be a cause of anaphylaxis at that point. In addition, the patient was taking brotizolam, an oral benzodiazepine, as a sleeping pill but had no other history of allergies.
Before anesthetic induction, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 173/73 mmHg; heart rate, 77 bpm; and SpO2, 98% (room air). Anesthesia was induced with intravenous fentanyl 100 mcg, remifentanil 0.26 mcg/kg/min, and remimazolam 6 mg/kg/h until loss of consciousness (total 8 mg used). Rocuronium 40 mg was administered, and he was intubated with a video laryngoscope. Tracheal intubation was successfully performed. However, the end tidal carbon dioxide was low (5–8 cmH2O), and more than 30 cmH2O of inspiratory pressure was needed to deliver the minimum necessary tidal volume (300 ml). We suspected incorrect endotracheal tube positioning, obstruction due to secretions, pneumothorax, and asthma. On auscultation, respiratory sounds in both lungs were barely audible. Endotracheal suctioning was performed, but no secretions were found. The blood pressure was also low, and inotropes and vasopressors were administered as needed (a total of 8 mg of ephedrine and 0.3 mg of phenylephrine were administered after induction of anesthesia). Bronchoscopy to check for any abnormalities in the airway revealed marked edema of the tracheal to bronchial mucosa and tracheal stenosis (Additional file 1). Based on the course and findings, we diagnosed anaphylaxis. Cardiac arrest occurred immediately after bronchoscopy; chest compressions were performed, and 0.5 mg of intravenous adrenaline was administered. Two minutes later, spontaneous circulation returned. A rash developed on the patient’s abdomen and thighs. The surgery was canceled, and he was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). The course of the anaphylactic episode is shown in Fig. . On ICU admission, the airway compliance improved, and the next day, tracheal edema was attenuated (Additional file 2), and the patient was extubated. Blood tests showed elevated tryptase levels [30 min after onset: 6.2 µg/L, 2 h after onset: 9.2 µg/L, 24 h after onset: 2.2 µg/L (normal range 1.2–5.7 µg/L)], and the acute tryptase level (2 h) was well above the patient’s baseline serum tryptase level (24 h); this finding was consistent with anaphylaxis . Fentanyl, remifentanil, rocuronium and remimazolam were used just before anaphylaxis. Latex and antibiotics were not used. Four weeks later, skin prick tests for candidate drugs that might be used during the subsequent surgery were performed (Additional file 3). However, we did not perform skin prick tests for remimazolam or midazolam, which is likely to exhibit cross-reactivity with remimazolam. These drugs were strongly suspected to be the causative drugs, and the potential anaphylactic response caused by the skin test was deemed too dangerous given the cardiac function of the patient. Prick test results for all drugs were negative (Additional file 3). In addition, fentanyl, remifentanil and rocuronium had been used without anaphylactic reactions in other situations, such as during prior cardiac surgery and ICU stays (Additional file 4). Based on the above findings, we determined that the allergen was remimazolam, and intradermal testing was not performed. Two months later, the patient successfully underwent robot-assisted gastrectomy under general anesthesia with fentanyl, remifentanil, rocuronium, propofol and sevoflurane and showed no allergic reactions.