A 13-year-old female patient with a 2-year history of left knee pain was referred to our clinic by a rheumatologic pediatrist. Prior to the consultation, she received treatment for juvenile idiopathic arthritis with uveitis, consisting of methotrexate 10 mg once a week and Adalimumab 20 mg every three weeks. There were no indications of a hereditary burden of osteochondral diseases. In terms of sporting activity, the patient regularly played soccer and swam in a non-competitive manner. On clinical examination, the patient showed a straight leg axis, no effusion, and a range of motion (ROM) of extension/flexion of 0°–0°–130°. On the opposite side, a range of motion of 10°–0°–160° was observed. Hypermobility was also seen in the patient’s other joints (overall Beighton score of 6). The medial and lateral collateral ligaments were stable in 0° and 20° flexion. The Lachman test and the anterior and posterior drawer tests were negative. No indicator of injury to the medial and lateral meniscus could be found clinically. The patella was central and stable, and the apprehension test and J-sign were negative. At rest, the patient felt no pain. However, already at light exertion, knee pain was indicated. The knee pain was initially rated 2 out of 10 on the visual analog scale (VAS) and located on the medial side of the knee. The MRI scan showed an OCD (Clanton type I-II) of approximately 12 × 12 mm at the medial femoral condyle (A,B) . The cartilage appeared intact, and no loose bodies could be detected. The remaining cartilage, as well as the cruciate and collateral ligaments, were found to be intact.
After initial conservative treatment with periodical MRI-controls for three months, the patient experienced an aggravation of pain and reported episodes of joint blockage. Apart from a mild effusion, the clinical examination was identical to the previous findings. The joint blockage phenomenon could not be provoked. The MRI scan showed a displacement of the OCD fragment to the suprapatellar recess (Clanton type IV, C,D). Due to the young patient’s age, it was decided to refixate the large osteochondral fragment using headless magnesium compression screws.
Surgery was performed with the patient placed in a supine position. A pneumatic tourniquet was put on the ipsilateral thigh and inflated to 100 mm Hg above the systolic blood pressure. Knee testing under general anesthesia showed a mild effusion, full range of motion, and no ligamentous instabilities. A knee arthroscopy was performed using a standard high anterolateral and anteromedial portal. In the medial compartment, the 15 × 15 mm osteochondral lesion (Outerbridge grade 4) at the medial femoral condyle was observed. Femoral and tibial cartilage conditions were otherwise unremarkable. The medial recess was free and showed no pathologies. The lateral compartment also showed excellent cartilaginous conditions and an unremarkable lateral recess. The menisci and cruciate ligaments were stable under palpation. Since the free osteochondral fragment could not be found in the anterior region of the knee joint, the posteromedial recess and the posterolateral recess were inspected. In the posterolateral recess, the displaced OCD fragment was found and extracted from the knee using a posteromedial portal.
The fragment was then reduced in size and debrided at the edges . The anteromedial portal was then extended to a medial mini-open arthrotomy. After identifying the osteochondral lesion, a curettage and microfracturing of the lesion with a 1.3 mm K-wire was performed. Subsequently, the OCD fragment was temporarily fixated by two 1.0 mm K-wires, which were subsequently overdrilled using a 2.2 mm cannulated drill. Two cannulated 2.8 × 20 mm headless magnesium compression screws (Medical Magnesium GmbH, Aachen, Germany) were inserted, and the border of the fragment was covered with fibrin glue .
After surgery, the knee was immobilized in a straight knee splint for one week. After one week the active range of motion was limited to extension/flexion of 0°–0°–60°, after 3 weeks postoperatively to 0°–0°–90° and after 5 weeks to 0°–0°–110° to reduce the load on the osteochondral fragment and promote healing. Seven weeks after surgery, the mobile brace was removed. Continuous passive motion was started directly after surgery. For the first six weeks postoperatively, only partial weight-bearing with 10 kg on the injured leg was allowed.
Seven weeks after surgery, the patient was presented for a scheduled examination. In the clinical examination, no joint effusion, and slight knee extension deficit of 5° with free flexion movement were observed. The knee continued to show ligamentous stability. The reported VAS-Score was 1 out of 10. Six months after surgery, the patient again reported pain in the affected knee (VAS-Score 3 of 10), especially after physical exertion. In the meantime, the patient resumed her previous athletic activities (swimming, soccer). Pressure pain could be elicited over the medial joint space and medial femoral condyle. The MRI scan showed the remodeling of the magnesium screws and the OCD fragment in place without dislocation . We recommended analgetic medication as well as activity reduction (no contact sports) for one month.
At the final visit after 10 months, the patient was free of pain (VAS-Score 0 of 10) and had a free range of motion (10°–0°–160°), equivalent to the uninjured side. The pressure—pain over the medial femoral condyle, which could be provoked in the preliminary examination, was no longer observable. The MRI scan showed progressive healing of the fragment and continuing degradation of the magnesium screws, without apparent formation of gas caverns around the implant .
We finished the therapy with a satisfactory result. Further treatment was taken over by colleagues from pediatric rheumatology, where the patient was previously treated. There, the patient appeared pain-free (VAS-Score 0 of 10) and without movement restrictions 14 months after the operation.