A 39 year old man with no previous abdominal surgery was incidentally found to have a 2.5 cm mass in the neck of the pancreas on a computed tomography (CT) scan evaluation for acute diverticulitis. Past medical history was only significant for hypertension and gastroesophageal reflux disease. At the time of diagnosis, patient denied symptoms such as diarrhea, hypoglycemia, intractable peptic ulcer, weight loss, fever or migratory skin rash. CT guided fine needle aspiration biopsy confirmed a nonfunctional neuroendocrine tumor. Due to its malignant potential, decision was made to proceed with a surgical resection.
Patient was taken to the operating room and positioned flat with 60 degree left side up supported by a bean bag. After adequate administration of general anesthesia, pneumoperitoneum was established using Hasson's technique through a 10 mm left paramedian port. Two additional 5 mm working ports were placed on either side to create adequate triangulation toward the pancreas . A 30 degree telescope was then inserted to inspect the peritoneal cavity. No macroscopic pathology was observed throughout the peritoneal surface and on the liver region. A handport device was then placed in the midline under direct vision.
Dissection was initiated with splenic flexure mobilization using a laparoscopic electrocautery. The lesser sac was carefully entered by elevating the stomach and dividing the gastrocolic ligament. The pancreas was then inspected and solitary lesion within the neck of the pancreas was clearly visualized . Intraoperative ultrasound showed a 2.5 cm tumor located in the neck of the pancreas over the superior mesenteric vein (SMV)-splenic vein confluence. The lesion was found to be full thickness involving the major pancreatic duct rendering enucleation not feasible. After complete peripancreatic tissue dissection with careful attention to the superior mesenteric and splenic veins, central pancreas was transected using LigaSure™ sparing a large healthy appearing pancreatic tail. The proximal cut edge of the pancreas was inspected to ensure adequate hemostasis. The resected portion of the pancreas was placed in an impervious bag and retrieved through the handport.
The remaining pancreatic tail was then elevated for a short distance to approximate the posterior wall of the stomach in preparation for the pancreaticogastrostomy anastomosis. Pancreatic duct was then cannulated using a 3 Fr Geenan™ stent and a retrogastric pancreaticogastrostomy was performed using interrupted silk sutures in a single layer fashion . Two Blake drains were placed in the lesser sac. Specimen weighted 20 grams showing neuroendocrine tumor features with negative margins on frozen section. Proton pump inhibitor and octreotide were administered postoperatively.
Laparoscopic assisted central pancreatectomy was performed successfully with operative time of 180 minutes and blood loss of 200 ml. Postoperatively recovery was unremarkable and the patient was able to ambulate on postoperative day (POD) 1. Nasogastric tube was removed by the second POD. A slight increase in drain output up to 200 ml/24 hours was noticed following introduction of regular diet on POD 5. Drain fluid showed mildly elevated amylase and lipase. The patient clinical condition continued to improve without symptoms until hospital discharge on POD 9. Permanent pathology report showed a well differentiated pancreatic endocrine neoplasm of uncertain potential behavior with negative peripancreatic lymphnodes. Three days following discharge, patient presented to the emergency room due to drain malfunction which was simply managed by 2 cm drain retraction and reattachment. Repeat CT scan showed a minimal peripancreatic fluid collection around the surgical bed without oral contrast extravasation. Abdominal drains were removed in 2 weeks postoperatively and the patient continued to do well at 3 month follow-up without any signs of pancreatic insufficiency.