A 10-day-old male crossbred (Frisian x local indigenous) calf presented with a severely distended abdomen . Due to the distention the paralumbar fossa, especially on the left, was not visible. The calf was reluctant to suckle from the dam, unable to walk, exhibited rapid and shallow breathing, and had visibly congested mucus membranes. Percussion of the left abdomen revealed a drum-like gaseous sound. On auscultation of the left abdomen, a dull fluid sound was detected. The anamnesis indicated that the calf had been dribbling urine continuously, unable to defecate, or had irregularly voided very little, hard, and pasty feces. General physical examination revealed no esophageal obstruction, but the calf was weak and with an abnormal gait. The calf was suckling its dam twice in a 12 h interval (at morning and evening) and had not started feeding the hay/roughage/concentrate or the calf starter at the moment. The physiological parameters of the calf were as follows: Rectal temperature = 39.8 degree Centigrade (°C), Pulse =175 beats/minute, Respiration =60 breaths/minute.
Abomasal bloat and choke.
In order to release trapped gases and check the patency of the esophagus, a flexible stomach tube coated with mineral oil was inserted into the esophagus, and advanced down into the rumen. A fermented watery-like fluid accompanied by some clots of milk and gases was released from the rumen through the stomach tube. Procaine penicillin (Pen Aqueous; Zoetis Canada), 10 ml (ml), 10,000 international unit per milliliter (Iu/ml of solution) mixed with 0.25Liter (L) of mineral oil was administered orally for 3 days, while milk was withheld to reduce the microbial burden and coalescence of gas. An isotonic solution containing 0.9% Sodium Chloride (Jiangsu HFQ Bio-Technology Co., Ltd), 8.4% Sodium Bicarbonate (Vet One, Nova-Tech, Grand Island, USA) and 5% Dextrose in water 1000 ml injection (Addis Pharmaceutical factory) was administered intravenously (IV) at a rate of 100 ml/kilogram (kg) over 3–5 h for 2 days. Before administration of IV fluid, the calf was sedated using Xylazine hydrochloride, 20 mg/ml (xylazine® immunological LTD, Hyderabad, India) intramuscularly (IM). This was administered during every fluid therapy, and the calf was tied up with rope in a lateral recumbent position. The hair around the jugular groove of the neck was clipped and the area was cleaned and disinfected using diluted 70% Ethanol (Addis Pharmaceutical factory). The superficial jugular vein was catheterized using 20 Gage, 0.8 in. butterfly catheter (Unolok, Hindustan syringe, Medical device LTD Faridabad, India) and secured with adhesive tape around the neck.
After 3 days of treatment, bloat reoccurred. Treatment was initiated a second time by giving antibiotic pen strep (Pen & Strep@, 100 ml, York Vet, USA): 5 ml, (IM), every 24 h (q24hrs) for 2 days while the calf had been fastening. Additional supportive therapy of 40% glucose (100 ml/kg/day IV), isotonic saline solution (10 ml/kg/hrs IV) and a multivitamin (Multivitamin injection 100 ml, Norbrook Laboratories Limited, Ireland), was administered 10 ml IM once at a time (Stat.) during the time that the milk was withheld. After 2 days of treatment, the calf was allowed to suckle milk from the dam; however, the calf exhibited bloat again 5 h after milk consumption.
Ruminal fistulation (rumenostomy) was conducted to prevent recurrence according to a procedure described by Turner and Mcilwraith . Before the surgical procedure milk was withheld from the calf overnight while IV fluids and glucose were administered at the dose rate explained above. The left paralumbar fossa was prepared by shaving the hair and washing skin aseptically using 7.5% povidone-iodine surgical scrub (Povidone-iodine cleansing solution, Wockhard LTD, Mumbai, India) while the calf was standing. A circular area of 6 cm (cm) in diameter just below the transverse process of the lumbar vertebrae was marked and infiltrated with local anesthetic, 2% Lidocaine (Zoetis Canada, Kirkland,Quebec), at the concentration of 20 mg per milliliter (mg/ml). Approximately a 2 cm diameter circular incision was made to remove the skin. After skin removal the abdominal muscles were dissected bluntly to expose the rumen. The rumen was grasped using sponge forceps and pulled to the exterior. The rumen wall was then tacked to the edge of the skin by four horizontal mattress sutures at “quarter hour” positions (12, 3, 6 and 9 o’clock). These sutures acted as stay sutures using a non-absorbable suture (Sofsilk™ 6–0 Black, Medtronic, USA). The rumen wall was incised carefully at one half centimeter from the wound margin/apposing skin. As the contents of the rumen came out during the procedure, we observed a high amount of milk that had entered into the rumen .
The calf was separated from the herd for 10 days to maintain close observation. Since rumenostomy is considered a clean contaminated surgery, we had to give parenteral antibiotic, penstrep, (Penstrep-400, Metaalweg, 85,804 CG Venray, Netherlands) 5 ml for 4 days, q24hrs IM to reduce the risks of peritonitis. A dexamethasone injection at 2 mg/ml (Sparhawk laboratories Inc., Lemexa, KS66215, USA) was given every eight hours (q8hrs) IM, and also served as an anti-inflammatory agent. Moreover, Deltamethrin 1% (w/v) pour-on ready-for-use formulation (Appropriate Applications Ltd., USA) at a dose rate of 10 ml per 100 kg body weight was used to prevent insect infestation and miyiasis. The surgical wound was examined and monitored every day until closure for any complications such as wound dehiscence or rumen attachment to the skin. Rumen contents leaking out onto the flank area and outer surgical site were cleaned by using antiseptic solution (Chlorhexidine) and clean towels. The rumen was repeatedly flushed through the fistula with 0.5–1 l of warm tap water adjusted to the calf’s body temperature. This flushing helped to prevent desiccation and was used for buffering purpose. The calf was allowed to suckle milk from its dam twice a day during the follow-up period. After 10 days post-operation, the calf was provided with some hay and fresh grasses to stimulate rumen function. Bloat resolved by the time the calf started solid feeds and the wound was closed surgically just after a week of feeding grasses and hay.
The calf was followed for 6 months after the procedure. Shortly after wound closure, the amount of milk that the calf was getting was reduced to encourage the intake of hay and grasses. During this time, bloat did not occur as it had been observed prior to surgery. Although ruminal contents spilled onto the flank post-operatively, this did not appear to upset the calf, and its general condition improved gradually. We recommended that the owner reintroduce the calf with the existing herd 6 months after the surgery, and advised the owner to inform us of any observable complications. We promised the owner that we would visit the calf at one year; however, the owner had sold the calf at 9 months of age to a beef farmer in another area of the country.