A 17-year-old girl diagnosed with BWS was referred to our department because of rapidly growing masses in her left breast. Regarding her medical history, she had been diagnosed with BWS at birth. High-resolution chromosome banding indicated no structural abnormalities of chromosome 11; however, she had an umbilical hernia, hyperinsulinemia, and left hemihypertrophy, leading to a final clinical diagnosis of BWS. She had no family history of hereditary disease, including BWS.
Physical examination at initial consultation revealed left-sided hemihypertrophy. Her left breast was markedly larger than her right breast, with two palpable masses, each measuring approximately 10 cm . Laboratory data, including tumor markers, were within normal limits. A mammogram showed two well-demarcated masses occupying the entire left breast , ultrasound revealed two giant well-demarcated isoechoic lesions in the upper-inner and outer areas of the left breast, respectively , and contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed two heterogeneous enhanced masses of about 10 cm in the left breast . No enlarged axial or supraclavicular lymph nodes were detected. Contrast magnetic resonance imaging showed two well-defined masses measuring about 10 and 8 cm, respectively, in the left breast, with progressive enhancement in dynamic imaging . The contrast pattern suggested fibroadenoma or phyllodes tumor. The two masses were fed by the lateral thoracic and internal thoracic arteries, and the drainage veins surrounding the breast tumors were markedly dilated . Examination of a core needle biopsy specimen showed benign breast tissue with a proliferation of branching mammary ducts and spindle-shaped stromal cells, indicating a fibroadenoma. The lesions were accordingly diagnosed as fibroadenoma with rapid growth and the patient underwent surgical resection. A skin incision was made on the lateral side of the left breast under general anesthesia. The feeding vessels were transected carefully and the two masses were enucleated . The operative duration was 145 min and the blood loss was 6 g.
The macroscopic findings of the resected specimens revealed smooth, well-circumscribed masses, and lobulated lesions with slit-like spaces were observed in the cut surface . Microscopically, a proliferation of branching mammary ducts, hyperplastic lobules, and spindle-shaped stromal cells accompanied by hyalinized or fibro-myxoid stroma were observed, indicating fibroadenoma . The lesions were accordingly diagnosed as juvenile fibroadenomas. Immunohistochemical staining using IGF2 antibody revealed overexpression of IGF2 in the cytoplasm of the ductal epithelial cells of the fibroadenoma .
Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative day 2. She had experienced no recurrence of the breast tumors at the time of this report, 9 years after the operation.