A 34-year-old male presented to an urgent care center, where he collapsed on arrival in the triage area, per providers in that department. He stated that he had emptied a full bottle of atropine eye drop solution into a glass of water and ingested it in an attempt to harm himself. The atropine concentration was 10 mg/mL, making for a total ingestion of 150 mg. On initial presentation, he had altered mental status with waxing and waning coherence, and when awake, he was very combative. He was also tachycardic with a heart rate (HR) of 125 beats per minute. A fingerstick glucose was normal. He was given 2 mg IV lorazepam, 4 mg IV ondansetron, 50 gm oral activated charcoal, and quickly transferred to a larger local hospital for further care.
In the emergency department at the accepting facility, the patient continued to have altered mental status, varying between severe sedation and uncontrolled agitation. His HR was 150 beats per minute, blood pressure (BP) 150/90 mmHg, respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 95% on room air. He had flushed skin, dry oral mucosa, nonreactive mydriasis, and a rectal temperature of 100.2°F. He showed no signs of trauma and had a nonfocal neurologic examination other than the gross altered mental status. The remainder of his physical exam was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia and no interval or segment abnormalities.
Due to the intermittent somnolence and uncontrolled agitation, the emergency physicians at the accepting facility were concerned for the patient's ability to protect his airway enough to maintain oxygenation and ventilation. This, in combination with the recently administered charcoal and the possibility of emesis with subsequent aspiration, was enough cause for them to move towards rapid sequence induction (RSI) and endotracheal intubation. While preparing for the intubation, a medical toxicologist was consulted by the treating physicians. In an attempt to avoid the morbidity of the RSI, intubation, sedation, and mechanical ventilation, the decision was made to administer physostigmine to reverse the anticholinergic effects of the atropine.
Over the subsequent 75 minutes, physostigmine was titrated in 1 mg increments, each given over 3 to 5 minutes to a total dose of 11 mg. There was minimal change with the initial few doses, but after the fifth dose had been administered each 1 mg dose improved the patient's mental status along with normalizing the heart rate from the tachycardia listed above. Each of these signs would slowly worsen again over the ensuing 5 to 15 minutes, necessitating another dose. At the completion of treatment in the emergency department, the patient's HR had declined into the 90s beats per minute, and BP to 125/80 mmHg. His mental status was normalizing to the point where he was relatively calm and could provide a little bit of subjective history.
Laboratory evaluation at the second hospital included a negative serum ethanol, negative acetaminophen, normal basic metabolic panel, normal complete blood count, and negative urine drugs of abuse immunoassay for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cannabinoids, cocaine, opiates, and phencyclidine. A serum atropine level later returned at 240 ng/mL (this was performed using the initial blood draw at the accepting facility).
He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further observation and treatment. During the night in the ICU, he required 3 additional 1 mg doses of physostigmine for agitation that recurred. Endotracheal intubation was never performed. The remainder of the medical portion of his hospital stay was uneventful.