A 49-year-old man with no specific medical or familial history was diagnosed with two liver tumors on regular abdominal sonography. He had no alcohol, medication, or health supplement intake, or a history of hepatic virus infection. Physical examination showed no jaundice, edema, gynecomastia, or palmar erythema, and his body mass index was 22.7. Blood examination showed no specific findings, including normal alpha-fetoprotein and protein induced by vitamin K absence-II levels and no preoperative physiologic disorder. Abdominal sonography revealed two hepatic tumors at S8: 2.1 cm and S7: 2.2 cm. They also showed clear hypoechoic lesions with mildly fatty liver . Both of them showed iso- to high-density areas in plain CT . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed delayed contrast . MRI images revealed that the tumors showed high-intensity at their borders and low-intensity at their contents on T1-weighted images . The tumors showed low-intensity on T2-weighted images . The images also revealed that the central areas of the both tumors showed high-intensity in T1 in-phase and low-intensity in T1 opposed-phase of MRI , which meant that the tumors included fat components. The images also showed Ethoxybenzyl (EOB) uptake of the lesions in the hepatobiliary phase with Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine-pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced MRI . Based on these findings, we suspected well-differentiated HCC based on fatty liver, or benign liver nodules like NRH or focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH)-like lesions as differential diagnosis.
Laparoscopic S7/8 partial resection was performed for both treatment and diagnosis with his consent. During surgery, the liver appeared fatty, and there was no tumor exposure at the surface level. Sonography revealed hypoechoic and round tumors with regular borders at S7 and S8. Each tumor included the hepatic vein and Glisson’s capsules. The total bleeding volume was 120 mL with an operative time of 205 min. The patient was discharged 10 days after the operation without any complications. Macroscopically, the resected specimens showed signs of a mild fatty liver with a yellowish background with ill-defined brownish lesions and irregular borders . Microscopically, approximately 30% of the background hepatocytes showed macrovesicular steatosis with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining . Pathologically, the indefinite nodular lesion (2 cm in size) showed zonal hepatocyte loss associated with congestion and hemosiderin-laden macrophages around the central vein . One of ill-defined lesion is pointed by some yellow arrowheads in Fig. C-2, which include degenerated hepatocyte around central vein, congestion, and hepatocellular area with poor fat deposition. No fibrosis or septum formation was observed around the nodules. Macrophage accumulation in the centrilobular area was highlighted by CD68 staining . No hepatocyte atrophy or macrophage accumulation was observed in other background livers. Non-specific lymphocytic infiltrates were observed in the portal area . Atrophic hepatocytes and dense reticular fibers around the central veins were clearly distinguishable by silver staining . There were no tumor lesions, including hyperplasia, adenoma, or malignancies, and no obvious microvascular changes, such as thrombus formation. Based on those pathological findings, we diagnosed regenerative hepatic change with centrilobular necrosis.