A 73-year-old male with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and type 2 diabetes presented to the emergency department (ED) of our university hospital with a chief complaint of pain in his right eye for four weeks. This was accompanied by palpebral swelling, redness, blurred vision, and a frontal headache. The patient denied diplopia on presentation but slowly developed it over the course of his hospitalization. He also denied any trauma. He described the pain as constant, pulsatile and throbbing, and localized behind his right forehead; he denied prior episodes. The review of systems was otherwise negative, and social and family histories were noncontributory. The patient was taking 81 milligrams aspirin daily.
Physical examination revealed 20/20 and 20/25 visual acuity in the right and left eye, respectively. Intraocular pressure (reference range: 10–21 millimeters of mercury [mm Hg]) was 19 mm Hg in the right eye and 17 mm Hg in the left. The pupils were 3 mm and reactive to light bilaterally. Examination of the right eye was notable for scleral injection, proptosis, ptosis, and conjunctival arterialization or hyperemia ( and ). Proptosis of the right eye is better visualized from above . Extraocular movements were intact, and visual fields were normal. There were no additional cranial nerve deficits, ocular palsies, or facial numbness; and the patient was otherwise neurologically intact throughout. A computed tomography without contrast of the brain revealed mild involutional changes and mild periventricular hypodensities. Asymmetric enlargement of the right superior ophthalmic vein, fat stranding of the right orbit, proptosis of the right globe, and prominence of the right extraocular muscles were also appreciated. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography revealed the right middle meningeal artery merging into the right cavernous sinus, consistent with a cavernous carotid fistula (CCF).