A 34-year-old male presented with episodic pain in the right upper abdomen that commenced before a week. The pain episodes lasted for 2–3 h each time, without an identifiable cause. The patient had not sought medical attention initially, but after 5 days, the abdominal pain became continuous and unbearable. He did not experience fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, or jaundice.
During the physical examination, mild tenderness was observed in the right upper abdomen, with no yellowing of the skin or sclera. There was no rebound tenderness, and Murphy’s sign was negative.
Laboratory tests revealed the levels of white blood cell count, the absolute eosinophil count (AEC)，the eosinophil percentage and the absolute monocyte count were elevated, respectively measured at 10.5 × 109/L, 2.3 × 109/L, 21.90%, and 0.79 × 109/L. γ-glutamyltransferase was found to be elevated at 159.50 U/L, and the level of the tumor marker carbohydrate antigen (CA)125 was observed to be elevated, measured at 110.10 U/mL. Hepatitis B tests showed positive results for HBsAg, HBeAb, HBcAb, and Pre-S1. And other tests showed negative results for AMA, ANA, and IgG4.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen revealed the presence of multiple lesions in the longitudinal fissure of the liver, hepatic hilum and omentum .
After a multidisciplinary team discussion at our hospital, the patient was diagnosed with biliary tract obstruction caused by bile duct inflammation.
In consideration of bile duct inflammation, the patient received cefotaxime sodium (1 g, twice daily, intravenous drip), entecavir capsules (0.5 mg, once daily, orally), and ornidazole sodium chloride injection (0.5 g/100 mL, every 12 h, intravenous drip) for antiviral and anti-inflammatory treatment. After 6 days of anti-inflammatory treatment, there was a slight improvement in right upper abdominal distension and pain. Follow-up blood tests showed elevated white blood cell count, AEC, eosinophil percentage, and absolute monocyte count, respectively measured at 9.96 × 109/L, 3.06 × 109/L, 30.70%, and 0.73 × 109/L. The level of C-reactive protein was found to be elevated, measured at 24.51 mg/L. The inflammatory areas showed enlargement, and intrahepatic bile duct dilation worsened .
The patient was discharged from the hospital after experiencing an improvement in symptoms. A month later, he returned for routine blood tests and repeat MRI examination of the upper abdomen. The eosinophil percentage was found to be elevated, measured at 19.20%. While the original biliary duct lesions had decreased in size, new lesions with a migratory sign were observed on the upper abdominal MRI . The medical team suggested diagnostic glucocorticosteroid pulse therapy or needle biopsy, but the patient declined these options and instead opted for a laparoscopic left-lateral hepatic lobectomy. The postoperative pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of EC . The AEC level was measured at 0.28 × 109/L 1 month post-operation and subsequently decreased to 0.09 × 109/L after 1 year.