A 31-year-old man living with HIV/AIDS who had not been taking antiretroviral therapy (ART) for several months presented to the Emergency Department with a chief complaint of one month of diarrhea and with recent onset of fevers. He reported at least five liquid, nonbloody bowel movements per day and had measured temperatures as high as 103oF. He also complained of headache, but denied focal neurological or respiratory symptoms. He was febrile to 38.2oC on presentation, for which he was started on empiric antibiotics. The presenting CD4 T-cell count was 71 cells/uL (6.2%), and the HIV viral load was 3,194,949 copies/mL. A broad diagnostic workup for opportunistic infections was sent; serum CrAg by LFA was reported as negative. Lumbar puncture was initially delayed due to patient hesitancy, however ultimately cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed 4 white blood cells/mcl (normal: 0–5 cells/mcl), protein 23 mg/dl (normal: 10–45 mg/dL), and glucose 45 mg/dl (normal: 40–70 mg/dL). India Ink testing revealed encapsulated budding yeast, and CSF CrAg LFA (IMMY Inc., Norman, OK, USA) was positive at a titer of 1:40. Liposomal amphotericin and oral flucytosine were initiated on day 2 of admission for treatment of cryptococcal meningitis once CSF results were available. Blood and CSF cultures eventually grew Cryptococcus neoformans. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed for evaluation of diarrhea and showed pale-appearing but otherwise normal mucosa; random biopsies were taken. Colonoscopy was also performed and revealed multiple small mucosal papules in the sigmoid colon, which were biopsied. Tissue samples from all biopsy specimens showed yeast with clear halos within the lamina propria accompanied by a histiocytic cell reaction; the halos were highlighted on mucicarmine stain, suggesting a mucopolysaccharide capsule and confirming a diagnosis of gastrointestinal cryptococcosis .
The degree of fungal burden and disseminated involvement prompted reconsideration of the initial negative serum CrAg testing. This concern was communicated with the clinical laboratory, and upon re-evaluation of the initial sample a questionable faint positive result was noted. The sample was then diluted 1:160 with a more overt positive result. A final reported titer of 1:2,560 confirmed the postzone phenomenon .
The patient’s clinical status improved and CSF cultures on antifungal induction therapy. He was subsequently transitioned to fluconazole for consolidation. He initiated ART and established care with the outpatient HIV clinic locally upon discharge. At follow up 3 months later, he was doing well with significant improvement in HIV viral load to 115 copies/mL as well as resolution of fever, headaches, and GI symptoms.