An 18-month-old male presented with a complaint of gait disturbance due to progressive loss of strength in both legs. On neurological examination, paraparesis, slightly increased deep tendon reflexes in the lower extremities, bilateral positive Babinski signs, and clonus were observed. Spinal computed tomography (CT) scan showed the total collapse of T3 vertebral body . Magnetic resonance imaging of the spine revealed that collapsed body of T3 vertebra surrounding by enhancing lesion compressing the spinal cord anteriorly with uninvolved adjacent disc spaces . Following the intubation of the patient, neuromonitoring modalities including somatosensory-evoked potential, motor-evoked potential, and electromyogram were placed. Then, the patient placed in the prone position and the head was fixed in a clamp. The cervical spine maintained in a neutral position. Pathological level was identified using C-arm fluoroscopy and T1-T5 segments were marked. After image acquisition, a midline skin incision was performed with a T-shape over the left third rib. Fascia was divided and paraspinal muscles were dissected. The muscles are then elevated off over the transverse processes and ribs to expose the costotransverse articulations. Under an operative microscope, T2-3-4 total laminectomy and then left T3-4 costotransversectomy were performed by bone-cutting device (Piezo Surgystar®, Dmetec Piezo Bone Surgery, South Korea) [, and ]. Dirty gray-colored tumor tissue that destructed the corpus of T3 vertebra but was not invaded into the dura was encountered . Total T3 corpectomy, two-level discectomy, and gross total excision of tumor were performed via left posterolateral approach under the microscope [ and ]. End plates were preserved. Anterior longitudinal ligament was seen as the ventral limit of corpectomy. Decompression of spinal cord and nerve roots was observed. T2-4 interbody fusion was performed with corpectomy cage placement and stabilized with a screw-rod fixation system under fluoroscopic guidance. Total excision was achieved with no additional neurological deficits in the postoperative period. Frozen section was reported to be compatible with LCH. The patient was discharged with a cervicothoracic rigid brace and approximately 20% strength regain in the lower extremities in the early postoperative period. Full neurological recovery was achieved 3 weeks after the surgery. Histopathologic examination revealed diffuse infiltration of histiocytic cells with eosinophils and lymphocytes. The histiocytic cells had irregularly folded vesicular nucleus and large eosinophilic cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for S100, CD1a, and langerin .