A 17-year-old girl experienced two loss of consciousness in September 2019, followed by progressive mood changes, irritability and a decline in her academic performance. In December 2019, she developed involuntary jerks in her upper limbs, widespread stiffness with abnormal limb postures, progressive decline in functional abilities, with the need of assistance to get dressed and climb stairs. She soon developed daily crying jags and insomnia. Her menstrual cycle was altered and amenorrhoea occurred.
Following this, she experienced a rapid decrease of visual acuity and was no longer able to read. At our first evaluation, in January 2020, we observed cognitive slowing, speech impoverishment, motor impairment and gait unsteadiness. She needed help when walking and changing position. Spasticity of the upper limbs, more severe in the right arm, cervical dystonia and dystonic posturing of right limb were present. Myoclonic jerks involving arms, especially the right one, occurred at regular intervals.
Oligoclonal bands type III on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and increased anti-measles IgG antibody titre in CSF (10 589 UI) and serum (22 038 UI), were found. PCR for measles was negative in CSF, serum and nasopharyngeal swab.
The mother revealed that the patient had contracted measles infection at 2 months old, before the age of mandatory vaccination.
The EEG showed the characteristic periodic Radermecker complexes, in 1:1 relation with the myoclonic jerks. During sleep, Radermecker complexes were always present, but the associated jerks disappeared.
The patient underwent a brain MR examination with a 1.5-Tesla system, which revealed the presence of T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) asymmetrical, confluent white matter hyperintensities with high signal on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps of diffusion-weighted images sequence involving both parietal lobes and the splenium of corpus callosum. A focal lesion characterised by diffusion restriction was detected in the left putamen. No contrast enhancement was seen. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy in the white matter of the right parietal lobe showed decreased N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA) with substantially normal Choline/Creatine (Cho/Cr) ratio.
Based on clinical history, neurological examination, EEG, MR images and anti-measles IgG antibody titres, the patient was diagnosed with SSPE.
Symptomatic treatment of the myoclonic jerks was attempted with administration of piracetam, levetiracetam, valproate, clonazepam, lacosamide and lamotrigine, all without clear effects.
Beneficial, although transient, effect on the intensity of jerks was observed with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Cervical dystonia was treated with three botulinum neurotoxin injection sessions, in association with pharmacological treatment with trihexyphenidyl.
Antiviral therapy with methisoprinol 3000 mg/die and ribavirin 800 mg/die was immediately started after diagnosis, without significant results.
In absence of any clinical improvement, at the end of February 2020, a normocaloric 3:1 ketogenic diet was started, with rapid induction through fasting and subsequent switch to 4:1 ketogenic ratio after 1 month. All the administered drugs were in sugar-free formulation. At the end of April, medium chain triglyceride oil was added (30 mL/die). Thereafter, the patient achieved stable levels of capillary β-hydroxybutyrate (3.8–4.6 mmol/L).
Dietary treatment was well tolerated and no side effects were observed, except for reduction of 11 kg in body weight, before stabilisation. Although globally reduced, the myoclonic jerks became prevalent in the right arm.
In May, after three administrations of steroids for retinal angiography, blood ketone level decreased to 1.8 mmol/L, with severe worsening of motor and behavioural symptoms.
A month later, ketosis reached stable levels of 4.5–5 mmol/L, with progressive improvement of cognitive and motor functions.
After 1 year, the myoclonic jerks are still present especially in the upper left limb and inferior right limb, but they appear reduced in amplitude and frequency. Dystonic posturing is no longer present.
The patient is now able to dress and wash herself, walk and climb stairs without aid. Cognitive performance has improved and she is now able to read, follow classes and use a smartphone and notebook. Irritability and crying jags are now infrequent. Sleep quality has improved, insomnia has disappeared and night arm stiffness has been reduced. Finally, a regular menstrual cycle has resumed.
The patient underwent five additional MR examinations: basal and 21, 38, 69 and 219 days after the first observation.
In April 2020, a small focal lesion appeared in the right putaminal nucleus while the left putaminal lesion resulted more hyperintense in T2W and FLAIR sequences.
For each brain MR examination, we have also calculated an ADC ratio of the white matter of the right parietal lobe using the homolateral frontal horn of the lateral ventricle as internal reference, with the following results in the five consecutive MR sessions: 0.37 – 0.39 – 0.41 – 0.48 – 0.42.