A 33 year old previously healthy Sri Lankan, Sinhalese female, from the southern part of the country, who was on the post partum day 6, following an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery via an elective caesarian section, presented with acute breathlessness of Medical Research Council (MRC) dyspnoea scale grade 4, for 1 day duration, which was associated with a non productive cough for 3 days. She did not give a history of orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea or chest pain. She had an episode of low grade fever on post partum day 1, which settled spontaneously within 24 h. There was no fever on the day of admission. The rest of systemic inquiry was unremarkable. She works as a clerk in the local divisional secretariat and her work involves field visits to the paddy fields and farms with exposure to surface water and mud. On examination, she was overweight with body mass index (BMI) of 28 kg/m2. She was afebrile, and was neither pale, nor icteric. She had bilateral symmetrical mild, pitting lower limb oedema without signs of inflammation. She was in respiratory distress with dyspnoea at rest and tachypnoea. There were occasional coarse crepitations in the right lower zone. Her pulse rate was 130 per minute and blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg on admission. Her jugular venous pressure was not elevated. She had no organomegaly and her neurological examination including fundi was normal.
She developed type I respiratory failure within few hours of admission, needing invasive mechanical ventilation. Her chest x-ray on admission revealed slight obliteration of medial half of the right diaphragmatic border, suggestive of right lower lobe consolidation . Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia and two dimensional echocardiogram revealed mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension with ejection fraction 60%. Haemoglobin was 10.2 g/dl, and she had a high total white blood cell (WBC) count of 11,000/µl with neutrophilic leukocytosis of 90.6%. She had thrombocytopenia since admission with a platelet count of 74,000/µl. Her C reactive protein (CRP) was 96 mg/l and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) 100 mm in the 1st h. Her D-dimer level was slightly elevated at 4.8 mg/l (< 0.2 mg/l). The blood picture on admission showed normochromic normocytic red cells without fragmentation or polychromasia, mild neutrophilic leukocytosis with left shift and moderate thrombocytopenia, which was suggestive of sepsis. Her blood sugar was normal (80 mg/dl).
Other initial investigations are summarized in Table . Based on these investigations, our initial differential diagnoses were severe pneumonia and acute pulmonary embolism. Her lower limb venous Doppler was negative for venous thrombi. Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) excluded pulmonary embolism. High resolution contrast tomography (HRCT) chest showed inhomogeneous, ground glass opacities throughout bilateral lung fields with consolidation in the right middle lobe, superior segment of left lower lobe and posterior segment of right upper lobe .
The patient was started on broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g 12 hourly and clarythromycin 500 mg 12 hourly). Despite antibiotics, she developed high grade fever from day 2 of admission. Chest radiograph on day 3 showed bilateral multi lobar consolidation . Abdominal ultrasonography revealed evidence of bilateral pyelonephritis with multiple abscesses in both kidneys.
While her sputum culture isolated a moderate growth of Coliform species, blood and urine cultures yielded negative results. Broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) culture done on day 5 was positive for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, which was confirmed via Analytical profile index 20E. This is a gram negative bacterium known to colonize the respiratory tract in hospitalized or ventilated patients, rather than cause infection. BALF culture was negative for fungi and mycobacteria. PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis in BALF was also negative. Her retroviral screening, venereal disease research laboratory test, Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay, Influenza A & B real time PCR assay, as well as autoimmune panel including Anti nuclear factor, Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and Rheumatoid factor were negative.
Despite antibiotics, patient continued to have high fever and developed left side focal seizures on the sixth day after admission. Her haemoglobin dropped to 7.3 g/dl and the platelet count dropped to 47,000/µl. The blood picture revealed evidence of microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia (MAHA), together with raised serum Lactate dehydrogenase levels of 1240 µ/l and normal coagulation profile. Other investigations on day 6 are summarized in Table . As the patient was not stable enough to undergo Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain, a non contrast CT (NCCT) brain was done on the same day and it did not reveal any mass effects suggestive of cerebral abscesses. Based on these findings, a presumptive diagnosis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) was made and the patient was commenced on plasmapheresis. ADAMTS 13 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type I, domain 13) assay was not done as it was not immediately available in our low resource setting. Following two cycles of plasmapheresis, patient’s neurological and haematological parameters improved, but the fever was still persisting with worsening chest x ray findings and renal abscess size. Contrast enhanced CT (CECT) abdomen revealed bilateral pyelonephritis with right upper pole renal abscess of 1.6 cm in diameter, early abscess formation in left lower pole and was negative for abscesses elsewhere or lymphadenopathy .
Since there was a suggestive occupational history with multi-organ involvement and abscess formation, with poor response to initial broad spectrum antibiotics, melioidosis was suspected and antibody level was requested. Melioidosis antibody, which was measured by indirect haemagglutination, was highly positive with a titer of 1:2560. Based on the suggestive clinical features, exposure history and highly positive antibody titer, the patient was diagnosed to have melioidosis with severe pneumonia and bilateral pyelonephritis with renal abscess formation, complicated with TTP and severe sepsis.
Intravenous meropenem 2 g 6 hourly and oral co-trimoxazole 1920 mg 12 hourly was started on day 7, following which, the patient demonstrated a dramatic clinical response, with fever settling within 48 h and gradual radiographic resolution. She was extubated on day 17. MRI of brain which was done following extubation was negative for cerebral abscesses but revealed extensive cerebral petechial haemorrhages with white matter oedema . This was likely to be due to a consequence of co-existing TTP and thrombotic microangiopathy.
After continuing meropenem for 21 days, the patient was discharged on co-trimoxazole (1920 mg 12 hourly) to be taken up to 3 months. She was advised to refrain from breast feeding until the treatment is complete. The recovery was uncomplicated and she showed remarkable improvement in the follow up visits. After 4 weeks of treatment, melioidosis antibody titer reduced to 1:320, and the antibody was absent in the baby.