A 26-year-old male ex-Olympic gymnast and gymnastics coach presented to our emergency department with bilateral knee pain and inability to straight leg raise secondary to jumping from the roof of his single story home, where his legs gave way after he landed on his feet. This is in the context of landing a jump vault and hearing a “popping sound” and sudden onset pain from his knees bilaterally 3 days prior. He had a background of chronic patellar tendonitis and a repair of his left patellar tendon for partial rupture 9 years previously. The patient was otherwise well and taking no regular medications. Physical examination revealed bilateral patella alta with a palpable defect superior to the tibial tuberosity; there were no significant joint effusions .
Xray demonstrated high riding patella bilaterally. The diagnosis was confirmed on ultrasound, with the right proximal insertional fibres ruptured and 1.5 cm retraction . The right distal tibial insertion was intact. The left had a similar appearance with some calcified areas on the retracted fibres, which were believed to represent chronic calcification and/or avulsion fragments.
The patient was consented for a bilateral patellar tendon reconstruction rather than a primary repair due to the poor quality of the tendons. Autograft was not considered as the injury was bilateral and due to the volume of remaining tendon fibres. The aim being to return him to his elite gymnastics as soon as possible. Surgery was performed by the senior author (PT).
Bilateral midline incisions were made over both knees, the operative findings confirmed the sonographic diagnosis. The reconstruction was performed using a ‘figure 8’ pattern through a transverse patellar tunnel with screw fixation to two tibial tunnels. The knee was placed at 90° of flexion prior to tensioning of the ligaments. The remnants of the patella tendon where sutured to the LARS ligaments using a braided, absorbable suture. The patella tendon was repaired using 2x corkscrew anchors (medial and lateral). The wound was closed in layers achieving meticulous haemostasis .
Post-operative Xrays indicated adequate screw and tibial tunnel placement . The patient was allowed to weight bear as tolerated and placed in extension knee splints for 2 weeks to minimize the chance of wound dehiscence. Rehabilitation with physiotherapy started on day 1 focusing initially on passive range of motion (ROM) exercises then on extensor and quadriceps strength.
At the two-week wound review post-operatively the patient still had some ongoing pain and swelling after bending the knees, however there were no signs of wound infection. The ROM of the right knee was 0-85° and the left 0-45°. At this appointment the patient was able to complete a straight leg raise bilaterally indicating an intact extensor mechanism. Two months post-operatively ROM was 0-125° bilaterally with no reported complications. At four months his ROM had improved to 0-130°.
At four years post-operatively, the patient is running a gymnastics club and actively coaching young gymnasts. He still experiences mild discomfort on descending stairs if carrying heavy loads but is otherwise painfree. He has not returned to training for competitive gymnastics. The patient claims he could return to some of the gymnastics skills but would struggle with vault and floor exercises secondary to lack of training. His Tegner Lysholm Knee score is 80, Modified Cincinatti rating score is 77 and Mohtadi-QOL Knee score is 58. Physical examination demonstrates well healed scars, no ligamentous instability or pain on palpation of the patellar tendon and bilateral ROM from 0-130° .