A 47-year-old female with a medical history of hypothyroidism presented in 2016 with months of pain radiating from the posterior mid-thoracic region to the right scapular area and the anterior portion of the right side of the chest. She also experienced right lower extremity paresthesias without complaints of weakness in her extremities. The patient described her pain as a burning-like quality. Her physical examination was unrevealing with full motor strength in her extremities. The initial workup, including a chest X-ray and mammogram, was negative.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine without contrast revealed a spinal cord tumor extending from the superior endplate of T4 to the inferior endplate of T5. There was a considerable enlargement of the spinal cord; the spinal cord with the tumor measured approximately 11 mm in the anterior-posterior dimension and 15 mm in the coronal plane. The imaging findings were concerning for a primary spinal cord neoplasm, such as an ependymoma or astrocytoma . The MRI did not show any evidence of edema or syrinx formation. A gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the thoracic spine better delineated an IMSCT partially enhancing lesion centered at T4–5 . Additional MRIs of the complete neuroaxis were negative for additional lesions.
The patient was taken to the operating room for tissue diagnosis 1 month after the presentation in 2016. The neurosurgical team performed a T3–6 bilateral laminectomy. Neural monitoring, including motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) and somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs), was used during the case. After the thoracic laminectomies, the tumor could be seen through the dura. The IMSCT caused the spinal cord to look severely swollen. After the dural opening, the tumor was noted to be localized to the left side of the spinal cord, more lateral than had been anticipated based on previous imaging. A paramedian myelotomy was performed in a surgical plane between the tumor and the spinal cord, and several tumor biopsy specimens were taken.
The neuropathology team concluded that the specimen could only be termed “abnormal tissue,” with no other absolute findings for a specific pathology. After the biopsy specimens had been taken, there was a temporary, intermittent decrease in amplitude in the left tibial MEP and a temporary decrease in SSEP signals on the patient’s left side. Due to this decrease in neural monitoring signals, the surgical team decided not to take additional specimens and concluded the operation. The final pathology of the surgical specimens was non-diagnostic. There was evidence of Rosenthal fibers; however, BRAF mutation was absent. After a careful review of the case at the Texas Medical Center multi-institutional Neuropathology consensus conference by multiple-board certified neuropathologists, it was decided not to send the tumor biopsy to another institution.
Despite the nondiagnostic final pathology from the thoracic spinal cord lesion, the patient received radiation therapy (a total dose of 54 Gray in 27 fractions) and chemotherapy consisting of four doses of bevacizumab and six cycles of temozolomide at 150 mg/m2 for 5 days every month. Her motor examination continued to remain stable after surgery. In postoperative year 1, a gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the thoracic spine showed possible pseudo-progression . The patient and the treatment team decided to continue the patient on her chemotherapy regimen. An 18-month postoperative MRI showed slight enlargement of an intratumoral cyst, which was likely a treatment effect of the radiation therapy .
At 20 months post-surgery, the patient complained of new lower extremity paresthesias in a contrasting distribution from her initial presentation. Another gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the thoracic spine showed a large, enhancing nodule superior to the cystic portion of the tumor . At this point, the patient restarted her bevacizumab regimen and was given six additional cycles of temozolomide treatment. Another biopsy was discussed; however, it was decided that another operation would be risky given the loss in neural monitoring signals and lack of positive pathology results from the last operation. The patient was followed clinically and radiographically with serial imaging.
A 2-year postoperative MRI showed a reduction in the size of the cystic component of the tumor; however, a 3-year postoperative MRI showed progression of the thoracic tumor superiorly with extension to the C7-T1 level . A gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the neuroaxis showed cervical extension of the disease up to the level of the clinoid and multiple enhancing lesions in the lumbosacral spine concerning metastases .
Subsequently, the patient underwent a fluoroscopic-guided biopsy of the L4 vertebral body . The pathology [-] showed foci of glial tissue within the bone and marrow space, confirmed with GFAP immunohistochemical stain. The glial tissue was hypercellular and composed of ovoid cells with mild nuclear pleomorphism. There was also hemosiderin present within the glial tissue, suggestive of chronic bleeding. Additional immunohistochemical stains to better characterize the glial tissue, including IDH1 (R132H) mutation for glial tumor confirmation, ATRX expression loss for definitive astrocytic differentiation, and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (perinuclear dot-like staining) for ependymal differentiation, were negative.
The patient underwent palliative radiation of 37.5–45 Gy in 15 fractions to the cervical and lumbar spine. The patient continued to have difficulty ambulating. Her neurologic examination worsened to a motor strength of 2/5 in her lower extremities and to complete loss of her bowel and bladder sensation. After a lengthy discussion, the patient and her family decided to proceed with hospice care.