A 64-year-old Saudi woman with known hypertension and dyslipidemia, who underwent regular breast screening (mammogram), presented to our hospital following the detection of an interval development of a suspicious grouped microcalcification in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast on the mammogram. Risk assessment placed the microcalcification at Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) 4C . She denied any history of palpable mass or changes to the nipples or skin. The results of the breast examination were within the normal range. A complementary breast ultrasonography (US) showed grouped microcalcification with no definite mass, BI-RADS 4C. Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed non mass-like clumped progressive enhancement corresponding to the mammogram findings of grouped microcalcification, BI-RADS 4C . US-guided core needle biopsy revealed focal adenosis and microcalcification, stromal fibrosis, with no malignancy. Due to the high suspicion of malignancy, the breast surgery team elected to excise the lesion and the patient underwent US-guided wire localization and wide local excision under general anesthesia.
The specimen was sent to the pathology lab as a breast lump with wire-guided localization, measuring 4.7 × 3 × 1 cm. The specimen was inked. Sectioning of the tissue revealed white-yellow homogenous cut surface with no definite masses or nodules. All of the tissue was formalin-fixed (10%) and embedded in paraffin for sectioning. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for histological examination along with immunohistochemistry and special stains. Microscopic study of the section revealed fibroadipose tissue with small-circumscribed nodule, about 0.7 cm in diameter , that was formed of proliferating epithelial and myoepithelial cells . Lobules of glands with tall-lining epithelium surrounded by myoepithelial cells were present. Areas of apocrine, squamous, and sebaceous metaplasia were present together with mucin-producing cells . Complementary immunohistochemistry studies revealed p63, calponin, and cytokeratin 5/6, demonstrating the positive reactivity of the myoepithelial component of the AME. Mucicarmine stain highlighted the cytoplasmic mucin . The pathological diagnosis was breast adenomyoepithelioma with mucoepidermoid/divergent differentiation, with no evidence of malignancy. The patient recovered uneventfully after the operation. A follow-up mammogram and US nine months after the procedure showed no evidence of recurrence. At about two years after the operation, a clinical follow-up conducted outside of our hospital noted the development of ductal carcinoma in situ in the same breast.