A 2 years old caucasian female was admitted to the emergency room of our Hospital because of acute onset, left hemiparesis and persistent weakness. Five days earlier she had developed an angina, dry cough associated to high fever (39.5 C°). The clinical examination showed an awake and nervous child with an increased heartbeat and respiratory frequency, weakness of left face, arm, and leg with hypertonia (left spastic hemiparesis) and impaired speech. Upon admission, blood examinations showed leukocyte count (2820/mm3). C Reactive Protein, electrocardiogram, chest X-Ray, and computed tomography of the brain without contrast, were all normal. Electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed moderate slow anomalies in the right cerebral hemisphere. Early lumbar puncture highlighted an increased dropflow speed. The CSF samples were normal, but virological examinations showed the positivity of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for EBV infection, along with the presence of EBV RNA copies (> 800 copies/mL). Pharyngeal swab culture confirmed an infection of EBV, which was identified through PCR. Moreover, in order to measure interleukin levels, CSF samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000 rpm and the supernatants were immediately stored at –70 °C up until their analysis. As controls, we used CSF samples collected from 5 children, age related to the EBV patient, with a diagnosis of head injury (2 patients) and viral meningoencephalitis (3 patients), who had had an ischemic stroke as a complication of their condition. IL-1β and IL-6 were measured using commercial immunoenzymatic kits (Human Quantikine by R&D Systems). In the EBV patient, we found significantly (p<0.001) higher levels of IL-6 (135.5 pg/mL) and IL-1β (20.2 pg/mL) compared to the controls (-). After the results of the lumbar puncture, a supportive treatment was started in the child with EBV. Two days after the admission, a first magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a massive ischemic area in the right parietotemporal region, along with lateral ventricular compression . Magnetic resonance angiography highlighted a focal occlusion in the origin of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA), with a lack of terminal arteries representation right after the trifurcation . Treatment with mannitol and aspirin was started. Biochemical examinations, homocysteine, coagulation tests and auto-immunity screenings (ANA, anti-ds DNA, anti-ANCA) were negative. Screenings for thrombophilia showed normal values of Protein C (73% with normal range 70-140%) and Protein S (62% with normal range 54-110%) activity. Factor VIII was 140% (normal range 70-140%). Factor V-Leiden, PT mutation G20210, Lupus Lyke Anti-Coagulant, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-protrombin antibodies, and anti β2glicoprotein antibodies were negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram and doppler sonography of cervical vessels were also negative. Microbiological serology for Varicella zoster virus (VZV), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), H1N1, Herpes simplex virus (HSV), Mycoplasma, Borrelia, Rickettsie, Coxsackie, Influenza B, Parainfluenza 1,2,3, Echovirus, Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and Adenovirus were either negative, or showed a previous contact. Eighteen days after, a follow-up MRI highlighted an evolution towards a sub-acute phase and showed a focal ischemic area in the cerebral peduncle that was missing in the previous MRI . A magnetic resonance angiography confirmed the focal occlusion of the right MCA origin and the lack of terminal arteries . Based on her clinical improvement, the patient was discharged after 23 days from the admission with a recommendation to continue the therapy with acetylsalicylic acid. One month later, Anticardiolipin antibodies, anti β2glicoprotein antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, anti-ANCA antibodies, IgG and IgM vs Borrelia burgdorferi, protein C and S activities, and coagulation tests results were in the normal range. A follow up EEG showed no changes. After 4 months from discharge, the brain MRI did not highlight any lesion evolution, while the left arm movement impairment persisted, along with a slight limp. The child’s speech was normal.