In August 2017, a 61-year old man with multiple cardiovascular risk factors – obesity (BMI 30.8 kg/m2), hypertension and hypercholesterolemia - underwent aortic valve replacement with a mechanical prosthetic valve for severe aortic stenosis. After surgery, the patient developed a persistent pericardial effusion and was discharged with steroidal therapy. Thereafter, the patient developed type 2 diabetes mellitus. Three months after surgery, the patient complained of exercise dyspnea with no clinical and laboratory signs of active infection. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed persistent pericardial effusion. In presence of post-pericardiotomy syndrome after cardiac surgery, an anti-inflammatory therapy with ibuprofen and colchicine was added on top of chronic steroidal therapy.
In February 2018, he was referred to our hospital for rapidly worsening dyspnoea and lower limb oedema despite pharmacologic therapy. The patient denied fever and had no signs of haemodynamic instability, but the jugular venous pressure was about 12 cm H2O. His pulmonary examination was remarkable due to a decrease in breath sounds in both lung bases. Laboratory studies revealed elevated inflammatory markers (White Blood cell Count (WBC) 13,226/mmc, C-Reactive Protein (CRP) 13.91 mg/dl, Procalcitonin (PCT) 1.5 ng/ml).
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a loculated pericardial effusion with signs of restrictive physiology, normal left ventricular function and no signs of valve dysfunction. Cardiac Computed Tomography (CT) confirmed the echocardiographic findings . To exclude an active infection, 18 F-labelled 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) was performed and revealed a selective hypercaptation of the tracer at the walls of the pericardial effusion (SUV max = 11) . Despite the selective cardiac hypercaptation on 18F-FDG PET/CT, urinary and blood cultures, abdominal ultrasound and pancolonscopy were performed and excluded other sources of infection.
Because of the location of the pericardial effusion, video-assisted thoracic surgery pericardial drainage was planned. During the procedure, pleural empyema and a pericardial abscess were revealed, so a conversion to a mini-thoracotomy approach was necessary in order to perform pericardiotomy and pleural decortication. After broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, an amoxicillin-sensitive E. coli was isolated from the pericardial fluid, so targeted intravenous antibiotics were continued for 2 weeks. The patient was discharged with oral amoxicillin/clavulanate therapy aiming to complete a 4-week therapy.
In April 2018, the patient presented to the emergency department complaining of a high fever, worsening dyspnoea and lower limb oedema. An urgent CT scan revealed a paracardiac egg-shaped fluid collection . Laboratory tests only showed a mild elevation of inflammatory markers (WBC 11.780/mmc, CRP 5.1 mg/dl, PCT 0.4 ng/ml). Empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy and high dose diuretic therapy were started, and the patient was transferred to the Cardiology Department.
The echocardiogram showed a left postero-lateral fluid collection, without diffuse pericardial effusion. Cardiac magnetic resonance confirmed a non-homogeneous fluid collection, thick walls picking up contrast medium and septal bounce. An 18F-FDG PET/CT revealed a persistence of tracer hypercaptation in the left paracardiac position (SUV 9.6 max) .
Due to the persistence of haemodynamic impairment, the patient underwent surgical excision of the pericardial abscess and partial pericardiectomy through a sternotomy approach. As shown in Fig. a the histological analysis demonstrated an underlying chronical inflammation process with fibrosis and mesothelial hyperplasia and inflammatory infiltrate rich in macrophages . In the absence of microbial growth at microbiological exams, E. coli targeted intravenous antibiotic therapy was continued.
In considerations of the persistence of fluid overload and the new onset of signs of pericardial constriction at echocardiograms, high dose diuretic treatment and colchicine were successfully administered.
The patient was discharged home with long-term oral antibiotic therapy and colchicine.
At the 6- and 12-month evaluations, the patient was asymptomatic, without any symptoms of fluid overload or echocardiographic signs of constrictive physiology. A 6-month CT scan revealed the persistence of mild diffuse pericardial effusion without any sign of pericardial abscess . A 12-month 18-FDG-PET did not show any hypercaptation of the tracer in the cardiac area .