In March 2022, a 63-year-old man without notable past medical history presented with rapidly progressive exertional dyspnea associated with night sweats. The electrocardiogram revealed complete atrioventricular block (AVB) with a heart rate of 40 beats per minutes and narrow QRS complexes. Lab tests showed anemia with hemoglobin at 9 g/dl, normal renal function and a biological inflammatory syndrome with CRP at 181 mg/L (normal upper limit: 4 mg/L) and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with Isoprenaline infusion. The initial workup included a bedside transthoracic echocardiography, which revealed a heterogeneous left atrial mass, measured at 50 × 60 mm, infiltrating the inter-atrial septum with an extension into the right atrium measured at 43 × 26 mm. This mass seemed to be implanted in the lateral wall of the left atrium and prolapsed into the mitral valve causing moderate mitral regurgitation and significant mitral stenosis with a mean gradient ranging from 7 to 14 mmHg. Then, a thoracic, abdominal and pelvic CT scan was performed and showed the cardiac mass associated with a mild pericardial effusion, hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and bilateral moderate pleural effusion . The workup was completed by a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) study to better characterize the mass. CMR confirmed the presence of a bulky mass with a “cauliflower” appearance, extending throughout the entire left atrium, infiltrating the interatrial septum and the right atrium as well as the basal inferior and inferolateral walls of the left ventricle . This mass appeared isointense on black blood spin echo T1-weighted imaging, slightly hyperintense on fat saturated T2-weighted imaging with a heterogeneous enhancement on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) sequences , suggestive of a malignant tumor. In order to distinguish between cardiac lymphoma or sarcoma, for which initial treatments are diametrically opposed (i.e., urgent chemotherapy vs. surgical resection) , a myocardial biopsy guided by transesophageal echocardiography was performed. Four endomyocardial fragments were collected from the right atrial side of the interatrial septum via a femoral venous access. Given the persistence of complete AVB at day 7, a VVI single lead transvenous pacemaker was implanted. Prompt pathological analysis revealed the presence of a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma classified as germinal center B cell type (CD10+, BCL6+, MUM1+), with a double expression of MYC/BCL2 . Urgent treatment was initiated as soon as the pathology results were obtained, 10 days after the biopsy, with corticosteroids (1 mg/kg) associated with chemotherapy including rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP). Six cycles of R-CHOP were completed within 6 months, allowing a clear improvement of the dyspnea and of the overall condition. CT-scan after the fourth cycle of R-CHOP showed complete remission of the lymphoma . After setting the MR conditional pacemaker to DOO mode, follow-up CMR revealed complete disappearance of the cardiac mass . Because the patient was in spontaneous sinus rhythm at the last visit and the stimulation rate dropped from 100% to 26% after the third R-CHOP cycle, an evaluation by the cardiac electrophysiologist was scheduled 3 months later to assess the percentage of RV pacing for possible pacemaker removal. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.