A 53-year-old man without respiratory symptoms had undergone chest computed tomography (CT) during a routine physical examination 8 months prior, revealing multiple ground glass opacities (GGOs) in the bilateral lungs. Considering the endemicity of tuberculosis in China he was empirically treated with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol (HRZE) at a local hospital. However, no radiologic improvement occurred, and bronchoscopy showed no special abnormalities after 6 months of anti-tuberculosis treatment. Additionally, bronchoscopy showed no abnormalities except for left upper lobe bronchial mucosa congestion at the local hospital. After one month of anti-infective treatment with roxithromycin at another hospital, the radiological changes were still not improved. Thus, the patient was referred to our department for further diagnosis and treatment. In addition to a history of hypertension, he had neither a history of other diseases nor a family history of diseases. The patient worked in a woolen mill with a history of dust exposure. No special abnormality was found on physical examination.
Positron emission computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed, which showed multiple subependymal calcified nodules in bilateral ventricles ; diffuse ground-glass density nodules throughout the lung fields, particularly in the middle and upper lungs, with no significant increase in FDG metabolism ; multiple low-density shadows containing fat density in the liver without an increase in FDG metabolism ; multiple nodular dense shadows in the bone with some FDG metabolism slightly increased . According to the guidance of the radiology department, the above lesions were considered multiple organ involvement of TSC (e.g., brain, lung, liver, and bone), in which bilateral lung lesions were consistent with the imaging manifestations of MMPH. Additionally, the examination also revealed multiple cysts in both kidneys.
To further explore the nature of the nodules in the bilateral lungs, a lung biopsy was performed with the consent of the family. Two wedge-shaped resection specimens of the right upper lung and right lower lung were sent for examination during the operation. In the section of the specimen, more than 10 scattered gray-white and gray-yellow nodules were observed with the naked eyes, the diameter of which was 0.2–0.7 cm. Microscopically, the alveolar epithelium in the diseased region proliferated actively. Additionally, some of them grew like spikes attached to the wall, many tissue cells gathered in the alveolar cavity, and widening of the alveolar space was observed in some nodules, with fibrous tissue hyperplasia and scattered lymphocyte infiltration . Immunohistochemistry showed TTF-1 (+), p53 (scattered+, wild type), ki-67 (individual+), and CD68 (tissue cells in alveolar cavity++) in the alveolar epithelium, elastic fiber staining showed elastic fiber hyperplasia in some nodules, and the lesion did not involve the pulmonary membrane .
Because MMPH is extremely rare and its cell morphology is difficult to differentiate from lung AAH, AIS and even MIA, further genetic tests were performed to identify MMPH. Molecular pathology showed no mutations in ALK, ROS1, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, HER2, RET, or EGFR. The pathological results were consistent with the histological characteristics of MMPH. According to the relevant literature , MMPH is rare and occurs mostly in patients with TSC. Additionally, most patients have typical clinical features of TSC; however, the clinical manifestations of TSC in this patient were insufficient, and no typical Vogt’s triad was observed (epilepsy, mental retardation, sebaceous adenoma). According to the latest diagnostic criteria of TSC in 2012 , the patient met 1 major criterion (subependymal nodules) and 1 minor criterion (multiple renal cysts) and met only the diagnostic criteria of a "possible diagnosis" in terms of the clinical diagnosis. To further confirm the diagnosis of TSC, TSC gene sequencing was performed. The nonsense mutation in exon 9 of the TSC1 gene (c.813T>A) resulted in the mutation of the 271st amino acid from tyrosine to terminator, and the premature terminator may cause nonsense-mediated mRNA degradation (NMD), resulting in the loss of protein expression . Accordingly, the patient was eventually diagnosed with MMPH secondary to TSC. Surprisingly, most patients with sporadic TSC had positive TSC2, and those with a family history of TSC had positive TSC1. However, the patient with no family history of TSC tested positive for TSC1. Because of economic conditions and time coordination, the relatives refused to perform TSC gene sequencing in the family.
Next, we followed up with the patient for up to three years. During this period, the patient showed no respiratory symptoms. Additionally, no significant change was found in the diffuse nodules of the bilateral lungs within 1 year . Cranial imaging showed multiple nodular low signals in the bilateral ventricular walls, consistent with tuberous sclerosis . In summary, the imaging signs tended to be stable during the one-year follow-up course of the patient.