A 50-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of abdominal distension. He also had lower urinary symptoms such as the sensation of incomplete voiding and increased frequency. He had no symptoms of bowel obstruction. Physical examination revealed a palpable mass occupying the lower abdomen up to the level of the navel, but there was no tenderness. Digital rectal examination revealed an elastic hard mass on the anterior side of the rectum without palpable intraluminal mass. Total colonoscopy showed no masses or stenosis in the rectum. We evaluated the urinary symptoms were due to the compression of the bladder by the tumor.
The results of laboratory tests were normal. Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was not available preoperatively. Urinalysis was normal, with no evidence of hematuria. Enhanced CT showed a large retroperitoneal mass measuring 30 cm in size with multiple septations surrounding the rectum and displacing the bladder, prostate, and seminal vesicle to the right anterior side . MRI showed a mass composed of cysts of various sizes ranging from smaller than 1 up to 6 cm and solid components. Whereas most cysts had simple fluid appearance (very high intensity on T2-weighted images), some showed the presence of layering which suggests the likelihood of either fat or blood in content . Several solid components which showed isointensity on T2-weighted images were enhanced on gadolinium-enhanced fat-saturated T1-weighted images . From these radiological findings, preoperative diagnosis was leiomyoma with cystic degeneration or perivascular epithelioid cell tumor . Biopsy of the mass was performed under CT guidance, and histology showed a spindle cell tumor. Immunohistochemically, preoperative biopsy of the tumor showed positive staining for SMA, desmin, and caldesmon while negative for S-100, HMB-45, and MDM2, indicating smooth muscle differentiation. Differential diagnosis of leiomyoma, low-grade leiomyosarcoma, and perivascular epithelioid cell tumor was made. We suspected the tumor originated from the smooth muscle of the bladder or deep soft tissue in the retroperitoneal space.
As the biopsy findings did not reveal obvious evidence of malignancy and because the outer wall of the tumor was relatively smooth, we chose to forego total pelvic exenteration and instead attempt complete macroscopic resection of the tumor with minimal combined resection of adjacent organs.
Laparotomy was performed through a midline incision, which revealed a huge mass from the pelvic floor up to the level of the navel . During exploration, the bilateral ureter was preserved but the vas deferens was resected. Because the plane of the interface between the bladder and tumor was unrecognizable, we injected air into the bladder and identified the border of the mass. We dissected the tumor, preserving the bladder and prostate with partial resection of the prostate. The tumor was not attached to the sacrum or levator ani and was mobilized from the pelvic floor. Because the tumor extended into the left pelvic sidewall and surrounded the rectum, we sacrificed the rectum as well as the left hypogastric nerve and left pelvic plexus. Finally, we performed a complete resection of the tumor with low anterior resection. Intraoperatively, the border between the tumor and normal prostate was not so clear.
The gross pathologic specimen was a 33 × 23 × 10 cm solid mass containing multilocular cavities. Sectioning revealed a multicystic cut surface , and blackish-brown intratumoral fluid was drained from the tumor. Histologically, the tumor was composed of variously sized dilated glandular structures lined by prostatic epithelia surrounded by fibromuscular stroma . Lesions of the well-developed, dilated prostate glands resembling prostatic hyperplasia were also evident . The cysts were lined by cuboidal to columnar secretory cells and basally located nuclei . Cytologically, we observed no atypical features or mitosis. Epithelial cells of the cysts and stromal glands were positive for PSA on immunohistochemical staining . The epithelium cells of the tumor were also positive for AR and NKX3.1 staining, indicating that the tumor originated from the prostate. The spindle cells seen on preoperative biopsy were thought to be stromal components of the tumor.
Final histology indicated a giant multilocular prostatic cystadenoma.
Postoperatively, whereas the patient developed a pelvic abscess due to urine leakage from the prostatic urethra, he recovered conservatively and was discharged on postoperative day 37. Since there is no positive evidence of adjuvant therapy of this prostatic cystadenoma, the patient is now under follow-up by blood tests and CT scan every 3–6 months.
At 2 months after surgery, the patient had a PSA of 0.365 ng/ml, which was within the normal ranges. Since then, we have observed no signs of tumor recurrence. The patient was completely asymptomatic at the 6-month follow-up visit and made a full recovery, with no complaints of any urinary disorders or sexual dysfunction.