The boy, aged 3 years and 10 months, was a full-term child with no history of asphyxia at birth. He was hospitalized in another hospital due to "severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia" as a newborn. Routine blood examination during this period showed Hb 129 g/L, HCT 39.2%, MCV 118.8 fl, MCH 39.1 pg, MCHC 329 g/L, and RET % 2.48%. The biochemistry revealed TB 516 µmol/L and IDIL 484 µmol/L. Finally, he was improved after blood exchange therapy. When he was 3 years old, he was found to have haemolytic anaemia (Hb 59 g/L, Ret% 11.3%, Ret 0.83*1012/L, TB 77.2 µmol/L, and LDH 3392 U/L). Bone marrow examination revealed hyperplastic anaemic bone marrow, and the ratio of granulocytes to red blood cells was 0.12:1. According to the patient's early age of onset and related clinical manifestations, the most common enzymes that cause haemolytic anaemia, such as G6PD, PK and P5′N, were routinely measured, However, they were found to be in the normal range . After regular blood transfusion treatment in the Outpatient Department of our hospital, his Hb gradually increasead to approximately 100 g/L. Intellectual disability was later reported after the patient had completed EEG and MRI, which showed normal results. The patient was then tested by the Chinese Wechsler Young Children scale of intelligence (C-WYCSI), which revealed a low value . The C-WYCSI is an internationally recognized and universal intelligence test for children aged 6–16. When the age is less than 18 years old and the IQ is less than 70, the retardation of intellectual development is considered. A value of 50–69 is mild, 35–49 is moderate, 20–34 is severe, and 0–19 is very severe. The C-WYCSI test suggested mild intellectual disability.
We further used a custom gene panel to perform next-generation sequencing. Genomic DNA of the proband was extracted from whole blood using a DNA Extraction kit (TIANGEN, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA was quantified using a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Genomic DNA (3 μg) was fragmented by nebulization. The fragmented DNA was end-repaired and A-tailed using standard protocols. The size-selected product was PCR amplified, and the final product was validated using an Agilent Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). A total of 283 genes were captured using a GenCap custom enrichment kit (MyGenostics, Beijing, China) (Additional file : Table S1). The gene panel that codes for RBC enzymes and RBC membrane proteins and congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia was used [, ]. The genome sequence reference version was derived from the human reference genome (GRCh37/hg19). The custom panels for HAs that we used can provide diagnostic yields of 26.63%. The enriched libraries were sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) using 100-base pair paired-end reads. All the suspected AK-causing mutations found by NGS were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. DNA sequences were obtained from the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)/Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) clinical variant interpretation guidelines established the criteria for the different types of evidence . According to the ACMG/AMP Guidelines, this missense mutation was classified as a pathogenic variation (PVS1 + PM1_moderate + PM2_moderate + PP3). A null variant (frameshift) was confirmed in the gene for which loss of function is a known mechanism of disease (PVS1). This variant was located in a mutational hot spot and/or critical and well-established functional domain without benign variation (PM1). This variant was absent from controls (or at extremely low frequency if recessive) in the Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes Project, and Exome Aggregation Consortium (PM2) . Both the missense mutation and frameshift mutation were classified as a disease causing by MutationTaster . The effect of the variant was evaluated by using PolyPhen2.2 , SIFT , MACP and REVEL to predict the pathogenic potential of the variants. . To better understand the structural implications of the missense mutation identified in the human AK-1 protein, we have used UniProt and SWISSMODEL to build a three-dimensional model of the mutant protein. We downloaded the FASTA sequence of AK1 (ID: P00568-1) from UniProt and obtained mutation sequences from Mutalyzer. We selected 1z83.2 as the AK1 protein structure template and used the computer program MODELLER for automated modelling. The protein structures were visualized with PyMOL 1.7.4. Table summarizes all the details of the haematological and biochemical studies conducted at West China Second University Hospital. AK enzyme activity detection showed a decreased level in red cells. This type of double heterozygous mutation has not yet been reported: a heterozygous missense variation in exon 6 (c.413G > A) that results in amino acid substitution of histidine for arginine at codon 138 (p.Arg138His) and a heterozygous frameshift mutation in exon 5 (c.223dupA) that results in an amino acid methionine position change at codon 75 (p.Met75Asnfs*19). Figure shows the sequence electropherograms of the AK1 exon 6 wild-type and mutant (A, B) and AK1 exon 5 wild-type and mutant (C, D). To investigate the effect of heterozygous missense variation on the structure and function of the enzyme, molecular modelling analyses were conducted by using bioinformatics software, such as UniProt, SWISSMODEL and PyMOL 1.7.4. The structures of the human AK1WT and AK1R138H mutants are shown as cartoons and are labelled as wild-type p.Arg138His (A) and mutant-type p.Arg138His (B), respectively . The patient exhibiting this compound heterozygous mutation was severely affected, whereas the patient’s parents, who were carriers for one of the mutations, were asymptomatic .