A 65-year old woman, on dialysis for 17 years, told her doctor she was exhausted and that she thought it was because she was taking too many drugs. The patient is an intelligent, independent, acculturated woman who lives alone in the French countryside.
Her medical history is complex: she was treated with lithium for about 20 years (from age 20 to 40). This was discontinued after she developed CKD; in recent years, under treatment with valproic acid and lamotrigine, her psychophysical balance has been good,.
She started smoking when she was 19 years old (30 cigarettes/day) and developed a smoke-related chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. She was obese in early adulthood; arterial hypertension was diagnosed at age 30 and type 2 diabetes at age 32, treated using oral hypoglycemic drugs, but she eventually lost about 20 kg, making it possible for antidiabetic drugs to be discontinued. She underwent total thyroidectomy for papillary carcinoma at age 41, and started levothyroxine therapy afterwards. Due to a progressive worsening of the kidney function she started hemodialysis at age 50. Her kidney disease was probably multifactorial (hypertension, diabetes, obesity, heavy smoking, lithium therapy).
Seven years after dialysis start, she underwent left hemicolectomy for colon adenocarcinoma, and two years later, left quadrantectomy followed by radiotherapy for ductal mammary adenocarcinoma. She underwent subtotal parathyroidectomy for severe tertiary hyperparathyroidism at age 62. Due to the presence of severe scoliosis, and the development of peripheral neuropathy, she uses painkillers regularly.
At the time of the present report, she was on thriceweekly hemodiafiltration, with good dialysis tolerance and high dialysis efficiency (Daugirdas 2 Kt/V: 1.6–1.8).
Her most recent treatment included antihypertensive drugs (spironolactone 100 mg, amlodipine 20 mg, perindopril 2.5 mg), antipsychotic drugs (valproic acid 600 mg, lamotrigine 100 mg), thyroid hormone (levothyroxine 150 μg), vitamin D, bicarbonate and calcium supplements (calcium carbonate 1 g, sodium bicarbonate 500 mg, vitamin D 25-OH 100,000 UI once a month), potassium and phosphate binders (sodium polystyrene sulphonate, on non-dialysis days and sevelamer 2.4 g per day), darbopoietin 20 μcg once weekly.
The clinical examination revealed a woman with good psychophysical balance, a moderate impairment in nutritional status, and a severe comorbidity burden (weight 54 Kg, height 155, BMI: 23 Kg/m2; subjective global assessment: B; malnutrition inflammation index: 10; Charlson index: 9). Apart from signs of chronic bronchitis, and an aortic 2/6 heart bruit, the clinical examination was unremarkable; arterial blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg, with mild orthostatic hypotension (135/80 mmHg); heart rate was 68 bpm. The most recent biochemical results are reported in Table .
The patient complained of severe fatigue, which had recently increased, and asked her doctor if he thought this could be the result of taking too many drugs.
In fact we thought our patient was right about pharmacologic interference, and felt that levothyroxine was the most likely candidate. A biochemical control disclosed a relevant increase in TSH (13.07 mU/L), as compared with her previous routine twice-yearly control (4.14 mU/L).
In retrospect, the levothyroxine dose was already high for a woman weighing about 55 Kg, and a reduction in the absorption of levothyroxine should already have been suspected.
Three of her chronic drugs display potential interference with levothyroxine: calcium carbonate, sevelamer and kayexelate. Since her sevelamer dose had recently been increased from 800 mg once daily to 800 mg 3 times per day, this long-scting phosphate binder was the most likely candidate. In keeping with this hypothesis, one month after discontinuation of sevelamer and modification of the timing of levothyroxine treatment (in the morning after night fasting) TSH was once more in the normal range. In the three months that followed, her levothyroxine dose was reduced to 100 micrograms per day. A further attempt to reintroduce sevelamer, taken at least 6 h after levothyroxine, led to a new increase in TSH (TSH 12.66 mUI/l), once more corrected by discontinuation of sevelamer.
Pubmed and EMBASE were explored (start to February 15th 2018) with the aim of retrieving papers related to dialysis, levothyroxine and phosphate binders. The following terms were employed: (a) dialysis, hemodialysis, hemodiafiltration, renal replacement therapy; (b) phosphate binder(s), sevelamer, calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, aluminum hydroxide, lanthanum carbonate; (c) levothyroxine, thyroid hormone replacement therapy. Due to the low number of papers retrieved by this search, a further search was performed combining (b) and (c). The searches, paper selection and data extraction were performed in duplicate (EC and VC); a further search on Google med did not lead to further papers. Discrepancies were resolved by discussion with a third party (GBP). A manual search of the reference lists from identified articles was done to identify additional articles. The search strategy and flow-chart is reported in Fig. .
Given the small number of papers retrieved, and their high heterogeneity, a meta-analysis was not performed, and the data were narratively discussed, in relation to other sources of information (data obtained in healthy volunteers, or in other diseases).