This case details a 54 year old woman who was referred to our clinic by her general practitioner for investigation of bilateral breast pain that she had for 6 months.
Her past medical history included hypertension for which she took a single anti-hypertensive. She had no familial history of breast or gynaecological malignancy. On clinical examination pathological nodes were palpated bilaterally in the axillae. There was left sided nipple inversion with a palpable mass in the upper outer quadrant of approximately 3 cm diameter.
On examination of the right breast there was skin tethering of the nipple and 3 masses were palpated, the largest being in the upper inner quadrant at 5 cm diameter.
Ultrasound and mammography of bilateral breasts demonstrated advanced bilateral breast cancer with axillary node metastases.
The right breast had a large lesion consistent with primary breast cancer at 12 o’clock measuring 44.3 mm in diameter. An additional 7 smaller lesions were distributed through the right breast consistent with satellite lesions. The largest pathological node in the right axilla measured 42 × 30 mm.
In the left breast at the 2 o’clock position there was a lesion consistent with breast carcinoma measuring 31.2 mm. The largest node in the left axilla measured 13.1 × 10.2 mm.
There was skin thickening of both breasts consistent with oedema, the right side was most pronounced. Core biopsies from lesion on right breast at 12 o’clock and the left breast at 2 o’clock demonstrated invasive carcinoma. , : (H&E x10) Left/right core biopsy show invasive carcinoma, no special type
The hormone receptor status was identified with right breast lesion being ER negative whilst the left breast lesion was ER positive.
, , : (x10) Positive staining for ER and PR. HER2 Immunohistochemistry score 3 + .
, , : (x10) Negative staining for ER and PR. HER2 Immunohistochemistry score 3 + .
The patient was presented at an oncology multidisciplinary team meeting.
Subsequent staging scans were arranged which included a CT of head, neck, abdomen and pelvis, a nuclear medicine bone scan and a PET scan.
The CT scan showed no evidence of metastatic disease. The only finding was the bilateral breast malignancies with bilateral pathological axillary lymph nodes, with the right being most pronounced.
There was mild FDG avid ill defined ground glass pulmonary opacity in the left lower lobe of her lung, this was though to represent an inflammatory or infective process given its absence on the CT scan. A follow up CT scan was recommended to ensure resolution.
There was no evidence of bony metastases on the nuclear medicine bone scan.
The patient was referred to medical oncology to commence neo adjuvant chemotherapy and hormone therapy. Pending the response to the therapy the patient will be considered for bilateral mastectomy and axillary clearance.