A 73-year-old man had a past operative history of ruptured colonic diverticulitis treated by Hartmann’s procedure in 2007, and perforated peptic ulcer treated by pyloroplasty in 2009. He suffered from abdominal and tarry stool for 5 days in March 2011, so he was admitted to a rural hospital for further survey and medication. An initial upper GI endoscopy showed gastric ulcer only, but hypotension with tachycardia and a drop in hemoglobin of 9 g/dl from 12 g/dl occurred the next day. Intravenous fluid and blood transfusion with packed red blood cell were prescribed. Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) with rupture was highly suspected, so CTA of aorta was carried out which disclosed an AAA with swollen bowel loop. He was transferred to our emergency department (ED) for consideration of vascular surgical intervention.
On arrival in our ED, vital signs were a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per min, a heart rate of 130 beats per min, a blood pressure of 98/73 mmHg, and a body temperature of 35.6 °C. Physical examination revealed a pale conjunctiva, no heart murmur, clear breathing sound, old operative scar over middle abdomen, and hypoactive bowel sound with tenderness over the periumbilical region. Leukocytosis, anemia, abnormal liver profiles, and metabolic acidosis were found. Laboratory investigations were summarized in Table .
A cardiovascular surgeon carried out emergent angiography of aorta, which depicted bleeding from the wall of the AAA and chronic total occlusion of the left external iliac artery, so a modified aorto-uni-iliac stent graft was implanted with femoral-to-femoral bypass, which underwent smoothly. A general surgeon performed exploratory laparotomy and found a massive blood clot with a volume of about 1310 ml filling the entire lumen of the small intestine, a dilated and swollen duodenum about 6 cm in diameter with ecchymosis, and a fistula about 2x2cm over the third portion of the duodenum . Duodenostomy with primary closure for repair of fistula defect, partition of the duodenum between the 2nd and 3rd portions, and side-to-side gastrojejunostomy were completed smoothly. He was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit for postoperative care. CTA of aorta showed neither endoleakage nor intraabdominal abscess on postoperative day 17. He was discharged without complications and returned for follow up at the out-of-patient department on postoperative day 25.