A 72-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 3-day history of hematemesis.
The patient developed hematemesis 3 d before presenting at our hospital. The hematemesis was approximately 200 mL in volume 2 times. He was admitted to the nearest private hospital. His hematocrits was 25%. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) under local anesthesia was performed on the first day in the previous hospital but failed because the patient choked and resisted scope insertion. He was reported to have anemia with a hematocrit 25% at the previous hospital, he received a 1-unit transfusion of red blood cells, intravenous fluids, and pantoprazole. On day 3 after admission, the patient had no hematemesis or anemia and had a hematocrit of 36%. He was then referred to our hospital. We performed gastroscopy and found a 5-mm ulcer with minimal blood clot.
The patient had diabetes mellitus and primary hypertension; he took 81 mg aspirin until almost 8 mo before he developed hematemesis. He had an approximately 2-year history of progressive dysphagia, which manifest as difficulty in swallowing solid foods then liquid foods, sometimes choking, and a non-significant decrease in body weight; there was no evidence of aspiration pneumonia. Barium swallow was performed and revealed a Zenker’s diverticulum that was 4 cm wide and 7.1 cm long, with a 1.1-cm-wide neck . Gastroscopy was performed and confirmed a large diverticulum 20 cm from the incisors without any ulcer in the diverticulum. He was diagnosed with Zenker’s diverticulum and put on the waiting list for Z-POEM before developing hematemesis.
No family history of Zenker's diverticulum.
On the day of admission, the patient was not pale and had a stable blood pressure of 146/70 mmHg and heart rate of 62 beats per minute. On physical examination, the abdomen was soft with no tenderness. Rectal examination found an empty rectum without any gross masses.
Laboratory investigation revealed a hematocrit of 36%.
Barium swallow was performed and revealed a Zenker’s diverticulum that was 4 cm wide and 7.1 cm long, with a 1.1-cm-wide neck .