A 31-year-old, African woman with no significant medical background presented to the emergency department with 6 weeks history of fever, difficulty in breathing, and weakness of proximal limb muscles. There was no history of skin rash. She was 18 weeks primigravida with an uneventful antenatal course. Initial assessment showed an averagely built female with a body mass index (BMI) of 23.7 kg/m2 (normal range: 18.5–24.9 kg/m2), temperature of 37.1 °C, heart rate of 90 beats/minute (regular), blood pressure of 144/84 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/minute and pulse oximetry 99% on room air. A respiratory system examination was unremarkable apart from reduced air entry at both lung bases. A neurological examination revealed intact higher mental functions, reduced power in both upper and lower limbs (proximal muscles 3/5 and distal muscles 4/5) , intact reflexes, sensations, cranial nerves, and cerebellar function. An abdominal examination showed gravid uterus appropriate for gestational age and a cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. Blood investigations revealed elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), creatine kinase (CK), troponin T and arterial blood gas on room air was suggestive of acute on chronic respiratory acidosis [pH – 7.31, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) – 58 mm Hg, partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) – 79 mm Hg, bicarbonate (HCO3) – 28 mEq/L]. Our patient had normal blood leukocyte count and no organism was isolated from sputum, urine and blood cultures, excluding underlying infection. An electrocardiogram (ECG) and bedside 2D transthoracic echocardiography were not suggestive of acute coronary syndrome or structure heart lesions. A chest X-ray showed hazy opacity in her left lower lung field . A computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest revealed bilateral basilar dependent atelectasis and excluded pulmonary embolism, pleurisy, pneumothorax, consolidation, and interstitial lung disease (ILD) . A pelvic ultrasound showed a single viable fetus with size and weight appropriate for gestational age, fetal movements were seen, fetal cardiac pulsations recorded, and amniotic fluid was adequate. Our patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) for further investigation and management. She was started on intermittent noninvasive bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP), with inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) of 10 cm H2O and expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP) of 5 cm H2O, to improve her hypercapnic respiratory failure. However, our patient was not compliant to the prescribed noninvasive ventilation (NIV) therapy.
On the second day of hospitalization, our patient developed severe respiratory acidosis (pH: 7.13 and PaCO2: 101 mm Hg) leading to deterioration in her level of consciousness with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 8/15 (eye opening - to pain 2/4; verbal response - incomprehensible sounds 2/5; best motor response - withdraws from pain 4/6). She was initiated on invasive mechanical ventilation for severe hypercapnic respiratory failure. After correction of respiratory acidosis by invasive ventilation, our patient regained her level of consciousness. Bedside needle electromyography (EMG) revealed electrophysiological evidence of diffuse irritable myopathy in sampled muscles . Based on Bohan and Peter criteria patient was diagnosed as probable polymyositis and started on pulse steroid therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg daily for 3 days, followed by maintenance oral prednisolone 60 mg daily and azathioprine 50 mg daily. After 5 days of initiating steroid therapy there was significant improvement in respiratory muscle function as evident from adequate gas exchange on low-setting pressure support ventilation [5 cm of water (H2O)] and increasing maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures (MIP and MEP), so the patient was weaned off invasive ventilation. Extensive immunological workup did not reveal any positive autoantibodies. Four days postextubation there was deterioration in respiratory function (blood gas on room air: pH 7.25 and PaCO2 93 mm Hg) necessitating initiation of intermittent noninvasive BiPAP (IPAP - 12 cm H2O and EPAP – 6 cm H2O), averaging 16 hours per day. After counselling the patient for compliance to NIV therapy, good adherence to BiPAP was maintained. Due to relapse in respiratory muscle weakness, intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) (0.4 grams/kg/day) were started for a total of five doses. After completion of immunoglobulin therapy, our patient was gradually weaned off NIV and transferred to the general medical ward.
During her stay in the medical ward, our patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both thighs, which showed edema of bilateral vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, adductor magnus, and gluteal muscles. . A muscle biopsy taken from her right deltoid was suggestive of inflammatory myopathy (scattered fibers with necrosis and regeneration, macrophages invading necrotic planes, collection of mononuclear cells at perivascular sites in perimysium and endomysium, and increase in perimysial fibrous and fatty connective tissue). After the muscle histopathology report, our patient was confirmed to have definite PM . Due to a rise in transaminases, not attributed to disease activity, azathioprine had to be stopped and our patient was kept on a tapering dose of oral corticosteroids. After 1 month of total hospitalization, our patient was discharged in good general condition with appropriate fetal growth, on maintenance oral prednisolone 20 mg daily and advised to follow up with her rheumatologist, obstetrician, and neurologist.
At 27 weeks of gestation, our patient was found to have intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) on routine antenatal pelvic ultrasound. Fetal growth was estimated to be 24 weeks based on femoral length, biparietal diameter, head circumference, and fetal weight was calculated to be 627 grams. During a multidisciplinary meeting between obstetrician, neonatologist, rheumatologist, and anesthetist/intensivist, it was decided to continue the pregnancy with close monitoring of our patient in the obstetric ward. In case of clinical deterioration, an urgent delivery would be carried out using spinal anesthesia with administration of a stress dose of steroids. At 31 weeks gestation, cardiotocography (CTG) was nonreassuring with repeated unprovoked decelerations and our patient underwent emergent lower segment cesarean section (LSCS) using combined spinal and epidural anesthesia. A baby boy with severe IUGR, weighing 1160 grams was delivered and immediately required invasive ventilation for respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The baby had a prolonged neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) stay complicated by Acinetobacter sepsis. He was gradually weaned of mechanical ventilation and transferred to the neonatal ward. The mother had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged after 7 days of delivery with follow-up in the obstetric and rheumatology clinics.