In December 2022, a 51-year-old woman came to our attention in a Northern Italy Clinic for a one-week history of three unpainful lesions on her right index finger . At physical examination, the lesion appeared as three swelling nodules with a grey necrotic center and red outer halo . Moreover, a pruritic papulovesicular eruption was present on her hands and feet, which was the real reason for medical consulting . At the beginning, the rash appeared like round erythematous papules and then evolved into target lesions with a central area and dark red inflammatory zone surrounded by a pale ring of edema . The woman reported that the rash appeared a few days after the initial lesions on the finger. No relevant conditions were present in the patient’s past medical history. Particularly, she did not take any drugs chronically. Blood tests revealed inflammation markers within normal ranges, as shown in Table , with a white cell count of 3.07 g/L (reference range 4–10 g/L), and C-reactive protein < 0.05 mg/L (reference range < 5 mg/L). The Quantiferon TB-gold test was performed, and it turned out negative; only a slight modification of liver function was visible. A biopsy was performed on one finger nodule and on a papulovesicular lesion . Microscopic examination of the primary lesion showed intraepidermal vesiculation with irregular hyperplasia and a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate . The papulovesicular eruption was histologically compatible with an urticarious reaction . As a matter of fact, when asked, the woman reported sporadic contact with a goat that had a similar erythematous nodule in her mouth during a holiday in Sicily (Italy), touching the animal’s mouth with bare hands while feeding it . Goat was diagnosed with ORFV infection, but the patient was not warned about the possible hypersensitive reaction during the next days. No treatment was needed for the recovery of the lesions, which spontaneously resolved within the next 6 weeks. Based on these findings, ORFV infection with an autoimmune widespread erythema multiforme was diagnosed.