A 75-year-old female was admitted to our hospital because of exertional dyspnoea and pre-syncope with bradycardia. The patient had a previous history of endoscopic operation for carpal tunnel syndrome 5 years ago and had been used β-blocker eye drops for normal-tension glaucoma for 20 years. On physical examination, blood pressure was 122/76 mmHg, and an irregular pulse was 42 beats/min. Jugular venous dilatation and bilateral leg oedema were observed. A Levine II systolic heart murmur was detected at the right sternal border in the fourth intercostal space, but lung sounds were clear. Chest X-ray showed an increase in the cardiothoracic ratio of 61.8%. The 12-lead electrocardiogram performed at admission showed bradycardia with an ectopic atrial rhythm. Laboratory data revealed elevated brain natriuretic peptide of 306.6 pg/mL (reference interval ≤18.4 pg/mL) and normal high-sensitive troponin I of 9.3 pg/mL (reference interval ≤ 26.2 pg/mL). Transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal LV ejection fraction of 68.9% and LV end-diastolic volume of 39 mL. No LV hypertrophy was observed since the interventricular septum thickness was 8.8 mm, the posterior wall thickness 9.3 mm, and the LV mass index 65.5 g/m2 . Right ventricular (RV) and right atrial (RA) dilatation were detected with an RV basal diameter of 47 mm and RV longitudinal diameter of 66 mm, and an RA transverse dimension of 56 mm and RA longitudinal dimension of 61 mm. RV systolic function was preserved with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 21.3 mm, tricuspid lateral annular systolic velocity by tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) of 11.0 m/s, and RV fractional area change (RVFAC) of 32% (; see , ). In addition, there was no organic lesion of the tricuspid valve, and severe FTR with maximum TR jet velocity of 2.04 m/s due to RV and RA dilatation was observed (; see , ). The right heart catheterization showed pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 6 mmHg, cardiac index of 3.47 L/min/m2, pulmonary blood pressure of 24/8 mmHg with the mean pulmonary artery blood pressure of 14 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance of 138.2 dyn·s/cm5. The differential diagnosis of the severe FTR with RV and RA dilation based on the patient’s presentation included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, primary pulmonary arterial hypertension, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension, carcinoid syndrome, and arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy. A diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was discarded, because of normal findings on chest computed tomography and spirometry. The pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension were ruled out because of the findings of right heart catheterization and lung perfusion scintigraphy. Carcinoid syndrome was eliminated because of the absence of typical physical findings such as lower abdominal pain, diarrhoea, flushed skin, bronchial asthma, and ovarian findings on computed tomography. Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy was also eliminated due to her age, no specific signs on the electrocardiogram, and absence of ventricular tachycardia. We provisionally diagnosed the patient’s presentation as chronic right heart failure with severe FTR secondary to dilated tricuspid annulus and as an atrial standstill or sick sinus syndrome. She was haemodynamically stable, and the symptoms were mainly due to bradycardia. It was therefore decided to implant a leadless cardiac pacemaker into the RV septum via the right femoral vein approach instead of a conventional pacemaker to avoid further deterioration of TR.
After the implantation, the symptoms improved, and the patient was discharged. However, she complained of leg oedema and fatigue on effort 6 months after discharge. A repeated transthoracic echocardiogram did not show any deterioration in LV systolic function. However, progression of RV and RA dilatation was observed, with an RV basal diameter of 58 mm and RV longitudinal diameter of 75 mm, and an RA transverse dimension of 69 mm and RA longitudinal dimension of 71 mm. Compared with the previous study, TAPSE, tricuspid lateral annular systolic velocity by TDI, and RVFAC worsened to 18.7 mm, 8.5 m/s, and 28.1%, respectively (; see , ). Furthermore, due to absent tricuspid leaflets coaptation, FTR worsened severe, with a maximum TR jet velocity of 1.90 m/s (; see , ). The cause of her symptoms was considered to be the severe FTR, and she was treated with loop diuretics of azosemide (30 mg daily). However, her symptoms did not improve over time, and her renal function continued worsening, so that we decided that surgical repair of the tricuspid valve was essential for improving the symptoms as was the performance of an intraoperative tissue biopsy for a correct diagnosis. Totally endoscopic, minimally invasive beating-heart cardiac surgery with right thoracotomy was performed for the tricuspid valvuloplasty. Surgical operative findings showed an enlarged tricuspid valve annulus and some sclerotic shortening at the anterior leaflet. We performed a tricuspid valve annuloplasty using a prosthetic ring as well as a left atrial appendectomy. We also performed a biopsy of a portion of the RV septum and the right atrium for microscopic examination. The operation was successfully performed without any complications, and the post-operative course was uneventful.
Pathological examination of right atrium using haematoxylin-eosin staining did not find any hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes, fibrosis of the myocardial interstitium, inflammatory cell infiltration, or granulomas. However, some vitreous-like eosinophilic tissue deposits were found. These deposits were evident in the endocardium and vessel walls of the right atrium. In addition, direct fast scarlet staining revealed an orange-coloured area with apple green polarization, which was determined to be amyloid deposition. Finally, immunostaining was negative for amyloid A and positive for transthyretin . These findings led to a diagnosis of ATTR-CM. However, the ventricular morphology showed that our patient was far from a typical case of ATTR-CM. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and 99mTc-pyrophosphate scintigraphy were also performed to obtain other clinical information. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed an LV ejection fraction of 54% and LV mass index of 55 g/m2, while gadolinium enhancement delayed imaging showed no delayed contrast in the right atrium and RV or in the LV . 99mTc-pyrophosphate scintigraphy showed grade 1 uptake in the RV and atrium , while DNA sequence analysis did not indicate any typical mutation, which supported a diagnosis of wild type of ATTR-CM (ATTRwt-CM). Our patient has been asymptomatic during the follow-up period after the surgical operation. She has also been treated with 80 mg daily of tafamidis meglumine to prevent further accumulation of transthyretin in the myocardium. Careful echocardiographic follow-up will therefore be needed.