A 7-year-old male child presented with swelling and pain in the outer aspect of the right heel for past 1 month. Mother of the child correlated the swelling with a history of trivial trauma. The swelling was gradually progressing. A history of incision and drainage of swelling by a local practitioner after 5 days of onset of swelling was noted. There was an associated history of high-grade fever of insidious onset, intermittent in nature with chills and without any diurnal variation. Constitutional symptoms such as significant weight loss, loss of appetite, and malaise were present for the past 2 weeks. He was unable to walk or weight bear due to pain in right lower limb for the past 1 week. The patient was febrile and having tachycardia at presentation. No lymphadenopathy was detected clinically.
A swelling of 5*4*2 cm size which was tender was present over the posterolateral aspect of heel extending anteriorly covering lateral malleolus, posteriorly extending to the area of tendoachilles insertion to the calcaneus, superiorly 5 cm above whole of the lateral malleolus, and inferiorly 2 cm above the heel . It had an irregular surface, well-defined round margins with loss of skin cover in more than 50% of the surface area with reddish brown color. There was active oozing of blood from the superior and inferior edge of the swelling. Temperature around swelling was raised. Lateral malleolus was not separately palpable from swelling. Tendoachilles could be separately palpable. Ankle motion was restricted and painful with no distal neuro deficits.
X-ray showed large soft-tissue shadow over heel with loss of soft-tissue planes and a lytic lesion over the posterior aspect of the calcaneus with destruction of the posterior tuberosity of calcaneus . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a lobulated well-defined mass of size 5*3.5*6 cm in the posterolateral aspect of the ankle with hyperintensity in T2 and T1 images (-). The mass invaded calcaneus posteriorly with encasement of tendoachilles. Peroneal tendons were free. Diagnosis of soft-tissue sarcoma was made.
The initial two core biopsies were non-confirmatory, one of which showed features of acute inflammation with no evidence of malignancy. Aerobic, non-aerobic, or fungal cultures were negative. The swelling increased in size and turned into a fungating mass with sloughs hanging from the surface within 2-week duration after the presentation . An excisional biopsy of the swelling finally showed features suggestive of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The tumor mass was found to be eroding into the posterior aspect of calcaneum with the involvement of the insertion site of tendoachilles . The swelling was curetted out till the healthy-looking bone was noticed along with partial excision of the encased tendoachilles. Intraoperatively skin closure could not be achieved. The wound gradually decreased in size with 5 days of continuous vacuum-assisted closure therapy at 125 mmHg , and it healed with secondary intention with regular dressing within 4 weeks. The range of motion of the ankle and subtalar joint was reduced compared to the unaffected side. Gradual range of motion exercises was started for ankle and foot. In microscopy, the tumor showed sheets of tumor cells intermediate to large cells with moderate amount of amphophilic to eosinophilic cytoplasm and the nuclei appeared to be vesicular with multiple conspicuous nucleoli with some cells showing eccentrically located nuclei and nuclear membrane irregularities . Immunohistochemistry showed ALK, CD30, CD99, EMA, ki67, and leukocyte common antigen positivity .
Staging of the patient was done by ruling out any synchronous or metachronous disease elsewhere by doing CT scan of chest and abdomen and bilateral bone marrow biopsy. Hence, a diagnosis of PBL with a histological diagnosis of ALCL was made. Treatment was carried out as advised by the oncology team, with 3 cycles of chemotherapy (CHOP – cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) followed by 5 cycles of localized radiotherapy. Supportive treatment in terms of prevention of anemia and infection was given. He did not have any presentation of any diseased lymphadenopathy or organomegaly during the course of treatment. At the last follow-up at 12 months, the wound over the posterior aspect had healed with the patient being ambulatory.