A 44-years-old man presented with ongoing fatigue symptoms and a new-onset intense occipital headache which was worse in the night and was waking him up from sleep. The patient reported progressive deterioration of the symptoms with increased intensity and frequency of the headaches; moreover, he complained of memory loss, dyscalculia, concentration difficulties, psychomotor agitation, and aggressive behavior.
He was initially treated with dipyrone (4 g/day, oral), naproxen sodium (550 mg/day, oral), and dexamethasone (24 mg/day, oral) from urgent care, and referred to the neurosurgery department. He presented a normal mental status (GCS 15) without impairment on his physical examination and mild bilateral papilledema on his neurological examination.
It was performed a brain MRI [-] that revealed a hypointense bihemispheric intraventricular mass on the T1-weighted image and hyperintense mass on the T2-weighted image, crossing the midline through the corpus callosum and infiltrating the trigone of the lateral ventricles. The brain MRI also revealed a heterogeneous contrast enhancement with an important cystic component.
The volume of the lesion (manual segmentation) was 63.1 cc and the estimated mean diameter was 50.15 mm. The initial hypothesis was GBM or anaplastic ependymoma. We discussed with the patient about the option of stereotactic biopsy to obtain samples for diagnostic purposes. However, the patient opted for microsurgery for maximum resection of the lesion; however, the gross-total resection was not achievable due to tumor extension.
We decided to perform a microsurgical resection with a right transparietal transsulcal approach, reaching the trigone of the right ventricle and the infiltrative mass. We resected the ipsilateral brain lesion; however, the contralateral ventricle resection was limited due to a deep surgical corridor and the need to manipulate vascular structures (i.e., vein of Galen). The immediate postoperative MRI revealed a residual tumor volume of 14.03 cc (estimated mean diameter of 30.58 mm) in the left ventricular trigone [-]. The histopathological study [-] showed a GS - Grade IV tumor and the immunohistochemistry [-] confirmed the diagnosis of GS (WHO - 2016).
After 20 days of the procedure, the patient presented an improvement of headache and psychomotor agitation; however, he continued with progressive worsening of memory loss and showed a diminished spatial awareness.
We started adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy with temozolomide. However, one month after the tumor resection, a new MRI revealed important residual lesion growing on the trigone of the left ventricle with a tumor volume of 41.6 cc (estimated mean diameter of 43.65 mm) and an impressive growth rate estimated in 176.68 mm/year [-]. The patient had a progressive neurologic decline and died 45 days after the surgical approach.