A 90-year-old woman presented to an ophthalmology clinic with a 1-year history of blurry vision in the left eye. She had a recent history of elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) in her left eye, along with recurrent episodes of AC inflammation. Despite starting her on steroid, maximum-tolerated ocular hypotensive meds, and valacyclovir for a presumed ocular herpetic disease, her IOP remained uncontrolled at 68 mm Hg. She was referred to our glaucoma service for further evaluation. Her ocular history includes uncomplicated bilateral cataract extraction with PCIOL implant 17 years prior to the initial presentation. There was no history of eye or head trauma.
On examination, her visual acuity with correction was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left. Her IOP measured by tonometry was 16 mm Hg in the right eye and 48 mm Hg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye demonstrated a clear cornea with microcystic edema, non-reactive pupil with a superonasal transillumination defect, 3+ mixed cells in the AC with pigments, and a well-positioned 1-piece acrylic PCIOL without donesis. Dilated fundus exam was unremarkable. Gonioscopy detected open angle with hyphema nasally and heavily pigmented trabecular meshwork inferiorly in the left eye compared to the pale trabecular meshwork in the right eye. Optical coherence tomography of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) showed normal findings in the right eye (75 μm) and superior RNFL thinning in the left (71 μm). Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) of the left eye demonstrated a PCIOL in the capsular bag with no iris-haptic touch and no Soemmering’s rings or foreign body in the sulcus . Additional workup for uveitis, including an anterior-chamber tap for virology, chest X-ray, syphilis and Lyme disease screening, and human-leukocyte antigen-B27 serology, all yielded negative results. The patient was diagnosed with UGH syndrome of the left eye.
In order to address her poorly controlled IOP, the decision was made to perform OMNI ™ canaloplasty and goniotomy in the left eye, taking account of her age and her wish to avoid filtering surgery. When the sulcus space was filled with viscoelasticity in order to confirm the IOL position, the tip of the superior haptics was found to be protruding outside the bag . The anterior capsule had 360-degree coverage of the optic indicating that the haptics was breaking through a puncture in the capsular bag peripherally. Dispersive viscoelasticity and a Kuglen hook™ was used to carefully dissect the superior haptics free from the bag. Packer-Chang™ IOL cutters were used to amputate the protruded haptics close to the haptic-optic junction, and the cut haptics was removed from the eye (online suppl. Video 1). The IOL-bag complex remained stable following this maneuver. Ab-interno canaloplasty with goniotomy was performed 360 degree, and all viscoelasticity was removed from the eye, followed by intracameral antibiotics.
At 1 week postoperatively, visual acuity improved to 20/50-1 and IOP was 10 mm Hg on 4 antiglaucoma drops off oral acetazolamide. Slit-lamp exam revealed mild corneal edema and a well-seated PCIOL. At her 1-month postoperative visit, her visual acuity improved to 20/50-1 with correction and her IOP was stable at 10 mm Hg on 3 antiglaucoma drops, and slit-lamp exam findings were unchanged. At her 4-month postoperative visit, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/30 bilaterally and her IOP was stable at 14 mm Hg without antiglaucoma drops. A slit-lamp examination and gonioscopy revealed a clear cornea with no signs of inflammation or hyphema. The patient was able to discontinue all glaucoma medications and steroid without recurrence of UGH.