A 57-year-old Japanese man presented with a 1-month history of progressive symptoms of facial and brachial edema, muscle weakness, dysphagia, myalgia, and a symmetrical widespread rash on his limbs and hands. He denied recent common cold symptoms. He was also noted to have unintentional weight loss (3 kg over 1 month). His medical and family histories were unremarkable. He was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus 8 years ago, but he did not go to the hospital until this visit.
Vital signs showed that the patient was afebrile, with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute, blood pressure of 120/78 mmHg, normal respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Physical examination revealed periorbital edema and Gottron's papules over his knuckles with brachial edema, and tenderness and weakness of the proximal limb muscles. Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated levels of creatine kinase (5002 U/L; reference range 30–175 U/L), aspartate transaminase (120 U/L; reference range, 12–35 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (46 U/L; reference range 6–40 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (440 U/L; reference range 119–229 U/L), D-dimer (9.1 μg/mL; reference range <1.0 μg/mL), and hemoglobin A1c (9.2%; reference range 4.6−6.2 %); however, white blood count, C-reactive protein, hemoglobin, electrolytes, lipid profile, and renal function were normal. Hepatitis B and C, and HIV serologies were all negative. Chest radiography showed no consolidation. Respiratory function tests, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram were unremarkable. Because of the history and significantly elevated muscle injury biomarkers, we suspected inflammatory myositis. The patient underwent further evaluation to investigate the probable diagnosis.
Additional laboratory data demonstrated that antinuclear antibody was positive at 1:40 with a speckled pattern. In addition, anti-TIF1γ antibody was positive by immunoprecipitation assay, although other markers including anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 antibody, and anti-Mi2 antibody were negative. Brachial contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated hyperintense muscles in T2-weighted sequences . A biopsy from the biceps brachii muscle was performed, and the infiltration of lymphocytic cells and CD4-positive lymphocytes was confirmed . These findings were compatible with dermatomyositis. Since anti-TIF1γ antibody has been associated with malignancies in dermatomyositis patients, we performed a whole contrast computed tomography scan and endoscopy. Contrast computed tomography showed a tumor mass in the ascending colon with no other notable metastases . Colonoscopy revealed an ascending colon tumor . The histopathological findings of the biopsy from the ascending colon showed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . A diagnosis of anti-TIF1γ antibody-positive dermatomyositis with ascending colon cancer (cT4aN2M0, clinical stage IIIb) was made.
The clinical course is shown in Fig. . He was initially scheduled to undergo surgical resection for the ascending colon cancer after the definitive diagnosis; however, elevation of creatine kinase (15,667 U/L) and progression of dysphagia were noted before the operation. Thus, we decided that medical treatment should be performed first. Subsequently, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and 1 mg/kg of prednisolone with slow tapering of the dose was started from day 40, and the level of creatine kinase decreased significantly. However, his dysphagia did not improve, and creatine kinase was elevated again on day 57. Thus, 1 g/day of methylprednisolone (mPSL) for three consecutive days was administered from day 58. After the second cycle of IVIG (on day 75) and steroid pulse therapy (on day 81), 50 mg/day of azathioprine was started on day 97 because creatine kinase was decreased but the dysphagia persisted. As the patient’s condition had deteriorated, manual muscle testing of his limb was grade 2 out of 5, and medical treatment was considered ineffective, PSL was increased from 15 to 20 mg per day and surgery including right hemicolectomy, gastrostomy, and tracheostomy was performed on day 124.
After surgery, the patient was almost bedridden due to disuse syndrome despite continuous rehabilitation. Fever was noted on day 146, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was not effective. Further investigation revealed positive serum cytomegalovirus antigen levels. Administration of ganciclovir 300 mg/day was initiated, but further complication of melena was noted. Gastroscopy was performed and showed cytomegalovirus esophagitis . The patient died 6 months later (204 days) after hospitalization due to the progression of uncontrollable infection.