We report the case of a 29-year old Hispanic male with ENKTL with the first relapse in the nasopharynx and then an isolated relapse in the CNS. At initial diagnosis in 2012, at age 21 years, he presented with disease in the caecum, hypopharynx, and bone marrow. He was treated with the SMILE protocol (dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, l-asparaginase, and etoposide) for 3 cycles, followed by autologous stem cell transplant with the BEAM regimen (carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan). He relapsed 4 years later, with presentation of left hemifacial pain, left otorrhea, fever, night sweats, fatigue, difficulty breathing through his nose, loss of smell, and loss of appetite. At this time, a positron emission tomography-computed tomography scan (PET-CT) revealed he had left cervical lymphadenopathy and nasopharynx, oropharynx, and soft palate avid .
The patient was then enrolled in a clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02541604) in August 2016 to receive 1200 mg (maximum dose) intravenous (IV) infusion therapy with atezolizumab every 3 weeks. Side effects were monitored according to the protocol. The target and non-target lesions were assessed by PET-CT after every two courses and evaluated by the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors v1.1 (RECIST).
The patient received his first dose of atezolizumab in September 2016 and his last dose in January 2018, for a total of 24 doses. At the start of treatment his EBV status was according to PCR analysis. Side effects were minimal without any Grade 3 or Grade 4 toxicity. He experienced striking clinical improvement within 3 weeks of receiving the first dose of atezolizumab. He reported increased appetite, weight gain, increased energy, disappearance of night sweats, no fever, and no missed days of work. At cycle 3, he was jogging approximately 3 miles per day about 5 days a week. At the end of treatment, the drainage from his left ear had almost completely disappeared. After completion of course 16, complete response (CR) of the target lesion and overall partial response (PR) were documented by PET-CT . After course 24, biopsies of the PET-positive areas in the nasopharynx and tonsils were taken to assess the pathologic response. Biopsies showed scattered Epstein–Barr encoding region (EBER)-positive cells without evidence of lymphoma. The decision was then taken to stop the administration of atezolizumab due to sustained clinical response.
The patient remained disease free for approximately 18 months off treatment. During follow-up he developed diabetes and had an increasing number of EBV copies, as determined by PCR, despite antiviral therapy. He was assessed for EBV-targeted therapy but did not meet the criteria. In June 2019, he developed a headache and nuchal rigidity. The work-up determined that he had an isolated CNS relapse and on-going evidence of chronic EBV infection with the EBV detectable in blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ; no additional sites of disease were identified. TIT chemotherapy consisting of methotrexate, hydrocortisone, and cytarabine was started and given twice a week, then weekly, and finally every 3 weeks. After 12 courses of TIT chemotherapy, the CSF still had disease and the plasma EBV load was still elevated; thus atezolizumab was added to the treatment regimen. Craniospinal radiation 3000 cGy to the brain and 2400 cGy to spine was started when it became evident that there was still EBER+ cells in the CSF. Following radiation, his EBV viral load was greatly diminished, but was still detectable albeit not quantifiable. Remarkably, the patient remains clinically well almost 1 year post CNS relapse while continuing on atezolizumab infusions.