A 12-week-old male intact domestic shorthair cat weighing 1.1 kg was presented for a progressive lameness of the left thoracic limb first noticed by the owners a week prior to presentation. The cat had been introduced to the household with no signs of disease 2 weeks earlier. There was one additional cat in the new household and both cats were strictly confined indoors with no physical contact with other animals.
Physical examination revealed a non-weight-bearing left thoracic limb lameness, mild muscle atrophy of the left thoracic limb and a large, firm swelling over the left scapula. No signs of skin wounds or trauma to the affected area were seen. The cat was otherwise bright, alert and responsive and no other abnormal clinical findings were noted.
Initial radiographic examination showed a monostotic spherical expansile bone lesion in the infraspinatus fossa of the left scapula with a central heterogenous mineral opacity surrounded by a zone of radiolucency and an outer rim of sclerotic and markedly thickened cortex and periosteal new bone with thin perpendicular radiating brush border-like reactions. Swelling of the surrounding soft tissue was noted (,).
CT (Philips Brilliance [40-slice]; Philips Medical Systems) was performed on the thoracic limbs. The expansile lesion had a central core of irregular mineral density with a heterogeneous lucent centre. The periosteum was thickened with a brush border-like reaction and there was marked surrounding soft tissue swelling . CT of the abdomen and thorax, including lung parenchyma, was unremarkable.
The differential diagnoses for the monostotic expansile bone lesion were an aggressive disease process such as bacterial osteomyelitis with sequestrum formation, fungal osteomyelitis or bone abscess. Bone cyst or neoplasia, such as osteochondroma or osteoclastoma, were considered less likely.
It was decided to collect samples from the scapular lesion for histopathological and microbiological analyses. The cat was premedicated with medetomidine (Domitor; Orion Pharma Animal Health) 0.08 mg/kg SC, meloxicam (Metacam; Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica) 0.2 mg/kg SC and methadone (Metadon Recip; Meda) 0.3 mg/kg. Ketamine (Ketaminol; Intervet) 5 mg/kg was administered intramuscularly to maintain a dissociative anaesthesia. Oxygen was delivered by flow-by during the procedure. With the cat positioned in right lateral recumbency a skin incision was made centrally over the left scapula parallel to the scapular spine. Blunt dissection through subcutaneous tissue, the aponeurosis of the deltoid muscle and the infraspinatus muscle gave access to the scapular lesion. Wedge biopsies were taken with a number 11 scalpel blade from both the mineralised capsule and the softer inner core. Fresh material was placed on a sterile surgical sponge during surgery, then placed in a sterile plastic container and submitted for microbiological culture in the hospital’s internal laboratory. Material fixed in 10% buffered neutral formalin was submitted for histopathological examination. The surgical site was lavaged with saline and closed routinely with 1.5 metric polyglactin 910 and nylon, and the cat recovered from anaesthesia. The cat received meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg administered orally q24h for 6 days after surgery.
Aerobic and anaerobic microbiological culture did not reveal bacterial growth.
The histopathological description of the lesion was a central acute suppurative osteomyelitis with reactive fibrosis and new bone formation in the periphery. Treatment with a first-generation cephalosporin cefadroxil (Cefadroxil; Mylan), oral suspension 20 mg/kg q12h, was initiated. The cat was re-evaluated after 3 weeks of antibiotic treatment. Physical examination revealed only a mild swelling over the left scapula and the lameness was completely resolved. Radiographic evaluation of the left scapula showed a markedly less aggressive lesion with a more normal trabecular pattern of the bone, thinning of the periost and decreased surrounding soft tissue swelling (, ).
Treatment with cefadroxil was continued to a total of 8 weeks, at which time the owners were interviewed by telephone and reported that the cat was acting completely normal, had no detectable swelling on the left scapula and no visible lameness.
The second follow-up, 20 weeks after treatment with antibiotics was initiated (12 weeks after completion of the treatment), revealed a clinically normal healthy cat with no scapular swelling and no lameness. Computed radiography and CT scan were performed which showed only mild expansion of the left infraspinatus fossa with near-normal thickness of the periosteum and no detectable periosteal reaction (,). The previous central heterogeneous mineral opacity was no longer present. A telephone interview with the owner was made 8 months after completion of the treatment; the cat was described by the owner as a completely normal healthy cat with no signs of lameness or scapular swelling.