A 47-year old Chinese woman with chronic kidney disease 5 underwent kidney transplantation 3 years ago. Her regular medications included Tacrolimus (1 mg, two times daily), Mycophenolate Mofetil (two times 250 mg, twice daily) and Prednisone acetate tablets (5 mg daily). Eighteen months ago, her proximal right index finger was red, painful and swollen, with some white pus. After admission, a hard and fluctuating 1 cm × 1 cm abscess was found on the dorsal side of the right index finger . Physical examination showed that the patient was in good general condition. The transplanted kidney was tough, inactive, with no tenderness. No snoring pain, no sputum pain and no negative shifting dullness in the renal area were detected. Digital Radiography (DR) showed soft tissue swelling around the right finger joint and an increased density shadow. Laboratory tests showed that C-Reactive Protein (CRP), blood, urine, stool and coagulation functions were normal, with creatinine 141 μmol / L, urea nitrogen 9.4 mmol / L and slightly increased uric acid, 423 μmol / L.
Gram and fluorescence staining of a direct smear from a syringe extraction of the abscess revealed the presence of filamentous fungi . On the second day, the same filamentous fungus was found on the pathological tissues after crushing when the lesion was stained with Gram stain, Grocott’s methenamine silver stain and fluorescent staining .
When the lesion was cultured at 37 °C or 28 °C for 3 days, filamentous fungi were observed, but no bacteria. White velvet colonies (2–3 mm) were found on a blood plate and in Sabouraud glucose agar (SGA) . After 1 week, grey aerial hyphae were observed . After 15 days, a 26 mm villous gray colony was observed on SGA and many “dew beads”-like exudates were found in the upper layer in the middle of the colony . Potato dextrose agar (PDA) (small culture) cultured at 28 °C for 6 days and 12 days showed separated hyphae but no spores. The mycelium color gradually darkened, which suggested presence of a dark fungus.
In order to identify the final pathogen, we performed DNA (Internal Transcribed Spacer, ITS) gene sequencing and compared the sequence with NCBI and Myo-bank databases. ITS gene primers were synthesized by Guangzhou Aiji Bio Company (Guangzhou, china) as follows: forward, ITS-1 5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3′, reverse: ITS-4 5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′. Amplification system (25 μL): 2x Taq PCR MasterMix 12.5 μL, double distilled water 8.5 μL, 1 μL of primers, 2 μL DNA template; amplification procedure: 95 °C (5 min), 95 °C (1 min), 55 °C (1 min), 72 °C (1 min), 38 cycles, 72 °C for 10 min. ITS gene sequences were analyzed by sequence scanner software (version 1.0) (Guangzhou Aiji Bio Company, China) and the quality value (QV) of sequence > 20 was selected and compared in NCBI and Myo-bank databases. The identification results were analyzed by the guide of CLSI MM18-A. We found that the homology between this filamentous fungus and Hongkongmyces snookiorum ILLS00125755 (Genbank Sequence ID: MH161189.1) was 99.66%.
The susceptibility of Hongkongmyces snookiorum to three antifungal drugs (amphotericin B, voriconazole and itraconazole) was tested using an E-test method (Trek Diagnostic Systems, East Grinstead, UK), performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for filamentous fungi. Briefly, Hongkongmyces snookiorum was cultured at 28 °C for 7 days. The concentration of hyphal fragments was adjusted to 1.0 McFarland standard (refer to CLSI M38-2A). A sterile cotton swab was immersed in the adjusted bacterial suspension. Excessive bacterial suspension was extruded on the wall of the tube, and streaked on the fungal drug sensitive agar plate. After 3–5 min at room temperature, E-test (Zhengzhou Antu Bio, China) was added to the plate and incubated at 35 °C for 7 days. The minimum inhibitory concentration in the E-test was obtained following manufacturer’s instructions. The test was performed in duplicate. The strain used for quality control was Candida albicans ATCC90028. The antifungal susceptibility test (E-test) showed sensitivity to azoles such as itraconazole and voriconazole, with MIC of 0.012 and 0.008 μg/mL, respectively, although resistance was observed against amphotericin B (MIC: 4 μg/ml). Administration of oral voriconazole (100 mg twice daily) combined with an operation resection was effective in the treatment of the lesion.