A 40-year-old man presented to the Emergency Room with abrupt-onset headache evolving for the past 10 days and associated with diminished visual acuity of the left eye, ptosis, and diplopia for 5 days. He was otherwise in good health, and he declared using exogenous androgens without medical prescription in the past 1 month. He started a treatment of anabolic steroids (nandrolone, testosterone enanthate, methandienone and stanozolol) 3 weeks before the occurrence of eye symptoms. Anabolic steroids were used for bodybuilding to increase muscle mass.
The patient was hemodynamically stable at admission. Clinical examination revealed chemosis of the left eye with partial ptosis. Pupils were isochoric and reactive to light with no deficit in visual acuity or visual fields during the neuro-ophthalmologic initial evaluation. Oculomotor testing revealed deficiency in the left eye adduction with partial paralysis of the oculomotor nerve . Blood count was normal except for minor leukocytosis without other signs of infection (normal CRP and sedimentation rate). The patient had no clinical signs of cortisol excess or acromegaly. Moreover, he did not exhibit any comorbidities known to be associated with hypercortisolism (diabetes, hypertension, fractures). The hormonal check-up showed excessively high serum testosterone levels (69 nmol/L; normal range: 11-31 nmol/L) associated with markedly reduced LH and FSH levels, consistent with inhibition of gonadal axis by the exogenous androgens. The rest of pituitary work-up was unremarkable . In the absence of a clear consensus in the published guidelines , we did not perform routine screening for hypercortisolism in the setting of a pituitary macroadenomas and without any suggestive clinical signs for Cushing syndrome.
The initial MRI showed a sellar lesion with an invasion of the left cavernous sinus classified 3b according to Knosp classification . A heterogenous anterior aspect of the lesion compatible with hemorrhagic zones was in favor of PA and normal pituitary gland was displaced on the right side .
After initial conservative management, the further treatment plan was discussed with our multidisciplinary team which includes a referent surgeon for pituitary surgery and neuro-endocrinologists, the patient and his wife. While the choice of surgical treatment versus conservative management remains controversial in the literature when only oculomotor symptoms are present, some data indicate possibly higher rate of ocular palsy recovery after surgical intervention compared to conservative management . Taking into consideration that our patient is a young individual engaged in active social and professional life, without any significant comorbidities and with a handicapping ocular palsy, a surgical treatment was decided.
The patient was then operated using an endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal approach to remove the tumor and decompress the structures inside the cavernous sinus . Intraoperatively, we found hemorrhagic areas and blood clots inside the tumor which confirmed the diagnosis of apoplexy. Histopathological analysis revealed the presence of a clinically silent sparsely granulated corticotroph adenoma. There was no hormonal co-expression detected. Post-operatively, third cranial nerve palsy resolved . His post-operative work-up showed mild/moderate corticotrope deficiency and the patient was temporarily substituted with hydrocortisone. Subsequent pituitary retesting at 6 weeks post surgery confirmed normalized corticotrope function (ACTH-stimulation testing) and reversal of the hypogonadotropic profile in the presence of normal testosterone levels . Immediate postoperative MRI showed no residual tumor . Given the absence of residual tumor, we did not perform a screening for subclinical hypercortisolism (such as a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test) after the surgery. Serial monitoring of cortisol and ACTH levels is scheduled.