A 79-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with chief complaint of periorbital edema. The patient stated she had been at a restaurant when she developed spontaneous right-sided epistaxis. Approximately five minutes after bleeding had started, she blew her nose, which led to one episode of sternutation. Following this, her epistaxis had resolved, and she went to the bathroom where she noticed right-sided periorbital edema which prompted her to go to the ED. The patient denied any recent trauma, falls, prior injuries to the head or face, headache, or orbital pain. She had no history of oral anticoagulation use, including aspirin. She denied any history of known osteoporosis, coagulopathy, or bleeding disorders.
Review of systems was remarkable for right eye swelling; however, she denied any sinus pain, periorbital pain, or headaches. On physical examination, there was significant right-sided periorbital swelling without proptosis. There were no signs of periorbital ecchymosis. The patient’s head was atraumatic without abrasions, lacerations, or ecchymosis. Her neurologic exam, including cranial nerve exam testing, was unremarkable. She had notable pain with palpation to the superior orbital rim. There was dried blood from the nares bilaterally, with evidence of a small area of excoriation on the anterior septum on the right, but no active epistaxis. Lab testing, including basic metabolic panel, complete blood count, and coagulation studies, was unremarkable apart from an ethanol level of 100 milligrams/deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: less than 80 mg/dL). [While we do not believe the patient’s alcohol intoxication played a significant role in her injury, it is a limitation to our report.]
Due to suspicion of orbital injury (including findings of periorbital swelling and bony orbit pain with palpation), the patient underwent computed tomography (CT) of the orbits without contrast. Imaging demonstrated multiple findings including a preseptal hematoma, along with an incomplete right zygomaticomaxillary complex fracture with preservation of the zygomatic arch. A buckle fracture of the lateral wall of the right orbit was also seen, with fractures of the right orbital floor and medial orbital wall without evidence of medial or inferior rectus entrapment . This fracture had propagation through the anterior lateral right maxillary sinus.
A CT of the head without contrast was also performed, which was remarkable for small foci of SAH over the medial left frontal sulci. There was an additional area of SAH in the sulci of the right temporal parietal junction . Trauma surgery and neurosurgery were consulted and recommended admission with repeat CT in six hours. The following day, the patient’s repeat CT head without contrast showed new bilateral subdural hematomas measuring eight millimeters (mm) on the frontal aspect on the right and seven mm on the left, and SAH in the left parietal lobe .
The patient remained stable without any neurologic complaints. Hematology work-up during her hospitalization was unremarkable. Two days following her initial presentation, repeat CT head showed stable findings with no increase in intracranial hemorrhage. Per neurosurgery recommendations, the patient was started on levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily for seven days, and she was subsequently discharged with instructions to follow up with plastic surgery regarding her orbital and facial fractures.