A 56-year-old woman with a 25-pack-year smoking history and alcohol abuse initially presented with a 12-month history of worsening dysphagia, odynophagia, and unintentional weight loss. Physical examination revealed a hard and fixed right-sided neck mass. Flexible laryngoscopy revealed an asymmetric mass at the base of tongue of which the biopsy was consistent with HPV-negative, moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Initial 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography and computerized tomography (PET/CT) scan revealed an extensive, intensely FDG-avid, right base of tongue lesion and metastatic right upper neck lymphadenopathy with no distant metastasis . Definitive concurrent chemoradiation was initiated using high-dose cisplatin. The first chemotherapy cycle was complicated by acute renal injury. Therefore, she was switched to cetuximab and received a loading dose of 400 mg/m2 followed by 250 mg/m2 weekly concurrently along with radiation treatment (total dose of 70 Gy; 200 cGy/fraction). She experienced a complete metabolic response on restaging PET/CT at 6 months . A follow-up PET/CT obtained ∼19 months from the initial PET/CT was consistent with the persistent response in the head and neck region but showed an intense right renal lesion and another less intense lesion on the left kidney . Subsequently, she underwent right partial nephrectomy. Surgical pathology confirmed a moderately differentiated metastatic squamous cell carcinoma with morphology very similar to the previously biopsied tongue lesion indicating the metastasis of head and neck origin. Repeat PET/CT scan performed at 22 months revealed a slight progression of the left renal lesion without any evidence of FDG-avid metastatic disease elsewhere . She was therefore initiated on palliative cetuximab and achieved complete remission as evidenced by restaging PET/CT 2 months later . The patient continued therapy for 4 additional months. Cetuximab was subsequently stopped for 6 months as per patient’s preference. Interval PET/CT performed at 36 months showed recurrence in the left kidney . Cetuximab was resumed again and she had the resolution of the prior noted left kidney lesion within 3 months after the resumption of the therapy . The patient was on intermittent cetuximab therapy with recurrence during break and response during treatment. She eventually underwent stereotactic body radiation therapy to the left kidney lesion 4 years later due to local progression. Maintenance cetuximab was resumed subsequently, and the patient remained on it for 12 additional months, experiencing good local control and good tolerance except for grade 1 mucocutaneous toxicity. Comprehensive multiplatform biomarker analysis performed on the left kidney metastasis discovered EGFR overexpression by immunohistochemistry, PI3K E542K mutation at exon 9, and TP53 C176S mutation at exon 5. Neither PD-1/PD-L1 expression nor RAS and BRAF mutations were detected . The patient provided a written informed consent for the treatment. Institutional Review Board approval was not sought as the treatment offered is standard of care and not part of a clinical trial therefore considered exempt from approval by the Institutional Review Board of Louisiana State University Health Sciences Centre in Shreveport.