A 65-year-old Man presented to our department via community referral, complained of right-sided painless cervical swelling.
Tumor onset was referred to be 8 years before it accelerated growth during recent months. There was no history of fever, trauma, toothache or pus discharge.
On examination, There was a soft painless cervical lesion of about 16 × 9 cm palpable in regions II–III-IV-V on the right side. This was classified as a stage III lesion according to the staging system proposed by de Serres.
The mass was painless and the patient was asymptomatic apart from some restriction of neck movement.
The patient's review of systems and additional medical history surgical, family, psychosocial and pharmacologic were unremarkable.
A contrast study of the neck using computed tomography (CT) showed a cystic lesion with thin walls of 150 × 100mm, medial to right sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM), which compressed the Carotid Sheath and was displacing the trachea and oesophagus to the left, occupied the right II–III-IV-V levels and was clearly delimited by vascular and muscular structures.
After obtaining the patient's informed consent, surgery was planned.
The procedure was done by an otolaryngologist-head and neck surgeon.
The neck was explored using a reverse ‘J’ shaped incision. After retracting the SCM (sternocleidomastoid muscle) for attaining wide exposure the cyst was found abutting the IJV and carotid artery which were carefully dissected away. All the important nerves and arteries encountered during the dissection were seen and preserved. The lesion was completely resected along with the entire capsule. The measurements of the Cyst were 15 × 10 × 8 cm in size.
Histological examination revealed unilocular cavity filled with uncolored fluid and lined with flat endothelial-like cells consistent with a diagnosis of cystic hygroma.
Post-operatively, the patient recovered well with no signs of any neurological dysfunction and he was discharged from hospital after 2 days.
Routine follow-up by clinical observation and ultrasound was done for past 11 months. There was no recurrence until now.