A 49-year-old woman with type 1 sialidosis (weight 49.2 kg, height 158.0 cm) had developed gait disorders at the age of 11 years and was diagnosed with type 1 sialidosis by genetic testing. The muscle weakness progressed to a manual muscle testing of 2/2. Therefore, her all limbs were contracted close to functional position and limitation of joint range of motion was developed. Therefore, she required complete assistance in her daily life activities from the age of 18 years. She had been wheelchair-bound when going out and bedridden in her home. She was able to swallow minced meal with full assistance and used to receive powdered medication through a gastrostomy.
She had been cognitively normal and could adequately understand our explanation about the proposed anesthetic managements. However, articulation disorders precluded smooth communication. Additionally, an ocular cherry-red spot was confirmed, and she suffered from progressive visual impairment. She was receiving levetiracetam and sodium valproate as prophylactics against myoclonic seizures of the limbs, and she had not experienced any seizures for the last few years.
She presented neither facial dysmorphism nor scoliosis. Magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal any intraspinal malformation. Orofacial examination revealed neither deformations nor growths such as occult tracheal granulomas in the oral cavity. She had neither neck extension restriction nor temporomandibular joint stiffness. Oral evaluation also revealed a Mallampati class 1 airway. She had no history suggestive of either obstructive sleep apnea or recurrent pneumonia. Her blood analysis, electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and spirometry did not reveal any abnormality.
At the age of 49 years, she was diagnosed with left breast cancer and was scheduled to undergo left total mastectomy. Anesthesia was planned as total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) using propofol and remifentanil. She positioned supine on the operating table with all assistance. The gap between contracted limbs and the table was filled with some towels. Electrocardiogram, noninvasive blood pressure, percutaneous oxygen saturation, and bispectral index (BIS) were monitored during anesthesia.
With no premedication, rapid sequence induction was performed with fentanyl 50 μg and a targeted controlled infusion (TCI) of propofol. The initial effect-site propofol concentration was set at 2.0 μg/ml. After confirming loss of consciousness at an effect-site concentration of 0.8 μg/ml, rocuronium bromide 50 mg was administered before tracheal intubation. The endotracheal tube (inner diameter 7.0) was easily inserted using a McGrathⓇ videolaryngoscope.
Anesthesia was maintained with a propofol infusion at the rate of 1.5–2.0 μg/ml and remifentanil infusion of 0.1–0.25 μg/kg/min to maintain BIS value between 40 and 60. Intravenous acetaminophen 750 mg was administered and local anesthetics (10 ml of 0.25% levobupivacaine) were injected at the surgical incision site. Intraoperatively, her blood pressure and heart rate stayed within 20% of preoperative values without special hemodynamic support. The surgery was uneventfully completed in 33 min and the blood loss was 1 ml.
Ninety seconds after administration of 100 mg of sugammadex, her train-of-four (TOF) ratio at the ulnar nerve recovered to 100%. She responds to her name being called with handshake, and spontaneous tidal volume was approximately 400 ml per inspiration at an effect-site propofol concentration of 0.5 μg/ml. Subsequently, her trachea was extubated 20 min after discontinuation of anesthetics. In the ward, acetaminophen was administered for analgesia as required. There were neither respiratory problems nor new neurological deficits during the postoperative course. She was discharged 7 days after surgery.
Three months after mastectomy, she presented with lower abdominal pain that was diagnosed with uterine fibroids and was scheduled to undergo open total hysterectomy. Anesthesia was planned as a combination of general and epidural anesthesia. Premedication was not prescribed. Preoperatively, an epidural catheter was uneventfully inserted via the T11-T12 intervertebral space. Next, the rapid sequence induction was performed with fentanyl 50 μg, a TCI of propofol and rocuronium bromide 50 mg. After smooth insertion of the endotracheal tube, anesthesia was maintained with a propofol infusion of 1.0–1.5 μg/ml and remifentanil 0.05–0.1 μg/kg/min. Patient-controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA) was initiated with 4 ml/h of 0.125% levobupivacaine, with a 3-ml bolus dose and 30-min lockout time, following administration of 3 ml 0.25% levobupivacaine via the epidural catheter.
The surgery was uneventfully completed in 3 h 7 min and blood loss was 212 ml. Hemodynamic stability was maintained without the need for cardiovascular support. After administration of 100 mg of sugammadex, the TOF ratio recovered to 100%. She emerged from anesthesia and her trachea was extubated 12 mins after discontinuation of the anesthetics. In the ward, PCEA alleviated her pain, with rescue acetaminophen given as needed. She was discharged on the 10th postoperative day after an uneventful postoperative course.