A 27-year-old man, who had no prior medical illness nor drug or family history, is admitted with a gradually worsening shortness of breath on exertion for a few months associated with a nonproductive cough. Also, he was complaining of paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, anorexia, and weight loss.
On physical examination: heart rate 120/min, blood pressure 106/70 mmHg, respiratory rate 26/min, and oxygen saturation 98%. Cardiovascular examination showed a raised jugular venous pulse and muffled heart sounds. Respiratory examination showed dullness on percussion with decreased intensity of breath sounds over the right thoracic area.
Laboratory tests found an inflammatory syndrome with a white blood cell count of 19,400/mm3, C-reactive protein was at 146mg/l. Chest X-ray demonstrated an enlarged cardiac silhouette, which was suspicious for a pericardial effusion, with a large right pleural effusion.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) confirmed a large circumferential pericardial effusion with significant fibrin deposits filling the pericardial sinuses and recesses and posterior pericardial thickening, without signs of compression. TTE showed also a severe tricuspid regurgitation associated with severe pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular dysfunction . Pericardiocentesis wasn't feasible due to fibrin deposits.
A possibility of pericardial tuberculosis was considered. However, workup was negative for the presence of acid-fast bacilli in the smear, tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction, and culture. A serology for HIV, HBV and HCV was negative. The immunological tests for common autoimmune cases of serositis and tumor markers were also negative. Pleural fluid analysis revealed a transudative effusion with no bacteria or neoplastic cells.
With the initial assessment being unable to demonstrate the cause of serositis, a computed tomography scan (CT scan) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed, which showed a circumferential tissue thickening of the pericardium with pleural effusion and ascites.
Based on the clinical features, an empirical anti-tuberculous therapy (Quadtab: 4tablets per day) and treatment with prednisolone (40mg/day) was started. However, the initial outcome was unfavorable since the clinical condition rapidly worsened (weight loss and severe anorexia, polyarthralgia, swelling of the face and right arm, and signs of low cardiac output). A doppler ultrasound of the right upper limb was performed, showing a deep thrombophlebitis of the right subclavian vein extended to the internal jugular vein.
A multidisciplinary team meeting, including cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons was conducted to decide upon patient management, the team recommended a surgical biopsy of the pericardium , the procedure was performed, under general anesthesia, by Pr. F. NYA a cardiac surgeon at military hospital of Rabat.
Unfortunately, the patient died during the procedure. Histopathological examination of the tissue sample was in favor of the diagnosis of a pericardial leiomyosarcoma.