A 59-year-old woman presented to the clinic with chronic cough. Multiple bilateral lung nodules were observed following computed tomography (CT) imaging of the chest and abdomen, which was initially performed to investigate irritable bowel disease. Her medical history included type-2 diabetes mellitus, gastroesophageal reflux disease, deep vein thrombosis, depression, and anxiety. She was a nonsmoker with no significant history of malignancy. Clinically, the patient reported night sweats, fatigue, productive cough, and occasional shortness of breath. Initial physical examination and laboratory test results were unremarkable. Her spirometry results were within normal ranges. An extensive laboratory workup was negative for autoimmune and infectious etiologies. The patient underwent transbronchial biopsies with multiple samples taken from the left lung to confirm the diagnosis. Follow-up imaging showed no progression in nodule size or number.
Chest CT revealed numerous bilateral pulmonary nodules throughout the lungs, most of which were small in size, measuring up to 5 mm in the right lower lobe and up to 4 mm in the left upper lobe .
H&E-stained sections show nodular foci of interstitial epithelioid to spindled cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and oval nuclei with fine chromatin arranged in a vaguely whorled architecture . Immunohistochemical evaluation of the lesional cells showed positive expression for EMA (membranous expression), progesterone receptor (nuclear expression), and pan-TRK clone mAb EPR17341 (membranous expression). Pan-TRK expression was restricted to the lesional cells and was not present in the background lung parenchyma. Insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1) was negative for expression . Subsequent biopsies targeting nodules of the contralateral lung showed histologically unremarkable benign alveolated lung parenchyma and was deemed non-diagnostic, owing to the limited targeting ability afforded by bronchoscopic forceps biopsies. RNA-based next-generation sequencing for the detection of NTRK fusions was negative for gene rearrangements involving NTRK1, NTRK2, and NTRK3.