A 55-year-old female underwent total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, and partial transverse colectomy for advanced left ovarian cancer 2 years ago. She was diagnosed with ovarian serous adenocarcinoma and multiple peritoneal metastases based on operative and pathological findings (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics: FIGO stage IIIc). After the operation, she received chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin, which is regarded as the standard therapy for advanced ovarian cancer, against the residual peritoneal metastases for 8 months. After the chemotherapy, she achieved a clinical complete response on abdominal computed tomography (CT). In addition, the serum tumor marker cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) level, which was elevated to 274.3 U/ml before the treatment, decreased to the normal range.
Two years after the initial surgical treatment for the ovarian cancer, she complained of dark urine, yellowish discoloration of the eyes, and loss of body weight. The serum CA125 level increased to 50.9 U/ml. Carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19–9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were normal. The total bilirubin level was elevated at 10.4 mg/dl. Abdominal CT showed intrahepatic bile duct dilatation due to an approximately 10-mm solid tumor at the hepatic hilum . Simultaneously, several irregular peritoneal nodules (less than 15 mm in size) were detected in the pelvic cavity. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed uptake in the hepatic hilum tumor (standardized uptake value (SUV) max 8.2) and the pelvic nodules (SUV max 4.7). Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings also showed a high-attenuation intraductal mass at the hepatic hilum and dilation of the intrahepatic bile duct . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) revealed the defect at the bifurcation of the common hepatic duct (Bismuth-Corlette classification type II) and endoscopic nasobiliary drainage was performed for obstructive jaundice . Intraductal ultrasonography (IDUS) suggested the tumor was located in the bile duct wall . Tumor biopsy and brush cytology of the bile duct indicated atypical cells suspicious for carcinoma; however, a definite histopathological diagnosis could not be obtained because of the limited biopsy samples. Preoperatively, she was diagnosed with a hepato-hilar bile duct tumor, concurrent with recurrent peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer. The recurrent peritoneal dissemination was regarded to be controllable by paclitaxel and carboplatin, because it developed 14 months after stopping chemotherapy. Curative resection was suggested for treatment of the hepato-hilar bile duct tumor, because a definite histopathological diagnosis was not obtained and primary cholangiocarcinoma could not be ruled out. The abdominal CT demonstrated that the tumor was in contact with the right hepatic artery, suggesting arterial infiltration. We planned a right hepatectomy and performed preoperative percutaneous transhepatic portal embolization (PTPE). The CT volumetry 3 weeks after the PTPE demonstrated that the volume of the left lobe increased from 390 to 511 ml. She underwent right hepatectomy with caudate lobectomy and extrahepatic bile duct resection.
Gross description indicated that the tumor was at the bifurcation of the common hepatic duct . Histopathologically, tumor cells did not invade the liver parenchyma . The tumor was localized in the biliary wall and extended to the subserosal layer of the hepatoduodenal ligament, whereas direct exposure to the hepatoduodenal ligament was not detected. Dysplastic cells formed tubular structures and showed nuclear hyperchromasia. Psammoma bodies, which are small calcifications, were seen in the tumor. The histopathological features were similar to the pathology of the primary ovarian cancer. In the native biliary epithelium, no areas resembling dysplasia were seen. Peritoneal washing cytology suggested a serous adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin-7 (CK-7) and Wilms tumor-1 (WT-1) and negative for cytokeratin-20 (CK-20) and estrogen receptor (ER) . These findings suggested that the biliary tumor was derived from the ovarian cancer. Peritoneal metastases were scattered around the peritoneum, greater omentum, and diaphragm. The final diagnosis was an ovarian cancer-associated metastasis to the bile duct and recurrence of lymph node and peritoneal metastasis of ovarian cancer.
Her postoperative course was unremarkable. According to the chemotherapy sensitivity test, she received chemotherapy with paclitaxel against the residual peritoneal metastases for 7 months and achieved a clinical complete response. However, progression of the peritoneal dissemination and lymph node metastasis was confirmed 28 months after the operation.