A 40 years old Iraqi lady presented to our private gynaecology clinic 3 months after marriage for infertility problem. Upon primary clinical assessment, she reported primary amenorrhea for which has never been evaluated. Otherwise, her previous medical and surgical histories were normal. Pubarche started at 10 years of age, and thelarche at 12 years. Her family history was negative. Physical examination showed a normal stature lady with normal breasts, axillary and pubic hair development. No hirsutism, acne or galactorrhea. Inspection of genital area showed normal external genitalia and a blind vaginal pouch. The pelvic examination revealed a palpable mobile firm mass. Office tans-abdominal pelvic ultrasound showed 7 x 9 centimetres heterogeneous well-delineated pelvic mass containing many calcifications .
Ovaries were normal, but the uterus couldn’t be clearly identified. Laboratory work-up including full endocrine assessment and tumour markers was normal. Mayer-Rokitanski-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome was then suspected. An abdominal ultrasound showed both normally located kidneys. A pelvic MRI was suggested in order to prove the diagnosis and characterize the pelvic mass, but the lady refused it because of financial limitation. She asked to skip to a definitive diagnostic procedure. She was scheduled for a diagnostic laparoscopy as being part of primary amenorrhea work up and for the pelvic mass assessment. Diagnostic laparoscopy showed normal ovaries and fallopian tubes, the total absence of the uterus and a solid pelvic mass arising from the right-sided intra-peritoneal part of the round ligament .
In the absence of a written consent of the patient to perform the mass removal, the patient was rescheduled for a laparotomy. In fact, with the doubt of the mass type, and the fear of the presence of leiomyosarcoma, we did not suggest a laparoscopic myomectomy with the use of power morcellator. We counselled the patient concerning the possibility of vaginoplasty and the fertility potential with the help of a surrogate mother. Laparotomy was performed in another clinic one month later and the pathology report revealed a leimyoma with some epithelioid features, moderate myxoid and hyalinized changes.