A 70-year-old man was admitted to our hospital to undergo treatment for GC in October 2017. Preoperative endoscopy revealed a circumferential type 3 tumor extending from the upper to lower portions of the gastric body . Biopsy revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2) immunohistochemical staining was negative. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed a primary tumor invading the pancreatic tail and spleen and enlarged regional and para-aortic lymph nodes . The patient received tegafur, gimeracil, and oteracil potassium plus oxaliplatin as first-line chemotherapy. After three courses, CT revealed progression of the primary tumor. After seven courses of paclitaxel plus ramucirumab as second-line chemotherapy, the primary tumor had increased in size. Therefore, we initiated third-line chemotherapy with nivolumab at 240 mg/body. Before third-line nivolumab, the primary tumor was still invading the pancreatic tail, spleen, and transverse colon, and the regional and para-aortic lymph nodes had decreased in size, but had not returned to normal. Although immune-related adverse effects of a grade 1 rash and grade 2 adrenal gland hypofunction occurred after the fifth course, nivolumab was continued for 24 courses. After the 24 courses of nivolumab, endoscopy revealed that the primary tumor was smaller . Follow-up CT revealed that the regional and para-aortic lymph nodes had decreased in size by 73%, and the degree of invasion had improved ; therefore, we planned conversion surgery. Intraoperatively, we found no intraperitoneal nodules indicating metastasis, and cytology revealed class II ascites. However, the distal pancreas, splenic hilum, and transverse colon were adhered to the gastric body, which was considered invasion by the primary tumor. Thus, we performed D2 total gastrectomy with distal pancreatosplenectomy and partial transverse colectomy. We retrieved 32 regional lymph nodes, but could not recover the para-aortic lymph nodes because of increased blood loss. The total operative time was 8 h and 50 min. Total blood loss was 1966 ml, and we administered transfusions of 560 ml erythrocytes and 480 ml fresh-frozen plasma (FFP).
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit postoperatively. On postoperative day (POD) 5, after oral intake was started, he developed a fever and abdominal pain. CT revealed a pancreatic fistula and leakage from the transverse colon anastomosis; hence, we placed an endoscopic ultrasound-guided drain, and the fistula resolved on POD 79. Oral intake restarted on POD 82, and the patient was finally discharged from our hospital in good condition on POD 87.
The pathological diagnosis was type III, moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (tub2) with signet ring cells, stage ypT1b (SM), ly0, and v0. The pathological proximal and distal margins were free from carcinoma cells . One metastatic lymph node was observed (No. 4d node) . The therapeutic effect was Grade 2b, and there were no signs of recurrence on CT 7 months after surgery, without adjuvant chemotherapy .