A 70-year-old male was brought to our emergency department with a complaint of sudden onset headache. He had Glasgow Coma Scale E4V5M6, WFNS grade I, at the time of arrival. A head computed tomography (CT) showed Fisher group 3 SAH and acute hydrocephalus [ and b]. CT angiography did not reveal an arterial aneurysm, but abnormal vessels were observed around the right vertebral artery of the intracranial portion , suspecting AVF. Cerebral angiography was performed on the same day. An arteriovenous (AV) shunt was observed, with the C1 radicular artery and anterior spinal artery of the right vertebral artery as the inflow vessels and the intradural vein as the drain aging vein. The outflow vein drained cranial and caudal intradural veins. No arterial aneurysm or varices was evident in the lesion at the initial cerebral angiography. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) contrast-enhanced motion-sensitized driven equilibrium (MSDE) showed a faintly enhanced area in front of the spinal cord that was presumed to be a vascular component [-]. MRI contrast spoiled gradient recalled echo (SPGR) did not show any obvious vascular architecture in the same area .
We diagnosed SAH due to ruptured intradural AVF at the CCJ. Feeding arteries were the C1 radicular artery, anterior spinal artery, and draining veins outflow to cranial and caudal directions. In the acute period, continuous ventricular drainage was performed. Considering the possibility that the hematoma might obscure the shunt point and that other lesions might be revealed as a source of bleeding, we decided on a wait-and-see surgical and to review radiological examinations.
Cerebral angiography was performed again on the 26th day. A varicose structure was seen in part of the draining vein compared with initial angiography [ and ]. The same site coincided with a vascular component that appeared to be an outflow vein previously by MRI-enhanced MSDE [ and ]. MRI contrast-enhanced SPGR also showed an aneurysmal structure . We considered that this aneurysmal structure had ruptured, and we planned direct surgery to occlude AVF.
On the 38th day, he underwent a right suboccipital craniotomy and hemilaminectomy of the right C1. After the dural incision, a shunt point was found at the cranial side of the first cervical nerve, which was considered to be the radicular AVF [ and ]. The inflow vessel, including the shunt point, was coagulated. Moreover, we observed the ventral side of the spinal cord, and the varices were found, so we coagulated and removed its lesion [ and ]. Intraoperative indocyanine green angiography confirmed the disappearance of AV shunt flow. The postoperative course was good, and cerebral angiography was performed on postoperative day 9, confirming the disappearance of AV shunt flow. On the 14th day, he underwent a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for secondary hydrocephalus and was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital with a modified Rankin scale 2 on the 30th day.
The lesion contained a muscular artery with an internal elastic lamina, a vein with a sparse muscular layer, and a vascular component with a thin wall that appeared to be a varices . Both the muscular artery and vein had enlarged areas of the lumen that were presumed to be the transition to the dilated vessels and were thought to be an AV shunt point. Elastica Masson staining showed that the walls of suggested varices structures were highly thinned and lacked internal elastic lamina . The vein wall also showed irregular thickening of the muscular layer, suggesting arterialization that causes abnormal pressure load .
Immunohistochemical staining results for is presented in . Although there was no obvious ruptured point in the specimen, there were lymphocytic cells infiltrated around the varicose vein [ and 6a], suggesting inflammation and hemosiderin deposition , which may have occurred after bleeding. CD68 staining showed positive cells around blood vessels , which appeared to be macrophages. Myeloperoxidase staining was negative .