A 27-year-old Korean male was admitted to the emergency room due to progressive shortness of breath and fever on the day of a hospital visit. The patient had been conducted as follows. The patient was placed in the prone position. The biopsy was taken from the lower pole of the kidney below 12th rib. The biopsy needle (16 gauge) is guided using USG to ensure visualization of the needle as it pierces the kidney parenchyme. There had been no immediate complications. Biopsy result revealed idiopathic membranous nephropathy and he received conservative management, including a low salt and protein diet, 80 mg of furosemide, and 80 mg of valsartan for 3 months. He had also been admitted to the department of nephrology due to transudative left pleural effusion, which was considered a complication of nephrotic syndrome and was discharged with full expansion of the lung by percutaneous drainage 3 weeks prior. He had no history of tuberculosis, chronic hepatitis, hypertension, or diabetes.
A physical examination revealed an alert status, but an acute-ill looking appearance. A marked decrease in breathing sounds and dullness upon percussion of the left side of the chest without wheezing was detected. His heart beat was regular without a murmur. Respiratory rate was 22/min, blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 115/min, and body temperature was 38.3 °C. Oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. No palpable lymph nodes were detected in the head or neck area. Organomegaly was not seen in the abdomen. No pretibial pitting edema, muscular swelling, or skin color changes were observed on either lower extremity. No tenderness on either costovertebral angle area was noted.
A chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan revealed massive left-sided pleural effusion . A complete blood count revealed hemoglobin of 13.8 g/dL; total leukocyte count, 17.7 × 103/mm3 with predominant neutrophils (77%); and a platelet count of 238 × 103/mm3. The blood biochemistry profile was as follows: protein, 4.4 g/dL; albumin, 2.1 g/dL, cholesterol, 223 mg/dL; glucose, 92 mg/dL; lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), 190 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 46 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 16 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 20 IU/L; blood urea nitrogen, 18.1 mg/dL; and creatinine, 0.85 mg/dL. His C-reactive protein level was 3.9 mg/L. A microurinalysis revealed 3+ protein and 2+ blood on a dipstick and 10–19 red blood cells/high-power field. The spot urine protein/creatinine ratio was 4.7.
A 14 Fr pigtail catheter was inserted into the pleural cavity, and 2 L of pleural fluid was drained initially over 24 h. A biochemical analysis of the pleural fluid revealed pH, 7.8; glucose, 93 mg/dL; LDH, 60 U/L; creatinine, 1.1 mg/dL; protein, 0.2 g/dL; amylase, 17 U/L; and adenosine deaminase, 2 IU/L. The pleural fluid/serum creatinine ratio was 1.29. Cultures from blood, pleural fluid, and urine were sterile. Cytology from the pleural fluid did not show any malignant cells. The patient was started on intravenous empirical antibiotics. His clinical manifestations, such as respiratory stress and fever, nearly disappeared on day 3 after admission.
An enhanced CT scan on day 6 after admission revealed diffuse left renal swelling and fluid collection in the anterior pararenal space. No specific urine leakage was seen on intravenous pyelography. There was no distal obstruction on these studies. Under suspicion of urinothorax, a 99mTc DTPA (diethylenetriaminepentacetate) renal scan was performed on day 12 after admission. Radionuclide scintigraphy and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT-CT) using 99mTc DTPA revealed urine leakage from the lower pole of the left kidney to the left sub-diaphragm and the pleural space 5 h after injecting the tracer . This leakage was also confirmed through retrograde pyelography (RGP) (Additional file : Fig. S1). A double-J stent and Foley catheter were inserted for 4 weeks to reduce leakage pressure and he was tolerable with this intervention. Follow-up radionuclide scintigraphy and SPECT-CT did not show any kidney or tracer leakage at the sub-diaphragm or pleural space . The pigtail catheter was removed with full lung expansion, and the double-J stent and Foley catheter were taken out safely. He is being followed in our outpatient department with no recurrence of urinothorax for 1 year.