We report the case of a 28-year-old Indian man who has worked as a computer engineer in Dubai for the past 5 years. He presented to the Accident and Emergency Department of our hospital with complaints of lethargy, anorexia, nausea, vomiting and weight loss over a 1-month period. His symptoms had worsened over the preceding 4 days, during which time he became progressively unable to perform his daily activities until he was unable to get out of bed. He had normal bowel habits and no fever, night sweats or hair loss. He did not experience headaches or problems with vision, swallowing or hearing, nor did he complain of neurological weakness or numbness. He never complained of cough or hemoptysis. He had not had any recent trauma of any form.
Our patient was not known to have any previous medical problems and never had any infectious disorder, despite frequent visits to his home country. He was seen and assessed in many private hospitals, where he received intravenous fluids and vitamins and then discharged.
He was brought to the Emergency Room of our institution by ambulance. Our initial assessment was that he was a young man who was remarkably weak, emaciated, pale and severely dehydrated with sunken eyes. His physical examination results showed blood pressure 60/40mmHg, heart rate 100 beats/min, respiratory rate 18/min, O2 saturation 100% on room air, body temperature 36.5°C and blood glucose level 50mg/dL. During our systemic examination, we noted that he had hyperpigmented skin over his knuckles as well as in the oral mucosa. A chest examination revealed normal vesicular breathing with no added sounds. The cardiovascular, abdominal and locomotor system assessments did not show any abnormalities. Our neurological review showed that he was sleepy but arousable, his higher brain functions remained intact and he was moving all of his limbs, but with some limitation due to generalized weakness.
The patient received intravenous normal saline immediately. Dexamethasone was administered (after a sample of serum cortisol was taken). No inotropes were required. After 2 hours, he started to communicate perfectly, and his vital signs improved. His blood pressure had increased to 100/60mmHg, his heart rate was 86 beats/min, his respiratory rate was 16/min and his O2 saturation remained 100% on room air. The patient was admitted to the high-dependency medical ward with a provisional diagnosis of adrenocortical insufficiency and acute adrenal crisis. The results of our initial laboratory investigations are shown in Tables and .
His chest X-ray showed a faint patch of infiltrate in the right lower zone, and an air bronchogram was suggestive of interstitial pneumonitis (probably chronic), supported by the absence of clinical indicators of bacterial pneumonia. No pleural effusion was observed. An echocardiogram was taken by the emergency room physician, which showed no structural abnormalities, an ejection fraction of 55%, no wall motion abnormalities and no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed very minimal fluid collection at the hepatorenal pouch and no evidence of any free ascetic fluid collection at the pelvis. A computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast enhancement for the abdomen and pelvis showed an unremarkable appearance of the adrenal glands. We noticed hypodensity around the portal vein, suggestive of peri-portal lymphedema (edema). We also observed mild abdominal ascites and bilateral pleural effusion. A minimal amount of free fluid around the gallbladder and in the upper abdomen and pelvic areas was seen.
The patient was continued on steroids and intravenous fluids. His condition improved substantially over a 10-day period. Meanwhile, we investigated the possible causes of his peri-portal edema and free fluid collection. No apparent reason was found, so we speculated that it could be associated with his adrenal insufficiency. Therefore, we decided that he could be discharged, with follow-up for this radiological feature after 8 to 12 weeks by obtaining another CT scan. At discharge, all of our patient’s blood tests had come down to normal, including the deranged coagulation profile, without any intervention. He showed significant clinical improvement, so he was discharged with prescriptions for hydrocortisone at a dosage of 20mg in the morning and 10mg in the evening and levothyroxine 25mg/day (to be started 2 weeks after the initiation of steroid replacement therapy), and we made an appointment for him to return to the endocrine clinic.
At the patient’s follow-up visit at the clinic, he showed dramatic improvement in his general condition. CT scans of his abdomen showed complete resolution of the peri-portal lymphedema and the free fluid in the peritoneal and pleural spaces . A repeat chest X-ray did not show any significant changes from the previous study, consistent with non-specific interstitial changes. His follow-up laboratory blood test results are shown in Table .