A 62-year-old woman was admitted to a community hospital in Jangheung, South Korea for multiple contusions due to repeated falls. After admission, she was treated with antibiotics, urinary catheterization, and a commercial lipid emulsion-containing total parenteral nutrition (TPN). C. diddensiae fungemia was diagnosed based on positive blood cultures drawn from peripheral veins on hospitalization days 17, 23, and 24 .
The patient had an 8-year history of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). From the time of SLE diagnosis, she had been taking methylprednisolone, azathioprine, and hydroxychloroquine sulfate and tapered them gradually. Her SLE has been well controlled without any medication for the past 2 years. Despite good control of SLE, chronic leukopenia of 2000 to 3000/mm3 (neutrophils 600 to 1500/mm3) persisted, and bone-marrow biopsy revealed hypocellularity of all cell lines without dyserythropoiesis or megakaryocytic atypia, which is typical of SLE. The patient had been diagnosed with a chordoma in the sphenoid sinus and clivus 5 years earlier. Despite repeated neurosurgery, the tumor progressed and resulted in multiple cranial nerve neuropathies. One month before hospitalization, the patient reported worsened difficulty in swallowing, and a physical examination revealed right vocal cord palsy and no right oropharyngeal lateral wall movement. Twenty-three days before this admission, she was admitted for aspiration pneumonia and given piperacillin/tazobactam and levofloxacin for 2 weeks. She has never received antifungal treatment.
A lipid emulsion containing TPN was started for nutrition support on day 1 of hospitalization and all infusions were completed within 24 h of initiating the fluid. On day 8, the patient developed an intermittent fever (peak temperature 38.8 °C) that persisted for 14 days. Catheter-associated urinary tract infection was suspected and ceftriaxone was initiated after a urine culture was taken. The antibiotic was subsequently changed to vancomycin because the urine culture revealed the presence of ampicillin-resistant, vancomycin-susceptible Enterococcus faecium. Chest and abdominal computed tomography did not reveal any focus of infection or perforation. Because blood cultures obtained on day 17 indicated the presence of a yeast, she was transferred to Chonnam National University Hospital (CNUH; Gwangju, South Korea) for the treatment of fungemia. Upon physical examination, there were no local inflammatory signs at the peripheral intravenous catheter sites, such as erythema, swelling or tenderness. On arrival at CNUH (on day 23), a follow-up blood culture was performed, and intravenous fluconazole was initiated empirically (800 mg loading and then 400 mg/day). The TPN was discontinued. An ophthalmological examination showed no evidence of endophthalmitis, and transthoracic echocardiography showed no evidence of endocarditis. On day 26 (4 days after CNUH admission), the fluconazole was replaced with micafungin (100 mg/day for 16 days) after 4 days of fluconazole treatment because of the high fluconazole minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) in antifungal susceptibility tests. Follow-up blood cultures taken on day 26 were negative. The patient’s condition improved and she was discharged on day 41 after supportive care and intravenous echinocandin treatment.
Six blood culture sets from peripheral blood obtained on days 17, 23, and 24 (two sets on each day) yielded the same yeast isolate. The isolate grew on sheep blood agar as non-hemolytic, white colonies after 48 h of incubation at 35 °C in an aerobic environment, and yielded pink colonies on BBL CHROMagar Candida (BD Diagnostics, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The isolates were analyzed by sequencing the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and D1/D2 regions of the 26S ribosomal DNA of their rRNA gene. The ITS region (including the 5.8S rRNA gene) and the D1/D2 domains of the 26S rRNA gene were amplified using the primer pairs pITS-F (5′-GTCGTAACAAGGTTAACCTGCGG-3′) and pITS-R (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′) and NL1 (5′-GCATATCAATAAGCGGAGGAAAAG-3′) and NL4 (5′-GGTCCGTGTTTCAAGACGG-3′) , respectively. The yeast was identified as C. diddensiae (GenBank accession no: KC253978 and MK394116.1) with 100% homology using BLAST . The isolate was misidentified as Millerozyma farinosa (93% probability) when the Vitek2 YST card (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Étoile, France) systems was used. Two commercial matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) systems, the VITEK MS (bioMérieux) with Knowledge Base ver. 3.0 and the MALDI-TOF Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) were not able to identify the yeast because C. diddensiae was not included in their databases. Antifungal susceptibility testing performed using the broth microdilution M27-A3 method of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) produced following MICs: amphotericin B, 1 μg/mL; fluconazole, 8 μg/mL; voriconazole, 0.25 μg/mL; caspofungin, 0.25 μg/mL; and micafungin, 0.125 μg/mL.