In the studied family, a 43-year-old gravida at 11 weeks of gestation (the proband, II-4), her mother (I-2) and sibling (II-1) were presented with abnormal fusions of joints . The clinical features of hands and feet are listed and provided in . In the initial observation on the fingers of the proband (II-4), it was noticed that both thumbs were normal ; however, finger 2–5 lacked creases on flexor and extensor surfaces of the interphalangeal joints , and was not able to flex . Further examination on elbow joints demonstrated that she had normal abilities to move them and was able to touch her shoulder with hands . On checking both feet of the proband , we found abnormalities similar to the fingers: (i) both thumbs were normal; (ii) both toe 2–4 lacked creases on flexor and extensor surfaces of interphalangeal joints; and (iii) the symptomatic toes were not able to flex. Furthermore, a little short phalange of second toe was noticed in both feet . Given that the proband was a gravida at 11 weeks of gestation, X-ray examinations that could enable uncovering of the status of the osseous fusion were not applied to her. Patient I-2 and II-1 had similar symptoms as the proband, therefore, detailed examinations including X-ray examinations were supposed to provide alternative evidences for the proband. Like proband, both patients I-2 and II-1 had normal elbows. For patient I-2, proximal interphalangeal joint osseous fusion of left finger 4–5 and right finger 4–5 were observed , but tarsal-carpal coalition was not found. Foot radiographs revealed that patient I-2 had proximal interphalangeal joint osseous fusion of left toe 3–5 and right toe 2–4 , and she had bilateral talonavicular coalition and talocalcaneal coalition of feet . For patient II-1, both observation and radiographs showed proximal symphalangism of left fingers 3–5 and right fingers 4–5 . Proximal symphalangism was evident in right toe 3–4, while distal interphalangeal joint osseous fusions were observed on left toe 2–5 . Furthermore, fusion of multiple tarsal bones was found in patient II-1 , that is, bilateral talonavicular coalition, bilateral talocalcaneal coalition, coalition of the cuboid bone and the third cuneiform bone on left side as well as coalition of the third cuneiform bone and the third metatarsal bone on the left side. Pure-tone audiometry (125 Hz–8 kHz) showed normal hearing thresholds in all the members.
WES was performed on the proband and total of 136,155 variants, including 122,267 single nucleotide variants, 13,882 indels (deletions and insertions, <50 bp) and 6 copy number variations were identified by WES, followed by annotation, filtration and prioritization steps to obtain the variants causing symptoms in the studied family . The results indicate that NOG is the most likely candidate gene. Pathogenicity analysis was performed to associate the identified NOG mutation with the syndromes of the studied Chinese family. Among all identified mutations of the proband, only one heterozygous G-to-T transversion c.163G > T at genomic position 54,671,747 of chromosome 17 was located in NOG, resulting in a substitution of aspartic acid to tyrosine at codon 55 (p.Asp55Tyr). Through literature search, we did not find the p.Asp55Tyr recorded in any database or on any previous publication. The evaluation of possible functional impacts revealed that p.Asp55Tyr was classified as a damaging mutation by multiple missense prediction tools . Comparative amino acid sequence alignment of NOG protein across different species in mammals revealed that the novel p.Asp55Tyr mutation occurred at highly conserved position . Furthermore, Sanger sequencing analysis identified p.Asp55Tyr in all the three affected family members (I-2, II-1, and II-4) while it was absent in the unaffected member (III-2) . Therefore, p.Asp55Tyr co-segregated with the symptoms in the studied family. Additionally, we found that this variant was absent in 200 normal controls, suggesting that p.Asp55Tyr did not represent a rare polymorphism, but was a pathogenic mutation within this Chinese family.
The crystal structure of noggin protein (Protein Data Bank accession code 1M4U) was used to visualize the spatial arrangement of amino acids around the mutated residue. Modeling was performed in UCSF Chimera as stipulated in the previously established procedures . Setting of all the parameters is described in . To better elucidate the mechanism by which the loss of function occurs, we mapped the identified p.Asp55Tyr (red) and all mutations previously reported in literature (green) to the structure . The disease-associated mutations are concentrated in three regions as previously reported: type I and type II receptor binding domains and the dimerization domain (, in circles) . The aspartate residue (Asp55) is located at a distance from the BMP binding-site called the type I receptor-binding clip ( left panel, colored blue) and hence, it is unlikely that this mutation directly affects noggin’s binding affinity to type I site of BMP. The p.Asp55Tyr mutation reported in this study is located within the type II receptor binding region, surrounded by a group of known disease-associated mutations forming a mutational “hotspot” in the noggin protein. Closer look at this mutational hotspot reveals that the aspartate side chain strongly interacts with the positively charged Arg167 residue by hydrogen bonding ( right panel). In fact, among all the known mutations within the type II binding region, only four amino acid residues Glu48, Asp55, Arg167, and Arg204 were found to strongly interact with each other via hydrogen bonds between their side chains. Asp55 interacts with the Arg167 by three hydrogen bonds, Glu48 interacts with the Arg204 with four hydrogen bonds, and Tyr167 interacts with Glu48 with one hydrogen bond . These four amino acid residues, two being positively and two being negatively charged, form a tight cluster and are very likely to hold the elbow-shaped BMP-interacting arm in position.
We replaced the aspartic acid residue with a tyrosine and computed the local structure using molecular modeling. Using the most probable conformation of the tyrosine residue (36.63% probability), we added hydrogens and analyzed the hydrogen bonds. All the three hydrogen bonds that were visualized between the aspartic acid and tyrosine 167 were abolished ; this indicated that p.Asp55Tyr was indeed a destabilizing mutation of the local protein folding.