A 64-year-old hypertensive woman of African descent presented to our emergency room with a two-day history of worsening shortness of breath and stridor. She had been aware of a recurrent goiter for over 15 years, having had a partial thyroidectomy 35 years ago for benign multi-nodular disease. Over the past year, she had been experiencing shortness of breath on exertion, generally relieved by rest. However, the period of rest needed to relieve her dyspnea had been increasing in duration. She did not have any hyperthyroid or hypothyroid symptoms and there was no history of fever, dysphagia, pain or hoarseness.
On presentation to our emergency department she had marked stridor, tachypnea (32 breaths/minute), tachycardia (120 beats/minute) and blood pressure of 160/95 mmHg. Her pulse oximeter oxygen saturation (spO2) was 78% on room air. A large multi-nodular goiter was obvious: right lobe 14×11 cm, left lobe 11×8 cm . All other examinations were normal. She was rushed to the operating theatre for intubation under general anesthesia. A central line was also placed via the right subclavian vein. On intubation, the larynx appeared normal and a 7.5Fr endotracheal tube (ET) was passed easily.
After intubation, she stabilized and was able to breathe comfortably with the ET in situ. She was admitted to the intensive care unit and given propanolol 20 mg orally, three times daily. Her laboratory test results were within normal ranges, with a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 1.4 mIU/L and free T4 level of 1.5 μg/dL. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck and thorax showed gross enlargement of both lobes of the thyroid with multiple nodules of varying sizes. There was marked narrowing of the cervical trachea with only the ET maintaining the patency of the airway . There was mild retrosternal extension on the left side down to the level of the origin of the great vessels but the retrosternal trachea was not compressed . The results of an electrocardiogram (ECG) were normal, while the results of an echocardiogram were consistent with hypertensive heart disease with an ejection fraction of 65%.
A total thyroidectomy was performed on the fourth day after admission. The gland was dissected easily with preservation of the recurrent laryngeal nerves and parathyroids. A tracheostomy was placed prophylactically. The trachea was normal with no features of tracheomalacia. She returned to our intensive care unit and recovered with no complications. Her calcium levels did not decline post-operatively. The tracheostomy was removed on day 10 post-operatively. Histology tests confirmed a benign multi-nodular goiter.