A 44-year-old woman exhibiting weight loss and loss of appetite was referred to our hospital because of a lesion in the liver that was detected by ultrasonography. The patient’s body mass index (BMI) was 10.9 kg/m2. She had no history of liver disease, pregnancy (gravida 0, para 0), oral contraceptive, or anabolic steroid use. Her laboratory findings on admission showed mild liver and kidney dysfunction (Child-Pugh class A) , and viral markers were negative. Her serum PIVKA-II level was extremely high (3327 mAU/mL; normal value, ≤37 mAU/mL), but her serum α-fetoprotein level was within normal limits. Multidetector row computed tomography (CT) revealed a liver tumor that was 80 mm at its largest diameter and had a high density with enhancement in segments S4 + S5 . It was enhanced during the arterial phase and obscured during the delayed phase . The inside of the tumor had cystic parts, calcification, fatty deposition, and suspected partial hemorrhagic necrosis . It was isointense compared to a normal liver on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , and hyperintense in accordance with the non-enhanced area of the tumor on T2-weighted MRI . Similar to the CT imaging results, after gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid administration, the tumor was enhanced heterogeneously during the arterial phase and obscured during the transitional phase . The lesion was almost isointense compared to a normal liver at the hepatobiliary phase . Diffusion-weighted images showed a slightly high intensity compared to the background liver. No central scar was detected on CT or MRI. No uptake of 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose was identified in the mass on positron emission tomography CT (not shown).
Radiologically, HCA and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are considered different diseases, but accurate diagnosis based on the imaging findings alone is difficult. According to some studies [–], when managing HCA, a biopsy is recommended for diagnosing tumor subtype when the tumor is smaller than 5 cm. However, the risk of malignant transformation is high in patients with tumors bigger than 5 cm and in male patients; thus, hepatectomy is recommended in these groups. In this case, even though the patient was female, the tumor had already grown larger than 5 cm and hemorrhagic necrosis was suspected via CT, so we decided against a biopsy because it might have led to further bleeding. Furthermore, this patient also had a significantly elevated level of serum PIVKA-II, which indicated the possibility of malignant transformation. Therefore, we performed hepatectomy of segments S4 + S5 for the definite diagnosis and treatment. The resected specimen had a 90 × 66-mm tumor in segments S4 + S5 . In the high-density fields of the CT imaging results, hematoxylin-eosin staining of the pathological specimen showed 2–3 layers of hepatocytes, which had poor atypia and small nucleoli . In the low-density fields of the CT imaging results, “map-like” fibrosis was detected, and bleeding, hemosiderin deposition, calcification, and ossification were also partially observed. In the tumor, portal tracts and bile ducts were absent, and abnormal muscular arteries had developed . Fatty deposition and inflammatory cell infiltration were observed in the hepatocytes, but no sinusoidal dilatation was recognized. In addition, brown pigment deposition was observed in the hepatocytes . The brown pigment was stained black by Fontana-Masson stain , and showed negative results to iron staining (not shown); thus, it was believed to be lipofuscin pigment. Immunohistochemical examinations revealed positive liver fatty acid-binding protein (LFABP) expression . The expressions of C-reactive protein (CRP), serum amyloid A (SAA), and nuclear β-catenin were negative (not shown), whereas the expression of glutamine synthetase (GS) was positive . PIVKA-II (MU-3, 1:500 dilution; EIDIA, Tokyo, Japan) was positive in the adenoma cells ; thus, we believe that PIVKA-II was produced by the tumor. We finally diagnosed the patient with unclassified HCA. After tumor resection, the patient’s serum PIVKA-II decreased to normal levels. Furthermore, her anorexia gradually improved, and she gained about 9 kg in 3 months. She had no recurrences for 3 months.