The patient is a 33-year-old Chinese woman who was diagnosed with International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IVB cervical cancer in November 2021. Instead of vaginal bleeding or abnormal discharge, her clinical symptoms were unusual and included a bloating sensation in the anal area and pain in the left buttock. Both the ThinPrep cytologic test (TCT) and the human papilloma virus (HPV) test were declared negative by the local clinic and a colonoscopy was carried out, ruling out colonic or rectal abnormalities. Gynecological examination showed enlargement of the cervix uteri, with infiltration to both parametria, but not reaching up to the pelvic wall or involving the vagina. Histopathology of the cervical biopsy indicated poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) . Multiple metastases were demonstrated by pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission computed tomography (PET–CT) at the erector spinae area adjoining T7–T8 vertebral column, the left iliac bone, and the retroperitoneal and pelvic lymph nodes. From December 2021 to April 2022, the patient was enrolled in the clinical trial of sintilimab combined with chemotherapy and radiotherapy for treatment of stage IV cervical cancer and underwent six cycles of immunotherapy and chemotherapy (sintilimab plus paclitaxel liposome and cisplatin, this clinical trial was registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry with registration number ChiCTR2100045676). Treatment was well tolerated and led to a partial response (PR). The masses adjacent to the spine and iliac bone was largely reduced. Thus, radiotherapy of the metastatic residues was carried out and followed by radiotherapy to the primary tumor at the cervix uteri.
However, by the time of the radiotherapy completion in October 2022, the patient noticed painless nodules at the left scapular region and the right hypochondrium. The following month, more nodules occurred on the scalp and trunk including the left axilla, anterior abdomen, and left back, along with a lesion invading the sternum which caused acute bone pain . The cutaneous masses were white, discrete with a rubbery consistency, and fixed to the skin. Several nodules increased in size and eventually ulcerated. Fine‑needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the left back swellings revealed metastatic squamous cell carcinoma, P16 stained positive . No visceral or brain metastasis was observed through thoracic and abdominal CTs or head and pelvic MRIs at this point. The patient was given palliative chemotherapy due to the wide range of metastasis. The masses were temporarily reduced but then increased in scale and number again. The treatment was subsequently switched to cadonilimab, a programmed death 1/cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (PD-1/CTLA-4) bi-specific antibody recently approved for metastatic or recurrent cervical carcinoma.