A 72-year-old Japanese man, who had no underlying disease, visited our hospital because of a nodular lung shadow that was detected during an annual health examination. He did not have any respiratory symptoms, such as cough, sputum production, and dyspnea. A chest radiograph showed a small nodular shadow in the middle lobe of his right lung . A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 20-mm spiculated nodule with pleural indentation in the upper lobe of his right lung , but no hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathies were seen. An abdominal CT scan showed a tumefactive lesion in his anterior sacral spine and left hydronephrosis. His laboratory findings on admission were 10.8 g/dl hemoglobin, 27.1 mg/dl blood urea nitrogen, 2.04 mg/dl creatinine and 0.53 mg/dl C-reactive protein. His IgG and IgG4 concentration was at 2407 mg/dl and 346 mg/dl (normal range, 4.8 to 105 mg/dl). Tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cytokeratin fragment (CYFRA) 21–1, were within normal range.
An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET) scan revealed high accumulation in his lung nodule, with maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 2.7 in the early phase and 3.3 in the delayed phase. His hilar and mediastinal lymph node showed high 18F-FDG accumulation with maximum SUV of 2.5 in the early phase and 2.3 in the delayed phase . The tumefactive lesion in his anterior sacral spine also showed high 18F-FDG accumulation, with maximum SUV of 4.0 in the early phase and 4.5 in the delayed phase . Abnormal accumulation in other organs was not observed on 18F-FDG-PET. A transbronchial biopsy with bronchoscopy was performed, which revealed carcinoma cells on cytology. He was diagnosed with lung cancer at T1bN0M0, stage 1A; this was suspected to be related to IgG4-related retroperitoneal fibrosis.
He underwent a right upper lobectomy and regional lymph node dissection. He was discharged on day 10 after lung surgery without any complications. Pathologic findings of the resected lung nodule showed lepidic pattern adenocarcinoma with coexisting infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells , with an IgG4 to IgG ratio of more than 40 % . Storiform fibrosis was not seen; however, obliterative phlebitis and nonspecific fibrosis were shown in his lung nodule . In his right hilar lymph node which showed positive findings of the 18F-FDG-PET scan, infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells with storiform fibrosis were seen . All sampled lymph nodes were negative for cancer cells. Distant metastasis was not observed. At 5 years after operation, he remained free from recurrence of lung cancer.