Our case was a 70-days old male child that has presented with respiratory distress and cyanosis following breastfeeding. Physical examination was normal except the tachypnea, subcostal retraction.
The infant's arterial oxygen saturation was 92% at room air. The patient has admitted with initial diagnosis of pneumonia and subsequently an antibiotic therapy has initiated. Initial laboratory investigations were normal .
A chest radiography has shown an opacity in the lower part of the left lung. A computerized tomography (CT) of the thorax has revealed a well-defined heterogeneously enhancing mass measuring 45 mm × 40 mm in the lower lobe of the left lung ( and ). There was no pleural effusion. Differential diagnoses has proposed by radiological service has included pulmonary sequestration and congenital adenomatoid malformation.
The exploration has revealed a mass measuring 50 mm × 40 mm × 20 mm, involving the lower lobe of the left lung, having a solid appearance. The mass has resected via the left lower lobectomy. There was no spread to the chest wall. After installing chest tube, infant has supported through mechanical ventilation during the post-operative period and has discharged from Pediatric Intensive Care Unit after 4 days with no further problems with respiratory distress.
Macroscopic examination has consisted of a lung lob measuring 50 × 40 × 20 mm. Cross-section shown a gray-white well circumscribed soft to firm mass with irregular brown border. Histological examination of tissue sections has revealed proliferation of neoplastic cells in lung tissue .
There was atypical proliferation of spindled to fusiform cells have arranged in interlacing long fascicules. The neoplastic cells has shown little pleomorphism, scanty cytoplasm with indistinct cell borders and have separated by interwoven collagen fibers and have arranged in a parallel fashion. Occasioned mitotic were were present (1-2 HPF). The tumor has contained areas of hemorrhage and necrosis.
There was prominent lymphoid infiltration throughout the neoplasm. Resected margin and pleural surface were free. The resected tissues have also subjected to immunohistochemistry. The tumor cells were positive for Vimentin but non-reactive for cytokeratin, S-100 protein, a smooth muscle actin, and desmin. The pathological evaluation has revealed the diagnosis of primary pulmonary Fibrosarcoma.
Metastatic workups including radionuclide bone scan and skull CT examinations have taken after initial surgery. Increased skeletal has up taken of the skull bones have detected by (Tc)-99m-labeled methylene diphosphonate (MDP) . Skull CT examinations have revealed bone lesions without brain parenchymal disease . There was a residual tumor measuring 5 × 7 mm dimensions on subsequent chest CT scan after surgery.
Post-operation adjuvant chemotherapy has planned to treat residual disease and distant bone metastasis. Chemotherapy regimen has included (VA: vincristine 0.025 mg/kg day 1; Actinomycin D 7.5 µg/kg days 1-5). He has received 12 cycles of VA regimen supported with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). The infant has routinely assessed for liver, renal, cardiac and pulmonary functions through physical examination and laboratory investigations during the chemotherapy treatment.
After completing 12 cycles of VA regimen, there was no any sign of residual tumor on CT of the thorax. During the follow-up, skeletal Tc-99m MDP uptake was normal after completing the chemotherapy treatment.
FDG-active metastatic lesion was normal on FDG-PET imaging after 12 cycles of VA regimen. He has grown up as a 21-months old boy without any sign of recurrence by radiological and physical examinations and has been off therapy since 18 months. During this time, infant has enjoyed normal growth and development.