A 26-year-old man was found unconscious in an amusement arcade following the detonation of an unspecified explosive. On his initial assessment, the emergency physician found a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 3, a left frontoparietal lacerated and contused wound extending to the frontosphenoidal suture , hypotension, and tachycardia. Eye examination revealed fixed and dilated pupils bilaterally with dubious light reflexes and intact corneal responses. On general examination, irregular breathing patterns were noticed and an injury severity score of 59 was reported (head or neck: “critical,” face: “critical,” and external injury: classified as “serious” due to the presence of diffuse burns caused by the detonation). Therefore, the patient was intubated for safe transport and sequentially admitted to the emergency department. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and neck showed a right parietal fracture with underlying frontoparietal pneumocephalus . Further investigation revealed multifragmentary burst fractures of the skull bilaterally accompanied by the presence of intracerebral foreign bodies exhibiting metal density and causing interhemispheric and subarachnoid hemorrhage. After briefly informing the patient’s family of the dismal prognosis, the decision to proceed with the reanimation procedures and surgical intervention was taken. Following initial surgical stabilization according to the Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines, the patient was transferred to the neurosurgical operating room and underwent left frontotemporal decompressive craniotomy with ligation and transection of the anterior third of the superior sagittal sinus, and microscopic resection of intraparenchymal foreign bodies. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for postoperative care. Despite following standard of care bundles to prevent surgical site infection, the administration of 1 g of topical vancomycin in the subgaleal space, and tight glycemic control, he eventually developed signs of infection 3 days after surgery, and a control CT scan of the head showed evidence of abscess formation and wound dehiscence, accompanied by obstructive hydrocephalus . Revision surgery consisted of an enlargement of the first craniotomy and positioning of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. During the procedure, a tense brain parenchyma was encountered, and the complete excision of the 3.5 cm abscess located within the left frontoparietal region was performed. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus was isolated from the culture and the patient was initiated on combined intravenous and intrathecal antibiotic treatment with vancomycin hydrochloride 500 kU intravenously every 6 h and 20 mg vancomycin once a day through lumbar puncture. The patient was subsequently transferred to the ICU where he persisted in a state of coma (GCS: E2M2V2, open eyes in response to pain, extension to painful stimuli, and incomprehensible sounds) with normalized intracranial pressure (ICP) and hemodynamic stability. Three days later, he was transferred to a neurorehabilitation facility but unfortunately died 1 month after the initial admission. The postmortem examination revealed evidence of basilar and interhemispheric subarachnoid hemorrhage.