A 25-year-old gravida 3, para 2002 at 32 0/7 weeks' gestation was referred with a 24-hour history of intermittent severe abdominal pain and obstipation. Her past medical history was significant for hypothyroidism, a microcytic anemia, and sigmoid volvulus in her previous pregnancy two years prior requiring endoscopic reduction at 26 weeks' gestation. Physical examination revealed suprapubic and right lower quadrant tenderness, with normal bowel sounds on auscultation; peritoneal signs of rebound and/or guarding were absent. Obstetric ultrasound demonstrated a nonanomalous singleton fetus with biometry consistent with gestational age, no evidence of placental abruption, and normal cervix length. Due to gravid status, abdominal radiography was inconclusive but suggestive of colonic distention. Laboratory evaluation was remarkable for normal leukocyte count and lactate, amylase, and hepatic transaminase levels. Two tap water enemas were efficacious in prompting adequate stool output with alleviation of clinical symptoms, and she was discharged.
Subsequently, she returned at 32 4/7 weeks with similar complaints; the gastroenterology service was consulted, and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed a 90-degree twist of the colon 30 cm from the anal verge . Colonoscopic decompression followed by rectal tube placement for 24 hours was successful, and she was discharged home. Unfortunately, symptoms recurred at 37 0/7 weeks, and she underwent a second colonoscopy with decompression, with rectal tube left in place. At 38 1/7 weeks, she underwent a third colonoscopic decompression procedure, and the decision was made to proceed with delivery. Labor was induced, culminating in a spontaneous vaginal delivery of a healthy female infant. Unfortunately she again experienced worsening abdominal pain on the first day postpartum, with computer tomography imaging confirming sigmoid distention with recurrence of volvulus . A fourth colonoscopic decompression was performed, and she was discharged home on the second day postpartum. Symptoms again recurred on postpartum day 32 and were managed by a fifth colonoscopic decompression followed by uncomplicated laparoscopic sigmoidectomy on postpartum day 34. Histopathologic evaluation of the excised specimen was benign.