A 27-year-old previously healthy white man had an episode of fresh water drowning after acute alcohol consumption. Friends quickly removed him from the water. A rescue team was activated and identified cardiopulmonary arrest in a non-shockable rhythm. Oral intubation was quickly performed. Neither stool reflux/vomiting nor aspiration was reported by the team. After two cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (for about 4 minutes) and orotracheal intubation, return of spontaneous circulation occurred. During transportation bradycardia was reported, which reverted after one dose of atropine.
He was admitted to the emergency room of a tertiary academic hospital. On examination he was hemodynamically stable and comatose with 3 points on Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) and nonreactive pupils. No other relevant physical findings upon arrival. He was placed on mechanical ventilation and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
A few hours after admission to the ICU he presented decreased consciousness level (GCS 4), hypotension, and signs of poor peripheral perfusion. A blood gas analysis showed hypoxemia with respiratory acidosis. He underwent hypothermia for neuroprotection after cardiac arrest, received protective ventilation for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and vasoactive drugs (norepinephrine plus epinephrine, which were maintained for 24 hours) through right subclavian central venous catheter (postpuncture pneumothorax was drained with a pigtail catheter uneventfully). He developed acute renal failure due to rhabdomyolysis, renal ischemia, and multiple organ failure, requiring hemodialysis for 15 days.
Gram’s staining of his tracheal aspirate taken 3 days after the accident showed Gram-positive cocci isolated and in pairs, and frequent Gram-negative bacilli. Tracheal aspirate cultures isolated methicillin-sensitive S. aureus, Enterobacter aerogenes, Aeromonas species, and E. tarda. Blood cultures (first set obtained) isolated methicillin-sensitive S. aureus and E. tarda, which led to the introduction of oxacillin and ceftriaxone on the sixth day of hospitalization. Five more sets of blood culture were performed after the introduction of the antibiotics. All were negative. Computed tomography performed on the 11th day of hospitalization showed bilateral pleural effusion, and multiple pulmonary consolidations and cavities with thickened walls and air-fluid levels, consistent with lung abscesses .
Twenty days after the ICU admission, he was transferred to the regular infirmary ward where the ongoing clinical, laboratory, and radiological improvement continued. On the 45th day of hospitalization, he was discharged home for out-patient monitoring with prescription of ciprofloxacin and clindamycin to be taken orally. He returned for follow-up consultation 14 days after taking the antibiotics. He reported no symptoms since the hospital discharge.