A 3-year-old Caucasian girl accompanied by her mother was referred by her pediatric dentist to the outpatient stomatology clinic at the São José dos Campos Dental School, UNESP, because of the lack of eruption of some teeth and marked atrophy of the left posterior inferior alveolar border . During investigation of her medical, dental and familial history, the mother reported the presence of maculae in various regions of the child's body. This was confirmed by physical examination, with the observation of bilateral, slate-brown maculae in the axillary region , on the back, and in the hypochondrium and groin. With respect to clinical history, the mother reported that her daughter had suffered some episodes of seizures when she was approximately one month old, and that at that time small blisters had appeared that followed the same trajectory as the current maculae. During that time, the reported blisters were diagnosed as herpes zoster and treated with topical acyclovir, but the outcome was unsatisfactory. After a period of approximately one month, the mother noted remission of the bullous lesions; however, maculae started to develop in these regions and persisted until the time of the visit.
The physical and intellectual development of the girl was considered to be normal by pediatricians despite the presence of discrete strabismus. After extra- and intraoral examination, a panoramic X-ray was requested to evaluate tooth germ development and to determine the reason for the lack of some teeth in the region of the third quadrant and the presence of conoid teeth 71 and 82. The X-ray revealed the absence of some deciduous and permanent tooth germs in the third quadrant (74, 75, 34, 35), as well as the lack of tooth 62 and of various permanent tooth germs at other sites. The mother was asked about the existence of family members with similar signs, which she denied. Hematologic tests showed no alterations.
Based on the clinical history and clinical and radiographic findings, the final diagnosis was IP . At present, the girl is under complete medical follow-up, mainly taking into account alterations in the skin, eyes, CNS and mouth.