A 50-year-old right-handed male is referred to a memory clinic with a three-year history of impaired facial recognition and language difficulties. The referring physician was concerned about a potential emerging neurodegenerative process such as Alzheimer's Disease or a temporal variant of Frontotemporal Dementia. The patient described difficulty registering and recognising faces, including his own and those of his wife and family. The first occasion that he can recall experiencing this was after his son had a hair-cut. His wife likened him to the patient's brother but he was unable to picture him. Things progressed from there. He has walked past his wife repeatedly while looking for her in a supermarket. He fails to recognise customers in the store where he works as manager despite having had significant dealings with them previously. He has difficulty identifying people in photos or recognising famous actors on TV. He uses cues such as voice recognition, tattoos, and an awareness of clothing to assist him day to day. His wife now wears a specific red coat when out together to make it easier for him to identify her. He has no trouble recalling semantic information about people once identified. When asked to visualise and describe his wife's face, he correctly described her as having brown hair but was unable to describe any additional distinguishing detail beyond the intellectual awareness that she has two eyes, a nose, and a mouth. In a similar manner, when looking at himself in the mirror, he describes being aware that he is looking at, and therefore must be seeing, his own face, rather than experiencing a feeling of recognition or familiarity. He also reported word finding difficulties in conversation and a tendency to use an inappropriate but related word inadvertently. There were no other cognitive complaints. Episodic memory, spatial and temporal orientation, navigational ability, and praxis skills were well preserved according to both subjective and collateral information.
He had no formal psychiatric history but reported long-standing anxiety symptoms. These had improved since he had stared pregabalin 75 mg twice daily for nonspecific muscular aches and pains for which a diagnosis of fibromyalgia was being considered by his GP. He was otherwise well. He was a nonsmoker and nondrinker. There was no history of seizures, headaches, or head injury. His mother had an unspecified dementia in her mid-70 s. He completed second-level education and subsequently undertook a two-year course in hotel management.
His wife described him premorbidly as an anxious personality who was quite rigid in his thinking processes and liked structure and planning. She always saw him as somewhat “emotionally detached” though she described a close and loving relationship with her and their children. She described him as an introvert who always have been prone to periods of withdrawal and quietness though these seemed to be happening more frequently in recent years.
A history of childhood sexual abuse was disclosed at a subsequent meeting. He had left his childhood home in his late teens and spent over 30 years abroad. His return to his native country coincided with emerging reports of institutional sexual abuse which were receiving widespread media coverage at the time. In retrospect, this was also the period when the first cognitive symptoms were noted by the patient.
Assessment at the memory clinic included geriatric, neurologic, psychiatric, and specialist nursing review as well as in-depth neuropsychological evaluation. Physical examination, including testing of vision, was normal. A full panel of blood showed elevated cholesterol only.
Neuropsychological testing demonstrated objective evidence of a relatively isolated prosopagnosia. See . The Northwestern University Famous Faces (NUFFACE) test consists of a series of 20 images of famous faces such as Elvis Presley and Princess Diana . Only four were correctly identified by our patient. A qualitative interpretation of this test provides additional helpful information. For example, our patient was able to appreciate that there were differences between the faces but he seemed to struggle to link those differences to a memory of having seen those faces before. Another interesting observation was his use of nonfacial details to assist him. A picture of Albert Einstein was identified as an image of scientist Doc Brown from the film “Back to the Future,” likely due to the characteristic hair styles common to both. Similarly, a photo of Humphrey Bogart with his hat tilted at a jaunty angle was tentatively proposed to be a member of the Rat Pack. By contrast, Muhammad Ali triggered a feeling of recognition in our patient but it took a significant length of time (during which three other photos were discussed) before he was correctly identified. He performed poorly, also, on the Wechsler Memory Scale, 3rd edition (WMS III) Face Recognition Test which examines immediate and delayed recognition. In addition to poor performance on face recognition tests, his performance on the Trail Making Test and F-A-S test was also impaired. General memory functioning was preserved and there was no evidence of a general object agnosia as shown by perfect scores on the Word Picture Match and Pyramids and Palm Trees tests. The patient was noted to engage well and apply effort throughout and was aware of and frustrated by his failures. Though his answers were short, he was articulate with no evidence of agrammatism or hesitancy in conversation.
Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was normal with no visible structural lesion and no focal atrophy. Brain Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron Emission Tomography (FDG-PET) showed a normal pattern of FDG metabolism. Lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarker analysis was negative for an Alzheimer's signature. On the basis of these results, we concluded that there was no evidence of a structural or neurodegenerative cause for his symptoms. The patient was open to considering a potential psychological basis for his complaints and agreed to a referral for psychotherapeutic evaluation.
When seen at the memory clinic for follow-up 18 months later, the patient reported no change in his symptoms, with persisting difficulty with face recognition and word finding problems. He continues to greet his wife as a customer when she visits him at work. The nonspecific muscular pain and anxiety symptoms had improved, however, on low dose amitriptyline. He had begun a programme of trauma-focussed counselling under the care of his community psychiatric team. As their work progressed, it emerged that he can recollect in clear and vivid detail the face of his abuser.
We hypothesise that this case represents an unusual form of conversion disorder. Conversion disorder commonly presents with a loss of motor or sensory function, for example, limb paralysis or blindness. However, our patient's symptoms of prosopagnosia and a specific language impairment are more unusual in that they are relatively discreet deficits which indicate dysfunction of two apparently distinct systems: facial recognition and language. At the neurobiological level, however, both are localisable to dysfunction of the right temporal lobe, suggesting a plausible location for a causative insult. As far as we can determine, an organic pathology has been outruled and we propose, therefore, a psychological basis for these symptoms which we believe have arisen as a result of a conversion-type reaction. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such reported case of a conversion disorder presenting in this way. We suggest that it serves to highlight the degree to which abnormal emotional processing can influence and disrupt the functioning of precise brain networks.