A 57-year-old Caucasian man presented to his primary care physician with a 4-year history of recurrent, transient right-sided facial paralysis and otalgia in settings of rapid altitude change. Episodes began with an inability to equalize ear pressure in his right ear shortly after commercial aircraft take-off followed by right-sided otalgia, unilateral right-sided facial droop, paralysis, and numbness, usually before reaching cruising altitude. He denied hearing loss between episodes, tinnitus, vertigo, left-sided ear symptoms, or symptoms at any times other than changing altitude. Notably, the patient traveled up to nine times weekly aboard domestic commercial flights. His episodes occurred with the highest frequency during aircraft ascent, but one incident occurred during aircraft descent and another during automobile travel from an altitude of 5000 to 11,000 feet over 90 minutes. Likelihood of paralysis increased when his trip coincided with periods of nasal congestion due to viral upper respiratory infection or seasonal allergies, but it did not correlate with the number of minutes at high altitude, type of aircraft, or frequency of travel per week. At the time of initial clinic presentation, he described escalating frequency and severity of baroparetic episodes but denied any prior medical evaluation.
Initial self-treatment during flights included yawning and performing the Toynbee maneuver (swallowing with a pinched nose) to equalize ear pressures, applying pressure with a hot water bottle, and the usage of over-the-counter (OTC) nasal decongestant sprays, which relieved pain and paralysis within minutes. He eventually began to pre-medicate with decongestants before flights with variable success.
The physical and neurological examinations on the patient’s first visit were as follows. Physical examination revealed a middle-aged man in no apparent distress. Blood pressure was 118 systolic/70 diastolic, heart rate 68, respiratory rate 14, temperature 98.0°F, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. The head was normocephalic and atraumatic, the pupils were equally reactive and responsive to light, and extraocular movements were intact. Sinuses were nontender, nares were patent with septal deviation present, and nasal mucosae were normal. Examination of the ears revealed normal canals and tympanic membranes without tympanosclerosis, retraction, or hemotympanum. Hearing was normal bilaterally, and results on the Rinne and Weber tests were unremarkable. Cranial nerves II–XII were intact, including comprehensive facial nerve testing with normal findings, and the remainder of the neurological examination was likewise unremarkable.
Past medical history was notable for mild intermittent allergic rhinitis, well-controlled hypothyroidism, obesity (body mass index 38), obstructive sleep apnea well controlled on continuous positive airway pressure, and dyslipidemia. Past medical history was negative for prior chronic otitis media or any previous ear, sinus, or nasal surgeries. Medications prior to the present diagnosis included levothyroxine, vitamin D supplementation, a testosterone patch, and as-needed OTC nasal and oral decongestants. Between episodes, detailed head, neck, and neurological examinations were within normal limits and without evidence of any residual facial weakness or evidence of chronic or prior otitis media.
The patient was raised and currently resides in California and is a married self-employed attorney with two children. The patient’s parents and two siblings are alive and reportedly healthy. He denied any family history of cancers, cardiovascular, or neurological diseases and likewise reported experiencing no unusual environmental exposures. The patient reported rare, light alcohol intake but was a lifetime non-smoker and did not use any recreational drugs.
Laboratory tests, including thyroid stimulating hormone, were unremarkable. Audiogram demonstrated no evidence of sensorineural hearing loss and normal flexibility and mobility of the tympanic membrane. Magnetic resonance imaging of the internal auditory canals with and without contrast revealed no masses or other lesions in the internal auditory canal or at the cerebellopontine angle and were without suspicious enhancement of the facial nerve. CT of the temporal bones suggested right-sided dehiscence of the facial canal and showed no evidence of sinus abnormalities or chronic infection .
Pending imaging and specialist evaluation, nasal corticosteroids were added to his regimen. The patient was referred to otolaryngology and underwent myringotomy with insertion of a titanium PET into the right tympanic membrane. At 2-month follow-up after ear tube placement, the patient was asymptomatic and the PET was found to be stable and patent. At 6-month follow-up, the patient reported having flown multiple times weekly without needing to pre-medicate and without recurrence of symptoms, and the PET remained stable and patent.