A 47-year-old woman with metastatic cutaneous melanoma treated with Ipi/Nivo was referred to ocular oncology clinic for evaluation of multifocal bilateral choroidal lesions concerning for possible choroidal metastasis. She was diagnosed with cutaneous melanoma 6 years prior with metastatic disease to the brain and abdomen discovered 4 years later. On presentation to our clinic, she reported symptomatic floaters while concurrently receiving treatments of nivolumab. Her presenting visual acuity was 20/20 and 20/25, and intraocular pressures were 13 and 11. External examination revealed poliosis of her eyebrows and eyelashes . Fundus photography was notable for multiple 1–3 disc-diameter flat hypopigmented/amelanotic placoid areas exposing underlying choroidal vessels in both eyes (a, b). OCT through the lesions demonstrated choroidal hyporeflectivity without retinal elevation (c–f). No other attributable cause for her floaters was found on exam. Treatment-related depigmentation of uveal tissues was suspected. The patient continued Ipi/Nivo therapy for six more months but subsequently stopped therapy due to severe acute pancreatitis and autoimmune hypophysitis. Fundoscopic examination 1 month after stopping therapy demonstrated further depigmentation/blanching of the previously identified hypopigmented areas in both eyes. There was no evidence of enlargement or development of new areas of involvement (g, h). Fluorescein angiography showed early window defects through the affected areas with normal perfusion and no evidence of vasculitis (i–l).
At her most recent ophthalmologic examination, nearly 20 months after initial presentation, the patient had remained off all therapy for 13 months and stated her floaters were unchanged OU. The choroidal lesions were unchanged from her most recent visit but remained more blanched than her original exam (m, n). In speaking with the patient nearly 3 years after her initial encounter, her vision is stable, and her floaters remain unchanged OU.