A 50-year-old white female patient was referred to the Oral Medicine Department of Fluminense Federal University due to symptomatic oral mucosa lesions that were causing burning sensations and spontaneous pain. The patient had been diagnosed with an autoimmune condition—psoriasis in childhood and with psoriatic arthritis within for the past 10 years. She had undergone a specific, immuno-modulating pharmacotherapy with IL-17 inhibitor, secukinumab, which had lasted for six months. Interestingly, despite previous treatment options, she showed no response to tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors, such as adalimumab. What is more, the patient could not tolerate cyclosporine therapy.
Initially, the patient reported a noticeable presence of suspicious and painful lesions on borders and lateral edges of her tongue, which appeared after 60 days of taking secukinumab. Two subsequent, standard inconclusive biopsies were previously carried out on both edges. Topical oral corticosteroids and betamethasone were prescribed, without any substantial improvement or positive treatment outcome. In addition, no cutaneous lesions were observed, and joint symptoms were well controlled by means of the prescribed therapy.
On intraoral examination, atrophy of the papillae on the posterior part of tongue were noted adjacent to a well-defined erythema and white non-detachable plaque on the lateral edges of the tongue . Non-invasive mini scrapes from both lateral borders and the dorsal surface of the tongue were obtained using a sterile cytobrush (Kolplast®, Brazil). The Papanicolaou staining, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) technique and cytopathological analysis were performed by an oral pathology specialist at the Pathology Centre of Antônio Pedro University Hospital (Fluminense Federal University, Niterói-RJ, Brazil).
The cytopathological investigation revealed keratinised clustered cells, often overlapped, with marked parakeratosis, as well as pseudo-hyphae and hyphae of Candida spp. . Interestingly, the subsequent histopathological examination of the biopsy block scraps showed non-characteristic features of parakeratosis, acanthosis, exocytosis of polymorpho-nuclear leukocytes, hyphae of Candida spp. permeating the corneal layer of the epithelium and moderately diffuse perivascular inflammatory infiltration . Based on clinical and laboratory assessment, adefinitive diagnosis of medication-related oral candidiasis was made.
A standard therapy of topical miconazole gel, 20 mg four times a day for 30 days was prescribed. The patient was advised to discontinue secukinumab therapy for 30 days, following consultation with a dermatologist. After this period, the symptomatic oral mucosa lesions regressed and subsided completely, which allowed the patient to restart and continue secukinumab therapy at a reduced dose of 150 mg monthly. As at the time of this report, the patient has followed up on the secukinumab for seven months and there has been no recurrence of oral lesion has been observed .