A 22-year-old Caucasian woman, diagnosed with CAEBV 1.5 years earlier, was admitted to the Immunology Clinic due to a 4-week history of productive cough, fever and general weakness. Previously, the patient had been receiving antibiotics for a month in an outpatient setting, but no significant improvement was observed .
The patient had been diagnosed with infectious mononucleosis at the age of 17 years, with resultant significant deterioration of her status lasting for 6 months. She was eventually hospitalized due to leucopoenia, anaemia, splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy and liver dysfunction. Antinuclear antibody titre was 1:80, the ENA (extractable nuclear antigen) panel and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) yielded negative results, and C3, C4 complement concentrations were normal.
Despite extensive diagnostic workup, including, among others, bone marrow and liver biopsy, a diagnosis has never been established.
During subsequent two years, the patient was rehospitalized a few more times, and periodically received treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (G-CSF) and corticosteroids. At the age of 20 years, the woman underwent splenectomy due to hypersplenism and splenomegaly. Six months later she was diagnosed with CAEBV, according to the Okano criteria 2005 i.e.: 1) persistent or recurrent infectious mononucleosis-like symptoms; 2) an unusual pattern of EBV antibodies with elevated anti-VCA (viral capsid antigen) and anti-EA (early antigen), or detection of the EBV genome in affected tissues including the peripheral blood; and 3) chronic illness that cannot be explained by any other known disease processes at the time of diagnosis. In situ hybridisation (ISH) staining of spleen specimens revealed expression of EBV latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) and EBV-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) in T lymphocytes (T-cell type infection). After these findings, the patient was put on immunostimulatory treatment with thymus peptides. The woman has never smoked or used other tobacco products, and has never been exposed to inhalant irritants. She also had no family history of pulmonary malignancies or other lung diseases.
At the time of admission to the Immunology Clinic, the patient had no fever. Neither respiratory failure or cyanosis were observed. No abnormalities were found on physical examination, except for axillary and inguinal lymph node enlargement (up to 1 cm), and single bilateral wheezes audible above the region corresponding to middle and lower lung fields.
Patient’s haemoglobin concentration was 9.9 g/dl and her WBC (white blood cells) amounted to 6300/μl, with 20.5% of lymphocytes, 66.6% of neutrophils and 6.5% monocytes. The other parameters of the blood were as follows: platelets 607,000/μl, ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) 120 mm/h, CRP 8.71 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase 126 u/l, alanine aminotransferase 88 u/l, total bilirubin 0.14 mg/dl and D-dimers 1817 ng/ml. The results of kidney function tests and electrolyte levels were normal.
Bacterial (aerobic and non-aerobic) and fungal cultures were carried out under standard conditions, and yielded no pathogens. Also polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based testing for genetic material of hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and -2), cytomegalovirus (CMV), human papillomavirus (HPV), parvovirus B19, influenza virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, Chlamydia trachomatis, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Toxoplasma gondii, Ureaplasma spp. and Listeria spp. yielded no positive results. EBV DNA copies were found in the sputum, whole blood, isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes as well as in the blood plasma . Other potential pathogens causing the condition were excluded.
Serum cytokines i.e.: granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IFN-gamma, interleukin (IL)-1-beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12 (p70), IL-13, and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha were measured by the use of the Multiplex MAP high sensitivity human cytokine panel (Millipore), following the manufacturer’s instructions, similar as described previously by Cohen et al. . The results were as follows: GM-CSF: 4639.97 pg/mL, IFN-gamma: > 2500 pg/mL, IL-1-beta: 23.72 pg/mL, IL-2: 13.91 pg/mL, IL-4: 6.16 pg/mL, IL-5: 174.77 pg/mL, IL-6: > 750 pg/mL, IL-7: 75.19 pg/mL, IL-8: 625.08 pg/mL, IL-10: > 6000 pg/mL, IL-12 (p70): 1978.23 pg/mL, IL-13: 27.65 pg/mL, TNF-alpha: > 1750 pg/mL. Concentration of IFN-alpha was determined with Human IFN-alpha ELISA kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and Human IFN-alpha ELISA Kit (R&D Systems). The concentration of IFN-alpha was assessed in serum, saliva, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) culture supernatant. The assays yielded no detectable levels of this cytokine.
Clear lung fields and normal cardiac and mediastinal silhouettes could be observed on chest radiograph. However, disseminated maculate infiltrative areas in both lungs, more prevalent on the right side, were observed on a CT chest scan . Abdominal ultrasound revealed enlarged liver with highly heterogeneous echogenicity, but without evident focal changes, enlarged (up to 10 mm) paraaortic lymph nodes, small volume of free fluid in minor pelvis and post-splenectomy status. No other abnormalities were found. The patient was disqualified as for the allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) due to the risk of immunosuppression-related complications of infectious IP [, ].
Long-term treatment with subcutaneous IFN-alpha was implemented (3 million units, 3 times a week) . However, patient’s condition deteriorated three months later: April 2013 she presented with fever, persistent cough and was in generally poor physical health . The dose of IFN-alpha was escalated to 6 million units 3 times a week, but still with no significant clinical improvement. CT performed one month later (May 2013) revealed only partial regression of pulmonary changes . Therefore, the patient was referred to the Pulmonology Clinic. She had 67.81% of lymphocytes with 94.19% CD3 T cells, CD4/CD8 ratio equal to 11.35 . Owing to poor response to previous treatment, inhaled IFN-alpha (1.5 million units 3 times a day) was added . To the best of our knowledge, this was the first documented use of the inhaled IFN-alpha in a patient with CAEBV and concomitant IP. Patient’s status has finally improved after 10 days of treatment.
Furthermore, partial regression of pulmonary changes was observed on a CT scan obtained one month later . Figure presents changes in EBV DNA copy numbers during the treatment.
The patient was qualified to allo-HSCT with reduced conditioning, which was carried out 6 months later (December 2013). Currently, the patient feels well, no EBV was detected in whole blood, blood plasma, PBMCs and sputum, and further regression of pulmonary changes was documented.