A 10-year-old girl presented with a painless reduction in visual acuity in her left eye, incidental finding on the school routine examination. The fundus revealed a unilateral solitary lesion of the RPE with fibrosis and hyperplastic changes at its periphery and thinning in the center. No family or trauma history was noted. The medical and ophthalmic history of the patient were negative. General pediatric physical examination results were normal for all systems. The initial best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. The diopter of both eyes was 0 DS OD and, − 2.0 DS OS. The anterior segment and intraocular pressure were normal. Funduscopic examination of the right eye was unremarkable. A solitary, unilateral, large, scalloped and yellowish-white lesion, with fringe-like margins was observed in the posterior pole and lower middle periphery of the left eye continuous with the optic nerve. Furthermore, we noted the presence of fibrosis and hyperplastic changes in the RPE at the periphery and thinning at the center of the lesion . Infrared fundal (IR) images showed that the fringe-like contour of the lesion was visible, with diffuse hyperreflective signals specifically in the fovea, while with peripheral dark spots, having a typical leopard-spot like appearance . Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) revealed a markedly scalloped lesion containing a hypoautofluorescence area mixed with an isoautofluorescence area . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed certain unique characteristics of the same . The outer segments of photoreceptors presented with an inhomogeneous signal in the fovea, with a weak local signal. The ellipsoid and interdigitation zones were thinner than normal, while the RPE/Bruch’s complex was not flat, with locally visible protrusions. En-face OCT image at the level of the superficial and deep retinal layers appeared normal , the outer retinal layer , and the choroid capillary layer revealed a weak mottled hyperreflective signal; the RPE zone showed a mottled hyperreflective signal with peripheral hyporeflective spots, fringe-like margin lesions . OCTA of the avascular area of the fovea in the superficial, deep, and outer retinal layers appeared to be oval in shape , the choroid capillary layer revealed an increase in the density of the choroidal vasculature in the fovea , the density of the packed honeycomb structure in the central macula increased in OCTA was consistent with the central atrophy yellow-whitish lesion in the fundus photograph ; OCTA image at the level of the RPE zone appeared normal . Based on the clinical examination and characteristic multimodal imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed to have URPED.
The treatment for this patient was closely observed. At the last follow-up examination, after 18 months, there were no changes in the fundus, and her BCVA remained 20/20 OD and 20/25 OS.