A 73-year old man was first referred to our hospital in 1992 due to liver dysfunction, and was diagnosed as having CH-C. In the following year, IFN-alpha monotherapy (3 MU 3 times a week for 24 weeks) was performed after histopathological confirmation of CH-C. With this therapy, HCV-RNA became negative and SVR was achieved. The liver functions were normalized and the histological findings of the liver also improved. The patient subsequently was followed up within HCC surveillance based on biochemical and diagnostic several modalities, such as ultrasonography (US) and computed tomography (CT), until 2000. During the follow-up period, the liver function tests were normal and HCV-RNA always tested negative on the annual testing after completion of the therapy. He willingly dropped out the follow-up since 2000. In 2006, 13 years after the achievement of SVR, he was referred to our hospital again complaining of epigastralgia. At that time, although HCV-RNA was still negative, mild liver dysfunction was noticed along with a marked increase of tumor markers of HCC, namely alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin (DCP: PIVKA-II); being 164.9 ng/ml and 3692 mAU/ml, respectively. Enhanced CT and US revealed huge liver tumors about 13 cm in greatest diameter in the left lobe invading the bile ducts and another tumor about 3 cm diameter in segment V . In the arterial phase of CT, these tumors were markedly enhanced followed by a relatively quick wash out in the equilibrium phase. Similarly, angiography revealed markedly hypervascular nodules in the same lesions, strongly indicating that these tumors were HCC . As described above, it is not common for HCC to develop more than 10 years after the achievement of SVR, and HCV-RNA still tested negative. To confirm the characteristic features of the tumor, we performed liver biopsy and confirmed that this tumor was well-differentiated HCC . Only mild fibrosis development could be observed in the adjacent non-cancerous lesions . These tumors were treated by intentional combination therapy, i.e., transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TAE) and stereotactic radiosurgery for residual HCC and bile ducts invasion. After these therapies, the level of tumor markers significantly decreased (AFP: 14.4 ng/ml, PIVKA-II: 32 mAU/ml). CT scanning revealed a remission status of these tumors , and he was discharged from our hospital to be followed up in the outpatient clinic.