A 76-year-old man visited the emergency department (ED) because of swallowing difficulty and epigastric discomfort approximately 10 h after ingesting psyllium seed husk powder to relieve constipation.
His symptoms began a few hours after the ingestion. Initially, his symptoms were not severe, and he was monitored at home. However, the symptoms continued to worsen. Therefore, he visited the local clinic, where he was administered metoclopramide, but the symptoms did not improve.
He had hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and Parkinson's disease. He said that he sometimes suffered from dyspepsia or dysphagia after taking the powder previously as well, but the current symptoms were the most serious.
He was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease at our department of neurology 3 years before visiting the ED and started taking Stalevo (125 mg of levodopa, 31.25 mg of carbidopa, and 200 mg of entacapone) twice a day. After 7 mo of follow-up, he decided to consult a neurologist near his house for the management of Parkinson's disease. Additionally, he was taking psyllium seed husk powder, about 5 g with water per day, for constipation, purchased from a drugstore without a prescription.
When he tried to swallow, immediate esophageal discomfort and regurgitation prevented any solid or liquid intake, even saliva. There were no accompanying GI symptoms, such as diarrhea or abdominal pain. He also did not present with any focal neurological abnormalities.
Initial biochemical results were as follows: white blood cell count: 6740/μL, levels of hemoglobin 13.7 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase: 33 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase: 5 IU/L, total bilirubin: 2.34 mg/dL, direct bilirubin: 0.59 mg/dL, serum amylase: 68 IU/L, blood urea nitrogen: 17 mg/dL, serum creatinine: 1.13 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein: 0.052 mg/dL.
Simple posteroanterior radiography at the ED showed no specific abnormal pathological findings. We suspected esophageal achalasia or food impaction; therefore, we decided to perform an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan for differential diagnosis. Abdominal CT scan revealed an approximately 2.0 cm × 2.5 cm mass located just above the gastro-esophageal junction . We suspected a bezoar due to the presence of psyllium seed husk powder.