A 17 year old female patient was referred to our clinic from the department of pedodontics, with dental anomalies, speech difficulty, and esthetic and functional problems . At 12 years-old the patient was diagnosed with AI. Past medical history revealed no related syndrome or pathology, neither in the patient nor family members. No alternative developmental or environmental causes of enamel defects (e.g., osteogenesis imperfecta, cerebral palsy, mental retardation) were detected. The patient suffered no complaints of ophthalmic, dermatologic or skeletal problems. The status of the hair and nails were normal and systemic examination was non-remarkable.
Deciduous teeth had been previously extracted and retainers applied. Panoramic radiography records revealed numerous unerupted teeth and clinical investigation found that hypo calcified, ill-shaped teeth had been extracted at an earlier stage .
The patient and her family refused to have any extra tests of teeth and genetic counseling to confirm the diagnosis once more. She was sent to the pedodontics with that diagnosis for treatment and then to our clinics with the need of surgery.
Extra oral examination revealed a concave profile with pronounced chin and nose, short lower face and retrognathic maxilla . The temporomandibular joint, masticatory muscles and mouth opening were normal. Deviation, deflection, pain and discomfort were not detected during opening and closing, and there was no display of upper gingival tissue when smiling.
Intraoral examination identified an Angle Class III malocclusion with narrow, small and retrognathic maxilla and posterior bilateral cross bite. In the mandible 31, 32, 36, 37, 42–45 and 47 were present. Tooth crowns exhibited a distinct microform with large spacing, while the roots were normal in length and form . In maxilla, a large amount of alveolar bone loss was observed due to previous surgical interventions and gingival tissue was enlarged in the molar region. Posterior dentoalveolar height exceeded that of the anterior dentoalveolar. SNB values were high due to a decrease in the vertical dimension of the lower face. Skeletal growth was low angle with an S-N/Go-Me angle of 270 (ratio 71%). The narrow maxilla resulted in circular cross bite in the transversal dimension. There was no asymmetry in the face, with equal ramus and corpus dimensions on each side. The sagital dimension was of skeletal class III (ANB, 40; Wits-appraisal, 9 mm) with molars showing class III malocclusion. The maxilla was small and atrophic and cranial base length was 63 mm (S-N). Soft tissue examination found that the upper lip showed more retrochelie than the lower lip (-4 and -1 respectively) and that the lower lip was thicker than the upper lip.
The principal treatment aims of improving function and facial/dental esthetics could be divided into skeletal (correct the class III pattern and vertical relationship) and dental (correct anterior open bite, achieve ideal overbite and over jet using dental implants) goals. Le Fort I advancement was selected for maxilla treatment, using distraction osteogenesis to achieve a stable result and prevent relapse.
Following Le fort I osteotomy, intraoral distractors (that had been previously adapted to the patient’s scull model) were placed at both sides of the maxilla . The maxilla was distracted for 10 days (0.5 mm × 2 per day) and, after a consolidation period, distractors were removed and implants inserted to the final sites. Implant sites with sufficient bone material had been previously selected using computed tomography (CT) data. The post-operative period was uneventful, with only slight paraesthesia and difficulty in mouth opening, which disappeared within two weeks. Patient’s initial and postoperative cephalograms are superimposed and 6 mm advancement of A point, 8 mm advancement of ANS (anterior nasal spina) point, 5 mm advancement of the upper lip, and 2 mm advancement of the tip of the nose were achieved . Finally, prosthetic restorations were applied to achieve an esthetic and functional result .