A 23-year-old woman presented with progressive headache, nausea, and vomiting for 1 week. Right-side weakness, ptosis, and diplopia were also found. Due to acute onset conscious disturbance (Glasgow Coma Scale of E3VaM5) in the hospital, brain computed tomography was arranged and revealed an enhanced brain tumor with necrotic cystic change. This tumor was located at the left temporal lobe with upward extension to the left basal ganglion and periventricular region, causing perifocal edema and midline shift . We performed emergent craniectomy for tumor removal in December 2006.
Pathology revealed pleomorphic, hyperchromatic cells with glassy, astrocytic cytoplasm, as well as hypercellularity, microvascular proliferation, and necrosis, consistent with the diagnosis of classic GBM .
The patient underwent radiotherapy 1 month later and followed by chemotherapy with temozolomide for 6 months. Her performance status improved to a Karnofsky Grade of 70, and her clinical condition was stable thereafter. However, follow-up brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in June 2014 revealed a new enhanced nodular lesion, approximately 1.1 cm in diameter, at the left temporal base. The brain MRI in October 2014 revealed a progressive change of lesions, maximum 3.0 cm in diameter . Thus, she again received surgery for gross tumor removal.
Histologically, except for the necrosis feature of GBM, the tumors showed the oligodendroglial component. Neoplastic cells also showed isocitrate dehydrogenase 1(IDH1)(+), p53(diffuse +), and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)(−) as revealed by immunostaining .
During follow-up, signs of increased intracranial pressure were noted in May 2015. Therefore, she received a third debulking surgery. The third pathology revealed both GBM- and PNET-like components. In immunohistochemistry, the PNET-like component exhibited positivity for synaptophysin and CD56 and focal weak positivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) .
One month after the surgery, her condition rapidly deteriorated. The patient and her family chose to pursue hospice care. She passed away with a total 9-year survival since diagnosis .