A 5-year-old Middle Eastern boy attended the pediatric dentistry department of the Dubai Health Authority with his parents with a chief complaint of multiple missing teeth. The child had been diagnosed with hypohidrotic ED since infancy by his attending pediatrician, but no other medical conditions were stated. The mother reported that the child experienced heat intolerance because of reduced sweating ability. The boy’s family history revealed that he is the third of five children; none of the other siblings have any medical conditions. The boy had a moderate build with a body mass index of 13.8 kg/m2.
His extraoral examination revealed characteristics consistent with hypohidrotic ED: thin, sparse scalp hair; discoloration around the eyes; less eyebrow and eyelash hair; flat bridge of the nose; retrognathic maxilla; dry, thick lips; prominent chin; concave facial profile; and reduced lower facial height. The patient’s intraoral examination revealed that only eight teeth were present (upper primary second molars, upper permanent canines, upper primary canines, and lower permanent canines). His upper primary canines had a history of dental treatment with strip crowns to make them look like central incisors for aesthetic reasons. The patient exhibited a deep overbite and thin atrophic knife-edge alveolar ridges with loss of vestibular height, especially in the mandibular arch. The only occlusal contact was between the upper and lower permanent canines, with the canines being in class II. The patient’s oral mucosa was slightly dry, and his tongue was enlarged. He had an apparent reduced ability to produce saliva, and the saliva was viscous in nature. Some food debris and plaque accumulation were present, which was attributed to poor oral hygiene exacerbated by reduced cleansing ability of saliva .
Radiographic investigations included a panoramic radiograph that revealed the presence of four unerupted permanent tooth germs (upper right first molar, upper right lateral incisor, upper left first molar, and lower left first molar). The upper and lower permanent canines were erupted before the normal eruption time. Moreover, the radiograph revealed reduced height of the mandible, which is an expected finding in a patient with ED .
Treatment options included removable partial dentures, overdentures, and fixed partial dentures (FPDs). Removable partial dentures are the most common treatment modality in children with oligodontia, but these prostheses can be less retentive and require frequent adjustments. For our patient, retention was significantly compromised by the thin atrophic nature of the alveolar ridges; therefore, removable partial dentures were excluded. Overdentures are more retentive than removable partial dentures, but they require elective pulp therapy of otherwise healthy abutment teeth. This option was excluded as well, owing to the parent’s request for a more conservative option. The last treatment option that was discussed with the family was FPDs, with the advantages of being more retentive and less demanding of the patient. The parents preferred a fixed prosthesis.
The proposed design for the upper arch was a Nance space maintainer with a saddle to replace upper primary first molars. A single incisor tooth was incorporated into the appliance to fill the big gap between the present anterior teeth to improve the aesthetics and smile. The plan was to use the appliance provisionally until the eruption of the upper right permanent lateral incisor. The lower arch was planned for an 8-unit ceramic bridge with ceramic-metal crowns on the two abutments (lower permanent canines) replacing the missing incisors and primary first molars. The lower appliance extended to the primary first molars without including the second primary molars to reduce the load on the abutment teeth. The pontic design was chosen to be of the modified ridge lap type, which has a concave fitting surface only at the facial surface, with the rest being convex, allowing it to contact the ridge only facially. Such a pontic design prevents food accumulation, making the appliance more hygienic. It also gives a better aesthetic result and is well tolerated by the ridge.
Upper and lower primary alginate impressions (perforated metal tray, alginate; 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) and bite registration with wax were taken and sent to the laboratory. Casts were poured and analyzed to finalize the treatment plan. Occlusion was checked, and it was noted that there was a deep bite between the upper and lower permanent canines preventing the placement of acrylic teeth, so 2-mm occlusal reduction of the lower permanent canines was planned to open the bite and allow the coverage of the lower canines with metal-ceramic crowns.
At the patient’s next visit, the parents were informed about the procedure. The patient’s lower canines were carefully reduced using a high-speed diamond fissure bur to create a 2–3-mm free space between the upper and lower permanent canines. The patient’s teeth were smoothed with yellow stone, and topical fluoride varnish (5% sodium fluoride, White Vanish; 3M) was applied. The upper molar bands were fitted on upper primary second molars (size 27 Unitek orthodontic bands; 3M), and an alginate impression was taken to fabricate the upper Nance space maintainer with saddle, and a lower alginate impression was taken to fabricate the lower FPD. Shade selection was done with the VITA classical shade guide (VITA North America, Yorba Linda, CA, USA), and the shade A1 was chosen.
At the patient’s next visit, the upper Nance appliance with acrylic teeth was tried in the patient’s mouth and cemented with ketac cement (3M ESPE Ketac-Cem; 3M) . We chose to deliver each appliance individually to gradually open the bite and train the patient in the new occlusion. Instructions were given to avoid consuming sticky foods, and oral hygiene instructions were provided. The boy’s parents were informed that he might experience some discomfort.
After 2 weeks, the boy was seen again in follow-up regarding the upper appliance and to deliver the lower appliance. The mother noted that the child felt comfortable with the appliance and was eager to replace his missing lower teeth. Upon intraoral examination, it was noted that gingival remodeling had occurred around the upper acrylic incisor with the formation of an interdental papilla between it and the adjacent natural teeth, giving the child a more natural aesthetic appearance. The lower FPD was tried in the mouth. Two retentive grooves were made on the cervical surface of the lower canines. Retention, resistance, aesthetics, phonetics, and occlusion were checked, and the appliance was cemented with ketac cement . Dietary and oral hygiene instructions were reinforced. Reestablishment of occlusion led to a favorable increase in vertical dimension with an increase in the height of the lower third of the face. The boy’s parents were instructed to encourage him to speak out loud to improve his phonetics. They were informed about the possibility of discomfort, difficulty eating, and unclear pronunciation in the first few days.
After 1 month of patient follow-up, the mother reported that the boy had slight difficulty in pronouncing some words, in addition to food accumulation around the lower appliance. The parents were reassured and were given speaking exercises for the child (counting, reading aloud) to help train his oral musculature to accommodate the new appliances. Oral hygiene instructions were reinforced, and the use of interdental brushes and superfloss to help clean around the acrylic teeth was demonstrated. Follow-up appointments were scheduled after 3 and 6 months. The appliances remained stable with no appreciable bone loss or gingival irritation. The parents reported that the patient had significant improvement in speech and masticatory function. Subsequent follow-up appointments were scheduled every 6 months. (A timeline of the patient’s care is shown in Fig. ).