A 34-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with vision loss in the right eye over the last 3 days. Upon initial ophthalmological examination, the patient’s visual acuity was HM/BE 20cm OD with no improvement in corrected vision and 1.0(Snellen chart)OS with corrected vision improving to 1.0(+1.0DS/-2.0DC*10), and intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg OD and 20 mmHg OS. Nothing noteworthy was observed in the anterior segment of either eye and observations of the ocular fundus showed no abnormalities in the left eye. However, from 3 o ‘clock to 11 o ‘clock in the fundus of the right eye, the retina showed a state of grey-white bulge and flutter without retinal holes, and the macula was involved. Fundus photography further showed retinal detachment with multiple large hemangiomas in the right eye and a suspected hemangioma in the left eye . There were 4 orange-red hemangiomas in the superior temporal periphery and inferior temporal detachment area of the retina in the right eye with dilated and tortuous feeding and draining blood vessels as well as evident peripheral neovascular membranes. Fluorescence angiography(FA) showed early hyper-fluorescence with late leakage. Optical coherence tomography(OCT) showed retinal detachment. Prior to this visit, the patient had undergone head CT examination and found an intracranial hemangioma , which was subsequently treated surgically at another hospital. Abdominal ultrasonography was also performed and showed multiple cysts present in the pancreas and right kidney while spinal CT showed no abnormalities. She was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes at the age of 32 and the HbA1c level on admission was 14.2%. Her mother suffered from diabetes and died of unknown causes at the age of 31. Her sister also underwent surgery for intracranial hemangioma. Although the patient’s mother and sister were not conclusively diagnosed with VHL by clinical or genetic testing, we highly suspect them to have the disease based on the available clinical results. Moreover, we did ophthalmologic examinations for the patient’s family who were willing to be examined and the results were shown in the supplementary materials .
Based on family history, clinical manifestations and imaging, we suspected that the patient had VHL. To further confirm this, the patient and her family underwent genetic sequencing and the results showed a c.233A>G heterozygous missense mutation (amino acid p.Asn78Ser) in exon 1 of the VHL gene of the patient, her daughter and her son , and the genogram of the family was shown in the supplementary materials . The patient was definitely diagnosed with VHL based on these findings.
The patient then underwent pars plana vitrectomy(PPV), lesion resection, endolaser photocoagulation and silicone oil tamponade for the right eye. During the operation, after a 23-gauge(23-G) PPV the four peripheral hemangiomas and the neovascular membranes were extracted using forceps, and an endolaser photocoagulation (argon ion laser, 532nm) was applied around the lesions to repair retinal detachment . As for the left eye, laser photocoagulation treatment(argon ion laser) was performed directly to the hemangioma and the surrounding area in order to induce degeneration of the tumor and its feeding and draining vessels. The retinal detachment of the right eye recovered and the hemangiomas of the left eye scarred following the treatment . At a follow-up examination before silicone oil extraction, 3 months after the surgery, the patient’s visual acuity had improved to 0.05 OD with corrected vision improving to 0.6(+4.50DS/+1.25DC*10) and 0.6 OS with corrected vision improving to 1.0(+0.25DS/-2.50DC*15). A timeline figure of the diagnosis and treatment of this case was provided in the supplementary material .
For the patient’s children, both of her daughter and son present the same heterozygous pathogenic mutation in the VHL gene, and her son (12 years old) had already had multiple retinal hemangiomas. We performed laser photocoagulation treatment for the patient’s son and suggested further cranial and abdominal examinations, but the patient refused. Follow-up examinations showed ideal recovery in his both eyes. However, it was with regret that we were informed of his death due to a cerebral hemorrhage 2 years after the treatment.