An obese 74-year-old female patient presented with a 3-day history of spontaneous sudden-onset headache and neck pain, accompanied by nausea, and a worsening occipital headache unresponsive to analgesics. Notably, she was taking clopidogrel 75 mg/d for coronary artery disease.
Neurological examination revealed marked nuchal rigidity, positive Kernig's sign, normal funduscopic examination (e.g., no papilledema), and no other focal neurological deficits. The initial clinical diagnosis was a spontaneous SAH.
Routine laboratory and coagulation tests were within normal limits. Chest X-ray showed no abnormalities. Noncontrast cranial computed tomography (CT) was negative for intracranial hemorrhage. Lumbar puncture (LP) yielded clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF); laboratory analysis of the CSF was normal. Doppler ultrasonography of the carotid revealed no significant stenosis or arterial dissection.
Thirty hours postadmission, the patient developed a rapidly progressive right hemiparesis accompanied by severe pain in the right shoulder. On examination, she exhibited marked hypesthesia with a severe flaccid paresis in both the right upper and right lower extremities (2/5 motor function). On the right side, deep tendon reflexes were decreased and there was no Babinski response. The second emergent brain CT scan was negative.
The patient was transferred to another institution 8 hours after the onset of hemiparesis at which point she was nearly quadriplegic (e.g., severe bilateral motor and sensory deficits below C5 level, labored respiration, and decreased chest expansion). Following cardiopulmonary resuscitation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the cervical spine demonstrated a large extradural mass, dorsally to the spinal cord extending from C3 through mid-T3. The mass had well-defined contours and contributed to multilevel posterior to anterior spinal cord compression. It was hyperintense on T1 and heterogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted studies . It was more right-sided in location and was accompanied by an increased cord signal from C3 all the way down to the T2 level, which was suggestive of severe cord edema/infarction . Following gadolinium contrast administration, no enhancement was observed. These radiological findings were compatible with a cervicothoracic spinal epidural hematoma.
The patient underwent a C3 to T1 laminectomy with lateral masses screws – posterior fixation to prevent instability; the C3–T3 epidural hematoma was completely evacuated. Below the ligamentum flavum, large hard, dark clots were found, but no discrete bleeding points or abnormal vessels could be identified [Figure and ]. At the end of the procedure, routine hemostasis was achieved and dural pulsations were evident. Histopathological examination was consistent with a hematoma; there was no evidence of a neoplasm or vascular malformation. The patient failed to improve following surgery and expired 18 months later.