This case involved a 71-year-old woman with a primary complaint of gait disturbance. The patient had a history of hypertension and cerebral infarction, and she had been taking oral antihypertensive and antiplatelet agents. The patient had no sequelae of cerebral infarction, after which she had a good course taking oral antihypertensive and antiplatelet agents. Diabetes mellitus is a common cause of Charcot arthropathy, but the patient did not have diabetes mellitus. The patient also had no family history of a cause of Charcot arthropathy or a neurological disease. She had a history of the present deformities of the left knee joint and ankle from around 65 years of age, but the patient left them untreated because she did not have severe pain. From around 69 years of age, varus deformity of the left ankle progressed. The patient developed difficulty walking and, therefore, visited our department for consultation. Physical examination showed that the left leg was shorter by 20 mm, with a functional leg length discrepancy. The patient was limping, but not using any assistive device. Marked varus instability of the left ankle was observed during the stance phase of walking . Range of motion in the left knee joint was extension of -15° and flexion of 75°. There was marked swelling, but no instability . The left ankle joint had marked swelling, and the foot was medially dislocated. A skin ulcer had formed at the lateral malleolus .
Plain X-ray of the left knee revealed marked narrowing at the joint space, depression and an osseous defect of the medial tibial articular surface, and marked proliferative changes of the femoral condyle . Plain X-ray of the left ankle joint showed medial dislocation of the talus bone, accompanied by an old fracture of the medial malleolus, an osseous defect of the distal medial tibial articular surface, and an osseous defect of the proximal talus articular surface . A lower extremity full-length standing X-ray showed a femorotibial angle (FTA) of 202° .
The patient had an HbA1c level of 6.1% and a fasting glucose level of 103 mg/dL; the patient was not considered to have diabetes. Syringomyelia was not observed on whole-spine MRI. The Treponema pallidum hemagglutination test was positive. White blood cell and C-reactive protein levels were normal. There were no general bacteria on culture of synovial fluid from the knee and ankle joints. On electrophysiological testing with the nerve conduction velocity test, a bilateral delay in motor nerve conduction velocity was observed in the deep peroneal nerve, and similarly, a bilateral delay of sensory nerve conduction velocity was observed in the sural nerve.
Total knee replacement and ankle (tibiotalar arthrodesis) fusion were performed with the patient under general anesthesia in the supine position and a thigh tourniquet. The medial parapatellar approach was used for the knee joint. A marked intra-articular osteophyte and formation of giant loose bodies surrounding the femur were observed . The large mass of local bone was saved for ankle arthrodesis .
A 5 mm defect was observed at the medial tibia. After drilling, cement was inserted as filling. The posterior-stabilized (PS) type was fixed with cement , and the wound was closed. Next, surgery on the ankle joint was performed using an anterior approach. The distal tibial articular surface and proximal talus articular surface were rasped, drilling was performed, and the bone was repositioned to a neutral position without shortening . Subsequently, an autologous bone graft from the knee was placed at the talocrural joint space, and the wound was closed. Ilizarov external fixation was used to fix the bone. First, two straight wires and two half pins were inserted into the proximal-to-mid tibia and attached to the proximal full ring, and then, six straight wires were inserted into the calcaneus and attached to the distal foot ring. In addition, six straight wires were inserted into the distal tibia for strong fixation .
The total operative time for the combined procedure was 152 minutes. The hemoglobin concentration decreased from 13.9 mg/dL preoperative1y to 9.8 mg/dL on postoperative day 1, but the patient was not transfused. On postoperative day 3, knee drainage material was removed, oral antiplatelet administration was resumed, and walking with full weight-bearing was permitted. Hospitalization was prolonged for 14 days. The ankle fusion appeared to have healed by 9 weeks, as evidenced radiographically and on CT by the absence of a lucent line at the arthrodesis site. The external fixator of the ankle was removed on postoperative day 92. At follow-up 7 years after the simultaneous surgery, the patient was satisfied with the procedure. Her American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society scale ankle/hindfoot scale scores improved, from 32 before surgery to 91 after surgery. SF36 scores improved, from 24.1 (physical component summary) before surgery to 51.1 (physical component summary) after surgery and from 16.5 (mental component summary) before surgery to 59.5 (mental component summary) after surgery. The Visual Analog Scale improved, from 75 before surgery to 0 after surgery. The Knee Society subjective and physical examination score improved, from 25 before surgery to 85 after surgery. The patient's clinical score was checked on the day before surgery and 3 months after Ilizarov external fixation removal.