A 26-year-old South-Asian female presented with a 6 day history of disproportionately worsened episodic vomiting on a backdrop of a 3 month history of oesophageal reflux due to frequent non steroidal anti- inflammatory drug (NSAID) use, a short two day history of new onset visual impairment with flashes of light, double vision and altered behaviour followed by recurrent generalized tonic-clonic seizures that had an initial focal origin from the left lower limb.
In the preceding year she was investigated for probable pyrexia of unknown origin twice in separate institutions without being able to arrive at a conclusive diagnosis. During the span of one year the patient also noted a weight loss of 8 kilos. She was also treated for eight months for young onset hypertension, which poorly responded to medical management (highest recorded value was 138/110 mmHg, other readings showed fluctuations ranging from 140/90 mmHg to acceptable levels of 110/70 mmHg) even with good drug compliance. She was also diagnosed as having sero-negative arthritis involving the left lower limb knee and ankle and was treated with Non-steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs for the same duration. Three months prior to the presenting episode she developed recurrent left sided loin pain which was diagnosed as a urinary tract infection. For the similar 3 month duration she developed recurrent episodes of vomiting which was diagnosed by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy as antral gastritis secondary to prolonged NSAID use.
On general examination, her consciousness level was a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) level of 14/15 with an elevated blood pressure of 190/120 mmHg. Palms of her hands revealed a blotchy palpable purpuric type of vaculitic rash . Nervous system examination revealed a clawed right hand in isolation without any other deficit or abnormality . Fundi were normal. Remainder of the systemic examination including the cardiovascular and respiratory systems and abdomen was normal.
Electrolyte profile was normal, except for serum calcium and phosphate which were ranged in the lower limit of an accepted normal value [S.Ca2+- 2.13 mmol/L (2.1-2.55), S.PO43--0.8 mmol/L (0.8-1.5)]. Repeated complete blood counts (CBC) showed markedly elevated white cell count [21.88 × 109/L (4–10)] with neutrophil predominance (85.4 %) and a low haemoglobin value of 7.1 g/dL. All three red cell indices [mean corpuscular volume −70.7 fL (80–100), mean corpuscular haematocrit -21 pg (27–34), mean corpuscular haematocrit concentration- 30 g/dL (32–36)] were reduced. Blood picture demonstrated microcytic hypochromic cells, polychromasia, target cells and polymorphonuclear leukocytosis. Platelet values and morphology were normal. Coombs test was negative. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated with a value of 130 mm for the 1st hour as was the C – Reactive protein with a value of 114 mg/L. Repeated values too were persistently elevated. Iron studies revealed a reduced serum iron of 8 μg/dL (37–148), a total iron binding capacity of 260 μg/dL (274–385) with an iron saturation of 3.1% (15–50) and an elevated serum ferritin of 189 ng/mL (6–159). Liver functions (coagulation profile and liver enzymes) and renal functions were repeatedly normal. Blood and urine cultures were negative but urinalysis repeatedly showed the presence of a significant number of red cells with protein in the absence of casts. Features were not in favor of meningitis or encephalitis to pursue an investigative path in that direction. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) was weakly positive. Anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti-dsDNA), anti-cyclic citrulinated peptide (ACCP), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) P and C, cryoglobulin and rheumatoid factor were all negative with an elevated C3 complement level of 160 mg/dL with a repeat value of 129 mg/dL (55–120), two weeks later. Thyroid function tests were normal. Hepatitis screening was negative. Skin biopsy revealed moderate vessel vasculitis and red cell extravasation with fibrinoid necrosis of vessels .
Preliminary non contrast computed tomography of the brain showed bilateral occipital lobe hypodensity coupled with oedema . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed bilateral occipital lobe involvement which had low signal intensity on T1 and high intensity on T2 without gadolinium enhancement . Electroencephalography demonstrated gross background slowing in delta range with continuous right-sided sharp slow complexes suggestive of ongoing seizure discharges, indicating an encephalopathic picture with right focal seizure discharges . Nerve conduction study confirmed isolated ulnar nerve involvement confirming mononeuopathy. Ultrasound abdomen revealed structurally abnormal kidneys (right kidney measured 8.8 cm in length and the left 8.9 cm) with irregular margins but preserved cortico-medullary demarcation. Renal imaging studies confirmed the ultrasound findings . Renal artery angiogram revealed the presence of micro aneurysms in the right kidney vasculature . 2D echo was normal. Two months later the repeat magnetic resonance imaging revealed overall improvement, but with multiple focal high intensity areas being noted on white matter of corona radiata and persistence of a high intensity area on the occipital cortex in the absence of post contrast enhancement .
We treated our patient symptomatically with antiemetics and antihypertensives and controlled the seizures with diazepam satisfactorily. Blood pressure control was achieved and vomiting subsided with a dramatic clinical improvement. Seizures did not persist after the initial day of presentation. Physiotherapy was initiated and continued for the ulnar nerve palsy. Immunosuppressive therapy was initiated for PAN and the patient showed good response with reduction of inflammatory markers and normalization and maintenance of blood pressure.