The case was a 31-year-old man who presented to the surgical referral clinic with a complaint of non-projectile vomiting of ingested matter. It was non-bilious, occurred 5–6 times a day after feeding, contained undigested food matter, and had persisted for three years. The vomiting had progressively worsened over the previous six months. The patient also complained of a burning type of epigastric pain for which he was treated with PPI (proton pump inhibitor) on multiple occasions for the past three years; however, had no improvement. The patient also had a significant amount of weight loss. Despite these, the patient has no history of hematemesis, melena, or previous TB (tuberculosis) treatment. The patient appeared emaciated with a BMI (basal metabolic index) was 16 kg/m2; however, his vital signs were in normal range, and his conjunctiva was pale. On abdominal examination, a succession splash was appreciated; otherwise, no signs of peritonitis. A complete blood count showed anemia (Hg 7 g/dl); nevertheless, other parameters were in the normal range. ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) was 30 mm/h and negative for HIV. Arterial Blood Gases (ABG) and serum electrolytes were not assessed as they were not available in the hospital.
A upper duodenum ( and ); afterward, either upper GI endoscopy with biopsy or barium swallow was planned but not available. We entered the peritoneal cavity with a midline vertical abdominal incision; however, intra-operatively the stomach was grossly redundant, and there was multiple enlarged peri pyloric and per duodenal lymph nodes with associated fibrous tissue around the pylori-duodenal junction with thickened pylori-duodenal wall with cicatrization and stenosis of the pylori duodenal canal with decreased size of the duodenum due to associated scarring and fibrosis. Otherwise, there is no palpable gastric mass or periampullary tumor. There is no damage to the duodenum. So, we took two enlarged lymph nodes and dissected the lymph nodes, and there was a little milky discharge from the lymph nodes, so we suspected possible caseous necrosis that may be due to tuberculosis. So, we sent a lymph node biopsy and did a Gastrojejunostomy. Endoscopy (confirmatory for GOO) was not available in the nearby hospital; as a result, Contrast Abdominal CT was sent to confirm the diagnosis of Gastric Outlet Obstruction (GOO) and concurrent malignancy. The CT confirmed GOO secondary to chronic peptic ulcer diseases resulting from cicatrized A lymph node biopsy was taken for histopathologic examination and showed capsulated lymphoid tissue which is composed of heterogeneous lymphoid cells with the germinal center formation with associated multinucleated giant cells and caseating epithelioid cell granuloma which is suggestive of Tuberculous Lymphadenitis .
The patient was discharged from the ward after one week of hospital stay and treated with anti-tuberculous drugs according to the national protocol for six months, and the above symptoms subsided without any post-operative or drug-related complications. The patient had gained 15 kg over two months at the follow-up visit and had no complaints. The wound site healed and no abnormal findings were appreciated.