A 17-year-old white man, previously healthy, was admitted following a reported new-onset generalized tonic-clonic seizure. The seizure was witnessed by his mother. She reported a continuous convulsion lasting for almost 6 minutes associated with urinary incontinence. Prior to admission, he had generalized body fatigue, intermittent nausea and vomiting for 1 week, without any associated features such as fever, chills, diarrhea, abdominal pain, chest pain, shortness of breath, and weight loss. He was diagnosed as gastritis in a primary health care clinic, and was treated symptomatically. Upon further inquiry, he reported recently joining a local fitness club and starting on high-protein supplement for 1 week prior to the development of the presenting symptoms.
On admission, he was afebrile with normal vital signs. The neurologic examination revealed that he was intermittently aroused to painful stimuli. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 10 (E4, V2, M4), with the remainder of the examination being nonfocal. Initial laboratory data showed a normal leukocyte count 10.7 × 109/L (N 4.5–13 × 109/L), normal glucose, electrolytes and calcium levels. His liver function tests were as follows: alkaline phosphatase: 179 IU/L (N 40–129 IU/L), AST = 40 IU/L (N <40 IU/L), ALT = 166 IU/L (<41 IU/L), total bilirubin = 8 microm/L (≤17 microm/L), an ammonia level of 787 micromol/L (N 16–60 umol/L) with a normal coagulation panel. His initial chest X-ray, computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain, and magnetic resonance imaging/magnetic resonance angiography (MRI/MRA) of the brain were all normal. His initial prolonged electroencephalography (EEG) showed mild diffuse background slowing without any evidence of electrographical seizures, or clear epileptiform discharges .
An ultrasound scan of his abdomen and pelvis with liver Doppler showed normal hepatic parenchyma and patent hepatic vessels without any other abnormality. Over the first 24 hours of admission, he became less responsive and his ammonia level failed to normalize despite lactulose therapy. He was intubated for airway protection. A repeat CT of the brain was done on the second day of critical care admission, showing diffuse effacement of sulcal spaces with decreased attenuation of the cerebral parenchyma, suggesting mild diffuse cerebral edema . In view of his persistently elevated serum ammonia levels and brain edema, dialysis was initiated, and plasma and urine amino acid analysis and urine organic acid quantitation were performed. The blood test showed low level of citrulline (7 μM; normal 19–62 μM), while the urine test revealed elevated levels of orotic acid (27.7 mmol/mol creatinine; normal 0–1.3 mmol/mol creatinine). Based on clinical and laboratory findings, urea cycle disorder was strongly suspected and our patient was started on arginine and an ammonia scavenger therapy, sodium benzoate, with intermittent hemodialysis. After the third hemodialysis session along with the medical therapy, our patient’s ammonia levels had significantly decreased over the course of treatment (median 55, average 184 μmol/L, range 30–787 μmol/L) , but without any observable improvement in his level of consciousness.
At that time, a repeat EEG showed a very severely attenuated, poorly organized, and nonreactive EEG that was observed at high sensitivity, indicating a profound generalized disturbance of cerebral activity . He was kept on maintenance medical therapy and intermittent hemodialysis. His ammonia level was subsequently maintained within normal range without improvement in the level of consciousness, failing multiple ventilation weaning trials. During the recovery period, he developed ventilator-associated pneumonia treated with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam for 10 days, but unfortunately, the course was further complicated by severe Clostridium difficile colitis, and miliaria profunda that ended with cardiopulmonary arrest and death despite aggressive restitution.
The initial genetic testing for the OTC deficiency did not show any deletion and no duplication was identified in the OTC gene by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis. However, and because of the strong clinical suspicion, this result was not considered as conclusive, as it could not exclude OTC variants, where any variants outside of the analyzed region might not be detectable by MLPA and still might be present. Sequence analysis of the OTC gene was recommended and the diagnosis was confirmed showing 119G variant, which was identified in exon 2 of the OTC gene. Based on these results, all of our patient’s siblings were recommended to be screened and were referred for genetic consulting.