The patient is a 12-year-old boy who presented with several months of abdominal pain, weight loss, and bloody diarrhea.
The patient experienced abdominal pain, weight loss, and bloody diarrhea and was referred for upper and lower GI endoscopy with biopsy.
His medical history was remarkable for several mild and self-limiting respiratory illnesses with non-productive cough. The most recent episode occurred fourteen months prior to his current presentation.
No notable personal or family medical history.
Unremarkable physical examination.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed and revealed focally ulcerated gastric mucosa and several inflammatory polyps arising within the second and third portions of the duodenum. Colonoscopy revealed patchy moderate inflammation characterized by erythema and numerous pseudopolyps involving the terminal ileum, cecum, and ascending colon . An erythematous region containing shallow ulcers was identified at the hepatic flexure. Multiple biopsies were taken from throughout the colon. A presumptive diagnosis of CD was made, methylprednisolone (40 mg/kg/d, IV) was administered and the patient was then discharged on oral prednisone (40 mg, QD) and oral mesalamine (1000 mg, TID).
Histologic examination of an H&E-stained colonic biopsy revealed a diffuse cellular infiltrate within the lamina propria with scattered histiocytic aggregates and occasional non-necrotizing granulomas . Grocott-Gomori’s methenamine silver (GMS) and Periodic acid-Schiff stains confirmed the presence of numerous yeast forms morphologically suggestive of H. capsulatum , further confirmed with positive urine Histoplasma antigen (6.58 ng/mL, positive range 0.2-20 ng/mL) and serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies to Histoplasma (35.9 EU, positive ≥ 10.0 EU).
Given the unusual nature of the histoplasmosis infection, an immunological workup was initiated and revealed profound hypogammaglobulinemia: Serum IgG 94 mg/dL (range 638-1453), IgM 9 mg/dL (range 56-242), and IgA 40 mg/dL (range 45-285) as well as CD8 lymphopenia (253/mm3, range 331-1445). Genetic testing was ordered for inborn error of immunity using Invitae Primary Immunodeficiency Panel and one pathogenic variant was identified in CD40LG c.43del (pThr15Leufs*7), associated with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome (XHIGM) and two likely pathogenic variants in TNFRSF13B c.310T>C (p.Cys104RG) (homozygous), associated with recessive common variable immunodeficiency (CVID).
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis demonstrated a calcified left lower lobe lung nodule with associated hilar lymphadenopathy, diffuse colitis with wall thickening of the distal small bowel through the cecum, abdominal lymphadenopathy, and abnormal-appearing adrenal glands, likely related to disseminated histoplasmosis infection.