A 6-year-old boy presented with erythematous scaly lesions on the scalp and back. Clinical diagnosis of psoriasis was established and he started treatment with topical corticosteroid (methylprednisolone ointment). Partial clinical improvement of the lesions was noticed, but residual plaques persisted . Approximately one month later, purpuric lesions appeared in the infrapopliteal region, gluteal area, and upper limbs. He had no fever, no arthralgia, and no gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms. A skin biopsy in the affected area was performed and revealed a small-vessel vasculitis affecting the papillary dermis. He continued topical corticosteroid treatment in the newly affected areas with good clinical response. Some days later, he performed a urinalysis that showed microscopic hematuria and nephrotic-range proteinuria (urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (UPCR) of 4998 mg/g). These urinalysis abnormalities persisted in the following two months although he always maintained normal blood pressure, had no edemas or urine macroscopic abnormalities, and had normal serum albumin, creatinine, and lipid profile. A thorough investigation showed no abnormal results, including measurement of circulating complement proteins (C3 and C4), immunoglobulins (IgA), ANA, anti-dsDNA and ENA antibodies, and serologic tests for hepatitis B virus, HIV, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Kidney and bladder ultrasound was normal. Nearly three months after the first altered urinalysis, de novo macroscopic hematuria was noticed, concomitant with abdominal pain and vomiting. Nephrotic-range proteinuria (10 mg/m2/H) persisted. Kidney biopsy histopathology revealed mesangial proliferation and fibrocellular crescents in 6/16 glomeruli with fibrinoid necrosis, and direct immunofluorescence showed predominant mesangial IgA granular deposits . These aspects were compatible with IgA nephropathy, Haas class III. Three methylprednisolone pulses of 30 mg/kg/day were administered, with subsiding macroscopic hematuria. He maintained oral prednisolone (60 mg/m2/day) for 4 weeks. During this treatment period, the psoriatic lesions clinically improved but the nephrotic-range proteinuria persisted . For that reason, cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/day) was initiated, concomitantly with progressive withdrawal of prednisolone. Nine weeks later, proteinuria decreased to a non-nephrotic-range (UPCR < 2000 mg/g) but persisted above 1000 mg/g and therefore enalapril was started. He completed 12 weeks of cyclophosphamide. Proteinuria continued to decrease and was negative one month later. Kidney function remained normal. Psoriatic lesions worsened with the progressive tapering of prednisolone dose, in spite of cyclophosphamide. Topical corticosteroid (mometasone) and calcitriol ointment were started but clinical improvement was negligible. He then started phototherapy with significant clinical improvement.