A 58-year-old myopic woman visited our clinic, complaining of blurred vision and symptomatic floaters in her left eye for 3 months. Ophthalmologic examination revealed significant Elsching pearl like PCO in her left eye and VF like a thick string in the posterior segment of the vitreous cavity. The BCVA of her left eye was 8/20. She had no history of any systemic disease and drug intake. Two years ago she had undergone phacoempulsification and IOL implantation in her left eye, preoperatively she had − 6.50DS myopia with her left eye and the axial length of her left eye was 26.81 mm. We performed vitreous and retina examination on her left eye by slit-lamp biomicroscopy with Goldman’s three mirror contact lens to rule out peripheral retinal tears and degeneration. By Goldmann three-mirror lens, we clearly saw the partial posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) at posterior fundus and the VF was approximately 4-5 mm in front of the optic disc. The patient was eager to improve the visual acuity and remove the floaters in her left eye. At that time, we considered that the patient’s residence was far away from our clinic. In order to reduce the number of visits of the patient, we decided to complete Nd:YAG laser capsulotomy and Nd:YAG laser vitreolysis in one time. After signing the informed consent, Nd:YAG capsulotomy was performed first, followed by Nd:YAG laser vitreolysis immediately. In order to decrease the symptoms of floaters after Nd:YAG capsulotomy, we used the cross incision method for Nd:YAG capsulotomy. The diameter of Nd:YAG capsulotomy was about 6 mm, the power was set from 1.6 to 3.0 mJ, and the total power was 34 mJ. Then we swithed the offset to the anterior to avoid the damage of the retina and optic disc behind the VF. We used the professional vitreous laser lens (the type: KARICKHOFF25mm OFF-AXIS) for vitreolysis. During the vitreolysis the energy ranged from 3.0–4.5 mJ for a value that fully vaporized the VF and the total power of vitreolysis was 130 mJ. In the process of Nd:YAG laser vitreolysis we found the fiber around the floaters were shaking violently. The whole timing of the two laser treatment was about 15 min. After the laser treatment, the patient immediately complained of a prominent darking and flashing sensation with her treated eye, but the patient’s complaint did not catch our attention and we did not have a timely retinal examination on her. Seven days later, she came back to our clinic complaining of rapid vision loss in her left eye and dark shadows in her lower visual field. We found her BCVA of the left eye was down to finger count at 2 ft. We found retinal detachment (RD) at the upper and nasal retina and involved the macular fovea, and two large holes in the upper retina about 4DD in diameter . She immediately underwent a vitrectomy, retinal reattchment and silicone oil tamponade surgery for her left eye. Six months later silcone oil removal was arranged on her, and the BCVA in her left eye gradually improved to 10/20 and maintained during a 1-year follow-up period.