A 59-year-old Tamil woman with a 10-year history of adequately controlled diabetes mellitus and hypertension presented with a gradually enlarging painless lump in the right inguinal region over a period of 8 months. It was not associated with constitutional symptoms such as fever, weight loss, or loss of appetite.
On examination, the lump was consistent with an enlarged, non-tender, firm inguinal lymph node that was not attached to the underlying structures. She did not have any other palpable lymph nodes or organomegaly. She was not pale or icteric.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed mild hepatomegaly and intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy in addition to inguinal lymphadenopathy. Her complete blood count, liver functions, renal functions, inflammatory markers, and coagulation screen were within normal limits. Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy were normal. An excisional biopsy of the enlarged lymph node showed evidence of Castleman disease of the plasma cell type with CD3 and Bcl-2 stained reactive pattern of follicles. She was treated with intravenously administered rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks. There was reduction in the size of her inguinal lymph nodes.
Six months later, she developed gradually ascending numbness and weakness of her lower limbs. These symptoms progressed in a symmetrical manner without upper limb or sphincter involvement. An examination revealed flaccid paraparesis with a proximal power of grade 4/5 and distal power of grade 3/5 associated with diminished lower limb deep tendon reflexes. Plantar responses were bilaterally flexor. She had impaired pinprick sensation up to thoracic 9 (T9) level with intact joint position sense and normal anal sphincter tone. There were no obvious spinal deformities or tender areas along her spine. A neurological examination of her cranial nerves and upper limbs did not reveal any deficits.
A nerve conduction study of her lower limbs diagnosed a moderately severe sensorimotor polyneuropathy with conduction slowing. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic and lumbosacral spine with gadolinium enhancement did not show compression of nerve roots or the thecal sac.
A summary of our patient’s hematological and biochemical investigations are shown in Table .
Serum protein electrophoresis showed a faint monoclonal band in the fast gamma region without immunoparesis. However, urine protein electrophoresis was within normal limits. Immunofixation of the monoclonal band was not performed at the time due to unavailability. Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy showed a hypercellular marrow with 30% plasma cells. A rectal biopsy showed normal rectal mucosa with focal ulceration. Congo red stain on the rectal biopsy did not reveal any amyloid deposits. A repeat contrast-enhanced CT scan of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed mild hepatomegaly, pericardial effusion, generalized subcutaneous tissue edema, multiple intra-abdominal lymphadenopathy, and multiple sclerotic bony lesions involving the thoracic and lumbar vertebral bodies, sternum, anterior ribs, and sacrum. A repeat MRI of her thoracolumbar spine was performed with gadolinium enhancement which showed altered signal intensity in multiple cervical and lumbar vertebral bodies in both T1 and T2 MRI sequences without destruction or collapse.
Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of POEMS syndrome was established. She was treated with six cycles of cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone, in addition to lower limb physiotherapy. Each 21-day cycle consisted of intravenously administered cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 infusion on day 1 and intravenously administered dexamethasone 40 mg daily on days 1 to 4.
Following three cycles of treatment, she demonstrated a remarkable improvement in her neurological deficits with recovery of muscle power and sensation to near normal.