A 39-year old woman with a history of irritative LUTS with macrohematuria and recurrent proven urinary infections (4–5 per year) over more than 10 years was directed to us by her attending urologist. During cystoscopy diffuse atypical flat black pigmented bladder tumors were seen throughout the bladder. An initial tentative diagnosis was melanosis of the bladder .
The patient received an extensive transurethral bladder resection (TUR-B), in which most (but not all) of the tumor formations were resected. In multiple locations, a thick layer of black pigmented cells was scraped away from a healthy underlying urothelial submucosa . Retrograde ureteropyelography showed no evidence of intraureteral lesions .
Histologically, condyloma-like benign hyperkeratotic squamous cell deposits could be seen in all resection samples and the diagnosis of intravesical ichthyosis was made. Urine cytology showed no signs of malignancy. The preoperative urine culture only showed natural skin flora (100 CFU/ml).
A profound anamnesis revealed that there was a 2-time history of extravesical CA (cervical, 10 years ago and perineal, 3 years ago) with cystoscopically no intravesical lesions at that time. The patient’s partner had no history of condylomata and both were never vaccinated against HPV. The patients only comorbidities were hypothyroidism (treated with L-Thyroxin 75 µg daily) and a penicillin-allergy. She was in a good physical condition and had never smoked.
HPV-Screening (urethral swab) was mildly positive for HPV42-DNA, a standard HPV-Vaccine (Gardasil-9®) followed. Colonoscopy showed no signs of intestinal condylomata; one small sigmoidal tubulovillous adenoma was resected.
Postoperatively, the recurrent urinary infections with macrohematuria persisted. Two control-cystoscopies after 2 and 5 months postoperatively showed minimal persistence of ichthyosis and extensive scarring, with no signs of active growth. The next cystoscopy is planned in 3 months, with a re-TUR-B if lesions progress.