A 82- year old male patient, with the only known comorbidities being hypercholesterolemia and sigmadiverticulosis, presented to a nearby hospital with productive cough and progressive dyspnea in the last 14 days. Chest x-ray showed a right lung opacification with pleural effusion. Subsequent chest CT scan revealed a 180° degree counterclockwise torsion of the whole right lung with partial atelectasis of the lower lobe and middle lobe as well as venous congestion and complete atelectasis of the upper lobe . The patient was then transferred to our thoracic surgical unit for further treatment. Upon arrival in our department a chest tube was placed on the right side and 1 l of pleural fluid was evacuated. Furthermore bronchoscopy was performed, showing torsion of the right mainstem bronchus with complete obstruction of the upper lobe. The intermediate bronchus showed even more profound rightward torsion with partial obstruction of the middle and lower lobe orifice . After drainage 12 h later a follow-up CT scan was performed, which showed complete evacuation of the pleural effusion with better ventilation of the middle and lower lobe but persistent lung torsion with suspected pulmonary venous occlusion and venous congestion of the upper lobe. A tumor was not suspected, but could not be excluded due to massive congestion of the whole upper lobe. Therefore the patient was taken to the operating room for diagnostic thoracoscopy. As suspected, the entire right lung was torqued in a 180-degree counterclockwise direction. Since thoracoscopic detorsion could not be achieved and the whole upper lobe showed hemorrhagic infarction, we converted to thoracotomy and performed anatomic resection of the right upper lobe . The upper lobe vein was centrally compressed by a tumor resulting in venous congestion and finally hemorrhagic infarction of the entire upper lobe. This finding was also confirmed by the pathologist who diagnosed a central bronchial adenocarcinoma in the upper lobe with compression and invasion of the upper lobe vein and additional hemangiosis carcinomatosa. The patient had an uneventful post-operative course and was discharged home in good condition on postoperative day 6. Because of concomitant malignant pleural effusion an adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended.
Unfortunately the patient died 2 months later due to rapid tumor progression.