A 51-year-old Saudi man, with no history of trauma, misdiagnosed as eventration of diaphragm for 20 years, reported to the clinic with abdominal bloating and intermittent dyspnea. CT revealed large right BH that contained stomach, pancreas, mesenteric fat, hepatic flexure, and transverse colon. The patient underwent elective laparotomy that started with mobilization of the left lobe of the liver to the left hepatic vein. The small and large bowel were reduced into the abdomen and the hernia sac was partially excised. The surgeon identified a hiatal hernia, approximated the diaphragmatic crura, and created a partial fundoplication. No other diaphragmatic defect was detected. The postoperative course was complicated by pulmonary sepsis, fever, and leukocytosis. Nine days postoperatively, thoracic and abdominal CT showed no change in size, site, or contents of BH, which implied failure of surgical repair. For the next 2 years, the patient complained of intermittent dyspnea and recurrent chest infections. Chest X-ray showed massive herniation of the stomach and bowel into the thoracic cavity . The patient was referred for surgery in another hospital. However, patient habitually failed to show up for his appointments despite repeated reminders and rescheduling. Eventually, the patient presented to the emergency room in hypovolemic shock with severe abdominal pain, retching, and vomiting. After the patient's resuscitation, a thoracoabdominal CT was obtained. A giant BH with mediastinal shift to the left was evident . The small bowel showed a high-grade closed loop obstruction at two sites above and below the diaphragm. The duodenojejunal flexure was incarcerated in the chest and obstructed with adhesions; the jejunoileal junction was obstructed with adhesions in the abdomen . Hepatic flexure and transverse colon were incarcerated in the right chest . Emergency laparotomy was performed which was followed by right anterolateral thoracotomy. Laparotomy confirmed the incarceration of small and large bowel in the chest and the adhesive obstruction in the abdomen. After the lysis of adhesions, we could not reduce the bowel safely or delineate the diaphragmatic defect adequately. Therefore, we proceeded with right anterolateral thoracotomy that facilitated lysis of adhesions in the chest, resection of hernia sac, release of entrapped right lower lobe, and reduction of bowel into the abdomen. Tenuous flimsy tissue at the rim of the diaphragmatic defect was debrided. Tension-free primary approximation was accomplished with nonabsorbable suture and reinforced with polytetrafluoroethylene mesh. The patient recovered well and was discharged home 8 days postoperatively. He remains clinically and radiologically free from hernia recurrence 1 year later.