We present here the clinicopathological features of a cervical uterine ERMS (uERMS) case in a 46-year-old woman. The study has been approved by the institutional Ethics Committee and an informed consent has been obtained (IJB/CE3005).
In September 2017, a 45-year-old woman presented to her gynecologist with intermenstrual bleedings which led to the diagnosis of a polypoid uterine cervical mass, for which initial excisional biopsy revealed a benign polyp. Three months later, she returned with recurrent uterine bleeding and cervical mass. A second biopsy was sent to our Department of Pathology at the Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium for revision and was reinterpreted as botryoid-type uERMS. The patient was referred to our Department of Surgical Oncology. There was no significant past medical history. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 4 cm fibromyoma of the uterine corpus and multiple Naboth cysts, without mass or abnormal uptake of contrast in the cervix. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) did not show significant 18Fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) uptake in the uterine cervix and no other foci of 18F-FDG avidity in the rest of the whole-body scan . The patient underwent a C1-type hysterectomy (HRT). Intraoperatively, there was no obvious intraperitoneal disease visible.
The final pathology report described a polypoid cervical lesion (30×7 mm), which exhibits the classical appearance of “bunch of grapes” associated with several Naboth cysts. This lesion prolapsed from the cervix ostium . Additionally, the myometrium contained multiple leiomyomas, the largest of 5 cm. Microscopically, the samples of the cervix and the isthmus showed a polypoid lesion composed of fusiform cells with oval nuclei. The surface was delimited by a squamous epithelium above a densification of stromal cells (cambium layer) beneath the surface . The tumor stroma was myxoid with pronounced edema. In depth, the tumor infiltration becomes denser and tumor cells more basophilic. Cartilaginous foci have not been demonstrated. The vaginal collar and the parameters are healthy. The immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for myogenin (Ventana BenchMark ULTRA, Sanbio, anti-mouse antibody MYF4, clone F5D, 1/1 dilution) and desmin (Ventana BenchMark ULTRA, Agilent, anti-mouse antibody, clone D33, 1/1 dilution) . The histology and the immunohistochemical profile were in favor of a cervical ERMS (botryoid subtype). The tumor cervical stromal infiltration was less than 50% and the pathological tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) staging was IA1. According to the IRSG clinical classification, the patient was grouped as IA, and it was decided by our multidisciplinary teams of gynecological oncology and sarcomas to carry out a simple surveillance.
Six months later, pelvic MRI control showed a recurrence in the right pelvic lymph nodes (LNs), with a necrotic mass of 40 mm. The mass had intense metabolic activity [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) 11.3] on 18F-FDG PET/CT scan without any evidence of metastatic disease. A multi-drug VIDE CHT regimen with Vincristine (1.5 mg/m2, D1), Ifosfamide (3 g/m2/day, D1–D3), Doxorubicin (20 mg/m2/day, D1–D3) and Etoposide (150 mg/m2/day, D1–D3) was started. The 18F-FDG PET/CT scan after two cycles showed a partial metabolic response of this known right pelvic necrotic mass (SUVmax 4.1; ΔSUVmax -65%) but with an increase in size (6 cm) on CT scan images . Due to the discrepancy between the two imaging techniques, it was decided to complete the CHT (for five cycles in total, then stopped for toxicity) and to do an external RT (50 Gy) before surgical resection. Pathological examination of the resected pelvic mass confirmed uERMS recurrence of 60 mm, with large zones of necrosis and the presence of cartilaginous structures. At present, the patient is free of disease 60 months after diagnosis.