A 28-years-old wheelchair-bound man presented to the clinic complaining of severe back pain and an inability to walk for the past two weeks. The patient had no history of actual trauma and had only suffered from minor back pain, after pulling a rug a month prior. Although the pain was initially low in severity, it had gradually increased in intensity and lead to severe disability and progressive weakness in both legs. He also complained of diffuse paresthesia in both legs.
He was a bodybuilder and the only positive finding in his past medical history was the arbitrary use of licensed and unlicensed drugs in the field of bodybuilding. On physical examination, the patient could hardly stand. Manual muscle testing revealed a bilateral weakness in the extensor muscles of the big toe (severe on the left and moderate on the right) and ankle dorsiflexors (moderate on both sides), but sphincter function remained intact. The power of the ankle plantar flexors and quadriceps were also completely normal.
In laboratory testing, a raised C-reactive protein was the only significant finding. In the review of imaging studies, we found a compression fracture in L2 and a burst fracture in L5 with canal compromise and intravertebral vacuum cleft sign in L5 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) especially on the axial plane showed a double line sign; a linear area of decreased signal intensity (vacuum cleft) within an area of increased signal intensity representing intravertebral fluid . We could not find any paravertebral soft tissue mass or abscess in this spinal region, and a whole-body bone scan showed isolated increased uptake in only these two areas without any signs of metastatic involvement.
Due to the presence of the neurologic deficit (impending cauda equina), we opted not to take a fine needle biopsy, and instead proceeded directly to the surgical intervention (by F.O-K′ surgical team). We placed the patient in the prone position, and a total L5 laminectomy, bilateral foraminotomy, and open bilateral transpedicular biopsy were all carried out along with spinopelvic stabilization and fusion . On the day after surgery, the patient was mobilized with a soft lumbosacral corset and began lower extremities rehabilitation. Microscopic tissue examination showed fragments of trabecular bony structure with bony sequestrum alongside new bone formation and necrosis, and therefore, KD was confirmed. Six months later, at the latest follow-up visit, his lower back pain and weakness had completely resolved, but he still complained of vague trivial pain and some diffuse paresthesia in both legs which were not interfering with the activities of daily living.