A 21-year-old man with no significant family history presented with a two-year history of weakness, numbness, and painful sensations in his lower limbs. Over the course of 1 month, he also experienced psychiatric disturbances. provides a timeline of the events. The patient reported additional symptoms, including urinary and bowel incontinence, as well as intellectual and motor developmental delays. He exhibited a motionless posture with a distressed facial expression, occasionally crying out loudly. Seborrheic dermatitis was observed on his face and trunk, and the buttocks had prominent brown hyperpigmentation with desquamating dermatitis . Tendon reflexes were normal, with no signs of pyramidal neurological deficits. However, the patient’s impaired consciousness hindered further examination. Laboratory tests revealed hypochromic microcytic anemia (hemoglobin level: 91 g/L), elevated transaminase levels (glutamic-pyruvic transaminase: 168.7 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase: 84.1 U/L), and significantly increased serum homocysteine levels (258.4 μmol/L, normal range, 5–15.0 μmol/L). Urine organic acid analysis and serum amino acid and acylcarnitine analysis showed substantially elevated urine methylmalonic acid levels (24.8 μmol/L, normal range, <4.0 μmol/L) and serum propionyl carnitine/acetylcarnitine ratio (0.33, normal range, 0.02–0.2) (,). No signs of infection, inflammation, or toxicity were present, and serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) anti-cerebellitis antibodies were negative. Spinal cord MRI scan results were normal. Electromyogram (EMG) findings indicated widespread motor and sensory demyelination with accompanying axonal injuries in the limbs, particularly affecting the lower limbs. The first MRI, obtained 2 months after symptom onset, revealed diffuse cerebral atrophy (–). Subsequent MRI performed at this visit (2 years after symptom onset) revealed bilateral symmetrical lesions in the cerebellum, characterized by hyperintensity on T2-weighted images, restricted diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), and no enhancement (–). Based on the abnormal serum amino acid and acylcarnitine levels, elevated urine methylmalonic acid level, and increased serum homocysteine level, inherited metabolic diseases were strongly suspected. The diagnosis of late-onset cblC deficiency was further supported by whole-exome genetic sequencing, revealing a homozygous variant (c.482 G > A) in MMACHC . Further genetic analysis proved that the patient in our case was maternal uniparental disomy (mUPD). Following treatment with adequate betaine (9 g/day, administered intragastrically), cobamamide (1.5 mg/day, administered via intramuscular injection), mecobalamin (1 mg/day, administered via intramuscular injection), and B vitamins, the patient’s serum homocysteine levels substantially decreased (60.9 μmol/L), as did urine methylmalonic acid levels (12.5 μmol/L). At discharge, the patient did not experience significant clinical improvement, as well as observed changes on brain MRI (–). Within 1.5 years of follow-up, he relieved slightly but relapsed after treatment discontinuation.