A 23-year-old Asian man with no major medical history complained about a mass he found 10 years ago in the upper left abdominal quadrant, but he seemed reluctant to undergo surgery and decided to seek conservative treatment. The mass was the size of an orange and had been slowly enlarging since then until it was as large as a football and was associated with sharp pain, so he sought medication. The pain was exacerbated by walking and relieved by lying down. He also suffered from early satiety and constipation. There were no signs of rectal bleeding, hematochezia, nausea, or vomiting. The patient had no prior history of abdominal surgeries, pancreatitis, alcohol abuse, gallstone disease, or trauma. Physical examination revealed a visible asymmetry in the bowel contour in the left upper quadrant. A well-defined mass was palpable below the left costal margin. There were no signs of abdominal tenderness or rebound tenderness on palpation. The contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 20.05 × 15.95 × 26.71 cm homogenous intraabdominal mass that was partially septated with well-defined regular edges in almost the entire abdomen, from the left upper abdomen to the middle, which pressed the surrounding organs . He was diagnosed with a giant splenic cyst and scheduled for open surgery.
One consultant gastrointestinal surgeon, one gastrointestinal fellow, and one surgical resident at a tertiary general hospital carried out the operation. Intraoperative findings showed that the cyst originated from the spleen. The cysts pushed against the left side of the stomach wall and the left lobe of the liver. An 5 cm incision was made in the cyst capsule using the monopolar cautery, and the cystic fluid was gently aspirated to keep leaking out into the abdominal space and so that the cystic capsule could be seen . After the drainage of 6.5 l of brownish cystic fluid, four big pieces of gauze were inserted into the peri-splenic space. Then the cyst capsule was excised in a peri-cystic splenectomy using a harmonic scalpel; almost all of the capsule was excised , and the rest of the capsule that adhered to the spleen was removed by mucosectomy using a monopolar cautery known as the “Lily technique” to prevent further cystic fluid production. After removal of the gauzes and peritoneal toilet, an abdominal drain was inserted.
Postoperative care included maintenance of the fluid, antibiotics, a soft diet, and early mobilization. He was hospitalized for ten days for the observation of abdominal drain production, which was around 100 cc in the first week after surgery and diminished in the second week. One month after surgery, he went for a follow-up visit and was doing well, and there were no signs of complications such as abdominal pain, recurrence, or infection at the surgical site , . When asked for his perspective on surgery, he said, “I'm happy that I'm getting better, and I should do the surgery earlier.”
Cyst fluid analysis was not performed as standard for a benign lesion, and the splenic cyst capsule was sent for histological examination. Anatomical pathology results in this patient showed a cyst wall structure coated by erosive mesothelial cells with a normal cell nucleus. Under those structures, there are fibro-collagenous connective tissue stroma, which has undergone hyalinization, lymphocyte cells, and histiocytes, accompanied by blood vessel dilatation and bleeding. There is also a normal white pulp. There is no sign of malignancy. The diagnosis for this patient's pathological condition is a primary splenic cyst .