A 37-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital due to progressive exertional dyspnea for three months. She had an 18-year history of arterial hypertension and underwent radiofrequency ablation for atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) 13 years ago. At that time, antihypertensive treatment was introduced, and a suspicion of secondary hypertension was raised, but no adrenal investigation was performed. Despite the progressive increase of antihypertensive therapy, her blood pressure (BP) remained uncontrolled under the maximal dose of a beta blocker, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist, a calcium channel blocker, thiazide diuretic, an alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist, centrally active drugs, and a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, the highest recorded BP levels being 220/120 mmHg. The patient denied a family history of heart disease and relevant personal history such as smoking, alcohol use, or drug consumption.
On presentation, the patient was hemodynamically stable, her blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg, and her heart rate was 88 beats/min. A high-pitched, decrescendo, grade IV/VI diastolic murmur was audible at the left lower sternal border upon physical examination. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring indicated elevated daytime and particularly nighttime systolic BP values (152 mmHg and 172 mmHg, respectively). An electrocardiogram showed the voltage criteria for left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a bicuspid aortic valve with grade II calcification and an eccentric jet of severe AR directed along the anterior mitral valve leaflet. Transesophageal echocardiography further detailed the bicuspid aortic valve, with a raphe formed by the fusion between the right coronary cusp and the noncoronary cusp. The diameter of the ascending aorta was 41 mm. The LV was dilated (EDV = 131 mL/m2 and ESV = 72 mL/m2), with severe symmetric hypertrophy. The left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) was mildly reduced (53%) but with a reduced global longitudinal strain (GLS = −11.2%) and diastolic dysfunction grade III .
Laboratory tests revealed increased serum values of N-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP = 15,449 pg/mL) with raised levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (39.03 mg/L, normal range 0–5 mg/L). The liver, renal, and thyroid functions were not affected, and no sign of bacterial infection was present.
A CT angiography was performed to investigate the secondary causes of arterial hypertension and associated congenital abnormalities. The CT showed a 36/50/44 mm retroperitoneal space-occupying solid lesion in the left paraaortic space, next to the L1 and L2 vertebral bodies and left renal hilum. After contrast administration, the tumor displayed a similar aspect, with avid enhancement due to hypervascularization, a description suggestive of a paraganglioma . The CT also confirmed the bicuspid aortic valve and the enlargement of the ascending aorta (maximum diameter = 40 mm).
After twenty-four hours, the urinary normetanephrine was increased to 2227 mcg (normal value of <549.5 mcg), with a normal value of metanephrine and elevated plasma chromogranin of 173 mcg/L (normal range 27–94 mcg/L).
Based on these examination results, we considered that the cause of uncontrolled hypertension and associated symptoms was the retroperitoneal tumor, with imaging characteristics that suggested a paraganglioma. A multidisciplinary team of cardiology, cardiac surgery, anesthesiology, urology, and endocrinology specialists concluded that paraganglioma resection should be completed first, followed by an aortic valve replacement if necessary. The reason behind this approach was the high risk for hypertensive crisis and mortality during cardiac surgery due to the potential for unpredictable catecholamine release intra- and perioperatively.
Adequate preoperative management was crucial before resection of the paraganglioma to control the BP and heart rate values during surgery, to avoid complications, and to obtain better results. The alpha-blocker dose was increased, followed by an adjustment of the beta-blocker dose to suppress sympathetic activity and reduce surgical mortality. After the BP and heart rate control, the patient was admitted to the general surgery ward, where the resection of the left retroperitoneal lesion was successfully performed .
The macroscopic paraganglioma examination revealed a 55/45/35 mm nodular encapsulated and heterogeneous tumor with hemorrhagic areas. Microscopic examination exhibited a proliferation comprised of epithelioid cells with round to oval nuclei and amphophilic cytoplasm arranged in nests with focal spindle-shaped cells. Immunohistochemical stains showed strong and diffuse positivity for synaptophysin and a Ki67 proliferation index lower than 1%, with a negative S100 stain. The histopathological aspect, together with the immunohistochemical study and the clinical presentation, confirmed the diagnosis of a paraganglioma .
The patient had no post-surgical complications and was discharged 4 days after surgery.
At the six-month follow-up, her BP values were well controlled under treatment with angiotensin II receptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, and mineralocorticoid receptor blockers, allowing for a gradual reduction in dosage and cessation of alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists and centrally active drugs. The echocardiography reconfirmed the severity of the aortic regurgitation, but a recovery of systolic function with improvement in terms of the LVEF was noted (59%). However, there might be residual subclinical impairment, as demonstrated by the reduced GLS (−13%). The LV diameters were within the normal range, but the LV volumes were increased. The main improvement after the paraganglioma removal was clinical, with the patient relating a significantly improved exercise tolerance, confirmed by an exercise stress test. The serum values of NT-pro-BNP were also normal (190 pg/mL). We performed a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan that showed severe AR with a regurgitation fraction of 45.7%. The LV was dilated and hypertrophied, with the LVEF = 61% but without signs of cardiac fibrosis, inflammation, or ischemia . The patient also received an abdominal and pelvic contrast-enhanced MRI that did not show residual or recurrent lesions.
Corroborating these results, in the face of an asymptomatic patient with severe AR, preserved LVEF, and an LV end systolic diameter <50 mm, a decision to delay the aortic valve replacement was made. Even if this patient has not yet fulfilled the guidelines indicated for aortic valve replacement, she is at risk of decompensation, so a close follow-up with regular visits to assess her symptoms, NT-pro-BNP values, and echocardiography was decided.