A 16-year-old, black female patient was referred from the ophthalmology service to our Ear Nose and Throat (ENT) unit at Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital, Durban South Africa with acute progressive right sided loss of vision for 3 days. It was associated with intermittent ipsilateral moderate-intensity frontal headaches radiating to the ipsilateral temporal area. She had been diagnosed with optic neuritis and commenced on methylprednisolone (250 mg intravenously every 6 h) 2 days previously, with minimal improvement. She noted disturbance in colour vision, and pain on eye movement but no diplopia prior to loss of vision. Computed tomographic (CT) imaging had shown pan sinusitis resulting in her referral to the ENT unit. She had chronic rhinosinusitis for which she was on treatment with a steroid spray and nasal douche. She did not have current or recent nasal obstruction, purulent nasal discharge or facial pressure. There was no associated fever, nausea or vomiting, no history of trauma, or preceding acute illness (particularly no recent upper respiratory tract infection), no other neurological symptoms or any periorbital swelling. She was a student in a metropolitan high school, did not smoke or consume alcohol, and denied any contact with animals or consumption of unpasteurised milk. She reported visiting her rural home approximately 6 weeks prior to presentation but denied consuming any raw milk or contact with horses. Her last normal menstrual cycle was a week prior to presentation.
On examination, she was a well looking patient, who was not acutely ill, fully conscious and had normal vital signs. ENT examination was normal except for an inflamed nasal mucosa. She had poor light perception on the right side (progressively worse since the initial visual acuity of counting fingers at first presentation to ophthalmology) and decreased colour appreciation on Ishihara chart assessment. She had full range of extra ocular motility and anterior segment examination was normal. Posterior segment examination revealed quiet vitreous, no papilledema or optic disc erythema; there were no retinal or macula abnormalities. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect noted. Left eye examination was normal with a visual acuity of 6/12 (20/40). She had no signs of meningism and the rest of cranial nerve examination was normal. The rest of the systems examination was normal.
Full blood count, urea and electrolytes and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal. Rapid Plasma Reagin for syphilis was negative, C-reactive protein was less than 10 mg/L and a rapid HIV test was negative. Coagulation studies were normal and D-dimer was negative. Computed Tomographic (CT) scan showed bilateral maxillary sinus, right ethmoidal, frontal and sphenoidal opacification. The superior ophthalmic veins were bilaterally enhancing with no filling defects. There was no caroto-cavernous sinus pathological enhancement seen. There were no retro-bulbar lesions noted, no orbital or pre-septal orbital cellulitis. There were no intracranial lesions noted, no ipsilateral bony defects of lamina papyracea, optic canal or lateral sphenoidal wall noted . There were no bony lesions noted in relation to the skull base in the midline.
There was no obvious direct link between loss of vision and the sinusitis, nevertheless a decision was taken to start the patient empirically on intravenous Amoxicillin/ Clavulanate (1.2 g three times a day) and perform emergency functional endoscopic sinus surgery. She was taken to theatre within 24 h of admission to the ENT ward (approximately 5 days since onset of loss of vision) where she had bilateral middle meatus antrostomy with maxillary sinus washout, right total ethmoidectomy, right sphenoidotomy and right frontal sinusotomy. Pus was found in both maxillary sinuses as well as in the anterior and posterior ethmoid sinuses on the right side, the sphenoid sinus had oedematous mucosa. There was oedematous mucosa in the left sphenoid and frontal sinuses with no pus. The right side was packed with Merocel® (Medtronic Xomed Inc) postoperatively.
Nasal pack was removed on day 1 postoperatively and nasal douche as well as steroid spray was commenced. She completed a 3 day methylprednisone course and continued on intravenous Amoxicillin/Clavulanate. She had no periorbital swelling and remained stable. The patient reported an improvement in vision day 1 post operatively.
Intraoperative swabs taken from maxillary sinus revealed Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus susceptible to Amoxicillin-Clavulanate. This was reported as a moderate growth on culture and was also picked up on microscopy. Specific identification was done by Lancefield grouping as well as the automated Vitek® 2 system. Histology of intra operative sinus tissue reported that the features were in keeping with chronic allergic sinusitis; no fungi demonstrated, no features of an osteitis, no granulomas or viral inclusions and no tumor. She had progressive subjective improvement in vision and had normal eye examination findings with a visual acuity of 6/9 (20/30) in both eyes on discharge, 4 days postoperatively. She was reviewed by a neurologist pre- and post-operatively and diagnosed with ‘neighbourhood syndrome’. Further imaging was deferred given the marked and complete recovery post surgery and antibiotics. She was discharged home on oral Amoxicillin/Clavulanate to be continued for another 10 days and long term nasal douche and Fluticasone nasal spray.
Two week and 4 week follow-ups were unremarkable; vision was still maintained and nasal mucosa inflammation had subsided.