A 53-year-old male, a farmer by occupation, presented to the dermatology outpatient department with complaints of repeated blisters, cutaneous necrosis, and ulcers on both hands and feet for 2 years. The patient reportedly gave the history of having black-colored bizarre-shaped lesions on both arms, forearms, hand, and ear pinna for the past 3 weeks. The patient also gave a history of swelling of both hands and feet along with a reduced sensation of the acral area of hands and feet. The patient denied any history of tingling and numbness, fever, joint pain, epistaxis, history of any drug intake prior to the onset of the lesion, or lacrimation.
On cutaneous examination, there was the presence of multiple irregularly-shaped ecchymotic and necrotic plaques surrounded by a dusky red zone with black adherent crust present on both arms, forearm, hand (a), and pinna (b). General examination showed diffuse infiltration of bilateral earlobes, madarosis of the ciliary and superciliary areas, and pitting edema of both hands and feet with necrotic ulceration and serous discharge from the feet . Peripheral nerve examination revealed thickening of the bilateral ulnar and common peroneal nerve, along with neuritis, gloves, and stocking pattern of peripheral sensory anesthesia. There was evidence of nodules or hypopigmented patches anywhere on the body. Cranial nerve and motor examination did not show any deficit.
His complete blood count along with differential blood count was normal except for low hemoglobin (9.6 gm/dL), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (36 mm at the end of the first hour), and positive rheumatoid factor (26 IU/mL). Routine serum biochemistry for the liver function test, kidney function test, random blood sugar, and urine examination were within the normal range. Serological tests for hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and retrovirus were negative. His chest radiograph, Mantoux test, and sputum for acid-fast bacilli did not show any evidence of tubercular infection. Slit-skin smear examination obtained from the forehead and ear helices showed 4+ (10–100 bacilli in the average oil field) bacteriological index .
Coagulation profiles including prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, and activated partial thromboplastin time were within normal limit ruling out the possibility of underlying coagulopathy. Laboratory workup for connective tissue disease, including antinuclear antibody (ANA) were negative. Histopathological examination of the central and peripheral lesions showed foamy macrophages and the dermal vasculature showed changes suggestive of epidermal necrosis, ischemic necrotizing endarteritis obliterans, resulting in microvascular occlusion of dermal vasculature .
Based on clinical and histopathological examination, diagnosis of the Lucio phenomenon was made. The patient was started on standard World Health Organization multibacillary multidrug therapy (WHO-MDT) comprising oral rifampicin 600 mg supervised dose once a month, clofazimine 300 mg supervised dose once a month and 50 mg unsupervised dose daily, and dapsone 100 mg daily. In addition to WHO-MDT, the patient was prescribed oral prednisolone 40 mg once a day for 15 days for anti-inflammatory action.