A 17-year-old female high school senior gymnast, who had signed a full scholarship offer for Division I collegiate gymnastics, initially presented to our office after 3 months of anterior knee pain. Her pain had gradually worsened in severity over this time period and was, especially, painful with dismounts and jumping activities. She had previously sought treatment with her primary care physician who had diagnosed her with patellar tendonitis and was being managed conservatively with the help of the school’s athletic trainer. She denied any history of amenorrhea, eating disorders, or previous stress fractures. Initial radiographs obtained in our office revealed what appeared to be a non-displaced transverse fracture of the inferior pole of the patella . An MRI was obtained that confirmed the diagnosis of a patellar stress fracture and ruled out any patella tendon or intra-articular pathology . The patient was immobilized in a hinged knee brace, locked in extension. She was also prescribed Vitamin D and calcium supplementation as well as daily use of an Exogen® LIPUS system(Bioventus LLC, Durham, NC, USA). It was discussed with the patient that since the injury was 2–months’ old, she was at a higher risk for failing conservative treatment, which would require operative fixation. At 1month follow-up, radiographs were obtained that showed early callus formation, and her examination revealed a clinical decrease in her pain. She was then progressed to weight bearing as tolerated with gradual increase in her range of motion guided by physical therapy. At 2 months, radiographs showed fracture healing, and we began gradual reintegration of gymnastics with limitations on tumbling/dismounting/jumping activities. At 3 months, she was allowed to return to full competition. After approximately 1year of returning to sport and competing as a collegiate gymnast, she unfortunately began to develop similar symptoms as before, now in her contralateral knee. She presented back to our office where we confirmed the diagnosis of a stress fracture of the inferior pole of the contralateral patella, similar to her previous injury . At that visit, radiographs revealed complete healing of her prior stress fracture from 1year ago. She was given the same conservative management plan of a period of immobilization in a hinged knee brace locked in extension, Vitamin D and Calcium supplementation, daily use of LIPUS, and later progressed to physical therapy with guided return to gymnastic activities. At 3 months, she was pain free, and a Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) survey was obtained . With the KOOS showing favorable results, in addition to being pain free, the patient was allowed a full return to competition. She is now 3 years from injury on the right knee and 2years from injury on the left knee and continues to compete at the Division I collegiate level without pain.