A 68-year-old man had undergone low anterior resection and regional lymph node dissection for rectal cancer . The pathological examination showed the tumor to be a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with invasion to the subserosa (T3) and regional lymph node metastasis (N1). No distant metastases were found at the time of operation (M0), and the pathological staging of the tumor was stage IIIB, according to the seventh edition of the International Union Against Cancer TNM classification. He was treated with oral uracil and tegafur plus leucovorin for 5 cycles as adjuvant chemotherapy. Eight months after the initial surgery, follow-up computed tomography (CT) showed an enlarged retroperitoneal lymph node located below the aortic bifurcation, which would be considered one of the aortic bifurcation nodes , a tumor in the head of the pancreas , and dilation of the common bile duct and main pancreatic duct. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed abnormal uptakes of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) in these two lesions . Biopsy of the narrowed section of the pancreatic duct showed an adenocarcinoma. However, it was difficult to identify whether the pancreatic tumor was primary or metastatic disease. Clinical examination was unremarkable. Blood tests showed continued elevation of serum bilirubin (>2.0 mg/dL). The serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was within normal limits (4.1 ng/mL), while the serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 level was increased to 127 U/mL. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis from the previously resected rectal cancer and primary pancreatic head cancer or pancreatic metastasis from rectal cancer was made. For these lesions, resection of the enlarged retroperitoneal lymph node and pancreaticoduodenectomy were performed. The pathological examination of the resected specimen showed that the histological type of both the retroperitoneal lymph node and the pancreatic head tumor was adenocarcinoma. Moreover, they were identical to the primary rectal cancer , and immunohistochemical study of the pancreatic tumor showed positive immunoreactivity for CDX-2 staining . Based on these findings, these lesions were diagnosed as metastases from the primary rectal cancer. These specimens had negative resection margins. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. After the second surgery, he was given 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (modified FOLFOX6) as adjuvant chemotherapy. However, the chemotherapy was discontinued after only 5 cycles due to an adverse event. He was then routinely followed up without any medication. Sixty-nine months after the metastasectomy, there has been no indication of recurrence.