A 43-year old male presented with non-specific clinical symptoms such as loss of appetite and intermittent upper abdominal pain which improved slightly with antacid medication. His medical history was unremarkable except for pulmonal sarcoidosis in his twenties which had been treated with corticosteroid medication. Both physical examination and laboratory tests were without pathological findings. An ulcerous lesion in the duodenum was detected gastroscopically and computed tomography was performed to exclude an external compressing tumor. CT scans did not detect any tumor but revealed mild splenomegaly with multiple hypoattenuating nodules with a maximum diameter of 2.5 cm which were contrast-enhancing in the late portal venous phase.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed multiple hyperechogenic splenic lesions without evidence of metastatic disease or infectious origin and hemangioma was assumed. Despite the absence of adenopathy, lymphoma was finally considered the most likely diagnosis, given the quantity of the nodules as well as their distribution within the spleen and splenectomy was advocated. After appropriate preoperative vaccination for Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenca B and Neisseria meningitidis, laparoscopic splenectomy was performed. The cut surface of the 12 × 8 × 4 cm specimen showed multiple nodular lesions with spongy appearance, varying from 0.5 to 2 cm in greatest dimension.
Microscopically, these lesions were composed of cavernous sinuses which were lined by a single layer of tall cells lacking typical endothelial features. The lacunae were filled with edematous fluid and blood . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for both endothelial (CD 31) and histiocytic (CD 68) markers. No cytologic atypia and mitotic figures were found.
The combination of morphological and immunohistochemical analysis presenting this hybrid endothelial-histiocytic phenotype established the diagnosis of LCA. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on day five. He will be followed-up closely for the occurrence t of visceral neoplasms.