A 43 years old man was admitted to our Internal Medicine Unit on April 2018 with a 7 days history of low-grade fever, bilateral epistaxis and abdominal pain.
His personal medical history showed that 9 years earlier he was hospitalized for subjective dizziness and syncope. Brain MRI showed multiple bilateral posterior parietal hyperintense gliotic lesions, while transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a free floating mass attached to the cusp of the mitral valve with moderate mitral regurgitation. A subsequent transesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the presence of vegetation on mitral valve; a mechanical valve replacement was then performed and a long-term anticoagulant therapy with Acenocoumarol was started with INR target between 2.5–3.5 and TTR target of 70%. The histological analysis of the native valve showed a non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis. During the recovery, a thrombocytopenia (97,000/mm3—n.v. 179–373) was found but no other diagnostic investigation was carried out.
At the age of 41 years, he was admitted to a Neurosurgery Unit for generalized seizures and subsequent head injury. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed a right subdural hematoma and electroencephalography (EEG) background activity was rather irregular, but did not reveal any epileptic abnormalities during wakefulness. The patient was only managed with antiepileptic drugs (phenobarbital). During the hospitalization, a low count of platelet (57,000/mm3) was observed and, after haematological evaluation, immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) was diagnosed and steroid therapy (methylprednisolone) was started and extended for 10 days with satisfactory clinical outcome. During the haematological follow-up, courses of therapy with methylprednisolone lasting 7–10 days were administered, taking into account the platelet count.
He had a family history of diabetes and hypertension, he was allergic to aspirin and at admission to our clinical unit he was taking therapy with ramipril, carvedilol, phenobarbital and acenocumarol.
At admission to our clinical unit the physical examination revealed a diffused reduction of vesicular murmur with right basal crackles, ache and pain in the upper abdominal quadrants and splenomegaly.
Laboratory findings were as follows: platelets (PLT) 25 × 103/mm3 (n.v. 179–373), prothrombin time (PT)—INR 4,58 (n.v. < 1.2), activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT) ratio 2.54 (n.v. < 1.20), Amylase 104 U/L (n.v. 8–53), Lipase 1399 U/L (n.v. 73–393), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) 393 mU/mL (n.v. 15–85), C-Reactive-Protein (CRP) 149 mg/L (n.v. < 2.9), Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) 333 mU/mL (n.v. 87–241); haemoglobin, white blood cell (WBC), serum urea, creatinine, electrolytes, glycaemia, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and bilirubin levels were all within the normal range. Microbiological tests (i.e. Toxoplasma, CMV, HSV, EBV, HIV, HBV, HCV) were all negative and neoplastic markers were within the normal values. Peripheral blood smear showed only megaplatelets.
Workup for autoimmune disorder revealed high titre of anti-β2 glycoprotein I (β2GPI) IgG (113.4 U/mL) and anti-Cardiolipin (aCL) IgG (> 640 U/mL) antibodies, and a low titre of anti-β2GPI and anti-aCL IgM (26.7 U/mL and 24.3 U/mL, respectively); whereas, antiplatelets antibody, Antinuclear antibody, anti ds-DNA, Anti-Mitochondrial antibody (AMA), Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), Anti-Liver-Kidney Microsomal Antibody (LKM) and Anti-Smooth Muscle Antibody (ASMA) were negative.
Lupus Anticoagulant (LAC) was performed using Silica Clotting Time (SCT) and Diluted Russell Viper Venom Time (dRVVT) test in three steps (screening, mixing and confirmatory); positive results confirmed the presence of inhibitors of hemostasis, although false positive test may result from interference by concurrent anticoagulant therapy. Anyway, given the presence of both aCL and a β2GPI antibodies, the test was not retested during anticoagulation suspension.
The ultrasound abdomen exam was normal, except of splenomegaly (14 cm). Total body CT confirmed splenomegaly and showed right lower and middle lobe pneumonia; pelvic and other abdominal organs were normal.
Based on the multiple previous courses of therapy with steroid that may facilitate pseudomonas lung infection, a dual antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam and levofloxacin was given with sudsequent pneumonia resolution.
The anticoagulation therapy was carried on and steroid therapy with methylprednisolone was set up with increase of platelet count (61 × 103/mm3). Supported therapy for the pancreatic insult was also administrated with subsequent normalization of pancreatic enzymes.
On the basis of medical history, clinical and laboratory features, despite the lack of confirmed clinical criteria, and ruling out associated autoimmune diseases, diagnosis of primary antiphospholipid syndrome was made.
At 3 month follow-up, the patients was free of symptoms; CRP, LDH, GGT were restored at normal range; platelet count was 57 × 103/mm3; the presence of Anti-β2GPI antibodies IgG (63.7 U/mL—middle titre) and IgM (20.5 U/mL—low titre), aCL antibodies IgG (> 640 U/mL—high titre) and IgM (26.7 U/mL—low titre) was confirmed.