A 45-year-old grandmultiparous woman presented with 1-year history of complete utero-vaginal prolapse. It became completely irreducible 3 months prior to presentation and was associated with menorrhagia, purulent vaginal discharge, frequent micturition, sensation of incomplete voiding and persistent lower abdominal pain. Pelvic examination showed an irreducible utero-vaginal prolapse with a pedunculated septic mass measuring about 12 by 10 cm in dimensions protruding through the cervical os. The vault of the vagina was edematous and inflamed . The rest of her clinical examinations and investigations were unremarkable. Abdomino-pelvic ultrasonography excluded the presence of any pelvic tumor and confirmed the absence of the uterus in the pelvis.
She was treated with tablets of ferrous sulfate, folic acid and Vitamin C, bed rest, broad spectrum antibiotics and twice a day cleansing of the prolapsed tumor with antiseptic solution for 3 weeks. This failed to produce significant improvement, and she was counseled for surgery. Vaginal myomectomy, which involved clamping of the broad fibroid stalk, excision of the fibroid mass and ligation, was done under general anesthesia administered by face mask. The vault of the vagina was too inflamed and unhealthy to allow for immediate vaginal hysterectomy . The prolapse was reduced with the vagina packed with moist gauze, and she was continued on antibiotics and bed rest. A pelvic examination done on the third postoperative day showed that the most distal portion of the prolapse was about 1 cm proximal to the plane of the hymen, and vaginal vault edema had completely cleared. The result of the histological report confirmed that the mass was leiomyoma. Vaginal hysterectomy and pelvic floor repair were done 7 days after vaginal myomectomy . Her post-operative recovery and follow-up were uneventful.
Informed consent and permission to take a photograph of the lesion and use her case for research and publications was given by the patient.