A 71-year-old woman presented to a general practitioner with a 5-day history of progressively decreasing left-sided vision. The sequelae of a prior surgery for a right-sided acoustic neuroma had left her with blindness on her right eye, right-sided hearing loss and peripheral facial palsy. She was a smoker with a history of 60 pack-years, and did not use medication daily. No family disposition could be obtained, since the patient was adopted. Over the previous 6 months, there had been an unintended weight loss of 10 kg. An ophthalmological examination revealed ischemic papillary stasis, which was treated with prednisone 80 mg/day. Furthermore, there was a sudden onset of involuntary movements of the upper and lower limbs. She was admitted to a hospital 7 days later. On neurological examination, she was alert and orientated. In addition to the already known features related to the treatment of an acoustic neuroma, there was universal choreoathetosis. The initial workup, including brain MRI (with T1, T2 and FLAIR sequences), and routine chest X-ray were all unremarkable. A whole-body PET scan did not reveal signs of primary or metastatic tumors. Further examinations with EEG and bronchoscopy were unremarkable. The following analyses of serum and cerebrospinal fluid were normal: ANA, ANCA, anti-Hu, anti-Yo, Ri-antibody, amphiphysin-1 antibody and anti-Zic4. However, anti-CRMP5 (alias anti-CV2, method: line-blot from Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) was strongly positive in both media – also indicating an occult cancer. She was then treated with immunoglobulin, which improved the choreiform movements. Unfortunately, over the following months, there was increasing weight loss, and the general condition worsened as well. Six months after the onset, a repeated PET scan showed foci suspicious of malignancy in the mediastinal lymph nodes and the right lung hilum. In May 2007, subsequent bronchoscopic biopsy revealed an SCLC. In spite of chemotherapy, repeated lung CT scans showed further progression, and the PNCA did not improve. As a palliative treatment for the SCLC, radiotherapy (10 Gy) was then given. She died 14 months after the onset of the symptoms, and her death was attributed to the SCLC complicated with infection.