A 45-year-old South Asian lady was referred to our institute, because of persistent elevation of TSH even after taking increasing dose of levothyroxine for 3 years. She was diagnosed with hypertension, rheumatoid arthritis, dyslipidemia, and hypothyroidism for 25 years. She was taking hydroxychloroquine, omeprazole, paracetamol, and diclofenac sodium in addition to levothyroxine 300 µg (six 50 µg tablets per day). She was recently started on hydroxychloroquine and azathioprine for a rheumatoid arthritis flare-up about 6 months ago. She had a hysterectomy 25 years ago, and she had no other significant surgical or medical history. Her family history was negative for thyroid or other autoimmune disorders. She lives in a joint family from a lower socioeconomic class. Her husband works as a shopkeeper and is the family’s sole breadwinner. When she presented to us, she complained of fatigue, dry skin, and constipation. She was stable on examination, with a pulse of 78 beats per minute, blood pressure of 128/79 mmHg, weight of 49 kg, and height of 150 cm [body mass index (BMI) 21.7 kg/m2]. Her thyroid gland was not enlarged, and she had no rheumatoid arthritis deformities. She had dry skin, particularly on her elbows, and had hair loss on both of her legs. Her ankle deep tendon reflexes were slowly releasing. Table presents routine investigations done three years back, whereas Fig. shows the TSH levels over the past 3 years and concomitant levothyroxine dose advised by her general physician. After thoroughly reviewing her history and examination, we reviewed her compliance with levothyroxine drug and dosage, and the use of concomitant medications was assessed. She was instructed to obtain levothyroxine from a reputable medical store, and she and her husband were counseled on the importance of lifelong need of hormone replacement therapy. After the first visit, her TSH dropped down to 9.8 µIU/L , so her dose was readjusted. Her TSH returned to 98 µIU/L on follow-up, so her dose was increased once more. However, her TSH did not improve significantly. At this point, her hemoglobin was found to be 10.7 g/dl, and she was started on iron supplements at lunchtime. Additional testing was recommended to rule out the possibility of malabsorption syndromes. Her anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies A and G (anti-TTG IgA and IgG) were negative, and her vitamin D levels were very low, but her vitamin B12 levels and serum albumin were normal. Serum iron levels were low. Vitamin D was adequately replaced, and she was advised to follow up. It was decided at this point to perform a levothyroxine absorption test to distinguish between pseudo and true malabsorption in this case.
Patient was asked to come in a state of overnight fasting (at least 8 hours). She arrived in our outpatient department (OPD) at 8:30 am, and blood samples were drawn at 09:25 am. She was then given 20 tablets of levothyroxine 50 µg [the brand available in our city was Thyroxine at the standard dose of 50 µg manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) pharmaceutical company] according to the following protocol at 10:00 am:
Standard LT4 weekly dose:Age 18–65 years, BMI > 40 kg/m2: 1500 µg = 30 tablets. Age 18–65 years, BMI < 40 kg/m2: 1000 µg = 20 tablets. Age 65 years and older: 600 µg = 12 tablets.
She remained seated in the consultant’s OPD room for 1 hour, and then allowed to eat cookies. A second blood sample was drawn at 1:26 pm .
The percentage LT4 absorption is calculated using the following formula :% Absorbed = [increment total T4 (TT4) µg/dL × 10/total administered LT4 µg] × Vd (L) × 100. Increment TT4: peak [TT4] – baseline [TT4]. Vd (volume of distribution) = 0.442 × BMI (body mass index)
Normal absorption was considered to be greater than 60% [, ]. This means pseudo-malabsorption of LT4 due to intentional nonadherence. However, if it is less than 60%, it means true malabsorption. We entered patient’s data by applying the above formula as shown in the Box﻿ .
The results were suggestive of pseudo-malabsorption rather than true malabsorption. For further management, patient was asked to come every week with overnight fast for 5 weeks. On each visit, 20 tablets of levothyroxine of same brand were given and patient was asked to sit in the OPD for 1 hour under direct observation of the treating endocrinologist. Her TSH continued to be normal after several months of DOTS therapy as shown in Table .