Our patient was a 30-year-old African woman, gravida 7, para 5. Her second screening ultrasound at 21 weeks of gestation showed normal fetal anatomy and placenta previa. She was referred in her 28th gestational week from her antenatal clinic to the University Hospital Outpatients Maternity Clinic because of anemia and mild thrombocytopenia. The first suspicion of placenta accreta or percreta based on pathological 'storm flow' on Doppler ultrasound was raised at 29 gestational weeks . Severe placenta accreta was confirmed at 35 gestational weeks both by ultrasonography and MRI. As a premature elective delivery was anticipated, she underwent amniocentesis during the same examination. Her amniotic fluid erythropoietin level was normal and her amniotic fluid lamellar body count was 3, consistent with an immature fetal lung maturity profile. Intra-muscular betamethasone was administered using two standard doses of 12 mg 24 hours apart. An elective Caesarean section was performed 10 days later with simultaneous tubal ligation. The weight of the healthy newborn boy was 3.1 kg. The Caesarean section was performed under general anesthesia due to mild thrombocytopenia. A classical uterine incision was used for extraction of the fetus in order to avoid the morbidly adherent low placenta. The internal iliac arteries were catheterized pre-operatively via insertion of balloons to decease peri-operative bleeding. The placenta was left in situ because of placenta previa with severe placenta percreta. Bilateral uterine artery embolization was performed. The total amount of blood loss during the Caesarean section was 300 mL. Our patient then received a single 100 mg dose of intra-muscular methotrexate. She recovered uneventfully with no complications, and was discharged on the seventh day post-partum. She received prophylactic metronidazole and cephalosporin orally for five days. Our patient returned to the emergency room the next day because of low abdominal pain. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was 45 g/L. A pelvic examination showed no significant findings. She again returned to the emergency room a week later because of recurrent low abdominal pain. Her CRP level was 20 g/L and chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) concentration was 1828U. Serial periodic serum hCG levels decreased from 1492U to 848U to 562U to 200U over the first four weeks, respectively. Her total intra-uterine placental volume was measured by repeat ultrasound examinations. The placenta shrunk from 900 cm3 on the first examination to 630 cm3 and then to 319 cm3 over four weeks . Ultrasound examination at four weeks showed necrotic areas within the placenta left in situ with heavily vascularized areas next to the bladder and a strong storm flow phenomenon. Our patient again returned to the emergency room three weeks later (seven weeks from the Caesarean section) because of heavy uterine bleeding. Her general condition was satisfactory, and she received three units of red blood cells and was hospitalized at this time. Her bleeding continued, became more profuse and her condition became unstable, so a decision to perform an emergency laparotomy was made. A laparotomy with emergency hysterectomy was then performed. Her uterus was still relatively large with prominent and bulging isthmic portion . The total blood loss during the hysterectomy was 3.7 L. Her uterus was filled by hematoma and placenta previa with deep myometrial invasion . A histopathological examination showed placenta percreta with chorioamnionitis, dilated blood vessels and incomplete involution of the uterus . Our patient recovered uneventfully. She was discharged on the fifth post-operative day in good condition.