A 33-year-old Caucasian woman was diagnosed in 2006 with a localized myxoid LPS of the right thigh that was treated with compartmental resection of the right quadriceps, with histopathological results showing a 10.7cm low-grade ML (well differentiated, mitotic activity: <10 and <50 percent of necrosis), with infiltration of margins that required extension surgery up to the periosteum, without the presence of residual tumor in the margins. Subsequently, she received adjuvant treatment with external radiotherapy to a dose of 70Gy. Two years later, while pregnant, she noted a mass in her left cervical and right axillary region, which proved to be a metastatic low-grade LPS . Molecular analysis of this tumor showed a t(12,16) + translocation resulting in a FUS-DDIT3 or EWSR1-DDIT3 fusion. Our patient underwent negative margin resection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with ifosfamide and epirubicin for six months. Three years later, the disease recurred with lesions in the left supraclavicular fossa (6.5×3.5cm) and upper thoracic and anterior mediastinum (4.5×5.0cm). The lesions were resected with no further treatment. Eight months later, during her second pregnancy, our patient noted a mass in her left cervical area. She delayed consultation for a few months until the baby was born and eventually presented with a large cervical mass that compressed the supra-aortic and carotid vessels and extended caudally to occupy the upper portion of the right hemi-thorax. There was also a second mass in the left pleural space; tumor size was 9×5cm .
Our patient was given trabectedin (1.5mg/m2/24-hour continuous infusion) and after four cycles a significant clinical improvement in her dyspnea and pain was noted. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a 50 percent reduction in the left supraclavicular mass, improvement in the chest lesion and resolution of the pleural effusion. This was considered stable disease by RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors) criteria and a PR according to the criteria of Choi et al.. She continued treatment for four additional cycles with complete response in the neck mass and significant reduction in the mediastinal and pleural lesions. A computed tomography scan after 12 cycles demonstrated a long-term PR according to RECIST criteria . Our patient remained asymptomatic with good treatment tolerability (only two episodes of grade 2 and 3 neutropenia in cycles 3 and 4, respectively).