Case Description A 30-year-old female was referred to our hospital with an 8-month history of proptosis of the right eye that was progressing slowly. She complained of double vision and pain around the right eye. Her previous medical history was unremarkable. During the previous 2 months she had experienced epiphora, positional headache, and painful eye movements, as well as nasal and post-nasal discharge.
The ear, nose, and throat examination revealed only nasal and post-nasal discharge. Ophthalmologic examin- ations showed severe proptosis of the right eye anterolaterally (approximately 3 mm), mild diplopia, and painful motility. Her visual function was mildly disturbed and revealed diplopia on left gaze. Visual acuity was measured as 20/20 in each eye and intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal. Her eye movement had a slight adduction limitation – (−1 grade).
Other movements were unaffected. The right globe was pushed downward and laterally. There was mild swelling of the right lower lid.
A hard nodular mass could be felt on and below the right medial cantus. Preoperative radiographic diagnostic work-up was axial, while a coronal computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinuses revealed a radiopaque mass in the right ethmoidal air cells with protrusion to the right orbit arising from anterior ethmoid sinus with extension upwards to the roof of the sinus and posterior ethmoid sinus and laterally in to the right orbital .
The ophthalmic side of the tumor was not smooth, with an irregular surface and was posterior laterally close to the optic nerve.
We approached the tumor with a right-side Lynch incision. The endoscopic approach was not suitable as the lateral side of the tumor was deeply extended into the orbit. In order to gain better exposure, we removed part of the ascending process of the maxilla and the lacrimal bone.
Because of the large size of the tumor, we divided it in two halves by drilling at the narrowest segment in an orbital and ethmoidal portion.
The ethmoidal portion was excavated by drilling and then the remaining eggshell of the tumor was separated from the ethmoid roof to prevent damage to the skull base and possible cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea. The orbital portion had an irregular surface and the superior oblique and medial rectus muscles were trapped in the tumor.
We had to divide the orbital portion into pieces by drilling and freeing the entrapped muscles before removing the tumor. We repeatedly monitored the optic nerve function by observing the pupil size.
Post-operatively, the patient’s proptosis disappeared completely. She suffered some limitation of inward eye movement, as well as decreased vision to 5/10 due to macular edema. We initiated oral prednisolone therapy (1 mg/kg daily) for one week. The patient’s condition improved to normal over the course of 4 weeks. The patient was observed at follow-up and was symptom-free after 1 year.