A 36-year-old African American woman with a history of occasional backaches for years had developed right leg pain for 2 months that was profound and incapacitating. Our patient had previously undergone minimally invasive microdiscectomy for a right L5-S1 herniated nucleus pulposus and made a full recovery, with no significant back pain and slight right leg pain (1–2/10). She had no symptoms for 6 weeks until she presented again complaining of difficulty walking and severe lower back pain radiating to her right lower extremity. Her neurologic examination demonstrated positive straight leg rising at 30° on the right, decreased pinprick over the lateral aspect of the right foot, and absent ankle jerk on the right. Repeat magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large reherniation of the same L5-S1 disc on the right side .
Due to worsening symptomatology and the size of the herniation, our patient was inclined to proceed with surgery. An L5-S1 secondary minimal-access endoscopic microdiscectomy and TLIF with O-arm computed tomography (CT) imaging and frameless stereotaxic guidance was performed. The approach to the discectomy was to be done at L5 on the right, so a decision to first place pedicle screws on the left side percutaneously, followed by a right side discectomy and meticulous disc fragment extraction, then subsequent placement of screws on the right side, was made.
Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM) was performed with SSEPs of bilateral tibial nerves, free-run electromyography (EMG), and triggered EMG via pedicle screw stimulation. The tibial nerves were stimulated with surface electrodes at the level of the medial malleolus of the ankles. EMGs were monitored with disposable needle electrodes in the following muscles of both lower extremities: vastus medialis, tibialis anterior, abductor hallucis.
Following the aforementioned outline to place pedicle screws percutaneously on the left side first, k-wires were positioned and the tap was followed into the L5 left pedicle. At this time, all free-run EMG activity remained quiet . While tapping, there was a sudden and profound spasm of our patient’s legs and back that lasted for the duration of 15 seconds, as evidenced by our EMG . The frameless guidance system and intraoperative CT imaging confirmed that the tap was accurately positioned in the pedicle. At this time, IONM indicated a loss of all SSEPs in our patient’s lower extremities . Consideration was given to the possibility of further extrusion of the L5-S1 disc, resulting in a cauda equina compression. A minimal-access tubular approach was immediately taken to expose the previous microlaminotomoy site, where extruded disc material was protruding. Several large disc fragments were extracted, and the dura and neural roots were then visualized. Upon completion of the decompression the SSEPs all began to recover. An interbody device was placed for fusion in standard fashion (with no loose disc fragments remaining), and then the pedicle screws on the right side were placed followed by rod placement with the Sextant system (Medtronic Sofamor Danek USA, Inc., Memphis, TN, USA) A follow-up intraoperative O-arm CT scan was performed, revealing the screws and interbody device to be in excellent position concurrently with no response in the IONM (indicating that the nerve roots were not injured from the pedicle screws). Positioning was confirmed by X-ray 1 week later . Our patient awoke with normal strength and sensation in her lower extremities.