On 22nd of August 2021, a 30-year-old smoker man without significant past medical history presented to the ED of Policlinico ‘Gemelli’ in Rome for interscapular chest pain that was worsened by breathing and lying in the left lateral position.
Few weeks before, he got vaccinated with BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 (first dose on 5th of June 2021, second dose on 10th of July 2021); fever and chest pain, worsened by breathing, occurred on 13th of July, (3 days after the second dose), treated at home with paracetamol with the resolution of fever and persistence of mild chest pain in the following days. At the admission to the ED, body temperature was 37.7°C; electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with PR depression and diffuse concave-up ST segment elevation , and blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg. Physical examination including cardiovascular examination was normal. Troponin was negative, with a raise in inflammatory indices and leucocytosis; COVID-19 Polymerase Chain Reaction test was negative. The echocardiogram showed a severe circumferential pericardial effusion of 3 cm and 2D and Doppler signs of cardiac tamponade A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was then performed, confirming that the pericardial effusion resulted in a compressive effect on the right atrium and right ventricle and excluding an acute aortic syndrome ; a diagnosis of acute pericarditis with signs of cardiac tamponade was made, and the patient underwent successfully pericardiocentesis with the aspiration of ∼700 mL of pericardial serous fluid.
Chemical, microbiological and cytologic tests on pericardial samples were negative ; microbiological and autoimmunity examinations on blood serum were negative too .
The patient was discharged at home in therapy with colchicine 0.5 mg bid and ibuprofen 600 mg 1 cp three times per day.
About 3 weeks later, on September 8th, due to exacerbation of persistent chest pain, the patient came back to the ED. Blood chemistry tests showed leucocytosis and raise of inflammatory markers, with stable negative troponin. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram showed mild circumferential pericardial effusion with initial signs of the fibrinous organization without 2D and Doppler signs of impaired ventricular filling.
The patient was hospitalized and anti-inflammatory therapy was potentiated with indomethacin 50 mg three times a day and colchicine 1 mg a day.
Given the gradual worsening of signs and symptoms of impaired left ventricular filling (tachycardia, hypotension, worsening dyspnoea), and the evidence of initial 2D sign of impaired ventricular filling at the echocardiogram, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for intensive monitoring.
After a multidisciplinary discussion with the team of rheumatologists, considering the criticality of the clinical picture and the results of recent studies that support the use of anti-IL-1 agents as a first-line treatment option in patients with recurrent pericarditis, not responsive to colchicine and other conventional anti-inflammatory therapies (including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and colchicine), and with the elevation of c-reactive protein (CRP), the same day therapy with anakinra was started with a sharp and sudden clinical and echocardiographic improvement with complete resolution of the symptoms and of the pericardial effusion in the following 3 days ; similarly, CRP values progressively decreased, as reported in . The patient was discharged at home. A daily dose of anakinra (100 mg) was administered for 3 months; no replacements of chest pain were complained at the clinical evaluation three months after the discharge. He referred that his state of anxiety related to his clinical conditions progressively got better till ending.