A 31-year-old male patient (height 131 cm, weight 31 kg, ASA III, Mallampati III.), with severe AS, underwent lumbar orthopedic surgery. Physical examination revealed a deformity of the spine, with the spine tilted forward and fixed , posterior extension and lateral bending limitation, schooner test was <4 cm, pelvic lateral pressure test and “4” test were positive. Biochemical examination showed WBC 19.05 × 109/L, NE 92.1%, alanine aminotransferase 6 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 9 U/L and HLA-B27 positive, and thoracic MRI showed thoracic and lumbar kyphosis changes, and the upper and lower margins of the vertebral bodies were straight, which conformed to the changes of ankylosing spondylitis. His mouth opening was 30 mm and thyromental distance was 55 mm. The cervical spine was solidified with maximum flexion and extension of 25°, and an oropharyngeal axis angle of 70° .
The patient's ECG, SpO2, blood pressure, and end-tidal CO2 were routinely monitored. 0.5 mg penehyclidine was administrated to reduce airway secretions and 2% lidocaine was used for pharyngeal surface anesthesia. We administered midazolam 3 mg and sufentanil 10 μg for conscious sedation with preserved spontaneous breathing and then awake intubation with double visualization. Patients with AS usually can't lie down, so we intubated in a sitting position. Neither the VL nor the introduction tool effectively revealed the epiglottis due to constrained neck movement. As a result, the endotracheal tube could not be inserted successfully. With the aid of VL, we guided the endotracheal intubation using a rigid lighted stylet (LS). The oropharynx was opened sufficiently so that the tracheal tube could be rapidly introduced below the epiglottis and entered the glottis. After intubation, connect the anesthesia threaded tube to listen to the breathing sounds of both lungs and give deep anesthesia and muscle relaxants symmetrically. Sufentanil 30 μg, cis-atracuramine 5 mg/h and 2% sevoflurane inhalation were used to maintain anesthesia. The operation lasted for 3 h and the bleeding was 100 ml. The operation proceeded uneventfully. After the operation, the patient was fully awake and had enough ventilation, swallowing, and cough reflexes recovered. Use a tube exchanger for extubation after sufficient sputum suction. The patient recovered well without postoperative complications.