A 17-year old female presented with coffee-ground emesis and epigastric pain following ingestion of sodium hydroxide in a suicide attempt. Urgent Endoscopy demonstrated third - degree burns in the esophagus, stomach and duodenal bulb. She was treated conservatively in another institution and was discharged in a stable condition. Two months later, she started experiencing nausea, vomiting, dysphagia to both solids and liquids with a significant malnutrition and weight loss (67 to 35 kg). Barium swallow esophageogram demonstrated a severe long stricture in the middle and distal thirds of esophagus with contrast retention in the stomach indicating severe pyloric stenosis.
The patient underwent several esophageal dilation courses without symptomatic improvement. Thus, she underwent jejunostomy placement to improve the general status before the surgical intervention.
The patient was referred to our institution at this point for surgical consultation. Given her age and the localization and number of strictures, our surgeon decided a new technique to treat this rare case. This technique composed of laparotomy and cervicotomy, subtotal esophagectomy, gastric pull-up, gastro-jejunal anastomosis as a roux-en-Y technique and cervical esophago-gastric anastomosis. There was three anastomosis, esophago-gastric (end-to-side), gastro-jejunal (side-to-side) and jejuno-jejunal (end-to-side). All anastomosis were hand sewn On postoperative day 9, the patient was complicated with fistula presenting with food discharges in the level of the esophago-gastric anastomosis after eating against instructions. Methylene-blue dye swallowing test confirmed the diagnosis and she responded well to conservative medical therapy. On day 15, the patient was discharged in a well situation. Six weeks later, she presented with dysphagia and barium swallow study revealed a 1 cm long stenosis 20 cm from the incisors. Patient underwent several endoscopic dilations with good results. On follow up for 18 months, she was asymptomatic with well general status and significant weight gain (35 to 62Kg).