34 years old patient, Gravida 6 Parity 3, previous 2 miscarriages (18 weeks & 12 weeks), was seen first at 23 weeks 4 days of pregnancy. She had undergone previous 3 cesarean sections and an evacuation of retained products of conception by curettage in 2013 for partial hydatidiform mole. At 27 weeks 5 days, she was admitted for vaginal bleeding. On further evaluation by ultrasound , the diagnosis of placenta percreta was made (later confirmed by MRI). At 29 weeks, she had constipation with 2 episodes of urinary retention and she was put on continuous bladder drainage. She developed urinary tract infection and treated with appropriate antibiotics based on culture sensitivity. She continued to have repeated bouts of vaginal bleeding of varying amounts and severe constipation from 31 weeks of gestation.
At 32 weeks 4 days, patient underwent cystoscopy, which had shown signs of cystitis with no definite infiltration. She underwent classical cesarean section under combined anesthesia (Epidural + General). The umbilical cord was tied near insertion and the placenta was left in situ because there was no spontaneous separation. Then, the uterus was closed. Prophylactic temporary bilateral internal iliac artery balloons were inserted and inflated earlier. Uterine artery embolization was performed post cesarean section and selective angiograms confirmed adequate positioning. The patient required large volume of particles and still had incomplete embolization with the lower part of the uterus still showing some unblocked branches on both sides.
Post-operatively, she was transferred to labor ward and within 4 hours, she developed clinical features of pulmonary embolism (PE). Some of her symptoms included drop in O2 saturation to 81%, tachycardia, chest pain, peripheral cyanosis, and signs of respiratory distress. Then, she was transferred to ICU and was initiated on heparin infusion. On chest X-ray, she had no atelectasis, pneumothorax, or pleural effusion. An immediate CT scan did not show any PE. There was no Doppler evidence of venous thrombosis in the femoral and popliteal venous systems. Later on day 1 post-operative, she had focal patchy consolidation left base and was started on parenteral meropenem, linezolid and fluconazole for the next 5 days. She had two consecutive CT scans on post-operative on days 2 and 3, which were negative. On ECG, there was right heart strain. She was now on enoxaparin. On the post-operative day 5, she was prescribed parenteral piperacillin-tazobactam for 5 days and she was shifted out of ICU next day. She had 500ml vaginal bleeding on the 9th post-operative day. 2 units PRBC were transfused. She was switched to oral cefuroxime and metronidazole and planned to continue on long-term low dose antibiotic. On post-operative day 11, she received methotrexate. On day 12, the MRA had shown the placenta was still enhancing with some areas of infarct and separation, fluid collection in the uterine cavity (present from day 1 post op, not increasing), with large ovarian veins, hugely distended and extensive pelvic varices, R>L, extensive collaterals. Her CRP was 12.7 mg/L.
On post-operative day 13, she underwent total abdominal hysterectomy. Intraoperatively, the bladder was densely adherent, drawn up, with large vessels in the broad ligament. The lower segment was bulging due to the presence of the placenta. The uterus was about 24 weeks’ size with adherent omentum. There was 100 mL of old blood in the cavity and the placenta was partially infarcted. The total blood loss was 2000 mL.
Post-operatively, she was in ICU for 2 days receiving anticoagulation treatment (bridging treatment with enoxaparin + warfarin) and patient controlled analgesia. She had a bout of severe cough on day 4 and loose motions on day 5. She was diagnosed with vault hematoma, which was retro-vesical, about 120 ml in volume, treated conservatively. On day 10 she had been discharged from the hospital.
She presented to the ER on the post-operative day 16 and was diagnosed with chronic pulmonary embolism. Patient had a pulmonary embolus within the right middle lobe pulmonary artery; areas of sub-segmental embolus within the right lower lobe pulmonary arteries. She had no pleural effusions or consolidation and no mediastinal lymphadenopathy. She was readmitted for 4 days. She was started on therapeutic enoxaparin + warfarin. She was continued on 6 mg warfarin for 4 weeks after discharge.