A 33-year old female, known to have a history of right occipital AVM treated by Onyx endovascular embolization 3 years prior, presented with severe right-sided trigeminal neuralgia and occipital lobe visual seizures. Embolization was done at an outside hospital and right hemifacial pain began after it. She failed three lines of medical treatment since then and has been maintained on carbamazepine 800 mg twice daily with no improvement in pain.
She underwent a diagnostic cerebral angiography which showed total occlusion of the previously embolized AVM along with distal occlusion of the right posterior cerebellar artery and SCA . No other abnormalities were detected in the posterior circulation.
Subsequent brain MRI showed the previously embolized AVM in the right occipital lobe , along with no evidence of a vascular loop impinging on the right trigeminal nerve that may explain her trigeminal neuralgia . Nevertheless, the decision was made to surgically intervene for exploration and MVD of the trigeminal nerve after thorough consultation with the patient.
One week after the angiogram, the patient underwent successful Jannetta MVD of the trigeminal nerve. She was positioned in lateral position and a retroauricular lazy-S skin incision was made two finger-widths away from the ear for a retrosigmoid approach. The flap was reflected from medial to lateral and the paravertebral muscles were elevated subperiosteally. A burr hole was made at the asterion just below the junction of the transverse and the sigmoid sinuses and a retrosigmoid craniotomy was done using a footplate. The craniotomy was enlarged by drilling the bone over the transverse and sigmoid sinuses. The mastoid air cells were covered with bone wax to avoid postoperative CSF leakage. The dura was then opened and reflected over the transverse and the sigmoid sinuses, and CSF was drained from the lateral cerebellomedullary cistern to relax the cerebellum.
Initial inspection of the cerebellopontine angle showed the seventh and eighth nerve complex. More CSF drainage was attempted to provide additional working space and the trigeminal nerve was subsequently localized and freed from the surrounding arachnoid adhesions. A whitish tubular structure that resembled an empty vessel was noticed crossing and abutting the trigeminal nerve root entry zone . After thorough inspection of the area, it was identified as the previously embolized SCA. As no other obvious vessel loop was noted, we considered this empty vessel as the offending structure causing the trigeminal neuralgia.
The SCA was hence carefully dissected off the trigeminal nerve root entry zone and the brain stem, creating space for two small pieces of Teflon sponges which were inserted to separate the vessel from the mentioned structures it was compressing . The dura and the muscle fascia were thereafter closed tightly and the procedure was completed.
The patient did well postoperatively and left the hospital 2 days later with no reported hemifacial pain. She was seen 2 weeks after the surgery in clinic with full resolution of trigeminal neuralgia and her medication dosage was halved.