A 57-year-old man (weight, 89.3 kg; height, 175 cm; body mass index, 29.16 kg/m2) initially presented to our outpatient clinic with complaints of lateral knee pain. Radiographs revealed lateral compartment osteoarthritis and valgus deformity of the knee joint. He underwent a closing wedge DFO . The target alignment was adjusted to the contralateral limb, and biplanar osteotomy was performed. Fixation was performed using a locking plate (Ohtofix®, DFO Plate, Hwaseong, South Korea). A bicortical lag screw was inserted initially at the combination hole for indirect reduction of the shaft. Subsequent self-tapping locking screws were inserted using a power driver after predrilling the screw holes and measuring with a depth gauge. Final manual tightening of the locking screws were performed in sequence with a torque-limiting screw driver. The rehabilitation protocol was routine, and tolerable weight bearing with crutches was performed after postoperative 1 week.
During follow up, he complained of an unusual painful swelling at the operated area. Aspiration was performed at postoperative 2 weeks, and 50 cc of blood was aspirated. At postoperative 1 month, he visited the emergency department because of recurrent painful swelling. More than 50 cc of joint fluid mixed with blood was aspirated. Radiograph revealed mild bone resorption at the osteotomy site. No signs of infection were found. Our laboratory results showed normal C-reactive protein (CRP) level. We encouraged him to perform partial weight bearing, and applied compressive dressing. At postoperative 3 months, he revisited our outpatient clinic on a wheelchair with similar symptoms. CRP level was normal and he was afebrile throughout the follow-up period. Radiograph revealed four broken distal fixation screws, with one screw pulled out and positioned within the knee joint. Computed Tomography (CT) revealed a widened gap and fractured lateral hinge .
Re-operation was performed. The distal screws were removed first. Among the four screws, the head portions of the three screws were removed, however one screw could not be found at the previous surgical site. The tip portions of the four screws were removed using a coring reamer and the remaining hardware was removed. The osteotomy site had minimal stability. At the anterior portion of the osteotomy site, the patellofemoral joint had a connection with the operated site. The pulled-out portion of the distal screw was assumed to have moved into the joint via this path, further strengthening the reason why joint fluid was aspirated from an extra articular site. The connection was closed and arthroscopy was performed to remove the migrated screw . Two cannulated lag screws were inserted between proximal-lateral and distal-medial fragments for compression of the lateral hinge. Subsequently a locking plate with a larger profile was reinserted for a more stable fixation . After the re-operation, his symptoms improved and the swelling disappeared. He was satisfied with the outcome of the re-operation and union was achieved at postoperative 6 months. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for all procedures.