A 46-year-old woman visited our hospital complaining of aggravated left lower abdominal pain, bloating, nausea and vomiting for few hours. 9 years prior to presentation, the patient underwent a radical trachelectomy with laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy for the cervical malignant tumor. In addition, the patient underwent an open appendectomy 18 years ago. A physical examination revealed an acute localized peritonitis with lower left abdominal tenderness, rebound tenderness, muscle tension locally. Laboratory tests showed slightly elevated inflammatory markers (CRP: 0.88 mg/l, WBC: 10.59*109/L, NE: 82.5%). The uterus and accessories ultrasound and lower abdominal CT scan showed no other abnormalities besides hysterectomy. Considering the patient's symptoms and abdominal signs, we further performed the whole belly contrast-enhanced abdominal CT which suggested slight intestinal dilatation and a small amount of pelvic fluid. After careful reading of the CT images, a small bowel was found between the left EIA and the psoas major , combined with the patient's surgical history, we suspected it might be an acute acquired internal hernia. Then we performed a laparoscopic laparotomy for the suspected ileus from the fissure. Intraoperative findings: about 10 cm ileum, ischemic, in purple, 2 m back from the cecum herniated into the gap between the EIA and psoas major . The dilated ileal wall was edematous and fragile, which could not be effectively clamped under laparoscopy, then we converted to open surgery. Carefully released the adhesion of the hernia orifice, removed the incarcerated loop from the hernial orifice, the hernial orifice consisted of the left EIA and the psoas major appeared . After warming the purple bowel with hot salt water towel, the purple bowel back peristalsis and resumed to pink , so we didn't remove any part of the intestine. A running suture with an absorbable 3–0 suture was used for primary closure of the sheath of left EIA and parietal peritoneum to prevent further re-herniation. The gastrointestinal decompression tube was removed on the first post-operative day after the patient had anal exhaust, and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.