A 31-year-old Asian woman presented in our institute with a history of pelvic mass. Prior to this consultation, she was undergoing treatment for infertility. She underwent laparoscopy followed by laprotomy in a non-oncological center for a suspected right ovarian cyst/pelvic mass. During the laprotomy, a mass of 9 × 7 cm was detected in the pelvic mesentery. The tumor was hemorrhagic, dark red/brown in color, and soft to firm in consistency and was seen arising from the pelvic colonic mesentery. The adjacent bowel lumen, uterus, and both tubes and ovaries were normal. There was no evidence of adhesions, tuberculosis, or endometriosis in the pelvic peritoneum. The mass was excised.
The patient came to our institute for further management. Her ECOG performance status was grade-1 and she had no supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and there was no palpable mass or free fluid in her abdomen. The results of per-vaginal and per-rectal examinations were normal. She had been married for two years and was undergoing treatment for infertility for the previous six months when she noticed facial hairs (features of hirsutism) and a deep husky voice. Her periods were regular for the last year and a half but were reduced to spotting lasting one day every 35 to 40 days during the last six months. When she came to our institute a month and a half after the surgical excision, the facial hairs had disappeared, her periods had normalized to a regular 3/28-day cycle, and she had a normal feminine voice.
Her hemogram and chest X-ray were normal. Her serum human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha fetoprotein, and lactate dehydrogenase levels were 0.29 mIU/ml, 3 ng/mL and 458IU/L respectively. On computed tomography scan, liver, gall bladder, pancreas, spleen, and kidneys were normal. Both the adrenals as well as ovaries were normal, and no mass lesions were identified. There was no para-aortic lymphadenopathy and no free fluid in the peritoneum or pleural cavity.
We reviewed the slides of the excised pelvic mass. Microscopically, the tumor showed cells arranged predominantly in sheets. The cells were large and round or polygonal with abundant granular cytoplasm . The nuclei were large vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli and showed a moderate degree of nuclear pleomorphism. The tumor was seen infiltrating surrounding adipose tissue. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed strong positivity for kertain, inhibin , vimentine, melan-A, neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin, and S-100 protein and focal positivity to epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) . An MIB1 index showed 4% nuclear positivity. The tumor cells were negative for calretinin, desmin, muscle actin, and CK7. Considering the clinical findings, histomorphology, and immunohistochemistry, we made the diagnosis of extraovarian and extra-adrenal steroid cell tumor (NOS) of the pelvic mesentery.