An 18-year-old girl with 16 years of experience in athletic swimming was admitted to our hospital after experiencing sudden cardiopulmonary arrest. She had been consistently selected as a representative prefectural swimmer at the Japanese National Sports Festival and participated in high-frequency, long-duration, and high-intensity endurance training (>6000 MET minutes per week). As a high-school student, she became aware of severe palpitations while swimming. She experienced sudden cardiopulmonary arrest during training. Her friends noticed this collapse and called for emergency medical services, and bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed. An automated external defibrillator identified ventricular fibrillation (VF), which was successfully defibrillated, and sinus rhythm was restored. The patient was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit of the nearest emergency medical hospital. After confirming the absence of significant findings on coronary angiography, the patient was administered hypothermia therapy. Fortunately, her consciousness was restored, and she was transported to our hospital to investigate her underlying disease. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with occasional premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) and negative T waves in the V1–V3 leads but without epsilon waves . Echocardiography revealed only mild-to-moderate right-ventricle dilatation without any other abnormal findings . The left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was preserved to a normal level of 63%.
Cardiac evaluations, including coronary angiography with acetylcholine provocation test, cardiac computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, biopsy of the right-ventricular cardiac muscle from the ventricular septum, and myocardial scintigraphy, showed no significant findings. Genetic testing was performed in the patient, her younger sister, younger brother, father, and mother. Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was isolated from their peripheral blood lymphocytes and a benchtop next generation sequencer was used for screening genes related to ARVC. The results identified a PKP2 genetic variant [PKP2 c.2489 + 1G > A (IVS12 + 1G > A) splicing error] in the patient, her younger sister, youngest brother, and father, leading to the diagnosis of ARVC . As per current recommendations, an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was used for secondary prevention. After ICD placement , an electrophysiological study (EPS) and radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFCA) were performed to reduce the probability of appropriate ICD therapy, as Holter ECG documented frequent PVCs (>20% of total heartbeats) and non-sustained ventricular tachycardias. Sustained VT was reproducibly induced in the EPS with stable haemodynamics , enabling the unmasking of the critical isthmus of the VT circuit . RFCA successfully eliminated this VT and achieved non-inducibility of any other sustained VT. During a 6-year follow up with continuous exercise restriction and no medication, VT/VF episodes were not detected by the ICD, and no progression of symptoms or echocardiographic findings were observed. The patient’s definitive diagnosis of ARVC was satisfied by the presence of three major criteria from different categories according to the task force criteria (inverted T waves in right precordial leads; non-sustained or sustained ventricular tachycardia of left bundle-branch morphology with superior axis; and PKP2 genetic variant).