A 25-year-old Caucasian man presented with a skull defect over the left frontotemporal region that had progressively enlarged over a 3-year period. He complained of mild dull local aching headaches with short term memory impairment of one year duration, occasional visual symptoms, and subjectively decreased hearing. Symptoms were explained by the polysubstance abuse and the patient’s past medical history of depression. General physical examination was unremarkable with the exception of a clearly visible osseous depression of the left frontoparietotemporal region associated with mild tenderness on palpation and interspersed softness embedded in a thinned but firm skull. The patient was neurologically intact. X-ray of the skull showed widespread loss of calvarial structure secondary to an osteolytic process. Subsequent head CT scan showed the typical features of a patchy erosive osteolysis of the left frontoparietotemptoral skull region indicative of an active underlying process. Coronal, sagittal and lambdoid sutures were shown to be patent radiographically in skull-scouts and CT-cuts in order to exclude craniosynostosis. Post-contrast MRI study revealed marginal enhancement of the calvarial defect with no evidence of brain invasion or soft tissue component. Bone survey as well as chest x-ray were done to exclude skeletal and pulmonary involvement, respectively. Furthermore, the metabolic and chemical labs’ profile of the patient did not reveal any abnormality indicative of metabolic or endocrinologic disease. This study was approved by the institutional review board (IRB) of our hospital using an IRB protocol number (2013-P-000253/3). An informed patient’s consent was obtained to submit this article to the journal in order to be published.
Based on a density graded CT scan, the severity of erosion at the affected skull region was determined. A custom made cranioplasty allograft was designed preoperatively using a digital computerized software (Stryker®, Kalamazoo, Michigan) to define the size, site and shape of the synthetic bone flap enabling a single-staged surgery of excisional craniectomy, allograft duraplasty and synchronous skull reconstruction. The pre-fabricated implant was made of Poly Methyl Methacrylate (PMMA). This patient’s pre-manufactured implant configuration was designed using specific software (Mimics, Materialise Company, Belgium) which generated allograft models based on variable degrees of osteolysis seen in the affected part of the skull bone on CT. The extent of calvarial bone to finally be excised and replaced was decided from a density-graded CT scan. To this end, we randomly selected 10 representative points within diseased and healthy skull regions, and obtained the respective Hounsfield units. This yielded a range of bone density values. The mean value for diseased bone was 342 HU (range: 158 to 643 Hounsfield units) whereas the mean value for healthy bone was 1489 HU (range: 1274 to 1630 units), respectively.
To generate the final allograft construct, we then color-coded the prospective craniectomy area on the CT scan using the highest obtained density value of diseased skull (643 Hounsfield units). We used this particular value as a cut off since its density was about half that of the mean value obtained from the density measurements of healthy bone. A visual overlay was then used to confirm that the chosen implant shape matched all areas of diseased bone.
Surgery as such was then performed in a standard fashion. The patient underwent general endotracheal anesthesia and was position supine in three point skeletal fixation pins (Mayfield). Preoeprative density graded CT and MRI data were loaded on an intraoperative image guidance system (BrainLab) to map the affected area onto the scalp. The incision was planned accordingly and a conventional myocutaneous flap was raised. The affected area was visually identified. The optimal extent of the resection was taken from the CT and sketched onto the bony surface. For corroboration, the pre-generated bone allograft was put as a stencil onto the marked and affected skull area and it was confirmed that it could be used for the ensuing craniectomy. This way we could excise a bone segment that matched precisely the custom made implant for later repair. After standard craniectomy employing a side cutting saw (Anspach, DePuy; West Chester, PA), we separated the affected bone from the underlying layer of dura and repaired a very small dural defect with a pericranial autograft before we proceeded immediately with vault reconstruction using the prefabricated bony allograft (see Figure ). The wound was hemostased and closed in layers without the need of subgaleal drains. The patient recovered from anesthesia immediately in the operative room. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient showed no neurological deficit.
Routine hematoxylin and eosin was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections after decalcification of the submitted bone specimen. The sections revealed distinct areas of bone resorption with replacement by fibrous tissue with variable degrees of vascularity and collagen depositions . In focal areas adjacent to zones of active bone resorption were numerous thin-walled, predominantly capillary-sized blood vessels . In other areas, the zones of bone resorption were composed of densely collagenized fibrous tissue with interdispersed small blood vessels . Beyond these characteristic features there were patchy areas with chronic inflammatory cells, including foamy macrophages .
The postoperative period was uneventful without local wound complications or any neurological deficit and the patient was discharged four days postoperatively. Over a two-year follow up period, the patient did not show any evidence of resorption of the adjacent skull bone or any other skeletal involvement.