A 65-year-old Chinese female presented to the emergency room (ER) with abdominal pain and one episode of syncope due to hypotension (70/60 mmHg).
Upon physical examination for the current emergency room visit, a palpable mass was identified in the lower abdominal and pelvic region, accompanied by tenderness and rebound pain. Neurological exam is insignificant with E3V4M5. The patient’s vital signs were stable, with blood pressure (BP) of 90/60 mmHg, oxygen saturation (SPO2) of 91% on room air, heart rate (HR) of 64 bpm with normal electrocardiograph, and arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis showing a lactate (Lac) level of 3.5 mmol/L.
Laboratory results revealed a platelet level of 93 × 109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) of 101 g/L, hematocrit (Hct) of 28.7% and creatine kinase (CK) level of 1928 U/L with other liver and renal function tests, urinalysis and complete blood count tests within normal ranges.
An abdominal/pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan suggested possible bleeding in the uterine and appendix regions . The patient's past medical history was significant for diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in the gastric antrum 2 years ago, with initial tumor staging of cT4aN + . Following 3 cycles of FOLFOX treatment, Stable Disease (SD) was observed. Upon follow up newly identified seeding metastasis in the bilateral adnexal area led to a diagnosis of Progressive Disease (PD) with Krukenberg tumors. Then patient underwent 6 cycles of Nivolumab + XELOX with SD and tumor shrinkage achieved. Three months before the recent emergency visit, the patient had been on maintenance therapy with nivolumab + Capecitabine. During the treatment patients experienced iron-deficient anemia and one episode of upper gastrointestinal bleeding which completely resolved. There was no prior history of surgical procedures.
Peritoneocentesis performed in the ER revealed unclotted blood, indicating the need for emergency laparotomy. The patient's vital signs remained stable during her stay in the emergency room, with systolic BP ranging from 110 to 100 mmHg and HR ranging from 60 to 70 bpm. Her elevated CK was considered to be dermatomyositis caused by nivolumab, and methylprednisolone 40 mg iv every 24 h was given. Upon entering the operating room (OR), the patient was oriented, alert, and conscious (Glasgow Coma Scale: E4V5M6), with vitals similar to those in the ER and SPO2 at room air ranging from 85 to 88%. ABG analysis showed a pH of 7.43, Hct of 27.8%, Hb of 89 g/L, partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of 72.9 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of 32.6 mmHg, and lactate (Lac) of 4.7 mmol/L. Invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring was initiated, and point-of-care ultrasonography (POCUS) was performed.
The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal left ventricular contractility with no obvious valvular abnormalities or RWMA. The inferior vena cava (IVC) was not collapsed, and respiratory variability was not apparent. Abdominal ultrasound showed her bilateral diaphragm elevated to around the T4 level, likely due to the abdominal mass and possible bleeding. Fluid was observed in both the left and right abdominal cavities. Pulmonary ultrasound revealed B-lines in the lower lung regions, possibly caused by the elevated diaphragm due to the abdominal mass and potential intraperitoneal bleeding.
During the POCUS exam, the patient remained calm and cooperative, showing no signs of distress. Due to elevated intraperitoneal pressure, rapid sequence induction was performed to minimize the risk of aspiration. Propofol Targeted control infusion of 3 µg/mL, rocuronium 50 µg, and fentanyl 50 µg were used for anesthesia induction, and the Sellick maneuver was performed. Successful intubation was quickly achieved, but the patient's blood pressure started to drop. Boluses of 6 mg ephedrine and 100 µg phenylephrine were administered. The patient was quickly placed in the Trendelenburg position to compensate for vasodilation and facilitate central venous catheter placement. Despite repeated doses of ephedrine (36mg in total) and phenylephrine (1mg in total), the patient remained hypotensive at approximately 60/40 mmHg and unresponsive to fluid resuscitation(rapid infusion of 500ml lactate ringer’s solution). A bolus of 20 µg of epinephrine was administered together with epinephrine infusion and norepinephrine infusion, gradually improving the patient's BP. Throughout the hypotensive period, which lasted approximately 15 min, the patient's heart rate remained below 80 bpm. After establishing a central line and initiating a continuous infusion of epinephrine and norepinephrine, the hypotension was slowly corrected, and the patient’s invasive BP stabilized at 130/70 mmHg with an epinephrine infusion rate of 0.15 µg/kg/min and a norepinephrine infusion rate of 0.1 µg/kg/min. Surgery revealed hemorrhagic infarction of the Krukenberg tumor due to torsion of the pedicle as the source of intra-abdominal bleeding. The patient received 4 units of packed red blood cells. ABG analysis at the end of the surgery showed an Hb level of 9 g/L and lactate of 8.2 mmol/L, with an Hct of 27.6%.
The surgery proceeded uneventfully and lasted approximately 90 min. Despite the absence of continuous surgical bleeding, vasopressor support could not be downscaled. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with continuous vasopressor infusion. Bedside ultrasonography was repeated to investigate the cause of severe hypotension after the induction agent. The patient's ventricular contractility was normal, without other apparent signs of valvular abnormalities or RWMA. The possibility of an anaphylactic reaction to induction agents was considered. However, the patient’s absence of signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, including cutaneous and respiratory manifestations, led us to consider another possible cause: an immune-related adverse event (irAE). Considering the patient's history of taking nivolumab, a PD-1 inhibitor, together with the patient's unelevated HR during intro-abdominal bleeding and profound hypotension after induction, thyroid dysfunction was suspected. Thyroid hormone levels were ordered together with cardiac biomarkers to detect cardiac injury. The results on the second day revealed severe hypothyroidism, while troponins and NT-pro BNP remained unelevated . An endocrinology consult was ordered, and thyroxine was promptly administered. The patient was free of vasopressors and successfully weaned off ventilation after 14 h in the ICU and transferred to the ward on the 2nd postoperative day, with an uneventful recovery. Up to 6 months after the surgery, patient recovered well and underwent regular oncologic outpatient clinic visits.