A female infant weighing 1790 g was born to a 35-year-old gravida 2 para 2 mother with an unremarkable family history by emergency cesarean section at a tertiary referral hospital because of decreased fetal movement and oligohydramnios at 32 weeks of gestation. After birth, the infant was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit for the management of respiratory distress syndrome and prematurity. At 10 days of age, she was discharged home with follow-up instructions.
At 18 days of age, a serious aspiration event occurred following breastfeeding. The infant was resuscitated by the ambulance crew at home and transferred to our hospital for respiratory ventilator support. Unfortunately, after the third day, sepsis and seizure activity developed. Following 30 days of treatment, she recovered clinically. However, due to neurologic impairment secondary to pulmonary aspiration asphyxia, she was unable to maintain sufficient oral intake. The decision to place a gastrostomy feeding tube was made, and the patient underwent a Pezzer catheter gastrostomy with the Stamm technique at 2 months of age. She was then discharged home, with a weight of 2800 g. At 4.5 months of age, the patient was admitted to our hospital with mild vomiting complaints, weighing 5100 g. The patient was hospitalized for 1 day due to prematurity and comorbidities. The physical examination and diagnostic workup were normal. Upright abdominal X-ray (UAXR) showed that the transverse colon frame was gaseous and that the Pezzer catheter remained in place .
At 5 months of age, the Pezzer tube was dislodged unintentionally at home, and a 12-French silicon Foley catheter was inserted at a local hospital. At 5 months and 3 weeks of age, the patient was admitted again to our hospital with respiratory complaints, nonbilious vomiting, and ineffective Foley catheter gastrostomy. The mother said she tried breastfeeding over the past few days, but the infant could not tolerate it well and would begin to cough. A chest exam and chest X-ray revealed pneumonia. Her abdominal exam was unremarkable: her abdomen was soft, mildly distended, had no palpable mass, and had normal bowel sounds. A rectal examination revealed normal stool. On UAXR, it was found that the abdomen was gasless and that the Foley catheter extended to the pelvis . On the second day of hospitalization, the patient's condition deteriorated rapidly, requiring transfer to the intensive care unit and ventilation. On the fourth day, the patient developed septic shock, and bilious drainage from her gastrostomy catheter was observed. UAXR revealed that the Foley catheter had moved even further distally and demonstrated air-fluid levels, suggestive of intestinal obstruction . Although her abdominal examination remained unremarkable, abdominal ultrasonography identified a small bowel obstruction with peritoneal free fluid, and the patient passed a small amount of bloody stool after a 0.9% sodium chloride saline solution enema. Only bedside studies could be performed due to her extensive comorbidities.
Laparotomy was indicated according to the patient’s imaging results and clinical findings, with an initial diagnosis of intestinal obstruction. Dilated jejunal bowel loops that formed multiple consecutive jejunal intussusceptions were detected during laparotomy. The Foley catheter had migrated forward from the stomach to the mid-small intestine—a distance nearly 10 times its length. Retrograde intussusceptions involving 70 cm of jejunum were detected, which were formed by approximately 10 separate 5–6 cm intussusceptions starting from the Ligament of Treitz , and manual reduction was performed . Careful evaluation of the reduced jejunal segments showed that most of the intussuscepted segments had necrotic areas of up to 1–2 cm, with minute perforation near the mesenteric border . The affected jejunal segment was resected and anastomosis performed. Postoperatively, the patient returned to the intensive care unit and remained intubated. She was discharged with 12 Fr gastrostomy tube (Avanos Medical Devices), 6 weeks after admission.