A 38-year-old Tunisian man was admitted because of severe cyanosis and effort intolerance.
At the age of 2 years, a complex cyanotic cardiac defect was diagnosed and left un-operated. He was lost at follow-up, thereafter. Due to worsening cyanosis and minimal effort dyspnoea, he was admitted to a local hospital and referred, thereafter, to our centre.
At admission, the patient was deeply cyanotic (O2 Saturation at finger plethysmography was 72%), with clubbing. On physical examination a ubiquitous systolic 3/6 murmur was appreciated, lungs were clear, and no peripheral congestion was observed. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed complete heart block, atrio-ventricular (AV) dissociation with junctional escape rhythm (heart rate 60/min) increased QRS voltages and deep S waves in the precordial leads . Haematocrit was 65% with iron storage within the normal range.
The echocardiographic anatomic diagnosis was: situs solitus, mesocardia, double discordance (i.e. AV and ventriculoarterial discordance) with, large VSD, and severe pulmonary stenosis with biventricular hypertrophy and good systolic function (Videos 1–3, ).
Cardiac computed tomography confirmed atrial, ventricular, and great vessels arrangement and normal pulmonary drainage . Cardiac magnetic resonance showed balanced well-functioning morphological right and left ventricles, no significant AV valves regurgitation, normal pulmonary vasculature, and occlusion of the right brachiocephalic vein at the junction with the superior vena cava (SVC), with venous flow collateralization into distal SVC through the azygos system ( and , ).
Cardiac catheterization demonstrated low pulmonary and systemic ventricle end-diastolic pressures (mean pulmonary artery pressure 18 mmHg), unobstructed epicardial left- and right-coronary arteries, correctly originating from the respective facing sinuses and absence of significant collateral circulation. Pulmonary angiogram confirmed pinpoint pulmonary stenosis and post-stenotic pulmonary artery dilatation .
Owing to the extreme symptomatic hypoxia, a physiologic repair contemplating VSD closure, relief of pulmonary stenosis, and pacemaker implantation was planned. This option was discussed with the patient that gave his consent.
Surgery was carried out by median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CBP) was realized by bicaval and aortic cannulation. Ventricular septal defect was closed through the right-sided mitral valve, aligning the left-sided morphological right ventricle (RV) with the aorta. The pulmonary outflow was reconstructed by the interposition of an 18 mm valved conduit (Hancock® 18) between the right-sided morphological left ventricle (LV) and the pulmonary artery (PA). The conduit was intentionally undersized in order to realize a moderate banding of the sub-pulmonary ventricle aiming to promote tricuspid continence. A 4 mm calibrated interatrial communication was left. Finally, an epicardial atrio-biventricular pacing system was implanted in order to avoid pacing-related mechanical desynchronization.
Separation from bypass was easily achieved with a low dose of adrenaline (0.04 mcg/Kg/min). Cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic cross-clamp times were 90′ and 53′ min, respectively.
The patient was weaned from the ventilator and extubated on the second post-operative day. The postoperative course was uneventful. Transthoracic echo revealed good biventricular function, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and mean gradient across the LV–PA conduit was 30 mmHg. Initial inferior vena cava congestion with evidence of dense spontaneous echo-contrast, progressively resolved along with haematocrit normalization and venous pressure reduction.
At discharge, on 20th post-operative day, the patient was asymptomatic without evidence of congestion on 25 mg of Furosemide b.i.d. and 25 mg of Spironolactone o.d., saturation was constantly above 95% even during moderate efforts. Close clinical and echocardiographic follow-up was arranged locally once the patient was back home, in order to monitor congestion and titrate diuretic therapy. At last contact with the local cardiology team, 50 days after the operation, ventricular function was stable, and the patient was well compensated on 40 mg of Furosemide.