A 58-year-old Japanese man with an 8-year history of T2DM had a symptom of pain in his right lower leg and visited the emergency room in Kawasaki Medical School. Previously, he had felt the same pain in the same region when his blood glucose was very high and thereby he was diagnosed as having T2DM 8 years before.
He had acute osteomyelitis in his right lower leg when he was a baby. Except for this, he had no past history. He had no remarkable family history. He was a barber; he smoked tobacco (pack-years = 0.75 pack/day × 40 years) and he drank alcohol every day. After the episode of acute osteomyelitis when he was a baby, there was no problem in his legs until he had general fatigue and felt pain in his right lower leg at the age of 50. He visited the emergency room. His vital signs were as follows: heart rate 76 beats/minute, blood pressure 116/70 mmHg, and body temperature 36.4 °C. He had a symptom of slight local swelling and heat sensation in the same area with pain in his right lower leg, but there were no findings in physical and neurological examinations. In addition, there was no ulcer or injury on his skin surface. Laboratory data were as follows: white blood cell count, 7400/μL (neutrophil 64.7%); C-reactive protein (CRP), 2.50 mg/dl; plasma glucose, 382 mg/dL; hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), 11.7%. He was diagnosed as having T2DM, but he had no diabetic complications. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lower limbs showed an abscess and inflammatory change in his right lower leg . An axial T1-weighted (T1W) image of his right lower leg showed a slightly lower intensity, and an axial T2-weighted (T2W) image showed a markedly higher intensity . Based on these findings, we made a diagnosis of acute exacerbation of chronic osteomyelitis and T2DM. We thought that it would be better to hospitalize him and start administering antibiotics via a drip, but he did not agree to the hospitalization. Therefore, as an alternative, we started 300 mg/day of cefcapene pivoxil hydrochloride hydrate and insulin therapy (18 units of aspart) on an out-patient basis. After starting insulin therapy, his blood glucose level gradually decreased, and his leg pain was also gradually mitigated. Finally, his leg pain disappeared 2 weeks later. His CRP became within normal range, and 3 months later the focus in his right lower leg was markedly reduced on MRI. In addition, the focus was not detected in ultrasonography of the right tibia site. Just in case, however, we continued antibiotics therapy for 4 months. Since his glycemic control was improved 2 months later, we stopped insulin therapy and started orally administered anti-diabetic drugs.
He was then followed up as an out-patient with T2DM for approximately 8 years. The medication at that time was 1000 mg/day of metformin, 25 mg/day of alogliptin, 15 mg/day of pioglitazone, and 50 mg/day of ipragliflozin. However, he did not take the medicine for approximately 8 months on his own judgement at the age of 58. After his interruption of therapy for 8 months, he felt the same pain in the same right lower leg again. He immediately visited our hospital. He had symptoms of slight local swelling and heat sensation together with pain in the same area in his right lower leg, but again there were no findings in physical and neurological examinations at this time. His vital signs were as follows: heart rate 99 beats/minute, blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, and body temperature 37.0 °C. He had a symptom of slight local swelling and heat sensation in the same area with pain in his right lower leg, but there was no ulcer or injury on his skin surface. Laboratory data were as follows: white blood cell count, 6680/μL (neutrophil 63.4%); CRP, 0.32 mg/dl; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 31 mm/hour; plasma glucose, 652 mg/dL; HbA1c, 6.9%; glycoalbumin 46.1%. Other laboratory data were as follows: red blood cell, 476 × 104/μL; hemoglobin (Hb), 15.9 g/dL; platelet, 25.1/μL; total protein (TP), 7.6 g/dL; albumin (Alb), 4.4 g/dL. Liver and renal function were within normal range as follows: aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 39 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 50 U/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP), 51 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 172 U/L; creatinine (Cre), 0.54 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 13 mg/dL; Na, 131 mEq/L; K, 4.4 mEq/L; Cl, 96 mEq/L. Pathogenic bacteria were not detected. He had no diabetic complications, probably because his glycemic control was relatively good before the interruption of therapy. His leg MRI showed a spreading of the abscess and inflammatory change in his right lower leg . We hospitalized him in our institution but he did not agree to undergo surgery for remission. Therefore, we started 3.0 g/day of sulbactam sodium/ampicillin sodium and insulin therapy (24 units of aspart and 20 units of glargine). After starting insulin therapy, his blood glucose level gradually decreased, and his leg pain was also gradually mitigated. Local swelling and heat sensation disappeared approximately 5 days later. Finally, his leg pain disappeared approximately 2 weeks later, and he was discharged from our hospital. Just in case, however, we continued antibiotics therapy (450 mg/day of rifampicin and 4 g/day of trimethoprim) for approximately 2 months. After a total of 3-month antibiotics therapy during hospitalization and after discharge, we stopped antibiotics therapy. He was then followed up for approximately 6 months, and his leg MRI showed a reduction of the abscess and inflammatory change in his right lower leg. He had no symptoms and/or problems, and his inflammation markers remained within normal levels for at least 6 months.