A 66-year-old man from Mexico presented to the hospital with a one-week history of worsening right hand pain, swelling and erythema most prominent in the distal palm. Physical examination demonstrated a painful 1.5-cm fluctuant mass extending from the palmar to the A2 pulley of the right fourth digit, with focal tenderness and swelling over the flexor sheath and limited digital motion. Patient was started on vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam. Patient denied the use of any medications. His medical history was notable for type 2 diabetes mellitus with HbA1c of 11.2 %. He reported a history of blunt injury to the base of the fourth digit on the dorsal aspect of the right hand after a concrete bench fell on his hand two weeks from the time of presentation. At the time of the fall, he did not observe any lacerations or breaks in the skin. Over the subsequent week, he reported observing a bruise forming over the site of injury. Blood tests were significant for white cell count of 17.5 × 109/L. Radiographs of the hand revealed soft tissue swelling in entire right palm, extending to the distal interphalangeal joints of the third and fourth digits with intact bony anatomy, without fractures or dislocations .
The in-house hand surgeon performed the procedure. After informed consent was obtained, the patient underwent incision, drainage, irrigation under general anesthesia. On inspection, there was a large blister on the dorsum of the finger with a cloudy fluid. On incision, this blister was opened and then an incision was made in the fourth digit of the right hand and extended distally between the metacarpal area. Immediate purulent fluid was expressed and samples were collected for culture. Further spreading was performed extending proximally to break up loculations. Purulence was removed, and the area was irrigated. Care was taken to visualize and protect neurovascular bundles. After gentle spreading performed to ensure no other pockets of purulence was present, attention was turned to the volar aspect of the finger. An oblique zigzag-type incision was performed over the A1 pulley region, the area of most fluctuance dorsally. Purulence was noted on the volar aspect indicative of infection spreading from distal to proximal consistent with a collar button abscess in the deep space between the volar and extensor area. This area was cleared and irrigated. Further spreading was performed down to the sheath and then a slight opening was made in the flexor sheath proximally. No purulence was noted in the flexor sheath and flexor tendons were loosely intact with preservation of passive flexion and extension. After further irrigation and ensuring absence of additional purulent pockets, packing was applied and a drain was placed through the webspace. The wound was packed volarly and then the skin edges were approximated with a nylon suture.
Intraoperative cultures identified the growth of Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. The patient returned to the operating room after 48 h for a second look operation . An area of fatty necrosis with purulent fluid in the dorsal wound was visualized. The volar wound had a slight expression of cloudy fluid on the ulnar aspect, but the tendon sheath was noted to be intact with no purulence or exudate within the tendon sheath at the A1 pulley region. The wound were thoroughly irrigated and necrotic tissue was debrided. The drain was removed 48 h after the second debridement. Postoperatively, his symptoms improved significantly, and he was discharged home on oral doxycycline for ten days and referred to physical therapy.