A 65-year-old obese woman visited our hospital 2 years ago, with intermittent foamy urine and edema for over 30 years. The presence of foamy urine was apparent following daily activity, diminished in first morning excretion, and intensified during periods of excessive exertion. Her edema was mild to moderate, noticeable on the eyelids and double lower limbs, worsened in the morning, and alleviated or absent at night. Levels of urinary protein ranged from negative to over 3.0g/L, while red blood cells were insignificant in qualitative urinalysis. Albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR) fluctuated between 15 to 4131 mg/g (normal range: less than 30mg/g), while the 24-hour urinary total protein (24h UTP) was 0.05 to 0.25g/24h (normal range: less than 0.2 g/24h). The fluctuation of urinary tests from 2019 to 2020 were summarized in Additional file : Table S1. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-agarose gel electrophoresis for urinary protein analysis revealed the presence of 61.4% albumin, 13.2% transferrin, 20.9% IgG and 4.5% IgA, which indicated that the protein was originated from glomeruli. Her serum albumin was 39-48g/L (3.9-4.8 g/dL, normal range 35-52 g/L or 3.5-5.5 g/dL), serum creatinine was 54-77μmol/L (0.61-0.87 mg/dL, normal range 45-84μmol/L or 0.51-0.95 mg/dL), and other chemicals were all in normal range during these years. Urine sediment, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, autoimmune antibodies and immunofixation electrophoresis were all unremarkable.
The ultrasound examination revealed clear bilateral renal structure, with the left and right renal longitudinal diameters measuring 11.4 cm and 11.2 cm, respectively. Additionally, the blood flow in the superior mesenteric artery and bilateral renal veins was satisfactory. Past medical history included hypertension, with blood pressure well controlled via losartan potassium hydrochlorothiazide tablet. Other medical history included a substernal goiter and non-functional left adrenal adenoma, both of which had undergone surgical treatment successfully.
She did not receive renal biopsy because of normal 24h UTP and serum creatinine. Because of repetitive and constant spot urinary protein, the patient had been misdiagnosed as unexplained chronic glomerulitis by nephrologists and treated with traditional Chinese medicine, Shenyan Kangfu tablets, Huangkui capsule and Bailing capsule. The treatment led to no improvement, she was referred to multiple centers and consulted with different doctors, leading to redundant tests and unnecessary expenditure. After querying, we discovered that the patient collected 24-h urine sample at home with less activity, while the spot urine sample for routine urinalysis and ACR was often collected after she came to the hospital. The distance between her home and the hospital was 6 km, taking a total of 45 min of walking and bus ride. We asked the patient to collect urine each time she voided and to record the voiding time along with the corresponding activity status. As it’s depicted on Table , the patient's ACR was 3mg/g in first morning excretion, that elevated and fluctuated with daily activity. The routine was repeated four times which yielded similar results that the higher intensity of exercise, the more severe ACR and protein-to-creatinine ratio (PCR) in the urine. The data supported the diagnosis of orthostatic proteinuria. Additionally, there was a correlation between the severity of the patient’s edema and the ratio of ACR after commuting to the hospital compared to the ACR in the first morning excretion.
LRV entrapment was suspected at first, but neither ultrasound nor abdominal computed tomography (CT) could find any signs of nutcracker phenomenon. Incidentally, the enhanced CT for her left adrenal tumor indicated she had the inferior vena cava (IVC) interruption between the subhepatic-suprarenal region, accompanied by a locally expanded LRV, as well as tortuous dilatation of the azygos vein, hemiazygos vein, and bilateral lumbar veins .
With the help of free-sectional ultrasound, it was confirmed that her LRV received a large part venous blood from the infrarenal IVC and the right kidney, through an expanded communicating branch, draining into the hemiazygos. A small portion of infrarenal IVC blood flowed reversely into the bilateral lumbar veins vein, via right and left ascending lumbar veins, draining into the azygos vein (right) and hemiazygos vein (left) separately. The moment after her coming to the hospital, the venous blood velocity was 21.5m/s at the left hilum, and 42.2m/s at the right side. In the rest state, the velocity changed to 47.2m/s and 94.2m/s respectively (Additional file : Table S2 and Figure S1-3). These changes reflected that the pressure in LRV was higher than the right side and elevated after daily activity. A schematic representation of normal venous system and the variant one is presented in Fig. .
The presence of facial and bilateral lower extremity edema was observed upon awakening in the morning, and its severity decreased with physical activity. Additionally, it was noted that both edema and proteinuria worsened during periods of increased exertion, and alleviated during periods of relative inactivity. Based on these observations, we proposed that the IVC interruption resulted in impaired venous reflux in the supine position and contributing to the development of edema in the face and lower extremities.