A 73-year-old man with a 10-year history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus presented with hepatocellular carcinoma and complicated cyst in the liver. The patient was scheduled to undergo right hemi-hepatectomy. Hypertension was controlled with an angiotensin II receptor antagonist. Diabetic neuropathy was diagnosed in autonomic function test. Magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen revealed a 2.6 × 2.6 sized hepatocellular carcinoma in segment VII and a 3.2 × 3.2 sized atypical complicated cyst in segment VIII. The patient had no abnormal findings in the adrenal gland, spleen, and pancreas, except for a simple renal cyst.
Initial blood pressure was 150/80 mmHg and heart rate was 65 beats per minute in the operating room. Anesthesia was induced with thiopental 300 mg, rocuronium 60 mg, and continuous infusion of remifentanil (effect site concentration 3 ng/ml) using a target controlled infusion system (Orchestra® Primea, Fresenius vial, Brezins, France). After endotracheal intubation, anesthesia was maintained with 1-3% of sevoflurane and remifentanil 2–4 ng/ml effect site concentration. The left radial artery was cannulated for direct blood pressure monitoring using a pressure kit (Tru-Wave® Disposable Pressure Transducer, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, USA). The right subclavian vein was catheterized for fluid management and central venous pressure monitoring.
From the start of the operation, blood pressures ranged from 100/40 to 150/70 mmHg with heart rates 55 to 70 beats per minute for three hours. Three hours into the surgery, systolic blood pressure abruptly increased from 100 to over 350 mmHg, the maximum measurable pressure of the monitor incorporated with anesthesia workstation (Zeus® anesthesia machine, Drager AG, Lübeck, Germany). Diastolic blood pressure increased from 40 to 130 mmHg and heart rate increased from 75 to 95 beats per minute. The anesthesiologist checked the delivery system of the anesthetics, which was functioning normally. No drug was injected at that time. Anesthesia was deepened and labetalol 10 mg was administered.
The operation was stopped immediately. Although a vasopressor such as epinephrine was not injected in the surgical field, the right adrenal gland had been cauterized by monopolar electrocautery to separate the liver from the adrenal gland. Approximately 3 minutes after suspending the operation, blood pressure and heart rate returned to baseline levels, which were maintained until the end of the operation. After the event, the right liver was resected successfully without any complication.
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for hemodynamic monitoring and neurologic examination. Neurologic examination performed by a neurologist was within normal limits, and the patient remained hemodynamically stable during recovery. Hormonal studies were performed to investigate an undetected pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma. However, urine metanephrine, vanillylmandelic acid, and homovanillic acid levels were 0.3 mg/day (normal reference: 0–0.8 mg/day), 2.3 mg/day (0–8 mg/day) and 2.8 mg/day (1.4-8.8 mg/day), respectively. Iodine-123 meta-iodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scintigraphy revealed no neuroendocrine tumors such as pheochoromocytoma. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged without any sequelae.