A 48-year-old female presented with a painless progressive swelling on the volar aspect of the left wrist and palm for 7 months associated with restricted wrist movements and weakened grip. She had no other comorbidities or previous exposure to TB. Examination revealed two swellings approximately 7 cm × 5 cm on the ulnavolar aspect of the wrist on either side of the carpal ligament, as shown in , which was non-pulsatile, compressible, doughy in nature, and without any local signs of inflammation. Wrist ROM and grip strength were reduced without any distal neurovascular deficits. Lymph nodes, chest, spine, and other systems were clinically normal. Laboratory tests were essentially normal other than an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 40 mm in the 1st h. Wrist and hand X-rays revealed soft-tissue swelling shadow on the flexor aspect and periarticular osteoporosis of the wrist bones. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lobulated altered signal intensity lesion seen in the distal forearm region along its flexor aspect and extending into the palmar hypothenar aspect of the hand engulfing the flexor tendons in a dumbbell fashion. The lobulated swelling appears iso-intense in T1-weighted images (WI) to adjoining soft-tissue muscle planes and exhibits a bright signal in T2-weighted axial images and short-tau inversion recovery sequences suggestive of thickened synovium and fluid surrounding the flexor tendon sheaths, as shown in . Intraoperative, a large encapsulated mass arising from the ulnar bursa proximal to carpal ligament and extending distally to encompass the tendons sheaths of the ring and little fingers. On severing the carpal tunnel, the swelling was found to be in continuation in a dumbbell fashion across the carpal tunnel with the ring and little finger tendon sheaths. With meticulous dissection, the mass lesion was successfully removed in toto, as shown in . To avoid spillage of contents and to remove the lesion en-masse, a tenotomy of the ring finger tendon was done as it was completely engulfed by the synovial mass and later resutured with Prolene 4-0 suture. The cut section revealed an irregularly thickened wall of the cyst cavity filled with yellowish material suggestive of rice bodies, as shown in . The excised mass was sent for HPE and microbiological analysis.
Grossly, a large irregular multilobed structure externally encapsulated with dimensions approximately 12 cm × 6 cm × 3 cm. Microscopic examination revealed fragments of a cystic wall which was made up of fibrocollagenous tissue containing necrotic material with thickened synovium and yellow cheesy material, which was suggestive of a large ganglion cyst. Tissue samples sent for Gram stain, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining, and aerobic culture sensitivity were negative. Samples subjected to the GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay for the detection of Mycobacterium TB revealed a positive result. Tissue sample staining or HPE did not reveal TB affection. The patient’s clinical presentation, MRI findings, intraoperative findings, and positive GeneXpert MTB assay report guided us to start the patient on daily ATT (2[HRZE] and 10[HRE]) regimen. Postoperatively, the hand and wrist were maintained in a posterior slab in a functional position. Under supervision, early active mobilization of fingers and wrist was started once the patient was pain free. The patient was reviewed at 3, 6, and 12 months post-surgery for follow-up. Her surgical wound healed well with no scar complications. At 3-month post-surgery, the patient had obtained full ROM of fingers and wrist. She reported a complete return to functional activity with good grip strength, using the affected hand in daily activities, as shown in (, , ).