49 years old man, hypertensive and diabetic, non-smoker neither alcol consumer.
He came to our hospital for suspected left foot infection following the removal of a plantar callus in a beauty center. He was then hospitalized and a diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis was made.
The patient reported that he had gone to a beauty salon a week ago for removing a callus. After a few hours he developed local inflammation. The attending physician prescribed Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid for one week.
At the physical examination there was a necrotic, purulent and exuding tissue of blackish gray color affecting the dorsal region of the left foot; there was an excavated, necrotic and purulent lesion in correspondence of the left plantar region, to the level of the second metatarsal, where the callus was removed.
Lastly, there was an evidence of erythema, skin distress and edema of the regions saved from the necrosis of the foot and of the distal third of the left leg.
The diagnostic suspicion of necrotizing fasciitis was based on the objectivity found.
The CT scan with and without contrast described a gangrenous inflammation of the soft tissues of the left foot and of the distal third of the leg, with involvement of the muscular fascia, which seemed to start from the loss of substance localized in the sole of the left foot. In the context there was a clear collection of gas.
It was also reported a phlogistic bone erosion and a diffuse calcific arteriopathy that complicated the case.
The patient was then subjected to an aggressive and radical necrosectomy with important demolition in order to delimit the macroscopically vital and bleeding skin margins. (,,,) In addition, we collected tissue and liquid for a microbiological and histological examination.
An extensive disinfection of the surgical margins was performed. Lastly, we medicated with iodoformic gauze and sterile cover.
The histology described a necrotizing exudative inflammation, with colonies of bacteria. In particular, Streptococcus Constellatus, resistant to Cephalosporin and Gentamicin, and Staphylococcus Hominis, resistant to Methicillin, were isolated from the microbiological buffer. Nevertheless, due to the presence of the gas, our clinical suspicion was oriented towards the presence of anaerobes. Blood cultures were negative.
We also evaluated the possibility of apply a negative pressure wound therapy, which we eventually postponed after the resolution of the underlying infectious problem, to avoid the risk of a new anaerobic infection .
We started therapy with Clindamycin + Daptomycin and Meropenem; then we replaced Daptomycin and Meropenem with Vancomycin because they were not tolerated by the patient.
During the hospitalization, we performed a second surgical toilette. (,,) At the end of the Vancomycin cycle, we administered Teicoplanin and Piperacillin/Tazobactam, with a clear clinical improvement.
Unfortunately, the patient developed IRA of a possible pharmacological cause, therefore the Teicoplanin was replaced by the Linezolid.
The acute episode was resolved and the patient, with a general and local good condition, was pointed to a hyperbaric chamber path.