A 15-year-old male was admitted to the emergency room after presenting a high fever for 10 days, abdominal colic, and mucous bloody stool for 4 days. He had severe abdominal distension and a cessation of passing gas. A month ago, he was suspected of being infected with the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) due to fever and a sore throat. He took ibuprofen to defervesce. Afterward, jaundice developed. Laboratory tests in other hospitals found that transaminase levels increased, and liver injury caused by acute infection was considered, but no additional pathogenic tests were conducted. Silybin and other hepatoprotective drugs were administered. One week later, symptoms were relieved, and transaminase levels decreased. In addition, he had no other notable medical or family history.
His complete blood count showed a white blood cell count of 0.36 × 109/L (Normal range(NR): 3.50–9.50 × 109/L), with neutrophils accounting for 45.8% (NR: 50%-75%), lymphocytes accounting for 42.0% (NR: 20%-40%), hemoglobin 57 g/L (NR: 120-160 g/L), and platelet count of 59 × 109/L (NR: 100–350 × 109/L); his C-reactive protein was 267 mg/L (NR: < 8.0 mg/L). There was also hepatic impairment, with ALT was 72U/L (NR: 9-50U/L) and AST was 54U/L (NR: 15-40U/L). The stool sample showed an elevated level of white blood cells (20–30/HPF, NR: 0–1) and red blood cells (2–3/HPF, NR: 0). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the rectal and sigmoid bowel wall with dilation of the proximal colon (Supplementary Fig. ).
We diagnosed as probable intestinal infection and acute intestinal pseud-obstruction. Colonoscopy is considered risky at this time. We promptly inserted an ileus catheter and initiated empirical therapy with meropenem, vancomycin, and human immunoglobulin. His abdominal pain resolved, and his blood count and liver function gradually normalized, but diarrhea continued.
The persistence of the symptoms compelled us to continue the search for the cause. Plasma metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) showed 50 Epstein‒Barr viruses; serum polymerase chain reaction showed that CMV copy was negative, and plasma CMV-IgG/IgM were also negative. Plasma SARS-CoV-2 IgG was positive, confirming a recent case of novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The test for Clostridium difficile, fungi, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Salmonella, Shiga, rotavirus, and parasites in feces was negative. Other tests, such as antinuclear antibody, antiphospholipid antibody, and HIV tests, were negative. Seventeen days later, he was scheduled for a colonoscopy. Sigmoid colonic and rectal ulcers were observed (Supplementary Fig. A, B). Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining revealed CMV inclusion bodies, and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining demonstrated positive CMV antigen , confirming colitis caused by CMV infection.
We started intravenous ganciclovir at a dosage of 500 mg/daily for 21 days. Meanwhile, due to the destruction of the superficial intestinal mucosa and persistent diarrhea, considering that inflammatory bowel disease cannot be definitely ruled out, he was also given oral mesalazine and prednisone (starting at 70 mg/daily) to repair the intestinal mucosa and reduce inflammatory reactions after consulting with the Department of Gastroenterology. During a follow-up examination three months later, his blood count and biochemical indicators were normal. Endoscopic findings revealed stenosis of colon lumen and histological signs of chronic inflammation (Supplementary Fig. C, D). CMV was negative for the IHC test, and his stool gradually returned to normal.