A 54-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a 2-week history of vague abdominal discomfort associated with nausea and multiple episodes of non-projectile vomiting. Two days prior, he developed intermittent fever associated with chills. The maximum documented temperature was 38.5°C. The symptoms were associated with headache, dizziness, a gradual diminution of vision of bilateral eyes, and ringing sensation in bilateral ears. He did not have any comorbidities. There was no history of anorexia, night sweats, and significant weight loss. He worked as a chef in a Chinese restaurant and was involved in handling meat and meat products. He did not smoke or consume alcohol. At the time of presentation, he was febrile. Physical examination revealed a systolic murmur on the apical area. Extraocular movements were sluggish. Apart from this, he had poor dental hygiene with multiple carious teeth with no prior dental treatment.
Routine laboratory evaluations showed leukocytosis and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP). Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed an abscess in the right lobe of the liver and a possible splenic abscess. MRI brain revealed a 1.1×2.1×1.2 cm thick-walled cystic lesion in the left parietal lobe with T1 hypo intensity, T2/FLAIR hyperintensity, and restricted diffusion consistent with abscess draining into the left ventricular system causing ventriculitis, choroid plexus, and focal meningitis as illustrated in Figure . Electrocardiogram (ECG) was unremarkable. With the presence of a systolic murmur and multiple foci of abscess in the brain and abdomen, a cardioembolic aetiology was suspected. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed which showed a 1×0.5 cm mitral valve vegetation with a flail mitral valve and moderate eccentric mitral regurgitation as shown in Figure . The size of cardiac chambers, global systolic function, and left ventricular ejection fraction as seen on the echocardiogram were normal.
The patient was attended by a team of neurosurgeons, cardiologists, infectious disease specialists, dental physicians, and critical care physicians in intensive care settings. Empirical broad-spectrum antimicrobial coverage was done with intravenous vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole. In the meantime, a blood culture and sensitivity test were done which revealed no growth of microorganisms. Repeat culture did not show growth as well. As per the attending team of the neurosurgeon, there was no need for immediate surgery, however, intravenous dexamethasone was started for vasogenic cerebral oedema. Levetiracetam was started for seizure prophylaxis.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was not done taking into consideration the risk of herniation ascribed to immense vasogenic cerebral oedema. Taking into consideration the likelihood of BCNE, an elaborate history concerning the presence of predisposing factors for BCNE was taken. He denied notable outdoor exposure, or contact with stray or farm animals, and did not recall a history of tick bites, pet scratches or bites, or contact with sick patients. He also denied a history of illicit drug abuse. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for fastidious organisms including Bartonella, Brucella, Coxiella, and Trophyrema was negative. Screening for legionella, mycoplasma, chlamydia pneumonia, anaerobic fungal culture aspergillus, candida as well as autoantibodies including anticardiolipin, and antiphospholipid was negative.
Extraction of multiple carious teeth 1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 26, and 27 was done by a dental team and the antibiotic therapy was switched to vancomycin and meropenem. His clinical conditions gradually improved, the echo showed a diminution of vegetation size, and further approach was stepped down from the intensive care unit to the hospital floor unit. Later, he was discharged on oral co-trimoxazole for the next 2 weeks. The dose of dexamethasone was tapered. Repeat MRI and echocardiogram were planned on follow-up visits.
The patient stated that he had been well-compliant with the antibiotics prescribed. But, on the follow-up visit, there was a new onset of lower back pain which started a week ago. The pain was dull aching, moderately severe, persistent, and aggravated with movement and postural changes. There was no history of recent trauma or fall injury. He did not have a history of incoordination, weakness, seizure, syncope, loss of consciousness, and behavioural disturbances. On re-evaluation, he was afebrile and did not have neck stiffness. However, the left lumbar area was tender. Salient findings on MRI Lumbosacral spine were the features suggestive of osteomyelitis and discitis of L3–L4 vertebrae . A disc core biopsy specimen was taken under CT guidance which showed no growth on culture. Repeat echocardiography showed persistence of mitral vegetation (1×0.5 cm), which was slightly larger in comparison to what was noted earlier with moderate eccentric mitral regurgitation. However, repeated MRIs brain showed resolution of the parietal lobe abscess. The patient was readmitted. He was attended by a neurosurgery team who denied the need for any active surgical intervention. Basal metabolic panel testing showed a slight rise in blood creatinine level (1.5 mg/dl). Three sets of blood cultures were performed during his re-admission, all of which were negative. The cardiovascular team was consulted for enlarging valvular vegetation. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was not done due to prevailing infection and also, it would not alter the current management approach. A thorough analysis and discussion between the cardiovascular team and infectious disease specialist team led to the decision to upgrade the antibiotics while having the patient under close observation and rapidly intervening in case of failure to respond. For now, he was not considered for a surgical approach. So, the patient was started on intravenous daptomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam. The pain was managed with Tylenol, topical diclofenac, and lidocaine patches.
Upon completion of the 6-week antibiotics course, the patient had clinically improved with down-trending inflammatory markers. TEE revealed the resolution of vegetation. Creatinine level had declined. There was no pain or fever. Physical examination was unremarkable except for a soft systolic murmur on the precordium. He was re-assessed in a follow-up visit 2 weeks later. The patient had persistent mitral valve prolapse as a complication and was scheduled for Mitra-clip placement.