A 68-year-old Japanese man presented at our hospital for evaluation and treatment of rectal cancer. He had no history of rectal cancer. He had been diagnosed with rectal cancer using colonoscopy for screening of rectal bleeding; following biopsy, the tumor was confirmed to be moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Barium enema showed a filling defect at the rectum below the peritoneal reflection . Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) revealed swollen lateral lymph nodes . We diagnosed him as having rectal cancer cT4aN1M0 clinical stageIIIa (UICC 8th). We decided to perform neoadjuvant chemotherapy for locally advanced rectal cancer for the purpose of the prevention of postoperative local recurrence. We performed CapeOX therapy 1 course until the RAS results were out. Since the RAS gene was confirmed as the wild-type, we changed the regimen and performed FOLFOX + cetuximab therapy 1 course to reduce the tumor size. The reason why we chose cetuximab is we can perform chemotherapy with cetuximab until just before surgery. On day 14, he visited the emergency room due to perineal pain. Physical findings showed BT 38.0 °C, HR 117/min, BP 79/57 mmHg, tenderness, redness, and swelling of the perineum and scrotum . He had no tenderness of the abdomen. CECT revealed extensive emphysema in the scrotum and gluteus maximus muscle . We diagnosed as Fournier’s gangrene caused by penetration of a rectal cancer. We performed debridement, left orchiectomy, transverse colostomy with double orifices. Abscess cultures yielded Escherichia coli. Intravenous antimicrobial treatment was administered using cefmetazole (1 g every 6 h).
After the first operation, we cleaned the wound every day. Because his right testis was in poor condition, we performed right orchiectomy under local anesthesia on postoperative day (POD) 7. Once the granulation tissue had formed , we performed abdominoperineal resection (APR) and dissected the left lateral lymph nodes. on POD30 . The amount of blood loss was 320 ml, and the operation time was 269 min. Pathological findings were type3, 35 × 30 mm, tub2, ly1, v2, ypT3N1a(263), and M0 Stage IIIa (UICC 8th). Histological grade was 1a (RECIST v1.1). The tumor left side wall was thin. Because the effect of chemotherapy was poor, we diagnosed as Fournier’s gangrene caused by penetration of rectal cancer.
After the second operation, we cleaned the wound every day. He left the hospital on POD59. On POD92, the wound was healed like that in the picture . Since he wanted to leave the hospital, we showed him the treatment procedure for scar healing. We performed CapeOX therapy eight courses as adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient had no recurrence for 1 year and 2 months after the operation.