We report the case of an 11-year-old Syrian male who presented to our hospital with complaints of intermittent generalized abdominal pain for 45 days accompanied by abdominal distention, tenderness, loss of appetite, and a rapid weight loss (15 Kgs in 6 weeks). No fever, jaundice, vomiting, or night sweats were reported. Medical, psychological, and family history were unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed mild abdominal distension and tenderness with shifting dullness. Neither hepatosplenomegaly nor lymphadenopathy was present. Laboratory examinations demonstrated WBC count 6.1 x 109/L, hemoglobin value 10.8 g/dl, hematocrit value 30.3%, LDH value 4299 U/L, and CRP value 8.8 mg/L. Other tests were within normal limits. Full-body computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated moderate ascites accompanied by a poorly defined heterogeneous mass with contrast enhancement measuring approximately (85x70)mm adhering to a thickened intestinal wall next to the ascending colon. In addition, several scattered retroperitoneal and paraaortic lymph nodes measuring up to 14 mm in diameter were observed. A preliminary diagnosis of peritoneal carcinomatosis of an undetermined origin was suspected. Nevertheless, the cytological study of the ascites revealed a dense proliferation of atypical lymphocytes with basophilic vacuolated cytoplasm, round enlarged nuclei, and multiple prominent nucleoli . Primary differential diagnosis included Burkitt's lymphoma. An open incisional biopsy from the aforementioned intestinal lesion was performed, and pathological examination by two pathologists revealed diffuse proliferation of medium-sized monotonous atypical lymphocytes with scant basophilic cytoplasm. Numerous mitotic figures and the characteristic starry-sky appearance were present . Immunohistochemical examination of the resected specimen revealed positivity for CD20, CD10, and BCL6, whereas CD3, TdT, and BCL2 were negative. And the proliferation index Ki-67 was approximately 100% , confirming the diagnosis of Burkitt's lymphoma. Bone marrow biopsy and cerebrospinal fluid were negative for malignant cells. Molecular techniques were not available at our institution, and the diagnosis was successfully made based on detailed examinations by two pathologists (ZA and AD).
Following diagnosis, the patient was put on a chemotherapy regimen based on the LMB95 protocol developed by The Societe Francaise d’Oncologie Pediatrique (SOFP) group. Thus treatment regimen consisted of alternating courses of Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine, Prednisone, Adriamycin, and Methotrexate (COPADM), followed by consolidation courses of Cytarabine and Methotrexate (CYM). A Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scan was performed six months later and revealed a complete metabolic response with no residual uptake (deauville1). The patient is currently in a good state and is being monitored regularly with CT scan to detect any recurrence. Our work was reported according to the SCARE 2020 criteria .