The patient was a 59-year-old female with advanced heart failure due to non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy. She had been healthy, but an abnormal electrocardiogram was detected by an annual health exam in 2002 when she was 40 years old. Cardiac ultrasound revealed a decreased LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 43% and dilated LV [LV end-diastolic/systolic dimension = 63/49 mm (mean values in Japanese healthy females are 44 ± 3 and 28 ± 3 mm, respectively)]. She was diagnosed with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy after close examination, including coronary angiography and myocardial biopsy. In 2006 at the age of 44, sustained VT occurred and an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted. A shock lead perforation occurred 4 days post-implantation, and the lead was re-positioned in the right ventricular septum. During that procedure, the pericardial effusion was drained by a subxiphoid surgical approach. The electrocardiogram during sinus rhythm is shown in . She had no family history of cardiac disease or sudden death.
Thereafter, her LVEF gradually decreased [24%, LV endo-diastolic/systolic volume index = 158/120 mL/m2 (mean values in Japanese healthy females are 49 ± 11 and 17 ± 5 mL/m2, respectively)] and her heart failure status progressed to an advanced stage despite being medicated with carvedilol (5 mg/twice daily) and enalapril (2.5 mg/once daily). In March 2021, the heart failure’s aetiology was systemically re-screened. Blood tests revealed no elevated high-sensitive C-reactive protein [<0.01 mg/dL (reference value < 0.14)] nor high-sensitivity Troponin-I [15 pg/mL (reference value < 24)] levels. Coronary angiography and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography were performed; however, no significant coronary stenosis or suspicious findings indicating secondary cardiomyopathy were evidenced. Spironolactone (25 mg/once daily), azosemide (30 mg/once daily), and dapagliflozin (10 mg/once daily) were additionally administered. Her systolic blood pressure was 66–80 mmHg; therefore, those drugs were considered to be the maximum tolerated dose and sacubitril/valsartan could not be administrated. The electrocardiogram demonstrated an intraventricular conduction disturbance with a QRS duration of 145 ms . Additionally, no mechanical LV dyssynchrony was evident, so cardiac resynchronization therapy was not indicated.
In July 2021, she was readmitted for multiple VTs . The VT electrocardiogram demonstrated a left bundle branch block pattern with a right inferior axis and V2 pattern break, suggesting the LV summit as the VT exit. An intravenous administration of amiodarone could not suppress the VT, and it degenerated into ventricular fibrillation (VF) during anti-tachycardia pacing. An ICD shock delivery failed to terminate the VF, but it was terminated by external defibrillation shocks (see , ). Thereafter, deep sedation and mechanical ventilation suppressed the electrical storm.
She was weaned from mechanical ventilation within a few days, and then, endocardial ablation was attempted. Small patchy arrhythmogenic substrates were found on the LV endocardium, but wider substrates were suspected to exist on the epicardium (see , ). No sustained VTs were induced by programmed stimulation. Substrate-guided radiofrequency ablation was performed (see , ).
In October 2021, she experienced severe discomfort and then had transient loss of consciousness. In the emergency room, her consciousness level was alert, systolic arterial pressure was 86 mmHg, and heart rate was 66 beats/min. An ICD intracardiac electrogram revealed that the VT had degenerated into VF requiring an ICD shock. No facial or leg oedema was observed; however, she complained of general fatigue on minimal exertion. Further, her weight gradually decreased to 40 kg, reflecting cardiac cachexia (height 163 cm and body mass index 15 kg/m2). Brain natriuretic peptide ranged from 351 to 654 pg/mL (reference value < 18.4) during the 3 months prior to this admission.
Oral amiodarone (100 mg/once daily) was administrated; however, it was suspected that further VT episodes might disrupt her haemodynamics requiring mechanical circulatory support. Cardiogenic shock before LVAD implantations is associated with a poor prognosis. Therefore, we decided that an LVAD was indicated as a bridge to heart transplantation (INTERMACS Profile-5A). Controlling VAs in LVAD patients is essential for achieving better outcomes during the waiting period for a transplantation, which is estimated to be more than 5 years in Japan. Percutaneous epicardial catheter ablation would have been difficult due to pericardial adhesions because she underwent subxiphoid surgical drainage for an ICD lead perforation. Therefore, an open-chest epicardial ablation during the LVAD implantation was indicated.
To minimize the cardiopulmonary bypass (CP-bypass) time, the procedural plan was decided as follows: (i) general anaesthesia would be initiated, (ii) a mid-sternotomy would be performed, (iii) the major vessels would be exposed, (iv) a drive line would be created, (v) epicardial mapping and ablation would be performed, (vi) CP-bypass would be initiated, and finally, (vii) the LVAD would be implanted.
The location pad for the three-dimensional (3D) map was attached below the bed with touch fasteners. The electrode patches (see , ) and limb leads were attached so as not to interfere with the surgical field. As planned, after procedures (i)–(iv), epicardial mapping was performed with an Advisor HD Grid (see , , NAVX precision system, Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL). Stable mapping was achieved with a warm saline bath around the exposed heart. The 3D locational data were reliable only when the heart sat in a physiological position, and it was not reliable when we touched or lifted the heart. That was one of the meaningful differences between open-chest and percutaneous epicardial mapping.
The local potentials of interest, such as isolated delayed potentials and local abnormal ventricular activity, were tagged on the 3D map, and three areas of interest could be found ( and and , and ). Radiofrequency was delivered in those three areas (see , ) with a maximum power of 20–30 W (FlexAbility™, Abbott Laboratories) until the target potential disappeared. No VA induction was performed owing to time constraints. Then, CP-bypass was initiated and an LVAD (HeartMate 3™, Abbott Laboratories) was implanted. All procedures were performed without any complications, and an additional 68 min was required for mapping and ablation. The post-operative course was uneventful, and she was transferred from the intensive care unit to the general ward 2 days post-procedure. Bisoprolol (2.5 mg/once daily), enalapril (1.25 mg/once daily), and spironolactone (50 mg/once daily) were continued. Due to concern regarding its adverse effects with long-term use, amiodarone was discontinued. Thereafter, no VT episodes were observed during a 15-month follow-up.