A 20-months-old Caucasian male patient was brought to the hospital as an outpatient. The main complaint was persistent fever and no improvement despite the antibiotic treatment. Parents mentioned that they visited their primary care physician at the polyclinic, who had prescribed antibiotic therapy, and were forwarded to the hematologist, who prescribed ferrous sulfate. The patient had baseline complete blood count (CBC) analysis on their hand . Parents mentioned no relevant travel history, the solid feeding has been successfully initiated at 6 months of age and by the time of this event the daily ration included well-balanced diet.
On the day one after initial assessment and two days after the onset of the symptoms, the patient was diagnosed with an upper respiratory tract infection and was prescribed empiric antibiotic therapy, due to fever and high erythrocyte sedimentation rate . The patient was also referred to a hematologist for assessment of low hemoglobin levels and was prescribed ferrous sulfate for presumed iron-deficiency anemia (IDA) by the hematologist as well as setting the follow-up visit after 2–3 weeks .
The patient was brought to us on the sixth day from the onset of fever and more than 96 hour (4 days) after the first dose of the Amoxicillin Clavulanate. A thorough physical examination yielded the following: Heart rate (HR)—138, respiratory rate (RR)—34, oximetry—98%, blood pressure—90/55 mm of mercury (mm Hg); Skin—pallor, capillary refill—normal; Oral—no hyperemia or lesion were detected; Eyes—normal; Ear—no abnormalities were detected, tympanic membrane—normal; Chest—no retractions, lung sounds were normal and symmetrical, heart sounds were normal; Abdomen—no pain was detected, spleen seemed slightly enlarged; Joint pain—negative; Central or Peripheral Nervous System symptoms and signs—negative, consciousness was not altered; Urination—normal, no dysuria; Defecation—normal, no constipation or diarrhea. Despite the antibiotic therapy, no improvement was observed.
Taking all the facts into consideration, the patient was admitted for further evaluation and management of a possible life-threatening condition.
Initial work-up at our clinic included CBC, abdominal ultrasound, and C-reactive protein, as well as involvement of a hematologist and an infectionist. CBC was initiated to check if the levels of certain blood cell lines were deteriorating, abdominal ultrasound was initiated to check for the enlargement of spleen and liver. Due to fever, splenomegaly and bicytopenia it was concluded that we would test for Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) and Visceral Leishmaniasis (VL) in the first place.
As soon as we received positive results for VL, the patient was transferred to the specialized hospital (Research Institute of Medical Parasitology and Tropical Medicine).
The first CBC showed decreased white blood cell (WBC) count (4 × 109/L), and red blood cell (RBC) count (3.6 × 1012/L); Hemoglobin level was also decreased (8.6 g/dL), however, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was normal. Hematocrit (HCT) also decreased (28.2%) .
The second CBC showed the same WBC count (4 × 109/L), RBC decreased even further (2.99 × 1012/L) as did hemoglobin (7.2 g/dL) and HCT (21.9%), and MCV stayed normal .
Erythrocyte sedimentation was increased on both the first and second measurements, 44 mm/hour and 35 mm/hour, respectively.
Although, platelet count was low in both the first and second CBC results according to laboratory reference, we did not count it as thrombocytopenia since the values were not below 150 × 109/L. Hence, by this time we had bicytopenia rather than a pancytopenia, but the approach remained the same.
The results continued to deteriorate on day 8 as well . Namely, hemoglobin and platelet count continued to drop (6.8 mg/dL and 63 × 109/L). Once the patient was transferred to a specialized hospital and specific treatment had been initiated.
C-reactive protein was significantly increased on the sixth day (126.7 mg/dL) .
On the first abdominal ultrasound, the long axis of the spleen was markedly increased (110 mm), liver sizes were normal, and no other abnormalities were found. The long axis continued to increase and was the largest on Day 7–128 mm. On the day of the discharge, the long axis was reduced to 120 mm.
Results were negative for acute EBV infection; However, they were positive for Visceral Leishmaniasis.
Before the diagnosis was confirmed, supportive treatment and empiric intravenous antibiotic therapy was initiated as soon as the patient got admitted to the hospital. After the confirmation of VL, the patient was transferred to a specialized hospital and meglumine antimoniate was initiated, which is considered first line treatment according to Georgian protocol proposed by Ministry of Health, the following tests are to be done to monitor for the side effects of the medication: CBC, AST/ALT, Amylase, Lipase and ECG. No issue was detected, supportive treatment was ongoing, however, a single RBC transfusion was required to correct the anemia.
Patient is under ambulatory surveillance by the doctors at the Research Institute of Medical Parasitology and Tropical Medicine and is being followed-up every month.