Our patient was a 67-year-old white woman with no relevant medical history. She was on no medication at time of admission. She did not smoke tobacco and consumed no alcohol. She was retired at time of admission and worked as a librarian before. She was married and had two children, both healthy. Her mother was 88-years old and still alive; her father died at the age of 94, cause not known. None of them had malignancies in their past. At time of admission she felt perfectly normal, had no B-symptoms, no bleedings, and no signs of infections. She was 152 cm in height and weighed 72 kg, with a body surface area of 1.7 m2. Her temperature was 36.7 °C (98 °F), blood pressure 128/79 mmHg, and pulse 73 beats per minute. No cardiac, respiratory, gastrointestinal, urological, dental, or neurological anomalies were detected at physical examination. The reason for her admission at our Hematology department was a routine blood analysis, performed before undergoing knee surgery, which showed leukopenia . A bone marrow examination was performed, revealing an underlying AML .
Induction therapy with cytarabine (200 mg/m2, continuous infusion over 24 hours, on days 1–7) and idarubicin (12 mg/m2, once daily, infusion over 1 hour, on days 1–3) was initiated, and given her neutropenic condition from the start, she stayed in protective isolation at the Hematology department. She received levofloxacin 500 mg once daily for intestinal decontamination and infectious prophylaxis. Since no complications occurred, the second induction was initiated with cytarabine (1000 mg/m2, twice daily, infusion over 3 hours, on days 1–3) and idarubicin (12 mg/m2, once daily, infusion over 1 hour, on days 3–5). After this therapy, she developed general weakness and diarrhea. At day 35 after the first induction, she developed neutropenic fever for which ceftazidime (2000 mg intravenously every 8 hours, continuous infusion over 8 hours) and Colimycin (colistimethate sodium; 2 × 106 international units intravenously every 6 hours) were started, guided by the presence of a resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain in the fecal cultures. Two days later she started vomiting and reported headaches and photophobia. Analysis of her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was compatible with bacterial meningitis . She was transferred to our intensive care unit receiving empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftazidime, Colimycin (colistimethate sodium), amoxicillin (2000 mg intravenously every 4 hours), and vancomycin (loading dose 1400 mg intravenously over 2 hours, maintenance dose 2500 mg intravenously over 24 hours); although the plasma concentration of this last one only reached therapeutic levels after 2 days. Gram staining on the CSF showed Gram-positive cocci, which were presumed to represent Staphylococci at first. However, cultures identified Rothia mucilaginosa as the responsible pathogen and after 2 days of empirical therapy, antibiotics were switched to amoxicillin (2000 mg intravenously every 4 hours) and rifampicin (600 mg intravenously every 12 hours) bi-therapy based on an antibiogram and the (limited) available literature [, , , ]. Blood cultures remained negative. She was stable for 1 week until she developed significant lethargy and anisocoria. Hydrocephalus was diagnosed with computed tomography (CT) imaging for which external ventricular drainage was provided. Because of a non-communicating hydrocephalus due to ventriculitis, a second drainage was performed. In spite of this, our patient developed bilateral mydriasis without reactivity to light and increasing edema on brain CT, leading to the placement of two more external ventriculostomies in the temporal horns . Despite these neurosurgical interventions and medical therapy with hypertonic salt and mannitol, intracranial pressure continued to rise, resulting in progressive brain edema and transtentorial herniation. In consultation with her family, further therapy was discontinued and she died on day 49 after the first induction chemotherapy. An autopsy was considered, but, given the clear medical context, this would not have led to other conclusions (Additional file ).