A 72-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our department with diplopia that he experienced the night before. The next morning, since his diplopia did not improve, the patient visited our hospital. The patient had no history of allergies. However, he had a history of surgery for aortic regurgitation and was prescribed warfarin. He also had hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and hyperuricemia during medical treatment. Although his father had von Recklinghausen’s disease (VRD) type I, the patient showed no obvious symptoms suggestive of VRD.
He received his first and second doses of the Moderna vaccine four and 1 weeks prior to his visit, respectively. No obvious symptoms were observed between the first and second vaccinations. The day after the second dose of vaccination, he developed a fever of 38 °C, sore throat, and runny nose, which improved spontaneously within a few days after acetaminophen administration. There were no other infectious symptoms, including gastrointestinal ones.
Neurological examination revealed mild ocular motor restriction in all directions with bilateral adduction, ataxia of the limbs and trunk, and loss of tendon reflexes in all extremities. No muscle weakness or sensory disturbances were noted. Blood test results, including glucose, thyroid function, and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies, were normal, except for prolongation of the prothrombin time by warfarin. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for COVID-19 was negative. Head magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography showed no obvious abnormal findings, including cerebral infarction or aneurysm . On the day after admission, the patient’s eyes were fixed at the midline. His ataxia worsened, causing him difficultly in walking unaided. MFS was suspected based on clinical symptoms; previous examinations; and differential diagnosis to exclude diseases including brainstem vasculopathy, cerebral aneurysm, Wernicke syndrome, multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, and myasthenia gravis. Therefore, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) therapy was performed. On the third day, weakness in proximal muscles such as the deltoid and iliopsoas appeared. Nerve conduction studies revealed F-wave abnormalities. His ataxia and muscle weakness peaked on the fifth day and gradually improved thereafter. On the sixth day, serum anti-GQ1b antibodies were detected, and the patient was diagnosed with MFS. Sputum and stool cultures did not detect any bacteria associated with MFS.
On the seventh day, he developed right-sided peripheral facial nerve palsy. Head magnetic resonance imaging revealed no abnormalities. Steroids, valacyclovir, and mecobalamin were administered, considering the possibility of Bell’s palsy.
These treatments gradually improved all symptoms. His muscle weakness and ataxia almost disappeared, and he was discharged home on the 22nd day. One month after hospital discharge, the other symptoms, including diplopia and facial nerve palsy, also disappeared.