A 41-year-old woman of Mexican descent presented to her gynecologist with abdominal pain, increasing abdominal girth, and dysmenorrhea. Ultrasound demonstrated markedly enlarged ovaries, as well as asymptomatic uterine fibroids. She underwent an exploratory laparotomy and, subsequently, a bilateral salpingo–oophorectomy with hysterectomy in July 2010. The pathology revealed bilateral cystic granulosa cell tumors of the ovaries , as well as a uterine atypical smooth muscle tumor of uncertain malignant potential . Radiographic preoperative imaging of the chest (computed tomography [CT]) also identified a 4.0×4.0 cm anterior mediastinal mass, and subsequent resection revealed both a well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma of the thymus and a type B3 thymoma.
Her prior medical history was remarkable for the resection of several subcutaneous lipomas over the past 4–5 years. Concurrent with the diagnosis of a mediastinal neuroendocrine carcinoma, primary hyperparathyroidism was observed following hypercalcemia (initial serum calcium level: 11.6 mg/dL; laboratory normal range: 8.4–10.2 mg/dL) in the setting of elevated parathyroid hormone levels (initial level: 109 pg/mL; laboratory normal range: 12–88 pg/mL). Ultrasound evaluation of the thyroid and parathyroid glands revealed a suspicious thyroid lesion, and the patient was referred to a head and neck surgeon. The pathology from a total thyroidectomy, central node dissection, and subtotal (3.5 glands) parathyroidectomy in November 2012 was consistent with a stage III papillary thyroid carcinoma with local lymph node involvement, as well as a right parathyroid adenoma. Finally, during the course of her evaluation, an enhancing hypervascular mass measuring 1.7×2.4 cm was identified in the body of the pancreas on contrast-enhanced CT scan. While currently unbiopsied, this mass has been evaluated by a pancreatobiliary surgeon and is considered to be radiographically highly suspicious for a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor. Serum gastrin, chromogranin A, and glucagon levels were within normal limits. Of important note, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed a normal pituitary gland; serum prolactin and other pituitary hormones were normal.
At the time of the initial evaluation by the clinical genetics service in May 2012, the patient described no additional manifestations of MEN1 syndrome (see ). She was married with two healthy children, and worked full time as a Spanish interpreter. She denied any past or current tobacco use or known chemical exposures. Her family history was significant for a father and paternal uncle with prostate cancer at ages 65 years and 50 years, respectively. On the paternal side, a cousin had been diagnosed with acute lymphocytic leukemia at the age of 6 years. On the maternal side, she could recall only a cousin with a “stomach mass”. She has more than 50 first cousins, many of whom lived in Mexico, whose medical histories were unknown to her.
Due to her constellation of findings, blood samples were sent for genetic testing to Ambry Genetics (Aliso Viejo, CA, USA). Through gene sequence and deletion/duplication analysis of the MEN1 gene, the patient was found to carry a mutation in the MEN1 gene (c.654 + 1 G>A). The c.654 +1 G>A mutation is located within intron 3 of MEN1. The mutant sequence differs from the wild type by an in-frame deletion of 35 amino acids. The mutation has been reported only once previously in a family where the proband presented with hyperparathyroidism and a gastrinoma. A paternal history of hyperparathyroidism was also reported in this family.