A 40-year-old patient, gravida three, para two, presented to the emergency department of La Fe University and Polytechnic Hospital (Valencia, Spain) in January 2021 at 23 weeks of gestation due to respiratory distress, cough, and fever. The patient had a confirmed diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 with a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test performed in a private center 48 h before. The patient had a known bicornuate uterus. She underwent one vaginal delivery at term and one subsequent preterm delivery at 28 weeks of gestation. The preterm newborn presented perinatal mortality of unknown origin in another hospital. The current pregnancy had a low-risk first-trimester screening for chromosomal abnormalities and a normal morphological ultrasound at 20 weeks of pregnancy.
At the emergency department, the patient manifested pleuritic chest pain, anosmia, dysgeusia, tachypnea, and dyspnea with minimal effort. Arterial blood gas displayed respiratory alkalosis, hypoxemia, and an inspired oxygen fraction index (PAFI) of 143. Blood tests showed a reactive C-protein (CRP) of 162.2 and a D-dimer of 55.800. No other parameters were abnormal. A chest X-ray revealed extensive bilateral areas of consolidation. Thus, she was admitted to the hospital. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) of 40 mg/12 h and dexamethasone were initially administered.
The patient required admission into the ICU one day after being admitted into the hospital due to respiratory failure requiring high-flow nasal oxygen therapy at the beginning. Later, intermittent noninvasive mechanical ventilation (BiPAP) was administered because of her poor clinical evolution. Nonetheless, on the fourth day in the ICU, the patient required orotracheal intubation for mechanical ventilation with a neuromuscular blockade. Functional deterioration persisted despite prone positioning (adapted to the pregnant woman’s condition) and nitric oxide therapy. Hypoxemic respiratory failure (p02 58 mmHg) was diagnosed. Thus, circulatory assistance using ECMO with venovenous access (right femoral–right jugular) under prophylactic antibiotic therapy was performed . During the entire hospital admission, a close pregnancy follow-up was carried out through maternal and fetal assessments that included a fetal ultrasound every 24–72 h.
ECMO began with flows of 4.2 L/min and FiO2 100% (at 4 L/min in the gas blender), increasing during the first days to 5.5 L/min to achieve proper oxygenation. Lung-protective ventilation was used, with a tidal volume of 3 mL/kg weight, FiO2 80%, and PEEP 10 cm H2O.
During the first 24 h after the implantation of the VV ECMO, anticoagulation was not used to avoid bleeding problems. After the first day, unfractionated heparin infusion was started, its administration controlled through an activated coagulation time (ACT) (160–180). In this case, as the peripheral insertion was percutaneous, the heparin administered for cannulation was not reversed.
After 15 days of ICU admission, a tracheostomy was performed, suspending the infusion of unfractionated heparin for a few hours, which could later be resumed without complications.
Seventeen days after ICU admission, sedation and the neuromuscular blockade were withdrawn. The respiratory transition was started using pressure support ventilation (PSV), concomitantly reducing the VV ECMO assistance flows.
Six days after the tracheostomy, on day twenty-one, a clear improvement was observed, and ECMO was withdrawn with PaO2/FiO2 382 mmHg. Tolerance to oral feeding, together with enteral nutrition, was started.
At 24 days of ICU admission, the consolidation of spontaneous ventilation through tracheostomy with the active expectoration of secretions was seen. Active respiratory and motor physiotherapy were carried out.
At 32 days of ICU admission, a tracheostomy decannulation was performed without incident. Spontaneous ventilation with nasal O2 at 2 L/min (FiO2 0.28) was started. After 33 days of ICU admission, the patient was discharged from resuscitation and transferred to the internal medicine department ( shows gasometric data during ICU admission).
Fetal lung maturation with betamethasone was carried out at 26 weeks of pregnancy. The obstetric follow-up was satisfactory. The fetal ultrasound revealed that the fetal growth and Doppler study, as well as the amniotic fluid, were within normal limits. An improvement in motor function with physiotherapy was seen. However, the patient developed bilateral external sciatic–popliteal nerve neuropathy due to prolonged rest. Forty-five days after her admission, the patient was discharged from the hospital.
At 37 weeks of gestation, the patient presented to the emergency department due to active labor. She underwent a vaginal delivery. The weight of the male newborn was 2750 g, the Apgar score was 10, arterial pH from cord blood was 7.29, and venous pH was 7.38. The patient was discharged 48 h later with a 40 mg LMWH treatment for six weeks.
At the outpatient evaluation four weeks after birth, the patient reported an improvement in muscle fatigue and weakness. Nonetheless, she described persistent dyspnea with heavy exercise. Afterward, the patient underwent a subsequent follow-up with her general practitioner.