We treated a 43-year-old woman with history of bipolar disorder whose family history included a first-degree relative with the same illness who had committed suicide 15 years before.
Her symptoms began at the age of 21, with a manic and psychotic episode related to drug abuse (cannabis and cocaine). Throughout the years she has experienced numerous relapses, requiring hospitalization on more than 10 occasions.
The patient’s first contact with our clinic was in 2012 after admission to the Acute Care Psychiatric Unit. She presented with a manic episode and serious behavioral disorder (aggressiveness) and legal issues. She had previously been stable for 4 years, taking low doses of oral olanzapine (2.5 mg/d). After hospital discharge, she was prescribed 800 mg/d amisulpride, 600 mg/d valproate, 0.5 mg/d clonazepam and 4 mg/d biperiden.
Our patient remained stable without any incidents until 2013, when she admitted having discontinued her medication the previous month believing to be pregnant, which turned out to be a false alarm. We explained to her the risk of relapse without adequate medical treatment. However, she came off her medication once more and was admitted again in the Acute Care Psychiatric Unit (2014) because of a manic relapse. After hospital discharge, she followed a treatment plan similar to the one prescribed after the previous admission.
During outpatient follow-up she expressed a desire to conceive. She had had a stable partner for 10 years, despite some relationship crises and break-ups. We gave her the appropriate information regarding therapy options, and explained the need to remove valproate. We informed her about the option of lithium, considering on balance that the possibility of bipolar disorder relapse and consequent risk to mother and baby was greater than teratogenicity, including lithium cardiac risks for the baby. Also, lithium could be a better option than antipsychotics due to protection against manic and depressive relapses. Finally, we agreed to introduce lithium, based on a benefit/risk balance previously discussed with the patient. A few months later she experienced a new manic relapse requiring hospital readmission (2015). She admitted that after starting lithium she had read on the prospectus that taking it was not recommended during the first trimester of pregnancy so she changed her mind and stopped medication again as a precaution in case she was pregnant.
A few months later, she presented with 3-month amenorrhea and a negative pregnancy test. Secondary hyperprolactinemia due to amisulpride was suspected (levels of 363 ng/mL), so we switched to paliperidone. Prolactin levels were decreased to 129 ng/ml.
In view of a history of repeated severe manic relapses because of treatment noncompliance and the patient’s firm desire to conceive we agreed to prescribe LAI paliperidone (100 mg/month). She showed a good clinical response and remained stable. Nevertheless, she gained weight due to the medication, feeling deeply uncomfortable about it. After considering other treatment options, we agreed to stop paliperidone (November 2015) and start LAI Aripiprazole (400 mg/month). She progressed favorably, with good tolerance of medication and normalization of prolactin levels.
In March 2018, she came to the clinic at 2–3 weeks pregnant. The pros and cons of continuing aripiprazole treatment during pregnancy were explained. Based on current evidence, antipsychotics in general and aripiprazole in particular had a low risk of side effects, but potential toxicity could not be completely ruled out. On the other hand, medication discontinuation implied a risk of relapse. She was given information about the side effects of aripiprazole during pregnancy and was provided with instructions to obtain further data (fact sheets from the MotherToBaby website, pharmacy reports from Vall d’Hebron Hospital in Barcelona). After consulting with her partner, she decided to continue treatment, but requested a lower dose. We decreased the LAI aripiprazole dosage to 300 mg/month and agreed with her that she was to come to the emergency room if any warning symptoms were noticed.
As it was considered a high obstetric risk pregnancy, ultrasound controls were performed on weeks 16, 17, 21, 26, 31, 35 and 38, with weekly follow-up by the midwife. Obstetric controls revealed no fetus malformations nor development issues. Pregnancy progressed without complications. She continued to comply with the agreed treatment throughout the whole pregnancy, without recurrence of her illness or significant mood fluctuations.
She gave birth in November 2018 at the gestational age of 40 weeks+ 4 days by spontaneous vaginal delivery, assisted by the midwife without complications. The newborn girl weighed 3500 g, with an Apgar score of 9/10/10, and umbilical cord pH of 7.29. No congenital malformations at birth or development abnormalities were observed at five months after delivery.
Two days after hospital discharge, she came to the clinic as an outpatient and was euthymic, so we agreed to reintroduce the recommended LAI aripiprazole dose of 400 mg/4 weeks.