A 39-year-old woman sought medical attention in April 2022 for the chief complaint of dull upper abdominal pain and fever up to 38°C lasting approximately 5 days. She had a medical history of Graves' disease without other complications and a family history. Abdominal ultrasound findings suggested a left upper abdominal cyst, and she was admitted for close examination and treatment.
Patient condition at admission was as follows: Height, 165 cm; weight, 50 kg; body mass index, 18.4; blood pressure, 145/54 mmHg; heart rate, 87 bpm; body temperature, 38.8°C. The abdomen was flat and soft, with tenderness in the upper abdomen. However, the mass was not palpable. Endocrinological and hematological examinations revealed no abnormalities except a mildly elevated CRP level (5.9 mg/dL).
Plain abdominal CT revealed a 95 × 80-mm cyst in the left adrenal gland; the left kidney was largely displaced to the caudal side. The cyst interior was uniform with high water density . The cyst contents indicated hyperintensity on both T1- and T2-weighted abdominal MRI. Highly viscous liquid or bleeding was suspected. A septum and a 52-mm solid component were found inside the cyst .
The patient was diagnosed with an adrenal cyst, and abdominal MRI findings could not rule out primary-onset malignancy. Therefore, we decided to resect the mass surgically. The DaVinci Xi system (Intuitive Surgical; 4 ports, and 2 assistant ports, Fig. ) was used. Blood loss was minimal, operating time 2 h 33 min, and console time 1 h 37 min. A transperitoneal approach identified a retroperitoneal cyst in the upper pole of the kidney. Although mild adhesion was observed between the mesentery and tumor tissue , we managed to remove only the cystic lesions. The left adrenal gland had become a single mass with the tumor and was thus co-resected.
A gross pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed unilocular cyst formation with no solid tumors. Accumulation of a dark red-like substance was noted on the inner surface . Pathological examination showed normal adrenal tissue adhered to the cyst wall. Besides bleeding and adhesion of clotting components in the lumen, infiltration of inflammatory cells and aggregation of pigment-phagocytic macrophages were observed. The patient was diagnosed with adrenal pseudocyst as this was a hemorrhagic cyst without epithelial coverage . Postoperative fever resolved, CRP was negative, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 9, with good postoperative progress.