The patient was a 22-year-old African American female who presented with a left breast mass. The mass had been present for at least 3 months. The left breast was larger and leaked a clear fluid. Upon initial examination, the patient's primary care provider observed a 4 cm mass. The patient also experienced pain down the left arm which was reported about a week after the initial exam. Her aunt on her father's side had been treated for breast cancer at 39. She had no past medical or surgical history, did not use tobacco, and menarche occurred at 11 years of age.
Ultrasound of the left breast revealed a 9 cm × 9 cm × 4.5 cm hypoechoic mass centered at the 12-1 o'clock area. The anterior of the mass appeared to be within 1 cm of the skin and the posterior was on the pectoral muscle. The echotexture varied from hypoechoic to isoechoic and there are small cystic areas within the mass. There were no other masses identified in the left breast or the left axilla. The mass was deemed suspicious for malignancy and the assessment was Bi-RADS 4b. The patient was sent for surgical consultation.
Upon surgical consultation a core needle biopsy was performed with a 22-gauge needle; four biopsies were obtained. The biopsies were consistent with a fibroadenoma, indicating a benign tumor, which was consistent with the presentation of most cystosarcomas in core needle biopsies [,].
The patient underwent a simple mastectomy with immediate breast reconstruction. Because the tumor volume was approximately two thirds of the breast and lumpectomy would result in poor cosmetic outcome, simple mastectomy with nipple-areola complex (NAC) preservation was performed on the patient. Standard breast reconstruction usually consists of a transverse rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap or a latissimus dorsi musculocutaneous flap. However, the patient did not have adequate fatty tissue at the abdomen for the TRAM procedure and the patient did not want the large scar across the abdomen that would result. The plastic surgeon thought LD was the better choice because it would provide a "living" breast but this still required a small implant. The patient opted for a saline implant with AlloDerm to the mastectomy site and a mastopexy (breast lift) or mastopexy and implant to the other breast for symmetry. Because breast reconstruction was coupled with mastectomy using AlloDerm, there was no need for a TRAM or LD surgery which reduced scarring and the patient's overall recovery time.
The simple mastectomy consisted of an incision along the mammary crease. Dissection of the breast was carried out by cutting down the anterior pectoral fascia and dissecting to approximately 1 cm from the clavicle. Medial dissection was carried out to the left lateral border of the sternum and lateral dissection was carried over to the anterior border of the latissimus dorsi muscle. A bovie electrocautery was used to create a superior flap of the entire left breast.
Next, breast reconstruction was performed. At the level of the inframammary fold, the pectoralis muscle was divided from 4 to 8 o'clock and a subpectoral/subserratus pocket was made using an electrocautery. At the mastectomy site, the superior pole of the breast flap was thicker than the inferior pole. Therefore, the superior breast tissue was laterally divided and sutured under the skin and to the pectoralis muscle with 3-0 Monocryl. This smoothed out the contour of the superior pole. AlloDerm, used to give more lateral fill, was sutured to the inframammary fold and to the part of the pectoralis muscle with 3-0 polydioxanone. The saline implant was then inserted into the pocket. The flap was advanced down, sutured into place, and the implant was filled. A drain was inserted and the incision was closed with Monocryl and Dermabond. For symmetry, the other breast underwent vertical mastopexy and positioned by making the superior border of the areola at the same level as the other breast.
Grossly, the excised encapsulated mass measured 6.5 cm × 6.4 cm × 6.4 cm. The surface was tan with a whorled appearance. Pathologic findings were consistent with a benign phyllodes tumor displaying large leaf-like projections surrounded by uniform stroma and black-inked margins of resection were negative .
There were no postoperative complications and hospital stay was 24 hrs. The patient is currently 41 months post-surgery and has not had local reoccurrence. The patient is very pleased with the cosmetic outcome and feels that immediate reconstruction was helpful in reducing emotional distress from the diagnosis and surgery.