A 54-year-old male was referred to our hospital due to progressive blurred vision in the left eye over the past year. He reported a gradual loss of visual acuity in the left eye and experienced daily throbbing biparietal headaches, relieved by analgesics. Additionally, he mentioned polyuria, polydipsia, and a loss of libido dating back approximately one year. His medical history included rheumatoid arthritis, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus induced by glucocorticoids. He was recently taking losartan (50 mg daily) and prednisolone (5 mg daily). There was no notable family history.
During the physical examination, bilateral visual acuity loss was observed (right eye: 5 meters counting fingers, left eye: 0.5 meters counting fingers). Ocular movements and other cranial nerves were normal, with no abnormalities detected in the peripheral nervous system and other neurological examinations. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a homogeneous iso-dense extra-axial intrasellar round mass extending to the suprasellar region, predominantly on the left side, with bony erosion and osteolysis around the sellar region . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined mass with iso-signal on T1-weighted images and hypersignal on T2-weighted images, originating from the pituitary gland within the sella turcica. The mass avidly enhanced following Gadolinium injection and was adherent to both carotid arteries without vascular compression or invasion, extending to the suprasellar cistern and compressing the optic chiasm (, ). Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis evaluation revealed no hormonal abnormalities.
The diagnosis was a non-functional pituitary macroadenoma, leading to the decision for endoscopic trans-sphenoidal surgery (ETSS). Intraoperatively, a soft grayish non-sustainable mass was grossly resected. There was a remarkable improvement in visual acuity during the early postoperative period (right eye: 5 meters counting fingers, left eye: 5 meters counting fingers), and a postoperative brain CT scan showed no residual mass . During the operation, we encountered a soft grayish sellar mass with suprasellar extension and peripheral bone invasion and erosion.
The tumor had extended to the floor of the 3rd ventricle. Following surgery, the patient experienced meningitis and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. Treatment included administration of intravenous antibiotics and acetazolamide. After completing a 21-day regimen, there was no CSF leak detected. Despite the tumor's lateral extension beyond the carotid arteries, into the middle fossa, and temporal region, which poses challenges for the endoscopic trans-nasal approach, the patient opted for ETSS due to the presence of approximately midline suprasellar extension without lateral spread.
Histopathologic examination revealed a hypervascular neoplasm of branching vessels surrounded by bland-looking pericytes with oval to spindle nuclei without evidence of anaplasia, necrosis, or hemorrhage. Immunohistochemistry staining was positive for STAT 6 in tumoral cells, while Ki67 was low, and CD-34 highlighted vascular proliferation—all consistent with HPC [World Health Organization (WHO) grade II] .
The patient had a history of ETSS, with observed postoperative changes in the sella. No abnormal enhancement affecting the brain parenchyma or meninges was detected. Both supra and infratentorial structures appeared grossly normal (, ).