A 74-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for severe mitral regurgitation. Further examination revealed prolapse of the anterior leaflet and rupture of the chordae tendineae. Baseline serum creatinine level was 102.5 μmol/L, and hemoglobin level was 12.6 g/dL. He underwent surgery for chordal replacement with expanded polytetrafluoroethylene chordae tendineae. And mitral annuloplasty was performed with a flexible annuloplasty Medtronic Duran ring. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography and postoperative transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated no residual mitral regurgitation. The patient was discharged in good condition one week after surgery. At the time of discharge, serum creatinine level was 87.5 μmol/L.
Seven weeks after surgery he presented with anemia and “dark urine” and was admitted to our hospital. Investigations showed haemoglobin 4.5 g/dL, hematocrit 12%, undetectable haptoglobin, reticulocyte count 9%, slightly depressed platelet count 75,000/μL, serum lactic dehydrogenase 3600 IU/L, and total bilirubin of 69.86 μmol/L (indirect of 57.1 μmol/L). Peripheral blood smear demonstrated mechanical hemolysis with schistocytosis and red cell fragmentation . Creatinine levels ranged from256 to 362 μmol/L. Coomb’s test, Ham test and sugar water test were negative. Expression of CD55 and CD59 for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria was normal. Drug-induced hemolytic anemia was not apparent, because there was no reduction of hemolysis after stopping the administration of any drug. On transthoracic echocardiography, mitral valve jet was found and judged to be mild, originating from the centre of the valve and striking the annuloplasty ring . The velocity of the mitral regurgitation jet was 2.3 m/s. The investigation did not show any evidence of a structural defect of the valve or the annuloplasty ring. Predonisolone for the possible microangiopathy was used. Three times of plasmapheresis and blood transfusion of 15 units red blood cells were required. After these treatments, the anemia and dark urine did not improve, with a creatinine level at 256 μmol/L. Based on previous experience with hemolytic patients following MVR and useless of aggressive conservative therapy, we decided to do reoperation for intracardiac inspection and mitral valve replacement after a detailed communication with the patient, despite RF. During the intraoperative inspection, there was no ring dehiscence or suture-related tear of the valve tissue. The annuloplasty ring was well endothelialized. Chordal attachments were intact. However, the new artificial chordae tendinae was completely non-endothelialized . The plasty ring was excised and the mitral valve was replaced with a 27-mm bileaflet prosthesis (Edwards Lifesciences). The hemolytic anemia resolved gradually after the reoperation. But the RF persisted after surgery and the patient was transferred to the department of hematology for hemodialysis. Three months later, the LDH level gradually fell to 224 U/L. His hemoglobin level was stable at 95 g/dL with 3% reticulocytes. Serum creatinine level was 80.4 μmol/L.