A 42 year old male presented to his primary care physician with a 20 pound unintentional weight loss over a 3 month period and new left axillary lymphadenopathy. A core biopsy of his axillary mass revealed metastatic malignant melanoma. He had no prior history of a primary melanoma. A staging PET/CT revealed abnormal FDG uptake in his left axilla and small bowel. A left axillary lymph node dissection was performed and revealed 2 of 19 lymph nodes involved with metastatic melanoma, BRAF wild type, the largest of which measured 10.1 cm. His medical history was significant for oligodendroglioma, which was surgically resected eight years prior to presentation, followed by radiation therapy for recurrence five years prior to presentation. He received four doses of systemic ipilimumab for his metastatic melanoma without incident. Post-treatment imaging revealed disease progression with new diffuse subcutaneous, lung, liver and bilateral axillary lymph node metastases.
He subsequently enrolled on a genetically engineered T-cell trial, targeting tyrosinase. He received fludarabine and cyclophosphamide as a conditioning regimen, then his engineered T-cells were infused, followed by one week of low dose IL-2, (72,000 U/kg IV q8 hours). Per the treatment protocol, unfractionated creatinine kinase (CK) levels were obtained just prior to and for two weeks after infusion of the genetically engineered T-cells. The CK levels were within normal limits during the course of this treatment. He initially experienced disease response, however, four months after his T-cell therapy, he again developed diffuse progression with new hilar lymphadenopathy and progression of his lung and axillary lymph node metastases.
He was next treated with three doses of pembrolizumab but post-treatment imaging again revealed disease progression in his lungs. CK levels were not checked during treatment with either ipilumumab or pembrolizumab. Despite multiple lines of therapy, the patient continued to have an excellent performance status, so he thus proceeded to treatment with HD IL-2 (600,000 IU/kg IV over 15 min every 8 h day 1–5 and day 15–19), which began nine months after receiving his engineered T-cell infusion.
During cycle one of course 1 (day 1–5) of HD IL2, he received 10 out of 14 possible doses and experienced the expected adverse effects of hypotension, sinus tachycardia, oliguria, metabolic acidosis, and acute kidney injury. Serum CK was monitored per protocol and was initially normal but peaked at 641 (50–320 IU/L) during the fourth day of treatment without associated symptoms or cardiac findings on EKG.
He had an uncomplicated recovery and was re-admitted to the hospital for cycle 2 of course 1 (day 15–19) of HD IL-2, without complaints and a normal serum CK level of 133 (50–320 IU/L). After 6 doses of HD-IL2, he began to experience diffuse myalgias and rigors. He was noted to have a rapid rise in CK to 2700 and increase in his serum creatinine from 2.5 to 4.4 (0.6–1.4 mg/dL). An EKG revealed sinus tachycardia and his serum troponin level was normal at 0.02 (0.00–0.04 ng/mL). The rise in CK was attributed to rigors and he was continued on therapy. He went on to receive 2 additional doses of HD IL-2. When his CK rose further to 3900 and the myalgias became more severe despite resolution of his rigors, subsequent doses were held.
Further investigation revealed an elevated serum aldolase of 32.7 (1.2–7.6 U/L), and elevated urine myoglobin of 132 (< 28 mcg/L). MB fractionation of CK was not performed. Urinalysis demonstrated large blood without red blood cells. Serial EKGs demonstrated sinus tachycardia but not sequelae of hyperkalemia, such as peaked T waves. Other labs for serologic autoimmunity, e.g. anti-nuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA anti-striated muscle antibody and anti-smooth muscle antibody, were not checked. Muscle function was not assessed with electromyography (EMG). He received supportive care and aggressive intravenous hydration with normal saline. He recovered fully from this episode of rhabdomyolysis.
Subsequent staging with a PET/CT revealed a mixed response in his pulmonary nodules with mild improvement in his hilar and axillary lymphadenopathy. Given his full recovery from previous toxicity and the mixed response on imaging, the decision was made to proceed with a second course of HD-IL2 therapy with close monitoring of CK levels and a low threshold for discontinuation of therapy.
He received only two doses of HD IL-2 and again developed diffuse myalgias with a rapid rise in his serum CK level from 184 to 1680. Serum aldolase and urine myoglobin were again significantly elevated, at 16.2 and 3430, respectively. All further doses of HD IL-2 were held and he was again supported with aggressive intravenous hydration. His clinical symptoms resolved and his CK level trended down to the normal range.
Due to this unusual toxicity, a muscle biopsy was performed to further evaluate for rhabdomyolysis and to ascertain if his engineered T-cells were present in his muscle tissue. The biopsy revealed rare myofiber necrosis and myophagocytosis and scant endomysial infiltrate. The infiltrate consisted of a mixture of CD3 and CD4 positive T-lymphocytes, CD68 positive macrophages and lesser numbers of CD8 positive T-lymphocytes, suggestive of an immune-mediated toxicity causing necrotizing myopathy . It was difficult to ascertain if the T-lymphocyte present represented his engineered T-cells. Of note, the engineered T-cells remained detectable in the circulation at this time. He was discharged home and follow up PET/CT imaging revealed a near complete response. At the time of this follow up, he was found to have new onset vitiligo involving his neck, upper back, chest, and upper arms . A skin biopsy at the edge of his neck vitiligo again revealed CD3+ T-cell infiltration .
No further HD-IL2 therapy has been administered and he continues to experience a durable response on imaging nearly two and a half years since completion of his HD IL-2 therapy. Of note, CK levels had not been checked when the patient had received prior therapy with ipilumumab or pembrolizumab. CK levels were, however, monitored at the time of treatment with engineered T-cells and were noted to be within the reference range.