A 70-year-old woman underwent routine physical examination 2 years ago, and the routine urine tests showed microscopic hematuria. Because of the absence of symptoms of gross hematuria and urgency, the patient did not take any further action or therapy. 3 months ago, routine urine tests still showed microscopic hematuria. Then, she went to the outpatient department for medical help from a urologist. The doctor first advised her to undergo a urinary ultrasound, and the result showed a low echogenic masses. Then, she underwent a abdominal computed tomography (CT), showed that there was a high-density mass anterior of the bladder that compressed the antetheca . Combining the patient’s age, imaging findings and routine urine tests, the urologist made a primary diagnosis of a bladder tumour.
On admission, the patient’s physical examination was normal, without any significant pathological findings. The patient had a past medical history of hypertension. She denied smoking and drinking. Her family history was unremarkable. Routine urine showed that occult blood in the urine was 2+, the red blood cell count was 20/HPF (high-power field), the white blood cell count was 109/HPF, and the epithelial cell count was 6/HPF. Bacterial culture of the urine demonstrated no evidence of colony formation. Other laboratory data, such as routine blood tests, blood biochemistry and immune indexes, were normal.
Considering the patient's age and related high-risk factors, we arranged cystoscopy (OLYPUS) operation in the operating room. During the operation, we find that the lump was not inside but outside the bladder and that it compressed the bladder. For this situation, we immediately organized a multidisciplinary treatment (MDT). During the discussion, the orthopaedist proposed that coronary imaging and 3D reconstruction of the abdominal CT should be performed. Therefore, we performed coronary imaging and 3D reconstruction on the computer immediately . According to the observation of the images, the orthopaedist made a diagnosis of osteochondroma. Our patient underwent surgery by the orthopaedist and urologist under general anaesthesia. During the operation, we found an irregular bone tumour approximately 1.5 × 1.0 × 0.6 cm in size on the pubic symphysis that compressed the anterior bladder wall , We resected it completely. The postoperative biopsy of the mass indicated a benign osteochondroma . After resection, the microscopic hematuria disappeared. After the 6-months follow-up, the symptoms were still absent.