A 2-year-old boy, not known to have any medical or congenital diseases, referred to our tertiary Hospital by his family physician due to recurrent attacks of scleral icterus for 3 months, almost with same intensity, with no fever, abdominal pain, and change in stool nor urine color. He has no history of allergy and his parents denied regular or recent drug intake. The family and psychosocial history were unremarkable. His physical examination was unremarkable, except yellowish sclera bilaterally. Laboratory tests revealed mild elevation of white blood cells, elevated levels of total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase. Abdominal ultrasound showed fusiform dilatation of the Common Bile Duct with sludge consistent with CC type I, the liver and spleen were homogeneous with no focal lesions and the gall bladder was partially contracted with no stone inside. A diagnosis of CC was further supported by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). After informed consent signed by his father, the patient was booked for minimally invasive CC excision with Roux-en Y Hepaticojejunostomy (RYHJ) surgery.
This procedure performed by a consultant pediatric surgeon subspecialized in minimally invasive surgery in pediatric age group at one of reputable centers in Europe, has a good audit of laparoscopic CC excision and Roux-en-Y hepaticojujonostomy reconstruction. The patient was placed in a supine position, an infra-umbilical incision by open Hasson technique used for 10 mm trocar, 30° lens, and Co2 pneumoperitoneum was established at a pressure of 8 mmHg and flow of 5 L/min. Another 10 mm port was placed just below the left costal margin medially, two additional 5 mm trocars were inserted in the right lower quadrant and an adequate exposure was achieved by retracting the liver and elevating the gallbladder to allow dissection of the CC and freeing it from the surrounding structures. The CBD was 3 cm fusiform in shape, with the help of camera magnification meticulous dissection and resection of proximal part of common hepatic duct was done, almost up to the confluence of right and left hepatic that permit anastomosis, with small lymph nodes (LN) around, this approach gave us superior field view over open approach. CBD was divided after clip placement distally as close as possible to pancreaticobiliaery junction.
A grapelike soft tissue mass that appeared within the excised part of common hepatic duct lumen made a new diagnostic challenge that raised the possibility of biliary RMS, while the procedure went through same plan; the gall bladder was freed and excised with the sample en-block {}. The specimen retrieved by endobag through the umbilical port after it had been extended up to 3 cm length, this was adequate to exteriorize the jejunum and anastomose the jejunojejunostomy of the Roux-en-Y limb extracorporeally, content returned back to coelomic cavity and pneumoperitoneum re-established again. The biliary tree washed out by normal saline 0.9%, a retro colic tunnel created through which the Roux limb delivered to the porta hepatis, an end to side hepaticojejunostomy accomplished laparoscopically using interrupted 4/0 absorbable sutures {}. A vacuum drain size 14 Fr. was inserted through the lower 5 mm ports to the Morison's pouch and the omentum was placed over the hepaticojejunostomy anastomosis.
On the first post-operative day, the general condition of the patient went uneventful, with 16.6 μmol/L total bilirubin and 14.2 μmol/L direct bilirubin, 1045 IU/L alkaline phosphatase, post-operative course went smooth and feeding began on day five post-operative. The Histopathologist confirmed biliary embryonal RMS tumor with cells at the resection margin and tumor free two Lymph nodes, the tumor cells were positive for Myogenin and Desmin immunostains {}. The patient was discharged home on day six, and re-admitted to oncology team two weeks post-operatively; he tolerated chemotherapy according to Children Oncology Group (COG) protocol for six months. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan showed no hypermetabolic masses to suggest neither recurrence nor metastasis. Sixteen months follow up after surgery, the patient has been growing and doing well with no complaints, Though the parents were thinking it was a minor illness, they realized thereafter the real problem and the way of management with excellent prospect. They were advised for follow-up at six months interval.