A 42-year-old female patient with neurofibromatosis was hospitalized at the department of general surgery with 10 days of right upper abdomen pain but no other symptoms such as diarrhea, vomiting, or bleeding. In addition, the patient said that she has had several nodules on her body for as long as she can remember and that both her mother and daughter have neurofibromatosis. However, during her abdominal MRI examination, a mass on the left side was found, which was described as a retroperitoneal tumor; she was then transferred to the department of urology. At the initial examination, significant café au lait spots and freckling were found over the patient's body, but the mass filling the left abdominal quadrant was inaccessible . Her blood pressure was 125/76 mmHg, and her heart rate was 74 beats per minute. Biochemistry and hematological tests revealed mild anemia (Hb: 97 g/L and Htc: 31.3 L/L); however, other parameters (liver function, renal function, electrolytes, coagulation function, blood cortisol, ACTH, blood aldosterone, renin, CRP, gastrin, insulin, and glucagon) were normal. No lesion or abnormality was discovered during the thorax CT scan evaluation. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an uneven tumor underneath the pancreatic body that occupies the left retroperitoneal region. The mass had about 3.8 cm × 5.7 cm × 2.8 cm in size, which has an unclear boundary with some surrounding intestinal tubes. The uncinate process in the pancreas is moved to the right. While the focus T1W image illustrates a low signal mass, the T2-weighted image indicates a high-signal tumor; and the diffusion-weighted displays an obvious high-signal tumor; additionally, enhanced MRI scans of the arterial, venous, and excretion phases clearly show uneven and noticeable enhancement . There were no gastrointestinal problems in our case. as well as the tumor's location based on imaging results led to the establishment of a primary diagnosis of retroperitoneal neurofibroma.
After three days of pre-operative preparation, the patient was taken to the operating room. Minimally invasive surgery was performed using a three-port retroperitoneal approach . A 2-centimeter incision is made on the posterior axillary line, beneath the 12th rib, anterior to the sacrospinal muscle. The muscle layer and lumbodorsal fascia were divided bluntly with a long hemostatic forcep. By insertion of the index finger into the retroperitoneal space (posterior pararenal space) and dissecting the fatty tissue from top to bottom and back to front, while simultaneously pushing the peritoneum anteriorly. Following that, the space is enlarged using a balloon expander. Subsequent trocar insertions will be directed from the retroperitoneal area using the index finger. Trocar 1 is entered via the first skin incision and sutured to secure the trocar, then a 10 mm camera trocar (Trocar 2) is placed two fingers breadths superior to the iliac crest on the midaxillary line; finally, trocar 3 is introduced on the anterior axillary line at the subcostal margin. On the dominant hand side of the surgeon, a 12 mm trocar is usually used, and a 5 mm trocar by a non-dominant one. CO2 insufflation via camera trocar with a pressure range from 10 to 14 mmHg to creates pneumoperitoneum. while the surgeon performs an operation on the patient's abdominal wall using trocar 1 and 3, the assistant stands on the backside holding camera using trocar 2. Firstly, retroperitoneal adipose tissue is mobilized from the infra-phrenic superiorly to the iliac fossa inferiorly and from the peritoneal reflection internally to the psoas major externally. after exposing the lateral conical fascia, it is longitudinally incised posterior to the retroperitoneal fold. After that, the dissection is conducted posteriorly between the posterior renal fascia and the psoas major, outside fascia. Due to the fact that the renal fascia is connected with quadratus lumborum fascia, these two fascias are always dissected together to expose the deeper psoas muscle fibers. superiorly, the plane of dissection extends to the diaphragm, while inferiorly it extends to the iliac fossa. Then, between the fusion fascia (the fascia posterior to the mesocolon) and the anterior renal fascia on the inferomedial pole of the kidney, precise anterior dissection is performed, accessing the first avascular plane (anterior pararenal space). At this point mass was seen and tumor boundaries dissection progress and we discovered a mass attached anteriorly to the duodenojejunal flexure. A portion of the duodenum was resected to remove the tumor mass, and primary anastomosis was accomplished through the retroperitoneal without manipulation of other abdominal organs.
A postoperative drain was placed through a small hole in the left posterior peritoneum, and a tumor mass of 6.5 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm in size was extracted. Following surgery, the patient spent one day in a critical care unit before being discharged to the wards. Finally, the drain was also put through the retroperitoneum to avoid peritonitis and reduce the risk of death, which is another advantage. On surgical day 9, the patient began an oral diet, and she was released from the hospital on day 14. Histopathologic investigations revealed that the resected mass was a composite of that CD117(+), CD34(+), desmin(−), DOG-1(+), Ki-67(+5%), S-100(−), SDH-B(+), and SMA(−), all of which are consistent with GIST tumor .