A 51-year-old female patient was admitted to the Department of Neurology in The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University on September 10, 2021 due to slurred speech, weakness in lower limbs, dizziness, and nausea. The patient had a history of cervical polyp surgery without other comorbidities. The patient had no personal or family history and no clear history of contact with birds and poultry.
Physical examination on admission showed that height, weight, body mass index (BMI), heart rate (HR), respiratory rate (RR) and blood oxygen saturation (SO2) were 1.6 m, 58kg, 22.65 kg/m2, 124 beats/min, 23 beats/min, and 88%, respectively. Furthermore, mild cyanosis of the lips, dysarthria, shortness of breath, audible wet rales in both lower lungs, and grade IV muscle strength in lower limbs were observed. Laboratory tests on admission and re-examinations during hospitalization were displayed in . Arterial blood gas analysis（ABGA）showed that pH, carbon dioxide partial pressure (pCO2), and oxygen partial pressure (pO2) were 7.554, 27.8 mmHg, and 53.6 mmHg, respectively. The calculated Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II and Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores were 12 and 4, respectively.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain on admission revealed a reversible lesion of the corpus callosum. The initial lung computed tomography (CT) indicated extensive patchy and consolidation shadows in the right lower lobe and left pleural hypertrophy. Lung CT during hospitalization and follow-up were displayed in (A-K).
Immediately after admission, the patient was administered nasal catheter oxygen therapy and piperacillin-tazobactam for anti-infection therapy. On the 2nd day after admission, the patient developed a fever with a maximum temperature of 39.1 °C, accompanied by lethargy and confusion, and thus was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU), where she received high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen therapy, and antibiotics were adjusted to cefoperazone/sulbactam combined with levofloxacin. On the 3rd day after admission, the re-examination of lung CT showed a significant increase in lesion area, and blood pressure decreased. Other routine imaging examinations, including ultrasound (US) of both lower limbs, showed no abnormality in ICU. Comprehensive treatment measures, including goal-directed fluid resuscitation, vasoactive drug infusion, oral endotracheal intubation, invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) with low tidal volume (4–6ml/kg), optimal positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), lung recruitment, deep analgesia and sedation combined with neuromuscular blockers, and prone position, were implemented. The patient was not treated with corticosteroids due to the possibility of progressive exacerbation of the infection. Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FFB) revealed that the bronchial openings of some lobes and segments in the right lung were blocked by a small amount of yellow mucous sputum, and the airway mucosa was congested. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was subsequently performed, and samples were taken for mNGS. After oxygenation index (OI) < 60 mmHg for 12 consecutive hours without improvement, the left femoral vein and right internal jugular vein were taken for veno-venous ECMO with heparin anti-coagulation. Activated clotting time (ACT) of whole blood was monitored every 4 hours to guide heparin administration and maintained within the optimal target range of 180–220 seconds whenever possible. During veno-venous ECMO, goal-directed fluid management, lung-protective ventilation strategies, deep analgesia and sedation combined with neuromuscular blockers, and prone position were continued. On the 8th day after admission, the mNGS in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) revealed that the pathogen was chlamydia psittaci, so the antibiotics were adjusted to doxycycline combined with azithromycin. On the 13th day after admission, ECMO was withdrawn after 10 days of clinical application, and the patient's condition improved with an OI of 305 mmHg. US re-examination of the left lower limb revealed inter-muscular vein thrombosis, so heparin was replaced by subcutaneous injection of 0.4ml enoxaparin sodium twice daily for anti-coagulation therapy. Considering that the extensive rash may be related to doxycycline, the antibiotics were adjusted to erythromycin combined with levofloxacin.On the 17th day after admission, the patient was weaned from IMV. On the 19th day after admission, the patients suffered sudden CA, and the autonomous heart rhythm was restored after about 2 minutes of successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Emergency pulmonary angiography (PA) showed bilateral main pulmonary artery embolism , and the patient's condition gradually stabilized after immediate catheter-directed thrombolysis with 300,000 units of urokinase and placement of an inferior vena cava filter. On the 21st day after admission, the patient was fully conscious with stable vital signs, so she was weaned from IMV again. On the 28th after admission, the patient fully recovered and was discharged. On the 11th day of follow-up after discharge, lung CT showed pneumonia in the left lower lobe and right lung and mild pleural hypertrophy on both sides. On the 74th day of follow-up after discharge, the inferior vena cava filter was removed. The re-examined lung CT indicated interstitial changes in the right lower lobe, while pulmonary function tests, OI, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) checklist-Civilian (PCL-C) score returned to normal. On the 313th day of follow-up after discharge, lung CT revealed mild interstitial changes in the right lower lobe, ground-glass nodules in the right upper lobe, and nodules in the left upper lobe. On the 502nd day of follow-up after discharge, lung CT showed small nodules in the right upper lobe, and the rest completely returned to normal.