A 65-year-old male presented with chief complaints of pain and stiffness in the left knee for 15 years. The patient was apparently alright 15 years back when he developed pain in the left knee which was sudden in onset gradually progressive aggravated by movements and walking, relieved with medication and rest. The patient also complained of stiffness in the left knee.
The patient had a history of the left distal femur fracture 15 years back for which he was treated with a plaster cast. The patient was a known case of diabetes mellitus on medication for 10 years. The patient at time of presentation was severely restricted in his ADL due to severe stiffness.
On inspection no scar, sinuses, and dilated veins on palpation, tenderness was present over both the medial and lateral joint lines. Further, examination revealed a fixed flexion deformity of 10° with shortening of 2 cm. Radiographs of the left knee in anteroposterior and lateral views were taken, which showed united distal femur fracture with grade 4 Kellegren Lawrence knee arthritis. CBC, ESR, and CRP values were within the normal range.
Due to severe knee stiffness and with the patient demanding early mobilization and functional knee ROM, total knee arthroplasty with intra-articular and extra-articular adhesion release was planned for the patient. After obtaining the fitness for surgery, the patient was operated on in a supine position under spinal anesthesia using the medial parapatellar approach. As a result of the previous distal femur fracture, the extensor mechanism was contracted and adhered to the anterior femur along with intra-articular adhesions which led to difficulty in patellar eversion and flexion of the knee; hence, a Thompson quadriceps plasty and recreation of medial and lateral gutter was done to aid in exposure.
The extensor mechanism was elevated and intra-articular fibrous tissue was removed with electro cautery and osteotome. The eversion of the patella was done gradually monitoring the tension on the patellar tendon insertion to avoid a extensor peel off. The intramedullary femoral jig was inserted with serially increasing diameter drill bits and checking under C arm to prevent breaching of the femoral cortex, as the bone was porotic and deformed. Following which femur was prepared. A proximal tibial cut was done using an extramedullary jig. The gaps were checked and trial implants were placed followed by checking stability, range of motion, and patellar tracking.
A cemented total knee arthroplasty using PFC sigma implant (femoral component size – 4, tibial tray size – 4 and spacer size – 15 mm) was done .
Intraoperatively, 120° of flexion was achieved by releasing extra- and intra-articular adhesions. After the prosthesis implantation, stability, patellar tracking, and range of motion were checked intraoperatively. The wound was closed in layers. Postoperatively, the knee was maintained in extension using a long knee brace. Continuous passive motion of 0–45° and isometric quadriceps strengthening exercises started the day after surgery.
Full weight-bearing started immediately on post-operative day 1 using a long knee brace.
The outcome at 2 years was good with the patient having a good knee range of movements (0–110° of flexion with extension lag of 10°) and no pain on weight-bearing. The patient is comfortable with no pain and difficulty walking. The Oxford knee scores preoperatively were 11 and after 2 years of follow-up was 47 .
Two years postoperatively, the knee radiographs showed no signs of osteolysis and subsequent implant loosening .