A 73-year-old female Caucasian patient presented at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery of the Saarland University Medical Center (Homburg/Saar, Germany) with a sudden onset of left-sided nerve palsy of the lower facial nerve branches (House–Brackmann score III) characterized by slightly weak motion of the mouth with maximum effort, for 1 month. She denied weight loss, fevers, or night sweat. Her past medical history consisted of hypertension treated with metoprolol (47.5 mg 1–0–1), ramipril (2.5 mg 1–0–1), and hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg 1–0–0) as well as an ischemia of the right thalamus 2 years ago without any persisting neurological deficits. Additional medication on admission included aspirin for inhibition of platelet aggregation (100 mg 1–0–0). She used to work as a shop assistant and retired 5 years ago. She lives together with her husband in a small city and has two grown-up healthy children. She never smoked or drank alcohol.
On clinical examination, the facial nerve showed an impaired function of the marginal mandibular branch on the left side as described above with no further functional deficits of the other branches. Eye closure and movement of the forehead muscles were not affected. Ear, nose, and throat routine examination showed no pathological findings. A neurological check-up with a detailed examination of all cranial nerves and sensory and motor function was inconspicuous. All vital signs, including pulse, blood pressure, and temperature, were in physiological range. Initially, cerebral computed tomography (CT) imaging was performed to exclude a cerebral event. It revealed multiple tumors within the left parotid gland. The laboratory blood analysis including inflammation markers [C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin], electrolytes, white and red blood cell counts, liver and renal function markers (AST, ALT, GGT, creatinine, urea), and borreliosis serology showed no conspicuous findings. A high-resolution ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. B) examination of the head without contrast agent were carried out and delineated multiple lesions along the left mandible. They presented as round in shape, well-defined, hypoechoic tumors without a hilar structure, which is reminiscent of lymphoma, but they did not show any hypervascularization or intranodal reticulation. For histological verification, a left-side partial parotidectomy with use of a nerve-integrity monitor and extirpation of an intraparotideal node was performed 7 days after initial presentation at our clinic. We decided to remove the node located at greatest distance from the main trunk of the facial nerve in order to lower the risk of nerve injury. Histomorphological analysis of the resected tissue revealed the diagnosis of a benign schwannoma . The tumor tissue showed high expression levels of Mib-1 indicating a high proliferation rate as well as S-100 pointing towards a neuroectodermal origin of the tumor cells. After the operation, the patient remained in hospital for five more days before leaving for home without any postoperative complications and without any change of her medication. The size of the nonresected tumors is monitored regularly every 4 months by ultrasonography. The facial nerve function remained unchanged since the operation with a total follow-up of 36 months, and fibromatosis has been excluded by a dermatological work-up including whole-body skin examination and sequencing of the NF1 and NF2 gene in the removed tissue.