In 2013, a 36 year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with chronic hepatitis B based on the elevated levels of liver enzyme and the positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) at a local clinic during follow-up for flu-like symptoms. He was referred to the hepatology division, in a general hospital for further assessment of chronic hepatitis B. The liver biopsy showed septal fibrosis and infiltrating lymphocyte in his liver tissue associated with degeneration of limiting plate, and histologic activity index—METAVIR score (Thio et al. ) was A2-F3. He had been living in Japan all his life and had no family histories of viral hepatitis. He denied intravenous drug use and dissolute sexual behavior in Japan, but admitted occasional sexual intercourse with men in Thailand since he was 20 years old. The screening for HIV antigen/antibody test was positive and HIV infection was confirmed by the positive Western-blot HIV antibody test. The Serological HBV genotyping test by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) in the clinical laboratory testing industry (SRL Inc. Japan) showed genotype D. However, his social history was not compatible with the risk of chronically HBV gonotype D (HBV/D) infection because HBV/D is rare throughout Japan except for some areas and not prevalent among men who have sex with men (MSM). Then, HBV-DNA genotyping was performed using obtained isolates from this patient. We cloned full-length HBV isolates and determined the complete genome sequences of 2 obtained clones as previously reported (Sugauchi et al. ). Briefly, the full length of HBV genome was amplified as two overlapping fragments by using the primer set to yield a 3200 bp amplicon for fragment A and another primer set to yield a 462 bp amplicon for fragment B. The fragment A or B was transferred to pGEM-T easy vector by TA cloning. The cloned plasmids of fragment A or B were sequenced and analyzed by phylogenetic analysis using MEGA6 (Tamura et al. ). The Bootscaning analysis using RDP4 software (Martin et al. ) revealed the clones represented as the HBV/A2 and the HBV/G/A2 recombinant strain . These findings indicated co-infection of HBV/A2 and HBV/G/A2. 36 nt insertion in the core region and two stop codons in the precore region were not detected in the recombinant strain because two estimated recombination junction of HBV/G were from approximately nt.192 to nt.1795 . The HBV/A2 and the HBV/G/A2 recombinant strain were compared with other registered strains including G/A recombinants by MEGA6. Figure shows the phylogenetic tree of these strains. Our HBV/G/A2 were located near the clusters of HBV/G and G/A recombinants. Our HBV/A2 belonged to the HBV/A2 cluster.
The HIV-RNA and CD4 T cell count were 4300 copies/mL and 226 cells/μL, respectively. The HIV subtype was CRF-01 AE and no primary mutations associated with drug resistance mutations were detected. Laboratory findings were as follows: platelet count, 10.6 × 104/dL; asparate aminotransferase, 84 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 122 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 272 IU/L; γ-glutamyltranspeptidase, 34 IU/L; hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), 93,297 IU/mL; antibodies to the HBsAg (anti-HBsAg), negative; total hepatitis B core antibodies, 11.9 S/CO; HBeAg, 42.9 S/CO; antibodies to the HBeAg (anti-HBeAg), negative; HBV-DNA, >9.1 log copies/mL; hyaluronic acid, 124 ng/mL; Type IV Collagen 7 s, 7.3 ng/mL. HBV drug resistance mutations related to lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir or tenofovir were not detected. He received antiretroviral therapy (ART) consisting of tenofovir/emtricitabine (TDF/FTC) and raltegravir to treat HIV-HBV/G/A2 recombinant infection. Three months after the initiation of ART, while the HBV-DNA decreased steadily, the levels of liver enzyme increased progressively with the rapid decline of HBeAg and HBsAg. The CD4 T-cell count increased to 487 cells/μL. This presentation was consistent with HIV-HBV immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). The levels of liver enzymes improved without specific treatments. The HBV-DNA decreased to 2.5 log copies/mL after 24 months of ART.