A 63 years old male with hypertriglyceridemia [triglyceride (TG) 12.82 mmol/L], started taking fenofibrate 200 mg/day for the first time. One day before taking fenofibrate, liver function tests were performed. The laboratory result showed alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (Alk P) were all in normal range. After taking fenofibrate for 2 days, the patient developed fatigue, body aches, anorexia and dark urine, fenofibrate was discontinued immediately. There was no change to the rest of the patient’s medication. One day after withdrawal, liver function tests showed ALT 690 U/L, AST 521 U/L, the direct bilirubin (DBIL) 50.1 umol/L, the total bilirubin (TBIL) 75.8 umol/L, Alk P 202 U/L, γ-GGT 769 U/L, the International Normalized Ratio (INR) 0.93.
Patient’s body mass index (BMI) was 27.76 kg/m2 with a body surface area (BSA) of 2.21 m2. He was jaundiced with yellow sclera and skin. He presented with right upper quadrant tenderness and hepatic percussion pain was elicited. Hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C antibody were negative. Anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, anti-liver and kidney microsome antibodies, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, anti-myocardial antibodies, anti-parietal cell antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and anti-ENA antibody were all negative. The IgG was normal (933.31 mg/dL), and the IgM was slightly decreased (36.45 mg/dL). Abdominal ultrasound showed an enlarged, fatty liver with enhanced liver parenchymal echogenicity . Additionally the US showed a normal gallbladder size, normal gallbladder wall thickness, and multiple gallstones.
Six days after withdrawal bilirubin levels decreased to normal. Ten days after withdrawal, AST and ALP level decreased to normal, fatigue and anorexia was relieved. The relationship between liver function and fenofibrate is shown in the Table .
All evidences suggested that this patient’s liver injury were attributed to fenofibrate. Although repeated application of fenofibrate on the patient would have confirmed its pathogenicity, fenofibrate was not re-applied because of the severity of liver damage.
To assess causality between the drug and liver damage, the standardized Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment Method (RUCAM) was used. The patient's RUCAM score was 7, which fell in the group of “probable”. To categorize the pattern of liver damage the R-ratio was calculated : [ALT/Upper Limit of Normal (ULN)] ÷ [Alk P/ULN]. The patient’s R-ratio was 12.8 and ALT ≥ 3 ULN, which fitted hepatocellular damage type.