A 45-year-old man experienced abdominal pain and vomiting. He consulted a nearby doctor, who prescribed an intestinal preparation. The patient developed ten episodes of diarrhea the next day and received infusion therapy. He experienced a persistent sense of abdominal fullness and left abdominal pain for 3 days and then consulted our hospital. The patient was previously healthy and had no remarkable medical history or cardiovascular risk factors. He had no smoking habit. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness over the epigastrium without signs of peritonitis. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an isolated dissection of the SMA in which the false lumen was thrombosed, the true lumen was compressed by the false lumen, and the middle colic artery to small colon branches were obstructed . No signs of bowel ischemia, such as bowel thickening, abnormal contrast enhancement, or ascites, were found. The creatine phosphokinase level, aspartate aminotransferase level, lactate dehydrogenase level, and base excess were normal at 210 IU/L, 22 U/L, 189 U/L, and 0.3 mmol/L, respectively, at the first visit to our hospital (3 days after onset). The lactate level was not measured at our hospital, but there was a mention in the medical information offer letter that it was normal at a university hospital.
Because of the patient’s continuous abdominal pain, we considered the need for emergency surgical therapy and transferred him to our university hospital. He was treated by conservative therapy including antiplatelet agents and prostaglandin, and his continuous abdominal pain disappeared. He was discharged on day 20 and returned to our hospital for follow-up. We performed nutritional management involving central venous nutrition followed by oral intake. We changed his liquid diet to rice gruel, but his nutritional state and oral intake did not improve. On day 35, enhanced CT showed that the area around the SMA was hypodense with abnormal contrast enhancement, and severe stenosis of the true lumen and a 3-cm-long thrombotic occlusion from the middle colic artery were observed .
We performed a surgical operation on day 40 because of the prolonged abdominal angina. Spontaneous abdominal pain and tenderness had been present at the first visit, but these symptoms disappeared before the operation.
The SMA was revascularized through a midline abdominal incision. During laparotomy, the transverse colon was pulled toward the head side, the origin of the small intestinal mesentery was divided, and the SMA was exposed and controlled at the branch of the middle colic artery. First, we performed thromboendarterectomy. We longitudinally incised the SMA from the thrombotic occluded part to the false lumen, performed thromboendarterectomy with a flap under a direct view, inserted a sheath into the central side (probably the false lumen), clamped the site with vascular tape, and placed an endovascular stent on the central side. A short 0.035-in. guidewire was introduced, and a 6-Fr sheath was placed in a retrograde fashion. Hand-injected retrograde angiography was performed; the false lumen and SMA orifice exhibited contrast enhancement, but the true lumen did not. A 0.035-in. guidewire was used to cross the true lumen into the aorta. The SMA then showed a stenotic area by contrast enhancement. A 10-mm × 4 cm stent (S.M.A.R.T.; Cordis Corp., Fremont, CA, USA) was placed in a retrograde manner at the SMA origin . We then performed a patch angioplasty using the great saphenous vein.
The pulse of the distal SMA then improved. Three days after the operation, oral intake was started and the abdominal angina stabilized. The patient was discharged 26 days after the operation. At 58 days after the operation, he was hospitalized again because of hypoalbuminemia and whole body edema. Lower digestive tract endoscopy showed no mucosal disorders, and CT showed a patent stent and no signs of bowel ischemia. We considered that the patient’s symptoms had arisen from a disorder of the absorptive surface area due to chronic weak bowel ischemia and long-term fasting. Central venous nutrition was initiated, and his frequency of diarrhea decreased. Oral intake was then begun, and as his oral intake increased, his nutritional status improved. He was discharged 28 days after readmission. Follow-up CT showed good flow and a thin flap between the stent and patch . He was symptom-free 3 years after the surgery with a good nutritional status.