An 84 year old male was referred with LUTS, complaining of frequency of micturation, nocturia (2-3 times) and weak stream. The patient scored 30 points on Danish Prostatic Symptom Score (DAN-PSS) and had been treated with alfa blockers by the General practitioner without any symptomatic effect. Rectal examination revealed a normal sized non tender prostate with a normal consistency. Urethral secretion showed traces of blood. Serum prostate specific antigen level was 1.6 ng/ml (normal 0-4 ng/ml). Pressure flow studies showed infravesical outflow obstruction (maximum flow rate (Qmax): 5.4 ml/second and post void residual urine volume (PVR): 109 ml) and transrectal ultrasound revealed a 34 ml prostate. On the basis of symptoms and pressure-flow studies it was decided to perform a transurethral resection of prostate.
Cystoscopy showed normal collicular distance and a contracted bladder neck. Bladder neck was incised at the 5 and 7 o'clock positions and transurethral resection of the prostate (around 5 grams) was carried out. There was no undue bleeding per- or postoperatively. Pathology showed a hemangioma of prostate gland occupying around 30% of the resected material. Postoperative high resolution transrectal ultrasound showed a resection cavity and unresected hemangioma with a total volume estimated at 25 ml . Consequently the obstruction was probably caused by the hemangioma. At follow-up 7 days after surgery the patient complained of a slow stream and difficulty initiating micturation. Postvoid residual urine was recorded at 1700 ml. The patient was treated with indwelling catheter for 14 days and subsequently performed intermittent self-catheterization for six months in order to monitor residual urine, though after two months the patient only needed to self-catheterize once or twice a week. At the final control six months after TURP the patient was symptom free with a Qmax of 17 ml/second and a residual urine volume of 50 ml. We would have offered a repeat TURP if the patient had a symptomatic infravesical obstruction at the final check.