A 51-year-old female with a past medical history of seronegative rheumatoid arthritis and on-demand treatment with NSAIDs was evaluated for lateral hip pain irradiated to the posterior hip for more than two years, which limited her recreational sports and activities for daily living. The pain was refractory to conservative treatment, including one year of physical therapy, three trochanteric bursa steroid injections, and one bone marrow aspiration injection by previous physicians. All injections were separated by three months and performed under fluoroscopy guidance. Physical examination was positive for Trendelenburg gait, tenderness over the greater trochanter, FABER maneuver, and abductor complex weakness with resisted hip abduction. Radiological images demonstrate moderate degenerative changes of the right hip joint with Tönnis grade 2 and greater trochanter enthesopathy . MRI demonstrated a complete, chronic full-thickness gluteus medius tendon tear with mild retraction, chronic enthesopathy with osteophyte formation at the abductor insertion with associated bursitis ( and b). Given the failure of conservative management and duration of hip pain, indication of surgical treatment with endoscopic gluteus medius repair was indicated.
The surgery was performed by the senior author. After adequate induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position on a hip arthroscopy minimal-post table after properly protecting the pressure areas. Standard preparation, drape, and pre-operative IV antibiotics were given. No hip distraction was applied, and the hip was placed in 15 degrees of abduction to relieve gluteal tension . Under fluoroscopic guidance, a spinal needle was used to localize the peritrochanteric anterolateral portal, and a 70 degrees lens was established deep to the iliotibial band (ITB), and adjacent to the insertion of the abductor tendon which was confirmed by rotation of the limb. Next an incision overlying the most anterior aspect of the insertion was made and correspondent instruments were guided into the deep peritrochanteric space. Next, the posterolateral (PL) portal was placed under direct visualization followed by placement of the distal anterior lateral accessory (DALA) portal. The ITB was not released during the procedure. Within the medial peritrochanteric space the bursal side of the abductor tendon insertion on the greater trochanter was visualized, demonstrating significant amount of scarring and hyperemia within the abductor tendon complex itself. A thickened hypertrophic bursa was visualized and treated with bursectomy utilizing radiofrequency and shaver . Complete bursectomy was performed until an adequate visualization of the gluteus maximus insertion was identified distally, its undersurface proximally, the longitudinal fibers of the vastus lateralis medially, and the ITB laterally. The abductor tendon insertion site on the femur was visualized arthroscopically and confirmed under fluoroscopic guidance. A pathologic osteophyte formation distal to the chronically hyperemic degenerative and torn abductor tendon insertion was identified. A probe was used to palpate the surface of the abductor’s tendon to detect areas of occult fiber disruption, identifying a full-thickness tear of the gluteus medius. The degenerative tissue around the tear was debrided using a shaver. No signs of intratendinous steroid injections were observed. Then, the insertional footprint itself was prepared with a shaver in burr mode to create a bleeding surface to improve tendon-bone healing . Next a transosseous equivalent repair construct utilizing 2 knotless SutureTak® Anchor with #2 suture (Bio-Composite SutureTak®; Arthrex, Naples, FL) was created for repair of the tendon to bone with a 3rd knotless SwiveLock® anchor (Bio-Composite SwiveLock®; Arthrex, Naples, FL) distal anteriorly to the footprint itself . A stable reattachment of the abductor complex to the prepared bone was visualized during rotatory examination . Local anesthetic (2cc Marcaine 0.5%) was placed within the wound at the repair site, the skin was closed sterilely, and a sterile dressing was applied.
Patients are evaluated by the treating orthopedic surgeon at 1-day, 2-weeks, 6-weeks, 3- months’ post-operative, and as needed until clearance for a return to desired activities. Patient’s pre-operative reported outcomes utilizing the MHOT-14 and Vail Hip scores improved from 27 to 79 points (on a scale of 0–100) and from 30 to 56 points (on a scale of 0–100), respectively, at eight months follow-up. The patient returned to the desired activities six months following surgery without any reported complications. Follow-up images are not part of the routine post-operative care at the clinic, unless the patient complains of pain or a traumatic injury occurs.
The patient followed a three phases rehabilitation protocol focused on patients with baseline dysfunctions documented pre-operatively as degenerative tendinopathy or tears in older, more sedentary patients.
Phase 1: Protected Mobility (post-operative day 0–week 6 post-operative).
Goal: Maintain mobility to reduce medical comorbidity and preserve hip/spine function without stressing tendon-to-bone repair during the early healing phase.
The patient was instructed to use a walker with partial flat-foot-weight-bearing and fitted for the T scope post-operative hip abduction brace (©2019 Breg, Inc.) limiting adduction and flexion to 90 degrees Brace at all times with 0-90 degrees. Daily position changes (no sit/ stand/ walk longer than 30 continuous minutes). Foot/calf activations; glut max isometric; abdominal isometric.
Phase 2: Unassisted activities of daily living (ADL) (post-operative week 6–8).
Goal: Engage isometric function of abductor/ITB; Increase stance-phase independence of operative limb and restore normal gait.
Week 6–7: discontinue walker and use a brace with a cane in the opposite hand. Week 7–8: discontinue brace and use a cane in the opposite hand.
Phase 3: Endurance (post-operative week 8–3 months).
Goal: Increase gait and ADL-related repair site endurance and reduce myofascial pain.
Aqua walking; Manual myofascial techniques avoiding extremes of passive ADDUCTION/IR/ER. Supine, foot on the ground core; Gentle isokinetic abductor.
Standing core/balance isometrics.