A 64-year-old Caucasian woman presented to a community otolaryngologist with a 4-year history of progressive postnasal drip and globus sensation. Her past medical history was significant for osteoarthritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and seasonal allergies. Her only medication was a fluticasone 50 mcg/dose nasal spray that she used once daily as needed during allergy season and famotidine 20 mg orally twice daily for gastroesophageal reflux disease. She worked as a jeweler and lived with a roommate. She had never been pregnant. There was no family history significant for cancer. She was a nonsmoker and did not consume alcohol. At her initial otolaryngologist appointment, she was diagnosed with laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR). She was treated with pantoprazole magnesium 40 mg orally for 3 months. Despite initial treatment for LPR, these symptoms progressed and over the course of a year, she also developed dysphonia. Therefore, she sought a second opinion with a local otolaryngologist. She did not report any constitutional or infectious symptoms.
On physical examination, she appeared clinically well. The oral cavity and oropharynx were normal and there was no palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. Her cranial nerves were intact and she was deemed to be a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. The initial evaluation with flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy showed a large vallecular lesion that was smooth and expansile, filling most of the oropharynx. It was, however, possible to pass the endoscope around the mass to visualize the glottis. The vocal cords appeared normal bilaterally. A neck ultrasound showed a well-defined hypoechoic mass with peripheral rim calcification located deep to the thyrohyoid membrane. The thyroid gland was found in a normal anatomic position and was without any nodules. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the neck showed a rounded heterogeneous mass centered within the right aspect of the oropharynx measuring 4.2 × 4.4 × 4.5 cm and caused mass effect to the adjacent base of tongue, soft palate, and supraglottic larynx . Radiography did not reveal any suspicious neck adenopathy. Transcervical ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy was performed, which was suspicious for papillary carcinoma due to microscopic findings of malignant cells, nuclear grooves, and a powdery chromatin pattern . Given the suspicion for papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), the case was discussed at an endocrine multidisciplinary case conference with recommendation for a staged surgical procedure. The first stage would be resection of the primary tumor, followed by a second-stage total thyroidectomy depending on the final pathology findings. The indication for a total thyroidectomy was size greater than 4 cm, in accordance with American Thyroid Association guidelines.
On the day of surgery, blood pressure measured 129/73 mmHg, pulse was 96 beats per minute, oxygen saturation was 100% on room air, and the patient was afebrile with a temperature of 37.1 °C. In the operating room, a tracheotomy was first performed for airway protection and the tumor was subsequently accessed through a transcervical, lateral pharyngotomy approach. The tumor was well encapsulated and involved the right base of tongue, lateral pharyngeal wall, and hyoid without gross invasion. The tumor was resected en bloc along with the right lateral hyoid, and the final specimen measured 3.6 × 3.8 × 5.9 cm. Of note, a limited cervical lymphadenectomy was also performed, primarily for access to the lateral pharynx, and two of three lymph nodes showed regional metastatic disease. The postoperative recovery period was uncomplicated and she recovered well with no dysphagia or dysphonia. Overall, the patient was admitted for three nights and was discharged on postoperative day (POD) 3. During her hospital stay, she received 24 hours of intravenous cefazolin 1 g every 8 hours and metronidazole 500 mg every 12 hours. She received one dose of hydromorphone 1 mg on POD 0 in the evening for pain control. She received three doses of lorazepam 0.5 mg sublingual for anxiety, five total doses of acetaminophen 1 g for pain, chlorhexidine 0.12% 15 ml mouth rinses every 6 hours, and enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneously every night for the three nights of her admission. Acetaminophen was given via nasogastric tube for the first 2 days, then orally when she was tolerating a fluid diet. She was started on clear fluids and advanced to full fluids on POD 2, then puree diet on POD 3. She was seen by a speech language pathologist on POD 3 who deemed her safe to swallow orally. Her tracheostomy tube and surgical drain were removed on POD 3. Her bloodwork was unremarkable: hemoglobin 124 g/L, white blood cell count 10.9 × 109/L, platelets 323 × 109/L, sodium 140 mmol/L, potassium 3.8 mmol/L, creatinine 54 μmol/L, lactate 1.0 mmol/L, bilirubin 3 μmol/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 6 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase 120 IU/L, alanine transaminase 15 IU/L, and lipase 125 IU/L. Her coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) test was negative. Upon discharge, she was prescribed acetaminophen 1 g orally every 6 hours as needed for 2 weeks, chlorhexidine 0.12% 15 ml mouth rinses every 6 hours for 2 weeks, and hydromorphone 1 mg orally every 4 hours as needed (15 tabs).
On microscopy, the tumor was composed of lobules of cytologically uniform cells forming cribriform, microcystic, solid, and tubular growth patterns . Peripheral palisading was present in the solid areas. Cleft formation, glomeruloid, and occasional papillary structures were seen. The intervening stroma was fibrovascular with focal hyalinization and mucoid stroma. The mass had a rounded edge with focal irregular infiltration into adjacent muscle. The tumor nuclei were uniform, round to oval with fine chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. Nuclear grooves, nuclear membrane notching, and occasional intranuclear pseudoinclusions were identified. Many nuclei showed optical clearing. Immunohistochemistry was positive for CK7, S100, SOX-10, and p63 (focal, patchy), and negative for thyroglobulin, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), p40, and GFAP. Molecular testing by RNA fusion panel revealed a CTNNB1-PRKD2 rearrangement. Overall, this was classified as a low-grade adenocarcinoma and staged as pT3 pN2b.
After a discussion regarding her case at a local multidisciplinary tumor board, options for close surveillance versus adjuvant radiation were presented to the patient at a 1-month follow-up. She declined radiation after extensive discussion and opted for surveillance. She underwent a flexible nasolaryngoscopy at that time, which showed a healed base of tongue, no evidence of disease recurrence, and no palpable lymphadenopathy. She underwent a follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her neck, which was normal and did not show any lymphadenopathy or tumor regrowth. She was then seen again in follow-up at 6 months and 10 months postoperatively. At both visits, she was clinically well with no symptoms of dysphagia or dysphonia. Her flexible nasolaryngoscopy did not show any disease recurrence; clinical palpation of her neck did not reveal any lymphadenopathy and ultrasound evaluation of her neck confirmed this. She is currently scheduled for yearly restaging imaging, which she will undergo in the coming months.