A 24-year-old healthy female presented to the clinic with WSL on the labial surface of the upper anterior teeth. Her chief complaint was that even though she had got her teeth aligned, she disliked her smile due to these opaque WSLs that were visible anteriorly. The patient had undergone fixed orthodontic treatment for 6 years, and the braces were debonded 2 years back, after which she noticed opaque white discoloration on the labial surfaces of anterior maxillary teeth. She visited her dentist but was fearful of any invasive intervention and yet was unsatisfied with the appearance of her teeth. She was moderately built and well-nourished, and her medical history was non-contributory. She brushed her teeth twice daily with fluoridated toothpaste using vertical and horizontal strokes. Her oral hygiene status was fair, and her gingiva was healthy. WSLs were observed on the labial surface of teeth number 11, 13, 21, 22, and 23 . There was no associated pain or sensitivity associated. The patient had undergone implant treatment and crown in relation to missing tooth 12. After explaining the condition of her teeth and treatment plan to the patient, her written consent was obtained to perform the procedure of icon resin infiltration.
Thorough oral prophylaxis and pumice prophylaxis was done on the anterior maxillary teeth to remove any stains. Multiple teeth isolation was achieved using an OptiDam to protect the gingiva from any irritation .
Icon infiltration contains three syringes:
Icon etch (15% hydrochloric acid).
Icon dry (ethanol).
Icon resin (tetraethylene glycol di-methacrylate).
Hydrochloric acid of 15% was placed on the WSLs for 2 minutes to allow the etching of teeth and to remove the hypermineralized layer on the surface subsurface of enamel to allow penetration of the resin . The acid was washed for 30 seconds and dried . After that ethanol (icon dry) was placed on the etched surfaces for 30 seconds and then air-dried again . The icon dry allows you to see the expected outcome. The same cycle of etching and icon drying was repeated to ensure access to deeper lesions. Finally, the resin was injected on the tooth surface using tetraethylene glycol dimethacrylate and allowed to settle for 5 minutes before curing . Dental floss was used to ensure that there wasn't any excess resin material interdentally. The resin was light-cured for 40 seconds, and finishing and polishing were done to remove excess by polishing discs to avoid staining .
The patient's satisfaction was evaluated by the pre and postoperative photographs . The patient was very satisfied with the esthetic results.
The patient was followed up for a 6 monthly period for 1 year, and the results were satisfactory .