A 56-year-old gentleman with a background history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (6 years of sound control and no associated complications), hypertension, and medically controlled hyperthyroidism presented to his local hospital with a 6-week history of progressive lower limb weakness, voiding difficulties, constipation, and burning paraesthesia of the soles of his feet, after a minor fall and head injury at work. He denied radicular pains in upper or lower limbs, or preceding neurological difficulties. He was otherwise systemically well. Due to the sphincter disturbance, he underwent emergency imaging of the lumbar spine which showed massive thickening of the cauda equina and lumbar roots and prompted imaging of the rest of his spine. This showed a similar picture with superimposed degenerative changes involving the cervical spine with evidence of midcervical cord compression due to a combination of discogenic disease and nerve root hypertrophy [ and ]. Imaging of the brain was comparatively unremarkable.
Given the massive root hypertrophy, an initial diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) was entertained. The patient was referred urgently to the regional NF-1 unit in Greater Manchester. On examination, no cutaneous stigmata of NF-1 could be appreciated, nor was there evidence of peripheral nerve hypertrophy. Upper and lower motor neuron signs were present with evidence of mild symmetrical wasting of distal lower limb muscles, predominant pyramidal distribution of weakness in the lower limbs and to a milder extent in the upper limbs with global areflexia and extensor plantar responses. Vibration sense was impaired to the anterior superior iliac spine with a reduction in pinprick to the mid-thighs and altered sensation to T8 with some additional non-specific sensory disturbance over the ulnar distributions of the hands bilaterally. He was unable to stand or walk unaided. It was felt that the presentation was atypical for NF-1, and an opinion was sought from the regional neuromuscular service while arrangements were made for cervical decompression. Genetic testing for NF-1 was taken.
The neuromuscular service’s subsequent review revealed similar examination findings although the patient was now globally weaker with Medical Research Council Grade 2 power scores in the proximal lower limbs. Neurophysiology showed evidence of a mostly length-dependent mixed axonal and demyelinating neuropathy, which was etiologically non-specific. The changes were compatible with diabetes, primary inflammatory neuropathy, or even NF-1. A biopsy of both sural nerve and proximal root biopsy was recommended at cervical cord decompression to increase diagnostic yield and rule out the presence of dual pathology, that is, the neuropathy and radiculopathy having separate causation.
Surgery was performed in standard prone position under total intravenous anesthesia with neurophysiology monitoring. A C4-C6 laminoplasty was performed. After opening the dura mater, the motor evoked potentials amplitudes in the lower limbs improved. The arachnoid was thickened, and large tumor-like swellings involving the C5 and C6 nerves bilaterally, ventral to cord could be appreciated. These appeared to arise from the motor roots as stimulated by the intraoperative nerve stimulator except the left C6 nerve root which was subsequently biopsied. A frozen section demonstrated dispersed large, myelinated axons throughout the lesional tissue, contradicting a diagnosis of a peripheral nerve sheath tumor. Instead of debulking, an expansive duraplasty, followed by expansive laminoplasty was therefore performed. A left sural nerve biopsy was also taken.
Histopathology of both the root and nerve biopsies showed striking features classical for a chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy with marked loss of large, myelinated fibers, endoneurial edema, thinly remyelinated axons, Schwann cell onion skinning, and T cell inflammatory infiltrates . The hypertrophy apparent in the nerve root was due to marked expansion of an edematous endoneurial matrix.
Six weeks after surgical decompression, the patient commenced monthly pulses of immunoglobulin therapy and is making slow and steady improvements to the point where he is mobilizing independently . Genetic tests for NF-1 subsequently returned negative.