A 17-year-old Asian female patient living in a rural area and whose family is engaged in animal husbandry had abdominal pain, lower back pain, and increased fever, especially at night, which started approximately 1 month before the admission to our emergency department. She had no history of disease and drug use. There was no chronic disease in her family. She went to different polyclinic branches in many hospitals with these complaints. During this time, in these sections, after receiving various diagnoses and treatments such as urinary infection and lumbar discopathy, she was diagnosed at another center with brucellosis after her standard tube agglutination test (STA) was positive at 1/320 titer, and her treatment was arranged in the form of a combination of doxycycline (100 mg; twice a day) and rifampicin (600 mg; once a day). Although the treatment was given to the patient, her complaints continued, and her lower back pain worsened, so she came to our emergency department and was consulted by the department of infectious diseases. On admission, her fever was 37.8 °C, and other vital signs were stable. On physical examination, diffuse tenderness was detected on palpation in the thoracolumbar vertebrae. Other physical examination findings were normal. In the examinations performed, hemoglobin (Hb) level was 10.4 g/dL, white blood cell count was 10,900 (53% neutrophils, 35% lymphocytes), C-reactive protein (CRP) was 92.9 mg/L (0–5 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 71 mm/hour, Rose Bengal plate test (RBPT) was negative, and posteroanterior (PA) chest X-ray was found normal. The brucellosis treatment the patient was taking was continued. Blood cultures were taken after admission. Although the lumbar magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was normal, on contrast-enhanced thoracic vertebra MR examination, bone marrow edema in T11 and T12 vertebrae in this disc space, mild hyperintense signal change in T2W disc space on contrast-enhanced examination, and intense enhancement of the described vertebrae were observed. Spondylodiscitis was considered. At the same time, a T1W hypointense, T2W hyperintense intense peripheral enhanced signal area was detected at this level, reaching a thickness of approximately 2 mm, which may be compatible with epidural abscess and paravertebral abscess in the anterior paravertebral area . Ceftriaxone (1000 mg; twice a day) was added to the treatment that the patient was taking and continued. She needed serious analgesics due to severe pain. Surgical intervention was not considered for the patient by the department of neurosurgery since there was no neurological finding on physical examination. Our request for interventional sampling was not accepted. The Brucella agglutination test with Coombs performed in our microbiology laboratory was positive at a titer of > 1/1280. There was no contact history regarding tuberculosis, and the purified protein derivative (PPD) test was negative. No growth was detected in blood cultures during and after this period. The patient, who did not have a fever after hospitalization, complained of a fever reaching 39 °C on the fourth day. On the days following the development of fever, the control white blood cell value was 21,000, and CRP was 420 mg/L; the possibilities for another focus of infection, progression of the current complication, or another complication were evaluated. As a result of the examinations, empyema was detected in the left lung, transferred to the department of thoracic surgery, and tube thoracostomy (closed underwater drainage) was performed. An exudate-like fluid was detected with drainage and a hemopurulent appearance. On gram examination, there were plenty of leukocytes, and no microorganisms were seen. There was no growth in the pleural fluid culture. The data obtained during this intervention were limited due to insufficient examination requests. The patient’s treatment was continued during this period by changing with doxycycline, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SXT) (10 mg TMP/kg/day intravenously divided every 6–12 hours). After the necessity of tube thoracostomy disappeared, the patient was taken back to our service to continue the treatment. On the eighth day following the drainage, the patient developed a fever again, and the acute phase values increased. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) was performed by taking a blood culture. Pleural fluid appearance with dense content, reaching a thickness of 3 cm in the thickest part on the right and 25 mm in the thickest part on the left, and containing air values on the left; pleural fluid with a thickness of approximately 1 cm between the leaves of the mediastinal pleura in the right paracardiac area, the largest in the paracardiac and prevascular areas in the mediastinum; and a few lymph nodes with a short diameter of 7 mm were detected . Before thoracic surgery, a thoracentesis was performed, and we planned microbiological tests. In the pleural fluid examination taken by thoracentesis, the appearance was hemorrhagic, leukocyte count was 15,000/mm3, pH was 7.0, protein was 3.5 g/dL, pleural fluid/serum protein was 0.61 (3.5/5.7), pleural fluid/serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 8.61 (2534/256), and glucose was 50 mg/dL. In Gram staining, 75% of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL) and bacteria were not seen. Acid Resistant Bacillus (ARB) was negative, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative. No growth in culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (result learned later). Pathology result reported “mixed inflammatory cell infiltration, mesothelial cell groups; it was reported as pleural effusion fluid; no neoplastic cells were found.” When the Brucella agglutination test with Coombs was found to be positive > 1/1280 in the pleural fluid, it was understood that the present empyema was also due to brucellosis. Despite the long incubation period, no growth was detected in blood cultures and pleural fluid samples. The patient, whose medical treatment was continued by providing drainage of the existing empyema, was discharged in a stable condition after approximately 1 month of clinical follow-up. The brucellosis treatment of the patient was completed after 6 months with the triple combination of TMP/SXT, rifampicin, and doxycycline. No additional problems were encountered in the outpatient clinic controls .