A 36 year old woman was admitted to her local hospital following a collapse at work, she had a 3 month history of dyspnoea, weight loss and abdominal swelling.
Clinical examination demonstrated a large mass occupying most of the abdomen and pelvis which was confirmed on CT scanning as shown in Fig . Additionally there were bilateral pleural effusions, but no other apparent pulmonary abnormalities. A CT scan of the brain showed no apparent abnormalities.
The routine haematology and biochemistry blood tests were unremarkable, however the serum hCG level was elevated at 1322 IU/L (nr 0-4), the CA-125 was also elevated at 1475 U/ml, whilst the serum AFP level was normal.
The clinical diagnosis made was of an advanced malignant ovarian germ cell tumour and shortly after transfer the patient's condition worsened with bowel obstruction and a pneumothorax in addition to the bilateral pleural effusions. This difficult clinical situation mandated rapid treatment and urgent chemotherapy was commenced with two days of etoposide (100 mg/m2) and cisplatin (20 mg/m2) using dexamethasone and ondansetron as the anti-emetics. The initiation of chemotherapy lead to a significant improvement in the clinical condition and the chemotherapy regimen was then changed to the POMB/ACE combination .
Following a brief stay in ITU for the treatment of hypotension and neutropaenic sepsis the patient was discharged home 1 month after admission to continue outpatient based chemotherapy with the hCG falling to normal 6 weeks after commencing treatment.
Two weeks after hospital discharge, the patient represented with a short history of impaired consciousness and pyrexia. Investigations demonstrated neutropaenia and hypokalaemia but with a normal CT scan of the brain and normal serum hCG levels.
At this point the diagnosis was unclear and the patient received empirical treatment for neutropaenic sepsis, viral encephalitis and tuberculosis. Two days later the patient's condition deteriorated further with the development of meningism and nystagmus and an MRI scan of the brain demonstrated oedema and a number of enhancing lesions reported as probable metastases as shown in Fig .
The empirical emergency treatment was continued with antibiotics, anti-virals, steroids and anti-TB therapy comprising Rifater, Pyridoxine, and Ethambutol and over the next 10 days the patient's condition improved gradually. The CSF sample taken at readmission was reported as positive for TB by both PCR and Elispot and culture positive growth was subsequently seen at 21 days.
Following the improvement from the acute neurological events, the POMB/ACE chemotherapy was recommenced but at this point the serum hCG level had become elevated with values ranging from 5-10 IU/L and this finding combined with an initial increase in the size and number of the CNS lesions on a repeat MRI again raised the concern that at least some of the lesions could be CNS metastases. However with the diagnosis of CNS TB confirmed and our previous experienced of transient hCG elevations in women treated with prolonged chemotherapy we elected to assume that all the lesions were infective in origin and persist with the chemotherapy treatment as planned.
The POMB/ACE chemotherapy was concluded with a total of 16 weeks treatment, whilst the anti-TB therapy was continued for a full course of 6 months. During the remainder of chemotherapy and initially post treatment the hCG level remained elevated for approximately 3 months before returning to the normal range as shown in the treatment graph in Fig .
At the completion of chemotherapy, a laparotomy was performed, removing the residual tumour, the ovarian remnant, but leaving the uterus and contralateral ovary in place. The pathology from the resected tumour was reported as necrotic tissue in keeping with a germ cell origin but without any viable tumour.
Post operatively the patient made an excellent returning to work 9 months after presentation with normal menstrual function returning 8 months after finishing chemotherapy. The follow up investigations have confirmed that the abdomen and pelvis remain free of disease and the CNS lesions have essentially resolved, as shown in Fig , and the hCG levels remain normal.