A 42-year-old Para I female patient was referred to a tertiary hospital after she presented with a passage of hair in the urine and lower abdominal pain for a year. Otherwise, there was no complaint of urinary frequency, urgency, or pain on urination. She did not report fever, foul-smelling vaginal discharge, or pain during coitus. She has not had any known chronic medical illness.
On physical examination, the patient had stable vital signs. There was no remarkable positive physical finding other than an old Pfannenstiel surgical scar. The pelvic exam was negative for any visible genital lesions, cervical motion tenderness, or palpable adnexal mass.
She underwent a joint evaluation and workup by urology and gynecologic oncology units. On laboratory investigation, CBC (complete blood count) was normal and hematocrit was 40.3%. Urine analysis was remarkable for microscopic hematuria in the range of 3–5 RBC/HPF (Normal ≤2 RBCs/HPF). But the other parameters of urine analysis were in the normal range. The serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum electrolytes, and liver enzymes were also normal. Serologic tests for HIV, hepatitis B, and C as well as Treponema were negative.
Abdominopelvic ultrasound examination showed a bizarre shaped tubular echogenic shadow in the lumen of the bladder that looks like a foreign body. Further imaging with a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a complex heterogeneous mass lesion in the right adnexa measuring 5cm*3.7cm that has multiple calcifications and fat attenuations inside it. The lesion invaded the right superolateral surface of the bladder with a defect in the bladder mucosa. It was concluded as a right adnexal mass lesion with possible bladder invasion .
Cystoscopy was also done and revealed a whitish papillary mass with hair-like component over the right posterior wall of the bladder near the dome .
Further workup with tumor markers using serum beta HCG, serum LDH, CA-125, and CEA did not reveal any clue toward a specific diagnosis.
A joint decision was made to surgically explore the patient. The pelvis was entered through the previous Pfannenstiel incision. The finding was a 4cm*6cm right ovarian mass with solid and cystic areas containing hair, bone, and teeth. Right side salpingo-oophorectomy, partial cystectomy and bladder repair were done. The excised mass was sent for histopathological analysis.
Excisional biopsy report showed stratified squamous epithelium, adnexal structures, fatty and bony tissue fragments, confirming the diagnosis of mature ovarian teratoma .
On subsequent follow-up visits, the patient reported improvement in symptoms and physical examination was unremarkable.