A 40-year-old man presented to the University of Alabama at Birmingham Medical Center emergency department with depression. He was admitted to the hospital and started on oral fluoxetine 20 mg daily, titrating to 40 mg daily after the initial 3 days. The patient then gave written informed consent to participate in an investigational study examining rapid reduction of depressive symptoms in patients with major depressive disorder with active suicidal ideation with intent. At the time of writing this case report, esketamine nasal spray has been approved only for the management of treatment-resistant depression (TRD). He met the trial eligibility criteria and was randomized to esketamine nasal spray, which was initiated on day 1 at a dose of 84 mg administered using 3 nasal spray devices (28 mg/device) twice per week for 4 weeks. After the initial dose, the patient reported dysgeusia almost immediately and began intermittently retching, which delayed the administration of the subsequent dose. He continued retching intermittently for 14 min, and the bad taste persisted for approximately 3 h.
After the third dose was administered on the first day, the patient was encouraged to rinse out his mouth with water and spit it out without swallowing. However, the patient retched within 2 min and the bad taste persisted for several hours. On the second dosing day, rinsing with water was attempted again, with a similar lack of effect. After 20 min of intermittent retching, a nurse suggested a fruit punch–flavored powdered drink (Crystal Light Fruit Punch) mixed with water to mask the taste, which the patient drank 25 min after the initial spray. The bad taste resolved within 5 min (30 min after the report of the adverse event). During the third dosing day, dysgeusia was reported again, but after drinking the punch-flavored beverage, the time to resolution decreased to 24 min after the adverse event was reported. This strategy was employed for all subsequent doses, and the patient reported only one more instance of dysgeusia on the final day of dosing. Again, time to resolution was within 30 min of the report of the adverse event. A punch-flavored drink has been used successfully to reverse or prevent dysgeusia with other patients at our center.