An 81-year-old man presented to the Cancer Hospital of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences with hoarseness, without a history of smoking, occupational or environmental exposures, or a family history of cancer. Bronchoscopic findings showed a neoplasm arising from the opening of the right upper lobe posterior segmental bronchi ; and laryngoscopy revealed a polyp on the posterior-portion of the right vocal fold with leukoplakia . Computed tomography (CT) revealed a well-demarcated, irregular mass, 2.9 cm in size, in the posterior segmental bronchial root of posterior apex of the upper right lung. The tumor was adjacent to the artery and vein of the right upper lobe . Biopsy specimens were pathologically diagnosed as right vocal-cord squamous cell carcinoma with intraepithelial neoplasia and pulmonary HCCC. He underwent radiotherapy 33 times for vocal-cord SCC without any additional therapy for the pulmonary tumor. CT reexamination demonstrated no obvious change 10 months later. He underwent right upper lobectomy and lymph node dissection 10 months later. Histopathologic examination of the resected specimen revealed that the lesion was HCCC with involvement of one lymph node.
A fully automated system was used to carry out immunohistochemistry (IHC) on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sections cut at 3 μm. The following antibodies were analyzed on Leica Biosystems: Calponin (EP63, ZSGB-BIO), SMA (1A4, MXB), p53 (MX008, MXB), and p40 (ZR8, MXB). Ki-67 (GM027, genetech), p63 (4A4, Ventana), and Desmin (MX046, MXB) were analyzed on a Discovery Ultra VENTANA systems automated Stainer (Roche), while CK5/6 (MX040, MXB) was analyzed with Dako Autostained Stain System.
Next, 56-gene targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) was conducted according to the previously described procedure . A QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Düsseldorf, Germany) was used to extract DNA from FFPE tissue. Quantification of DNA was performed using a Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA), and quality assessment was performed using a 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. Fragmented genomic DNA was processed to create libraries with barcodes that were used to hybridize with DNA panels. Data from sequenced libraries was analyzed to determine genetic alternations. The closest genes in both directions were defined as the predicted fusion partners when breakpoints were detected in the intergenic regions.
Dataset 22 from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database was used to analyze the incidence rate of lung malignant neoplasms between 2000 and 2019. International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, 3rd edition (ICD-O-3) was used to identify tumors based on the histological findings. Neoplasms were included according to the following criteria: (1) neoplasms in the head and neck (HN) (C00-C14, C32) and lung (C33, C34) by the ICD-O-3 primary sites code; (2) neoplasms with malignant behavior; (3) primary tumors diagnosed by international criteria; (4) synchronous tumors and metachronous tumors defined as multiple primary tumors diagnosed within 1 year and more than 1 year, respectively.
In this study, multiple primary tumors in the lung and HN were analyzed based on sex, age, sex, primary site, histologic type ICD-O-3, and tumor behavior. The data were compiled by SEER*Stat version 8.4.0.1. and R software (version 4.1.02) was used to generate the boxplot and network.
Biopsy samples obtained by bronchoscopy revealed a neoplasm with infiltrative growth in the bronchial submucosa . It was composed of polygonal cells, which were arranged as flaky, adenoid clusters in the myxoid matrix with hyaline degeneration. The polygonal cells had an eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm with light atypical round-to-oval nuclei . On IHC, tumor cells demonstrated strongly positive staining for CK7 and CK5/6; mildly positive staining for p40, and negative staining for SMA, Desmin, and Calponin. Ki67 proliferative index was approximately 8% . According to the morphology of this tumor, NGS was performed. NGS showed EWSR1-ATF1 fusion in 14.4% of the tumor cells . In addition, a frameshift mutation (p. T13fs) in exon 2 of the FANCI gene was observed. Based on the above-mentioned features, the diagnosis of primary pulmonary HCCC was confirmed.
Meanwhile, biopsy samples under the laryngoscope yielded a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with high grade dysplasia and epidermoid metaplasia in the right processus vocalis .
A right upper lobectomy with lymphadenectomy was performed. Grossly, a yellowish, firm, solid mass adjacent to the segmental bronchus was identified . Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections showed a morphology which was similar to that of bronchial biopsy sections . Polygonal cells with eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm were arranged as flaky nests or adenoid clusters in the myxoid matrix with hyaline degeneration. Mucous secretion was observed in a gland-like space with no bona fide glandular differentiation. Abundant extracellular mucus with absent mucinous cells was confirmed by alcian blue and periodic acid schiff staining . Nuclei were light atypical with a small blue nucleolus and rare nuclear divisions. The neoplasm mainly involved the whole layer of the segmental bronchus and regionally involved the alveolar tissue and one intrapulmonary lymph node. There was evidence of perineural invasion but no pleural involvement or necrosis. The resection margin was negative. In the study period, this patient was free of any local recurrence and required no additional therapy after surgery.
A total of 1,776,599 primary lung cancers from 1,752,949 patients were selected and analyzed from the SEER dataset. Among them, 21,451 (1.224%) patients had a primary head and neck malignancy tumors before a primary lung malignancy, including 6,049 and 16,689 cases of synchronous and metachronous primary malignant tumors, respectively. Unlike the incidence of total pulmonary malignant tumors, squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) had the highest incidence rate among all pulmonary malignant tumors occurring with HN malignant tumors . The most frequent patterns were pulmonary SCC with HNSCC and pulmonary adenocarcinoma with HNSCC. Additionally, HN adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) (n = 10, 37.04%) and HNSCC (n = 9, 33.33%) were the most common carcinomas occurred with pulmonary salivary gland-type malignant tumors, including ACC, mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC), and epithelial myoepithelial carcinoma (EMC).