A young male, 22 years old, presented to our tertiary eye center with complaints of a painles, gradual decrease in vision both eyes, more in the right for 1 year duration. He gave a history of wearing high power glasses (-12.0 DS) OU since early childhood for distance vision.
On presentation, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was hand movements close to face (HMCF) with inaccurate projection of rays (three quadrants) OD and 6/24 (0.6 logMAR) projection of rays accurate OS. Ocular examination revealed a port-wine stain on the right upper lid along with bluish-black scleral pigmentation and dilated prominent episcleral vessels (episcleral vascular malformations i.e., EVM) in both eyes with a clear cornea, deep anterior chamber, homogenously dense iris pigmentation and a clear lens. Posterior segment examination revealed both optic nerves to be average in size; OD showed a 0.9 cupping with up to 270o neuro-retinal rim loss; OS showed 0.8 cupping with a bipolar notch. There was pigmentation within the inferotemporal optic disc margin bilaterally, without any associated choroidal or retinal pigmentation . The IOP noted was 50 mm Hg OD and 44 mm Hg OS and required systemic hyper-osmotic agents for control. Gonioscopy revealed wide angle recess with an anterior or high insertion of iris reaching up to the anterior trabecular meshwork at places, along with homogeneously dense trabecular pigmentation and concavity of iris configuration . The visual fields were not possible in the right eye due to poor vision while advanced field loss, i.e., incomplete double arcuate scotoma with the involvement of fixation was seen in the left eye .
On systemic examination, bilateral port-wine stain could be noted on the face, over the cheek, upper jaw and chin, more on the left side along with brownish-black pigmentation over temples and forehead extending onto cheek and medial aspect of lower lid bilaterally and also upper jaw on the left side . Similar pigmentation was seen on the hard palate (Palatal Melanocytosis i.e., PM) centrally along with palatal vascular malformation (PVM) on the left side . No other port-wine nevi were present on any other body parts. The facial and ocular pigmentation (ODM) had been present since early childhood. There was no history of seizures, hemiparesis or mental retardation. Bilateral varicose veins were noted over the last ten years requiring surgical intervention one year prior . Neuroimaging by MRI could not document cerebral calcification or atrophy. Family history for similar disposition was negative, thus pointing to a sporadic inheritance.
Due to advanced glaucomatous damage in both eyes and requirement of systemic anti-glaucoma medications for IOP control, the patient was subjected to trabeculec-tomy with anti-fibrotics and releasable sutures in both eyes sequentially at 2 weeks interval. Intraoperatively, care was taken to stabilize the IOP by systemic hyperosmotic agents and controlled paracentesis was done to maintain a stable anterior chamber and help reduce the risk of suprachoroidal hemorrhage. The surgery was uneventful, without the need for draining sclerotomies, but a mild hyphaema occurred at the very end, due to episcleral vessel bleed while suturing the scleral flap. Post-operative course was uneventful, and complications like hypotony, shallow chamber, fresh bleeds or high IOP spikes were not noted. The releasable sutures were removed at two weeks post-operatively. Trabecular meshwork was sent for his-topathology and noted to have increased melanocytes. By 6 weeks’ post-operative, his vision improved to finger counting 1 meter with -14DS OD and 6/18 with -11DS OS; which has remained stable over 3 years follow-up. The IOP is maintained between 9 to 13 mm Hg without any medications.