A 17-year-old female patient complained of blurred vision in her right eye (OD) for 4 months. Further questions about the medical history revealed that the patient presented with intermittent low fever, cough for 4 months and headache for 4 days. Physical examination revealed neck stiffness and bilaterally diminished breath sounds, with a temperature of 37.8 °C. On examination, visual acuity in the right eye (OD) was hand motion at 10 cm, and visual acuity in the left eye (OS) was normal. The intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left eye.
Chest CT showed miliary nodules in the lung . Cerebral MRI displayed multiple intracranial nodules, and diffused miliary nodule lesions with peripheral edema . The purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test, MycoDot test and interferon-gamma release assay yielded positive results. Cerebral examination showed increased intracranial pressure, elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein concentration, and decreased CSF glucose and chloride, suggesting the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis . Ocular fundus photography showed macular oedema, stellate exudation and an absent foveal reflex in the right eye , and sporadic yellowish-white exudation at the posterior pole in the left eye .
Simultaneous fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) demonstrated early irregular hyper-fluorescence in macular center of the right eye, and sustained hyper-fluorescence with a ring of leaking surrounding the lesion on FFA and ICGA in the late phase , highly suspicious for choroidal granuloma with CNV. FFA showed two lesions as early hypoautofluorescent and late hyperautofluorescent with central hypoautofluorescence, and ICGA showed three hypofluorescent spots during the initial and transit periods with the late phase presenting hypofluorescent centers and surrounding hyperfluorescent edges in the left eye , suggesting the diagnosis of choroidal tubercles.
In the right eye, optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed chorioretinal elevation of macular area, with an area of exudative retinal neurepithelium layer detachment (subretinal fluid sonolucent height was 2.242 mm) . Ocular ultrasonography B-scan revealed an oval solid mass measuring 6.86 mm × 2.83 mm in the posterior wall of the right eye .
The patient was started on anti-TB medications. She was treated previously with oral corticosteroids daily 30 mg for 1 month, and her symptoms of fever and fatigue disappeared, but her visual acuity of the right eye did not improve. In consideration of her well-defined TB with miliary spread, the patient received a six-month course of HRZE anti-tubercular regimen comprising isoniazid (0.3 g), rifampicin (0.45 g), pyrazinamide (1.5 g) and ethambutol (0.75 g) and intravenous dexamethasone (10 mg daily for 2 weeks and 5 mg daily for 2 weeks), followed by oral prednisone 30 mg daily with a slow taper. Meanwhile, the patient received an intrathecal isoniazid (0.1 g) and dexamethasone sodium phosphate (5 mg) injection OD.
Her systemic condition gradually improved during the first 10 days of combination therapy. Cerebral pressure gradually returned to normal from 240 mmH2O, CSF protein concentration decreased, and CSF glucose and chloride returned to normal levels , supporting the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. However, the combination therapy did not improve macular edema in the right eye. Then, the patient received an anti-VEGF ranibizumab (0.05 mL) injection in the right eye. One month later, OCT scan showed clear retinal structure with a significant improvement of macular edema and disappearance of subretinal fluid . The final visual acuity was 0.2 in the right eye and 1.0 in the left eye.