A 65-year-old woman was being followed up after pulmonary sarcoma surgery. She was admitted to our hospital with the symptom of dyspepsia and because positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) showed abnormal accumulation in the transverse colon. Colonoscopy revealed a type II tumor at the left side of the transverse colon , for which biopsy was performed. Examination of biopsy specimens revealed a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The chest and abdomen CT images were acquired with a 64-detector row CT scanner. The CT scan was started at 70 s after the injection of non-ionic contrast agent, and reconstructed thin-slice images that were 0.625 mm thick. The CT revealed sub-circular wall thickening of the transverse colon near the splenic flexure . Although CT showed no lymph node enlargement and no signs of metastasis, a hypovascular lesion measuring 17 mm was detected in segment 4 of the liver. Additionally, the ICV was seen to drain into the GCT along with the ASPDV and RGEV , and the ICV pedicle was located cephalad to the pedicle of the middle colic artery (MCA). On laboratory evaluation, the patient’s carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were not elevated. Based on these results, she was clinically diagnosed with transverse colon cancer T4a N0 M1a Stage IV according to the TNM classification, for which she underwent single-incision laparoscopic transverse colectomy with D3 lymph node dissection. The operation time was 195 min with minimal blood loss. The final pathological diagnosis was T4a(SE) N1M1a Stage IV.
The operation was performed using a cranial-to-caudal (C–C) approach and flip-flap method . The ICV ran towards the GCT on the ventral side of the duodenum and pancreatic head , which confluence was observed to be cranial to the root of the MCA. The hepatic flexure was mobilized from the second part of the duodenum. Continuing caudally, the dorsal aspect of the ascending mesentery and the mesenteric root were separated from the third part of the duodenum. The greater omentum was separated from the transverse colon, the omental bursa was opened, and the inferior border of the pancreas was exposed. Separating the mesentery from the right side to the left side with maintenance of a layer preserving the prepancreatic fascia, the accessory right colic vein (ARCV) and MCV were divided at the root with preservation of the ICV and GCT, further continuing the dissection of the mesenteric fat above the SMV. The mesenteric fat above the SMV and the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was dissected from the caudal-tocranial direction, toward the inferior border of the pancreas, and the MCA was divided from the SMA at its root. The MCV, RGEV, ASPDV and ICV were found to form the GCT, confirming the preoperative assessment .
The patient had no postoperative complications and was discharged from the hospital 13 days after surgery. The pathological diagnosis was pT4a N2[#221(3/9), #222(2/4), #223(0/10), total n(+,5/23)] M1a Stage IV. The proximal and distal margins of the lesion were free of tumor cells. Postoperatively, chemotherapy and subsequent hepatic resection were performed. As of 3 years after the operation, although tumor recurrence in the residual liver has been observed, there is no local or lymph node recurrence.