A 38-year-old man was diagnosed with UC at the age of 26 years. Four months after the diagnosis of UC, the patient underwent hand-assisted laparoscopic restorative proctocolectomy, IPAA, and ileostomy for acute fulminant UC. Minor leakage at the anastomosis was observed postoperatively but improved with conservative treatment. Although a fistula was observed near the anastomosis, no obvious abscess formation was noted . Six months after surgery, simple closure of the fistula was performed using the transanal approach, and the ileostomy was closed 1 month later. Two years after closure of the ileostomy, he developed a perianal abscess and underwent ileostomy reconstruction. However, a postoperative small intestinal obstruction developed, and the small intestine, including the ileostomy and part of the cranial pouch, was resected . At age 29, he underwent bilateral nephrostomy for bilateral ureteral strictures caused by chronic pelvic inflammation. Thereafter, his general condition remained stable despite chronic inflammation. He was referred to our department at age 35, because his symptoms did not improve despite repeated seton drainage of a complicated perineal fistula .
We diagnosed PRC with a pelvic abscess and complicated pouch fistula and decided to perform salvage surgery. We performed residual pouch resection, partial small intestinal resection, and ileostomy reconstruction. The operation time was 686 min, and the blood loss was 800 ml. As the midline wound was expected to have a high degree of adhesion, we utilized laparoscopy for the adhesion dissection and laparotomy for the intestinal manipulation. We inserted the camera port into the left upper abdomen, where we assumed there would be minimal adhesions, and observed the abdominal cavity . We carefully dissected the adhesions between the small intestine and abdominal wall to expose the residual pouch. Because the small intestine was highly adherent to the pelvis, we used an anal approach.
At this point, we decided to open the abdomen and perform resection of the residual pouch, including the complex fistula, and partial resection of the small intestine involved in the pelvic abscess . The midline wound was closed after the scar was trimmed. The residual small intestine was 200 cm in length. Histopathological examination showed inflammation in all layers of the pouch, as well as epithelioid cell granulomas , and the diagnosis was revised to Crohn’s disease (CD) postoperatively. Postoperatively, the Alb and CRP values were within normal ranges, although the preoperative Alb and CRP levels were 2.8 g/dl and 10 mg/dl, respectively. His quality of life improved notably, and he returned to society and is now an outpatient.
The patient was a 50-year-old man who was diagnosed with UC at 18 years of age and was administered high doses of steroids; however, his symptoms did not improve. He had undergone subtotal colectomy and ileostomy at a previous hospital. Subsequently, the patient underwent residual rectal resection, IPAA, and ileostomy. The ileostomy was closed 8 months after the surgery, and his condition stabilized thereafter. At 35 years of age, perianal pain developed, and the patient was diagnosed with a complicated pouch–perineal fistula.
Colonoscopy and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a fistula near the staple line at the ileal end closure on the head side of the pouch . Reconstruction of the ileostomy and seton drainage were performed; however, his symptoms did not improve, and he was referred to our hospital . We diagnosed PRC with a pelvic abscess and pouch perineal fistula and decided to perform salvage surgery. We performed laparoscopic pouch resection and ileostomy reconstruction. The operative time was 668 min, and the blood loss was 250 ml. The pouch was carefully dissected, because it was highly adherent to the pelvis . We performed pouch resection, including fistula resection, using an additional anal approach and partial small intestinal resection, including ileostomy . The resected specimen showed strictures in two locations: at the oral site of the afferent limb (at the pouch) and at the IPAA . Histopathological examination revealed an inflammatory cell infiltrate mainly composed of lymphocytes in the extensive pouch mucosa but no epithelioid cell granulomas or other findings suggestive of CD. Postoperatively, the CRP level was within the normal range, while the preoperative CRP was ~ 1 mg/dl for a long period of time. In contrast to the preoperative BMI of 17.3kg/m2, the patient's nutritional status improved postoperatively. He returned to society and is now an outpatient.