A 35-year-old male presented with constant blurry vision in his left eye for 6 weeks. His past medical history was significant for CF complicated by chronic pancreatic insufficiency leading to insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, chronic sinusitis, hypertension, iron deficiency anemia, and obstructive sleep apnea. His only previous surgery was a combined sinus surgery consisting of bilateral maxillary antrostomies, ethmoidectomies, sphenoidectomies, and frontal sinusotomies performed 7 months prior to presentation. Medications at the time of presentation included albuterol, azithromycin, itraconazole, insulin, lisinopril, pancreatic enzymes, and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim. He denied any tobacco or drug use. His visual acuity at presentation was 20/20 in both eyes, intraocular pressure was 18 OD and 16 OS, and his pupils were 4 mm and reactive in both eyes. His anterior exam was unremarkable, but his posterior exam in the left eye was significant for intraretinal hemorrhages along the nerve fiber layer with associated retinal thickening in the inferior macula consistent with a BRVO . Optical coherence tomography revealed mild intraretinal and trace subfoveal fluid in the left eye . The findings were confirmed with fluorescein angiogram which revealed delayed venous filling in the inferior venous arcade .
His blood pressure readings had been consistently between 110 and 145 systolic over 70–85 diastolic in the past year, and his most recent hemoglobin A1c was 6.9% 4 months prior to presentation. Laboratory workup revealed normal complete blood cell count, Vitamin A and D levels, prothrombin time, thrombin time, antithrombin activity, Protein C and S activity, cardiolipins, dilute Russell’s viper venom time, homocysteine level, and a negative prothrombin G20210A mutation. A complete metabolic panel was notable for a mild elevation in glucose of 121 mg/dL (70–100 mg/dL). Antinuclear antibody was weakly elevated at 2.1 units (≤ 1 unit), and sedimentation rate was 24 mm/h (0–22 mm/h) with normal C-reactive protein. The only significantly abnormal lab was a fibrinogen level of 479 mg/dL (200–375 mg/dL).The patient was observed without treatment given his visual acuity was 20/20 and the macular fluid did not involve the fovea . Six months after presentation he remained 20/20 in both eyes and the macular fluid had resolved with careful observation.