A 20-year-old woman sustained fracture dislocation of C-4 and C-5, fracture ribs, right pneumothorax, fracture of right humerus, and C-4 complete tetraplegia in a road traffic accident. She was intubated, ventilated and chest drain was inserted. Tracheostomy was performed and this patient was weaned off the ventilator. Initially, this patient was managed by indwelling urethral catheter. Three years later, suprapubic cystostomy was performed because the indwelling catheter had eroded the roof of urethra. Cystoscopy showed erosion of urethra, which was very patulous. Haygrove sound 8/11 was inserted per urethra. A small midline incision was made in suprapubic region through which Haygrove sound was brought out. A 16 French Foley catheter was then inserted into the urinary bladder. Suprapubic catheter was changed once a month.
About a year after undergoing suprapubic cystostomy, the suprapubic catheter came out while a health professional tried to give bladder washout. A sterile catheter was not available and then suprapubic tract had closed. Therefore, a catheter was inserted per urethra. Subsequently, suprapubic cystostomy was performed after introducing a semicircular bougie per urethra and through the dome of urinary bladder and then to the suprapubic region. An 18 French silicone Foley catheter was tied to the tip of the bougie with nylon thread. The 18 French, Foley catheter was gently guided in to the urinary bladder while the bougie was slowly withdrawn.
After twelve months, this patient experienced frequent blockages of catheter. Therefore, flexible cystoscopy was performed. Suprapubic catheter was found to be in proper place. There was no stone; no tumour. Mucosa of urinary bladder was congested. Suprapubic catheter was changed every month in spinal injuries centre for next two years. Then onwards, the catheter was changed in the patient's home by a District Nurse every four weeks.
Fourteen months later, this patient started bypassing every night. Flexible cystoscopy was performed. Urethra was patulous. There was erosion of urethra. The urinary bladder was of small capacity. The tip of suprapubic catheter was located in the urethra. The catheter had gone through patulous bladder neck and had entered the urethra. This patient's carers were taught how to anchor the catheter in the suprapubic region using BioDerm catheter holder. This patient was prescribed oxybutynin modified-release 10 mg once a day. Community health professionals changed suprapubic catheter in the patient's home.
Two years later, this patient came to spinal unit with history of swelling in the suprapubic region. Clinical examination revealed that the balloon of suprapubic catheter was lying under the skin. A Foley catheter was inserted into the urinary bladder through suprapubic tract. Four months later, the suprapubic catheter inserted by a community health professional, was found to be lying subcutaneously outside the urinary bladder. There was no dressing to anchor the catheter. The catheter was not fixed to skin with any device such as Cath Grip (BioDerm Inc. Largo, Florida 33773, USA). Computed tomography revealed the suprapubic catheter was lying outside the bladder. The balloon and tip of the catheter were located in the subcutaneous adipose layer superficial to the lower part of the rectus sheath. A month later, this patient started getting small amount of bloody discharge around suprapubic catheter. Ultrasound examination of kidneys revealed normal echotexture to the right kidney, which measured 11.4 cm with good cortical medullary differentiation and cortical depth. An 8 mm calculus was noted in the lower pole calyx of the right kidney. There was no evidence of hydronephrosis. The echotexture of left kidney was normal; left kidney measured 11.3 cm with good cortical medullary differentiation and cortical depth. There was no evidence of hydronephrosis.
About three months later, patient's carers noticed seropurulent discharge from under-surface of pubis in addition to similar discharge from suprapubic cystostomy site. Computed tomography, revealed the suprapubic catheter balloon to be lying within the empty urinary bladder. There was some midline soft tissue stranding adjacent to the lower abdominal wall muscles at the site of insertion of the suprapubic catheter. There was no evidence of large collection around the suprapubic catheter. More significantly, there were a couple of new small locules of gas in the previously seen small fluid collection (3.4 × 1.6 cm), which was related to the symphysis pubis anteriorly and separate from the suprapubic catheter site. There also appeared to be some erosion of the symphysis pubis with a few bony fragments in the joint space. Small fluid collection was seen extending down along the proximal right adductor muscle. At the site of insertion of the adductor muscle the collection was 2.6 × 2.2 cm .
Wound swab showed heavy growth of Streptococcus milleri, light growth of Coliform species and scanty growth of Proteus species. This patient was prescribed several courses of antibacterial agents based on microbiology reports-Amoxicillin, then Metronidazole, Amoxicillin with Clavulanic acid, then Amoxicillin, followed by Trimethoprim.
Follow-up Computed Tomography performed eight months after the first CT, revealed persistent soft tissue thickening along the tract of the suprapubic catheter with mild localised inflammation in the abdominal wall fat. This soft tissue thickening showed some enhancement suggesting chronic inflammation. The suprapubic catheter tract was abutting the area of inflammation extending from the site of osteomyelitis at the symphysis pubis; there was a small fluid collection 1.7 cm in diameter containing a small pocket of gas immediately adjacent to the right side of the catheter tract posteriorly. There was persistent inflammatory soft tissue thickening at the symphysis pubis, although bony destruction did not appear to have significantly extended since the previous examination. There were pockets of gas within this and there was an abscess at the right adductor insertion extending for a small distance along the fibres of the right adductor muscle. This collection was 3.8 cm in diameter and had increased since the previous examination.
Computed tomography, performed eleven months after first CT revealed a slight increase in the amount of the previously depicted collection surrounding the adductor muscle measuring about 2.7 × 4.8 cm in maximum transverse dimensions as compared to 2.7 × 3.8 cm previously. At the symphysis pubis, there was also increase in the soft tissue component of the symphysis pubis osteomyelitis. The inflammatory soft tissue lesion had slightly increased in size; however, there was almost complete resorption of the previously depicted air loculi. Inflammatory processes still were seen continuous with the thickened suprapubic cystostomy tract. No evidence of newly developed collections or soft tissue abnormalities. A few bilateral subcentimetric inguinal lymph nodes were still noted. There was no evidence of pelvic collections.
Currently, this patient continues to manage her bladder by suprapubic cystostomy. A size 24 French, 30 ml balloon Bard Biocath Hydrogel coated Foley catheter is being used for suprapubic cystostomy. There is no discharge from under-surface of pubis. The suprapubic cystostomy site looks healthy with no evidence of inflammation.