An 18-year-old G1P0 female presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of nausea, fatigue, and intermittent vaginal bleeding for the prior four days. She believed she was approximately two months pregnant but was unsure about her last menstrual period. She had not followed up with an obstetrician for her pregnancy, per chart review. The patient was given an informal diagnosis of hyperemesis gravidarum based on one previous ED visit when she had presented with emesis and was started on metoclopramide. She had been having six to eight episodes of emesis daily but denied emesis on the day of presentation. She reported light spotting but denied any tissue passage. She stated she had gone through one pad a day in the prior three days. Review of symptoms was positive for fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and vaginal bleeding. The patient had no chronic medical conditions or pertinent social or family history. She was taking metoclopramide 10 milligrams (mg) as needed for nausea and prenatal vitamins daily.
Upon arrival to the ED, the patient had a temperature of 97.9° Fahrenheit, heart rate of 160 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, and blood pressure of 95/57 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). On exam, she was tachycardic, had generalized abdominal tenderness, and appeared agitated with a flattened affect. She would answer questions appropriately but tersely with one word. A pelvic exam showed a closed cervical os with white vaginal discharge and a friable erythematous cervix that was tender to palpation, but no adnexal tenderness.
Initial laboratory results are listed in and . Other lab results included high sensitivity troponin of 14 (0–12 picograms per milliliter [pg/mL]), and quantitative human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG): >208,656 milli-international units per milliliter (m[IU]/mL). Her urinalysis showed large blood [negative], 3–5 red blood cell count (0–2 per high power field), 80 ketones (0 mg/deciliter), and moderate bacteria (none seen). An electrocardiogram was performed as well as a formal pregnancy ultrasound. The ultrasound demonstrated a single, live intrauterine gestation with crown-rump length corresponding to a gestational age of 10 weeks 4 days +/− 7 days.
With the abnormalities noted on initial labs, a right upper quadrant ultrasound was obtained showing only gallbladder sludge, without wall thickening, pericholecystic fluid, or common bile duct dilation, and a negative sonographic Murphy’s sign. Additionally, we obtained a serum lipase, acetaminophen, prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (PT/INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and alcohol level. The lipase, acetaminophen, and alcohol levels were all negative. The patient received two liters of normal saline with repeat vitals as follows: heart rate 132 beats per minute; blood pressure 127/77 mm Hg; and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. Following discussion with intensive care and obstetrics and gynecology, the patient was transferred to a tertiary care center for a higher level of care.