It was a closed trauma of the right hemithorax by a direct mechanism in a 12-year-old boy, occurring 24 h before admission, following a sports accident (kickboxing), with a fall of another boy directly on the right clavicle (the fulcrum was the knee on the clavicle). On examination: The child was conscious, hemodynamically, and respiratory stable, with a trauma attitude of the right upper limb . The right shoulder seemed shorter than the right one. There was a depression at the right sternoclavicular junction with limited shoulder abduction. Palpation revealed a bony protrusion quickly masked by edema, painful on palpation. No vascular or neural abnormality was found at examination. A standard chest X-ray was inconclusive for the diagnosis, which showed the presence of asymmetry of both clavicles . A complementary computed tomography (CT) scan with 3D reconstruction showed a right sternoclavicular disjunction with a posterior dislocation arriving at the intimate contact of the innominate trunk, responsible for a reduction of its caliber, but which remained permeable and well opacified after the injection of contrast product, without extravasation . We performed an orthopedic closed reduction under general anesthesia. In dorsal decubitus with a log under the shoulder, the reduction was done after a slight traction and abduction of the arm with antepulsion of the shoulder. Forward traction of the medial aspect of the clavicle allowed reduction with an audible crack. Vascular -nervous examination was normal, with immobilization with a clavicular ring and swathe shoulder immobilizer. A post-reduction CT scan confirmed a reduction of the dislocation with a right sternoclavicular joint in place, congruent with the reduction of the previously described disjunction and the absence of other associated lesions . Rest and immobilization for 6 weeks were recommended ( and ). A reevaluation on the 7th day showed the disappearance of the antalgic attitude of the upper limb and the absence of pain on sternoclavicular junction during palpation. The subsequent removal of the means of immobilization at the 6th week was done with self-rehabilitation by simple movements at low amplitude. The evolution at 24 months was favorable, with a complete recovery of the amplitudes of the shoulder and normal aspect at X-Ray .