A 60-year-old male patient was admitted for recurrent dizziness with chest discomfort for 1 year. He had no history of other chronic diseases, medication, or surgeries. The coronary CTA showed mild atherosclerosis in the coronary artery. Transthoracic echocardiography indicated an enlarged left atrium, and his left ventricular ejection fraction was 67%. Dynamic ECG showed sinus bradycardia with an average heart rate of 45 beats per min, second degree type II sinoatrial block, and the longest time of sinus arrest as 3.1 s. ECG did not indicate intraventricular conduction delay. Thus, the transvenous pacemaker implantation with LBBP was scheduled. The study was approved by HwaMei Hospital, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Ningbo, China (YJ-KYSB-NBEY-2021-079-01).
A dual-chamber pacemaker (model A3DR01; Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was implanted in the patient. The LBBP lead (model 3830–69 cm; Medtronic Inc.) was delivered using a sheath (C315, Medtronic Inc.) via the left subclavian vein access. About 206 s were spent screwing the LBBP lead in place successfully. During the trans-septal process of the LBB lead, continuous unipolar pacing at 2 V@0.5 ms was performed to observe the paced QRS morphology of the surface ECG. The impedance was monitored dynamically. A 16-ms shortening jump of stimulus-peak left ventricular activation time (pLVAT) from 82 to 66 ms in lead V5 at 5 V@0.5 ms output and indistinct PoLBB were observed at 83 s. Typically, a high output (10 V) is used to measure pLVAT. However, the default output of the Medtronic device programmer for measuring the unipolar pacing impedance was 5 V, and during the measurement, ECG was recorded to observe whether pLVAT was shortened abruptly compared with 2 V@0.5 ms. Therefore, we used 5 V as a high output. As the lead continued to be screwed in for 94 s, the same jump of pLVAT at 2 V@0.5 ms output was recorded which remained constant at low output, and PoLBB was distinct. The isoelectric stimulus-QRS interval was visible at 206 s . Thus, it was determined that the tip of the lead reached the selective LBB location . Unipolar pacing demonstrated that the final LBB threshold was 0.3 V@0.5 ms, left ventricular septal myocardial threshold was 0.5 V@0.5 ms, the R wave amplitude was 13 mV, and the unipolar impedance was 872 Ω.
Notably, the screwing procedure of the LBB lead always connected John-Jiang’s connecting cable. Unlike traditional cable that had to be detached to provide the rapid lead rotations, the Jiang cable could be revolved to record the EGM uninterrupted. As the LBB lead was placed transseptally from the right ventricular septal surface to the left, the tip of the lead was continuously paced to observe the changes in the paced QRS complexes. Thus, the intrinsic EGMs could not be recorded with sinus rhythm. This patient had some premature atrial beats capturing the ventricle (3–4:1) during the operation. Therefore, paced mixed intrinsic ventricular complexes from supraventricular impulses could be recorded. According to the comparison of the morphology, beat by beat, recorded from the right ventricular septum (RVS) to the endocardial side of the left ventricular septum (LVS) along the path of the LBB lead implantation, the intrinsic QRS did not show any obvious change on the surface ECG but had a significant difference on the intrinsic intracardiac EGM. Compared to the lead tip EGM on the right ventricular septal surface before the lead screwed in (1 s), the intrinsic intracardiac EGMs recorded before 41 s were dominated by a single posterior peak that moved forward gradually as the lead was screwed in continually. The waveform evolved into double peaks between 41 s and 94 s and changed from positive and negative to mainly positive. Subsequently, fragmentation potentials appeared at the rear. Then, the waveform emerged as several spikes until 210 s. After 84 s, the time from onset to the first peak remained unchanged .