A 39-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with acute upper abdominal pain in September 201X. She underwent laparotomy for gastric perforation. The procedure involved simple closure with omental coverage. Anterior wall of the pylorus, 5 mm in diameter, was perforated. The tissues around the perforation site hardened because of associated inflammation. Moreover, no findings, such as a mass, serosal irregularity, or disseminated nodules, indicated tumor presence. After surgery, the patient was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the pylorus by endoscopic biopsy. The endoscopic findings revealed a submucosal tumor with partial exposure to the surface mucosa . Figure shows contrast-enhanced computed tomography, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission, and computed tomography. Figure depicts the barium examination. The findings suggested that the adenocarcinoma expanded in the submucosal gastric wall.
Gastric adenocarcinoma usually does not present a submucosal tumor morphologically because it is an epithelial tumor. A heterotopic pancreas is a well-known submucosal lesion of the gastric antrum. Thus, we considered the possibility that adenocarcinoma from a heterotopic pancreas invaded the gastric lumen. Table presents the blood chemistry tumor markers. Only SPan-1 was above normal. The preoperative diagnosis of this patient was a heterotopic pancreatic carcinoma of the stomach; however, the definitive diagnosis of heterotopic pancreatic carcinoma requires the pathological examination of the resected specimen to meet the three conditions proposed by Guillou et al. . Adenocarcinoma of the stomach, which would be c-stage IIB (cT3N0M0), was also considered a differential diagnosis [, , ].
Surgery was performed to determine the original organ and prevent pyloric obstruction. Three months after the first procedure, a distal gastrectomy with systematic D2 lymph node dissection (Roux-en-Y reconstruction) was performed. The surgical findings indicated that the tumor was in the anterior wall of the antrum and pylorus of the stomach. Additionally, the greater omentum covered the perforation site, but the serosal surface of the tumor was smooth. No macroscopic tumor dissemination was observed. A heterotopic pancreas approximately 1 cm in diameter was observed on the posterior side of the tumor, which was also dissected en bloc. Our intraoperative diagnosis was heterotopic pancreatic carcinoma of the stomach, invading the stomach and first portion of the duodenum. During laparotomy, peritoneal lavage cytology was performed.
Figures , , show the pathological findings. The pathological findings revealed tubular mucosal adenocarcinoma. The tumor cells had clear cytoplasm and were diffusely spalt-like transcription factor 4 (SALL4)-positive. No atypical findings were observed in the heterotopic pancreas. Based on these findings, the patient was finally diagnosed with GACED. Furthermore, peritoneal lavage cytology was positive . According to the classification of the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association, pathological findings are described as follows: LD, LessAntPost. Type 3, 88 × 32 mm, adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic differentiation, pT3, INFb, Ly1a, v0, pN0 (0/25), pPM0 (103 mm), pDM0 (34 mm), M1 (CY1), and stage IV [, ]. The TNM classification of AJCC classified the tumor as pT3pN0M1, pStage IV .
The postoperative course was good. Postoperative chemotherapy with S1 plus oxaliplatin (SOX) (100 mg/m2/day S-1 for 2 weeks with 100 mg/m2 oxaliplatin on day 1, every 3 weeks) was started 47 days after gastrectomy. A total of 14 cycles were administered without severe adverse effects. One year after the gastrectomy, a laparotomy was performed to treat an incisional hernia. At that time, no macroscopic peritoneal metastasis was found and second peritoneal lavage cytology was negative for cancer. Chemotherapy was discontinued after a discussion with the medical team. Five and a half years after gastrectomy, the patient was well with no recurrence.