A 67-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with a three-month history of epigastric pain, anorexia, and subjective weight loss. His previous medical history was unremarkable. The patient did not present any associated fever or chills. He reported that his bowel habits were normal, with no blood or mucus in the stool. The patient reported that he did not smoke or drink. On examination, the patient was afebrile, with no pallor, jaundice, or lymphadenopathy. An abdominal examination revealed that he had an enlarged liver. A whole blood sample was collected. Laboratory test results were as follows: hemoglobin, 128g/L (normal, 110 to 160g/L); white blood cell count, 7.5×109/L (normal, four to 10.0×109/L); platelet count, 125×109/L (normal, 99 to 303×109/L); serum bilirubin, 18μmol/L (normal, 2.3 to 20.4μmol/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 18U/L (normal, five to 34U/L); and alanine aminotransferase, nine U/L (normal, 0 to 40U/L). Blood serologies for hepatitis B and C and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. The serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration was 17.4ng/mL (normal, <20ng/mL), the serum carcinoembryonic antigen concentration was 2.8ng/mL (normal, <five ng/mL).
Ultrasonography of the patient’s abdomen showed a mass in his left liver lobe that measured approximately seven cm in diameter. Computed tomography of his abdomen confirmed a mass measuring seven cm in diameter in the left lateral segment of his liver . The tumor was relatively poorly enhanced. The surface of the left liver lobe was blurred, leading to suspicion of tumor infiltration to the surrounding tissue. No other abnormality was detected in the patient’s abdomen. The upper and lower gastrointestinal series and chest radiography results were normal. A hepatic tumor was suspected and surgical resection was scheduled. Intra-operatively, a firm mass (seven cm in diameter) at the base of segments II and III was noted. The suspected tumor was adhered to the greater omentum, transverse colon, stomach, and anterior abdominal wall. A left lateral hepatectomy and distal gastrectomy were performed. Hepatic tissue three cm away from the lesion was considered a control and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues were obtained from the patients with HCC who accepted surgical resection. Tissue specimens from the liver were collected and stored in liquid nitrogen until they were examined histopathologically.
On pathological examination, the resected liver appeared as a yellow-white mass that contained a number of pus-like areas; several smaller nodules were adjacent to the mass. The histopathologic examination revealed prominent lobular inflammation, with large areas of hepatocyte loss and necrosis. Bacterial colonies of Actinomyces were observed surrounded by polymorphs as revealed by hematoxylin-eosin staining. The colonies tested positive for periodic acid-Schiff with the Splendore–Hoeppli reaction at the periphery and outer zone of inflammatory cells . No evidence of malignancy was found. The overall features were those of hepatic actinomycosis. The abscess involved the stomach and extended to the gastric muscularis propria, leading to focal fibrosis and inflammation.
The serum HMGB1 levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The serum HMGB1 concentration in the patient who had actinomycosis was 8.5ng/mL [,], 2.1±0.9ng/mL in the control group and 5.2±0.7ng/mL in the HCC group. The HMGB1 level in the patient who had actinomycosis was higher than the control and HCC groups .
Expression of HMGB1 messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) and protein in hepatic tissues was determined by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and western blot, respectively. HMGB1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly increased in the hepatic actinomycosis tissue compared with the control and HCC tissue .
Immunocytochemistry and confocal laser-scanning microscopy were used to confirm the distribution of HMGB1 protein in the hepatic tissues. Cells were double-stained with anti-HMGB1 antibodies and propidium iodide and analyzed by confocal microscopy. The cytoplasm of the control cells showed intense green staining, whereas the nucleus showed weak staining, indicating that HMGB1 is distributed mainly in the cytoplasm. In the HCC group, the nucleus stained very strongly, indicating that HMGB1 is distributed mainly in the nucleus. In the actinomycosis-affected cells, staining in both the cytoplasm and nucleus was enhanced, suggesting increased HMGB1 protein levels throughout the hepatic cell in this patient with primary hepatic actinomycosis .
The patient was treated with penicillin (intravenous penicillin G, 24 million units per day for the first two weeks and oral penicillin V, 1.5g per day for the following six months) and discharged when he was asymptomatic. He remained healthy, and the serum HMGB1 concentration was 0.92ng/mL (normal, <three ng/mL) at two years after surgery.