A 62-year-old Japanese female patient was admitted to the endocrinology center of Kurume University Hospital complaining of recent orbital pain, especially during eye movement and bilateral eyelid swellings. One year prior to her visit, she was diagnosed with severe adult GHD and secondary hypothyroidism due to low levels of both TSH and free thyroxine (T4) [, ], and insufficient elevation in GH and TSH levels following intravenous administration of 100 µg of GH-releasing peptide-2 (GHRP-2) or 200 mg of thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) (Supplemental Table ). Thus, the patient was administered 0.5 mg/day of subcutaneous somatropin, recombinant GH, injection and 50 µg/day of oral levothyroxine. The clinical course is shown in Fig. .
Upon physical examinations, bilateral swelling of the eyelids was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed swelling of bilateral lachrymal gland and right upper eyelid edema , which suggested thyroid-related ophthalmopathy; however, hypertrophy of the extraocular muscles was not detected. An MRI time course was displayed sequentially at diagnosis, at 13 days after GH discontinuation, and after ophthalmopathy treatment . The subject was diagnosed with thyrotoxicosis based on clinical symptoms, including sweating and palpitation, as well as laboratory findings upon admission . We discontinued levothyroxine administration when the patient was diagnosed with Graves’ disease based on clinical findings, including positive detection of TSAb , increased blood flow in diffuse goiter shown by ultrasonography, and preserved diffuse 123I uptake by 4.7 % in the thyroid gland under thyrotoxicosis . In addition, neither free thyronine nor free T4 levels decreased, and TSH remained below the detection level even following levothyroxine discontinuation. The clinical activity score (CAS) for thyroid-related ophthalmopathy was 3: positive for orbital pain, pain during eye movement, and lachrymal gland and eyelid swelling.
Somatropin, administered at 0.5 mg/day subcutaneously, was also discontinued since serum IGF-I levels were elevated to 205 ng/mL (reference range for ± 2 standard deviation [SD]: 68–196) . Orbital oppression and left lachrymal gland swelling were attenuated after somatropin discontinuation . Three sequential courses of corticosteroid pulse therapy (each course involved intravenous drip infusion of 0.5 g/day methyl prednisolone [PSL] for 3 days followed by 20 mg/day oral PSL for 4 sequential days) and fractional radiation therapy (20 total gray at 2 Gy/day for 10 days) were performed. CAS was improved to zero points, and orbital MRI demonstrated improvement in lachrymal glands swellings and right eyelid edema . Furthermore, we were able to terminate oral prednisolone administration without recurrence of ophthalmopathy for an additional year .