We describe the case of a 56-year-old Caucasian woman who presented acutely with left arm numbness and pain lasting for nearly eight hours. She had had similar episodes of numbness a few days previously, but these had lasted for only five to 10 minutes each time.
She smoked 20 cigarettes/day. Her heart rate was regular, although her blood pressure was lower in the left arm than in the right arm (103/80 mmHg vs. 170/80 mmHg, respectively). Her left arm looked pink but cool, with no palpable brachial, radial or ulnar pulse. There was decreased sensation over the forearm, though there was no motor deficit.
Her chest, cardiovascular and abdominal examinations showed no other abnormalities. She underwent urgent computed tomography, which showed an acutely thrombosed left subclavian artery.
She was put on an intravenous heparin infusion and magnetic resonance angiography was arranged . Initial angiograms obtained through the femoral artery in the groin showed a tight stenosis which was right at the origin of the subclavian artery. As a result, a guidewire could not be passed through the groin puncture despite several attempts. The brachial route was therefore chosen. A guidewire was passed using a left brachial artery approach through the narrowing. A 5 mm × 4 cm stainless steel stent Genesis (Cordis Endovascular, Warren, NJ, USA) was subsequently deployed and, when ballooned, although it clearly had eliminated the atherosclerotic lesion, the diameter was less than the diameter of the native normal vessel. To improve conformity, the stent was ballooned to 6 mm, which improved the conformity. A good, brisk flow through the stent was confirmed, and the procedure was subsequently completed .
Unfortunately, the patient continued to smoke heavily and was soon re-admitted with recurrent symptoms. The duplex repeat angiogram confirmed an occlusion of the left subclavian stent. The occlusion was successfully traversed, and a 6 cm-long, 7 mm S.M.A.R.T. Nitinol Stent System (Cordis Corporation, Miami Lakes, FL, USA) was deployed through the original stent with a good result .
Unfortunately, the stent blocked again for the second time, and a decision made to carry out a bypass rather than perform repeat radiological re-intervention. She therefore underwent a carotid to axillary bypass.
Intra-operatively, the left common carotid artery was approached through a longitudinal incision along the medial aspect of the left sternocleidomastoid (SCM). The artery was exposed and controlled. The left axillary artery was approached through an infraclavicular incision parallel to the clavicle. The artery was exposed and controlled. A total of 3000IU of heparin were given intravenously. A 6 mm ringed PTFE graft was tunneled under the SCM and over the clavicle and anastomosed using a 5-0 Prolene suture . Good pulses were established after the procedure. The patient had an uneventful recovery, and her claudication symptoms settled completely. At her one-year follow-up examination, the graft was still patent and she was asymptomatic.