A 48-year-old female without any history of cardiovascular disease or family history of sudden cardiac death experienced an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. She was returning home after briefly stepping outside when she suddenly felt nauseous and collapsed. Her family performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation for 10 min until emergency medical services (EMS) arrived. She was found to be in VF and received five defibrillations, intravenous amiodarone, and epinephrine before achieving return of spontaneous circulation. An initial differential diagnosis is displayed in . The patient was sedated and intubated by EMS and emergently admitted to the catheterization lab. Troponin I levels were elevated at 0.698 ng/mL, suggesting myocardial injury with ST changes noted on electrocardiogram (ECG) , but coronary angiography showed no significant coronary artery disease. Initial computed tomography angiography (CTA) was negative for pulmonary embolism. Substance abuse testing was only significant for elevated benzodiazepine and sertraline levels, which the patient was taking to control anxiety and depression, respectively.
A 12-lead ECG showed sinus tachycardia of 115 beats per minute with normal QRS complexes (80 ms) and absence of prolonged PR or QTc intervals (180 and 443 ms by Bazzett’s formula, respectively) . Leads V1, V2, and aVR demonstrated ST segment elevation, while leads II, III, and aVF demonstrated reciprocal ST segment depression. The patient subsequently underwent therapeutic hypothermia with a ZOLL Medical Thermoguard XP® catheter (Chelmsford, MA, USA). Initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 30–35%, severe diffuse hypokinesis, normal left ventricle wall thickness, early diastolic dysfunction, and moderately decreased right ventricle function. On lower right extremity ultrasound, an incidental thrombus on the hypothermia catheter was found, and low-intensity heparin was subsequently started.
The patient recovered well and was extubated on day 8. Repeat TTE showed significant recovery with increased LVEF of 60–65% and normalized right ventricular function, chamber size, wall motion, and thickness. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium enhancement confirmed normal left and right ventricle function without structural abnormalities, fibrosis, or evidence of myocardial infarction. Cardiac MRI also revealed suspected pulmonary emboli likely due to the hypothermia catheter. CTA confirmed non-occlusive pulmonary emboli in the right lower lobar pulmonary artery and right upper segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries. She was therefore started on apixaban.
She subsequently underwent a successful subcutaneous implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implant with a Boston Scientific EMBLEM™ MRI subcutaneous ICD (Marlborough, Massachusetts, USA) on day 19 and was discharged the day after the procedure. ECG post-ICD implant showed borderline tachycardic sinus rhythm at 97 beats per minute with normal PR and QTc intervals (140 and 413 ms by Bazzett’s formula, respectively) and persistent T-wave inversions .
The patient was admitted into cardiac rehabilitation and recovered uneventfully with significant gains in exercise tolerance. As the aetiology of the VF was unknown, genetic testing was discussed with the patient, which she consented to having it performed. Her family history revealed that the patient’s father was diagnosed with paroxysmal atrial tachycardia at age 37, and her paternal grandmother had a history of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and heart block with a ‘cardiac event’ of unspecified aetiology in her 50s. Genomic DNA from a sputum sample was analyzed via Ambry Genetics’ CardioNext® targeted gene panel (Aliso Viejo, CA, USA). Testing revealed a VUS identified as a heterozygous c.2162G > A/p.R721H variant within exon 18 of the ACTN2 gene. The variant was predicted in silico as ‘disease causing’ by MutationTaster2, ‘probably damaging’ by Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (PolyPhen-2), and ‘deleterious’ by Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant missense prediction tools. On anti-arrhythmic therapy, no further episodes occurred with no discharges from her ICD.