A 72-year-old Asian female presented with high grade fever, 38 °C, and chills which had been present for 8 days prior to admission. She had been followed for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by the orthopedics department of our hospital for 3 years. At the first visit for febrile episodes, upper respiratory tract infection was diagnosed and she was told to rest and stay in bed. She went home without antipyretics, analgesics or antibiotics. However, she reported worsening lower back pain 3 days after the first visit. Subsequently, she was admitted due to difficulty moving, especially walking, because of severe lower back pain. Furthermore, the presence of a severe inflammatory disease, such as an infection, was suspected based on blood examination results on admission .
Her medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension and RA, reasonably well controlled with low-dose oral steroids and weekly methotrexate. Her familial history was also unremarkable. She neither smoked nor drank alcohol regularly and had no history of caring for animals. Moreover, she had no history of allergies to drugs, foods, or inhaled substances. She ran a dining room in downtown Tokyo. She had undergone dental implant insertions, but had been free of dental caries and periodontal disease for several years.
At the beginning of hospitalization, she was unable to walk because of severe sharp pain, affecting the entire body, including lower back pain which been present prior to admission. She was unable to state definitely where in her body the pain was strongest. She was started on antibiotics (cefazolin 2.0 g/every 8 h) and a nonsteroidal antiphlogistic balm for the pain. Her condition subsequently improved with resolution of the high grade fever spikes, but a low grade fever persisted.
On the 2nd hospital day, highly pleomorphic, filamentous gram-negative bacilli were isolated from anaerobic blood culture of the clinical sample obtained on the day of admission . Isolates grew on both Brucella with Hemin and Vitamin K1 (HK) agar (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and 5 % sheep blood agar (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Those samples could be subcultured at 37 °C on 5 % sheep blood agar plates (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd.) in a capnophilic atmosphere containing 5 % CO2 according to previous reports [, ]. We obtained a colony approximately 1 mm in diameter in 3 days using these media. Though the isolate was not identified by biological techniques, we accurately identified the strain with 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) genotyping, as previously described [, ], and a similarity search was conducted using the EzTaxon . The isolate (GenBank accession no. LC062896) showed 100 % (1455/1455) similarity to the Streptobacillus moniliformis type strain DSM 12112T (GenBank accession no. CP001779). A phylogenetic tree containing all available 16S rRNA sequences was constructed from a multiple sequence alignment with the neighbor-joining method using Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software, version 5.1 (Additional file : Figure). We performed antimicrobial susceptibility tests on the isolate employing both the microdilution method using MicroScan® Negacombo 3.12 J (SIEMENS Inc. Berlin, Germany) and using lysed horse blood broth with microdilution, but we were unable to measure minimum inhibitory concentrations against several antibiotics, because there was no growth of the isolate even in the control well. Thus, though we switched the administered antibiotic to sulbactum/ampicillin (3.0 g/every 6 h) on the 2nd hospital day based on interim report of blood culture test, we had initially administered ampicillin (2.0 g/every 6 h) based on previous reports describing antimicrobial susceptibilities of similar isolates [, ].
Though overall status including the fever showed improvement with antibiotic administration, the lower back pain persisted. She thus underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar vertebrae. The MRI at the levels of the 3rd and 4th lumbar vertebrae showed a low signal on T1-weighted images , whereas signal intensity was high within the intranuclear cleft of the disk on short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) T2 imaging and disc extrusion with a high water content was observed adjacent to the extra-dural area . The vertebral endplates at this level were destroyed and high-signal-intensity bone marrow edema was visible. These findings are typical of pyogenic vertebral spondylodiscitis, but there were no signs of crush injury or transformation in the lesion. We continued the antibiotic administration and confirmed gradual improvement of her lower back pain. Furthermore, exercise capacity, including walking, gradually recovered. Follow-up MRI studies showed no deterioration of the lumbar lesions, and she was discharged on the 71st hospital day.