The patient was a 64-year-old Japanese man who was admitted to our hospital for the gradual growth of a thyroid tumor. At 20 years of age, urinary protein had been detected in his urine specimen. He became conscious of lip enlargement and a limb volume increase at 30 years of age. He had been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus at 56 years of age, and increased urinary protein was detected at the same time. A renal biopsy was performed. The histopathological findings showed FSGS. However, steroid treatment was not started, owing to diabetes mellitus. A thyroid tumor was detected at 59 years of age, and fine-needle aspiration cytology was performed. No malignant cells were detected in a histopathological examination; however, the thyroid tumors gradually grew larger, and thereafter the patient was introduced to our department. He was suspected of having acromegaly due to his characteristic facial features, and he was therefore admitted to our hospital.
He had previously undergone surgery for the treatment of colon cancer at 61 years of age.
His mother and grandfather had a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus, respectively. There was no history of endocrinological disease in his family.
His physical examination on admission showed that his height and body weight were 164.0 cm and 65.8 kg, respectively, and he had a body mass index of 24.4 of kg/m2. He received losartan potassium 12.5 mg and amlodipine 5 mg as treatment for hypertension. His blood pressure was 108/54 mmHg. His heart rate was 88 beats/minute with sinus rhythm. He showed acromegalic features, including an outstanding jaw and eyebrow area and enlargement of the nose, tongue, and lip. He also had large hands and feet. His thyroid gland was not enlarged, and the thyroid tumor could not be palpated. Pitting edema was not observed in the lower limbs.
Table shows the laboratory findings on admission. Urinalysis showed 2+ protein due to FSGS. The patient’s hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level was 6.3% on diet therapy alone. The patient’s lipid levels were within normal limits under treatment with atorvastatin 10 mg. His blood cell counts and blood chemistry were within normal limits. The patient’s GH and IGF-1 levels were 2.7 ng/ml and 496 ng/ml, respectively. His thyroid-stimulating hormone level was 0.03 μIU/ml, but his free T4 level was in the normal range, and his thyroglobulin antibody and thyrotropin receptor antibody were negative. Other pituitary hormones, including luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and adrenocorticotropic hormone, were all within normal limits. GH was not suppressed by a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test , and it was increased paradoxically in response to an intravenous injection of thyrotropin-releasing hormone. Gadolinium-enhanced pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (T1-weighted) showed a pituitary adenoma of 11 mm in diameter . These findings were consistent with acromegaly. Transsphenoidal surgery was performed to resect the pituitary adenoma. The pituitary adenoma was completely excised . The histopathological findings showed pituitary adenoma . The sections were analyzed with GH staining and diagnosed as GH-producing pituitary adenoma . After surgery, the patient’s GH and IGF-1 levels normalized to 0.37 ng/ml and 171 ng/ml, respectively. GH was found to be suppressed on the basis of a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test . The treatment was considered to have successfully led to the remission of acromegaly.
Figure c shows a renal biopsy performed at 58 years of age. A glomerulosclerotic lesion was found at the proximal tubule on the contralateral side of the glomerular vascular pole (tip variant). At this time, the patient was diagnosed with FSGS.
During hospitalization after the surgery, his cardiovascular examination findings were normal; his lungs were clear to auscultation; and the result of his abdominal examination was unremarkable. The peculiar facial features found in acromegaly did not change. The result of his neurological examination was completely unremarkable. No abnormal findings appeared after the surgery.
Urinalyses were performed before and after the surgery; the data are shown in Fig. . Twenty-four-hour urine collection was performed three times before and three times after the surgery. The patient’s urinary protein decreased from 967.3 ± 301.6 mg/day before the surgery to 513.0 ± 121.8 mg/day at 3 months after the surgery (p = 0.07). We followed the patient every 2 months for 8 months after the surgery in order to measure the spot urine protein/creatinine (Cr) ratio and HbA1c level. The patient’s spot urine protein/Cr ratio significantly improved from 1.65 ± 0.71 g/g Cr before the surgery to 0.93 ± 0.34 g/g Cr after the surgery (n = 5 at both points; p < 0.05). The patient’s HbA1c level significantly improved from 6.32% ± 0.1% before the surgery to 6.08% ± 0.1% after the surgery (n = 5 at both points; p < 0.05).