A 49-year-old male was referred for an EPS after presenting with a 15-year history of presyncopal palpitations. Background history was notable for smoking, hypertension (admission systolic blood pressure on antihypertensives 130/75 mmHg), hypercholesterolaemia (low-density lipoprotein level following statin therapy of 4.1 mmol/L), diabetes, and previous SCORE-calculated 10-year risk of 3%. Regular medications included simvastatin 40 mg o.d., metformin 500 mg b.i.d., ramipril 10 mg o.d., and bisoprolol 10 mg o.d. which was held for 5 days before EPS. Physical examination on admission was unremarkable. Resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a short PR interval and overt pre-excitation. An Rs morphology in V1, as well as negative delta waves in II, III, and aVF describes typical ECG characteristics of a posteriorly located LLAP.
At initial EPS, quadripolar catheters were placed in the standard His and right ventricular apex (RVA) locations. Placement of a decapolar catheter within the CS was challenging, so basic EPS was conducted just using His and RVA catheters. This revealed an abnormally short His-ventricular (HV) interval of 16 ms, non-decremental AV conduction, accentuated pre-excitation with single atrial extrastimuli (AES) indicative of a left posterolateral AP insertion, and an AP effective refractory period (APERP) of 240 ms . The patient also developed recurrent pre-excited atrial fibrillation with a shortest RR interval of 306 ms during burst atrial pacing which spontaneously resolved. As the CS could not be found , coronary angiography was undertaken. Relevantly, the left coronary artery had only mild atherosclerotic disease . On late-phase filling cine images, there was an anomalous CS with a poorly defined origin near the right atrial free wall, a narrow elliptical os, a thin proximal section and a bulbous ectatic looking mid- to distal course .
Owing to the propensity for recurrent pre-excited AF requiring multiple DC cardioversions as well as the anomalous CS, ablation was not pursued in this instance, and a plan was made for repeat ablation under general anaesthesia guided by 3D mapping. In the interim, the patient underwent cardiac computed tomography (CT) which confirmed an anomalous CS emptying into the right atrial appendage on the right atrial free wall (G, arrows) and a patent LCx artery .
Four weeks later, the patient presented to hospital with central chest discomfort and an elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T of 810 ng/L (normal <22 ng/L). ECG revealed absence of previously visible pre-excitation and a new rS morphology in lead V1 . Echocardiography showed a preserved left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction with basal posterolateral hypokinesis . Coronary angiography showed acute occlusion of an OM branch of the LCx which was successfully reconstituted with a drug-eluting stent . Patient made an uneventful recovery following stenting and was discharged on aspirin 75 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg o.d. and simvastatin was switched to atorvastatin 80 mg o.d. in addition to his other usual medications.
At repeat EPS, after holding bisoprolol for 5 days, baseline HV interval was now 40 ms with decremental anterograde nodal conduction. Isoprenaline administration revealed predominantly nodal conduction with rare alternating pre-excitation and an APERP 390 ms (previously 240 ms, ) and AVNERP of 280 ms. Adenosine was administered and failed to unmask pre-excitation even in the presence of complete AV and VA block . Given that the AP was now no longer clinically significant, ablation was not pursued. Since the ACS, the patient reports no further palpitations and there has been a complete absence of any overt pre-excitation on ECG.