A boy aged 1 year and 5 months was admitted to the hospital because of ectopic urethral opening and perineal vegetation for more than 1 year. After birth, the parents found that the child has an abnormal appearance of the penis, with the penis bending downward, the urethra opening in the perineum, and a red polyp protruding from the perineum urethral orifice. As the child grows, the protrusion gradually increased and the deformity became more serious. The patient did not experience frequent urination, urination pain, urgency, or dysuria. Ultrasound examination in the outpatient department of our hospital showed that “there was no definite echo of the uterus and ovary in the pelvic cavity, and there was no obvious abnormality in the ultrasound images of the bilateral testes and epididymis,” and the chromosome examination showed “46, XY.” The outpatient was admitted to our department with “perineal vegetation unknown, perineal hypospadias.” The results of the physical examination conducted by the admission specialist were the following: the penis body of the child was short, the penis body and glans were poorly developed, the urethral opening was at the perineum of the ventral root of the penis, the penis was severely curved downward and was difficult to extend, and the foreskin was cap-like covering the dorsal side of the penis glans. The red polyp protruded from the perineal urethral orifice and was located approximately parallel to the penile body . The protrusion was grossly cylindrical, about 2.0 cm in length and 0.6 cm in diameter, and resembled the neogranulation tissue. The surface was uneven, with ruddy mucosa without obvious skin coverage . There was a bifid deformity in the bilateral scrotum; the bilateral scrotum touched the testes; the size was generally normal, without redness, swelling, tenderness, and thickening of the bottom of the right scrotum. There was also no abnormal mass. The auxiliary examination showed 46, XY chromosomes. The color Doppler ultrasound examination of the scrotum, adnexa, and uterus showed that there was no obvious abnormality in the bilateral testis and epididymis, and no exact echo of the uterus and ovary was detected in the pelvic cavity. The ultrasonography result showed a solid nodule in front of the penis (an inflammatory granuloma?). The VCUG showed that the urethra was short and the anterior part of the urethra was dilated in a cystic structure , which was considered to be the perineal opening of the hypospadias. The MRI showed a patchy tissue in the perineum and urethra, with a size of 2.1 cm × 1.3 cm, which was approximately equal to the surrounding tissue. The enhanced scan showed an obvious uneven enhancement.
The child underwent urethral vegetation resection and cystoscopy under general anesthesia. The urethral opening was found from the middle of the red vegetation protruding from the ventral penile body and perineum, and the cystoscope was inserted. The root of the abnormal vegetation in the perineum was located at the distal end of the verumontanum opening approximately 0.5 cm . The vegetated part was wrapped by a little urethral mucosa. The urethra of the ventral part of the penis showed bright-red mucosa-like skin. The rest of the urethral mucosa and bladder neck mucosa were smooth without stenosis. After the cystoscope entered the bladder, the urine color was slightly mixed. The bilateral ureteral openings were in normal position without abnormal mass. Considering that the vegetation was large, the base was deep, and the urethral plate was damaged more after operation, a hypospadias surgery was not allowed for the time being. The child was placed in the supine position, and the root of the vegetation was pulled out as far as possible . The complete vegetation was removed along the urethral plate skin of the vegetation root and was sent for examination. A careful hemostasis was performed, and the appearance of the urethral plate was formed by an intermittent suture with absorbable sutures. The results of intraoperative frozen pathology examination suggested that a benign tissue could be seen according to the specimen, the resection margin was clean and complete, and the root junctions are normal cells. The F10 double-lumen balloon catheter was indwelling and supported the urethra for 1 month after the operation.