A 65-year-old male, 155 cm tall and weighing 53 kg, was scheduled to undergo mesh cage insertion and posterior spinal fusion from T6 to L5 for severe kyphosis due to spinal tuberculosis. Preoperative chest radiography revealed severe kyphosis of the thoracolumbar spine; however, there was no active lesion in the lungs. Thoracolumbar magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography revealed spinal fusion at the level of T9–L3, with volume decrease and deformity associated with severe kyphosis. The kyphotic angle was approximately 115 degrees . Preoperative pulmonary function tests revealed a mild restrictive pattern with a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 1.81 L (63% of normal), a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 1.53 L (73% of normal), and an FEV1/FVC ratio of 85%. Preoperative electrocardiography revealed normal sinus rhythm. In the preoperative visit, the patient exhibited limited neck motion because of severe kyphosis; he was Mallampati class III.
In the operating room, the patient was monitored using three-lead electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, non-invasive blood pressure monitoring, and bispectral index. Due to inability to lie on his back without any supportive devices, the head of the operating bed was raised approximately 30–40 degrees, and anesthesia was induced in the semi-recumbent position. Anesthesia was induced using a target-controlled infusion of propofol (Schnider model) and remifentanil (Minto model); rocuronium bromide 0.6 mg/kg was administered to facilitate tracheal intubation. Before tracheal intubation, preoxygenation was performed for 5 to 10 min with 100% oxygen in a face-to-face approach, with bimanual mask holding and mechanical ventilation. Although the awake intubation technique may be considered in cases of anticipated difficult intubation, the cause of difficult intubation in the present case was attributed to a kyphotic change, and not the airway itself, such as an anteriorly deviated glottis or soft tissue swelling; therefore, the authors believed that the patient’s airway could be adequately maintained using bimanual mask-holding in a face-to-face position. Initially, direct laryngoscopy and video laryngoscopy were attempted; however, it was exceedingly difficult to visualize the vocal cords because of the patient’s semi-recumbent position, his short stature, and the relatively large bed size. Moreover, a conventional lightwand technique from the head end of the patient was also difficult to perform. Although fiberoptic bronchoscopy can be considered as a first choice, it was temporarily unavailable because of an insufficient number of devices and well-trained staff. As the conventional overhead approach using laryngoscopy or lightwand was difficult, an alternative face-to-face approach using a lightwand was attempted. After all lights in the operating room were turned off, the anesthetist opened the patient’s mouth while facing him, and slowly inserted the tracheal tube-launched lightwand, of which the tip was bent at an angle of 90 degrees along the base of the tongue in the midline. The bright red light at the tip of the stylet was transilluminated and positioned at the center of the neck; subsequently, the tracheal tube was gently inserted at the location of light on the neck. . Face-to-face lightwand intubation was successful on the first attempt, and no specific complications, such as hemodynamic instabilities, intraoral traumas, or others, were encountered. After tracheal intubation, invasive arterial blood pressure was monitored through a cannula placed in the left radial artery using a hemodynamic monitoring device (EV1000 clinical platform, Edward Lifesciences Corp., Irwin, CA, USA). The surgery lasted approximately 7 h, during which vital signs were adequately maintained. After completion of surgery, neuromuscular blockade was reversed using sugammadex 200 mg followed by extubation in the operation room. Adequacy of respiration was confirmed, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with continued monitoring. Although there was no postoperative sore throat or hoarseness of voice, there was suspicion of pulmonary congestion on chest radiography. On arterial blood gas analysis, the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) while breathing room air was 64 mmHg. However, the patient was not dyspneic, and pulmonary congestion and PaO2 improved over time. On postoperative day 2, the patient was transferred to the general ward without any significant problems.