A 65-year-old male, 175 cm, 55 kg, was scheduled for a robotic-assisted repair for a left inguinal hernia. The patient had a history of medically controlled cervical spondylosis and past coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. In addition, he had undergone a right inguinal hernia repair under general anesthesia 10 years before and a thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy and retrosternal gastric tube reconstruction for esophageal cancer 4 months before. Preoperative examinations, including blood and urine tests, an electrocardiogram, chest and abdominal radiographs, and spirometry (vital capacity as percent predicted, 104.6%; forced expiratory volume in 1 s as percent of forced vital capacity, 77.0%), revealed no abnormality except for a low hemoglobin level (11.4 g/dL). A chest radiograph showed no pneumothorax . Furthermore, a computed tomography (CT) taken before the esophagectomy had shown no emphysematous lung cysts.
Anesthesia was induced with propofol, remifentanil, and rocuronium and maintained with desflurane and remifentanil after tracheal intubation. Bilateral rectus sheath blocks with levobupivacaine were performed under ultrasound guidance prior to surgery. During surgery, the lungs were ventilated with a volume-guarantee pressure-controlled mode employing a fraction of inspired oxygen, 50%; tidal volume, 450–500 mL; positive end-expiratory pressure, 5 cmH2O; and respiratory rate, 10–14 per minute.
With the patient placed in the supine position, 8-mm ports were inserted via skin incisions at the umbilical and right as well as left lateral abdominal walls for abdominal carbon dioxide insufflation at a pressure of 10 cmH2O and subsequent laparoscopic procedures. Then, a robotic-assisted inguinal hernia repair using the da Vinci Xi Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was performed, while the patient was placed in a 10-degree head-down position. The peritoneum around the hernia orifice was dissected widely, a hernia mesh placed over the dissected area was fixed on fasciae and ligaments, and the peritoneum over the mesh was closed. No surgical manipulation of the upper abdominal organs or the diaphragm was performed. Intraoperatively, percutaneous arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) and end-tidal carbon dioxide partial pressure remained at 99–100% and 35–40 mmHg, respectively. The peak airway pressure during the Trendelenburg position remained around 20–25 cmH2O. Fentanyl 200 μg and acetaminophen 1000 mg were intravenously administered for immediate postoperative analgesia. Durations of surgery and anesthesia were 82 and 143 min, respectively. No subcutaneous emphysema was noted.
Emergence from anesthesia was rapid, and the extubation was uneventful. In the postanesthesia care unit, SpO2 remained between 99 and 100% with supplemental oxygen delivered at 4 L/min via a mask. The patient complained of no pain or dyspnea and returned to the ward after a 30-min stay.
In the ward, supplemental oxygen was continued for 3 h. Even after its termination, SpO2 remained at 98–99%. A supine anteroposterior chest radiograph, taken approximately 2 h after surgery, showed only slight bilateral pneumothorax and the deep sulcus sign, which represents lucency of the lateral costophrenic angle extending toward the hypochondrium and suggests the presence of a pneumothorax in supine position . On POD 1, SpO2 remained at 97–98% without supplemental oxygen. However, a follow-up upright posteroanterior chest radiograph showed evident bilateral pneumothorax . Because of no symptoms of dyspnea or chest pain, the patient was to be followed up without specific interventions. The patient was discharged from hospital on POD 3, since a chest radiograph on POD 2 showed no worsening of pneumothorax. At the outpatient visit on POD 9, a chest radiograph showed slight residual bilateral pneumothorax . A chest CT taken on POD 44 showed no remaining pneumothorax.