A 7-year-old female patient came to see a doctor in our hospital for low back ache with gross hematuria for one day. No abnormality was detected by physical examination. The result of routine urinalysis indicated 2083 RBCs/µl, while no abnormality was reported in other laboratory examinations.
Ultrasonic examination (Mindray Resona 7) indicated: A solid hypoechoic mass with a size of 29.2 × 31.9 mm located in the dorsal parenchyma of upper pole of left kidney, with clear border and being endogenous for most part, slightly protruding from the surface of kidney, partly pressing towards renal collecting system, and annular calcification was observed in its surrounding . Results from CDFI showed abundant and coarse blood signals inside of the mass .
CTU inspection (GE Light Speed 64 CT) showed a circular soft tissue density with a size of 29 × 32 mm, which exhibited non-uniform interior and multiple arc and spot-like shadows of calcification inside of the foci and in the surrounding. The CT value of the solid part was 44HU, which was obviously increased after enhanced scanning. CT value during renal cortex phase was approximately 155 HU which equaled to that during renal medullary phase. Coarse shadows of blood vessels were observed inside of the foci, with a few small spot-like non-intensified focus in the center. The border between the mass and renal tissue was clear, and no apparent symptom of destruction was observed in neighbouring kidney calices . Three-dimensional (3D) imaging displayed that bilateral renal pelvis and calices were well imaged, in which left renal calices was narrowed by pressure. Bilateral ureters were unobstructed with no obvious filling-defect observed . Image diagnosis of the case was ‘left renal mass with the consideration of malignant tumor, nephroblastoma?” Radical nephrectomy of the left kidney was suggested after the completion of other related inspections.
Observations during the surgery: Radical nephrectomy of the left kidney was performed. Exposing the mass by cutting though the kidney, we observed the integrate capsule wrapping round the surface of the mass. When the capsule was cut open, the section of the mass was solid, white and medium-hard, with slight necrosis and hemorrhage inside. Gross observation: a grayish yellow mass located on the upper pole of the section of left kidney, clinging to the renal cortex, with clear border, the capsule, and a size of 29 mm × 32 mm × 22 mm .
Postoperative pathological results: observed under microscope at low magnification, tumor cells were arranged in a solid or nodular pattern, and the interfibrillar substances between cell nests were rich in blood vessels, as shown in Fig. B (40×); at high magnification, tumor cells were large in size and rich in acidophily cytoplasm, and had prominent nucleus with scarce nuclear fission, as shown in Fig. C (200×). Immunohistochemistry results: TFE3 nucleus (+) , SDH-B (−), VHL (−), CAIX (−), CK7 (−), CD117 (−), CD34 (sinusoids+), MyoD1(−), Myogenin (−), Myoglobin (−), Desmin (−), PAX8 (−), CK pan (−), NSE(+), SOX-10 (−), CgA (−), Syn (−), S-100 (−), HMB45 (−), SMA (sinusoids+), PNL2 (−), CathepsinK (+), SF-1 (−), BCOR (−), Vimentin (+), Melan A (−), Ki-67 (+) l%. In combination with cell morphology and immunohistochemistry results, it was deduced to be ASPS. After systemic examination, no obvious lesions were found in other parts except the left kidney, which is considered to be nephrogenic ASPS.
Detection of genetic variation: Using fluorescence in situ hybridization method (FISH), ectopia was detected in t(Xp11.2) (TFE-3) genes. Gene sequencing was performed at 3D Med Inc. The results shown that gene arrangement occurred between exons 1–7 of ASPL and exons 6–10 of TFE3 . Gene fusion of ASPL-TFE3 further verified the accuracy of this case as ASPS.