A 55-year-old Japanese woman was referred to Yodogawa Christian Hospital because of incidental finding of an abnormal shadow in the chest X-ray. She was a never-smoker. Chest computerized tomography (CT) examination revealed a 38×12 mm-sized stellate-shaped mass in the right lower lobe and a 15×10 mm ground-glass opacity shadow in the left upper lobe of the lung . Apparently no enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes were detected on the CT. Endoscopic biopsy of the left lung tumor showed adenocarcinoma (data not shown). Right lower lobectomy and left upper segmentectomy were performed to resect both mass. Cut surface of the resected tumors revealed a gray stellate-shaped mass in the right lung and a white and yellowish mass with relatively clear border in the left lung (data not shown).
The tissue was fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Three-micrometer-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE). Immunohistochemistry was performed on representative sections with appropriate antigen retrieval. A primary antibody against ALK was purchased from NICHIREI (NICHIREI 413681; clone #5A4) and the immunostained signal was visualized using I-VIEW DAB universal kit (Roche diagnostics, Switzerland). For mutational analysis, genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections using Genomic DNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). DNA sequencing for EGFR gene mutation was performed as described with minor modifications. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using probes for EML4 and ALK genes was performed as described previously .
Microscopic examination of the resected right lower lobe revealed a heterogenous adenocarcinoma composed of a mucinous cribriform tumor and lepidic growth (adenocarcinoma in situ) pattern . At low-power microscopy, these two components were seen adjacent to each other (data not shown). As described above, the mucinous cribriform histology of the HE stained specimen made us suspicious of EML4-ALK positive lung adenocarcinoma [-]. To examine this possibility, immunohistochemical analysis was performed. At low-power microscopy, the tumor was homogeneously stained positive for ALK (data not shown). At high-power microscopy, the tumor cells were positively stained for ALK . Fusion and split FISH analyses using probes for EML4 and ALK genes confirmed that the adenocarcinoma of the right lung was indeed EML4-ALK positive . We confirmed that the EML4-ALK positive adenocarcinoma has no mutations in exons 18, 19, 20, 21 of EGFR gene (data not shown).
On the other hand, the resected left upper lobe specimen contained a adenocarcinoma in situ . This tumor was negative for ALK . We searched for EGFR mutations for exons 18, 19, 20, and 21 in the genomic DNA from the adenocarcinoma in situ, but none of them were found (data not shown).
As an adjuvant therapy, the patient has taken orally tegafur-uracil 300 mg/day since 3 months after the resection operation. Until now, she has not shown any signs of relapse or adverse effects. Eleven months after the operation, neither chest CT, nor bone scintigraphy, nor brain magnetic resonance imaging did show any signs of relapse or metastasis.