A 58-year-old Turkish woman was admitted to our hospital complaining of pain from a swelling on the right side of her chest for the previous 4 years. She had no history of trauma and her past medical history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a 10 cm × 7 cm tender palpable mass in the midaxillary line with otherwise normal findings.
Her routine laboratory test results were normal. Posterior-anterior (PA) chest X-ray demonstrated a purely lytic expansile lesion originating from the right 3rd rib with ballooning of the cortex. Computed tomography (CT) of the lesion showed a multiloculated, expanding mass with fluid levels in the right 3rd rib. The mass was protruding into the hemithorax and the adjacent soft tissue . The cortex overlying it was intact. A radionuclide bone scan showed increased uptake at the site of the lesion and no other abnormalities. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) demonstrated hemosiderin laden macrophages and multinucleated osteoclastic giant cells. Through a right posterolateral thoracotomy, the lesion was explored and found to be localized in the anterior three-quarters of the 3rd rib with multiple cystic components, extending into the surrounding intercostal muscles. The visceral pleura were intact. The cystic mass in the 3rd rib and the adjacent segments of the 2nd and 4th ribs were resected along with the intercostal muscles. The chest wall was reconstructed with a double layered Prolene mesh (Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA). The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the eighth day following the surgery.
The microscopic examination demonstrated blood filled multiple cavernous spaces separated by fibrous connective tissue, with hemosiderin pigment laden macrophages; multinucleated osteoclastic giant cells and well-developed vascular spaces with hemorrhages in the septa lining the cystic spaces, confirming the diagnosis of ABC .
Our patient has been followed up for 5 years with no evidence of recurrence or functional disturbance .