We are reporting a case of a 63-year-old man, who hailed from the Kanpur district, Uttar Pradesh, India, an endemic fluorosis region. He presented with numbness and weakness in all four limbs 20 years back. Skeletal survey and computed tomography (CT) scan was done revealing osteosclerosis, cervical canal narrowing due to thickening and ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at the C2-C7 vertebral level, and was diagnosed as a case of compressive cervical myelopathy due to skeletal fluorosis. He underwent laminectomy at the C2-C7 level, with excision of the calcified ligamentum flavum and adequate decompression. The patient was relieved of symptoms. He was on serpentine 50 mg twice daily for 20 years.
Now, he presented with recurrence of symptoms. The weakness had increased in severity to the point that he was unable to sit or stand without support. There was no associated bladder or bowel dysfunction.
Higher mental functions and cranial nerves were intact. Motor examination revealed positive pyramidal signs and decreased power (4/5) in all four limbs without any atrophy/fasciculation. On sensory examination, pain, temperature, and joint position sense were impaired at C1 and C2 dermatomes areas.
Laboratory tests showed raised serum fluoride and urinary fluoride levels. However, complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, electrolytes including calcium, magnesium and phosphorus were normal.
The patient underwent a skeletal survey, CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine. The skeletal survey showed osteosclerosis, postoperative changes of laminectomy at the C2-C7 vertebral level, large osteophyte formation, soft tissue calcification, and calcification of the interosseous membrane in the forearm [Figures –]. CT scan revealed thickening and ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at the C1 level, thickening and ossification of the residual ligamentum flavum at C1/C2, and dural calcification at the C2 vertebral level, leading to dorsal thecal sac indentation with a residual canal space measuring 5.4 mm. A defect in posterior elements of the cervical spine was seen suggestive of the previous laminectomy procedure .
MRI revealed severe compression on the dorsal spinal cord at the C1 and C2 vertebral level with T2 hyperintensity in the cervical spinal cord suggestive of severe compressive myelopathy . The patient was advised operative decompression, but he refused. He was on supportive management: tizanidine HCl (an antispasticity medicine), sublingual single night dose, 8 mg. Spasticity decreased significantly from the pretreatment level of grade 2 to grade 1 according to the modified Ashworth scale.