A 57-year-old, right-hand dominant female presented to the emergency department (ED) with unusual movements and shaking of her left arm. In the ED, the staff had to restrain the patient from actively hitting herself in an excited manner. The nursing staff then requested medical evaluation and clearance from the physician team so the patient could be transferred to the psychiatric ED due to apparent self-destructive behavior.
The patient stated she had not been sleeping well recently. Her husband was away and she felt overwhelmed by caring for their dog. The patient stated she awoke that morning around 2:30 am feeling weak to the point that she could not get out of bed. She felt as if her left arm did not belong to her and she could not control her arm’s movements. She had to hold her left hand with her right to keep her left arm from moving. She denied ever having this problem before. Her husband stated that she had previously exhibited similar symptoms when faced with stressors. The patient also complained of numbness and tingling of her left hand and mild shortness of breath. She stated it felt like “cold water is running down my [left] arm.” Additionally, she complained of a feeling in her throat that was making it “hard to breathe,” and she had a headache located in the back of her head, described as slightly worse than her prior headaches. The patient had previously been involuntarily admitted to a behavioral health unit after attempting to harm herself, although she did not have any psychiatric diagnoses.
She had a past medical history of breast cancer status post right mastectomy. She did not take any daily medications and had no drug allergies. Her family history was notable for cancer and coronary artery disease. She was a daily tobacco smoker and occasionally used marijuana. She denied any alcohol use. She denied any chest pain, nausea, vomiting, change in vision, lightheadedness, dropping of objects, or trauma. She recently had a mild, pruritic skin rash for which she completed a course of oral prednisone. She denied joint pain, fevers, chills, cough, or abdominal complaints.
On examination, she was alert and, although she appeared very anxious, was in no acute distress. She was afebrile (37.1° Celsius) with a heart rate of 94 beats per minute, blood pressure 108/62 millimeters of mercury, and her oxygen saturation was 97% while breathing room air. She weighed 51.8 kilograms (kg) (114 pounds), was 165.1 centimeters in height (5 foot 4 inches), and had a body mass index of 20.14 kg per meter2. She was well developed and well nourished. Her head was normocephalic and atraumatic. She had dry mucus membranes with a clear oropharynx. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation with normal extraocular movements and anicteric sclera. Her neck was supple, with full active range of motion, and without lymphadenopathy or carotid bruits. Her lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, without wheezes, crackles, or rhonchi. She did not have any increased work of breathing. Her heartbeat was regular at a normal rate without murmurs, rubs, or gallops. The patient’s abdomen was soft with normal bowel sounds and without distention, tenderness, rebound, or guarding. Her extremities had no edema, had 2+ pulses, and were without tenderness or deformity bilaterally. Erythematous scaly plaques were observed on her neck, bilateral ankles, axilla, and lower arms.
Neurologic examination showed cranial nerves II–XII were intact except for a left homonymous inferior quadrantanopia. She had 5/5 strength throughout all extremities and normal muscle bulk and tone. The upper extremity exam was limited by flailing movements of her left arm, which were notably high in amplitude and non-rhythmic. The movements worsened with emotional distress and decreased with distraction. When the patient was asked to look at something specific, the flailing left-arm movements stopped. There was decreased sensation to light touch and pinprick over the left upper extremity in a patchy distribution. Her biceps, brachioradialis, and patellar reflexes were 1+ bilaterally. No dysmetria was noted on finger-nose-finger testing bilaterally, and the patient declined a gait exam. Her speech was clear. She followed commands and answered most questions appropriately but occasionally was tangential. She was oriented to self, place, and time.
Initial laboratory results are shown in –. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was completed, which showed sinus tachycardia without signs of ischemia. A chest radiograph did not show any focal consolidations, pneumothorax, or cardiomegaly. Computed tomography (CT) of the head without contrast did not show evidence of an acute intracranial bleed or acute infarction. There was non-specific asymmetric diffuse sulcal effacement of the right cerebral hemisphere relative to the left. No midline shift was noted. Neurology was consulted due to worsening left upper-extremity movements throughout her ED evaluation. A clock drawing completed by the patient is shown in . A diagnostic test was then performed, which confirmed the diagnosis.