A 21-year-old male patient, from a village in rural Karnataka (India), presented to the ER with complaints of breathlessness since 1 day, acute onset, present at rest, progressive, associated with cough and scanty sputum. Patient had a history of fever for 4–5 days associated with chills and neck pain and was treated for the same in a teaching hospital near his hometown. He was informed that he has reduced cardiac function following the development of breathlessness and was referred to a higher center for further management. There was no history of rash or polyarthralgia. There was no history of alcohol consumption, exposure to a case of tuberculosis, and deaths in young age in the family. There was also no history of preexisting heart disease.
On examination, pulse rate was 160 bpm, blood pressure 80/52 mm Hg, and respiratory rate was 40/minute SpO2 78%. Patient was not febrile. Extremities were cold, and pulse was thready.
Coarse crackles were present in the bilateral infrascapular region, and basal air entry was reduced on both sides. Neck movements were very painful. No obvious sensory or motor deficits were seen. ECG revealed sinus tachycardia .
Patient was immediately administered 8 L/minute oxygen, inotropes, diuretics, low-dose aspirin, and atorvastatin. Empirical antibiotics were started after blood culture, and routine tests were performed. 2D-Echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20%. Chest X-ray revealed bilateral mild-to-moderate pleural effusion. Intravenous (IV) tramadol was administered in view of severe neck pain, and the presenting symptoms were all attributed to suspected viral infection, with a background of ongoing dengue epidemic in the region.
Lab results indicated bacterial sepsis, and dengue serology was negative . Sequential organ failure assessment score was calculated to be 8. Total white blood cell (WBC) counts and serum (S.) creatinine levels were on an increasing trend, and the blood culture grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) on day 3 of admission. Subsequently, IV vancomycin and linezolid were started according to a sensitivity report. Fever spikes persisted, accompanied by tachycardia and tachypnea.
Inotropes were tapered down by the sixth day of admission with blood pressure maintaining at 104/66 mm Hg. However, the total counts increased to 25,600/mm3. As the tachypnea was still persistent, the USG chest was done on day 6 that showed approximately 800 mL fluid on the left and 700 mL on the right side of the chest with septations. It was decided to drain the fluid by placing an intercostal tube on the left side. Pleural fluid was turbid, dark-colored, with pus cells but not remarkable for tuberculosis or malignancy.
Patient developed icterus, liver functions were found to be deranged. Serum creatinine was returning to normal and found to be 1.07 mg/dL on day 7. In view of continuous fever and tachypnea, netilmicin (according to culture sensitivity) was added. Intercostal tube was removed once the drain reduced to less than 50 mL by day 8.
Meanwhile, the neck pain had increased, but still no neurological deficits were present. MRI spine on day 8 showed a posterior epidural abscess, extending along the cervical, and visualized dorsal spine, maximum width 4.5 mm at the level of C4. Neurosurgeon's opinion was taken; however, it was decided not to drain the abscess and wait for a response to the ongoing antibiotics. Intravenous tramadol was administered for pain relief.
CT scan of thorax on day 10 revealed multiple loculated pleural collections, soft tissue densities in both lungs, and moderate effusion in bilateral pleura. Intercostal tube was put on the other side, to try and remove possible infectious foci. Visible improvement in tachypnea was seen by day 15.
Antibiotics were continued, and total counts started normalizing (11,100/mm3 on day 20), and fever spikes reduced. Repeat echo on day 20 showed improved left ventricle ejection fraction (60%).
Meanwhile, incentive spirometry with chest physiotherapy helped in improving lung function, and patient could maintain saturation without oxygen support.
Neck pain had reduced, and repeat MRI spine on day 22 showed reduced thickness of epidural abscess.
Initial IgM coxsackie investigation was reported as strong positive on day 22, and hence a certain diagnosis was established.
Patient was given IV antibiotics for a total of 6 weeks and was discharged in a state of good health.