Here we report a case of a 24-year old female migraine without aura patient who participated in two resting-state fMRI sessions (31 days apart) in our study. The diagnosis of migraine was made by a headache specialist according to the International Headache Society criteria . The headache attacks occurred approximately 4 times per month since age 14. They were severe in intensity (7–8 on a scale of 1–10) and had a throbbing quality with nausea, vomiting and photophobia. A typical episode lasted 4–72 h. Her migraine was not related to menstrual cycle. The patient had no other medical conditions and had not taken any daily medications except a contraceptive (gestodene, ethinylestradiol). Both the interictal and ictal scans were carried out on pill-taking days. Migraine attacks were treated with diclofenac and domperidone for nausea.
During the 3 days preceding the fMRI scans she was pain- and medication-free both times. At the second occasion she suffered an unexpected migraine attack during the examination that she subsequently described as a bilateral, throbbing pain (7/10) aggravated by head motion and associated with photophobia and nausea, and after the scan she vomited. In the beginning of the ictal image recording the pain was moderate (3/10) and pulsating with mild photophobia.
Functional MRI data acquisition was performed in the MR Research Center (Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary) with a 3 T Achieva MRI scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands) using a BOLD-sensitive T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging sequence (TR = 2.500 ms, TE = 30 ms, FOV = 240 × 240 mm2) with 3 × 3 mm in-plane resolution and contiguous 3-mm slices providing whole brain coverage. A series of anatomical images were also acquired during the first imaging session using T1-weighted 3D TFE sequence with 1 × 1 × 1 mm resolution. To determine the significant alterations in the functional connectivity, a period of 4 min from both sessions was selected, while the patient was in rest and with eyes opened. Imaging data were analysed using statistical parametrical mapping 12 (SPM 12, Friston, The Welcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK) and the CONN toolbox for MATLAB, using seed-to-voxel whole brain analysis, with false discovery rate (FDR) correction at p ≤ 0.05 significance level and a minimum cluster size limit of 50 voxels. The DMN seed region was chosen according to the work of Amin and colleagues [posterior cingulate cortex, Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) coordinates −2 −60 36, R = 10 mm) to make our results comparable to the reported connectivity changes obtained during PACAP38-induced migraine attacks.
The study was approved by the Scientific and Research Ethics Committee of the Medical Research Council, Budapest, Hungary (23609-1/2011-EKU) and was carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki. The subject gave written informed consent.