A 60-year-old Caucasian man with a diagnosis of relapsing-remitting MS was evaluated in our Neurosurgery outpatient clinic. He described his initial symptoms as beginning 7 years ago, with altered sensorium that occurred while driving. He developed mild left-fingertip numbness 2 years later. An MRI of his brain was performed at that time to aid in diagnosing his neurological symptoms. This demonstrated periventricular white matter lesions, and he was diagnosed with MS. He was initially treated with interferon-beta; however, recently he has been experiencing injection fatigue and stated that he is considering a transition to oral medications. He also described left-sided ear pain and shoulder dysesthesia, which began 5 years ago. He had tried multiple medications for this neuropathic pain, including gabapentin, pregabalin, and carbamazepine, with little clinical relief. Based on the described location of the pain, he was diagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia and referred to our Neurosurgery service for consideration for surgical treatment.
On detailed questioning, our patient described episodic rapid-onset pain in his left shoulder that lasted 30 seconds and radiated to his ear and retroauricular region. These episodes did not have a trigger and had been progressively worsening. On a systematic review we noted that he described difficulty coordinating his left arm and leg over the past 5 years as well, corresponding to the duration of his pain. On examination he was alert and oriented, and recalled his history well. He showed no abnormal signs on a cranial nerve examination. Examination of his extremities demonstrated subtle left deltoid muscle wasting and weakness. His fine touch perception showed a left-sided patchy loss in his left C3–5 dermatomes. In his lower extremities he had a positive crossed-adductor response on his left leg, but no clonus was elicited and his reflexes were otherwise normal. An MRI of his brain and cervical spine demonstrated multiple demyelinated plaques in his corpus callosum, particularly prominent in his splenium, and a plaque on his left cervical spinal cord at the level of C3–4 in the dorsolateral column and dorsal horn . He had no evidence of neurovascular compression or demyelination at his trigeminal nerve root entry zone.