A 45-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a history of ear pain and loss of hearing, nasal crusting, exertional dyspnea and fever for a month. He was a factory worker, smoker and known for hypertension treated by calcium antagonist and ACE inhibitor. He presented in the past few months multiples episodes of nasal congestion treated as chronic sinusitis with antibiotics and inhaled corticosteroids without improvement.
On physical examination, his temperature was 37.5 °C, oxygen saturation 97%, blood pressure 120/60 mmhg, pulse 102/min and regular. The nasal exam showed right nasal septal deviation and crusty and inflammatory mucous membrane bleeding at the contact. Papular skin lesions were present on the elbows. Pulmonary and cardiac auscultation was normal; no organomegaly nor signs of synovitis was present.
Laboratory evaluation showed normocytic normochromic anemia (10 g/dl) with increased ferritin and low serum iron, transferrin and transferrin saturation, typical of anemia of inflammation, leukocytosis (13,000/mL, neutrophiles 73%) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (158 mg/dl). Liver and kidney function tests were normal, with mild hematuria and proteinuria (200 mg/24 h). There was no nutrient deficiency, no signs of hemolysis, no electrolytes disorders and normal thyroid tests.
The thoracic computerized tomography (CT) scan showed multiple lung nodules and sub-glottic tracheal stenosis.
Biopsies of the nasal cavity and skin lesions were performed.
Further laboratory evaluation by indirect immunofluorescence showed a characteristic cANCA (cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) pattern. The patient’s serum was also positive for antibodies to proteinase-3 (anti-PR3) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The diagnosis of Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis was made according to the ACR/EULAR 2017 Classification Criteria, based on the typical clinical (bloody nasal discharge and ulcers, hearing reduction) and biological criteria (cANCA and antiPR3), confirmed by classic histological lesions of granuloma formation and necrotizing vasculitis found in the nasal and skin biopsy .
On the 3rd day following admission to hospital, the patient experienced a pre-syncopal episode, with no loss of consciousness, no chest pain and no palpitations.
The electrocardiogram documented sinus tachycardia (110 bpm) and supra ventricular extrasystoles.
The transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal ejection fraction, with no regional wall motion abnormalities, no valvular disease and no pericardial effusion. The diastolic function was normal with a low E/e’ ratio < 14, a not dilated left atrium (volume 25 ml/m2) and a peak TR velocity < 2,8 m/s; no intracardiac mass were viewed.
The levels of myocardial necrosis markers such as troponin and N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide were normal.
The 24-h Holter ECG was highly pathological showing profuse supraventricular extrasystoles (25,000/24 h) with atrial tachycardia bursts at about 150/min, and second- and third-degree atrioventricular block diurnal and nocturnal .
The cardiac magnetic resonance showed small foci of increased intramyocardial sign on T2 weighted sequences in the septal and lateral walls, suggestive of myocardial edema, possibly related to the GPA .
After the exclusion of other causes of AV block, such as ischemic disease, metabolic or drug related causes, infectious disease (Lyme, tuberculosis, syphilis) or infiltrative myocardial disease, we considered the AV block as part of cardiac involvement of the GPA.
A treatment with pulses of methylprednisolone (500 mg twice/day) and Rituximab (375 mg/m2) at one dose every week for four weeks was started, according to the 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation Guideline for the treatment of active severe GPA .
Despite steroid treatment for 10 days and two doses of Rituximab, the patient continued to experience symptomatic high-grade AV block with prolonged episodes of supraventricular tachycardia.
In agreement with infectiologists and internists, given the persistence of brady and tachyarrhythmia symptoms despite treatment, and given the higher risk of infection of a temporary pacing, we decided to implant a dual chamber pacemaker.
With continuing immunosuppressive therapy for four weeks, the upper respiratory symptoms, as well as general and cardiac symptoms, improved significantly. The inflammatory markers levels normalized (CRP 9 mg/L).
In the follow-up one month later, we could start beta-blockers, his ECG returned to normal sinus rhythm and pacing rate was less than 1%. In the absence of recurrence of sustained supraventricular arrhythmia, no ablation was proposed. A follow-up CMR is planned in the year.