A 36-year-old sub-Saharan African woman presented to the Accident and Emergency department with a 7-hour history of vomiting and central abdominal pain radiating to the back. There were no respiratory, cardiovascular or urinary symptoms, and past medical history was unremarkable. The blood results included an amylase of 3070 U/litre and an abdominal ultrasound showed multiple tiny gallstones confined to a thin-walled gallbladder with normal pancreas, liver, kidneys and spleen. A diagnosis of gallstone-induced pancreatitis was made and laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed 5 days later, once her symptoms had settled. An on-table cholangiogram demonstrated a filling defect at the distal end of the CBD with no duodenal filling. Laparoscopic CBD exploration was undertaken and two stones were removed from the distal CBD using a Dormia basket through the choledochoscope. A Latex 12-Fr T-tube was inserted into the CBD at the end of the procedure. The patient made an uneventful recovery postoperatively and was discharged with the T-tube spigotted and left in situ.
A T-tube cholangiogram 3 weeks later excluded any bile duct obstruction or leakage and the T-tube was therefore removed without difficulty. However, the patient soon started vomiting and complained of increasingly severe right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Following overnight observation, ultrasonography for suspected bile leak was inconclusive. Biliary peritonitis was clinically suspected and an emergency diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. This revealed that the fistula had become disconnected at the point of contact with the anterior abdominal wall . Bile was clearly visible draining from the fistula opening (arrowed). The whole length of the fistula was inspected and no other leak was found; the proximal junction with the CBD was intact. The distal fistula was recannulated with a 10 Fr Latex drain and bile was observed to be draining freely from it. Following an uneventful recovery, cholangiography of the cannulated tract with the Latex drain in-situ was repeated after 5 weeks and no dye was able to pass down it. The tract was therefore presumed to have closed. The Latex drain was removed 24 hours later with good recovery to date and no further complications.