In February 2021, a 59-year old female patient from Saxony, Germany, presented to a community hospital due to persisting exertional dyspnea (class II – III, according to New York Heart Association [NYHA]). She had suffered from a mild course of COVID-19 four months earlier. The otherwise healthy patient additionally reported an unintentional weight loss of 8 kg within the last 3 months. She declined fever or night sweats. Travel history included visits to the People’s Republic of China in 2015 and Iran in 2017, but no recent stays outside of Germany was reported. The patient declined regular contact to domestic animals; however, due to the close proximity of her home to a forest, foxes regularly appeared in her surroundings.
A chest X-ray showed a large left-sided pleural effusion. By means of thoracocentesis, several liters of a cloudy white exudate were evacuated. Histopathologic and microbiologic examination of the exudate indicated the presence of chylous effusion without signs of malignancy, bacterial or fungal infection. Unfortunately, further biochemical analysis of the pleural fluid with examination for lipid components has not been carried out. Additionally, a specific interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) for tuberculosis was negative.
A CT scan was initially misinterpreted as multifocal HCC infiltrating the left diaphragm, spleen, stomach and a loco-regional lymphadenopathy. While there was no histological evidence of malignancy, results of the liver biopsy were in line with low-grade drug-induced liver injury and an amorphous necrosis with surrounding tissue inflammation. Following MRI of the abdomen, a per continuitatem hepatothoracal spread with infiltration of the left diaphragm and the spleen , based on AE cysts in both liver lobes , was suspected. This led to a repeated liver biopsy, where histological examination showed an amorphous necrosis containing periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive, amorphous structures, as well as cystic structures, both indicating echinococcosis. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from liver tissue was negative for Echinococcus DNA, however, Echinococcus serology was positive indicating AE (E. granulosus and E. multilocularis screening tests positive, Echinococcus antigen B ELISA negative, E. multilocularis specific Em2 ELISA positive).
Lastly, the diagnosis of AE was made based on epidemiological history, imaging showing infiltrating growth of the lesion, histology and serology results [, ]. Treatment with albendazole 400 mg BID was started. The hepatic and pulmonary manifestations were considered inoperable by the members of the internal multidisciplinary tumor board. An infiltration of the thoracic duct was shown in an additional magnetic resonance lymphography (MRL) to be the underlying cause of the chylous pleural effusion. To relieve the patient from persistent dyspnea, a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with evacuation of the exudate, pleurectomy, decortication and talc pleurodesis were performed. Diagnosis was confirmed by PCR from pleural biopsy being positive for E. multilocularis DNA. The surgical procedures releaved the patient of her dyspnea. FDG-PET scan combined with computed tomography (PET/CT scan) performed a few days postoperatively demonstrated a significant diminution of the pleural effusion with persisting elevated glucose metabolism along the pleura.
Following two months of treatment with albendazole, a repeat PET/CT scan was performed, which showed an almost complete reduction of glucose metabolism within the liver.
Unfortunately, the left-sided pleural effusion re-accumulated after some month. Nevertheless, we decided against further interventional procedure, as the patient remained oligo-symptomatic under continued pharmacotherapeutic treatment. Should the patient develop respiratory symptoms in the future, radiological intervention with coiling of the thoracic duct would be an option.