A 46-year-old female presented to the emergency department with intermittent chest pain radiating to the back and the left subclavian area starting 8 h prior. She had a smoking history of 20 pack years and a positive cardiac family history. The rest of the personal history was insignificant. The physical examination was unremarkable. The initial 12-lead electrocardiogram did not show any abnormal findings; however, laboratory results revealed an increased troponin value, indicating myocardial damage. Thus, the patient was admitted to the coronary care unit, with suspected NSTEMI and a coronary angiography was planned. The pharmacological treatment plan included dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel, atorvastatin and omeprazole. Interestingly, bedside echocardiography revealed a structurally and functionally normal heart, except for a cystic formation 25 mm in diameter and low flow gradient, located in the infero-lateral cardiac wall.
Coronary angiography performed the following day revealed a coronary aneurysm with arteriovenous communication and thrombus formation without stenosis in the periphery of the LCx in the absence of coronary artery disease .
Cardiac computed tomography (CCT) revealed the presence of an aneurysm of 4,3 cm diameter located at the right-posterior cardiac border with thrombus formation (∼ 13 mm diameter) within the aneurysmal sac and an arteriovenous communication with the distal part of the LCx .
The following day, the patient reported pain relapse accompanied by a new increase in troponin levels and electrocardiographic abnormalities in the inferolateral wall (negative T waves in leads II, III, aVF and V5-V6). Repeated echocardiography revealed a marginally reduced LVEF of 50–55% with hypokinesia of the posterior cardiac wall and right ventricle. Additionally, a hyperechoic area was observed in the aneurysmal space consistent with thrombus enlargement .
After consultation with the hospital’s cardiac surgeons, surgical excision of the aneurysm was favored. The aneurysm was macroscopically visible after elevation of the heart apex, measuring approximately 6 cm. The aneurysm was excised revealing the thrombus. Following the removal of the thrombus, the proximal and distal orifices were revealed and sutured. The aneurysm was ligated, and the patient was weaned off the Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) without complications.
Histopathological examination of the aneurysmatic tissue revealed an intima with mild myxomatoid changes, while the media was characterized by disarray of the smooth muscle and the elastic fibers. These findings seem to have resulted in the structural weakness of the vascular wall contributing to the formation of the sac . There was evident separative destruction of the media wall with thrombus material found inside similar in constitution to the separate pieces of the large thrombus, with abundant erythrocytes, fibrin deposition and inflammatory cells. There were no findings of atherosclerotic lesions . The histopathological examination did not show any specific findings towards vasculitis or connective tissue disorder. Therefore, the most probable cause of the CAA is supposed to be a congenital malformation.
The patient was discharged with the recommendation for 12 months dual antiplatelet therapy according to acute coronary syndrome (ACS) guidelines. During follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic, with normalization of both the LVEF and the electrocardiogram.