A 36-year-old woman underwent a routine physical examination at a local hospital.
Colonoscopy revealed a polypoid lesion with a diameter of 1.5 cm, and the lower edge was located 3 cm from the anal verge. Because the lesion was more likely to be a polyp, ESD was performed at that time. Pathology revealed a mucinous adenocarcinoma, with moderate differentiation and submucosal invasion. There was no residual tumor at the basal edge or in the resection mucosa. The patient visited our hospital immediately for consultation on whether further treatment was needed.
The woman was previously in good health.
The patient’s family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed no abnormalities except several metal clips that could be palpated on digital rectal examination.
We evaluated the carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen-199 levels, which were found to be 2.54 ng/mL and 12.73 ku/L, respectively. Our pathologists also confirmed the pathologic finding of the local hospital.
We performed abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and chest CT for this patient, in addition to a pathological consultation. Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis was not performed because there was no residual tumor. The chest CT scan revealed no sign of distant metastasis. However, the abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed suspected enlarged bilateral LLNs and some enlarged mesorectal LNs (MLN) . Among these, there were two enlarged LLNs in the left lateral area, both located in the distal internal iliac region (263D), with short-axis diameters of 7.1 mm and 6.2 mm, respectively. An enlarged LLN was noted in the right lateral area (distal internal iliac region), with a short-axis diameter of 5.3 mm. These three LLNs had at least two of three malignant features, including a round, irregular border and shape, and heterogeneous density, consistent with a positive LN diagnosis. The maximum short-axis diameter of the enlarged MLN was 4.8 mm, which was insufficient for a diagnosis of LNM.