A 75-year-old hypertensive man presented with an elevated PSA of 9 ng/dL and a normal prostate on digital rectal examination. Following a multi-parametric MRI (mp-MRI) of the prostate, a transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy confirmed a Gleason 6 prostate cancer disease in both lobes, consistent with a cT1c disease. Metastatic work-up was negative. Patient elected to undergo an open radical retropubic prostatectomy. No intraoperative complications were encountered.
Post-operatively, the drainage from the Foley catheter was not as expected, and intravenous fluid was initially increased. The patient was clinically doing well, until we gradually noticed increase in urine leak around the indwelling catheter, which we initially thought secondary to bladder spasms. Later, a soaked wound dressing, having a urine-like odor, was noted. Repeated blood tests revealed leukocytosis of 23,000/μL, with 86% left shift, and an elevated serum creatinine of 2.14 mg/dL, from a 1.14 mg/dL baseline. Urine leak was suspected. Creatinine level taken from the wound drainage was 48.16 mg/dL, which confirmed the diagnosis of a urine leak. Although a malfunctioned indwelling catheter was suspected, irrigation through the catheter confirmed its patency. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were started.
A scout KUB image showed the catheter tip at a more cephalad position than the usual position at the bladder neck . A plain CT scan was done confirming the tip of the indwelling catheter within a diverticular pouch of the bladder (A&B). Retrograde cystography revealed the filling of two anterior diverticular pouches, giving the shape of a “Mickey-Mouse” like bladder . Leakage at the urethro-vesical anastomosis site was noted, with subsequent seepage of contrast to the subcutaneous tissue and thus from the abdominal wall wound .
The explanation is that the urine, coming from both ureteral orifices, was not captured by the Foley catheter, which was stuck in a bladder tic, forcing the urine to leak through the urethra-vesicle anastomosis, and from there to the abdominal wound. The balloon was deflated, and the Foley catheter was repositioned within the bladder, under fluoroscopy, and the balloon was again inflated. . The leak from the surgical wound, and through the urethra, completely stopped.
Follow-up blood tests showed a gradual decline in leucocyte count to 9800/μL and creatinine level to 1.24 mg/dL. The patient was discharged home, four days later. The final pathology was upgraded to Gleason 7(3 + 4) prostate cancer, with negative surgical margins, consistent with pT2cNxMx disease. No lymph nodes dissection was performed.
The indwelling catheter was kept for 2 weeks, and removed after resolution of leak on retrograde cystography. Six months later, the patient was voiding adequately, with no urinary incontinence, and complete wound healing.