A 55-year-old man presented with a chief complaint of progressive, painless vision loss in the left eye over the course of 20 days. The patient had no significant prior medical or ocular history. The patient had no history of smoking,had no previous trauma,and had no infected lesions.His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and intraocular pressure (IOP) in the left eye were 20/100 and 15 mmHg, respectively. Only cortical opacity in the left lens was evident on slit-lamp biomicroscopy before pupil dilation. Therefore, an initial diagnosis of age-related cataract was made by outpatient physicians. The patient was then referred to a surgeon for cataract surgery. A dilated pupil examination under slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed a well-defined, ovoid soft tissue amelanotic mass filling the inferonasal quadrants. Superficial vessels were evident on its surface and lens opacity was mainly present at the mass location . Ultrasound biomicroscopy examination revealed a solid mass in the ciliary body from 6:30 to 8:30 . Ultrasonographic examination of the tumour showed medium to high echodensity and an approximately 0.5–0.6-cm ovoid mass . Magnetic resonance imaging also revealed a well-marginated, ovoid soft tissue mass (0.5–0.6 cm). The mass was slightly hyperintense on T1-weighted images and markedly hypointense on T2-weighted images , and demonstrated considerable enhancement . Based on these findings, the patient’s modified diagnosis was cataract in the left eye, secondary to ciliary body neoplasm. The neoplasm push againstthe lens and the lens is modified its metabolism, leading to lens opacity. Transillumination experiments were performed during the operation, and no transillumination defects were found. Surgical intervention was performed to investigate the pathological diagnosis, as well as to relieve symptoms and improve vision. Instead of enucleation, sclerotomy with tumour biopsy was performed because the tumour was considered benign. Trans-scleral resection was performed along with partial lamellar sclerouvectomy, pars plana vitrectomy, and silicon oil tamponade. The tumour was completely removed during the operation. Pathological examination was performed after complete removal of the tumour. Light microscopy(NIKON,Y-THM,made in JAPAN) showed that the tumour was composed of collagenised fibrous tissue. The tumour is a regular, amelanotic oval mass about 1 cm × 0.6 cm × 0.5 cm.Some regions contained substantial spindle cells with tumour-like proliferation, and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration in surrounding areas . Tumor cells are round to epithelioid, accompanied by vesicular nuclei, vacuolar chromatin and prominent nucleoli, and rich in interstitial mucus-like with neutrophil infiltration. Spindle-shaped myofibroblasts are loosely arranged, surrounded by edema-like mucus-like background, with a large number of blood vessels and inflammatory cells,plasma cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils. No clear zonal maturation was seen under the microscope. The cells are spindle-shaped or oval. Nuclear atypia was not obvious. Nucleoli are not prominent. Lymphocyte infiltration was scattered around, and more lymphocytes aggregated around small blood vessels. The proliferation index of tumor cells is 2%(ki-67 2%). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive staining results for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) , desmin , and vimentin , as well as negative staining results for smooth muscle actin (SMA) , S-100, Ki-67 , CK, CD68, and calponin. Additional immunohistochemical experiments were performed for the patient, and the patient’s p53 was wild-type .
The final diagnosis based on histological and immunohistochemical assessments was IMT of the ciliary body.
The patient was followed up regularly after discharge, and the condition of body and eyes was stable. The silicone oil removal operation was performed in our hospital, and the operation went well.