Twenty years ago, a young woman (23 years old) felt chest pain occasionally when she walked hastily, the pain lasted about 2 min and can relieve itself, so she was admitted to the local hospital and diagnosed with mild-moderate mitral insufficiency (MI). Because of no obvious limitation in physical activity, the patient didn’t pay much attention to it, and no special treatment was obtained. Six months ago, she came to Beijing for further diagnosis due to worsening symptoms, she was diagnosed with congenital heart disease, ALCAPA (see Figure ), severe MI, and left ventricular enlargement (LVE) and underwent Takeuchi procedure and concomitant mitral valve repair in our hospital. During the operation, we found that the left coronary artery (LCA) arises from the left sinus of pulmonary trunk, and we created an aortopulmonary window above the left aortic sinus and an intrapulmonary tunnel that baffles the aorta to the ostium of the anomalous LCA through the anterior wall of the pulmonary trunk. After the operation, she was followed regularly for 3 months and unaware of any abnormalities. Four months after the Takeuchi repair, she began to complain of chest pain on exertion. Physical examination revealed a Grade 3/6 continuous murmur of puffing character at left sternal border between the 2nd and 4th rib, blood pressure (BP) 110/54 mmHg, heart rate 75 b.p.m. Electrocardiogram showed left ventricle high voltage and abnormal Q waves. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a small fistula from the intrapulmonary baffle to the main pulmonary artery (MPA), mild mitral regurgitation, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD) 54 mm (57 mm before the Takeuchi repair), and ejection fraction 52%. Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CTA) confirmed a fistulous connection from the posterior wall of the proximal LCA into the anterior wall of MPA, the diameter of the fistula is about 4 mm (see Figure ).
After the baffle leak was confirmed, we adopted a new method, percutaneous transcatheter closure, to treat the baffle leak. During the operation, ascending aortic angiography in the left anterior oblique (LAO) view and selective coronary angiography of the left main coronary artery demonstrated contrast leakage from the LCA into the MPA (see Figure and B), then we used a ventricular septal defect (VSD) occluder (Starway Medical Technology Inc., Beijing, China) to close the baffle leak through 6 Fr transferring sheath, the VSD occluder we used is a self-expandable, double disc implant device made from a Nitinol wire mesh, the two discs are linked together by a short connecting waist, and the device waist in diameter is 6 mm. Selective coronary angiography of the left main coronary artery in the LAO view demonstrated no contrast leakage after implantation of the device (see B and C). Blood pressure increased to 115/68 mmHg. The pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) decreased from 46/22 (mean: 29) mmHg to 31/14 (mean: 19) mmHg. The Qp/Qs decreased from 1.52 to 1.05. Twenty-four hours after the interventional treatment, TTE re-examination showed no evident residual shunt and LVEDD decreased from 54 mm to 50 mm. The patient’s symptom improved significantly before hospital discharge, and TTE re-examination of 3-month follow-up showed no evident residual shunt.