In 2007, a 54-year-old woman, with no medical history, presented with left retrobulbar optic neuritis. She was treated with steroid pulse therapy, followed by oral prednisolone. Three months later, the patient experienced paresthesia below the upper chest. Cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed T2 hyperintense lesion over the C2-C4 region . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed glucose 78 mg/dL (serum glucose 122 mg/dL), total protein 70 mg/dL, white blood cell (WBC) 1/μL, red blood cell (RBC) 1/μL. Cytology of CSF and cultures for bacteria, viruses and fungi were negative. In 2008, the patient presented with weakness of bilateral lower limbs and numbness below thoracic area. Thoracic spine MRI revealed hyperintense lesion over the T5-6 region on T2 weighted image with contrast enhancement on T1 weighted image . She was diagnosed with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and was treated interferon-beta from 2008 to 2012. Disease-modifying therapy (DMT) was later escalated from interferon-beta to fingolimod (0.5 mg/day) since 2012 because of frequent clinical and radiological relapses. The patient tolerated DMT with fingolimod without side effects. During the following eight years, the patient experienced four minor relapses (three episodes of cervical myelitis and one episode of thoracic myelitis) with nearly complete resolution after each attack following methylprednisolone pulse therapy. At the end of 2020, the patient was scored 3 on the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS).
In 2021, the patient underwent surgery for core decompression of the femoral head. She also had a synthetic bone graft substitute due to avascular necrosis of the femoral head. After the operation, her consciousness level deteriorated. She also experienced flaccid tetraplegia and oculomotor dysfunction. Brain MRI revealed T2-hyperintensities and T1 contrast enhancement over the bilateral subcortical white matter, basal ganglia, brainstem, right parietal lobe, and upper cervical cord . The presentation was compatible with acute demyelinating lesions. The test of AQP4 antibody was positive, and the diagnosis was revised to neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder based on the diagnostic criteria of the 2015 International Panel for NMO Diagnosis (IPND) . The patient was put on steroid pulse therapy, and subsequently, plasma exchanges for ten times. Her consciousness improved, but residual neurological deficits, including spastic paraparesis (MRC scale grade 3 over the bilateral lower limbs), and mild hypoesthesia below the middle thoracic level remained (EDSS score 6). Fingolimod was discontinued and switched to azathioprine (50 mg/day) at the same time. Complete blood count (CBC) revealed white blood cell (WBC) 9100/μL (neutrophil 7917/μL, lymphocyte 346/μL), hemoglobin (Hgb) 11.1 g/dL and platelet 306,000/μL before fingolimod discontinuation, and WBC 6590/μL (neutrophil 5371/μL, lymphocyte 507/μL), Hgb 10.6 g/dL, platelet 229,000/μL after fingolimod discontinuation.
Three weeks after stopping fingolimod, the patient developed consciousness disturbances, fever, and oculomotor dysfunction. CBC revealed WBC 10490/μL (neutrophil 8686/μL, lymphocyte 881/μL), Hgb 10.6 g/dL and platelet 271,000/μL. Deterioration of consciousness (E3V3M6 → E2V1M4) and acute respiratory failure developed on the day after admission. An endotracheal tube was inserted and the patient was mechanically ventilated. CSF analysis revealed glucose 85 mg/dL (serum glucose 120 mg/dL), total protein 80 mg/dL, WBC 4/μL, RBC 130/μL. Cultures for bacteria, viruses, and fungi were negative, and cytology of CSF revealed no malignant cells. Serological screening for autoimmune diseases including ANA, anti-dsDNA, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-beta2-glycoprotein, anti-cardiolipin, lupus-anticoagulant, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA, c-ANCA) yielded negative results. Polyomavirus JC viral load test of spinal fluid was negative (< 100 copies/μl, < 27 IU/μL). Repeated serum aquaporin-4 antibody tests were positive. Brain MRI revealed multifocal T2-hyperintense lesions, involving the subcortical white matters of bilateral hemispheres, thalamus, cerebral peduncles, brainstem, and left middle cerebellar peduncle, indicating disease progression . Brain magnetic resonance angiography revealed no segmental vascular narrowing and dilatation. Steroid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for three days and subsequential plasma exchanges for ten times were performed. The fingolimod withdrawal syndrome was considered. Due to the persistent comatose state (E1M2VT) for 2 months, the patient’s family decided to utilize hospice care. After withdrawal of ventilatory support, the patient expired. The timeline of the patient’s clinical course is shown in .