A 22-year-old male, with no previous medical history, was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) at our hospital with blunt thoracic trauma and near-drowning after a high-energy trauma. The man had been driving a car when, for no apparent reason, he lost control and drove into a ditch filled with water.
The patient consequently aspirated water, but managed to reach solid ground. He was transported by ambulance to the hospital emergency unit, where he was found to be in respiratory failure, probably as a result of severe lung contusion. He was subsequently intubated and mechanically ventilated. During the first few days of admission, pressure-controlled ventilation was used with relatively high ventilator settings. During the first hours after admission these settings were a positive end-expiratory pressure level of 18 cm H2O, inspiratory pressure level of 13 cm H2O, a fractional inspired oxygen level of 60% and a respiration frequency of 30 cycles per minute. No recruitment manoeuvre was performed. A central venous line was inserted into the right femoral vein. Other than fractures of the left clavicle and superficial haematomas, there were no abnormalities on physical examination of the thorax. In particular, no asymmetrical pulmonary auscultation, subcutaneous emphysema or abnormal heart sounds were present. Chest radiography and a 12-lead ECG were performed on admission . No significant abnormalities were observed at the time, but shortly thereafter the ECG showed ST-depression in leads II, III, aVF and V3 and V4. No major haemodynamic problems occurred, and the creatine phosphokinase and accessory MB-fraction indicated only a loss of skeletal muscle. However, extreme ECG abnormalities developed during the following hours . CT scanning of the thorax, performed approximately 12 hours after admission, showed a pneumopericardium, as well as pneumomediastinum and bilateral pneumothorax . Severe lung contusion and haematothorax were also apparent on these images.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed after transthoracic echocardiography had failed to deliver the required image quality. TEE did not identify any wall motion abnormalities, and the accident appeared to have had no abdominal or cerebral repercussions.
Both the pneumothorax and pneumopericardium resolved after the insertion of a left-sided chest tube. The right-sided pneumothorax resolved spontaneously, after which the patient made a rapid recovery and was discharged from the ICU on day 5. He was discharged from hospital five days later, having made a complete recovery.