The emergency medical unit was called for a 77-year-old woman who reported constrictive chest pain for 6 h. Her medical history included hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, obesity, and T2DM since 2005.
Her ongoing treatment included metformin 2 × 850 mg/day, empagliflozin 25 mg/day (for 5 years), nebivolol 5 mg/day, simvastatin 20 mg/day, aspirin 80 mg/day, spironolactone 50 mg/day, and citalopram 20 mg/day. The patient had chest pain, without other symptoms. Vital signs showed heart rate 100 beats/min, blood pressure 140/90 mmHg, oxygen saturation 97%, and body temperature 36.3°C (97.3°F). Weight was 98 kg, and body mass index was 35 kg/m2. Cardiopulmonary auscultation was normal. Capillary blood glucose was 247 mg/dL (13.7 mmol/L). Based on the ECG, anterior STEMI were diagnosed .
The patient was immediately transferred to the cath lab for a primary percutaneous intervention.
The coronary angiogram showed a triple-vessel disease, including occlusion of the LAD, and severe narrowing of circumflex and PDA. The patient was successfully treated with disocclusion and stent implantation in LAD. The non-culprit lesions were also treated in the same session.
In the cardiac ICU, a second ECG diagnosed AF, which was treated with antithrombotics including ticagrelor 90 mg 2× and low-molecular-weight heparins (enoxaparin 2× 80 mg) .
Blood test showed (normal lab value in brackets) serum creatinine 0.85 mg/dL (0.6–1.3), creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) 4.1 ng/mL (<3.4), high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I 143.0 ng/L (<15.6), and haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) 7.8% (61.9 mmol/mol) .
Left ventricular ejection fraction was 41% with significant apical akinesia on transthoracic echocardiography.
After 7 days in the cardiac care unit, the patient was admitted to the ICU for acute respiratory distress syndrome due to rapid AF and pneumonia diagnosed on the basis of wheezing, cough, and fever.
The C-reactive protein was high at 91.1 (≤5.0 mg/L), the results of the other blood tests are shown in , and the chest X-ray showed a moderate infiltrate.
Due to the patient’s critical condition, EC was recommended to restore sinus rhythm, and intravenous cefuroxime was administered. In anticipation of a planned cardioversion the following day, the patient was fasted, and metformin was withheld.
On Day 8, routine blood gas and urine tests in the ICU revealed an elevated anion gap and metabolic acidosis . The lactic acid level was normal, which excluded lactic acidosis associated with sepsis or metformin. Despite normal blood glucose levels, ketones were analysed. They were found to be high. However, the patient had no symptoms of DKA. A diagnosis of euglycaemic DKA (eu-DKA) due to SGLT2i (empagliflozin) was suspected.
Intravenous insulin treatment was initiated with glucose 5%/1500 mL plus NaCl 4 g infusion, followed by insulin glargine SC. The evolution of biological parameters throughout the eu-DKA episode is presented in .
In addition, electrical cardioversion was no longer considered as the transoesophageal echocardiography showed a thrombus into the left atrium.
Upon stabilization, the patient was discharged from hospital after 22 days on antiplatelet drug, anticoagulant, and SC insulin therapy. After 6 months, the patient had lost 10 kg. Heart failure was treated with ramipril 2.5 mg/day, bisoprolol 5 mg/day, and bumetanide 1 mg/day. Sinus rhythm, antiplatelet, and anticoagulant medications were maintained. Diabetes was treated with basal insulin (glargine U-300 26 IU/day) and metformin 850 mg 2×/day.