In November 2020, a 68-year-old man presented at the emergency department in the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University with a five-day history of right ptosis, swelling, and pain, accompanied by a four-day history of fever. He was treated with ceftriaxone, dexamethasone, and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) at the local hospital for 2 days. However, his condition progressively worsened. He denied headache or convulsion, and his medical history was poorly controlled diabetes.
On neurological examination, the patient presented a complete ophthalmoplegia in the right eye, ptosis, swelling, a fixed dilated pupil unresponsive to light, no light perception, and loss of sensation in the right forehead and eyelids. No purulent nasal discharge, fetor, or anosmia was observed. Meningeal signs were negative, and motor exam revealed normal muscle bulk and tone, power 5/5, and more than two reflexes with normal plantar responses. The sensory exam found that the patient was intact to pinprick and vibration on trunk and limbs. There were no positive signs in the cerebellum.
On laboratory testing, the capillary glucose was 230 mg per deciliter, and the hemoglobin A1c was 14.6%. Basic hematology showed a white blood cell count of 22,410 per deciliter, 80% of neutrophils, and urinalysis was notable for glucosuria and ketonuria. Cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed elevated white cells of 463 per deciliter (48.2% monocyte), a protein level of 850 mg per deciliter, and glucose of 122 mg per deciliter. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed pansinusitis and multiple lesions scattered in the right cerebral hemisphere and right pons .
The patient presented complete ophthalmoplegia (combination of unilateral impairment of cranial nerves III, IV, and VI), loss of vision (II), and loss of sensation in the right forehead (ophthalmic branch of V). Based on the positive signs above and the imaging results, we located the lesions on the right orbital apex and right brainstem. The etiologies considered included infectious, vascular, inflammatory, neoplastic, and traumatic. In the absence of a definitive diagnosis, the patient was administered ceftriaxone, linezolid, metronidazole, acyclovir, dexamethasone, and LMWH after admission. Due to the rapid development of the patient's condition, the samples of blood and cerebrospinal fluid were immediately sent to Genoxor Medical Science and Technology Inc. for mNGS testing. On the following day, the report indicated that Rhizopus arrhizus, which is the most prevalent causative agent of mucormycosis, was detected in both the patient's cerebrospinal fluid and peripheral blood. The reads were 78 in cerebrospinal fluid and 131 in the blood (the sequencing coverage and sequencing depth in ). The result was verified by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) later with the same cerebrospinal fluid sample for mNGS. The qPCR was performed to amplify the specific part of Rhizopus arrhizus, with Rhizopus arrhizus-specific primers Rhizopus arrhizus-F (TTCAAAGAGTCAGGTTGTTTGG) and Rhizopus arrhizus-R (CAGTCTGGCTCCAAACGGTTC). Combined with the patient's clinical manifestations, it was finally confirmed to be a fungal Rhizopus arrhizus infection. Liposomal amphotericin was timely treated. However, the patient began to experience disturbance of consciousness and unfortunately died within 4 days after presentation.