A 74-year-old female, former smoker had resected stage III lung adenocarcinoma and was treated with adjuvant concurrent chemoradiation with carboplatin and paclitaxel in 2008 . The patient’s surgical resection specimen was tested for EGFR amplification by FISH (ARUP Laboratories) and KRAS mutation analysis (GenPath Diagnostics), and the results indicated EGFR was non-amplified and KRAS was wild type at codons 12, 13, and 61. Her medical history includes hypertension, hyperlipidemia, GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease), SVT (supraventricular tachycardia), chronic kidney disease and osteoporosis. The patient developed metastatic recurrent lung cancer with malignant pleural effusion in 2010. The EGFR mutation analysis by real-time PCR (Clarient Diagnostic Services) was done on the pleural effusion specimen and none of the 29 known mutations, deletions and insertions found in exons 18–21 of the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain was detected. The patient was then treated with pemetrexed and sorafenib on trial (NCCTG N0626 study, ) with a durable response for more than 2 years . The treatment was stopped in 2012 due to intolerance. Afterwards, the patient was on observation for 2 years until she developed symptomatic progression with extensive bony metastasis in 2014 . Her left pelvic metastasis biopsy specimen was used for genomic profiling and PD-L1 staining (see below). She was treated with palliative radiation, followed by carboplatin and pemetrexed. Cytotoxic chemotherapy was discontinued after 2 months due to profound toxicities which required hospitalization, despite of dose reductions .
To explore additional therapeutic options, we then performed comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) using the FoundationOne panel . The CGP identified the BRAF V600E mutation as well as inactivating mutations in tumor suppressors including ATM. In addition, the tumor mutation burden was low—five per megabase and the tumor was microsatellite stable (MSS). The full report of the CGP is provided as Additional file . Based on this genetic profile, the patient was started on dabrafenib in April 2015 . Dabrafenib was used at 150 mg PO BID throughout the treatment course. She had excellent clinical and radiographic responses . Her performance status drastically improved. Her only noticeable side effect was hypokalemia that was managed with oral and IV potassium replacement. The patient developed increase of metabolic activity from two disease sites on PET scan suggestive of disease progression without clinical symptoms 7 months after initiation of dabrafenib. Based on the phase II trial reported in 2015 ASCO annual meeting demonstrating activity of dabrafenib and trametinib combination in BRAF mutated lung cancers, our patient was offered the addition of trametinib. However, she did not tolerate the combination and stopped trametinib after 1 week. The patient was asymptomatic from her metastatic lung cancer until the 19th month into the dabrafenib therapy, when she developed productive cough and restaging scan revealed new hypermetabolic upper abdominal lymph node metastases at the gastrohepatic ligament, precaval and peripancreatic retroperitoneum .
The patient was discontinued from dabrafenib and started on pembrolizumab based on her positive PD-L1 staining (90%) in December 2016 . The treatment was complicated by immune mediated colitis and pneumonitis which promptly responded to systemic steroids. The dose and duration of steroids used for treating pneumonitis are as follows: prednisone 40 mg daily for 1 weeks, followed by 20 mg daily for 5 days, 10 mg daily for 5 days, 5 mg daily for 5 days, then off. Her colitis was successfully treated in the similar fashion. A repeat CT scan 12 days after initiation of pembrolizumab was done for the work-up of abdominal pain, confirmed colitis, but also demonstrated decreased size of the gastric hepatic ligament node and resolution of the peripancreatic nodule, consistent with early response. She was able to stop steroid and became asymptomatic from her disease and prior treatment effects in March 2017. As of July 2017, the patient has no signs of disease progression after only two doses of pembrolizumab (200 mg IV) 7 weeks apart without additional therapy . The patient has not had any hospitalization after the initiation of dabrafenib. It is noted that a recent pooled analysis of advanced melanoma also showed the patients who discontinued PD-1 checkpoint blockade antibodies continue to benefit from the treatment.