A 65 years old, Caucasian female patient presented on admission to our Liver Surgical Unit with a history of flushing, diarrhoea, vomiting and low grade fever. Ultrasound (US) demonstrated multiple hypoechoic lesions in both liver lobes. Computed Tomography (CT) revealed heterogeneous hypodense lesions invading most of the hepatic parenchyma. The lesions showed mild gradual enhancement during the arterial and portal phases, while cystic areas were also demonstrated. The larger of the lesions showed extrahepatic extension compressing and dislocating the duodenum. No vascular invasion was noted . A 24 h-urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) level was high (36,4 mg/day – normal range: 1–6 mg/day); the tumor markers CEA and Ca 19-9 were within normal range. The patient underwent a CT-guided biopsy of the larger lesion and the histology revealed a well differentiated tumor, composed of solid (insular) nests or ribbons of monomorphic, medium-sized cells, with variably eosinophilic neoplasm and round nuclei. Peripheral palisading was also noted in some solid nests with no tumor necrosis. The morphologic features of the tumor were compatible with a neuroendocrine tumor. The diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The neoplastic cells were proven to be positive for the endocrine markers Chromogranin A, Synaptophysin, NSE and CD56, in addition to Cytokeratins Cam 5.2, 5/6 and 19 . No immunohistochemical findings were suggestive for carcinomatous (metastatic or primary) or metastatic melanocytic growth identified.
In addition to these diagnostic modalities the patient underwent an abdominal and chest CT scan along with abdominal MRI, mammography and an upper and lower GI endoscopy which didn't reveal the primary. A total body octreoscan with In111, a MIBG scan and a [11C] 5HTP-PET showed intense uptake of the radiotracer exclusively in the liver. Based on the biochemical and thorough radiological investigation, the diagnosis of PHCT was made with certainty. Due to the extended liver invasion, resection wasn't feasible and palliation was performed with TACE and subsequent administration of lanreotide (long acting somatostatin analogue) 30 mg/28 days subcutaneous for 22 months. TACE included streptozotocin 1.5 g/m2 dissolved in 10 ml of normal saline (0,9%) combined with 10 ml of lipiodol. The emulsion was injected into the branches of the hepatic artery distal to the origin of gastro-duodenal artery. Two years later the patient is free of symptoms with no radiologic disease progression.