A 33-year-old woman with no family history of cancer presented to a local hospital in November 2014 with a palpable mass in hypogastric region. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed a 12 × 8 cm irregular hypoechoic mass with spot blood flow signals and clear boundary on left rear part of the uterus. She was diagnosed with uterine leiomyoma, and underwent an open myomectomy. Pathologic examination revealed a broad ligament LMS, and immunohistochemical analyses showed positivity for SMA and a Ki 67 level of 30%. Subsequently hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy were performed. No tumor cells were detected in sections taken from tubes, ovaries and omentum. She recovered well and then discharged from the hospital.
In November 2017, she was referred to our hospital for a mass in the right thigh. On physical examination, a firm mass measuring 10 cm in diameter with tenderness was felt on the back of right thigh, and there were not any positive abdominal findings. Laboratory findings including serum amylase, serum lipase and serum tumor markers (CA19–9 and CEA) were all within normal reference ranges. CT scan of thighs showed a low-density mass with delayed enhancement in the back of right thigh , and MRI of thighs showed long T1 and long T2 signals on plain scan and high signals on fat suppression imaging. A diagnosis of LMS was established on ultrasonography-guided core needle biopsy, and immunohistochemical study showed positive staining for SMA, Vimentin, Desmin and H-Caldesmon, and negative staining for S-100, CD117, DOG-1 and CD34. To evaluate the overall condition of the patient, a whole-body 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed, which revealed one hypermetabolic lesion on the right thigh and another on the tail of pancreas. Abdominal CT scan showed a 22 mm * 23 mm rounded low-density mass on the tail of pancreas with heterogeneous enhancement in arterial phase .
A group of experts including surgeons, oncologists, radiologists and pathologists met to provide Multi-Disciplinary Treatments. The surgical team included experienced general and orthopaedic surgeons. Resectability of the two leisons was evaluated by the surgical team of the multidisciplinary team. Neoadjuvant therapy was administered as the tumor was deemed to be borderline resectable with concerns to its proximity to neurovascular bundle. Therefore, we first performed a distal pancreatectomy. The cross-section of the en bloc resected tumor was a whitish fish-liking mass with complete capsule . The frozen pathological examination supported the diagnosis of an LMS with necrosis, mild atypia, and 17-18 mitosis per 10 high power fields (HPF) . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for SMA, desmin, h-caldesmon, Ki67 (positive rate 30%), and negative for S-100, CD117, dog-1, CD34.The tumor in the thigh received external-beam radiotherapy (25Gy given in 10 fractions on week days) and chemotherapy (Lobaplatin 50 mg/m2 intravenously daily) for 3 weeks, to which the tumor showed no response. Therefore, the tumor was resected completely with a negative margin. Postoperative pathologic examination was consistent with the former ultrasonography-guided biopsy and frozen pathologic examination of pancreatic tumor. The patient was discharged 5 days after the operation, and free of disease recurrence in the 2 years follow-up.