An 84-year-old man who had previously undergone a right radical nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma presented to his general practitioner 15 years later with iron deficiency anaemia (haemoglobin 95 d/dL, mean cell volume 79.2 fl, ferritin 16.5 μg/l, transferrin saturation 6%). His co-morbidities included type 2 diabetes mellitus, asthma, ischaemic heart disease (coronary artery bypass graft 13 years previously) and a hip replacement. His medication included ramipril, bisoprolol, simvastatin, metformin, aspirin, vitamin B12, ferrous sulphate and a fentanyl patch.
An oesophago-gastroduodenoscopy (OGD) revealed an ulcerating duodenal mass, and the biopsy confirmed metastatic clear cell renal carcinoma. A CT scan demonstrated the large 110 mm duodenal mass was centred in the head of the pancreas and was causing gastric outlet obstruction with mild pancreatic duct dilatation . His amylase was 23 IU/L. In addition, there were multiple, bilateral pulmonary metastases, and a 25 mm left renal nodule in keeping with a second renal tumour.
At his initial oncology assessment his ECOG performance status was 1, he was living independently and was managing all activities of daily living without assistance. He therefore commenced palliative systemic therapy with pazopanib at a dose of 800 mg once daily as first-line treatment for his metastatic renal cell carcinoma. A re-staging CT scan after 3 months of treatment indicated disease response. However, he developed reduced appetite, grade 2 diarrhoea and grade 3 fatigue and his ECOG performance status deteriorated to 3. Therefore, after a short treatment break, his pazopanib was reduced to 400 mg once daily. A further CT scan after 6 months of treatment demonstrated ongoing disease response, and at that time his only persisting toxicity remained grade 1–2 diarrhoea, which was managed with loperamide.
However, after 9 months of treatment, he developed a severe bout of diarrhoea, accompanied by dehydration and severe postural hypotension. His renal function deteriorated and his creatinine rose from a baseline of 84 μmol/L to 158 μmol/L and his estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) fell from 80 ml/min/1.73m2 to 37 ml/min/1.73m2. An ultrasound scan of his single remaining kidney revealed no evidence of obstruction. Urinalysis was negative for blood and a urine-to-creatinine ratio of 16 mg/mmol demonstrated negligible proteinuria. Serum electrophoresis and immunoglobulins, auto-antibody titres and complement levels were all unremarkable.
A working diagnosis of acute kidney injury (AKI) from acute tubular necrosis (ATN) due to hypovolaemia and hypertension as a result of his diarrhoea was made. His pazopanib and antihypertensive agents were temporarily withheld and he was rehydrated. His renal function improved and his creatinine fell to 119 μmol/L and his eGFR rose to 53 ml/min/1.73m2, although failed to return to his previous baseline. Given the ongoing response of his metastatic RCC to pazopanib, the drug was re-introduced. Over the ensuing year his eGFR remained stable on this medication with continued oncological response.
Following this period of stable renal function, his creatinine subsequently began to progressively rise again. This time, there was no identifiable disruption of fluid balance, haemodynamic disturbance or exacerbation of his gastrointestinal symptoms. Other than pazopanib, he was not taking any potentially nephrotoxic agents. There was only moderate proteinuria (uPCR was 56.3 mg/mmol) and further CT imaging again excluded renal obstruction.
A renal biopsy including immunofluorescence and electron microscopy demonstrated mild acute tubular necrosis (ATN), severe chronic tubulointerstitial damage, with 60% interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (IFTA) and a disproportionately large number of interstitial oxalate crystals . There was no evidence of an active glomerular lesion (other than mild diabetic changes) or thrombotic microangiopathy to suggest a tyrosine kinase nephropathy. Subsequent 24-h urinary oxalate analysis demonstrated raised urinary oxalate excretion - urine oxalate 658 μmol/L, 645 μl/24 h and a urine oxalate:creatinine ratio of 153umol/mmol. His faecal elastase-1 level was reduced at 61 μg/g consistent with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. Taken together, these findings were suggestive of secondary oxalate nephropathy from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency due to his pancreatic metastatic lesions as the primary cause of his renal impairment.
Pancreatic supplementation with oral creon was commenced, which resulted in significant improvement in his gastrointestinal symptoms. He also took oral calcium acetate to act partially as a “phosphate binder”, but also to help chelate oxalate in the bowel and reduce its absorption. His renal function continued to deteriorate and he subsequently commenced maintenance haemodialysis for end-stage renal failure . Thirty months after starting treatment for metastatic RCC, he remains on first-line pazopanib with repeat imaging demonstrating only very minor disease progression in the pancreas and left kidney and stable lung metastases.