This case involved a 16-year-old male patient. His left shoulder was injured while playing basketball 1 year ago. After the injury, he suffered swelling and pain, with limited movement and no shoulder deformity. However, the patient did not go to the hospital for diagnosis and treatment. After approximately 1 month, the pain had disappeared when the patient was at rest but reappeared after activity. The pain was positively correlated with the activity volume, degree and time, but the patient still insisted on playing basketball in the year after the injury. The patient was referred to our hospital for diagnosis and treatment due to recurrent pain symptoms. The patient had no history of long-term steroid use, alcohol abuse, systemic lupus erythematosus or rheumatoid disease. During the physical examination, the patient had no obvious deformity of the left shoulder, the pain was obvious when the shoulder joint was rotated and squeezed, and the active and passive range of motion was normal. There was no rotator cuff injury or shoulder instability. X-ray showed a slightly flattened left humeral head, a mixed shadow of high and low density, and a crescent sign . Magnetic resonance T1-weighted imaging showed depression of the left humeral head, decreased local bone signal intensity, and articular cartilage detachment. T2-weighted imaging showed a bone depression under the articular surface, mixed signal shadows, articular cartilage detachment, and articular cartilage discontinuity . Computed tomography showed an irregular shape of the left humeral head, a bony depression on the articular surface, and multiple cystic bone resorption under the articular surface. A 3D computed tomography (CT) scan showed oblong necrosis of bone on the articular surface of the left humeral head, irregular depression, and a collapsed area of approximately 576 mm2 (29.7 mm × 19.4 mm) . All results suggested subchondral osteonecrosis of the left humeral head.
The patient was initially diagnosed with subchondral osteonecrosis of the left humeral head and underwent surgical treatment with general anesthesia in the beach chair position. The left shoulder surgical area and the left knee joint were cleaned with disinfection towels. The left deltoid muscle pectoralis major space approach was taken; the incision was approximately 8 cm, and the cephalic vein was protected at each layer. The left shoulder joint cavity was exposed; the joint fluid was clear, the humeral head cartilage was partially free, and the size was 10 mm × 30 mm. Next, the subchondral bone was exposed, the free cartilage was removed, and the surrounding cartilage was freshened. Cartilage transplantation tools (Arthrex) were used. The necrotic bone was removed, and a small incision was made in the left knee joint. Three 8 mm osteochondral columns were taken from the upper part of the femoral trochlea to be transplanted in the defect of the humeral head, and two 8 mm periosteal bone columns were taken from the humeral head. At the defect, the surface was flush with the surrounding cartilage, and the stability of the grafted osteochondral column was explored. The incision was closed layer by layer after the subscapularis tendon was sutured and the drainage tube was indwelled .
After surgery, the patient was given a triangular scarf for protection. On the second day, the patient underwent X-ray, magnetic resonance imaging and CT + 3D CT scans for imaging evaluation and follow-up . One week after the operation, the patient was instructed to perform shoulder rehabilitation exercises. One month after the surgery, the patient was satisfied with shoulder joint function and returned to school. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients mothor for publication of this case report details.