A 65-year-old man with a 4-week history of mild epigastric pain radiating to the back (exacerbated after meals), progressive obstructive jaundice, anorexia and weight loss of 3 kg was admitted to our Department of Surgery in November 2005. There was no history of a change in bowel habit, melena, haematochezia, pancreatitis, liver or gallbladder disease. The patient had undergone open repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm 5 years previously and he was a heavy smoker (40 pack-years) and had a high alcohol intake (300 ml/day).
Upon admission, the patient was icteric, afebrile and had normal vital signs. Physical examination revealed normal bowel sounds, deep jaundice and mild tenderness in the epigastrium and right upper quadrant, without evidence of peripheral lymphadenopathy, palpable mass or hepatosplenomegaly. The patient had an unremarkable haematological profile, but the liver function tests were abnormal: aspartate transaminase (AST) 253 IU/l, alanine transaminase (ALT) 393 IU/l, total bilirubin 7.9 mg/ml, direct bilirubin 6.41 mg/ml, alkaline phosphatase 236 U/l and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 462 U/l. Both serum carcinoembryonic antigen titre and serum carbohydrate antigen titre were normal.
The patient underwent ultrasonography of the liver, biliary tract and pancreas, which revealed a hypoechoic mass at the head of the pancreas. Further assessment of this finding with helical, contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated the presence of a large, hypodense, non-homogeneous lesion at the head of the pancreas, with a maximal diameter of 5 cm, without dilatation of the main pancreatic duct . Limited lymphadenopathy was also detected in the peripancreatic and the para-aortic regions. The tumour was in contact with the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) without signs of infiltration or encasement of the vein or of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The patient also underwent upper GI endoscopy, which revealed mild gastritis in the gastric antrum without evidence of malignancy in the stomach or duodenum. A CT-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy was not diagnostic, and the patient was scheduled for exploratory laparotomy.
At surgery, a large mass at the pancreatic head was found, which could be easily separated from the contiguous vascular structures with blunt dissection. Interestingly, the tumour did not seem macroscopically to invade the surrounding viscera. A pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) was performed. Histologic evaluation of the surgical specimen revealed extensive involvement of the pancreas by a diffuse, extranodal, high grade, large cell, NHL (centroblastic lymphoma). A neoplastic population, consisting of large non-cleaved lymphoid cells with nucleoli, was seen to surround pancreatic ducts; no lymphoepithelial lesions were present . A few small reactive T lymphocytes CD3+ and CD45R0+ (Dako, Glosrtup, Denmark) were observed. Immunohistochemical assessment of the neoplastic cells revealed B lymphoid phenotypes CD20+ (Dako) and CD10+ (Cell Marque Corporation, USA), and the cells were negative for CD3, CD45R0, CD30, CD15, ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase), EMA (epithelial membrane antigen) (Dako) and EBN-A2 (Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2) (Dako). Mitotic activity was very high (Ki67 (Dako) > 80%) . The tumour was classified as stage IIE according to the Ann Arbor classification [,]. The resection margins were free of disease. However, all adjacent lymph nodes in the gastric or peripancreatic region were infiltrated by the tumour.
In the immediate postoperative course, the patient had several episodes of bilious vomiting shortly after food intake, attributed to oedema of the gastrojejunostomy, which gradually resolved. He also developed a pancreatic fistula which completely resolved after 5 weeks without affecting the patient's nutritional status or electrolyte balance.
After surgery the patient underwent four chemotherapeutic sessions consisting of cyclophosphamide, novantrone, vincristine and prednisone, all administered at 3-week intervals. Twenty-one months after surgery the patient was alive and in a good clinical condition.