A 63-year-old Japanese man (SIMC-Uro #9950, a unique non-sequential patient control number in the department of SIMC-Uro) visited a nearby clinic due to intermittent macroscopic hematuria. He had a medical history of mild diabetes mellitus and surgery for colon carcinoma. Physical and laboratory findings were within normal limits except for the presence of microhematuria at the clinic. Cystoscopy revealed a broad-base non-papillary bladder tumor. CT (#1, ) and MRI (#1, Fig. a) revealed a bladder tumor invading perivesical tissue without apparent metastases (cT3N0M0). He underwent transurethral resection of the tumor, and the pathological diagnosis of the resected specimen was UC that invaded sub-epithelial connective tissues (pT1).
He was referred to the SIMC-Uro for the treatment of the invasive bladder tumor. Physical and laboratory findings were within normal limits (height 175 cm, body weight 63 kg). CT #2 at the SIMC detected no metastatic lesions. He underwent three cycles of monthly neoadjuvant chemotherapy using gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2, day 1, 8, and 15) and cisplatin (70 mg/m2, day 2), followed by radical cystectomy and extended pelvic lymph node dissection. Histopathological examination detected high-grade UC in the previously resected portion even after chemotherapy, however, no cancer cells were detected in the surgical margin of the bladder specimen (pT1N0).
CT #5 which was performed 266 days after radical cystectomy, identified cancer recurrence in the pelvic wall (50 mm in length) which invaded to the rectum . Transrectal biopsy of the tumor pathologically conformed the recurrence of the bladder cancer. Irrespective of two cycles of salvage chemotherapy using the same regimen as the neoadjuvant setting, the recurrent tumor significantly enlarged to 81.6 mm (CT #5, Fig. b).
The patient initiated treatment with tri-weekly 200 mg of pembrolizumab injection 283 days after radical cystectomy. Of note, 9 days before the treatment, the case complaint of any symptom except for mild diarrhea (Grade 1 in Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0 ) due to unknown reason. At the day of Grade 1-diarrhea, laboratory data including serum CK level (CK: 34 [normal range: <244] U/L) and ECG (#1, Fig. a) were normal. From 12 to 34 days after the administration of pembrolizumab, he serially complained of Grade 3-diarrhea, Grade 3-erythema multiforme with pruritus and left ptosis with diplopia. Our comprehensive management team consisting of pharmacists, nurses, cardiologists, and neurologists intervened to this case. Laboratory examination showed significantly elevated CK (3385 U/L), its isozyme CK-MB (62.5 [<5] n/mL), and troponin I (372.1 [<26.20] pg/mL) . ECG#2 findings revealed a right bundle branch block which was not observed at ECG#1 although echocardiographic findings were normal. Overall, the ECG, echocardiography, and laboratory data suggested that he had mild myocardial damage with conduction disturbance. MG and myositis due to autoimmune abnormality was unlikely, because their specific examinations including repetitive stimulation test, tensilon test, electromyography as well as serum measurements of anti-AChR Ab and anti-MuSK Ab were all negative. Consequently, the case was diagnosed as MG with myositis with systemic myopathy involving the cardiac and facial muscles as an irAE.
He initiated 60 mg/day of prednisolone (1 mg/kg, Fig. ). Serum levels of CK, CK-MB, and troponin I as well as symptoms including diarrhea and ptosis gradually improved. Although the conduction disturbance remained in the remote period, the patient demonstrated no impairment of ventricular function throughout the whole observation period. Interestingly, the tumor significantly shrunk to 25 mm only 49 days after the single pembrolizumab administration (CT #6, yellow arrowheads in Fig. c). The dose of prednisolone was gradually reduced to as shown in Figure . The tumor remained small without any treatment after a single injection of pembrolizumab as of 201 days after the pembrolizumab injection (CT #8, Fig. d). Prednisolone was withdrawn 362 days after the pembrolizumab injection (321 days treatment with prednisolone). Consequently, irrespective of severe neuromuscular complications, this case accomplished putative pathological complete remission by the single injection of pembrolizumab.