A 13-year-old girl complained of a three-month history of lower back pain and degrading ability to walk. Her past medical history revealed developmental delay with gait disorder related to premature birth at 31 weeks of gestation. On physical examination, she had mildly enlarged lymph nodes in the cervical group, motor weakness, muscle hypotrophy, loss of sensation and brisk deep tendon reflexes at the lower extremities. Laboratory investigations detected unremarkable peripheral blood cell count, high levels of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (74 mm; normal up to 20 mm) and C-reactive protein (89 mg/L; normal up to 10 mg/L). A peripheral blood lymphocyte typing was negative for presence of blasts and a bone marrow aspiration allowed to exclude tumor involvement. A contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and the spine showed an epidural mass infiltrating the spinal canal via the left neural foramen. The mass, extending from Th12 to L1 with compression and displacement of the spinal cord , was causing destruction and collapse at the twelfth thoracic vertebra. To ascertain the disease spread and the correct risk stratification, a total body computed tomography (CT) was performed. The CT confirmed the presence and the extension of the paravertebral mass and revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum and cervical groups . Staging 18F-fluordeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan detected pathological FDG uptake involving the paravertebral tumor and the lymph nodes detected at CT scan . The patient underwent ultrasound-guided biopsy of the epidural mass. Histological examination with immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated a classic-type, nodular sclerosing variant HL, excluding both a primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma and an anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Considering both bone involvement, due to contiguity of the mass, and neurological symptoms, related to compression by tumor, the girl was classified as stage 4. After informed consent was acquired, she received 2 cycles of chemotherapy using Prednisone, Vincristine, Doxorubicin, Etoposide (OEPA regimen), followed by 4 cycles of Prednisone, Dacarbazine, Vincristine, Cyclophosphamide, Etoposide, Doxorubicin (DECOPDAC-21 regimen), according to the specific international protocol European Network-Paediatric Hodgkin Lymphoma (EuroNet-PHL-C2). During treatment there was a rapid and marked improvement of motor and sensory deficits. Total-body CT after treatment revealed a complete remission of the epidural mass, reduction in lymph node size in the mediastinum group, but no change of the cervical lymph nodes. FDG-PET scan showed an uptake only in the upper neck lymph nodes. Therefore, the patient received a total dose of 2880 cGy radiation therapy delivered to the laterocervical lymph nodes at 180 cGy per fraction over 16 days. CT-scan after radiation therapy documented complete remission.
The girl was required to wear an orthopedic corset for six months, following the vertebral collapse, to maintain an erect position. Intensive neuromotor rehabilitation improved strength and muscle trophism. She started walking again with assistance initially, until complete ambulatory recovery. She performed clinical and laboratory evaluation, chest x-ray and abdomen ultrasound every three months for 1 year and every four months thereafter. Three years post-treatment, she has no residual back pain or neurological sequelae. MRI acquired annually from tumor onset confirms complete remission, no relapse or complications .