A 26-year-old female was referred to our hospital for evaluation of a pelvic mass incidentally noted in routine pre-pregnancy ultrasonography examination. The lesion did not cause any discomfort, and the patient did not report any symptom. She and her family members had not experienced such lesion in the past. General examination was unremarkable and laboratory findings were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic cavity was performed. MRI examination revealed an irregular mass with clear boundary in the pelvic retroperitoneum . It located in the front of sacrum and behind uterus and rectum. The oppression and displacement of neighbor organs were found. No direct invasion was detected. This mass measured 9.4 cm (anterior-posterior), 9.1 cm (transverse), and 9.5 cm (craniocaudal). The signal intensity of this lesion was inhomogeneous. It mainly showed isointense and slight hypointense on T1 weighted image and isointense and hyperintense on T2 weighted image. On contrast-enhanced images, it showed significant but heterogenous enhancement. The left and lower part of the mass showed some areas with hyperintense on T1 weighted image and hypointense on T2 weighted image. On contrast-enhanced images, it showed no enhancement. This abnormal signal indicated the presence of hemorrhage within the tumor. In addition, flow-void sign was identified at the lesion core and margin. The uterus, bilateral ovaries and rectum had no abnormalities.
Subsequently, computed tomography (CT) examination was performed for further understanding this lesion and its surroundings, especially the adjacent vessels. Pre-contrast CT scan demonstrated a well-defined, irregular soft tissue mass in the same location showed on MRI . The internal density was slightly inhomogenous, with CT values ranging from 34 to 69 HU. The left and lower parts of the mass demonstrated higher density with CT values ranging from 51 to 69 HU. No calcification was identified. On contrast-enhanced CT images, it showed marked but heterogenous enhancement during arterial phase, with a maximum CT value of 228 HU, which was slightly lower than that of the adjacent vessels (CT value: 284 HU). Dilated feeding arteries and drainage veins showed clearly in the mass core and margin. The enhanced area increased but the CT value decreased in the following phases. However, areas with higher density showed on plain CT scan had no obvious enhancement. This manifestation also indicated there was hemorrhage in the mass. In the peripheral parts around hemorrhage, some irregular areas without obvious enhancement were also detected. No other masses or abnormalities were found in abdomen. No enlarged lymph nodes were detected around the mass.
It could be confirmed this mass with abundant blood supply did not arise in the organs in pelvic cavity according to the imaging examinations. Then, the lesion was radically excised. During surgery, the mass was found behind the posterior pelvic peritoneum. It is very irregular and tightly adhered to the adjacent tissue. No invasion was detected. There were many vessels in the surface of tumor. With patience and careful separation, it was completely excised with great amount of bleeding during operation. The cut surface was grayish-white in color and necrosis and blood clots were seen in its inner part. It showed solid tissue with a somewhat crisp texture. The histopathology findings showed clusters of dilated thin-walled vessels prominent hyalinization of the vessel walls, and a perivascular and intercellular ground substance. Pleomorphic tumor cells were distributed among these dilated vessels. The mitotic counts was 3/10 HPF. Hemorrhage was also detected. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, cluster of differentiation (CD) CD34, CD99, CD117 (focal), and B‑cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2), whereas S-100 protein, CD56, smooth muscle actin (SMA), Desmin, DOG-1, ALK-1 and actin was negative . The Ki-67 labeling index was 5 %. The final diagnosis was pleomorphic hyalinizing angiectatic tumor (PHAT) of the soft parts.
The postoperative period was uneventful. In the 18 months since the operation, the patient has continued to have no occurrence.