A 23-year-old male patient presented with chronic inflammatory back pain, which was associated with morning stiffness. He was diagnosed with seronegative axial spondyloarthropathy on the basis of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings and a positive human leukocyte antigen B27 report . He presented with deformity over the lower back, which was insidious in onset, gradually progressing, and was first noticed by the patient 5 years ago.
Examination revealed rigid left-sided thoracolumbar scoliosis . The left shoulder was at a higher level. The right side trunk-to-arm distance was increased. His chest expansion was 2.6 cm, and his lumbar Schober’s test was 1 cm. The lumbar range of motion was restricted. Sacroiliac joint stress tests were positive on both sides. Neurology was normal.
A radiograph showed thoracolumbar scoliosis with convexity to the left side and a cobbs angle measuring 41°. ( and ) The curve was rigid, with the cobbs angle on bending films correcting to 36°. He had a coronal imbalance of 3.6 cm with an apex at the L1-L2 disc space. The X-ray showed ossification of the posterior interspinous ligament with fusion of the lumbar facet joints, showing clear characteristics of an ankylosing spondylitis appearance. , a computed tomography (CT) scan of the thoracolumbar spine revealed fusion of the posterior facet joints; however, the discs were not completely ossified. MRI showed features of sacroiliac joint fusion with no evidence of fusion at the disco-vertebral junction of the thoraco-lumbar spine.
We planned a D9–L4 posterior instrumented stabilization with deformity correction. It was a rigid thoraco-lumbar curve with an apex in L1–L2 disc space. Deformity correction was done with an asymmetric pontes osteotomy at four levels, from L1 to L4 vertebra. A multilevel asymmetric pontes osteotomy was planned in view of the coronal plane deformity and flexibility of the anterior column (disc space was not ossified).
After general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in a prone position. A posterior midline incision was taken, subperiosteal exposure of posterior elements was done from the upper instrumented vertebra to the lower instrumented vertebra. Bilateral pedicle screws were then placed. An asymmetric Pontes osteotomy was performed where the resection of the posterior elements on the convex side was wider than that on the concave side of the curve. The osteotomy was done first at the apex of the curve and then at two levels below and one level above. The osteotomy was done with the aid of a bone scalpel. The bone scalpel was used to perform the osteotomy because the posterior elements of the thoracolumbar spine were completely ossified. The bone scalpel ensured precise bone cuts with a reduced risk of thermal and mechanical injury to dural structures. It also led to reduced osseous bleeding intraoperatively.
The asymmetric pontes’ osteotomy resulted in a non-parallel resection gap, being wider on the convex side. Compression applied to the convex side resulted in a reduction of the coronal plane deformity. Two pre-contoured rods were placed, and conventional techniques of compression and distraction were applied. A reasonable on-table correction of the deformity was achieved.
Decortication of the posterior elements and a bridging autograft were used to achieve posterolateral fusion. Neuromonitoring was used during the entire procedure. Drain was used post-operatively and kept for 48 h. The patient was mobilized full-weight bearing with walker support on the second post-operative day. Follow-up radiographs and clinical photos are shown in . The Cobb angle of the curve improved from 41° to <10° ( and ). The 2-year follow-up radiograph showed good maintenance of correction, which was assessed by measurement of the cobbs angle of the curve, which was maintained at 10°.