A 20-year-old man diagnosed with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy presented with deteriorated cardiac function (left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction 18%). After registration with the Japan Organ Transplant network, he underwent continuous-flow LV assist device (LVAD) implantation as a bridge to transplantation. When a donor in good condition was found 2 years and 3 months after LVAD implantation, we decided to perform heart transplantation. The PLSVC and atresia of the left brachiocephalic vein (LBCV) were recognized on preoperative chest computed tomography . Because the right superior vena cava (SVC) seemed larger than the PLSVC, we initially planned to ligate the PLSVC.
After full median sternotomy and dissection around the heart, we found that, contrary to our expectations, the PLSVC had a larger diameter than the right SVC. Therefore, we decided to reconstruct the PLSVC instead of ligating it. We established cardiopulmonary bypass by inserting a 21-Fr cannula into the ascending aorta and 24-Fr and 28-Fr drainage cannulas into the right SVC and inferior vena cava, respectively. An additional 28-Fr cannula was inserted into the PLSVC.
Orthotopic heart transplantation was performed with modified bicaval technique. After completion of the anastomoses of the left atrium, pulmonary artery, ascending aorta, inferior vena cava, and right SVC, the transected PLSVC was reconstructed with a 10-mm ringed expanded polytetrafluoroethylene graft, which was passed behind the left ventricle and anastomosed to the free wall of the right atrium (RA) in side-to-end fashion . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient did not experience any complications, including venostasis-related symptoms. He was discharged home 6 weeks after the transplantation. The prothrombin time international normalized ratio was controlled at 1.5 to 2.0. Postoperative enhanced computed tomography revealed good patency of the reconstructed graft 2 months after transplantation . During 2 years of follow-up, the patient has done well, with good systolic and diastolic function of the transplanted heart and no adverse events.