A 45-year-old female patient presented to us with pain in both the knees since 1 year. She also had difficulty in walking. Pain had gradually increased over the period of 1 year. She had no history of the previous trauma, steroid use, meniscus surgery, alcohol intake, or smoking. Physical examination revealed local tenderness over MFC and medial tibial condyle and decreased range of motion. Laboratory investigations showed no specific findings. Subchondral fracture with articular surface collapse of MFC with joint space narrowing and varus deformity was seen on X-ray in both the knees. Sclerosis was seen on X-ray in the medial tibial condyle on both the sides. X-ray of both knees revealed SPONK in Koshino’s Stage IV and Carpintero’s Stage IV . MRI of right knee showed characteristic focal hyperintense areas surrounded by band like hypointense areas in both MFC and MTP which was suggestive of subchondral collapse with ill-defined bone marrow changes . Computed tomography (CT) scan of both knees was done to assess the deformity. Right knee showed a defect measuring 2.51 cm in the MFC . Left knee CT scan also showed defect in MFC . Taking the deformity and disability into consideration, total knee replacement (TKR) was planned for both sides. Initially, left knee was operated. Large longitudinal osteochondral flap was seen intraoperatively on MFC’s extensor surface. The MTP was depressed and cartilage fibrillation was seen. After excising the flap, there was defect seen in medial condyle with sclerotic bone at base. An auto-bone graft obtained after cutting posterior condyle was used to build up the defect . A cruciate retaining type of TKR was done . Two weeks later, right side TKR was done. MFC of right side also had a large osteochondral fragment which was excised to leave defect with depth more than 5 mm. This defect was reconstructed with bone graft obtained from posterior cuts. MTP of right side had similar findings as left side . Posterior stabilized type of knee replacement component was used along with femoral extender stem . Histopathological examination was done of the excised osteochondral fragments and tibial cuts. It revealed necrotic bone, surrounded by an area of fibrovascular granulation tissue on both the femoral and tibial sides . Patient was mobilized full weight bearing after surgery and has good functional outcome at 2 years follow-up.