A 41-year-old male presented to our hospital with a past medical history of active intravenous opioid use. This was complicated by group A streptococcal bacteremia with L5-S1 discitis and osteomyelitis, L2-L3 osteomyelitis, and a left psoas abscess. Additional complications included a right-sided parapneumonic effusion with septic emboli and cavitary lesions, and left ankle abscess with septic arthritis status post a left ankle washout during this hospitalization. He was conservatively managed with intravenous antibiotics for his discitis and spine osteomyelitis as recommended by neurosurgery.
His opioid use history involves being treated with buprenorphine-naloxone, with several recovery periods throughout the year after starting the medication. Although he had previous episodes of recovery with the use of buprenorphine-naloxone, he had started using intravenous heroin for about 3 months before being admitted. He last used his buprenorphine-naloxone about 1 year prior. During his hospitalization, he was initiated on buprenorphine-naloxone 8 mg twice a day, which was modified to 4 mg sublingual twice a day and further tapered down to 2 mg twice a day after the patient was experiencing significant diaphoresis which he felt was from taking the buprenorphine-naloxone. The Acute Pain Service was consulted for optimization of his pain regimen due to his current infection, recent ankle washout, and prior opioid use history.
The patient describes his pain as deep, aching, and mainly located in the lower back and left ankle. His pain is aggravated by movement and improves with rest. His pain was well-controlled by the Acute Pain Service with a ketamine infusion that has since been discontinued earlier, opioid regimen as needed, acetaminophen, buprenorphine-naloxone, cyclobenzaprine, gabapentin, and naproxen . He states that his pain has overall been more manageable aside from exacerbations with movement. On further conversation regarding his pain regimen, the patient agreed on the goal of weaning and discontinuing intravenous opioids. Intravenous opioids were discontinued, slightly decreasing the opioid regimen the patient was on.
One day later, the patient was noted to be experiencing tachycardia, diaphoresis, myalgias, hypertension, and chills, which the primary team reconsulted the Acute Pain Service to re-evaluate for opioid withdrawal. The patient felt his pain did not escalate or worsen in the twenty-four hours since the Acute Pain Service team evaluated him. He still described his pain as deep, aching in the lower back and left ankle, but was still manageable and slowly improving. He remained afebrile with a max temperature of 99.7 degrees Fahrenheit. Laboratory studies showed no leukocytosis. We did not make any changes to his opioid regimen for the day.
Upon evaluation of the medication regimen changes, the total daily opioid dosing was decreased slightly, and it was very unlikely that there was any level of opioid withdrawal with the minimal changes to the patient’s medication regimen . Worsening infection was another differential to consider given the patient’s presentation of discitis, osteomyelitis, abscess, and septic arthritis. However, the patient was afebrile and his max temperature was 99.7 degrees Fahrenheit. He did not have an elevated white blood cell count, so this was an unlikely reason for the patient’s symptoms. Rebound pain was considered however, the patient felt his pain was manageable and did not worsen even with the de-escalation of his pain regimen. However, the patient received zoledronate infusion therapy for hypercalcemia on the same day intravenous opioids were discontinued. He initially received an intravenous infusion of 0.9% sodium chloride for hypercalcemia of 12.3 mg/dl (Institution Reference Range 8.4–10.2 mg/dl), which was suspected to be from prolonged immobilization in the setting of severe bone infection. The patient’s serum creatinine was 0.9 (Institution Reference Range 0.6–1.3 mg/dl) before intravenous zolendronate use. However, his serum calcium level did not improve, so the patient was given a one-time dose of 4 mg of intravenous zoledronate. He had no other medications known to cause withdrawal-like symptoms per chart review. Therefore, it was suspected that an acute phase reaction occurred, which is commonly seen within a few days of bisphosphonate use, especially with an intravenous infusion.