A 59-year-old man who presented with short of breathiness and palpitation for 3 months was sent to our hospital, Physical examination revealed normal blood pressure and heart rate of 65 beats per minute. There was no jugular venous distention or left parasternal lift. A midsystolic 2+/6 murmur was heard over the precordium in the mitral area. The pulmonary and abdominal examinations showed no abnormalities. Transthoracic Echocardiography disclose the enlargement of right ventricle, and pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 51mmHg, with moderate tricuspid regurgitation, with intact atrial septum. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm, and left ventricle high voltage. We carried out the computer tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) of pulmonary artery and found that the dilation of pulmonary artery, and enlargement of right atrium and right ventricle, left superior pulmonary vein connected to the left brachiocephalic vein through a vertically orientated vessel courses lateral to the aortic arch, right pulmonary veins and left inferior pulmonary vein were seen draining normally into the left atrium . The patient was diagnosed partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection. After careful examination, we performed the anastomosis of left superior vein and left atrial appendage through video assisted thoracoscopy without cardiopulmonary bypass. Two incisions were made, one was used as manipulation port about 5 cm length in the fourth intercostal space between the midaxillary line and midclavicular line, the other was 1.5 cm length in the seventh intercostal space at the midaxillary line. After exposure of the left pulmonary hilum, the vertical vein draining LSPV was dissected as long as possible to the confluence to the left brachiocephalic vein, and cut off at the confluence site using stapler, then the pericardium was opened behind the phrenic nerve and anterior left pulmonary hilum, the left atrial appendage was exposed, and the 50 mg heparin was administered into the vein by anesthetist, an auricular appendage clamp was placed on the left atrial appendage, and the vertical vein was clamped proximal to pulmonary hilum, a 20 mm opening was made in the vertical vein, another opening of similar dimension made over LA appendage. Vertical vein was anastomosed to atrial appendage with 5 − 0 prolene in side-to-side fashion . After the anastomosis, the clamp at the pulmonary vein was removed and deair, the line was tied, and the auricle appendage clamp was removed. The upper part of pericardium was closed. And 24 F tube was inserted into left thoracic cavity. The postoperative recovery was uneventful. The CTPA was carried out 7th day postoperation, and it showed the left superior pulmonary vein connected to the left atrial appendage, the anastomosis was unobstructed .
The patient was discharged after 7 days hospital stay postoperatively. CTPA was carried out every six months in the first year. CTPA after one year showed the left upper pulmonary vein connecting to the left atrial appendage fluently .