A 49-year-old previously healthy female presented with a 1-week posterior-region knee pain post direct fall from a standing position on her left knee. This was directly followed by knee joint blockage with a limited range of motion of only 30 to 60 degrees of flexion. The patient started taking NSAID and had minimal pain relief. She reported increased pain upon standing from a sitting position and vice versa with associated tingling and numbness at the level of the calf region especially upon standing.
On examination, she showed good lower-limb alignment, no pain was provoked on meniscal and ligament testing, and there was an absence of muscular atrophy. Her range of motion was limited to only 30 to 60 degrees of flexion, and the patient had pain on the active range of motion. She also had pain upon active and passive extension of the knee joint with tingling and numbness over the calf region extending from the knee posteriorly. She was found to have a nonpitting edema posteriorly with moderate anterior joint effusion. On patellar examination, she felt pain originating from the posterior region of her left knee joint. To note, the patient has never had any symptoms related to her knee up until the direct fall from the standing position.
MRI revealed a multiloculated structure arising from the synovium around the cruciate ligaments within the femoral notch extending beyond the joint capsule posteriorly with significant displacement of the popliteal vessels .
It showed evidence of synovial thickening, and on gradient echography, it showed spotty and irregular hyposignals compatible with the presence of hemosiderin. There also was associated soft tissue edema around the above-described lesion. The patient underwent arthroscopic intervention in the left knee under spinal anesthesia. The posterior compartment of the knee was reached arthroscopically through the triangular space formed by the ACL laterally, PCL medially, and the femoral notch superiorly. Total resection of the lesion was done through only anterior knee portals without taking the risk of posterior portals preventing potential neurovascular injury. The pathology report confirmed the presence of PVNS. On 6-month MRI follow-up, the previously described soft tissue enhancement suggestive of residual inflammatory changes noted within the femoral notch along the cruciate ligaments as well as posterior to the distal metaphysis at the site of the previously present lesion has decreased . The synovial fluid had also decreased with no evidence of hemosiderin deposits. There was no evidence of interval appearance of new susceptibility artifacts or blooming effect on the T2 gradient sequence that could correspond to evident recurrence. The compressive effect previously present on the popliteal vessels has completely disappeared with no further tingling sensation and numbness over the calf region. Clinically, patient regained full ROM on flexion extension (0° to 135°) of the knee. The previously reported pain no longer exists, with no blocking upon flexion. Patient underwent physical therapy protocol and showed significant muscle strength and balancing improvement. She was scheduled to 1-year clinical follow-up.