A young Caucasian female patient aged 28 years came to our hospital complaining of chronic right upper quadrant pain. Physical examination was unremarkable as was her medical history. She was investigated with upper abdominal ultrasound that was negative for chololithiasis but revealed dilated gallbladder and common bile duct with a diameter of 2.1 cm. Her laboratory values were within normal limits with total bilirubin of 0.28 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) at 42 U/l, and γ- GT 16 U/l. Serum tumor markers were within normal limits. The patient was further studied with computerized tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography that proved dilation of common bile duct between the confluence of hepatic ducts down to the upper pancreatic border. The intrapancreatic portion was normal. The investigation was negative for choledocholithiasis and otherwise unremarkable. Pancreaticobiliary junction was normal.
With a diagnosis of a choledochal cyst, Type Ia according to Todani classification, the patient underwent excision of the extrahepatic biliary tree with Roux-en-Y reconstruction. An intraoperative cholangiography was performed for diagnosis confirmation .
The patient had an uneventful recovery and left the hospital at the seventh postoperative day. Specimen was sent for histological examination . On histology, the gallbladder, the cystic duct, and partly the common bile duct showed a prominent intraluminal papillary proliferation of neoplastic epithelial cells with delicate fibrovascular stalks. Papillary epithelium consisted of columnar cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and round nuclei with minimal irregularities and mild pseudostratification, resembling slightly dysplastic biliary epithelium. Immunohistochemical staining revealed MUC1 and MUC5AC expression while tumor cells were negative for MUC2. Findings were consistent with intracystic papillary neoplasm of the gallbladder and intraductal papillary neoplasm of the cystic and common bile duct with low-grade dysplasia, pancreatobiliary subtype .