A 20 yr old male patient was referred from a peripheral hospital to our institution intensive care unit having been operated on for perforated duodenal ulcer. He had presented with a long- standing history of peptic ulcer disease and had developed sudden onset of severe abdominal pain a day prior to admission. A plain radiograph done revealed free air under the diaphragm. Surgical intervention of a modified Grahams patch for a perforated duodenal ulcer was done. Post operatively, he was referred to due acute kidney injury(AKI).
At the ICU, his vital signs were an elevated heart rate of 140bpm, increased respiratory rate of 36 breaths per minute, low blood pressure of 80/50 mmHg and his temperature was 36.5°c. On examination, he had purulent discharge from his abdominal drain. His serum creatinine was elevated at 254 mmol/L (65–130) with an increased Blood Urea Nitrogen of 18.8 mmol/L (1.7–8.3). The arterial blood gas analysis (BGA): PH-7.354, PCO2 -3.57 kPa, PO2 – 8.26 kPa, HCO3 – 14.6 mmol/L, Base Excess- -9.6 mmol/l and SPO2 -91.3%. He was admitted with a diagnosis of hypovolaemic shock with intra-abdominal sepsis, compensated metabolic acidosis, and AKI. His initial management was intravenous fluids, empirical antibiotics: ceftriaxone, metronidazole and analgesics.
The patient was taken to theatre and intra operatively, 2 litres of purulent bilous material was found in the peritoneum and the previous repair had given way and there was now a large duodenal perforation with friable edges measuring approximately 1 cm in size at D1. A pyloric exclusion was done with a Roux-and-Y gastrojejunostomy and peritoneal lavage was done. Abdominal drains were left in-situ and he was taken back to the ICU.
The patient remained stable post operatively but was noted to have pus oozing from the incision site on post-op day three and on day four upon release of sutures he had a burst abdomen. He was also noted to be febrile with temperatures of 39 °C. An emergency laparotomy revealed a duodenal stump blow-out. Peritoneal lavage and repair of the duodenal stump was done and a “Bogota bag” as a method of temporary abdominal wall closure was chosen. He went to theatre twice weekly for peritoneal lavage and change of Bogota bag for an initial period of three weeks due to pus exudate from the abdomen and abdominal drains but as the effluent reduced, he went on demand basis. His clinical outlook was generally improving however the intra-abdominal infection persisted. The challenges we faced with the patient’s deranged physiology while in ICU are tabled as shown on .
shows the microbial profile that was grown and the antibiotic sensitivity patterns. These are most likely hospital acquired infections. His urinary cultures only once grew candida and all his tracheal aspirates grew nothing on culture. His antibiotic treatment changed from the empirical treatment with ceftriaxone and metronidazole and was tailored as per microscopy, culture and sensitivity results. Throughout his stay in the ICU he was put on H.pylori treatment, thromboprophylaxis, total parenteral nutrition and two hourly turning in bed to avoid bed sores.
After the fifteen laparotomies of which 12 were planned, the repair held and the intra-abdominal sepsis was controlled. The patient developed an entero-atmospheric low output fistula that was managed conservatively. He started passing stool ten weeks after his admission and he was allowed to feed orally as the parenteral nutrition was weaned off. Granulation tissue formed over his bowel and the low output fistula eventually closed. The patient was transferred from ICU to the ward having stayed there for ten weeks. The wound continued to be dressed in the ward for the next 2 months and healed with formation of a large ventral wall hernia. He was discharged home to be reviewed by the plastic surgery team at the surgical outpatient clinic to plan for reconstruction of the abdominal wall at a later time.