A 14-year-old male patient started with automotor seizures without loss of consciousness, which included oroalimentary and distal portions of the extremity automatisms, preceded by an abdominal aura. Initially he had persistent seizures, approximately three attacks per month. He was treated with antiepileptic drugs, which reduced their frequency to one attack per month. When he was 19 years old, seizures frequency was almost daily despite being treated with several antiepileptic drugs such as topiramate, carbamazepine, valproate, and clobazam. Also, automotor seizures evolved to secondary generalized tonic–clonic ones, three times during that year. He had two seizures during the video-electroencephalography monitoring, which showed an epileptiform activity compatible with acute temporal waves. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a nonenhancing lesion located at the right inferior temporal gyri, which was hypointense and hyperintense in T1- and T2-weighted images, respectively. There were only few linear enhancing images near the lesion after contrast administration, which were thought as vessels. Furthermore, MRI revealed cortical retraction in the right temporal lobe, in which both subarachnoid spaces within the sulcus and the sylvian cistern were wider than left side ones . Presurgical evaluation included the placement of five deep brain electrodes in his right temporal and frontal lobes to confirm if it was the epileptogenic zone. Invasive monitoring confirmed that seizures originated in the right temporal lobe, thus, a right anterior temporal lobe resection was performed. Histological diagnosis of the resected tumor was GG. There were dysplastic neuronal cells, atypical low grade glial cells, and microcalcifications. Glial component was positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) whereas the neuronal component was immunoreactive for neuronal nuclei (NeuN), synaptophysin, and neurofilament protein. The Ki-67 proliferation index was very low: 1% . It was reported by the pathologist as a grade I lesion according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the central nervous system.
Thereafter, the patient continued with antiepileptic drugs, and he had no seizures anymore. Three years later, he started with headache, nausea, and vomiting. New MRI demonstrated a giant heterogeneously enhancing space-occupying mass within the right temporal lobe. It had cystic areas mainly in its upper parts. There was brainstem compression, and the midline shift was evident. The middle cerebral artery was displaced; it was just above and beyond the superomedial aspect of the lesion [Figure –]. Thus, a second resection was performed and the entire tumor was removed . Histological examination of the resected specimen report was PNET. It was a small-cell and high grade tumor with abrupt borders, which included areas of necrosis and rosettes formation as the typical pattern formed by cells in neuroblastoma. The majority of its cells were small, with hyperchromatic nuclei, increased nuclear:cytoplasm ratio, and immunoreactive for synaptophysin and negative for NeuN. It exhibited only focal positivity for GFAP. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 50% .
Immediate postoperative recovery was uneventful. One month and a half after the last operation, he was admitted again because of headaches and left hemiparesis. MRI showed a giant right temporal tumor again . He and his family decided not to undergo another operation, so he was referred to the radiotherapy department. At the moment when this article was written, he has started craniospinal radiotherapy and he will start chemotherapy depending on his clinical condition. His neurological state did not improve so far.