A 13-year old male with no previous medical history presented to the surgical unit of the University Hospital of the West Indies with a 3-day history of abdominal pain that began in the epigastrium but later became localized in the right iliac fossa. The pain was associated with several bouts of vomiting. There was no diarrhoea, joint pain, or petechial rash.
Physical examination revealed a temperature of 38 °C, pulse rate 109 min−1 and normal blood pressure. Examination of the abdomen revealed marked tenderness in the right iliac fossa with mild guarding.
Complete blood count revealed thrombocytopenia (platelet count 119 × 106 mm−3) and leucopenia (white blood cell count of 2.1 × 106 mm−3). Haemoglobin and haematocrit were normal. An abdominal ultrasound was performed and showed a small fluid collection in the right iliac fossa, however the appendix was not identified. There was normal peristalsis of bowel loops.
The patient was observed for 24 h in hospital and was noted to have worsening right iliac fossa pain and leucopenia on the second day. Examination at that time revealed marked right iliac fossa tenderness in keeping with a diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Because the signs were thought to be typical of appendicitis diagnostic laparoscopy was not deemed necessary and an appendicectomy performed via a Lanz incision, at which time a normal appendix was found with multiple enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes. Lymph node biopsy was not done.
Repeat blood investigations again showed bicytopenia with platelet count of 99 × 106 mm−3 and a white cell count of 2.3 × 106 mm−3.
Dengue fever was suspected and was confirmed with a positive IgG and IgM enzyme-linked immmunoabsorbent assay.
The histology of the appendix showed no gross abnormality. The patient received supportive care, which included analgesics, bed rest and fluid therapy and made an uneventful recovery. Repeat blood investigations one week later were normal.
The patient was seen one year later in the outpatients department at which time blood results were repeated and were normal.