A 26 years old Hispanic female with no significant past medical history came to the emergency room with complaint of weakness and lethargy for 3 weeks. She denied nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, melena, rectal bleed, heavy menstrual periods or loss of weight. Family history was significant for father having colon cancer at the age of 50 yrs.
Examination revealed marked pallor, koilonychia and a 3/6 systolic flow murmur at the left sternal border. Her stool occult blood test was positive with brown stools. Laboratory data revealed severe iron deficiency anemia with the Hemoglobin of 4.5 g/dl, Mean corpuscular volume of 50.3 fL. The RDW was 29.8 and the reticulocyte count of 3%. On further investigation the serum Iron was low at 10 mcg/dl, Total Iron Binding Capacity (TIBC) was elevated at 441 mcg/dl and the transferritin saturation was low at 2.3%. Serum ferritin was 3.9, the Vitamin B 12 level was 1469 pg/ml and all other biochemical work up for Anemia was normal. As part of Iron deficiency work up endoscopy was performed. The Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed numerous diffuse polyps of varying size and shape filling the stomach. Some of the polyps were actively bleeding. . No polyps were found in the duodenum or proximal jejunum. The serum gastrin level which was done subsequently was normal (47 pg/ml). Serological testing for Helicobacoter Pylori was negative. The biopsy of the polyps showed dilated, complex tortuous gastric foveolar type glands and intestinal metaplasia with surface chronic ulceration and inflammation The diagnosis of hyperplastic gastric polyposis was made and the microscopy was negative for Helicobacoter Pylori. The Upper GI series and colonoscopy did not show any polyps in the small bowel or colon respectively. In view of the active bleeding polyps and symptomatic anemia patient underwent a laparoscopic near-total gastrectomy with Roux en Y gastric bypass surgery after multiple blood transfusions . After the procedure the patient's anemia improved, there was no drop in her hemoglobin and hematocrit in the subsequent follow up in the clinic for the past two years.