An 80-year-old nonsmoking woman consulted the emergency department for exacerbation of chronic cough and hemoptysis, for which bacterial and mycobacterial infections were ruled out. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan showed two morphologically different bilateral lesions: a cystic left apical lesion measuring 6.1 cm × 5.3 cm × 4.5 cm with hilar ipsilateral necrotic lymphadenopathyc and a peribronchovascular centimetric solid retractile lesion associated with ground glass opacities (GGO) of 3 cm in the right upper lobe . Brain MRI and abdominal CT scan did not reveal any lesions.
Given the morphological aspect of the lesions, suggestive of primary lesions with cystic features for the left one and retractile with ground glass for the right one, cytological and histological samples were collected from both sites through bronchoscopy. The apical excavated left lesion showed squamous cell carcinoma, whereas the right upper lobe lesion was adenocarcinoma. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis was performed for both lesions and revealed a mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) gene deletion with exon 14 skipping in squamous carcinoma and an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene mutation in exon 21 (L858R) in adenocarcinoma . Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction confirmed MET alterations.
After discussing the case at a multidisciplinary team meeting, the surgical approach was suggested but declined by the patient. Because of the locally advanced stage of the squamous left lesion with 10 L lymph node (cT3N1, stage IIIA, according to the 8th TNM classification), systemic treatment was initiated with capmatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for metastatic NSCLC harboring MET exon 14 skipping mutations . In parallel, for the localized right adenocarcinoma cT1N0 stage IA3, stereotactic radiotherapy with 60 Gy (eight fractions of 7.5 Gy) was delivered. Thoracic CT scan after 2 months of treatment showed a partial response with a decrease in the size of the left lesion (40%) and 10 L adenopathy (50%), as well as a good local response after radiotherapy of the right lesion (30%). After developing grade 3 edema of the lower limbs, a known side effect of capmatinib, treatment was stopped. One month after discontinuation, a new thoracic CT scan revealed an increase in the size of the left upper lesion (75%) and the adenopathy (40%). After multidisciplinary discussion, left upper lobectomy was proposed and accepted by the patient. The final histology showed traces of squamous cell carcinoma in the parenchyma but not tumor cells in the resected lymph nodes, including the 10 L area (final staging ypT1 N0). More than 9 months after surgery, patient is considered to be in remission of both NSCLC and is currently under a quarterly radiological and clinical follow-up. The main clinical events are summarized in .
This case highlights the importance of rigorous pathological sampling and molecular analysis of lung cancer with possibly advanced stage on radiology, especially in nonsmoking patients. This population is well known to be more likely to have molecular alterations , thus allowing targeted therapies to be received.