A 54-year-old Iranian man was admitted to our hospital in May 2006 because of malaise, weight loss and edema of the lower limbs beginning 2 months prior to admission. He also had a history of iron-deficient anemia and increasing abdominal swelling for 8 months prior to admission. On physical examination he was cachectic and pale in appearance, with normal vital signs. The conjunctiva was pale. Chest and heart were normal. On abdominal examination, tense ascites was detected. There was also a 2+ pitting edema of the lower limbs. His initial lab tests were normal except for anemia, thrombocytopenia and leucopenia .
Abdominal sonography revealed splenomegaly (23 × 7 cm) and large amounts of ascites. Portal vein diameter was 18mm with a blood velocity of 25 cm/s. Duplex doppler ultrasonography of the splanchnic venous system was consistent with portal hypertension. Ultrasound showed no evidence of vascular obstruction in the splenoportal axis. On CT scan, there was no lymph node enlargement compressing the portal splenic axis.
Eosophagogastroduodenoscopy showed four columns of grade three esophageal varices with red signs, small gastric fundal varices and moderate portal hypertensive gastropathy. The duodenal bulb was normal but the second part of the duodenum had atrophic folds and scalloping. Results of duodenal biopsy revealed lymphocyte infiltration, crypt hyperplasia and villous atrophy compatible with CD, grade Шb according to the Marsh classification . Serologic studies revealed positive anti tissue transglutaminase (tTG) and anti endomysial antibody (EMA). Percutaneous liver biopsy revealed mild non-specific chronic hepatitis.
Liver function tests including serum albumin and prothrombin time were normal. Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibody, and human immunodeficiency virus antibody were negative.
Serologies were not consistent with autoimmune hepatitis, or primary biliary cirrhosis. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), antiobodies to anti-liver/kidney microsomes (ALKM-1), antimitochondrial antibody (AMA), and anti-liver cytosol antigen antibody (ALC-1), were negative. The serum gammaglobulin level was normal.
A gluten free diet was advised. At a 3 month follow-up visit, the patient had gained 3 kg; and his hemoglobin, platelet count and white blood cell count were increased . On physical examination there was mild peripheral edema, and only a small amount of ascites.
Furthermore, his spleen size decreased to 17 × 6 cm by ultrasonography. He did not return for follow-up visits until 1 year later, when he was admitted again to our hospital because of progressive malaise, anorexia, diarrhea, abdominal pain and weight loss. He had not been compliant with a GFD in the past year despite our recommendation. Abdominal CT scan showed splenomegaly, thickening of the small intestine, and multiple soft tissue densities in the mesentery. Push enteroscopy revealed multiple jejunal ulcers and a mass lesion, which was biopsied. Seven days later the patient developed an acute abdomen and underwent an emergency laparotomy. Perforations of the small intestine at two sites, 100 and 135 cm from the ligament of Treitz, were seen. Also, during laparotomy, the liver did not look cirrhotic and biopsies were compatible with ulcerative jejunitis and intestinal T-cell lymphoma. The patient was referred to an oncologist but unfortunately died 2 weeks later.