A 40-year-old South Asian woman presented with blurring of vision, cloudiness, and a dark spot on her right eye for 1 week. She stated that she had been using a topical oral gel medication, fluocinonide 0.05% oral gel, twice a day for the past month as prescribed by her dentist for mucosal inflammation following oral surgery. She denied specific stressors in her life, current pregnancy, or other exogenous steroid medication use. She did not present with a history of hypertension; other past medical, surgical, family, and social histories were reviewed and were noncontributory. Her best corrected visual acuity measured 20/25–2 in her right eye and 20/20–2 in her left eye. The intraocular pressures were normal and anterior segment examinations in each eye were unremarkable. Posterior segment examination of her right eye showed a large serous retinal detachment in the superotemporal macula with multiple associated pigment epithelial detachments located inferonasal to the fovea and another in the inferotemporal macula. The posterior segment of her left eye revealed multiple pigment epithelial detachments within the macula. There was no evidence of intraocular inflammation in either eye.
Fluorescein angiography revealed pooling of dye within each of the pigment epithelial detachments within the macula of both eyes. In the late phase of the angiogram, dye was found leaking into the subretinal space in her right eye. No edema or leakage from the discs was observed in either eye. Optical coherence tomography showed a large serous retinal detachment and multiple pigment epithelial detachments in her right eye and a pigment epithelial detachment without subretinal fluid in her left eye. The clinical diagnosis of idiopathic CSR was made and was attributed to our patient’s use of the oral fluocinonide gel. She was instructed to discontinue using the oral corticosteroid at the discretion of her dentist.
Two months following cessation of the oral topical corticosteroid gel, she reported an increase in vision in her right eye. Her best corrected visual acuity measured 20/25 in her right eye and 20/20- in her left eye. Posterior segment showed complete resolution of the subretinal fluid with residual pigment epithelial detachments in her right eye and stable pigment epithelial detachments in her left eye.
At her 6-month return visit, best corrected visual acuity measured at 20/20 in both eyes. An ocular examination showed stable pigment epithelial detachments and no evidence of recurrence of serous retinal detachments.