A 41-year-old woman was referred to our hospital to have treatment for giant liver hemangioma. The liver hemangioma was detected 6 years previously, and the tumor had gradually increased in size starting 3 years before admission. She underwent trans-arterial embolization (TAE) two times for liver hemangioma at another hospital. However, TAE was not effective, and the liver hemangioma increased in size. She felt abdominal pain and abdominal fullness, which made her unable to walk a long distance. There was no past history of chronic hepatitis or blood transfusion. Admission laboratory tests revealed a mildly decreased hemoglobin (10.1 g/dL), normal platelet counts (14.7 × 104/μL), normal serum total bilirubin (1.0 mg/dL), normal serum albumin (4.5 g/dL), normal serum prothrombin time (88%), mildly elevated D-dimer (9.78 μg/mL), and mildly elevated FDP (23.1 μg/mL). The Child-Pugh classification was A, and the indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 4%.
Plain computed tomography (CT) showed giant liver hemangiomas with lipiodol deposits . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed 30-cm and 15-cm liver hemangiomas in the right liver and left lateral section, respectively . There were multiple tiny hemangiomas in segment 4. According to 3DCT, right liver volume was 60% and remnant liver volume was 40% . We, therefore, concluded that complete resection of both giant hemangiomas was impossible, and we performed debulking right hemi-hepatectomy of giant hemangioma which caused abdominal pain and abdominal fullness . The total operation time was 4 h, and the total blood loss was 1800 mL. The tumor was a giant hemangioma, 30 cm in diameter, 3.2 kg in weight, and the tumor cells showed cavernous hemangioma on pathological findings. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged 14 days after surgery.
The abdominal fullness and abdominal pain disappeared immediately after surgery, and she completed a full marathon 3 years after surgery. The hemangioma in the remnant liver, 15 cm in diameter, shows no change, and she is well without symptoms 7 years after surgery .