A 33-year-old normotensive, non-diabetic Bangladeshi Bengali female presented with sudden onset severe retrosternal chest pain and two episodes of syncope over 4 h. Chest pain was worse on deep inspiration and associated with shortness of breath, orthopnoea and palpitations for 2 days. She had an ankle fracture and was on a cast with plaster immobilization for the preceding month, and admitted to unilateral leg pain and swelling.
On admission, she was cyanosed with gasping respiration; pulse and blood pressure were non-recordable. She developed asystole soon after, and reverted to sinus rhythm following 2 min of cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR). After resuscitation, heart rate was 136 beats/min and blood pressure was 80/55 mmHg. SpO2 was 90 %. Respiratory rate was 35 breaths/min. She was given high flow oxygen, intravenous (IV) normal saline and dopamine infusion for hypotension. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia (rate 136/min), right bundle branch block (RBBB) with S1Q3T3 pattern . Bedside echocardiogram revealed dilated right atrium (RA) and RV , floating thrombus in RA ; impaired RV systolic function [tricuspid annular planar systolic excursion (TAPSE) was 9 mm] with no evidence of RV hypertrophy; there was mild tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension with pulmonary artery systolic pressure ~45 mmHg and normal left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction 60 %). Immediate thrombolysis was done with IV streptokinase 1.5 million units over 2 h as per accelerated regimen of European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, resulting in a subsequently normal ECG . Subsequent CT pulmonary angiogram done immediately revealed an approximately 2 cm filling defect in the descending branch of left pulmonary artery extending up to the lateral and posterior basal segmental arteries, suggesting thrombus . d-dimer assay was positive. Troponin-I was 1.27 ng/mL (high risk—0.11–0.60). Complete blood count revealed neutrophilic leucocytosis. As she had no episodes of bleeding following thrombolysis, she was commenced on low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight for 5 days with simultaneous oral warfarin titrated to a therapeutic PT/INR of 2.0–3.0. Review echo done 2 days later revealed no thrombus or pulmonary hypertension, normal RA and RV. She was discharged on warfarin 5 mg daily and was asymptomatic with therapeutic PT/INR at 3 month follow up. She denied use of the oral contraceptive pill and was advised against its use owing to its potential as a risk factor. Hypercoagulability evaluation including Protein C and S levels, antinuclear antibody, anticardiolipin antibody and serum homocysteine levels were within normal range, thus eliminating other causes of hypercoagulability as possible aetiology of thrombosis.