A 26-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital due to recurrent abdominal pain for 3 months and aggravated for 2 days. This kind of paroxysmal colic was around the umbilical and hypogastric region and radiated to the lower back. The local community hospital he once visited considered “kidney stones”. The patient was given regular symptomatic solutions, which included antispasmodic and analgesic treatments. His abdominal pain was not significantly relieved after treatment. For further diagnosis and treatment, he was sent to our hospital. Upon physical examination, his vital signs were stable. He had an anemic appearance and slight tenderness around the umbilicus during abdominal palpation, without renal percussive pain. The clinical laboratory results of the patient showed that he was moderately anemic, with normocytic anemia and elevated bilirubin, mainly indirect bilirubin, there were no obvious abnormal in other laboratory results . Total abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed kidney stones in both sides and a small amount of pelvic effusion, and abdominal cavity and small retroperitoneal lymph nodes were increased in size. Gastroscopy showed chronic non-atrophic gastritis with bile reflux and colonoscopy was normal.
During his hospitalization, the abdominal pain was aggravated, but some acute abdominal diseases, including pancreatitis, cholecystitis and appendicitis were excluded, based on the normality of inflammatory indicators and CT examination. Kidney stones and abdominal allergic purpura could not reasonably explain this patient’s pain symptoms, suggesting that there must be other etiology. Upon inquiring into the patient’s medical history in detail, it was learned that the patient was a warehouse keeper who had been working in the children’s new book warehouse for more than 2 years, meaning he has been in close contact with new children’s picture books for a long time. Physical examination revealed Burton’s lines over the gums, which is a classical feature of CLP . Moreover, blood examination showed that his blood lead level had increased to 52.8 μg/dl (normal range < 10 μg/dl) . Hematological manifestations of heavy metal poisoning and basophilic stippling of erythrocytes are found in marrow and blood smear . Therefore, CLP was highly suspected. He immediately received dimercaptosuccinic acid (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid, DMSA) therapy 10 mg kg− 1 by mouth every 8 hour, taking the drug on first third days of the week, with 1 week as a course of treatment. During the first week of hospitalization, supportive treatment with water-soluble vitamins was also given. His abdominal pain was relief significantly within 2 days after treatment. After 1 month treatment, Hemoglobin (Hb) was increased from 74 g/L to 157 g/L and serum total bilirubin (TBil) was decreased from 31.2 μm/L to 13.2 μm/L, Blood lead was reduced from 52.8 μg/dl to 17.2 μg/dl in 5 months . Above all indictors were normal after 8 months treatment.