A 34-year-old man (height 172 cm, weight 87 kg, body mass index 29.4 kg/m2) had been followed for purpura nephritis since he was 18 years of age. Since 32 years of age, he had been treated for hyperlipidemia with 20 mg of atorvastatin (cholesterol-lower agent). He had no history of alcohol abuse or smoking. Because of the gradual progression of renal failure, he was started on corticosteroid therapy (prednisolone at 30 mg/day) for the first time at 34 years of age.
The time course of the corticosteroid therapy is shown in Fig. . Two months after the initiation of corticosteroid therapy, he underwent tonsillectomy followed by corticosteroid pulsed treatment (500 mg of methylprednisolone for 6 days) for purpura nephritis. The prednisolone dose was gradually decreased, declining to 10 mg/day at 6 months after its initiation. He was not on any diet or exercise program during the corticosteroid therapy, even though he was overweight.
Eight months after the initiation of corticosteroid therapy, he complained of left hip pain with no antecedent triggering activity. T1-weighted MRI scans obtained 2 weeks after the onset demonstrated a low-intensity band lesion in the left femoral head . On the other hand, there was no obvious abnormality in the right femoral head. On short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images, an associated bone marrow edematous lesion was confirmed distal to the band lesion on the left side, indicating the occurrence of femoral head collapse . The patient was diagnosed with unilateral osteonecrosis of the left femoral head and was referred to our department.
Although osteonecrosis of the left femoral head had collapsed already, joint preserving procedures, such as osteotomy and bone grafting, were considered to be more suitable than total hip arthroplasty since the patient was relatively young. For the purpose of evaluating the indications of osteotomy, he underwent MRI again 6 weeks after the initial MRI. This time, a low-intensity band newly appeared in the right femoral head on T1-weighted images . STIR images did not reveal a bone marrow edema . The second MRI scans demonstrated the new development of osteonecrosis in the right femoral head. As the right hip was asymptomatic and the patient did not will additional treatments, we decided to observe conservatively without restricting weight-bearing unless the right hip became symptomatic. Thereafter, his left hip underwent transtrochanteric anterior rotational osteotomy. Postoperatively, the patients started to perform active range of motion exercise 5 days after the operation and began to use wheelchairs at the same time. His left hip was maintained non-weight-bearing status until 5 week after the operation, followed by partial weight-bearing walking using two crutches. Full weight-bearing walking was permitted 4 months after the operation. His right hip had remained asymptomatic as of 8 months after the second MRI scans (7.8 months after the operation). At that time, the low intensity band was observed more obviously on T1-weighted images.
The time courses of the patient’s serum lipid levels (triglycerides, total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol) are shown in Fig. . The serum level of triglycerides showed transient elevation twice during the period of observation (2.5 and 8.5 months after the initiation of corticosteroid therapy). The first elevation occurred immediately after corticosteroid pulse treatment, while the second occurred without obvious trigger events including the increase in the dose of corticosteroids. No other parameters showed significant elevations during the period of observation. There were also no remarkable changes in his coagulation parameters, hepatic enzymes, or C-reactive protein level.