A 7-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was presented for decreased
appetite and lethargy. A complete blood count (CBC) revealed a borderline anemia
(hematocrit 28%) and a serum biochemical analysis was normal. No treatment was
initiated. The cat was re-evaluated 2 months later, and CBC and serum biochemical
profile were repeated. At this time the anemia was slightly worse (hematocrit 26%)
and thrombocytopenia was now present (platelet count 80 × 109/l;
reference interval [RI] 200–500 × 109/l [see ]). The white blood cell count and
serum biochemical profile were both normal. All leukograms and platelet counts were
reviewed by Antech pathologists, and each CBC was performed using the same Siemens
Advia 120 CBC analyzer for standardization of values.
Thoracic and abdominal radiographs, along with an abdominal ultrasound, were
performed owing to the worsening CBC trend. Thoracic radiographs showed no
alterations within the pleural cavity, and no signs of metastatic disease or primary
lung masses. The heart and lungs appeared normal on both the lateral and ventral
dorsal projections. There was an opacity visualized silhouetting with the spleen on
the right lateral projection. This opacity was anywhere from 1.5 cm to 3 cm in
length in other projections, and was diagnosed as splenomegaly with a mass effect
present.
The abdominal ultrasound showed diffuse splenomegaly with splenic thickness exceeding 1.5 cm,
and with one discrete mixed echogenic mass located within the parenchyma of the
spleen. The mass was vascular, as evidenced by color Doppler, with very defined
margins measuring 3.15 cm and 1.76 cm in a sagittal plane , and 3.25 cm by 2.13 cm in a
transverse plane . No lymphadenopathy or evidence of metastasis were seen, and the liver
lobes were unremarkable with appropriate echogenicity. Based on the appearance of
the spleen on ultrasound, this was presumed to be a neoplastic process.
The top three differential diagnoses for this case were mast cell tumor,
lymphosarcoma and hemangiosarcoma; therefore, the decision was made to pursue a
splenectomy. During surgery, the liver parenchyma was smooth and homogeneous
throughout the lobes, and no biopsy was taken. The spleen appeared enlarged
primarily across the dorsal extremity and the color was red to dark red. There were
no signs of hemorrhage on or surrounding the spleen. The mass could easily be
identified as it was lighter red to tan in color, with an area of white stippled
foci in the center of the mass .
After removal, the spleen was sectioned and submitted for histopathologic evaluation,
which yielded a diagnosis of HS, with a high suggestion for the hemophagocytic
phenotype . There
was an infiltrating and expanding poorly demarcated neoplasm identified, composed
mainly of pleomorphic neoplastic round cells arranged in sheets. The neoplastic
cells seen had distinct borders with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Anisocytosis
and anisokaryosis were seen, along with multiple binucleate cells. The overall
mitotic count was 30 per 10 high-power fields, with a large proportion of these
being bizarre in appearance. Neoplastic cells were seen with phagocytized red blood
cells and hemosiderin pigment. A Giemsa stain was performed and was negative, ruling
out mast cell neoplasia. A diagnosis of HS was confirmed with CD18
immunohistochemistry previously validated for use in feline tissues. The neoplastic
cells labeled positive for CD18 antigen , consistent with a diagnosis of HS
(Michigan State University Diagnostic Laboratory). Immunohistochemistry for CD204
was also performed and was strongly positive, further confirming the histiocytic
origin of this lesion (; Michigan State University Diagnostic Laboratory).
Upon consultation with a medical oncologist, chemotherapy with CCNU (lomustine;
Wedgewood Pharmacy) was advised in conjunction with oral prednisolone and iron
dextran injections. shows the timeline of rechecks, medications prescribed, chemotherapy
given and pertinent laboratory values. A bone marrow aspirate was discussed and
would have assisted with tumor staging and prognostication but was declined by the
owner. A recheck abdominal ultrasound performed 58 days postoperatively and after
one dose of CCNU showed a mass in the area of the splenectomy and numerous variably
sized hypoechoic nodules throughout the liver . The liver nodules were interpreted
to be metastatic nodules from the previously diagnosed HHS, although confirmatory
fine-needle aspiration cytology was not performed. The complex lesion measuring
1.86 cm in the area of the previous splenectomy (see ) was highly suspicious for regrowth
or metastasis of the HHS, although fine-needle aspiration cytology of this lesion
was not performed either. The liver parenchyma was visually normal both during
surgery and on the first ultrasound examination.
Chemotherapy was discontinued following the second ultrasound examination. The owner
elected humane euthanasia 90 days post-splenectomy because of progressive anemia and
declining clinical condition, including marked peritoneal effusion and jaundice. The
owner declined further laboratory analyses and necropsy examination.
The hematologic trends seen in this cat represent steady progression of disease with little
to no response to treatment. The anemia initially seen was a mild
normochromic–normocytic anemia with a mild inflammatory leukogram. There was a
noticeable increase in white blood cell count throughout the course of treatment,
and the platelet count did improve after the splenectomy was performed shortly after
day 0. The progression to a severe anemia occurred rapidly, even in the face of two
separate doses of CCNU, iron dextran injections and continued prednisolone
administration. A blood transfusion was discussed; however, the cat declined more
rapidly than anticipated.