A 43-year-old woman was admitted with chronic HCV infection approved by positive anti-HCV antibody and HCV-RNA and two-fold increase in maximum transaminase levels for previous six months. According to family and personal history of the patient, her uncle died of complications of cirrhosis and she had no chronic disease previously. Physical examination had normal findings. Viral load was 1580000 copies/mL. HCV genotype was 1b. Anti-HCV treatment started in August 2012 with 180 mcg of PEG-IFN α-2a subcutaneously once a week in combination with RBV 1000 mg/daily for a 48-week course. She had an early virological response (EVR), because HCV RNA level was undetectable and the serum aminotransferase levels returned to normal in the second month of therapy. In the seventh month, the patient complained of insomnia and joint-pains on her wrists and ankles. In physical examination, there were mild swellings on the back of the both hands, wrists, metatarsophalangeal (MTF) and proximal inter phalangeal (PIF) joints, and tenderness in the related joints. Ranges of motion were normal. In laboratory tests, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) and C reactive protein (CRP) levels had positive results (59.76 U/mL and 8.54 mg/L), but RF had negative finding. She was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). After the treatment with prednisolone 5 mg/day, naproxen 750 mg/day (15.04.2013) for one month, the symptoms regressed by 50%, and after ceased the INF and RBV treatment the symptoms were alleviated. Treatment with methotrexate 2,5 mg/week, folic acid 5 mg/week and prednisolone 5 mg/day was changed in 22.07.2013. On the ninth month of therapy, the patient complained of patchy-hair loss (03.06.2013). Dermatological examination revealed two circumscribed alopecic areas, which included “V” shaped 16 × 14 cm on the vertex and occiput and ovoid and 3×3 cm on the right parieto-occipital region. On alopecic areas, there were no vellus or miniaturized hairs and no exclamation mark hairs. No scaling, erythema, scarring, atrophy or induration was seen (, ). Hair pull test had positive results. In laboratory examinations, glucose, HbA1C, Fe, ferritine, vitamin E, Zn, 25-hydroxy vitamin D3, 1-25-dihydroxy vitamin D3, IgG subtypes, TSH, thyroid function tests,FSH, LH, progesterone, DHEA-S, SHBG, prolactin, testosterone, parathormone and complement levels (C3, C4) all had normal findings. Rose-bengal, Wright agglutination, RF, VDRL, antinuclear, anti-mitochondrial and anti-smooth-muscle antibodies, ENA profile and antithyroglobulin antibodies had negative results, but antibodies against thyroid peroxidase (TPO) were elevated (263.3 IU/mL) and E2 was low (11.8 pg/mL). Anti-CCP and CRP were still at high levels (48.72 U/mL, 6.44 mg/L). Ultrasonography showed enlargement of thyroid gland, hypoechoic and heterogeneous appearance and two nodules on the right lobe. Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT) was diagnosed for the patient. She had been received no therapy for it and decided to get follow-ups. In the trichogram, the ratio of anagen, dystrophic anagen, telogen and catagen hairs were 32%, 50%, 14% and 4%, respectively. Histopathological examination of excisional scalp biopsy showed a normal number of catagen-follicles in the dermis. There were no anagen-hairs on the alopecic patches and no inflammation in the periphery of the follicles (, ). Based on clinicopathological and trichological findings, DAE was diagnosed. Because of severe alopecic adverse effect and early virological response, the treatment was stopped after getting an informed consent from the patient at 42 week. Although INF therapy was discontinued, anti-CCP level increased and RF became positive (145 U/mL, 31.7IU/mL), elevated anti-TPO levels remained high (239.3 IU/mL) and virological response persisted for seven months after the termination of therapy. Hair regrowth began within three weeks (, ). Four months later, she had a sustained virological and biochemical response and hair regrowth was completed . HCV RNA level was undetectable during the whole treatment period and the patient had still sustained virological response 14 months after the cessation of therapy (21.07.2014). At the time of writing the manuscript, she was still under follow-up and HCV RNA level was controlled every six months. She was operated for thyroid gland disease in 2013. Her anti-CCP level and RF still had positive results (> 300 U/mL, 29 IU/mL), therefore she was under control of our rheumatology department (21.07.2014).