A forty-three year-old, active duty, Caucasian male presented to our hospital with a complaint of acute onset dyspnea. His past medical history included post-traumatic stress disorder, chronic migraines, and a recent admission for prostatitis approximately five weeks prior. He was an active duty officer in the US Army, who was a non-smoker, a non-drinker, and who denied illicit drug use. His previous admission had been complicated by urinary retention necessitating the placement of a foley catheter. Urine culture at that time resulted with ten thousand colony forming units of viridans group streptococci identified through colony morphology and biochemical testing. As part of the laboratory’s standard operating procedure susceptibility testing was not performed in the absence of a physician request due to a bacterial colony count less than one hundred thousand. He was subsequently discharged home with a fourteen day course of empiric Levofloxacin 500 mg once daily.
On re-presentation, he denied the presence of genitourinary symptoms. Initial vital signs revealed blood pressure of 120/73 mmHg, pulse rate of 140 beats per minute, temperature of 99.4 degrees Fahrenheit, respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. Physical examination was notable for mild respiratory distress with supraclavicular retractions, tachycardia with new 3/6 holosystolic murmur, and pitting lower extremity edema. There was no evidence of splinter hemorrhages, Janeway lesions, or Osler nodes. The remainder of the physical examination was within normal limits. Notable laboratory results were as follows: leukocyte count 13.3 × 103, hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL, platelet count 150 × 103, C - reactive protein 11.5 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 68 mm/hr., troponin of 0.08 ng/mL, and renal function panel with an anion gap of 18. Radiographic studies included portable chest x-ray and chest CT scan revealing pulmonary edema and bilateral pleural effusions. The patient was started on empiric vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam antibiotic therapy. Despite hemodynamic stability at presentation, his cardiopulmonary status deteriorated over the course of six hours until the patient required vasopressor support and eventual intubation. Bedside transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a large, pedunculated, highly mobile echo dense mass involving the anterior mitral leaflet measuring 2.2 cm × 1.7 cm with associated severe mitral regurgitation. .
Due to the patient’s hemodynamic instability from acute heart failure from newly discovered cardiac vegetation on the mitral valve, the cardiothoracic surgery service took the patient to the operating room for an emergent mitral valve replacement. Intraoperatively, it was discovered that the vegetation involved mainly the anterolateral commissure (A1/P1 leaflets) but also extended into P2 and P3. There was also infectious involvement beyond the valve into the chordae. Extensive intraoperative debridement was undertaken, the chordae to the posterior third leaflet were preserved, and the mitral valve was replaced with a 31 mm St. Jude mechanical valve. Following his surgery, the patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit for convalescence.
Blood cultures initially obtained in the Emergency Department grew gram-positive cocci in clusters at approximately thirty-six hours. Identification of the bacteria was later confirmed as A. urinae by use of the bioMerieux Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time Of Flight (MALDI-TOF) utilizing the Vitek MS database. Species identification was accepted after meeting the greater than 85 % confidence value threshold. Antibiotic susceptibilities obtained via agar diffusion revealed a penicillin susceptible strain with 0.12mcg/ml by ETEST (bioMerieux). Ceftriaxone and vancomycin susceptibilities were obtained via Kirby Bauer susceptibility testing and revealed intermediate 2mcg/ml and susceptible results 1mcg/ml, respectively. No additional antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed. Tissue culture performed on the cardiac vegetation itself resulted in identical identification and susceptibilities. Urine cultures failed to grow any pathogen. With susceptibility results known, the antibiotic regimen was narrowed to a continuous infusion of penicillin G dosed at twenty-million units over twenty-four hours combined with once daily gentamicin dosed at 3 mg/kg. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. He remained inpatient for an additional ten days while undergoing diuresis and awaiting his oral warfarin to reach a therapeutic level. His intravenous antibiotic regimen was continued for a total of six weeks from date of first negative blood cultures. Follow-up transthoracic echocardiogram obtained at the completion of antibiotic therapy displayed an appropriately functioning prosthetic valve and preserved ventricular systolic function. In addition to antibiotic therapy, the patient was treated with a six-week course of cardiac rehabilitation.