A 26-year-old, 9-month postpartum female, with no significant past medical history (the patient denies medication intake, herbs like aconite, trouble during delivery, any heart issues or family history of sudden death or cardiomyopathies) who presents to the emergency room due to 11days of dyspnea, exacerbated by daily activities, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND). Vital signs found on clinical examination were blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and heart rate of 126 beats per minute. An irregular heart rhythm was noted with associated elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP). The chest x-ray on admission showed biventricular cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. The 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG)reported irregular rhythm with bigeminy premature ventricular contractions (PVC). Echocardiography showed four chamber enlargement, systolic dysfunction with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <20%, severe mitral insufficiency, and pulmonary hypertension. Blood work was notable for a negative Chagas test and no electrolyte imbalance.
The second day after admission, the patient developed sustained VT. This was treated with amiodarone bolus 150 mg over 10 minutes, shortly after she became hemodynamically unstable (hypotension and shock signs) without neurologic disturbance. The patient refused electrical cardioversion. We completed the amiodarone infusion (1mg/min over 6 hours) with no improvement in patient’s cardiac rhythm. The ECG presented a BVT rhythm with alternating axis and a RBBB image as shown in and .
Two days later with no change on patient rhythm or symptoms, the patient suffered a cardiac arrest. During cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), the patient had ventricular fibrillation (VF)that defibrillated with 360 J. Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) achieved after 8 minutes of CPR. Post ROSC, norepinephrine sustained adequate blood pressures. Patient had a normal heart rate persisting with the BVT rhythm.
A lidocaine trial as antiarrhythmic agent shows no improvement. Patient persisted with the BVT rhythm and multiple paroxysms of sustained VT. Without the possibility of ablation in the country and no financial capability to travel, staff placed an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) (programed to deliver shock with a >200 bpm and >0.12ms QRS) and initiated propranolol until a maximal dose of 40 mg by mouth (PO) every 6 hours. This resulted in the same BVT rhythm with a lower heart rate and less episodes of paroxysmal monomorphic VTs. After 15 days of relative stability, staff discharged the patient from the hospital.
On the follow-up visits, patient had the same BVT rhythm with a slower pace rate of about 130 bpm, improvement of her NYHA functional class from class IV to class II, no symptoms on rest or minimal activity, and fewer instances of VTs.