A 29-year-old male patient presented to a tertiary hospital with complicated epididymo-orchitis and testicular abscess from a private clinic. He initially presented with a three-day history of left testicular pain and swelling. The pain is vague and dull aching in type which is relieved with scrotal elevation and support. For which reason, he visited a private clinic and given intravenous antibiotics for five days with a diagnosis of acute epididymo-orchitis. Despite the antibiotic treatment the patient’s initial complaints worsened and later he visited our hospital. Otherwise, he had no fever, chills, or rigor. The patient had no history of urethral discharge or urinary complaints. He was married and had a monogamous sexual relationship with his wife. The patient had no trauma to the pelvis or genitalia. He had no recent or chronic cough, or contact with a chronic cough, anorexia, infertility, or significant weight loss. The patient had no past medical history of diabetes mellitus or hypertension. The patient was neither an alcoholic nor a smoker. Physical examination revealed a mildly tender left scrotum with normal-appearing scrotal skin and an enlarged, indurated left testicle. The Prehn’s sign was positive; otherwise, the cremasteric reflex remained intact. Initial laboratory test results (CBC and urine analysis, culture, serology, and AFB) were unremarkable. The patient was initially administered intravenous antibiotics (ceftriaxone, 1 g IV BID, for 02 weeks together with NSAIDs analgesics (Diclofenac) and scrotal elevation. Despite medical management, the patient’s complaints worsened and evolved into an abscess. Initial scrotal Doppler ultrasound showed post-infectious testicular infarction with a heterogeneous left testicle with hypoechoic and hyperechoic areas and no flow on color Doppler detected over the testicular parenchyma. The left testis was diffusely enlarged measuring 4.7×3.2 cm in size. Otherwise, no hydrocele, spermatic chord, or epididymal enlargement was noted, and the overlying skin has normal contour. The contralateral testis showed normal studies. .
On subsequent physical examination, skin changes with induration small subcutaneous fluctuant mass were noted but no ulceration on left hemiscrotum and for these incision and drainage of the left testicular abscess was performed. The Intra-operative finding was adhesion between the left testicle and the overlying scrotal skin and approximately 05 mL of thick non-offensive pus was drained, with focal necrotic areas on the anterior surface of the left testicle (A). The spermatic cord was normal, with no evidence of torsion. The wound was left open with a saline-soaked dressing to observe further changes in the testes. We followed up the patient in our inpatient urology ward with wound care on a twice-daily basis, scrotal elevation, and antibiotics for 72 hours. However, necrotic changes and discoloration of the left testis had progressed . Repeat Doppler ultrasonography revealed testicular parenchymal infarction. For this reason, we performed left-sided orchiectomy after obtaining informed consent, and the sample was sent for pathological examination. The patient was admitted to the outpatient department with an uneventful clinical course. The pathology report revealed a testicular tuberculous abscess ( and ), where the patient was linked to the TB clinic and administered anti-TB medications according to national guidelines. Chest radiography, which was unremarkable, was performed subsequently. The patient is currently taking anti-TB chemotherapy and on follow up without any further complaint from his initial presentation.