A 38-year-old woman was diagnosed with invasive breast cancer at her local hospital. The patient was referred to our department in February 2020. Physical examination revealed a well-defined palpable mass at the 3–4-o’clock position of her left breast. Ultrasonography revealed an irregular hypoechoic mass at the 4-o’clock position, 1 cm from the nipple, measuring 3.9 × 3.3 cm, which was consistent with the biopsy-confirmed malignancy . Two hypoechoic suspicious daughter nodules in the 3:30 direction, 5 cm and 4 cm from the nipple, with diameters of 1.2 cm and 0.6 cm, respectively, were also detected. Additionally, multiple enlarged lymph nodes suspicious for metastases were detected in the left axilla, level I to III.
A core needle biopsy of the left-sided 3-o’clock mass confirmed invasive ductal carcinoma, of nuclear grade (NG) 2/3 and histologic grade (HG) 2/3, which was estrogen receptor (ER) positive (6/8), progesterone receptor (PR) positive (6/8), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) negative (1+), with a Ki-67 proliferation index of 10%–20%. A left axillary lymph node needle aspiration biopsy revealed metastatic carcinoma. A whole-body CT scan revealed no evidence of distant metastasis.
The patient’s TNM staging was cT2N1M0. Following discussions, the patient agreed to NACT with four cycles of an anthracycline-based treatment followed by four cycles of a taxane. Pre-NACT enhanced breast MRI revealed a mass (3.4 × 2.2 cm) at the 4-o’clock position, 1 cm from the nipple, in the left breast, which was concordant with the biopsy-confirmed malignancy. Multiple enhanced nodules (1.4 cm in the longest diameter) were observed, and the total extent measured 5.8 cm . MRI revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left axilla.
The patient received four cycles of NACT with 60 mg/m2 of intravenous adriamycin and 600 mg/m2 of intravenous cyclophosphamide, plus 75 mg/m2 of intravenous docetaxel. After the fourth cycle, the dimensions of the malignant mass had decreased to 2.1 × 1.0 cm, as revealed by ultrasonography of the left breast . The two daughter nodules in the 3:30 direction shrank to 0.5 cm and 0.4 cm. The left-axillary lymph nodes (levels I to III) shrank slightly. The post-NACT MRI showed that the biopsy-confirmed malignant mass and the multiple suspicious daughter nodules (total extent measuring 2.1 cm) in the left breast also decreased in size .
We proposed breast-conserving surgery using a prone/supine MRI-based 3D-printed BSG to facilitate the excision of the main breast tumor along with the suspicious daughter nodules. Breast imaging was performed using a 3.0 T MRI system (Ingenia; Philips Healthcare, Best, the Netherlands) with a bilateral dedicated 4-element breast coil. Additional supine MRI was performed to replicate the patient’s intraoperative position. The patient provided written informed consent and agreed to undergo supine imaging in addition to the standard baseline MRI protocol. Data obtained from the prone/supine MRI scans were analyzed. The tumor and normal breast tissues were divided using the image segmentation program Mimics Medical v17 (Materialise Inc., Leuven, Belgium). We designed a BSG to target the original tumor region by combining pre-NACT MRI-generated tumor data with post-NACT MRI-generated breast data . The 3D-printed BSG was designed not to target the tumor region depicted in pre-NACT magnetic resonance (MR) images but to mark the reduced tumor area by comparing pre-NACT MR images with post-NACT MR images. To ensure an accurate projection of the tumor resection boundary, the following specifications were used for modeling the BSG: (1) The BSG was designed to fit precisely on the breast skin surface. (2) A hole was made to fit the nipple and prevent rotation of the BSG; guidelines indicating the contralateral nipple and the suprasternal notch were included on the BSG. (3) The BSG was manufactured as a hybrid type with a groove for marking the original tumor area with an additional 0.5 cm around the tumor boundary to guarantee safe margins. Blue dye injection columns were incorporated to indicate the extent of the tumor requiring removal.
The surgery was performed in August 2020. The 3D-printed BSG was sterilized preoperatively. The surgical resection line was drawn onto the breast skin surface along with the groove designed to match the tumor shape, and blue dye was injected into the breast through the columns indicating the resection boundary . A left-sided lumpectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed. The tumor was removed using the blue dye border as the excision boundary. An intraoperative frozen biopsy of the resection margins yielded negative results. Sentinel lymph node frozen biopsies revealed one of five lymph nodes positive for metastatic carcinoma, and axillary lymph node dissection was performed. The total operation time was 81 minutes.
The final histopathologic diagnosis of the specimen was residual invasive lobular carcinoma: NG 3/3, HG 2/3, ypT2 (3.2 cm) N1 (2/12) M0, stage IIB, ER (+, 34-66%), PR (+, 11-33%), HER2 (1+), and Ki-67 <10%. All resection margins were free of tumor cells. The distance from the tumor to the resection margin was 3.2 cm, 2 cm, 1.2 cm, and 1 cm in the 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12- o’clock directions, respectively. The mean distance from the tumor to the resection margin was 1.9 cm. The patient underwent adjuvant radiotherapy and hormonal therapy with tamoxifen. At the last follow-up before this report, the patient was in a good condition.