A 70-year-old Japanese man had a 3-year history of granulomatosis with polyangiitis that had manifested as multiple nasal nodules, pulmonary cavities, and serum antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-positive, necrotizing, crescentic glomerulonephritis. He had taken 15 mg prednisolone and 150 mg of mizoribine per day since the diagnosis. Cyclophosphamide or rituximab was not used. Three years after the diagnosis (at which point the total amount of prednisolone was 17.5 g), he complained of severe back pain and consulted our hospital (Yokosuka General Hospital Uwamachi).
A physical examination revealed that his blood pressure was 143/93 mmHg, pulse rate 93 beats/minute, respiratory rate 16/minute, and body temperature 36.6 °C. His bowel sounds indicated hypoactivity, and his abdomen was distended but without tenderness. Laboratory analysis showed a C-reactive protein level of 12 mg/dl (normal 0 to 0.3 mg/dl) and white blood cell count of 9700/μl. Blood gas analysis showed pH 7.378, base excess − 6.0 mmol/L, and lactate 1.1 mmol/L. Computed tomography (CT) showed a large amount of gas located in his abdominal wall, bowel wall, and mesentery . It was difficult, however, to rule out the possibility of intestinal perforation or necrosis.
He underwent an urgent exploratory laparotomy, which led to a diagnosis of pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis without intestinal perforation or necrosis . Two years before this diagnosis, multiple ulcers had been detected in his colon on the right side , so we surmised that some of these ulcers had developed pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis. The day after the exploratory laparotomy, he started HBO therapy at 2.0 atmospheres absolute (ATA) for 90 minutes/day. The treatment duration was 17 days, with 13 sessions. Following HBO therapy, we found no evidence of pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis on CT scans . He was discharged from our hospital without complications 19 days after completion of the HBO treatment. At his most recent follow-up, 3 years after being diagnosed with pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis, he was clear of the disease.