A 48 year-old African American male presented to our hospital with a four-day history of severe right flank pain starting several hours after smoking cocaine. His pain was associated with subjective fevers, nausea and vomiting. There was no gross hematuria or dysuria. His blood pressure was 140/78 mmHg, heart rate 130 beats per minute, temperature 39.5 °C, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute and his oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. Pertinent exam findings included severe right costovertebral angle tenderness, diffuse right-sided abdominal pain and a positive psoas sign on the right. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 14 × 109/L (76% neutrophils), serum creatinine 1.4 mg/dL (124 μmol/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 704 U/L and serum creatinine kinase (CPK) 259 U/L. A urinalysis showed 3+ proteinuria, 1 to 3 red blood cells per high power field and no white blood cells or casts. Urine toxicology confirmed the presence of cocaine. A Computerized Tomography (CT) scan with contrast revealed a sharply-demarcated heterogenous area of focal decreased enhancement in the anterior right kidney consistent with renal infarct, but pyelonephritis could not be completely ruled out . Volume-rendered Single Photon Emission-Computed Tomography (SPECT) image of a gallium scan showed no evidence of tracer localization in the right kidney to suggest an infection. It did reveal absence of tracer localization in the upper pole of the right kidney suggesting absence of perfusion to that area . Blood and urine cultures were negative. A trans-thoracic and a subsequent trans-esophageal echocardiogram showed no evidence of intra-cardiac thrombus or valvular vegetations. Further screening tests for hypercoagulability (factor V Leiden, prothrombin gene, protein C and protein S, anti-thrombin III, anti-phospholipid antibody and homocysteine); collagen vascular disease (rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody); and lipid disorders were within normal limits. Our patient was then diagnosed with CIRI by exclusion.