A 74-year-old Japanese male complained of back pain. There was no history of drinking or smoking. The patient had a medical history of dialysis due to nephrotic syndrome, operation of abdominal aortic aneurysm, coronary stenting, pacemaker implantation, and RCC. The patient did not have a history of medical or surgical therapy for tuberculosis. He was taking aspirin and clopidogrel sulfate, and his family history included duodenal cancer in his father.
Seven years ago, the patient was diagnosed with RCC (cT1aN0M0, cStage I). His renal function had already failed, and the patient was put on dialysis. The surgeons did not recommend resection of the right kidney owing to concerns about several complications, despite the fact that the patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Score of 0. The surgeons recommended ablation of the tumor; however, the patient refused to undergo ablation due to concerns about the treatment side effects. The fact that this was before the introduction of ablation therapy for renal cancer at our institution also impacted this patient.
Therefore, SBRT was recommended for the right kidney tumor, which the patient accepted. We performed SBRT, which was created with a three-dimensional radiotherapy planning system (Eclipse, Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA). Respiratory tumor movement was measured using continuous X-ray images in a simulator. Gross tumor volume (GTV) was defined as the visible tumor on the planning computed tomography (CT) image. The CTV was defined as the GTV plus 3 mm because patients only underwent non-contrast-enhanced CT. The planning target volume (PTV) margin of 5 mm was added to CTV. Prescription doses were based on a previous report : 70 Gy in 10 fractions covering 95% of the PTV (D95) was delivered using 6 MV X-rays. Dose constraints for organs at risk conformed to previous reports . An acute side effect of grade 1 dermatitis occurred after SBRT, but there was no acute or late complication of more than grade 2. The RCC did not show shrinkage or progression and the patient was diagnosed with stable disease on CT. The patient remains stable 7 years after treatment without surgery or chemotherapy; however, the patient came to the hospital with gradually worsening back pain for several months.
CT revealed that the left erector spinae muscle was swollen compared with the contralateral side at the third lumbar level . The lesion appeared to have a nodular structure including high and low attenuation areas. Retrospectively, it had been clarified 5 years ago, but the change was gradual . Ultrasonography showed a tumor 30 mm in size without blood flow in the left paraspinal muscle . Magnetic resonance imaging was not performed because he was a pacemaker patient. Positron emission tomography–CT (PET–CT) revealed uptake of 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) in the left paraspinal muscle (maximum standardized uptake value of 2.8) . We therefore suspected a malignant tumor, a benign tumor such as schwannoma, vascular malformations, or chronic expanding hematoma.
Pathological examination of biopsy specimens from the lesion of the left erector spinae muscle showed bleeding and fibrine precipitation. In addition, atrophy and glassy fibrosis of the striated muscle due to radiotherapy were observed. The clinical diagnosis was radiation-induced CEH.
We performed conservative therapy with medication alone because the tumor had been gradually growing. One year after starting observation, the patient died due to subdural hemorrhage after a fall and progression of renal failure.