A 48-year-old African-American man with no significant tobacco history presented with a slow-growing mass in his neck and 11 kg weight loss over a 9-month period . On further history, he reported left arm pain and weakness, intermittent fever with chills, and had denied any dyspnea, shortness of breath, or cough. His past medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and nerve impingement of his left shoulder. On physical examination, a mass was noted on the left side of his neck just superior to the sternoclavicular joint measuring 3 × 3 × 1 cm. He had ptosis and miosis of his left eye. His speech was hoarse, indicative of recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement. His breath sounds were decreased and coarse at the left apex. The strength of his extremities exhibited 3/5 weakness in his left arm, with the remainder of his limbs normal. There was positive muscle atrophy of his left upper extremity. Otherwise, the remainder of the physical examination was benign in nature.
An ultrasound performed on the neck mass showed an ill-defined heterogeneous mass lateral to his left thyroid lobe, resulting in mild mass effect. Further investigation was warranted with radiological studies including chest X-rays and a computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest. A chest X-ray exhibited a mass extending from the hilum of his left lung with gross deviation of his trachea and elevation of his hemidiaphragm. A CT scan of his chest showed a large multiloculated pleural-based mass in his lungs surrounding his left common carotid artery, left subclavian artery, which interfaced broadly with the aortic arch and extended into the left neuroforamina of C4/C5 through T1/T2 .
Percutaneous needle core biopsy was performed on his neck and showed fibrohistiocytic tissue with mild chronic inflammation but was negative for malignancy. A left thoracotomy with biopsy was performed of the pleura and of the upper and middle lung lobes of his left lung evidencing a mass extending from the anterior mediastinum medially at the level of his pulmonary artery trunk superiorly into the superior sulcus and posteriorly into his chest wall. Tissue samples were obtained, all demonstrating a gross appearance of a pink to yellow gelatinous tissue for which frozen sectioning revealed soft tissue malignancy. Hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated a predominance of hyperchromatic spindle-shaped cells with acidophil cytoplasm . This is consistent with high-grade sarcomas typically with disorganized pleomorphic cells that can also include histiocytes and giant multinucleated cells . A panel of immunohistochemical stains was performed of which only Wilms tumor protein (WT1), vimentin, and Ki67 were positive. This finding ruled out carcinoma, mesothelioma, melanoma, vascular tumor, synovial sarcoma, and Kaposi’s sarcoma as possible etiologies. Overall, immunohistochemistry revealed a high-grade undifferentiated myxoid sarcoma confirmed by the Mayo Clinic as fibromyxosarcoma versus MFS.