A 74-year-old male patient was referred to our department with severe pain in the palate and nasal obstruction. His medical history included hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, for which he was taking azilsartan and metformin hydrochloride, respectively. He had no history of smoking or drinking. In 1999, a maxillary SI, on which the metal framework was designed to be fixed with two retaining screws, was placed on a severely atrophied maxilla for the occlusal reconstruction of the molar area. One of the retaining screws fell off shortly after the implant placement. Although he had used the SI without any particular dysfunction during mastication during the 5-year follow-up, he had experienced mild pain in the palate and slight mobility of the SI. After the follow-up ended, the mobility of the SI gradually worsened. Subsequently, he developed nasal obstruction in 2017, followed by severe pain in the palate. He later visited our department in 2019.
Clinical examination revealed a maxillary SI with poor fitting, severe mobility, and an undermined ulcer with induration on the palate, accompanied by a fistula and the exposure of the metal framework . A panoramic radiograph showed a maxillary SI and retaining screw , while computed tomography showed major maxillary bone resorption around the metal framework, the retaining screw that almost fell off, and bilateral maxillary sinusitis . An incisional biopsy was performed under the suspicion of carcinoma, and pathological and systemic examination revealed SCC (cT4aN2cM0). After administering neoadjuvant chemotherapy comprising paclitaxel, carboplatin, and cetuximab, bilateral neck dissection was performed, followed by partial resection of the maxilla with the removal of the SI . The surgical defect of the palate was reconstructed with a free anterolateral thigh flap. The SI, which was removed, comprised a metal framework with two holes for retaining screws and attachments of the prosthesis of the molar region. The surface in contact with the bone was covered with extensive amounts of plaque and calculus, while the polished surface in contact with the mucoperiosteum was covered with a small amount of calculus . Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis suggested that the SI was fabricated using pure titanium on a cast and that no titanium was present in the resected specimen . Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the SI in contact with the SCC showed a few microcracks, suggesting pitting corrosion . Pathological microscopic examination of the resected primary tumor revealed well-differentiated SCC, which was highly keratinized. It showed widespread ulceration of the epithelium and extensive infiltration of the stroma and bone . Subsequently, he underwent adjuvant chemoradiotherapy, which comprised cisplatin combined with intensity-modulated radiation therapy, as the resection margins were positive. Wound healing of the reconstructed palate and dietary intake were uneventful . Regarding the prosthetic solution, it was difficult to provide a maxillary denture with sufficient stability due to the loss of the alveolar ridge. Currently, he is undergoing chemotherapy for recurrent lymph node metastasis.