A 25-year-old Sri Lankan woman was referred to our unit with a preliminary ultrasound scan (USS) suggestive of a liver cyst. She had right hypochondrial pain, and several episodes of intractable itching. Only one of these episodes of itching was associated with clinically and biochemically proven obstructive jaundice.
On examination, she was anicteric and did not have any features of liver disease. Abdominal examination was unremarkable.
Liver function tests were normal. Serum tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), α feto protein and CA 19-9 levels were within normal limits. An USS of the liver showed a 5.5 cm × 4 cm multiloculated intrahepatic cyst with several smaller cysts within. The intrahepatic ducts were slightly dilated, with the cyst probably extending into the proximal bile duct. Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) confirmed the presence of the cyst in segment 4B of the liver which had an enhancing thin wall with multiple septa and no intracystic solid component . CECT also revealed intrahepatic, common hepatic and proximal common bile duct dilatation probably due to an extension of the lesion along the left hepatic duct. A hydroxy iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan excluded a direct communication of the cyst with the biliary tree. Serum echinococcus IgG levels were normal.
Laparotomy confirmed a lesion in the left side of the liver with an extension into the common hepatic duct along the left hepatic duct. The gallbladder was extrahepatic. During left hepatectomy, the cyst extension was removed intact, through the cut end of the left hepatic duct . A synchronous cholecystectomy was performed once the resection surface of the liver had been checked for biliary leaks by injecting saline through the cystic duct. The patient had an uneventful recovery.
Histology revealed a multilocular, mucinous biliary cystadenoma lined by a single layer of glandular epithelium, arising from the left intrahepatic ducts. A basement membrane separated the epithelial lining from the underlying ovarian type mesenchyme. The patient is well at 24 months with no evidence of recurrent disease.