A 68-year-old man with a smoking history of 40 pack-years came to seek medical advice in light of cough, expectoration, and shortness of breath.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest (which cannot be found at present) indicated a malignant tumor of the lung. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy confirmed the lesion characteristics and histopathology. At high magnification, cells in two biopsy samples of same lesion were uniform in size and arrangement, fusiform in shape with hyperchromatic nuclei , and having an aggressive growth pattern. Coupled with immunohistochemistry (IHC), these results indicated a SCLC diagnosis . Molecular pathology was tested by amplification-refractory mutation system (ARMS)-PCR, which indicated an absence of sensitive mutation . According to the American Society of Clinical Oncology Endorsement of the American College of Chest physicians guidelines, the patient was treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy consisting of six cycles of etoposide and carboplatin with thoracic radiotherapy Dt45Gy/30F twice per day. After treat, his clinical symptoms improved and the lesion in the right lower lobe shrank dramatically on CT scanning .
The patient suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, and diabetes for at least 10 years. As they were not thought to be associated with the progression of lung cancer, we did not include a detailed description in this article.
The presence of bilateral pulmonary interstitial hyperplasia and inhomogeneous emphysema were consistent with tumor progression and deterioration of the patient’s condition. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsies were performed to determine the reason why the standard SCLC treatment did not have a curative effect. The tumor cells were ovoid with hyperchromatic nuclei and arranged in strips or nests . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) indicated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma owing to the presence of some specific pathological markers . What needed more attention was that several SCLC markers, such as thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1, cytokeratin (CK)5/6, and P40, were expressed only in individual cells, and Ki-67-positive cells accounted for more than 25%, indicating rapid growth and proliferation of tumor cells. Genetic analysis found that the patient had no epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement (D5F3 Ventana IHC). However, repeated molecular pathology showed that after standard chemotherapy, the patient bore a KRAS mutation , which corresponded with the histology findings. Four cycles of cisplatin and pemetrexed achieved a decrease in the size of the lesion in the right lower lung, which further supported the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma.
With the remission of clinical symptoms, the patient failed to continue regular follow-up and periodic imaging. It was beyond our expectation that the patient suffered thoracalgia in the lower right chest 3 years after the last CT examination. A CT examination of his chest indicated growth and consolidation of the lesion in the lower right lung, with scattered nodules, and right inferior lobe insufficiency compared with a CT obtained 3 years previously. .