A 34 years old woman was admitted to the Endocrinology Research Centre (ERC) in September 2021 with a diagnosis of hypothyroidism unresponsive to exogenous levothyroxine as well as exquisetely diabetes mellitus (DM). On admission she complained of impaired swallowing, sore throat, “twitching” pain in the neck, hoarseness of voice, episodic headaches, periorbital swelling mainly in the morning, high glycemia indexes up to a maximum of 34 mmol/l, numbness and lower leg edema.
On examination, her general condition was relatively satisfactory, she was oriented both in place and in time and contact was easy. Her general appearance was unkempt, her clothes and hair were dirty. Her body weight was 95 kg, height 166 cm, body mass index 35.2 kg/m.sq. On her back there were areas of vitiligo, the skin of the front surfaces of both thighs contained rough scars (according to the patient, post-injection abscesses), and the rest of her physical examination was noncontributory.
She had three children, was a very heavy smoker and alcohol drinker. She was not employed despite an engineering degree. She had paternal relative with diabetes mellitus (DM) of unknown type.
According to the patient, in November 2020, hypothyroidism was diagnosed based on the results of hormonal blood tests (data not available), and she was prescribed levothyroxine sodium with a gradual titration of the daily dose to 200 mcg, i.e. 2.1 mcg/kg.
In March 2021, there was an episode of unconsciousness, an ambulance team was called, and she was hospitalized with hyperglycemia of 26 mmol/l (468 mg/dl). Intensive insulin therapy (Insulin lispro 8–35 units 3 times a day and Insulin-isophan 30 units in the morning and in the evening) was initiated at the hospital. After discharge, due to complaints of high glycemia indices, Metformin 1000 mg twice daily was added, but hyperglycemias up to 34 mmol/l ( 612 mg/dl) still occurred on glucometer self-measurements. She was therefore referred to ERC for thorough work-up and treatment.
On September 21, 2021, she was hospitalized for the first time at the ERC. Decompensation of primary hypothyroidism against the background of autoimmune thyroiditis was confirmed: TSH 108 mIU/l, AT to TPO > 1000 mU/ml, AT to TG > 40,000 mU/ml, fT4 < 5.15 pmol/l (0.4 ng/dl; reference interval 0.69–1.47 ng/dl). The dose of levothyroxine was increased to 300 mcg and given under nursing supervision and fT4 level was normalized at 11.29 pmol/l ( 0.88 ng/dl) after 5 days, strongly suggesting non-compliance at home.
In the hospital, she had widely fluctuating glycemia indices from 33 mmol/l (594 mg/dl) to 2.1 mmol/l (37 mg/dl) during standard diabetic diet and her home insulin regimen. However, no hyperglycemia was registered in venous blood even during simultaneous very high blood glucose levels according to the glucometer measurements. She never had positive urinary ketones.
On September 22, 2021, she was transferred to the intensive care unit due to a sudden episode of mental confusion, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, headache, with a background glycemia of 3.2 mmol/L (58 mg/dl). In the intensive care unit, under strict nursing supervision, glycemic readings were all normal within 4.5–8.3 mmol/l (81–159 mg/dl) for 2 days despite complete withdrawal of both insulin therapy and metformin, but with slow intravenous infusion of 5% glucose solution. An oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed and no evidence of DM was obtained: fasting glucose was 4.96 mmol/l (90 mg/dl), and 2 h later it was 7.39 mmol/l (133 mg/dl). Therefore, artifical hypo- and hyperglycemia was suspected.
Back on the general ward continuous interstitial glycemia monitoring Medtronic Paradigm Vео MMT-754) was initiated. Elevated glucose values (up to 18 mmol/L, 324 mg/dl) were recorded only by glucometer, while no hyperglycemia was detected in the interstitial fluid using glucose sensor at the same time. Very low glucose values were repeatedly noted, down to 2.1 mmol/l (38 mg/dl), and during one such episode venous blood sampling was performed: glucose 1.86 mmol/l ( 33 mg/dl), insulin 2.2 µU/ml (Roche), C-peptide 1.18 ng/ml and proinsulin less than 0.5 pmol/l. Presence of oral glucose-lowering medications in the blood was excluded by High performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Taking into account the discordant values of insulin and C-peptide it was decided to perform a fasting test to re-examine these hormones during hypoglycemia.
She developed clinical hypoglycemia (accompanied by severe weakness, excessive sweating, trembling) after 1.5 h of fasting; venous blood samples were taken and fasting was stopped (the patient ate).
In addition, laboratory indicators were also suspicious of factitious hypoglycemia due to the introduction of insulin analogues, so it was decided to conduct an additional study of insulin with the Abbot kit.
The feature of these results was very low blood glucose level accompanied by low-normal insulin concentration in the Roche’s assay but with grossly elevated value in the Abbott’s assay. Thus, the presence of artificial hypoglycemia due to exogenous administration of insulin analog preparation, i.e. the diagnosis of Munchausen syndrome, was confirmed. Taking into account the patient’s customary home use of ultra-short-acting insulin (insulin lispro) we assume that this drug was surreptitiously administered by the patient to induce hypoglycemic episodes. Unfortunately, at that time our medical institution did not have an opportunity to identify the insulin preparations by HPLC-MS/MS.
After discussing the results with the patient, we told her that continuation of surreptitious insulin injections to induce hypoglycemia puts her life and health in danger. However, the patient calmly denied surreptitious administration of insulin preparations. A psychiatrist consulted the patient and diagnosed her with chronic anxiety-depressive disorder with panic attacks. The patient was given recommendations for drug treatment and psychotherapy.