In November 2021, a 68-year-old man with a past history of hypertension presented to the emergency department of our center affiliated with Tehran University of Medical Sciences with a gradual deterioration of consciousness, shortness of breath, and also symptoms of volume overload, which included edema in lower limbs, especially in the right lower limb, as size difference was clearly observed. He had also experienced dizziness and fall incidents during the last few months, but reported no head injury. He denied having a history of abdominal pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, urinary symptoms, or significant weight loss. He denied the use of any medications except for hypertension. His habitual history was negative, and he did not report a family history of cancer or hematologic disorders. The vital signs showed tachycardia (105 bpm), tachypnea (23 rpm), and fever (38.1°C); his blood oxygen saturation was also low (77%). His physical examination showed severe edema (level 3) on lower limbs, genitalia, and also upper limbs. His abdomen was soft, without tenderness or hepatosplenomegaly; however, moderate ascites were notable. Several bruising and ecchymosis were noted on the back and lower limbs. Upon auscultation, no abnormal cardiac sounds were heard, but pulmonary sounds, particularly on the right side, were diminished. The cranial nerve examination and cerebellar tests, including Romberg's test, were normal. No lymphadenopathy was discovered in physical examination.
The laboratory data of the patient showed hemoglobin of 8.6 g/dL [normal range: 14–17 g/dL], white blood cell count of 7.7 × 103/mm3 [4.5–11.0 × 103/mm3], and platelet count of 50 × 103/mm3 [150–400 × 103/mm3]. Liver function tests revealed elevated alkaline phosphatase along with slightly increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase and bilirubin. A peripheral blood sample revealed schistocytes and hyper-segmented neutrophils. The coagulation test revealed the following results: A prothrombin time (PT) of 26 s [11–13.5 s], a partial thromboplastin time (PTT) of 60 s [30–40 s], a thrombin time of 29.6 s [14–21 s], an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.2 [0.0–1.1], a fibrinogen level of 47 mg/dL [200–400 mg/dL], and fibrinogen degradation product (FDP) of 160 μg/mL [0–5 μg/mL] . The DIC score was 7 based on the International Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis diagnosis criteria. The patient was diagnosed as having overt DIC and treatment with cryoprecipitate and fresh frozen plasma was initiated immediately. Cranial and thoracic computed tomography (CT) scans, and also abdominal sonography were requested. The cranial CT scan revealed mild SDH (<1 mm) in the left cerebral hemisphere, while the consultation with the neurosurgical department indicated the patient did not require surgical intervention . Meanwhile, a chest CT scan revealed bilateral severe pleural effusion (more severe on the right) and collapsed consolidation on both sides, which was suggestive of bacterial pneumonia . The sonographic evaluation showed free fluid in the abdomen, and although no pathology within the parenchyma of the liver or spleen was recorded, the inferior vena cava and hepatic veins were markedly dilated. A color doppler sonography of the lower limb vessel was also performed, which was negative for deep vein thrombosis. According to the findings, along with an echocardiographic assessment, we ruled out pulmonary thromboembolism with a ventilation-perfusion scan. The evaluation was furthered after the correction of coagulopathy, using pleural fluid tapping, which showed that the pleural effusion was exudative, and subsequently, antibiotic therapy with levofloxacin was initiated . Echocardiography revealed increased pulmonary artery pressure (LVEF: 55%–60%, PAP: 44 mm Hg), which confirmed the suspected preserved ejection fraction heart failure.
A search to determine the underlying etiology was continued and a comprehensive malignancy work-up was performed. Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 12 ng/mL (normal: <4 ng/mL). Prostatic induration was identified through the digital rectal exam. Abdominal ultrasound investigation reported enlarged prostate with a volume of about 70 cc with a mass effect on the bladder. Increased distended bladder wall thickness was also noted. The patients underwent an abdominopelvic CT scan without contrast, which revealed a prostate enlargement (57 × 57 × 44 mm) with two hypo-signal nodules in the right middle and left inferior portions of the inner gland, along with multiple left para-aortic, left external and internal iliac, and left peri-rectal lymphadenopathies . Further investigations also revealed bone metastases, specifically in the pelvic bone, however, no liver metastasis was observed. As the patient's condition became stable, a prostate biopsy was also performed, which reported prostate adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 8 and grade group of 4 with perineural invasion. Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of metastatic prostate cancer was confirmed in the patient. Urology and oncology consultation was requested accordingly, and medical androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) including triptorelin and bicalutamide was recommended for the patient. Four days after the diagnosis confirmation, the patient lost consciousness, and another brain CT scan showed that SDH had exacerbated . As there was a clear midline shift, immediate acute care with surgical intervention and craniotomy along with mannitol fluid therapy was performed, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Unfortunately, the symptoms exacerbated, resuscitation and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) were unsuccessful, and the patient expired.