A previously healthy full term 15 day old Caucasian male with an unremarkable antenatal, perinatal, and family history presented on Day 2 of illness with a 24 h history of poor feeding, irritability, fever, and rash. Examination revealed fever (39.6 C), tachycardia (HR 180–210), tachypnea (RR 68), extreme irritability, acrocyanosis, and a generalized maculopapular rash, but otherwise was normal. Admission blood work revealed a normal complete blood count, slightly elevated serum transaminase levels, mild hypoalbuminemia (30 g/L), and a normal c-reactive protein (CRP) of 2.6 mg/L. Empiric treatment with intravenous ampicillin, cefotaxime, and acyclovir was given for presumed neonatal sepsis and possible encephalitis. On day 4 of illness, in addition to ongoing fever, he developed recurrent apnea and required supplemental oxygen and transfer to the tertiary care hospital pediatric intensive care unit. His blood work showed mild neutropenia, elevation of serum transaminase levels (alanine transaminase 86 U/L, aspartate transaminase 220 U/L), a normal ESR (1 mm/hr) and hypoalbuminemia. An infectious etiology was considered unlikely given negative bacterial cultures from blood, cerebral spinal fluid, and urine, and negative viral studies for herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Influenza A and B, cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, rubella, adenovirus, and rotavirus. The urine and blood cultures were collected before the start of antibiotics. His chest radiograph was normal. On day 6 of illness, he developed bilateral non-purulent conjunctivitis, palmar erythema, striking bilateral non-pitting edema and erythema of his feet, and erythema and swelling of several proximal interphalangeal joints . He continued to require supplemental oxygen for suspected pneumonitis. On Day 7 of illness, after 5 days of fever and meeting 3 out of 5 criteria for KD, with no other obvious diagnosis, he was given IVIG (2 g/kg) for suspected incomplete KD. Over the next 48 h, his symptoms including extremity edema resolved, he no longer required supplemental oxygen, and fever did not recur. His CRP remained normal throughout his illness. Laboratory values improved and his platelet count progressively increased from 246,000 on Day 7 to 852,000 on Day 13 of illness. In the subacute phase, he was treated with low dose aspirin. He had persistent thrombocytosis followed by typical extremity desquamation. Echocardiograms on weeks 1, 2, and 6, and at 12 months were normal with no carditis or coronary artery abnormalities.