A 68-year-old man was diagnosed with metastatic malignant melanoma on May 30, 2023, after surgical excision of a mass in the right axillary region. In his past medical history, the patient reported hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and peripheral vasculopathy. He was a smoker and a frequent alcohol consumer. There was also a positive family history of cancer; his father had been diagnosed with lung cancer. Following biopsy results, computed tomography (CT) staging revealed brain metastases, lung metastasis in the right lower lobe, lymphadenopathy in the area of the right bronchus, and two other metastases in the right perinephric space and the left rectus abdominis muscle. The patient underwent whole brain radiation therapy with the last session taking place on June 8, 2023. The molecular profile of the tumor revealed a BRAF V600E mutation.
As a next step, we decided to initiate combined immunotherapy with nivolumab (anti-PD-1) and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) eventually commencing on June 26, 2023. His blood test results were as follows: white blood count (WBC) at 6,880/μL with neutrophils (NEU) at 3,230/μL, hemoglobin (Hb) at 10.8 g/dL, and platelets (PLT) at 375,000/μL. However, after a single dose, the patient was hospitalized due to febrile neutropenia.
Specifically, on the first day of his hospitalization, July 17, 2023, his WBC was 1,600/μL, with NEU = 50/μL. His Hb level was 9.2 g/dL. He presented with a fever that had started 24 h prior to his hospitalization, reaching a maximum temperature of 39.1°C, without other symptoms. He remained in good clinical condition. Other blood tests revealed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 146 mg/L (normal upper limit 6 mg/L). Blood and urine cultures were obtained, and we initiated antibiotics (meropenem 2 g × 3) and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) as a precautionary measure.
On the second day of hospitalization, July 18, the patient remained in good clinical condition but continued to experience fever episodes, with WBC at 1,620/μL and NEU at 50/μL. Additionally, there was a deterioration of anemia (Hb = 8.2 g/dL, hematocrit [Ht] = 27.5%), necessitating a blood transfusion. Due to the persistent fevers, an infectious disease specialist recommended a comprehensive virus test, a complete polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for respiratory pathogens, and CT scans to rule out abscesses. Vancomycin was also added to his treatment (1 g × 2).
Over the next 2 days, July 19–20, we observed a significant decrease in WBC (WBC = 1,630/μL, NEU = 20/μL). On July 20, the patient experienced difficulty swallowing and hoarseness. An otorhinolaryngologist examination revealed throat redness with mycosis, leading to the addition of antifungal medication (fluconazole).
On July 21, we decided to perform a bone marrow biopsy. While awaiting the biopsy results, we initiated corticosteroid treatment with methylprednisolone 40 mg × 2 (1 mg/kg/d) as indicated by ESMO guidelines. The bone marrow report indicated no stem cell infiltration but an absence of a medullary series.
From July 23 to July 27, we observed a significant improvement, with a decline in CRP and stabilization of WBCs. Notably, procalcitonin remained negative throughout hospitalization. Blood and urine cultures were also negative. The patient remained clinically stable and afebrile from July 28 until his discharge, with WBCs at 44,840/μL and NEU at 38,760/μL (due to G-CSF).
On August 1, 2023, the bone marrow biopsy results became available. The report indicated complete maturation arrest and lymphocytic infiltration (15–20% by small T-cells with an interstitial pattern), suggesting myelosuppression related to prior immunotherapy. The patient was finally discharged on August 3, with a corticosteroid therapy prescription (methylprednisolone with gradual dose tapering) for 2 months. Online supplementary Table 1 shows the summarized values of the patient’s blood tests from start of treatment until recovery.
Due to the serious side effects of immunotherapy, we decided to discontinue nivolumab and ipilimumab and initiate BRAF and MEK inhibitor combination. The first cycle commenced on September 6, 2023, with a scheduled CT restaging during the upcoming appointment.