An 83-year-old man with a history of peripheral artery disease and diabetes mellitus (DM) was admitted to hospital with gangrene below the level of ankle of the right foot. The patient was septic, with fever 37.6°C, WBC: 29.6 × 109/L, Hct: 39.2%, CRP: 161 mg/L, and Cr: 5.2 μmol/L. Diabetes mellitus had already resulted in complications such as diabetic retinopathy and nephropathy. Due to the severity of his condition, the patient emergently underwent amputation above the knee under general anesthesia. During the operation, the patient was transfused with one unit of concentrated red blood cells. The procedure was uneventful, and the patient woke up normally.
In the first four postoperative days, patient's wound was in good condition, and his renal function and inflammation markers were also improving. He also had no fever. However, he was considered to be severely malnourished because his albumin levels were 1.2 g/dL and had anasarca. The patient was started on a high-protein diet and intravenous antibiotics and was transfused with one unit of concentrated red blood cells during this time.
On the fifth postoperative day, the patient had right parotid gland swelling and fever up to 37.8°C, findings consistent with the diagnosis of parotitis. The patient was examined by an otolaryngologist, and a CT scan of the neck was scheduled. The imaging study confirmed the parotid gland swelling with hyperdense presentation, thickening of the fascia, and edema of the fat tissue. Additionally, there was enlargement of the unilateral masseter muscle. The parapharyngeal space was clear. Finally, no abscess formation was found .
Cultures from wound, inflamed Stensen's duct, and blood returned Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The patient was started on metronidazole, piperacillin/tazobactam, and linezolid instead of clindamycin and ciprofloxacin that were previously given. Extra intravenous fluids were also given at 1000 mL/24 hr rate. During the next seven days, the patient's condition improved and the parotitis subsided. His laboratory findings were WBC 12.8 × 109/L, CRP 31 mg/dL, Cr 2.7 μmol/L, and Alb 1.8 g/dL. Two days later (postoperative day 15), the patient was discharged.