A 60-year-old male with a background of hypertension, smoking, and no known drug allergies, was admitted in our hospital with an inferior STEMI. He remained haemodynamically stable (Killip 1) with normal blood pressure (140/80 mmHg) and heart rate without need of drug support. In the emergency department, heparin 5000 IU, ticagrelor 180 mg, and aspirin 250 mg were administered. While preparing him for urgent coronary angiography (CA), he experienced a ventricular fibrillation immediately treated with direct current (DC)-shock and followed by vomiting. The CA showed an occlusion of proximal right coronary artery which was successfully treated with thrombus aspiration and direct implantation of one drug-eluting stent (Ultimaster, Terumo Corporation) 3.5 × 20 mm (, Videos S1 and S2). After 45 min, back in the ICU, the patient reported chest pain with evidence of inferior ST-segment elevation. A new CA revealed an early acute intrastent thrombosis (ST, , Video S3), which was treated by wiring of the artery, thrombus aspiration followed by post-dilatation with 3.75 mm non-compliant (NC) balloon. He was then reloaded with ticagrelor 180 mg and an intracoronary bolus of GP2b3a inhibitors was administered. Intravascular ultrasound sonography (IVUS, OptiCross™ Boston Scientific) was performed, showing severe strut malapposition in the mid-portion of the stent (about 6–14 mm from the proximal edge) due to a partial stent crushing occurred after the post-dilatation with the NC balloon in the second procedure (, Video S4). Since the first guidewire wire could not gain the true stent lumen, the IVUS probe was placed between the vessel wall and the crushed stent (see ). In order to see the initial section of the crushed struts, the ‘live view’ was set. After several IVUS-guided attempts, a Sion Black wire (Asahi Intecc) successfully gained its way through nearly all the stent true lumen (, Video S5, see ). Subsequent post-dilatation with 1.0 balloon up to 4.25 NC balloon permitted a good final angiographic and IVUS result. (The total time from the beginning of the first CA to the end of the second coronary intervention procedure was 2 h and 40 min, see Timeline; see , Videos S6–S8; ) Four days later the patient was discharged asymptomatic with normal ejection fraction and at 1 year of follow-up he did not experience further events.