A 65-year-old lady was admitted with a 1-month history of intermittent generalised cramping abdominal pain with anorexia, weight loss (10 kg), vomiting and loose bowel motions. There were no systemic symptoms of fever, sweating or rigors. Apart from a past history of hypothyroidism and hypertension there was no other significant history and she was a non-smoker. There was no family history of gastrointestinal diseases.
On examination, she was comfortable but dehydrated. She had a heart rate of 107 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 157/84 mmHg and a temperature of 37.2°C. The abdominal examination was unremarkable and bowel sounds were normal. Abdominal X-ray demonstrated multiple air fluid levels but no dilatation of the small bowel or colon. Haematological analyses confirmed a haemoglobin level of 12.4 g/dl, white blood cell count of 8.5 × 109/litre and a C-reactive protein level of 98.5 mg/l. A provisional diagnosis of sub-acute intestinal obstruction was made.
The patient failed to settle with conservative management. Repeat abdominal X-rays confirmed an abnormal air-fluid level mainly in the right upper quadrant. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a mass arising from the pelvis with a tubular appearance consistent with small bowel intussusception and mucosal oedema. There was mild dilatation of the ileum proximal to the level of the intussusception with a 'telescoping' appearance of the small bowel intussusception distal to this area .
A midline laparotomy confirmed an intussusception approximately 30 cm proximal to the ileocaecal valve with a firm mass at its lead point. The affected bowel segment was irreducible and non-viable. A 30 cm segment of non-viable small bowel was resected and an end-to-end single layer sero-submucosal anastomosis was performed.
Macroscopically, the resected ileal segment contained a 3.5 cm ulcerated pale polypoidal mass 4 cm from the nearest resection margin. The adjacent mucosa demonstrated extensive ulceration, fissuring and incipient necrosis of the wall which was in keeping with chronic ischaemia related to repeated intussusception. Histopathological examination of the polyp revealed an ulcerated polypoidal mass with florid connective tissue proliferation arising from the submucosa and inner muscularis with distortion and reaction of the overlying serosa. Furthermore, there were cytologically bland spindle cells, lymphocytes and eosinophils in the background. There was no evidence of malignancy or necrosis.
The patient's postoperative recovery was uneventful and she was discharged 9 days after surgery. She remains well 20 months later with no further gastrointestinal symptoms.