A 38-year-old woman with a history of having undergone Strassman metroplasty of a complete bicornuate uterus began regular prenatal care in Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Capital Medical University from 6 weeks of gestation. She had been diagnosed with a bicornuate uterus, endometriosis, and teratoma during laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy for infertility 6 years ago. She had reported no other symptoms related to these conditions. After four failed in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) attempts due to an inaccessible uterine cavity, she underwent combined hysteroscopic and laparoscopic Strassman metroplasty four years ago. The procedure was converted to open surgery because of dense adhesions. A transverse myometrial incision was made into the uterine cavities from one cornua to the other. The two uterine halves were then sutured vertically from the anterior uterus across the midline fundus and down the posterior wall, creating one unified cavity. Over the next two years, the patient conceived twice by IVF-ET, and both pregnancies ended by curettage for embryo arrest without a chromosomal disorder at 11 weeks of gestation.
This pregnancy was naturally conceived, and the patient was under regular antenatal follow-up without the administration of progesterone. Her nuchal translucency scan was normal, and noninvasive prenatal testing indicated low risk. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound were suggestive of a posterior-anterior adherent placenta reaching the serosa with anterior myometrial thinning and partially missing at 22 weeks of gestation . She reported occasional vaginal bleeding.
At 28 weeks of gestation, the patient went to the emergency room for massive vaginal bleeding after defecating. On arrival, she had lost approximately 600 ml of blood without experiencing any abdominal pain, and there was still active bleeding greater than the amount typical of menstruation. Her pulse rate was 80/min and blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. Rapid infusion and emergency cesarean section were carried out. During the operation, we noticed severe adhesions around the fragile saddle-shaped uterus. A large number of tortuous vessels covered the lower anterior wall of the uterus. The lower anterior uterine wall adhered to the bladder and was extremely thin, and the posterior wall had closely adhered to the pelvis.
The cesarean section incision was located in the uterine body above the upper edge of the placenta. A healthy boy weighing 1,350 g and measuring 35 cm in height, was delivered from transverse to breech position with a normal cord blood gas analysis and Apgar scores (1, 5, and 10 minutes) of 10-10-10. After the delivery, a 5-cm vertical rupture of the uterus was noticed along the previous metroplasty scar and crossing the transverse incision of the uterus. The tissue beside the scar was much thinner than the surrounding wall. The placenta was on the posterior wall, covered the cervix, and reached the anterior wall. It covered about 4/5 of the uterine cavity and closely adhered to the uterine wall. The patient had severe bleeding after delivery, and 20 IU of oxytocin and 250 µg of carboprost tromethamine were injected into her myometrium to promote uterine contraction. The placenta adhered tightly to the lower uterus and had to be separated manually. A 5 × 6-cm section of the placenta was implanted in the right anterior wall of the uterus and could not be removed. The uterine cavity was filled with gauze and active bleeding was stopped. In addition to the 600 ml hemorrhage before the cesarean, the patient lost another 3,400 ml of blood due to hemorrhage after surgery. The patient was transfused with 10 U of red blood cells, 1,200 ml of plasma, and 1 U of platelets. Subsequently, antibiotics were administered to prevent infection. Over the next 48 hours, the patient had no fever or bleeding, and her vital signs were stable.
Massive vaginal bleeding resumed when the gauze was removed under intravenous anesthesia 48 hours after the Caesarean section, with about 2,000 ml of blood loss in only 5 minutes. Meanwhile, the uterus did not respond to massage or oxytocin, hemabate, or carbetocin administration.
A transabdominal hysterectomy was performed immediately. The uterus adhered closely to the ovary, intestine, and bladder, and was a rigid saddle shape and bloated to 16 weeks in pregnancy size with blood clots inside . After the hysterectomy, a 2 × 2-cm rupture was found on the bladder, which was repaired and required a left ureteral stent. The patient lost 2,000 ml and 2,500 ml of blood, respectively, before and during the 5-hour surgery and was transfused with 13 U of RBC, 1,200 ml of plasma, and 1 U of platelets. The postoperative period was uneventful, including bladder irrigation and the administration of intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once daily for 5 days. The patient was discharged after the ureteral stent extraction. Both mother and child remained well at follow-up 2 years after delivery.