A 29-year-old gentleman with no significant medical history presented following a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. His physical examination and vital signs were unremarkable except for a grossly evident left lateral thigh mass. MRI brain showed three contrast-enhancing lesions: 14 × 6 mm right posterior temporal lesion, 7 × 5 mm posteromedial right thalamic lesion, and 3 mm subcortical posterior right frontal lobe lesion [-]. Imaging of the left femur revealed a 7.1 × 3.9 × 4.1 cm mass in the vastus lateralis and an adjacent femoral metastasis. Biopsy of the soft-tissue mass was consistent with ASPS. Following soft-tissue biopsy, PET scan showed pathologic radiotracer uptake in the left femur without radiotracer uptake in the lungs [ and ].
In <1 month from initial diagnosis, the dominant posterior temporal lesion grew from 14 mm to 22 mm in axial diameter. After interdisciplinary discussion, the patient agreed to neoadjuvant stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) (24 Gy in three fractions) to all three brain lesions, followed immediately by en bloc resection of the dominant right posterior temporal lesion. TFE3 immunostaining and ASPL-TFE3 chimeric transcript detection of the brain tumor confirmed metastatic ASPS. The specimen was strongly positive for PD-L1 (tumor proportion score [TPS] 90%). Based on emerging data for PD-L1 ICI in ASPS, atezolizumab was initiated.[,,]
Atezolizumab was started 2 weeks after surgery (1200 mg dose every 21-day cycle). After 4 cycles, PET imaging showed continued radiotracer uptake in the left vastus lateralis and femur. MRI brain at that time showed no evidence of recurrence in the postoperative bed, a PR and reduced T2-FLAIR signal of the thalamic lesion and stable appearance of the posterior frontal lobe lesion (RECIST 1.1). Following 7 cycles, repeat MRI femur showed a PR of the primary lesion from 4.2 × 4.1 cm to 2.3 × 2.1 cm (RECIST 1.1) [ and ]. Approximately 5 weeks following the MRI femur, the patient underwent resection of the primary and adjacent metastatic femoral lesions, which although unappreciable on examination, had remained hypermetabolic on PET imaging . Pathology noted 75% necrosis/ fibrosis in the primary lesion and CR of the femoral metastasis. At present, 15 months following initial diagnosis, the patient has received 14 cycles. Review of CT chest, MRI brain, and CT femur shows no recurrence of the left lower extremity disease or the dominant right posterior temporal lesion . A faint linear enhancing focus remains at the posterior aspect of the right thalamus and the posterior right frontal lobe lesion has decreased in size from 4 mm to 3 mm , with unchanged peritumoral edema. No new appreciable lesions were noted [-].