A 37-year-old woman found a slow-growing nodule under the skin of the surgical scar on the umbilicus which caused periodic pain and presented to the Dermatology Department of West China Hospital, Sichuan University (Chengdu, China) on March 29, 2019 for treatment. Histological analysis of a fine needle aspiration biopsy of the nodule suggested endometriosis.
Umbilical nodules appeared at the incision site of the original laparoscopic cannula at the lower edge of the umbilicus about 4 years prior, which had gradually increased from 0.5 cm to approximately 1.5 cm in diameter and were accompanied by pain during menstruation.
The patient had undergone laparoscopic ovarian cyst removal and bilateral salpingoplasty at the Department of Reproductive Endocrinology of our hospital 6 years prior. After cyst removal, pathological examination had led to the diagnosis of endometrial cyst.
The patient’s vital signs were normal. Abdominal examination revealed no tenderness or rebound tenderness. At the incision of the original laparoscopic cannula at the lower edge of the umbilicus, three brown hard nodules of different sizes were detected, with the maximum diameter of about 1.5 cm. No redness or ulceration was found on the surface of the nodules . The boundary between the nodules and surrounding tissues was clear.
Fine needle biopsy of the umbilical nodule confirmed the diagnosis of umbilical endometriosis. Positive expression of the immunohistochemical markers’ estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and p63 was found in the infiltrated glands of the dermis; in addition, progesterone receptor and cluster of differentiation 10 were expressed in the periglandular interstitial space. Ki67 was about 10% positive in the gland and interstitium. Serum level of tumor marker carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 39.1 U/mL and that of carbohydrate antigen 12-5 was 19.7 U/mL.
No superficial ultrasound examination of the abdominal wall was performed because the nodules could be seen clearly by the naked eye. Transvaginal Doppler showed that the endometrial echo was uneven, with a slightly strong echo (endometrial polyp could not be excluded). A cyst about 1.5 to 2.9 cm in diameter was present on both ovaries (chocolate cyst of the ovary is likely).