A 77-year-old man was referred for surgical treatment for mitral valve regurgitation. There was a history of reflux esophagitis and his chief complaint was dyspnea on exertion during the previous 2 months. A physical examination revealed a pansystolic murmur at the apex. Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm and left ventricular hypertrophy, while echocardiography revealed severe mitral regurgitation due to A2-A3 prolapse with a dilated left ventricle (end-diastolic dimension/end-systolic dimension = 56/35 mm) and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (EF = 65%). A coronary angiogram was normal.
Upon admission, laboratory test results showed the following: leukocytes 1500/μL, neutrophils 190/μL, hemoglobin 11.3 g/dL, and platelets 106 × 103/μL. The patient was diagnosed with MDS by a hematologist, who advised us to administer G-CSF until the neutrophil count became greater than 1000/μL. No transfusion of packed red blood cells (RBCs) or platelet concentration (PC) was required.
A subcutaneous injection of G-CSF was given 12 days prior to surgery and the neutrophil count (3470/μL) gradually improved . The patient underwent a MICS-mitral procedure through the fourth intercostal space with moderate hypothermia. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) established via the right femoral artery and vein, along with antegrade and retrograde cardioplegia. The mitral valve was exposed through a left atriotomy, and torn chordae and prolapse of the A3 lesion were demonstrated. Two pairs of artificial chordae were implanted into posterior papillary muscle tissue and used for the anterior mitral leaflet of A3. An annular ring prosthesis (3D Memo Rechord #30) was used to fix the mitral annulus. During the operation, activated coagulation time was maintained at 349–612 s, and 2 units of packed RBCs, 4 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 40 units of PC were transfused in the operating room. Operation, CPB, and aortic cross-clamping times were 351, 209, and 143 min, respectively.
The postoperative course was uneventful. There was no bleeding tendency and re-exploration for bleeding was not required. The patient was stable and was successfully extubated 37 h post surgery. Postoperatively, an injection of G-CSF, along with antibiotic prophylaxis of cefazolin (CEZ) and piperacillin (PIPC) were administered. The neutrophil count remained between 865 and 5712/μL . Postoperative transfusions of 2 units of RBC and 40 units of PC were required. There was no complication with infection, while postoperative echocardiography revealed trivial mitral regurgitation with a normal ejection fraction. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 23 after confirming no sign of infection and that neutrophil numbers was within a normal range.