A 47-year-old female with a history of asthma, hystero-oophorectomy, obesity, arterial hypertension, urinary tract infections, hypertriglyceridemia, and lumbar vertebra infarct was referred to our department in 1998 for cutaneous vasculitis.
Since the age of 23 years, she had had frequent flares of palpable purpura on the lower legs, with occasional arthralgia of the metacarpophalangeal joints, elbows, and knees, associated with hematuria and proteinuria. The flares were triggered by bronchitis episodes and bipedalism. On several occasions, they also appeared after urinary tract infections. Variable doses of prednisone were required to manage the flares.
In November 1998, the patient was admitted to the nephrology department. A kidney biopsy revealed mesangial proliferation with IgA deposits, and IgAN was diagnosed. She was referred to the dermatology department because of a palpable purpura flare on the lower legs. A biopsy of a lesion showed a perivascular inflammatory infiltrate composed of neutrophils with leukocytoclasia, extravasated red cells, and fibrin deposit in the vessel walls, consistent with the diagnosis of leukocytoclastic vasculitis . A direct immunofluorescence study performed on involved and perilesional skin revealed IgA, C’3, and fibrinogen in the walls of the skin vessels . No other immunoglobulins were detected.
A laboratory test in November 1998 revealed urine protein 0.42 g/24 h and 2–3 red blood cells per high power field. Speckled antinuclear antibodies were positive at a titer 1/40, and the anti-DNA antibodies were negative. The level of IgA was 449 mg/100 mL (normal value 69–382). Hemoglobin, leukocytes, liver and kidney function tests, antiphospholipid, antistreptolysin, anti-HBV, anti-HCV, levels of IgG, IgM, rheumatoid factor, complement CH50, C’3, C’4 cryoglobulins, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were all within normal range or negative.
After the diagnosis of IgAV was made, the patient presented frequent flares of cutaneous vasculitis. These flares were treated with prednisone at different doses and for variable time periods. We attempted to lower the dose of prednisone by administering azathioprine, colchicine, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, and benzathine penicillin, but none of these treatments showed any efficacy to control flares.
In 2002, IgA levels were 769 mg/100 mL (normal value 69–382) and IgAκ monoclonal gammopathy was detected. Bence-Jones urine protein test was negative. The patient was referred to the hematology department. No further treatment was required.
In June 2004, she presented several flares of widespread cutaneous vasculitis involving the lower legs, abdomen, and arms. Several courses of oral prednisone were administered at a maximal dose of 45 mg/day. In January 2008, kidney function tests were normal. However, in view of the persistent flares of extensive cutaneous lesions, mycophenolate mofetil 360 mg b.i.d. was initiated to reduce prednisone exposure. No improvement was observed, and a dose of prednisone 20 mg every 2 days was maintained.
In January 2009, therapy with O3FA capsules containing 460 mg eicosapentaenoic acid and 380 mg of docosahexaenoic acid t.i.d. was added to the oral corticotherapy due to the persistence of cutaneous activity. The flares diminished in frequency and intensity, allowing prednisone to be tapered down and stopped in January 2011. O3FA was also slowly tapered down to 1 capsule every 2 days. However, in May 2012, a cutaneous flare again appeared on the legs, and the O3FA dose was increased to 1 capsule per day. In July 2012, a new flare of vasculitis appeared on the lower legs and abdomen, disappearing after increasing the O3FA dose to 1 capsule 3 times a day. This dose was tapered down to 1 capsule a day in November 2012. The patient has continued to take this same dose of O3FA daily and has been free of flares to date. The most recent laboratory tests, in October 2015, included IgA level, antinuclear antibodies, and urine analysis; all were within the normal range.