A 28-year-old white woman checked herself into an outpatient clinic of psychosomatic medicine and psychotherapy (PSO) for the first time. She reported having a vacuum-assisted child delivery 6 weeks prior, during which significant blood loss led to the surgical removal of her placenta. Since then, she could not bond with her baby and had been experiencing feelings of emptiness as well as a decrease in energy and general happiness. In addition, she had withdrawn from social activities. Later, she began experiencing migraines. During her visit, she was short-spoken, emotionless, and gave conflicting responses to simple questions. When asked about her mood, she indicated that she was feeling very relaxed.
Three days later, the patient was referred to the psychiatric emergency room for ambiguous psychopathology and progressive headaches. Upon arrival, she was not able to explain why she was in treatment at the outpatient clinic for PSO. The patient’s mother added that her daughter had barely spoken or answered questions over the past 2 days. The patient later reported that she had stopped breastfeeding owing to insufficient lactation while also experiencing sharp, bilateral headaches (intensity 7, 0 = no pain, 10 = unimaginable pain) without noticeable triggers. These headaches lasted about 10 minutes, occurred several times per day, and had appeared for the first time 6 days before her second visit. She also described having nausea and flashes of light in her left eye. Painkillers did not relieve the migraines during the day, but she slept comfortably and pain-free at night. She did not take any other drugs, and she had never before had mental disorders or other relevant diseases. Her micturition and defecation were normal. She did not have night sweats, fever, or weight loss. Her social network was supportive. There was nothing of note in her family medical history. A psychopathological assessment demonstrated mild disorientation (date indeterminable, wrong month), a severely impaired capacity to concentrate (not able to solve easy arithmetic problems), deficits in long-term memory, poverty of speech (sparse replies to questions, sometimes delayed or unanswered), a flat affect, and feelings of helplessness. There were no indications of rumination, incoherence, delusions, perceptual disturbances, movement disorders, or aggressive thoughts toward herself, her baby, or others. The targeted physical examination did not show pathologies.
On the basis of the acute onset of these symptoms after a complicated birth and a normal physical examination, she could have been diagnosed with severe postpartum depression. Nevertheless, the sudden onset of severe headaches with flashes of light, disorientation, and long-term memory impairment raised suspicions. Therefore, a neurologist was consulted. Blood analysis results ruled out the possibility of a cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and, although it showed mild anemia and leukocytosis, revealed normal C-reactive protein and D-dimer levels. In response to the recurrent headaches that appeared to be depression-related, recommendations were made for the patient to take a fixed intake of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the next few days.
As a result of the conspicuous psychopathology, the patient was advised to undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), but she ultimately declined. Two days later, the patient was admitted for acute right-sided hemiparesis. A brain MRI scan displayed a contrast-enhanced mass lesion in the left frontal lobe . The patient underwent urgent tumor resection that revealed a GBM harboring an isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 mutation (IDH1). After 10 days, the patient was discharged with a substantially improved psychopathology and without neurological deficits. The subsequent concordant radiochemotherapy, which was initiated 2 weeks after discharge, was tolerated very well. Owing to chemotherapy, the patient was not able to breastfeed her baby. At the last follow-up, almost 3 years after tumor resection, the patient was in excellent mental and physical condition with no evidence of tumor recurrence.