A 29-year-old man was referred to our hospital for MMD treatment. The patient had experienced transient left-sided hemiparesis when he was 11-years-old, and he was eventually diagnosed with MMD at 12 years of age. He was prescribed aspirin at a previous hospital. Sixteen years had passed uneventfully; however, at 28 years of age, he presented with a sudden headache. Computed tomography revealed right thalamic hemorrhage with ventricular hemorrhage [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed MMD (Suzuki grade 4) development of the thalamic channel with hemorrhage in the ipsilateral hemisphere [-]. We performed superficial temporal artery-to-middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) bypass and encephalo-duromyo-arterio-pericranial synangiosis (EDMAPS) in the right hemisphere for the prevention of rebleeding. The postoperative course was uneventful. After 3 months, STA-MCA bypass and EDMAPS were performed in the left hemisphere. DSA performed 3 months after the last surgery showed patency of the direct bypass and development of transdural anastomosis due to the indirect bypass. In addition, a pseudoaneurysm was observed in the right posterior branch of the MMA [ and b]. The pseudoaneurysm was located immediately under the edge of the craniotomy site .
demonstrated the intraoperative photo of STAMCA bypass and EDMAPS on ipsilateral hemisphere of pseudoaneurysm development. The arrow showed the location of pseudoaneurysm hereafter. The damage to MMA by craniotomy or dura cut may be a cause of aneurysm development.
We planned to perform the internal trapping under general anesthesia. After intravenous administration of 4000 U of heparin, the right external carotid artery was catheterized with a 4-Fr guiding sheath (ASAHI FUZBUKI, Asahi Intech, Japan). Subsequently, a distal access catheter (Guidepost, Tokai Medical Products, Japan) and microcatheter (Echelon-10, Medtronic, USA) were navigated into the right MMA. Microangiography of the posterior trunk of MMA revealed transdural anastomosis by indirect bypass . The aneurysm size was 4.2 mm × 3.9 mm and neck length was 1.1 mm . Fortunately, aneurysm neck was small against our expectations; as a result, we could embolized aneurysm tightly without MMA occlusion.
The microcatheter was navigated into the pseudoaneurysm, and the pseudoaneurysm was embolized using five platinum coils (Optima Coil System™, BALT, USA) . Angiography after embolization showed complete occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm, patency of the MMA, and transdural anastomosis . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged without neurological deficits. Follow-up DSA performed 1 month after the endovascular treatment showed no recanalization of the pseudoaneurysm [ and ].