A 45-year-old previously healthy Asian man presented with a history of intermittent fever with chills and rigors over 2 months’ duration. There were associated night sweats, loss of appetite, and loss of weight. There was a history of transient macular rash at the onset of the fever which spontaneously resolved without treatment. Generalized lymphadenopathy was noted by our patient mainly involving cervical, axillary, and inguinal regions over 1 month which became extremely painful a few days prior to his presentation. He had synovitis involving lower limb small joints following the presentation, progressing to lower limb large joints and ultimately upper limb small and large joints over 3 days. He did not have past history or family history of arthritis and he had an unremarkable past medical history. He worked as a mason but had never been exposed to toxic environmental conditions to his knowledge and there was no promiscuous sexual behavior. He did not consume alcohol and he did not smoke tobacco.
On examination at the initial presentation he was emaciated, febrile, and pale. There were bilateral, firm, matted lymph nodes of varying sizes of 2–3 cm in the cervical, axillary, and inguinal regions which were tender. There was tender hepatosplenomegaly. The rest of the examination was normal. However, a few days following admission there was bilateral symmetrical polyarthritis involving both small and large joints of upper and lower limbs with lower limb predominance. There was marked synovitis of distal and proximal interphalangeal joints of lower limbs compared to the rest of his joints.
Laboratory investigations revealed high white cell counts with normocytic anemia. Platelets were within the normal range. His inflammatory markers were high and they were in a rising trend following the onset of arthritis. His liver and renal functions were normal. Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, anti-nuclear antibodies, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 1 and 2 antibodies, Epstein–Barr virus immunoglubulin G (IgG) and immunoglubulin M (IgM), cytomegalovirus IgG and IgM, and Toxoplasma antibodies were all negative or within normal limits. His serum uric acid was marginally elevated. An X-ray of his hands and feet showed soft tissue swelling without evidence of erosions or osteopenia.
His first lymph node biopsy showed a reactive lymph node. The biopsy was repeated due to a strong suspicion of lymphoma. The second lymph node biopsy with immunohistochemistry showed large pleomorphic cells with CD20 positivity and small lymphoid cells with CD3 positivity. The population of T cells was high, but the presence of B cells arranged in cohesive clusters and sheets favored a high grade DLBCL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of his neck, chest, and abdomen staged him at Ann Arbor stage IV.
He was started on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents and colchicine for the arthritis but there was no response to treatment. Treatment with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and prednisolone (RCHOP) commenced; following the first cycle of therapy, his arthritis showed marked response with complete resolution of the synovitis. He completed his chemotherapy but intermittently succumbed to infections. His synovitis completely resolved following chemotherapy.