A 21-year-old woman with severe fixed dystonia was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment in July 2017. The patient’s medical history showed that she had birth hypoxia. During her first years of life, she presented unwanted movements and dystonic posturing. At the age of 2 years, she had developed generalized dystonia with severe spasticity and was diagnosed with CP. Her symptoms were refractory to medical therapy and SPR.
She has experienced generalized dystonia with severe spasticity and her speech was also affected. These conditions led her to move using a wheelchair. On admission, she presented with uncontrollable facial expressions and movements, and showed increased muscle tone in the face and the extremities . The patient received GPi DBS in our department in July 2017. GPi DBS were located correctly ; however, little stimulation effect was observed after surgery. Her clinical symptoms gradually deteriorated regardless of repeatedly programming . At a 2-year follow-up visit, she was unable to sit for prolonged periods of time due to severe spasticity in her trunk and extremities.
In July 2019, the patient consulted our hospital again for further treatment. Upon admission, the patient presented with involuntary movements in multiple body parts including eyes, mouth, neck, trunk, and all four extremities . During examination, muscle spasms were found in all four extremities, especially in the left arm, right leg, flexion of the left elbow, and right knee. Due to truncal dystonia, the patient was unable to stand and needed a back support while sitting. In addition, the patient’s speech was laborious, non-fluent, and incomprehensible . The patient also experienced pain in the extremities (visual analog scale score = 6; Burke-Fahn-Marsden dystonia rating scale movement sub score [BFMDRS] = 93.5; and the disability sub score = 21). The modified Ashworth scale (MAS) for rating the spasticity was three and four for the right arm and other limbs, respectively. The score for quality of life using the 36-item short form health survey (SF-36) was 123, and moderate depression was revealed by a Beck Depression Inventory score of 14.
Due to limited treatment options and the potential role of the cerebellum in dystonia and spasticity, we proceeded with cerebellar DBS. The ethics committee of the Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine approved this procedure. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents. The surgical procedure is described in detail in Figures , legends and the MRI images for determining the coordinates of the target SCPs and DNs are shown in Figure .