A 35-year-old Caucasian female was referred to endocrinology for assessment and management of query malignancy and metabolic bone disease. She was otherwise healthy and had recently relocated to our center. She was taking pantoprazole for suspected gastroesophageal reflux disease but had otherwise no known chronic medical conditions. Her only other medications were oral contraceptive pill, calcium, and vitamin D3.
On detailed history, she initially presented to her family physician 9 months prior with a 1-year history of nonspecific epigastric pain. She denied any constitutional symptoms including fever, chills, or night sweats. However, she reported a remote episode of 10-lb weight loss that she attributed to personal stress, which she regained by the time she was assessed in the endocrinology clinic. She denied bone or muscle pain, previous fragility fractures or vertebral fractures, and changes in bowel or urinary habits and stated that her menstrual cycles were regular. She smoked marijuana regularly for the last 15 years and denied alcohol intake or tobacco use. Her physical examination was significant for a palpable lymph node in her left axilla, which was soft and immobile. The rest of her physical examination was largely unremarkable, with normal cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal, and screening endocrinological exam for thyroid nodules and cushingoid appearance. She had no family history of metabolic bone disorder. Her epigastric pain was felt secondary to gastroesophageal reflux disease, and she was started on a trial of pantoprazole.
Her initial blood work with her family physician revealed hemoglobin of 137 g/L, leukocytes of 5.6 × 109/L with normal differential, platelets of 192 × 109/L, creatinine of 55 μmol/L, sodium of 143 mmol/L, potassium of 3.9 mmol/L, chloride of 107 mmol/L, sodium bicarbonate of 26 mmol/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 12 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 14 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 94 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 123 U/L, and mild elevation of both pancreatic enzymes amylase and lipase. The elevated pancreatic enzymes prompted a CT scan of her abdomen, which showed no radiologic evidence of pancreatitis, but revealed multiple other findings including innumerable low-density splenic lesions, a horseshoe kidney, and multiple osteolytic lesions throughout the axial skeleton. These findings prompted referrals to hematology, medical oncology, and endocrinology for query malignancy and metabolic bone disease.
Further blood work from consultants revealed absence of monoclonal antibodies on serum and urine electrophoresis, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) of 0.83 mIU/L, parathyroid hormone (PTH) of 3.7 pmol/L, cancer antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3) of 10 kU/L, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 2.8 μg/L, and a normal Papanicolaou test. Blood work was remarkable for elevated free kappa light chains of 26.42 mg/L with upper limit of normal of 19.6 mg/L, elevated kappa-to-lambda ratio of 2.14 with upper limit of normal of 1.65, and low 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 level at 21 nmol/L (reference range 75–150 nmol/L).
Further imaging including a contrast-enhanced chest CT demonstrated a 6.5 × 13.1 × 4.9 cm circumscribed homogeneous hypodense soft tissue mass occupying the anterior mediastinum extending from the thoracic inlet to just inferior to the thyroid, multiple tiny lung hypointensities in a peribronchovascular distribution with slight upper lobe predominance, a 1.8 cm low-attenuating lesion in the inferior margin of the left axilla, numerous hypointense splenic lesions, and, again, numerous osteolytic lesions in the axial skeleton . Of these osteolytic lesions, some had sclerotic margins with cortical breach at the manubrium. This was further investigated with a bone scan that found no scintigraphic evidence of radiotracer uptake corresponding to the numerous bone lesions . Skeletal survey was also done, which redemonstrated the lytic lesions in the axial skeleton, with the most prominent lesion noted in the pelvis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the chest confirmed a cystic mass in the mediastinum, without evidence for enhancement following administration of gadolinium . MRI also confirmed a cystic lesion in the left axilla and showed multifocal well-circumscribed T2 hyperintense bone lesions in the spine and pelvis . There was no evidence of spinal cord compression or fractures seen on MRI. Additionally, MRI demonstrated multiple T2 hyperintense splenic lesions, which were too small to characterize but were suggestive of cystic lymphangiomas . A bone mineral density study was obtained, and bone density and Z-score were within the expected range for her age- and gender-matched control. Thyroid ultrasound showed a sub-centimeter left thyroid nodule with no suspicious features of malignancy. She also received a mammogram that showed no evidence of suspicious breast lesions.
Full upper and lower endoscopies were performed with biopsies taken, all of which were negative for malignancy. She was evaluated by the thoracic surgery service at an outside institution for a CT guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of the mediastinal mass. The results ruled out malignancy, but the biopsy was not available for review. Subsequently, she was assessed by the orthopedics service, and an open bone biopsy of the left iliac crest was performed. This showed normal bone marrow cells with no primary or secondary malignancy. General surgery was consulted for an excisional biopsy of the left axillary lesion to confirm the diagnosis. Pathological examination showed characteristic features including dilated and cystic structures lined by endothelial cells with no atypia or evidence of malignancy . Taken together, the constellation of radiological findings on CT and MRI in addition to the pathology findings confirmed the diagnosis of GLA.
She continued to do well on follow-up, and her epigastric pain had resolved on a course of pantoprazole. She did not suffer from any fractures or other local symptoms related to her GLA and had no respiratory symptoms despite the mediastinal mass. She was also counseled about the importance of bone health measures with adequate calcium in the diet and vitamin D3 supplements as well as regular exercise to strengthen her bones. She was counseled to seek medical attention if she developed symptoms, with a plan to follow up in clinic yearly.