A 70-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to hospital from a convalescence center with symptoms of fatigue, fever, decreased oral intake, and increasing shortness of breath on exertion. The patient was three weeks after coronary artery bypass grafting. His postoperative course included multiple blood transfusions secondary to intraoperative losses. The patient denied any chest pain, cough, nausea, diarrhoea, night sweats, or urinary symptoms concerning for post-op infection. His past medical history was remarkable for hepatic sarcoidosis, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and stage 3 chronic kidney disease.
On admission, clinical examination revealed a temperature of 39.6 degrees Celsius, heart rate was 80 beats per minute, blood pressure was 122/50 mmHg, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, and he was saturating at 96% on room air. Heart sounds 1 and 2 were present and normal with no added sounds, and minimal crepitations in the left lung base were noted on auscultation. The abdomen was soft and nontender with no organomegaly. The patient was alert and oriented.
Laboratory results are displayed in . Chest X-ray revealed evidence of his recent sternotomy. A septic screen was performed with blood cultures and midstream urine sample taken for culture and sensitivity. The patient was commenced on IV piperacillin and tazobactam and admitted to the ward with the initial diagnosis of pneumonia.
Over the next two weeks, the patient continued to deteriorate both clinically and biochemically. CT thorax indicated small bilateral pleural effusions and a small pericardial effusion. Transthoracic and transoesophageal echo did not indicate any evidence of haemodynamic compromise caused by the pericardial effusion. He was reviewed by the cardiothoracic team who advised conservative management.
MSU and blood cultures did not grow any pathogen. The patient developed pancytopenia and worsening LFTs .
The patient became frankly jaundiced with scleral icterus. His levels of consciousness began to fluctuate, and he was spiking temperatures, desaturating, and becoming increasingly hypotensive. Ultrasound of his liver did not indicate any intra- or extrabiliary tract obstruction, focal liver lesion, or sonographic evidence of acute cholecystitis. CT abdomen indicated widespread lymphadenopathy which was likely reactive.
Serology for hepatitis B and C and HIV was negative. Serum plasma electrophoresis did not detect monoclonal bands. Alpha 1 antitrypsin and ceruloplasmin were within normal limits. Antinuclear, neutrophil-cytoplasmic, smooth muscle, mitochondrial, and liver-kidney antibodies were all negative. Iron overload studies indicated the following: iron within normal limits, a low total iron binding capacity, raised transferrin saturation, and ferritin of greater than 30,000 ug/L. Serum triglycerides were elevated at 3.22 mmol/L, and fibrinogen was noted to be low at 1.2 g/L. EBV DNA was detected using PCR and EBV. Nuclear antigen IgG became positive. There was no evidence of serological analysis being performed in this patient prior to surgery, nor was it evident in his medical chart from previous admissions.
The patient met criteria for haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, likely driven by EBV infection. Bone marrow biopsy supported the diagnosis with evidence of active phagocytosis . The patient was commenced on high-dose dexamethasone and reviewed by haematology with further molecular testing confirming the diagnosis.
The patient made a full recovery and was subsequently discharged back to a convalescence center for further rehabilitation.