The 22-year-old female Caucasian patient was admitted to the local hospital for a 2 d history of abdominal pain. The patient had no relevant medical history and there was no relevant family history. The patient worked as a bartender and used to smoke 10 cigarettes per day. The patient declared no allergies, was 170 cm tall and weighed 60 kg. Upon the admission a tenderness of the mesogastrium was observed. A Blood test showed leukocytosis 13.1 × 109/L (ref. 4.0 × 109/L-10.0 × 109/L) and an elevation of pancreatic amylase level 246 U/L (ref. 13-53 U/L). The diagnosis of idiopathic, mild acute pancreatitis was established. The initial ultrasound screening had reported liquid collection near the head of the pancreas. Conservative treatment led to complete regression of symptoms, with laboratory test values returned normal. The patient was dismissed but recurrent episodes of abdominal pain, anorexia, and weight loss persisted. A CT scan was performed, which confirmed the presence of a peripancreatic, thick-walled collection (sized 5.6 cm × 2.8 cm × 2.7 cm), located between the head of the pancreas and the posterior wall of the antrum of the stomach . In the context of the recent pancreatitis, the collection was interpreted as a pancreatic pseudocyst. Given the persisting symptoms, a decision was made to perform an endoscopic ultrasound guided transgastric drainage of the pseudocyst. During gastrointestinal endoscopy a prominence of a posterior gastric wall was observed . Two plastic stents were introduced transmurally into the cavity of the cyst. The patient’s symptoms receded completely. To clarify the relationship between the cyst and the pancreatic duct, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed. Here, pancreatic duplication was described for the first time. The accessory pancreatic lobe was located ventrally and had a separate ductal system. The lobe communicated with the mass of the cyst localised between the pancreas and the antrum of the stomach. The pancreatic duct of the accessory lobe was connected to the main pancreatic duct (of Wirsung) within the body of the pancreas . The stents were extracted through an endoscopic procedure after 6 mo. The patient later again developed recurring attacks of abdominal pain and anorexia. Recurrence of acute pancreatitis was not observed.