In August 2020, a 30-year-old female patient presented with a one-week history of floaters in the right eye (OD). She had past medical history of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with chromosomal translocation t(1;19)(q23; p13.3) TCF3/PBX1 diagnosed in July 2018. Her treatment began in August 2018, with 6-mercaptopurine, vincristine, methotrexate, prednisone, cytarabine, idarubicin, prophylactic intrathecal methotrexate and dexamethasone. Systemic remission was achieved in May 2020. Before hospital discharge, neurological and ophthalmological exams were normal.
Due to her visual complaints, she was referred for an ophthalmological examination. Visual acuity was 20/20 OU, biomicroscopic examination and pupillary reflexes were unremarkable. On ophthalmoscopy, there was peripapillary nerve fiber layer edema with protrusion of a white mass with a “creamy” aspect from the optic disc on both eyes (OU). There were small traces of white “creamy” material on inferior vitreous on OD. Macula was normal OU. Visual field showed enlargement of the blind spot in OD and was normal in the left eye (OS) . Orbit and head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed small low intensity nodules on optic nerve head OU, which were classified as compatible with ALL infiltration . Neurological examination was normal. Lumbar puncture (LP) showed normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) open pressure (17 cm), neoplastic cells and positive immunofluorescence markers for leukemia. There were no other sites of CNS affection. The final diagnosis was of bilateral optic nerve leukemic infiltration as initial site for disease relapse.
Bone marrow transplant was programmed after full hyper-CAVD drug combination chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, vincristine sulfate, doxorubicin hydrochloride and dexamethasone) and intrathecal methotrexate cycle, which began in August 2020. Local radiotherapy OU was planned but on the third day after starting chemotherapy (D3), ophthalmoscopy showed remarkable improvement OU . Therefore, radiotherapy was postponed). On D10 the patient had no ophthalmological complaints, no visual field defects, clear vitreous OD and marked improvement of the disc appearance OU . Local radiotherapy planning was therefore cancelled. On D21, ophthalmoscopy revealed small reminiscences of optic disc leukemic infiltration on OD . Immunosuppressive therapy was initiated for bone marrow transplant and no further photographical registration could be done until hospital discharge.
In December 2020, the patient was submitted to an allogenic bone marrow transplant. In February 2021 she had no ophthalmic complaints, and her exams were all normal. On ophthalmoscopy, OD showed minor optic disc pallor and OS was normal . Acute lymphoblastic leukemia remitted, and the patient is being followed up closely until the date. Upon any changes in the patient’s status, prompt necessary treatment will be initiated.