A 54-year-old male construction worker and farmer, a resident in Sanya city, Hainan province, was admitted to Hainan General Hospital on July 14, 2012, and complained of chills, fever, cough, chest tightness, pain in left thigh and popliteal fossa, and left lower limb swelling for 4 days. Ultrasonography showed a slightly stronger echo in his left common femoral vein, revealing venous thrombosis. Imaging findings of X-ray on July 14 showed that flaky blurred shadows with multiple small patches scattered in bilateral lungs, with uneven density and ill-defined boundary . Furthermore, computed tomography (CT) on July 17 showed the mildly-enhanced irregular nodule with the size of 1.5 ✕ 1.7 cm in the left upper. The multiple point- and strip-like lesions scattered in the lower lobes . The contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrated strip-like filling defect in the left and right pulmonary arteries and their branches . The bilateral pleural effusion was revealed and no abnormality was discovered in the structure of the chest wall. Moreover, in Fig. a, chest X-ray revealed multiple nodular opacities in bilateral lungs (including retrocardiac area), in Fig. b, c, and e, chest CT revealed multiple nodular opacities in bilateral lungs, and in Fig. d showed a peripheral wedge-shape opacity in right upper lobe. Taken together, these hinted the occurrence of septic PE in our patient. There were slightly larger mediastinal lymph nodes, bilateral pleural effusion, low-density lesions in the right lower kidney, and splenomegaly with multiple low-density lesions. His plasma D-dimers were 8.24 μg/ml (normal range≦0.5 μg/ml). Therefore, the diagnosis of DVT at left lower extremity and PE was made. At admission, the patient’s body temperature rose up to 39 °C, and his blood examinations, including leucocyte, neutrophil percentage and C-reactive protein, elevated significantly over reference ranges. He was suspected of severe infection, and levofloxacin and cephalosporin were empirically administrated the day after his hospitalization. The patient refused the implantation of inferior vena cava filter. After July 17, he was treated with daily subcutaneous injections of low molecular weight heparin to reduce the risk of further thrombosis. Despite anticoagulation and antimicrobial therapy, the patient presented continuous high fever, chest tightness, cough and expectoration, shortness of breath, and antibiotic was transferred to cefoperazone/tazobactam.
His coagulation results were normal except for the elevated fibrinogen level (4.17 g/L, normal rang 2~4 g/L). Blood examination demonstrated hyperglycemia (blood glucose7.98 mmol/L, normal range 3.89~6.11 mmol/L) and hyperlipemia (triglyceride 2.59 mmol/L, normal range 0.33~1.69 mmol/L), but antibody examinations for human immune deficiency virus, hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus were all negative. Expectorated sputum smear revealed a large amount of polymorphonuclear leucocytes and gram-negative bacilli. On July18 to 22, his blood, sputum and bone marrow grew B. pseudomallei, respectively. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) showed that the strain was susceptible to all antimicrobial agents with breakpoint value in CLSI.
On July 20, the patient began receiving antimicrobial therapy of imipenem. However, 4 days later, his condition dramatically deteriorated, and presented as heart failure, renal failure and persistent high fever (up to 40.1 °C). On July 25, his family members received the medical crisis notice of life-threatening respiratory and circulatory failure. Considering the low probability of his survival, his family decided to take him home in accordance to the local customs of not dying in hospital. Without proper treatment the patient died 3 days later after he was discharged.
After 24 h of incubation on blood agar at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere, the B. pseudomallei B86 grew into round, wet, convex, non-hemolytic, gray-white colonies, with1mm in size. But after another 24 h, the colonies turned dry, flat, a little hemolytic, and yellow with a little metallic luster, and with the smell of earthy mildew. After 72 h, the hemolytic zone, metallic luster and smell became stronger, colonies wrinkled as wheel-shaped . Phenotypic identification by DL-96NE (Zhuhai DL biotech, China) revealed B. pseudomallei, and the identification rate was 99.5%. AST was performed using E-test method (Liofilchem, Italy), the MIC results were as follows: susceptible to imipenem (MIC: 0.5 μg/ml), ceftazidim (MIC: 1 μg/ml), amoxicillin/clavulanate (MIC: 2 μg/ml), doxycycline (MIC: 2 μg/ml), and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (MIC: 2 μg/ml).
To genetically characterize the isolate, the 16S rRNA sequencing was conducted. Sequence analysis of the 1385 bp-segment of 16S rRNA gene of BP86 demonstrated an identity of 99.93% with B. pseudomallei K96243 (GenBank accession no. NC_006351.1). The whole genome of the pathogen was also sequenced using a whole-genome shotgun strategy based on the Illumina HiSeq platform. The selected optimal assembly results were compared with the seven housekeeping genes of B. pseudomallei for MLST by reference to , and the determined sequence type of BP86 was ST 46.