A 12-year-old Saudi boy of Arab ethnicity, with no past relevant medical, surgical, family, or psychosocial history, presented to the King Saud Medical City emergency department with bleeding per rectum and mild abdominal pain 3 days after blunt abdominal trauma while playing football. On examination, his abdomen was slightly tender and bowel sounds were present. Initially, focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) showed mild intraperitoneal fluid in his pelvis. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen revealed mild pelvic hemoperitoneum, but there was no definite solid or hollow visceral injury. So, he was admitted to the general ward for serial abdominal observation. On admission to the surgical ward, he was stable with a heart rate (HR) of 86 beats per minute (bpm) and blood pressure (BP) of 100/70 mmHg. His hemoglobin (Hb) was 9.6 gm/dl. We kept him nil per mouth and a nasogastric tube was inserted. The intake and output chart was regularly calculated. Serial Hb monitoring showed a continuous fall in his Hb level during the following days. He continued to have altered rectal bleeding. On day 3 his Hb dropped to 6.1 gm/dl, despite having received 2 units of packed red blood cells (PRBC). He started to develop a mild fever with a temperature of 37.8 °C, tachycardia with a HR of 140 bpm, and the BP dropping to 70/40 mmHg. He was resuscitated and stabilized with intravenously administered crystalloid fluids and 2 units of PRBC. He did not require any inotropes or vasopressors. Due to this clinical deterioration, he was urgently taken to the operating room for further diagnostic and therapeutic management. The nasogastric tube revealed bile without hematemesis. After initiating general anesthesia, an on-table colonoscopy was performed to identify the bleeding site. There was altered blood within the whole colon and terminal ileum without a definite bleeding site. Therefore, we proceeded to a laparotomy. During the laparotomy, an injured Meckel’s diverticulum was identified as the source of the significant arterial bleeding . Proximal to the diverticulum the small bowel was collapsed and did not show any blood. The bleeding from a branch of the mesenteric artery was stopped, and the Meckel’s diverticulum was resected. Histology revealed vascular injury due to trauma and gastric mucosa within the diverticulum. He required another 2 units of PRBC transfusion during and after the operation, and this increased his Hb to 10.2 gm/dl. He remained stable after that and developed postoperative superficial surgical site infection on day 4. He was discharged home on postoperative day 7 with instructions for wound care at a local clinic and our out-patient department (OPD) follow up after 1 week. No further complications were found during his OPD visit, and he was discharged from our hospital .