A 84-year-old man (76.5Kg/174cm), treated with apixaban (5mg twice a day) for new-onset atrial fibrillation and known to have heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) of 35% due to amyloidosis and metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma at bone level diagnosed 2 years previously, was admitted to our hospital with NYHA stage III dyspnea and decompensated heart failure.
Blood tests showed high D-dimer levels (4515 ng/ml) and thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an acute type A aortic dissection.
He was admitted for emergency ascending aorta replacement surgery.
Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography revealed a moderate aortic regurgitation (regurgitant volume- 22.4 ml), with an ascending aorta diameter of 7 cm and a reduced ventricular ejection fraction of 35-40%.
The EuroScore-II pre-operative mortality risk estimate was 24.2 %.
The CPB circuit included a roller pump, a membrane oxygenator (Affinity FusionTM , Medtronic, Tolochenaz, Switzerland), a hard-shell reservoir (Affinity Fusion Cardiotomy/ venous Reservoir, Medtronic, Tolochenaz, Switzerland) with a 200 ml minimum operating level, a hemoconcentrator (Dideco DHF02, LivaNova, Sorin Group, Mirandola, Italia) and a cardioplegia device (Myotherm XP®, Medtronic, Tolochenaz, Switzerland). A NaCl 0.9% purged CytoSorb® cartridge was inserted between the recirculation line and the venous reservoir . Hemoadsorption was performed throughout the entire CPB duration.
Preoperatively, the patient presented thrombocytopenia (platelets, 144 g/l), stage II acute kidney failure (serum creatinine, 107 µmol/l). Activated clotting time (ACT) was 195 seconds, Partial thromboplastin time was 33 seconds and apixaban-specific anti-factor Xa activity (AFXaA) was 121 ng/ml .
After administration of 20,000 IU of non-fractioned heparin, the ACT reached 714 seconds. CPB was conducted in standard fashion (ph-stat) at normothermia. The ascending aorta was replaced with a 30 mm diameter Dacron tube. The duration of the surgical intervention was 5h53 with 109 min of CPB duration and 52 minutes of aortic cross-clamping.
After CPB weaning, heparin was reversed with 30,000 IU of protamine and final ACT was 161 seconds. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% and a discrete aortic regurgitation.
A total of 7 units of packed red blood cells, 2 unit of platelets, 8 units of fresh frozen plasma and 6 gramme of fibrinogen were administered to treat perioperative coagulopathy, as well as 3000 IU of prothrombin complex concentrate (Octaplex®) and 5 mg of recombinant factor VIIa (NovoSeven®).
The patient was transferred to ICU on 5 ug/kg/min of dobutamine and 0.35 ug/kg/min of norepinephrine. No adverse or any device-related side effects were documented during or after CytoSorb® treatment.
Postoperative chest tube drainage volume at 24h was 280 ml. Dobutamine was discontinued on the end of the first postoperative day, and norepinephrine at the 5th postoperative hour.
The patient was extubated 48h post-surgery, transferred to the ward on the 4th postoperative day and discharged on the 21st postoperative day.