A 69-year-old male was admitted to a hospital in June 2016 because of right arm asthenia and dysarthria and was diagnosed as having cerebral infarction in the left middle cerebral artery area along with deep vein thrombosis. ECG demonstrated normal sinus rhythm and echocardiography revealed no intra-cardiac thrombus or vegetation. The patient was discharged from the hospital following administration of apixaban.
In August 2016, the patient was readmitted to the hospital because of recurrent right arm asthenia and dysarthria. MRI revealed multiple cerebral infarctions in not only the bilateral cerebral hemispheres but also the cerebellum. Trousseau’s syndrome was suspected at this time. Apixaban administration was stopped and an intravenous drip of heparin was started. Echocardiography revealed mild mitral regurgitation with vegetation on the mitral valve. Although the laboratory data suggested no evidence of infection, ceftriaxone and gentamicin were added as a precaution against infective endocarditis. The patient was then referred to our hospital for surgery.
A CT scan revealed a left renal infarction and multiple swollen lymph nodes around both the abdominal aorta and stomach with antral hypertrophy, suggesting an advanced gastric cancer or lymphoma. As the vegetation showed no change despite the heparin and antibiotics therapy, cardiac surgery was performed on day 5 after referral. Extracorporeal circulation was instituted employing aortic and bicaval cannulation. After aortic cross-clamping, the mitral valve was exposed via a left atriotomy. Both mitral leaflets had vegetation on the surface, and major vegetation 15 mm in width was evident on the anterior leaflet . These were resected in their entirety and replaced with a 25-mm Epic bioprosthesis (Abbott). Continuous intravenous heparin administration was resumed on the following day, aiming for an activated partial thromboplastin time of between 40 and 50 s. Histologic analysis revealed that the vegetations were thrombi covered with vascular endothelium and that the mitral leaflet tissue was not damaged . On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed as having NBTE.
An endoscopic stomach biopsy was performed on the seventh postoperative day, and histologic analysis revealed non-solid poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with components of signet-ring cell carcinoma and moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The patient was definitively diagnosed as having Trousseau’s syndrome and, subsequently, transferred to the department of surgery. A Billroth I distal gastrectomy was performed, and a continuous intravenous heparin drip was employed during the operation. Histologic analysis revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with a component of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and metastatic tumor cells in the dissected lymph nodes (T4aN3bM0; stage IIIb). Further histologic analysis using alcian blue staining confirmed the presence of mucin in the tumor.
Subcutaneous heparin injection was introduced on day 8 after the gastric surgery, and the patient was discharged from our hospital in October after acquisition of the self-injection technique. During this long hospitalization, no thromboembolic events were observed. Chemotherapy was started in November. The patient has survived for 18 months after the diagnosis of Trousseau’s syndrome without any recurrence of thromboembolism.