A 39-year-old apparently healthy woman complained of fever and productive cough, in March, 2017. Her medical history did not reveal any specific illness, including acquired immune deficiency syndrome, collagen disease, and congenital immunodeficiency. She neither smoked nor consumed alcohol. Three days after onset (clinical day 3), she was admitted to a local general hospital, owing to progressive fever, malaise, and anorexia. On admission, her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 39.2 °C; blood pressure, 106/64 mmHg; pulse, 80 beats/min with a regular rhythm; SpO2, 97% in an air-conditioned room; and respiratory rate, 16 breaths/min. Cyanosis, cardiac murmur, and abnormal breath sounds were absent. The patient’s liver, spleen and lymph nodes were not palpable. Her white blood cell count was 5600/μL, with a shift to the left (81.2% neutrophils). Her aspartate aminotransferase level was 23 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 12 IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 206 IU/L; and C-reactive protein, 2.4 mg/dL (normal range, 0–0.3 mg/dL). Moreover, the patient’s chest X-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) images revealed subsegmental consolidation in her right lower lobe . After admission, administration of ampicillin/sulbactam (ABPC/SBT), at 6 g/day, was initiated under a clinical diagnosis of severe community-acquired pneumonia. Azithromycin (AZM) was also given at 2 g/day p.o. stat on clinical day 3 . Her indirect hemagglutination titer for MP was negative (1:40) on clinical day 4. After admission (clinical day 7), her fever had not subsided, and the pulmonary lesions had extended to the entire right lower lobe as well as to the left lower lobe . Thus, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and a transbronchial biopsy of the right lower lobe were performed. These examinations revealed nonspecific inflammation with neutrophil infiltration, but no pathogen was identified on pathological or microbiological examination. Contrary to the extremely rapid progression of the pulmonary lesions, her general condition had not significantly deteriorated, which was not compatible with severe bacterial infection. Owing to the unique clinical presentation, organizing pneumonia was considered. Therefore, treatment with prednisolone (PSL) was initiated at 40 mg/day from clinical day 7, and steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 1 g/day) was given on clinical days 10–12. However, neither her symptoms nor her pulmonary lesion improved . Rather, her respiratory failure had worsened significantly, after steroid pulse therapy (clinical day 14), as she required oxygen inhalation at 15 L/min on her motion; therefore, she was transferred to our hospital (Hokkaido University hospital) for further examination and treatment. Considering the existence of lower respiratory tract infection due to any rare pathogens, ABPC/SBT was changed to meropenem (MEPM) on clinical day 14, and levofloxacin (LVFX) and minocycline (MINO) were also initiated concurrently. On admission (clinical day 14), her indirect hemagglutination titer for MP had elevated to 1:2560, which was more than that identified on clinical day 4 at the referring hospital. Moreover, BAL fluid (BALF) examination, which was performed on the day of admission to our hospital, using Ribotest™ Mycoplasma (Asahi Kasei Pharma Corporation, Japan), yielded positive results for the mycoplasma antigen. No other pathogen was identified on microbiological examination of the BALF. Based on these clinical findings, we confirmed our case as severe life-threatening MP pneumonia. Thereafter, we continued empirical antibiotic therapy with LVFX, MINO and MEPM, and corticosteroid therapy with PSL at 40 mg/day. Two days later (clinical day 16), her fever, malaise, and hypoxia had resolved, and her pulmonary lesions had significantly improved . Therefore, we replaced the antibiotics with garenoxacin (GRNX) as monotherapy, at 400 mg/day, and reduced the dosage of PSL from clinical day 18. The patient was discharged on day 24, and administration of GRNX and corticosteroid therapy were continued until clinical day 30 . Subsequently, she had an uneventful recovery with no recurrence of fever or pneumonia.
Due to the rarity of our patient’s clinical course, we performed further molecular identification using DNA extracted from her BALF. DNA of MP was identified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with Mp181-F and Mp181-R primer pairs and an Mp181-P probe . A previously described RFLP analysis of point mutation in domain V of MP 23SrRNA gene was used to identify mutations known to confer macrolide resistance (2063, 2064, and 2617 in the MP 23S rRNA gene domain V region). The result of the molecular analysis was positive for A2063G mutation, which was, at that time, a common macrolide-resistant mutant of MP in Japan. Based on these results and the clinical course, we confirmed our case as severe MP pneumonia due to a macrolide-resistant strain.