A 40 years old male got admitted with a chief complaint of fever, cutaneous lesions with burning and itching sensation, and odynophagia.
The patient was a known patient who got admitted to the emergency ward 7 days back in our hospital after a Road Traffic accident with a GCS score of E4V5M6. He had lacerations over his head and foot with some minor bruises for which he was admitted for 3 days and was treated accordingly. During his medication, he didn't have any reactions to the treatment. During his discharge he was prescribed 10 days of antibiotics cefixime 200 mg b.d., and painkillers (combination of paracetamol and tramadol, 325 mg + 37.5 mg o.d.) only if required. During his presentation, he denied taking any painkillers and was on antibiotics solely for 6 past days after which he developed cutaneous manifestations. On, taking history, he didn't have such manifestations before, his family members didn't have any such problems, neither did he have any known autoimmune disease, allergy history, or active malignancy, nor did he have any significant drug history and for the past 6 days, he wasn't under any drug except antibiotic, cefixime.
On examination, multiple lesions were present which were hyperpigmented and reddish-purple target macules and papules over his face, trunk, back, and upper limbs with involvement of <10% BSA. The rash was erythematous with the presence of blisters and necrotic core along with the presence of the Nikolsky sign. In the oral cavity, there was an ulcerative lesion along with the hemorrhagic crusty erosion of the mucosa of lips and tip of the nose and also a whitish lesion over the dorsum of the tongue. Ocular involvement and genitalia were spared. The rash was present along with fever (103° F), odynophagia and dysphagia. The prognosis assessing SCORTEN score was 2 (mortality rate of 12.1%) at the time of admission. His vital signs were within normal limits.
On investigation, haemoglobin was 12.4 g/dl (normal male: 13–18 g/dl), ESR was 37 mm in 1st hour (male: 0–10 mm in 1st hour), random blood sugar (RBS) was 10.10 mmol/l (adult: 3.67–7.8 mmol/l). Other parameters were in the normal range.
Management of the patient was done with prednisolone tablet 20mg in tapering dose for 12 days, fexofenadine 120 mg o.d. and chlorpheniramine 4 mg for 10 days, omeprazole 20 mg b.d. for 12 days, paracetamol 500 mg t.d.s, nystatin oral drops for 15 days and gargling with 1% viodin with lukewarm water 8 hourly. Concerning therapeutic drug monitoring and periodically improvement of the patient's health condition, he was discharged after 12 days of hospital stay with the recovery of skin and some residual dysphagia. He was advised and counseled regarding his condition and precaution to be taken for future antibiotic use. Unfortunately, after the discharge of the patient, his follow-up couldn't be maintained. This was due to the lack of compliance from the patient's side, despite the advice for three follow-up routines after 2 days, one week and one month respectively.