In March 2016, a 47-year-old male patient was admitted to the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery and Traumatology service of a public hospital, referred by the medical team with the chief complaint of respiratory difficulty after the appearance of a soft palate lesion. On anamnesis, the patient reported rapid weight loss, drug use for more than 10 years, and the development of a hard palate lesion three years earlier, which was left untreated. In addition, the patient reported the development of a soft palate lesion one month earlier. Intraorally, an extensive mass of mucosa-like color was present in the palate region, which obstructed the oropharynx and consequently caused dyspnea.
The sagittal computed tomography (CT) image reveals a soft tissue mass in the nasal cavity extending to the posterior portion of the nasopharynx and the lower part of the sphenoid sinus, with lowering of the entire musculature of the soft palate (A). The coronal CT image shows density loss of the septum in the nasal cavity and nasal conchae, maxillary sinus opacification, and lesion extending to the sphenoid cavity floor (B). The axial CT image reveals the soft tissue mass observed in the nasal cavity with opacification of the maxillary sinuses (C).
After the initial examinations, the patient was submitted to tracheostomy (A) and intraoral incisional biopsy under general anesthesia (B). Intraoperatively, the tumor had a fibrous consistency and showed normal bleeding. The specimen was sent for histopathological analysis (A). Microscopically, the presence of a densely collagenated connective tissue was observed, with numerous blood vessels that were usually of small caliber and sometimes congestive; also, foci of hemosiderosis were visible (B). Based on the microscopic reports, clinical-radiological characteristics and physical examination, the diagnosis of NA was established.
The patient was referred for excision of the lesion. However, due to the extension of the lesion and the patient's systemic conditions, the teams of different specialties decided not to perform surgical resection or radiotherapy, opting for embolization. However, as a technology procedure was not available at the time, the patient remained hospitalized awaiting treatment availability. Approximately one month after the incisional biopsy, bilateral swelling in the submandibular region and parapharyngeal regions was noted (A and B). In addition, the patient presented severe headache, difficulty in closing the eyes, dysphagia and dyspnea, trismus, left facial paralysis and episodes of fainting. The patient was under palliative care and died after a few weeks.