A 65-year-old man underwent laparoscopic pylorus-preserving PD with modified child reconstruction for ampulla of Vater adenocarcinoma. We performed standard pylorus-preserving PD for periampullary tumours with six ports. Lymph-node dissection of the caudal half of the hepatoduodenal ligament was performed. Pancreaticojejunostomy and duodenojejunostomy were performed via mini-laparotomy (7 cm), and hepaticojejunostomy was performed laparoscopically. We did not use antiadhesive drugs. In the postoperative course, drainage was needed due to a pancreatic fistula. Macroscopically, papillary tumours spread from the ampulla of Vater to the distal bile duct. Histopathologically, the tumour was moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma that invaded the sphincter of Oddi with four nodal metastases, and all margins were free of tumour cells. According to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (8th edition) staging guidelines, the tumour was labelled as stage IIIB (fT2N2M0) . Twelve months later, a computed tomography (CT) scan revealed liver masses (in segments 3 and 5) and swollen para-aortic lymph nodes . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed abnormal uptake in both lesions . He received chemotherapy with gemcitabine plus cisplatin after being diagnosed with liver metastases and para-aortic lymph-node metastases from ampulla of Vater adenocarcinoma. After three courses of chemotherapy, the para-aortic lymph nodes were reduced in size, but the liver metastases did not change on CT. Three courses (six courses in total) later, the CT scan showed the disappearance of the para-aortic lymph nodes and progression of liver metastases . The uptake of the liver lesion was stronger, but that of para-aortic lymph nodes vanished on FDG-PET . Moreover, his serum level of the tumour marker carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) increased to 159.9 U/mL. After obtaining his consent, we planned to perform hepatectomy to remove the life-threatening liver metastases (in segments 2, 3, and 5). Nineteen months after the initial surgery, he underwent laparoscopic partial LR of segment 5 and left lateral sectionectomy. First, we performed partial resection of segment 5 with five ports in the half left lateral decubitus position. The intraperitoneal adhesions were somewhat loose, but the adhesions around the hepato-jejunal anastomosis were rather hard. After removing the adhesions from the right dorsal side, we could isolate the portal vein without hindering the hepato-jejunal anastomosis. Furthermore, on the left side of the hepatic duct, the hepatic artery with firm granulation tissue was isolated. Therefore, we could perform partial resection of segment 5 safely by gaining vascular inflow control by occluding the hepatic artery and portal vein with clamp forceps . Next, we performed left lateral sectionectomy in the supine position with five ports; three were other ports. However, it was difficult to clamp the portal vein, because it was hidden behind the Roux limb, leading to hepato-jejunal anastomosis . The operation duration was 235 min, and the volume of blood loss was 100 g. The histopathologic diagnosis was liver metastases from ampulla of Vater adenocarcinoma with grade 1a histological therapeutic effect, and all surgical margins were negative. The prophylactic drain was removed on the 7th postoperative day. He was uneventfully discharged 12 days after the second operation without fever or abnormal abdominal pain. Afterwards, on the 19th postoperative day, drainage was needed because of an intra-abdominal abscess, which was diagnosed by CT at an emergency room visit. Enteric organisms, including Citrobacter freundii, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterococcus gallinarum, and Streptococcus constellatus, were identified in the drainage fluid. This additional drain was removed after the abscess healed. Currently, the patient has been alive for 8 months after LLR, and his postoperative CA19-9 levels have decreased to the normal range (36.6 U/mL). Eight months after the second operation, he underwent a chemotherapy regiment that was the same as before the operation, gemcitabine plus cisplatin, to suppress para-aortic lymph-node metastases as planned, and has not had another recurrence.