A 72-year-old asymptomatic woman was referred to our hospital for examination of a pancreatic lesion detected on abdominal ultrasonography during a health screening. Her past medical history and physical examination were unremarkable. On laboratory testing, the serum levels of amylase, bilirubin, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within normal limits.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a heterogeneous, hypoechoic mass in the pancreatic head. Dynamic computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a non-deforming mass in the pancreatic head measuring 2.0 cm in maximum diameter and a dilated upstream of the main pancreatic duct (MPD) . The lesion showed isoattenuation on unenhanced CT, mild hypoattenuation during the pancreatic parenchymal phase, and isoattenuation during the portal venous and delayed phases relative to the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion showed heterogeneous low-signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging and mild high-signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging compared to the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma. On diffusion-weighted imaging, the lesion showed mild high-signal intensity with an apparent diffusion coefficient value of 1.4 × 10-3 mm2/s. On MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) , the lesion obstructed the MPD in the head of the pancreas, and the upstream pancreatic duct was smoothly dilated (8 mm in diameter). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a stricture of the MPD with a dilated upstream. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a 24 mm mural hyperechoic mass in the MPD. On positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT), the pancreatic lesion showed avid 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 3.6 at the early imaging (1 h after intravenous FDG injection) , which increased to 5.0 at the delayed imaging (2 h after intravenous FDG injection).
The patient then underwent a subtotal pyloric-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. Macroscopically, a well-demarcated, homogeneous, white-to-yellow-colored solid lesion measuring 2.0 cm was noted in the pancreas head. Microscopically, the solid lesion was composed of accessory glands and ducts, lined by cuboidal to flattened epithelium without atypia . The accessory glands and ducts were embedded in a fibrotic stroma, and the islets of Langerhans were not evident within the lesion. Lymphocyte and follicle formation infiltrated diffusely around the MPD. Immunohistochemically, the ductal cells were positive for epithelial markers, but negative for synaptophysin and chromogranin A. The cell membrane of the accessory glands and ducts showed homogeneous expression of glucose transporter type I (GLUT-1) and hexokinase II (HK-II). The expressions were especially strong along the basilar membrane of the accessory glands. The pathological diagnosis was solid-type pancreatic hamartoma. After surgical resection, the patient received follow-up CT examinations every three to 6 months and there has been no recurrence for 36 months.