A 34-year-old male patient was presented with a 2-month history of intermittent headaches in the right frontal region. No other significant neurological deficits were found. Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed mass in the right frontal part of the skull . The mass was attached to dura mater and it was mildly compressing the middle frontal gyrus beneath. Also, signs of intraosseal propagation were present. Patient underwent right side frontal craniectomy. Bone attached to the tumor was extracted. Duroplasty and cranioplasty were performed. Surgery went without complications. Postoperative computerized tomography (CT) was satisfying. Tissue samples from multiple sites of tumor connected to dura with surrounding bone were taken intraoperatively and underwent histopathological analysis. Tumor consists of large cells with pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli, with pathological mitotic figures. Tumorous tissue shows immunohistological reactivity for CD45 LCA, CD20, CD79a, CD10, BCL6 and PAX5. They were partly positive for BCL2 and CD30 and negative for CD3 and CD21. C-myc shows positivity in 36% of tumor cells. Proliferation index Ki67 is diffusely 75% . According to WHO classification it corresponds to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Afterwards, extended diagnostics were performed. Bone marrow biopsy showed an abnormality in the percentage of non-segmented neutrophils of 17%. Other results showed medium–high erythropoiesis with normal cell ratios but without findings of malignant alteration or infiltration. A cylindrical sample showed no morphological nor immunohistochemical (CD20, PAX5, Ki67 and CD3) evidence of malignant infiltration. Lumbar puncture was also performed and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples showed no positivity to malignant cells. Afterwards, full body CT was performed, followed by ultrasound including thyroid and salivary glands. Also, MRI of brain and spinal cord was done. All conducted imaging methods revealed normal anatomical and structural features without traces of lymph node enlargement or flee fluid throughout the body. A hematologist was consulted and methotrexate or R-CHOP therapy was recommended.
The patient was transferred to the hematology department for further diagnostic procedures. Upon analysis no pathological findings were found. After consultation R-CHOP and intrathecal methotrexate protocol was chosen. The patient was administered four cycles of R-CHOP and intrathecal methotrexate. Four months afterwards, MRI and neurosurgical control were performed. MRI revealed satisfying postoperative result without any new intracranial masses .