A 75-year-old female patient with a history of multiple spine surgeries, chronic pain syndrome (cervicalgia and lumbalgia), and a slightly ataxic gait was treated with IT morphine and clonidine infusion (SynchroMed II Pump Medtronic) since 2012. In April 2018, she presented with new-onset paresthesia sub-T5. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine showed high-grade compression of the spinal cord (with compression-induced myelomalacia) at T3–T5 corresponding to the location of the catheter tip with suspicion of a catheter-tip-associated granuloma [Figures and ].
A right-sided hemilaminectomy of T4 as well as a partial hemilaminectomy of T3 and T5 was performed. The exposed dura was thickened and adherent to the surrounding structures. After removal of the adhesions and preparation of the dura, a necrotic-seeming central thickening, continuous with the surrounding normal dura, was identified as the granulomatous mass. This highly adherent mass was carefully resected along a clearly defined plane between the granuloma and the normal dura. A partial resection of the healthy dura surrounding the right T4 nerve root was required. The catheter was then identified inside the spinal canal and removed. Due to adherence to the T4 nerve root, the decision was made to sacrifice the T4 nerve. The granuloma was then carefully resected along with the divided nerve. The underlying spinal cord had signs of metal deposits from the catheter as well as signs of myelomalacia. The spinal cord was completely decompressed, and the primary closure of the dura was possible.
Postsurgery, the patient showed a moderate- to high-grade proximally pronounced paresis of the right lower extremity, which slightly improved in the days following surgery. MRI revealed a satisfactory decompression of the spinal cord and removal of the granuloma. However, the MRI showed a more marked (preexisting) myelomalacia extending now from T2 to T7. Additional oral analgesia oxycodone 5 mg twice daily and trimipramine 100 mg once daily had to be continued unchanged, for the persistence of foremost lumbar pain. After an initial stable clinical course, she complained of increasing neuropathic pain initially located mostly in the T9–T12 area and subsequently ascending into the thorax approximately 2 months after admission. Pain medication had to be increased by adding pregabalin and cannabis oil (drops) and increasing the morphine and clonidine pump dosage yet without clinical benefit. Clinically, the patient complained of instability and sensory loss in the left leg. A lumbar MRI was performed, which did not explain the new findings. Within 1 week, the patient deteriorated dramatically loosing almost all motor strength in the lower extremities. A cervical and thoracic MRI showed a mass suspicious for a catheter-tip granuloma causing a compression of the thoracic spine at T7–T11 associated with a secondary myelomalacia now extending proximally to the conus medullaris.
A laminectomy of T6 was performed. The underlying tissue was granulomatous, and the catheter was identified within the granulomatous mass. The lesion was excised leaving a dural defect that could not be repaired with primary closure. Watertight closure with a Gore-Tex patch was achieved. The remaining catheter was removed through a separate incision, and a new catheter was not placed.
The histopathological finding showed typical granuloma tissue formed by histiocytes, granulocytes, necrotic areas, and abundant hemorrhagic residues. The neurological state of the patient improved mildly after device removal, granuloma excision, and intense rehabilitation foremost gaining slight-to-moderate motor strength in the left leg.