In November 2020, a 19-year-old man was sent to the emergency department for stomach bleeding after drinking alcohol. There was no hematemesis, melena, hematuria, hematochezia, dizziness and headache. Physical examination showed that there was no obvious gastrointestinal type and peristalsis wave, no abdominal tenderness and rebound pain. The patient was hemodynamic stability (blood pressure 120/74mmHg, pulse rate 75/min). therefore, laboratory tests, gastroscopy and Computed tomography (CT) scan were performed. Gastroscopy showed a submucosal elevated lesion in the gastric fundus . Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a tumor with low homogenous echogenicity originating in the gastric muscular layer , considering the posibility of stromal tumors. CT scan of the abdomen demonstrated a high density lesion measuring 1.2 cm × 1.7 cm in the gastric fundus, the nodule showed obvious homogeneous enhancement on the dual-phase enhanced CT scan, and stromal tumors or neurogenic tumors were considered . No abnormality was showed on laboratory examinations. We planned to perform a laparoscopic resection of the gastric fundus tumor, with the patient in the supine position and under general anesthesia, the transverse supraumbilical incision was made, a laparoscope was placed through a supraumbilical incision. An ultrasonic knife was also used to cut the gastrocolic ligament along the greater curvature of the stomach, cut and ligate the root of the left gastroepiploic artery and vein, and individually cut the first short gastric vessels, to expose the fundus of stomach. We found the tumor protrudes from the anterior wall of the fundus, on the lesser curvature of the stomach, measuring 2.0 × 2.0 cm in diameter, with a clear boundary and protruding serosa. The tumor was lifted by non-invasive forceps, closed and cut along the edge of the tumor at about 1 cm, the tumor was removed completely, and the edge of the gastric wall was strengthened by continuous suture. The abdominal cavity was rinsed with saline and drained, with the drainage tube in the left upper abdomen, and there was no active bleeding. Postoperative pathological examination proved an accessory spleen in the stomach , the size of the nodule is about 1.6 cm × 1.1 cm × 0.8 cm. After postoperative anti-inflammatory, hemostatic and other symptomatic support treatment, and the patient recovered well and the patient was discharged on the 6th day after surgery. He was followed up by telephone for two months, during which he had no complications.