A 34-year-old man without significant medical history was admitted to our hospital due to upper abdominal pain. Physical examination showed significant abdominal pain. Laboratory data were within normal range, except for a slightly increased C-reactive protein level (0.40 mg/dL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed the target sign in the transverse colon. There was no evidence of bowel obstruction, bowel wall edema, or tumor and idiopathic colo-colonic intussusception was suspected. Because of excruciating pain, he had difficulty maintaining the position for colonoscopy. Therefore, we decided against performing colonoscopic reduction. Laparoscopic surgical reduction was planned to avoid resection of an excessive length of bowel.
During the laparoscopy procedure, a 12-mm port was inserted at the periumbilical region using the open technique and an intra-abdominal pressure of 10 mm Hg was established with carbon dioxide insufflation. Under laparoscopic observation, additional 5-mm ports were inserted at the lower abdominal quadrants bilaterally and the midline. Thorough inspection of the peritoneal cavity showed no signs of perforation, bowel wall ischemia, or tumor and confirmed idiopathic colo-colonic anterograde intussusception. Surgical reduction was achieved by a combination of delicate direct pressure on the anal side of the transverse colon and gentle pulling on the oral side . Partial resection of the intussuscepted bowel was performed due to bowel wall edema and Gambee's layer to layer anastomosis was performed. No obvious tumor was observed in the resected bowel on macroscopic examination. Histopathological examination showed significant edema and vasodilation of the submucosa. There was no evidence of special intussusception, such as a parasite. Idiopathic colo-colonic intussusception was confirmed . The operation time was 131 min, and total blood loss was 20 ml. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day once bowel function returned. Endoscopic observation was performed after discharge, and it was confirmed that there were no other lesions that could lead to colo-colonic intussusception.