A 25-year-old female patient who presented with persistent chest pain was admitted to our institution. Undeveloped secondary sexual characteristics were found during physical examination . Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed that her AD involved the ascending and abdominal aorta . She had undergone thoracic endovascular aortic stent graft implantation (, arrow) in a local hospital due to acute Stanford type B aortic dissection at age 19. No uterus or ovaries was found by CTA (, arrowhead) and transabdominal ultrasound (, arrowhead). Sexual hormone detection revealed hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (follicle-stimulating hormone 66.98 IU/L, luteinizing hormone 25.41 IU/L, and estradiol 0.1 pg/ml).
Her height (155 cm) and weight (55 kg) were within the normal range in the Chinese female population, and she had no hypertension or family history of genetic disorders. In early pregnancy, her parents, both working at a chemical plant, had a history of exposure to potential toxicants, including cyanide, ammonia, sulfuric acid, and nitric acid. Her 18-year-old brother had hypertension, and her mother had coronary artery atherosclerosis. She presented with primary amenorrhea at age 15, was diagnosed by a gynecologist as MRKH syndrome accompanied with congenital absence of the ovaries, and was treated with hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for only 3 months. G-banded karyotyping analysis revealed a normal 46,XX karyotype . The abnormalities in her reproductive system were eventually diagnosed as MRKH syndrome with 46,XX GD.
To further explore the genetic correlation between AD and congenital dysplasia of the reproductive system, we performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) and copy number variations sequencing (CNV-seq). Whole-exome sequencing of the patient and her family members, including her mother, father, and brother, showed a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the MYH11 gene (MYH11; NM_002474.2; c.5081A>G; p.Glu1694Gly) and ACTA2 gene (ACTA2; NM_001613.2; c.773G>A; p.Arg258His). MYH11 c.5081A>G was carried by the patient, her mother, and her brother, and ACTA2 was only carried by the patient . The WES results were validated by Sanger sequencing . An approximately 109-Kb (Chr 6: g.24920238-25029535) duplication at chromosome 6p22.3 was found in the patient by CNV-seq, which has not been related to the development of the uterus and ovaries. Finally, no clear genetic link between AD and abnormalities in the female reproductive system was found.
We performed emergency total aortic arch replacement and frozen elephant trunk surgery, and the patient recovered well and was discharged on postoperative day 12.
The patient refused to receive HRT after surgery, and her abdominal aortic dissection (AAD) was progression during a 6-month follow-up (–). The false lumen of AAD at intimal tears (–) and maximum diameter (–) both expanded slightly 7 days after surgery and rapidly expanded 6 months after surgery.