An 81-YEAR-OLD woman with a history of hypertension treated with only amlodipine was admitted to our emergency department with impaired consciousness 8 h after ingesting 50 5-mg amlodipine tablets with suicidal intent. On admission to the emergency department, blood pressure (BP) of 50/40 mmHg and heart rate (HR) 45 b.p.m. were recorded. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 13. The results of routine laboratory tests on admission were as follows: total leukocyte count 10,140/μL, serum creatinine 1.37 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 22.2 mg/dL, serum ionized calcium 1.14 mmol/L, and lactate 5.5 mmol/L. A 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed no abnormalities. Comprehensive toxicological analysis of the urine was negative.
Her medical history revealed only hypertension, treated with amlodipine, without a β-blocker or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. She was not diagnosed with depression before admission. The patient was diagnosed with an amlodipine overdose. She was intubated for airway protection and given fluid boluses. Intravenous vasopressor therapy was initiated (dopamine, 10 μg/kg/min; noradrenaline, 0.2 μg/kg/min). Atropine showed no effect on HR. She was hospitalized in the intensive care unit (ICU). The clinical course of the patient is shown in Figure . On admission to the ICU, her BP was 50/35 mmHg with an HR of 40 b.p.m. She remained in a hypotensive state despite high-dose vasopressor therapy. A calcium gluconate (8.5%) infusion was initiated at a rate of 0.7 mL/kg/h, and her serum ionized calcium level was maintained at up to two times the upper limit of the reference range. On admission to the hospital, hyperglycemia was not shown. In this case, glucagon was given as a 100-μg/kg bolus followed by further doses at a rate of 100 μg/kg/h. In addition, high-dose insulin euglycemic therapy (HEIT) was initiated by an insulin infusion at a rate of 15 units/h with 10% dextrose. Despite these interventions, the patient's hemodynamic parameters did not improve. High-dose insulin euglycemic therapy was subsequently stopped because the patient developed hypoglycemia 13 h after admission to the ICU. As the patient's serum ionized calcium level increased, her BP improved . The doses of noradrenaline and dopamine were decreased, but bradycardia continued to worsen. After 24 h in the ICU, the serum ionized calcium level peaked at 2.7 mmol/L. Blood pressure fell despite a consistently high serum ionized calcium level. A dobutamine infusion was started and was increased up to 6 μg/kg/min to improve cardiac output with little effect. Despite these interventions, the patient's HR remained at 30–50 b.p.m., therefore, an isoproterenol infusion was started 26 h after ICU admission to improve cardiac output by increasing the HR. Soon after the infusion was started, the patient's HR increased. After 48 h in the ICU, the patient's serum ionized calcium level decreased to 1.5 mmol/L, and her HR and BP remained stable. Isoproterenol was weaned and stopped on ICU day 3. The patient was extubated on the same day, and she was discharged on day 14 without any complications.