A 54-year-old man was admitted to our department due to the worsening of clinical conditions and onset of diffuse oedema and ascites. A diagnosis of liver cirrhosis was made (Child-Pugh B7. MELD Na+ 9) during hospitalization. The patients had a history of paroxysmal AF, heart failure, metabolic syndrome (with severe obesity, BMI 41 Kg/m2), previous pancreatic cured tail carcinoma (2013), hypothyroidism, arterial hypertension, sleep apnoea syndrome, and epilepsy. The CHA2DS2-VASC score was 2 (heart failure and hypertension) and the HAS BLED score was 2 (liver cirrhosis and labile INR).
The patient was on therapy with levothyroxine 175 mcg/day, pantoprazole 40 mg/day, bisoprolol 2.5 mg/day, spironolactone 300 mg/day, furosemide 25 mg/day, warfarin with an international normalized ratio (INR) target of 2.5, levetiracetam 500 mg/BID. Daily schedule of medications at admission is shown in . Blood values at admission are shown in .
After discharge, the patient was sent to our outpatient clinic for the management of antithrombotic therapy. Patient appeared obese, awake, alert, oriented, and hydrated. No acute distress. The external chest is normal in appearance without lifts, heaves, or thrills. Heart rate and rhythm are normal. No murmurs, gallops, or rubs are auscultated. S1 and S2 are heard and are of normal intensity. A clear improvement in ascites and oedema was observed. Due to the poor TiTR of the patient (44%) during warfarin therapy and the scarce possibility to undergo frequent INR checks, warfarin was discontinued, and dabigatran 150 mg twice daily was started. However, the concomitant use of Levetiracetam and a high BMI (41 Kg/m2) are known to reduce plasma concentrations of all DOACs (a summon of potential interaction among DOACs and antiepileptic drug is shown in ): for these reasons, we decided to measure plasmatic concentrations of dabigatran by evaluating anti-IIa levels. Blood samples were collected at dabigatran peak concentration (2 h post-intake) and trough (immediately before next intake), after 10 days from the beginning of therapy. The trough plasma concentration of dabigatran was in the normal range provided by the lab (61–143 ng/mL), while peak concentrations were below range (117–275 ng/mL) . As patient was taking Dabigatran and Levetiracetam at the same time in the morning and in the evening, we asked the patient to delay Levetiracetam intake at 12 a.m. and 12 p.m., respectively, to allow Dabigatran to reach a higher peak level. Indeed, dabigatran peak concentration increased from 88 to 101 ng/mL .
During 32 months of follow-up, no haemorrhagic or ischaemic events occurred. He experienced an improvement of liver cirrhosis achieving a Child-Pugh A5 class and a substantial weight loss of about 40 kg through dietary restriction (BMI: 29 Kg/m2). Furthermore, there were no new episodes of seizures, without modification of levetiracetam posology.