In April 2016, a 44-year-old premenopausal woman was admitted to the Breast Surgery Department, the Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, with a 12-month history of a huge lump in the right breast. Initially, the patient just had a small fist-sized lump in the right breast, without any pain or discomfort. It grew so slowly that she did not pay much attention on it. Then, the lump started to grow rapidly and became very large within 2 months, and her right breast was entirely covered with a 8-inch ball-sized mass. The breast skin appeared dark and had ulceration.
The patient had undergone breast lump resection twice in 2001 and 2008, and both pathological diagnoses were benign PT. The patient had no history of cardiovascular or respiratory disease. Moreover, she had no family history of breast cancer.
Physical examination revealed that the left breast was normal, without any palpable lump. The right breast was obviously large, nearly 25×25 cm in size, with a circumference of nearly 80 cm. The skin on the surface of the lump was dark, with ulceration area of 7×5 cm and without bleeding or discharge . On palpation, the size of the lump was 18×20 cm, hard with local tenderness and poor mobility. Axillary lymph nodes were not palpable. Mammography showed a huge right breast, about 23×23 cm, with dermal ulceration around nipple . Ultrasonoscopy showed the right mammary gland that was enlarged obviously, with inset showing echo intensity disorder and blood flow signal probed . Several hypoechoic focuses were seen on the area of right axilla, of which the largest was 1.5×0.9 cm in size. The left breast and axilla had no abnormal signal. Biochemical examination revealed no significant abnormalities. The chest computed tomography (CT) revealed that the lump had not broken into the chest cavity, and the lungs were normal . The patient’s other relevant examinations such as the abdomen CT, the brain CT, and the bone ECT were also normal.
Needle core biopsy of the breast lump was suggestive of PT of the borderline subgroup. Then, the patient underwent mastectomy of the right breast and sentinel lymph node biopsy. During surgery, surgeons detected that the pectoralis major was invaded, and so the partial muscle adhered to the tumor was resected. The intraoperative frozen section showed no metastatic cancer cell in sentinel lymph nodes. Finally, the latissimus dorsi muscle flap was graft to remedy for the tissular defect on the chest. Postoperative treatment was uneventful, and she was discharged after 6 days.
The cut surface demonstrated a leaf-like pattern. The scope of dermatic ulceration or necrosis was 13×10 cm. Postoperative paraffin-based histopathology showed fast cellular proliferation, mitosis about 9/10 high-power fields (HPFs) . The tumor did not invade the skin. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was as follows: spindle cells AE1/AE3, smooth muscle actin (SMA) (+), Desmin (−), CD34 partial (+), BCL-2 (−), p53 partial (+), ki-67 15%, tumor cells, estrogen receptor (ER) <1% weakly positive, progesterone receptor (PR) <1% weakly positive, and Ki67 40% .
The patient had recovered well after the surgery until March 2017. The patient came to our hospital again because of a local recurrence. Her palpation and imaging examinations indicated three large masses on the right chest, the largest one of about 6.7×4.0 cm . Then, she had lumpectomy, and the tumor was diagnosed as malignant PT . After the second surgery, we followed up her by telephone, and knew that she had underwent radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Up until now (February 2018), she is still alive and undergoing chemotherapy.