A 61-year-old Chinese man who showed slow motion and speech at 53 years of age was admitted to our hospital in May 2012. At 54 years, gait instability, dysarthria, fine motor clumsiness, cognitive decline, and depression were observed. His difficulties in movement and postural stability then worsened gradually. At 56 years, he began to experience recurrent falls. At 58 years, he needed the aid of crutches when walking. At 59 years, he started to have incomprehensible speech, dysphagia, and double vision, and was confined to a wheelchair. Before his admission to our hospital, he had no treatments other than irregular vitamin intake. His medical and family histories were unremarkable.
Neurological examination revealed cognitive decline, decreased spontaneous speech, masked face, oculomotor abnormalities, muscle rigidity, ataxia, dysarthria, and dysphagia. His cognitive impairment included apathy, marked slowing of cognition, decreased verbal fluency, and frontal release signs. His ocular movements were slow and limited in vertical direction. Muscle strength was mildly decreased in all four limbs (4/5). His limbs and axial muscles were rigid. His rapid alternating movements were clumsy and finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin movements were awkward. Resting and postural tremors in limbs were not observed. Superficial and deep sensations were intact. Deep tendon reflexes in all limbs were brisk. Sucking reflex and bilateral palmomental reflexes were present, and bilateral Babinski and Chadock signs were positive. His symptoms were not responsive to levodopa. His laboratory tests during hospitalization were unremarkable. His brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan (3.0T) suggested mild ventricle enlargement, marked atrophy of mesencephalon and cerebellum, and “Hummingbird sign” in the mesencephalon .
According to clinical diagnostic criteria of PSP from the Movement Disorder Society , this patient was diagnosed with probable PSP with Richardson’s syndrome (prob. PSP-RS). His PSP rating scale was 73 on admission . After the approval of the Ethics Committee of Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine and the acquisition of patient’s informed consent, this patient received the transplantation of UCBSCs.
We followed previous preparation protocol of allogeneic UCBSCs . The general preparation procedure is shown in Fig. . UCB (100 ml) was collected from healthy unrelated donors . To ensure the safety of UCBSCs, pathogen detection was performed to avoid potential infection, including hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV), anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), rapid plasma reagin (RPR), and TORCH five items. Mononuclear cells were then collected. The stem cells with a concentration of 2–3×1010/L were kept in 1 ml nutrient solution in a small bottle for intrathecal injection. The cells with 0.6–1.0×109/L were kept in 30 ml nutrient solution in a blood bag for intravenous infusion. The stem cells were counted by whole blood analyzer syxmex100i: cell quantity of 1 unit ≥ 2–3×107 cells. Cell viability was detected by COUNTSTAR Cell Counter: standard viability ≥ 90%. CD34+ cells were determined by flow cytometry (BD FACSCalibur), 1.0–2.0% CD34+ cells were required. The packed cells were placed upright in a vaccine ice box (2–8 °C). The cells were delivered to patients no more than 12 hours after preparation.
The whole treatment included two intravenous infusions (30 ml, 2–3×107 cells, per time) and four intrathecal injections (1 ml, 2–3×107 cells, per time). The first and last injections were intravenous infusions, and the rest were intrathecal injections. The interval between every two injections was 3 days. Adverse events were closely monitored during and after the treatment.
This case was followed up via clinical interviews and phone calls by an experienced clinician. Three months after UCBSCs therapy, rigidity of his limbs and neck was mildly alleviated . Six months after UCBSCs therapy, tube feeding was not required. The condition of this patient was stable over the next 2 years. Three years after UCBSCs therapy, the patient required tube feeding again, but the rigidity of limbs and neck was still better compared with the baseline level. All the other neurological deficits did not deteriorate until the last follow-up (through 8 years in total). No deterioration of cerebral lesions was found in his brain MRI 2 years after the treatment . During the follow-up, no adverse event was observed. The progression of PSP seemed to cease after the UCBSCs therapy.