In January 2018, a 32-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital because of malfunction of the temporary vascular access for hemodialysis. Her medical history presented miscarriage, pre-eclampsia with preterm delivery, chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 5 on renal replacement therapy, and recurrent thrombosis of arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs).
She had a miscarriage at 7th week of gestation in October 2015. CKD stage 4 was diagnosed immediately after the miscarriage. The patient presented high blood pressure, elevated serum level of creatinine (190 µmol/L), and urinary protein level of 3 grams per diuresis. The renal biopsy demonstrated global and segmental glomerulosclerosis, tubular atrophy with thyroidization, and arteriosclerosis. Immunopathologic assessment of the renal tissue showed C3 linear deposition along the glomerular basement membrane and mesangium.
The patient’s second pregnancy was complicated by impaired kidney function and pre-eclampsia. The preterm delivery was performed at 28th week of gestation in July 2017. Her second pregnancy finished successfully with live birth of a premature baby girl with weight of 890 grams and APGAR score 5/6. Some complications of prematurity were registered in the new-born during the early and late neonatal period. The hemostasis testing showed shortened activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of less than 23 s with an elevated D-dimer (4102 ng/mL). The patient started with hemodialysis treatment immediately after the preterm delivery.
Her maintenance hemodialysis care was complicated by recurrent vascular access thrombosis. The patient had multiple AVFs that failed due to thrombosis. The first distal (radial-cephalic) AVF and second proximal (brachial-cephalic) AVF were created on the left forearm. A computer tomography angiogram was performed on the patient’s right arm before the planned creation of AVF on right arm. The angiogram showed blood vessels without deformation (stenosis or thrombosis). Repeated hemostasis testing showed shortened aPTT of less than 25 s with an elevated D-dimer (1017 ng/mL). Therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin (Enoxaparin, 40 mg/0.4 mL) with dosage of 0.7 mg/kg was started one week before the intervention. The middle (radial-cephalic) AVF was created on the patient’s right forearm. The third AVF also did not function due to thrombosis. Central venous catheters were necessary for a proper vascular access, with all the difficulties and hazardous situations.
A thorough thrombophilia screening confirmed the presence of aPL. LA was present in plasma, measured on two occasions 12 weeks apart. Anticardiolipin antibody (IgG and IgM) and anti-β
2 glycoprotein-I antibody (IgG and IgM) were within normal range. Antiphosphatidylserine antibodies (APSA) were also negative. To rule out an APS secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus, the patient was evaluated and found negative for antinuclear and anti-dsDNA antibodies on several occasions. Treatment with long-term anticoagulant therapy with a vitamin K antagonist was started with target international normalized ratio (INR) 2 to 3. The peritoneal dialysis was planned as a renal replacement therapy for this patient with recurrent thrombosis of AVFs.