A 22-year-old female patient originated from Dakar/Senegal, with no known medical history presented in May 2014 with progressive low limb edema and puffy face. She was admitted in nephrology department 2 weeks after the beginning of symptoms and treated by only free-salt diet. On admission, physical examination found high blood pressure at 150/100 mmHg, glomerular range proteinuria (++++) on urine dipstick with no hematuria. On physical examination, hyperchromic diffuse punctilious purpura skin lesions predominant on the trunk, the neck and the upper thigh were found. Paraclinical investigations revealed a nephrotic syndrome with 24 hours proteinuria of 4.29 grams, hypoalbuminemia of 19.4 g/L and hypoproteinemia of 56 g/L. Serum creatinine was 60.9 mg/L and urea 1.62 g/L. Full blood count (FBC) showed normochromic and normocytic anemia of 9.9 g/dL hemoglobin, 4700/mm3 WBC and 434103/mm3 platelets. Auto-immunity investigations revealed negative results for anti DNA and anti Sm antibodies. However, anti SSA/Ro, anti-SSB/La and anti U1 RNP were strongly positive meaning a possible Sjogren syndrome. Anti- neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) was positive with a peri-nuclear type fluorescence (p-ANCA), specific to myeloperoxidase (MPO). HBV, HCV and HIV serology had negative results as well as syphilis (TPHA-VDRL). The kidneys were at good size and differentiation. In optic microscopy (OM), renal biopsy performed after blood pressure control showed a crescentic glomerulonephritis (GN) with circumferential cellular and fibrous proliferation affecting 85% of glomeruli. There was also tubular and interstitial involvement with moderate edema and inflammation together with mild endarteritis fibrosa . Immunofluorescence (IF) was not performed.
Diagnosis of microscopic polyangitis with renal and skin involvement probably associated with a secondary Sjogren syndrome was retained. The patient presented a five score of 2 with 24 hours proteinuria, more than 2 grams and impaired GFR. She underwent dialysis and received angiotensin converting inhibitor (ACE) and furosemide before renal biopsy. After renal biopsy, we added pulses of methylprednisolone at dose of 15 mg/kg/day for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone of 1 mg/kg/day and pulses of cyclophosphamide of 700 mg/m2 every 15 days for the first 3 pulses and every 21 days thereafter.
At the 5th month of treatment while she had just received her last pulse of cyclophosphamide, she was admitted with impaired consciousness and fever. Physical examination found obnubilation with no neurological focal sign. There were no sign of meningeal irritation. Cardiac examination found regular tachycardia. Lung auscultation was normal. Blood pressure (BP) was 135/85 mmhg and temperature 38.5°C. The following days were marked by worsening of the patient consciousness with a Glasgow coma scale of 9/15 and a hemorrhagic syndrome with melena, purpura skin lesions and gingival bleeding. Malaria tests had negative results. Complementary investigations revealed CRP of 96 mg/L, central pancytopenia with severe anemia 5.1 g/dL, neutrophillic leukocytopenia with 2000 leucocytes/mm3 and neutrophiles 700/mm3, thrombocytopenia 47000/mm3, and reticulocytes 67000/mm3. Natremia and kaliemia were normal. Other paraclinical findings showed increased ferritinemia at 4692 (23 times more than the normal range), LDH 468 IU/L (twice the normal) and hypertriglyceridemia 2.52 g/L (1.5 times the normal). Serum calcium and phosphorus were within normal ranges. Due to these clinical and biological findings, a bone marrow aspiration was performed, which found medullary invasion by macrophages with signs of hemophagocytosis .
Diagnosis of HS complicating a microscopic polyangitis was retained and methylprednisolone pulses started. We noticed apyrexia on the first day, improvement of consciousness and general condition in the following days. We also noticed progressive normalization of different biological parameters in the following days and weeks. The patient was under hemodialysis after follow-up of about 9 months with stable clinical state.