A 70-year-old man presented with progressive gait dysfunction following spinal surgery for a thoracic OLF. The progression of his gait dysfunction is summarized in . The patient had undergone a T9–T12 laminectomy after being diagnosed with a thoracic OLF, 3 years after his first visit. Five years after the operation, he underwent a laminectomy of L2–L3 and L5 for a lumbar OLF, which was associated with lower limb pain and gait disturbance. Pain and gait function improved after the second spinal surgery. However, 7 years after the second operation, he experienced a renewed deterioration in his gait function, which was associated with limited balance ability, slower walking speed, and frequent falls, that restricted him to walking indoors only. He also experienced a loss of hand dexterity and sensation, with difficulty performing fine motor skills, such as fumbling with buttons. The patient was diagnosed with OLF again 11 years after the second operation and underwent posterior decompression with instrumented fusion of C3–C7. After the third surgery, hyperesthesia and motor impairment of his upper limbs improved, although the gait disturbances persisted. With 40 min of physical therapy, twice weekly, over several months following the third surgery, the patient regained the capacity to walk continuously for 10 min. However, his gait gradually deteriorated again, 1 year after his third surgery. He presented to our institution with difficulty walking indoors due to limited balance. Thinking of his situation as being chronic stage, we considered that motor learning to reduce the risk of falling was necessary rather than improvement of muscle strength. For this purpose, the decision to use the HAL for gait improvement was made, because of our experiences of the efficacy of HAL in motor learning [, ].
The T2-weighted magnetic resonance spinal image in , obtained 2 years prior to the HAL intervention and 15 years after the T9–T12 laminectomy, shows a high-intensity change persisting in the spinal cord. From this finding, the patient was diagnosed with late-onset neurological deterioration due to spinal atrophy at the site of prior decompression of the thoracic spinal cord.
The patient completed ten 20 min gait sessions using HAL during 5 consecutive weeks. Each session included 20-minute overground walk with HAL and 10 MWT without HAL before and after the session. All sessions were performed with a therapist, two assistants, and an engineer, under the supervision of a physician in case of emergency. The therapist and two assistants attached and detached the HAL exoskeleton suit, with the engineer implementing the gait analysis. For safety reasons, the All-in-One Walking Trainer (Ropox, Denmark), which includes a harness, was used for all sessions to prevent falls . In this case, the CVC mode was used as it supports a patient's voluntary motion by providing an assistive torque to each joint according to voluntary muscle activity. The CVC mode allows the operator to adjust the degree of physical support provided to the patient and to gradually reduce this support as session progresses.
The 10 m walk test (10 MWT) was used to measure the primary outcome of the study and effectiveness of the intervention. The 10 MWT was performed without HAL or any assistance, but under supervision to ensure safety. The number of steps and time required to complete it were measured. Video recording and motion capture (MX with 16 T20S cameras; Vicon, UK) were used for the gait analysis, using the VICON Plug-in Gait marker placement for the lower limbs. Motion data were collected at 100 Hz, and the sagittal plane joint angles were computed using the Plug-in Gait model. Step length and cadence were also quantified from the kinematic data, using heel strike as the reference time point.
Activity of the gastrocnemius muscle was recorded, bilaterally, using a Trigno Lab wireless EMG system (Delsys, United States). The EMG data was collected at 2000 Hz in synchronization with the motion data and band-pass filtered at 30–400 Hz (using custom scripts, MATLAB, MathWorks, United States). The patient had a drop foot during swing phase, because of excessive and out-of-phase activation of the ankle plantar flexors. Therefore, the phase-dependent muscle activation of the plantar flexors was evaluated using the ratio of the integrated activity of the gastrocnemius during the swing phase to the activity of the muscle over the entire step cycle (swing and stance phase combined). The kinematic data for seven step cycles were extracted from each 10 MWT trial. For each of the extracted cycles, the maximum and minimum angles at the hip, knee, and ankle joints were extracted to calculate the joint range of motion. The kinematic profile of each lower limb joint for each extracted step cycle was normalized to the duration of the step cycle and averaged across cycles.
We also evaluated the modified Ashworth scale (mAs) of the gastrocnemius muscle and the International Standards for Neurological and Functional Classification of Spinal Cord Injury (ISNCSCI) motor scores motor score as a measure of lower limb motor function.
All outcome variables were measured before and after the HAL intervention (PRE- and POST-10 sessions). Simple linear regression was used to examine the relationship between session number and changes in gait speed, cadence, and step length during the 10 MWT. All analyses were performed using JMP® 13.0.0 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA); a p value < 0.05 was considered significant.
HAL intervention improved all measured features of gait performance during the 10 MWT, with the pre- to postintervention increases in gait speed (0.83 m/s to 0.97 m/s; β = 0.61, p=0.036), cadence (1.83 steps/s to 2.00 steps/s), and step length (0.45 m to 0.48 m; β = 0.52, p=0.082). Figures – show those outcomes during HAL session.
The patient walked approximately 100 to 200 m during each session. Changes in lower limb kinematics are shown in Figures –. After the HAL intervention, the mean ± SD maximum hip angle flexion during the swing phase increased from 23.4 ± 1.3° to 31.3 ± 1.0° on the left side and from 28.1 ± 1.6° to 35.3 ± 2.0° on the right side . Similarly, maximum flexion decreased at the knee from 57.2 ± 1.5° to 53.3 ± 0.6° on the left side and from 63.6 ± 1.9° to 57.3 ± 2.4° on the right side , with a further decrease in ankle plantar flexion, from 5.3 ± 1.8° to 3.6 ± 1.2° on the right side . Surface EMG profiles of the gastrocnemius are shown in . The muscle activation ratio of the gastrocnemius decreased from 30 ± 10% to 14 ± 5% , while toe clearance increased from 59 ± 6 to 62 ± 7 mm . Step length increased from 477 ± 31 mm to 510 ± 23 mm on the left side and from 417 ± 43 to 464 ± 26 mm on the right side . The gastrocnemius mAs score improved from 1+ to 1. The lower limb ISNCSCI motor score improved from 34 to 49, with a noteworthy increase from 3 to 5 for left hip flexion and ankle plantar flexion, bilaterally. No adverse events associated with the HAL intervention were identified.