A 54-year-old man was referred to our clinic because of colicky postprandial pain of the upper abdomen during the last month, with aggravation 5 days before admission. The patient had diminished the amount of food uptake and had also a 6-Kg-body weight loss during the previous 2 months. His past medical history included CREST syndrome under cortisone therapy during the last year and primary repair of the left ureter and the small intestine due to traumatic perforation in a car accident 17 years ago. Physical examination revealed a pale, malnourished patient and an unremarkable abdomen without tenderness or distension. Besides an anemia, the other blood investigations, as well as tumor markers, were within normal limits. Plain abdominal radiographs showed no pathological findings, while contrast-enhanced series demonstrated a stricture in the transition area from the second to the third portion of the duodenum . Abdominal computed tomography showed a mass in the duodenum, without evidence of metastases . Thorax computed tomography was negative for metastases as well. Gastroduodenoscopy revealed an ulcerated lesion between the second and third portion of the duodenum and the biopsies showed an adenocarcinoma. Colonoscopy was normal.
Laparotomy, through a bilateral subcostal incision, revealed a large tumor locally invading the third portion of the duodenum and possibly the pancreas. Therefore, a partial pancreatoduodenectomy (Whipple's procedure) was carried out. Histological examination revealed a low-grade duodenal adenocarcinoma of maximal diameter 4 cm, which infiltrated the duodenal wall and the fibro-adipose tissue of the mesentery. Metastasis was found in one out of ten lymph nodes examined, while the surgical margins were negative for microscopic disease.
The patient's postoperative course was complicated with a peripancreatic-remnant collection and a lower respiratory infection, which were treated conservatively.
No additional therapy was instituted and 21 months after the operation the patient is alive, without any evidence of local recurrence or metastases.