We report the case of an otherwise healthy 13-year-old female lacrosse player who had a remote history of intermittent foot drop associated with pain several years prior. She had undergone extensive workup at that time with X-ray of the knee, which was only significant for osteochondritis dissecans of the lateral femoral condyle, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, leg, knee and ankle. The MRI revealed no significant findings, including no visible abnormality of the peroneal nerve but did show mild tenosynovitis of the flexor hallucis longus and flexor digitorum longus. It was believed that she suffered from CECS, and she was treated conservatively with foot orthotics and physical therapy.
Several years later, she experienced foot drop twice in 6 months which brought her back to the orthopedic office for reevaluation. Physical examination at that time was significant for 3/5 strength with dorsiflexion and 4+/5 strength in her extensor hallucis longus (EHL). In addition, she exhibited hyperesthesia in her deep peroneal nerve distribution and tenderness to palpation throughout her anterior leg musculature. A right lower extremity MRI was performed, which showed no evidence of neuropathy or compressive lesion. She re-presented 2 days later with complaints of severe pain, persistent foot drop and a cool leg in the absence of a clear etiology.
At that time, she was sent to the emergency room for evaluation of acute compartment syndrome. In the emergency department, compartment pressures were measured with a Hand-Held Stryker compartment monitor (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan). Compartment pressures were 51 mm Hg in the anterior compartment and 45 mm Hg in the lateral compartment. She was promptly taken to the operating room for an anterior and lateral compartment fasciotomy and a muscle biopsy of the anterior compartment. Intraoperatively, she was found to have thick fascia, but no other abnormalities were noted. In the post-anesthesia care unit, she had improvement in her foot dorsiflexion and EHL strength. The muscle biopsy returned as normal and she had complete resolution of her symptoms on her post-operative visit 8 days later.
At a 5-month post-operative follow-up, she complained of recent onset of numbness and tingling in her superficial and deep peroneal nerve distributions. On physical exam, she had a positive Tinel’s sign over her common peroneal nerve at the fibular head. MRI was negative for pathology, but electromyography revealed slowed conduction velocity of the peroneal nerve across the fibular head. It was decided to proceed with neurolysis and exploration of her peroneal nerve.
Intraoperatively, fibrous constricting bands and a vascular leash were discovered around her peroneal nerve in the popliteal fossa . The nerve was freed from any points of tethering in a 12 cm window from the fibular head to the popliteal fossa. Immediately postoperatively, the patient showed no evidence of peroneal nerve palsy with full dorsiflexion and eversion of the foot. She has been recently seen for follow-up 5 years postoperatively, and she is symptom-free with full strength and no neurologic symptoms. She has experienced excellent recovery and she is playing Division I varsity collegiate lacrosse as a senior in college.