A 56-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the hospital with symptoms of high Cr for more than 9 mo as well as nausea and vomiting for 2 mo.
The patient had serum Cr 126 µmol/L in another hospital 9 mo prior with no symptoms. He had nausea and vomiting 2 mo prior to admission. In the outpatient department, laboratory data showed Cr 1448.6 µmol/L, uric acid (UA) 653.2 µmol/L, and serum potassium (K) 5.2 mmol/L. The blood test showed hemoglobin (Hb) 95 g/L. The patient was admitted to the hospital on March 24, 2021.
The patient was diagnosed with left lower extremity deep venous thrombosis and inguinal lymphadenopathy due to left lower limb edema at the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University in 2019. The specific process of diagnosis and treatment is unknown. In the same year, he was treated by thyroidectomy and recovered well. The patient denied hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease.
The patient denied any family history of kidney disease or malignant tumors.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.2°C; blood pressure, 155/112 mmHg; heart rate, 78 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 20 breaths per min. Furthermore, the patient developed symptoms of mild pitting edema in the left lower extremity. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
On admission, laboratory data showed Cr 1448.6 µmol/L. Additionally, relevant urine tests showed urinary microalbumin (U-ALB) 59.6 mg/L and urinary β2-microglobulin (β2-MG) 10.30 mg/L, and the 24 h urine protein quantification was 1400.64 mg/24 h. The map of urine protein electrophoresis did not detect monoclonal protein. There were multiple protein components indicating mixed albuminuria. At the same time, the albumin level decreased to 35.8 g/L. Immunological indicators were as follows: C3 0.40 g/L, C4 0.07 g/L, IgG 22.42 g/L, and IgG4 2.9971 g/L. The result of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) was the perinuclear type (p-ANCA), which was sensitive to formaldehyde. Antinuclear antibody test results were positive with a ratio of 1:320. The blood test showed hemoglobin (Hb) 95 g/L and serum ferritin 972.7 ng/mL. C-response protein was 7 mg/L. There were no markedly abnormal findings in the routine test of feces, procalcitonin, blood coagulation parameters, thyroid function, rheumatism indicators, nodular vasculitis indicators, M-type phospholipase A2 receptor, serum immunofixation electrophoresis, serum anti-mycobacterium tuberculosis antibody, blood lipid, blood glucose, or tumor markers.
Renal ultrasound showed that hydronephrosis was aggravated to a moderate grade and that both renal parenchyma became slightly thinner with echo thickening and decreasing blood flow. The abdominal aortic ultrasound indicated the following observations: The abdominal aorta was mildly sclerosed; the intima of the iliac artery was unevenly thickened; and the intima of the inferior mesenteric artery was diffusely thickened with luminal stenosis. Combined with the medical history and perivascular and interstitial pathological changes, a total abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan and enhanced CT scan obviously indicated RPF as shown in Figure . At the same time, there was no obvious abnormal density shadow in the parenchyma of either kidney on CT, while the enhanced CT scan showed that the parenchymal enhancement in both kidneys was weakened. Moreover, we observed that the middle part of the ureter was narrowed. Consequently, the upper section of the bilateral ureters was dilated, and there was mild hydronephrosis of both kidneys.