A 47-year-old female complaining of acute chest pain for 1 day, was admitted to the emergency room of our hospital on November 26, 2016. She had no history of hypertension but her blood pressure was 180/90 mmHg. She was never definitely diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus or other diseases. She had no signs of secondary hypertension (including renal disorder, macroangiopathy, pregnancy-induced hypertension, chromaffinoma, primary hyperaldosteronism). Her family had no history of acute aortic syndrome or suspicion of any connective tissue disease, such as Marfan syndrome. Acute aortic syndrome was suspected based upon symptoms and course. A CTA scan revealed a Stanford type B aortic IMH involving the descending aorta from the left subclavian artery to the level of the diaphragm . The diameter of the descending aorta was about 3.3 cm (including 1.3 cm crescent-like thickening at the level of the pulmonary artery bifurcation). The ascending aorta was not involved, and penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers was not found in the entire aorta. Emergency medicine specialist immediately gave the patient medical treatment, including analgesic treatment, tight blood pressure control and rehydration therapy. The follow-up CTA images marked decrease in the thickness of IMH and the symptoms of the patient also distinctly improved during hospitalization. After 2 weeks observation in our hospital, she was discharged home. On the follow-up CTA scan 1 month after the initial event, the IMH was thoroughly absorbed (The diameter of the descending aorta was still 3.3 cm at the level of the pulmonary artery bifurcation) and the aorta looked completely normal. . Although she had been taking metoprolol and nifedipine, her blood pressure was hard to control, at approximately 160/90 mmHg during a resting state. She was transferred to our hospital again presenting with unrelieved chest pain 3 months later. After admission, a repeat CTA scan revealed an acute complex type A aortic dissection, involving the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and descending aorta (from the left subclavian artery to the left common iliac artery) . An urgent bedside echocardiography was performed and showed acceptable cardiac function with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% and mild mitral regurgitation.
Emergency surgery was performed under the support of total cardiopulmonary bypass with selective cerebral perfusion via right axillary artery cannulation. We used an anterior approach via median sternotomy in order to manipulate the ascending aorta, where the risk of rupture was the highest. It was increased to 4.5 cm in diameter, with a dark red color over its length. Following induction of moderate hypothermic circulatory arrest, it was opened when the nasopharyngeal temperature reached 25 °C. The site of dissective entry was ~ 4 mm in size and located in the anterior wall intima in close proximity to the sinotubular junction. Based on the condition that Innominate artery, left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery were severe involved and a comprehensive review of the patient’s good physical condition, ascending aorta replacement and total arch replacement (TAR) with a frozen elephant trunk implant (FET) was implemented. After surgery, the patient underwent treatment with extensive debridement and continuous mediastinal irrigation because of a mediastinal infection. Fortunately, she survived and was discharged 1 month later. Pathology revealed the mucoid degeneration of the stoma and the broken and necrotic elastic fibers of the media. The patient was doing well and without new complaints at a 3-month follow-up .