The patient was a 43-year-old female with no significant past medical history. She
received her first Pfizer BioNTech SARS CoV-2 vaccine without incident, and only
reported mild fatigue and myalgias afterwards. After she received her second dose of
the Pfizer BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine, at the end of her 15-minute observation period
she reported a tingling sensation on the back of her tongue. After a short period of
further observation and continued symptoms she was brought to the emergency
department (ED). On arrival to the ED, she had normal vital signs and no abnormality
on physical exam. She was offered steroids and diphenhydramine but declined. Within
15 minutes, she began to cough and complained of tightness in her throat.
On re-evaluation, the patient was noted to have wheezing and edema of her uvula. She
was given diphenhydramine, methylprednisolone, and famotidine intravenously (IV),
along with IV fluids and albuterol inhaler. After five minutes her symptoms
progressed, and she began to vomit, reported worsening throat swelling, and was
tachycardic with a heart rate of 150 beats per minute. She was then treated with
epinephrine 0.3 milligrams intramuscular (IM) to her deltoid area. However, she
continued to wheeze, had uvular swelling, was unable to talk (due to throat
swelling), and was noted to be pale, with continued tachycardia. A second dose of
epinephrine was given IM (to her deltoid), and within five minutes her wheezing and
vomiting resolved, she was able to talk, and reported improvement in throat
swelling. She was kept in the ED for two hours of observation, with a continued
hoarse voice, subjective tightness in her throat, and noted uvular swelling on exam.
Due to the persistence of swelling, she was placed in the observation unit for
continued monitoring.
Several hours after arrival to the observation unit, the patient again rapidly
developed increased throat tightness, vomiting, and shortness of breath, with
wheezing and uvular swelling on exam. She was given additional methylprednisolone
and diphenhydramine IV, along with a racemic epinephrine nebulizer and albuterol
inhaler. When her symptoms did not improve, she was given a third epinephrine 0.3
milligrams IM (to her thigh). She was transferred to the intensive care unit for
further monitoring; however, steroids and diphenhydramine were not further
administered that night. She awoke in the morning hospital day (HD) #1, with
subjective tightness in her throat, a hoarse voice, and was again noted to have
uvular swelling. Later that morning, she began coughing, vomiting, and noted a fine
macular rash to her forearms. Physical examination again showed wheezing with
increased uvular swelling, along with tachycardia. She was started on
diphenhydramine IV every eight hours, methylprednisolone IV every 12 hours, racemic
epinephrine nebulizers every four hours, and albuterol inhaler every four hours. She
received three racemic epinephrine nebulizers that day due to cough and throat
tightness.
The following morning (HD# 2) she was noted to have a diffuse, pruritic macular rash
to her chest, arms, and face, and uvular edema was still appreciated. She had two
episodes of coughing, throat tightness, and wheezing requiring additional racemic
epinephrine nebulizers and diphenhydramine IV. Her methylprednisolone was increased
to every eight hours after these episodes, and she was transferred to the telemetry
floor. On HD# 3 her cough and wheezing had resolved; however, her rash, sensation of
throat swelling, and uvular swelling persisted. Only one racemic epinephrine
nebulizer was given on that day. On HD# 4 wheezing had resolved; however, rash,
throat tightness, and hoarse voice continued. Pulmonary consult recommended trial to
oral steroids with taper on discharge.
The patient was discharged home on HD# 4 with an epinephrine auto-injector,
famotidine, and a prednisone taper. Rash was still present at discharge and did not
resolve until two days after discharge. She was seen by her primary care physician
(PCP) one week after the initial incident for follow-up, still complaining of throat
tightness and a hoarse voice. The PCP visualized minimal edema of the uvula. The
following day, she saw an otolaryngologist who performed laryngoscopy; no laryngeal
swelling was noted. He recommended continuing famotidine and prednisone, and added a
nasal antihistamine. The patient was seen by an allergist three weeks after her
initial reaction. Skin tests for polyethylene glycol 3350 (using Miralax) and
polysorbate 80 (using Refresh eye drops) were non-reactive. Patch testing was also
performed, and negative as well. She was advised to continue to carry an epinephrine
auto-injector. She has not had any further reactions to date.