A previously healthy, active 83-year-old female presented with a 7-day history of persistent mild fever, and was diagnosed with COVID-19 after a positive real-time loop-mediated isothermal amplification test result and admitted to our hospital in early October. She was a non-smoker and had no history of autoimmune disease or congenital coagulation disorders. On admission, physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37.2℃ and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. Laboratory tests showed normal hepatic and renal function but coagulation abnormalities, and computed tomography (CT) found bilateral ground glass opacities with a predominantly peripheral location . She only required isolation and did not require oxygen administration during the first four days in hospital.
On day 5 post-admission, her respiratory condition worsened. She developed moderate respiratory distress and required oxygen administration. Both chest radiography and CT revealed the presence of shadows. We administered oral dexamethasone (6 mg/day on days 5–14) and favipiravir (two 1800 mg doses on day 5, followed by 800 mg twice daily on days 6–18) .
On day 8 she required an oxygen intake of 3 L/min via nasal cannula, which was followed by a gradual improvement of her respiratory condition and chest imaging. Oxygen administration was discontinued on day 12. During this period, laboratory findings, including serum D-dimer, ferritin, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) levels, were stable. Prophylactic anticoagulant therapy was not initiated because her condition was improving and she was mobile .
On day 16, two days after completing the dexamethasone course, she developed fever, oxygen desaturation, and a reduced level of consciousness, despite continual improvement of her chest X-ray findings. Laboratory tests showed markedly raised serum D-dimer, ferritin, and sIL-2R levels. Contrast-enhanced CT scan showed PE of the right pulmonary artery and DVT of the left iliac vein up to the level of the bifurcation of the common iliac vein. Continuous intravenous heparin infusion at a dose of 10,000–15,000 IU/day was initiated, with a target of maintaining an activated partial thromboplastin time of 1.5–2.5 times the normal level .
On day 18, her oxygen requirement peaked at 4 L/min, administered via nasal cannula, followed by improvement in her condition. Her serum sIL-2 and ferritin levels peaked on days 20 and 21, followed by a decline in her D-dimer levels. Nasopharyngeal transcription-reverse transcription concerted reaction (TRCR) tests (TRCReady, Tosoh Bioscience, Japan) were negative on days 19, 23, and 27, and chest X-rays on days 21 and 30 revealed bilateral regression of the shadows in the lower lung fields. Oxygen administration was discontinued on day 27. Heparin was replaced with oral apixaban (5 mg twice daily), and she was discharged on day 33.