An 81-year-old Caucasian man presented with a one-year history of increasing left leg swelling, initially in the calf and subsequently extending to the thigh. The general practitioner requested a venous Doppler ultrasound of the left leg and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis, which failed to discover any underlying cause. He had developed multiple lesions on the left anterior thigh, which increased significantly in number and size over two months.
Eight years before this presentation, in 2006, he underwent a cystectomy and ileostomy for high-grade TCC of the bladder. The cystoprostatectomy specimen showed invasive TCC extending into the inner half of his muscularis propria (Stage pT2a) but with a single focus of advential intralymphatic tumor, arising in a background of high-grade transitional cell carcinoma in situ mainly involving the left bladder wall. Ureteric and urethral margins were clear and there was no significant prostatic pathology. Histopathology of the resected trigone and lateral bladder wall was graded 2 of 3 in the WHO classification. An abdominal and pelvic CT scan demonstrated no para-aortic or pelvic lymphadenopathy, and no distant metastasis. It was hoped that the cystoprostatectomy was curative and, therefore, he did not require adjuvant treatments.
On physical examination in 2014, there was left lower limb edema extending to his thigh and a well-demarcated macular-nodular rash on his anterior thigh . There were no palpable masses or nodes in his groin or popliteal fossa bilaterally. His abdomen was soft and non-tender.
Laboratory parameters demonstrated a normocytic anemia with a hemoglobin level of 103g/L (reference range, 130 to 175), stable since at least 2011; and normal platelet and white cell counts. Iron studies were consistent with anemia of chronic disease, with a normal ferritin level of 78ug/L (reference range, 30 to 310), reduced iron level of 3umol/L (reference range, 11 to 28) and saturation of 6% (reference range 15 to 50), and transferrin level at the lower limit of normal at 2.1g/L (reference range, 2.0 to 3.6). His B12 and folate levels were normal and thyroid-stimulating hormone level was reduced at 0.19mU/L (reference range, 0.5 to 5.5) (there were no T3 or T4 levels on record). His coagulation profile was normal. His electrolytes were normal, however, his creatinine level was elevated at 117umol/L, and his estimated glomerular filtration rate was reduced but stable (since at least 2012) at 50mL/min/1.73m2. Liver function and adjusted calcium tests were normal. There was no C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) or other tumor markers on record. Cytology was normal on urinalysis. A skin punch biopsy demonstrated features favoring metastatic, poorly differentiated non-small cell carcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining showed strong diffuse positive staining for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and cytokeratin 20 and focal positive staining for cytokeratin CK5/6 and P63. The tumor cells were negative for PSA and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). The above cytokeratin immunoprofile is consistent with metastatic TCC showing focal squamoid differentiation. Left lower limb lymphoscintigraphy confirmed severe lymphedema in his left leg. A contrast-enhanced CT scan of his chest, abdomen, pelvis and thighs did not demonstrate any mass or adenopathy in the pelvis or left groin to explain our patient’s left leg lymphedema. There was no other evidence of metastatic disease. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the spine demonstrated no evidence of metastatic disease to his spine, however, a whole body bone scan found multiple osteoblastic metastases throughout the bony pelvis. Positron emission tomography (PET) demonstrated diffuse left leg swelling, likely related to increased tracer activity in a 17mm pelvic lymph node in the left pelvic wall. There were multiple small foci of nodular uptake seen on the anteromedial aspect of the left distal thigh consistent with the known cutaneous metastases. Sclerotic bone lesions with increased uptake on the bone scan were not highly fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid in comparison to the avid pelvic node and thought to be possibly related to an alternative pathology such as prostate cancer.
He completed a planned course of palliative radiation therapy to the left thigh lesions (30Gy divided over 10 fractions) as well as the left pelvic node (a total dose 18Gy divided over six fractions). Methotrexate was excluded as a treatment option in our patient in light of the potential for accumulation in the ‘third space’ comprising the lymphedema in his left leg. Our patient became too unwell to undergo a subsequent planned course of chemotherapy (carboplatin and gemcitabine). The disease ran an aggressive course and our patient died six months after the diagnosis of cutaneous metastases.