A 5 day-old female presented to a field clinic, suffering from feculent emesis and failure to pass stool since birth. The patient’s mother did not receive prenatal care and had a presumed full-term vaginal delivery at home.
Before transfer to a hospital, the child was treated with intravenous fluid resuscitation and orogastric tube decompression. Feculent drainage from her orogastric tube was noted.
In hospital, the patient presented with malnourishment (2.5 kg, 3rd percentile for age) and moderate dehydration. Her abdomen was grossly distended without signs of peritonitis.
Because external genitalia appeared anatomically correct; the anus was imperforate; and by using a probe, we could distinguish a stenotic anal canal, we classified the child as Wingspread low subtype ARM (Wakhlu ).
Abdominal radiograph demonstrated extensive bowel dilatation. Attempt at barium enema revealed no recto-anal fistula.
Cardiovascular examination revealed no evidence of cardiac anomalies with no murmurs, equal femoral pulses and appropriate pre- and post-ductal oxygen saturations.
Electrolytic and fluid balance was optimized for surgical intervention and parenteral antibiotics were administered.
Exploratory laparotomy revealed grossly intact gastrointestinal system from proximal stomach to patent ileocecal valve. The length of the small bowel was grossly adequate for nutrient absorption.
However, distal to the ileocecal valve, five centimeters of a blind-ending colon existed with a fully-formed appendix and some bulbous anatomical features of a cecum. But there was no ascending, transverse, descending or sigmoid colon. We visualized the superior mesenteric artery but were unable to visualize the inferior mesenteric vessels. The colonic segment was not attached to the posterior abdominal wall and floated freely in the abdominal cavity .
There was no rectum, no evidence of no intestinal-urinary or genitor-urinary fistulae and no gross anal musculature atresia—the pelvic bowl was an empty cul-de-sac at the base of which, the imperforate, stenotic anus could be palpated, confirming Wingspread low subtype ARM. There was no evidence of malrotation, other urogenital abnormality or abdominal wall defect.
A percutaneous drainage tube was placed into the colonic segment and through the ileocecal valve into the terminal ileum. Post-operatively, the patient remained hemodynamically stable and received enteral nutritional support for two months.
She then underwent a second-stage exploratory laparotomy, J-pouch creation, perforation and dilation of the anal opening and anal pull-through.
The patient recovered from the second-stage operation without complications and is defecating effectively with plans for long-term monitoring and follow-up.