A 32-year-old Caucasian female with a 4-day history of fever, malaise, and cough was found unconscious and hypoxic by the emergency team. She was successfully resuscitated and after initial treatment at a local hospital transferred to our institution for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) due to influenza pneumonia, which caused respiratory failure and severe ARDS. She also had an abscess of her left breast that grew Escherichia coli bacteria. Due to sepsis (peak CRP 222 mg/L; peak procalcitonin 81.2 μg/L) and accompanying acute kidney injury (AKI), the patient required additional organ support by continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (CVVHD). Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score was 18. The patient remained refractory hypotensive despite a broad anti-infective regimen, adequate fluid resuscitation, and high doses of inotropics and catecholamines. The severity of septic shock suggested an immense overwhelming host response assumingly accompanied by a notable cytokine storm such as known from patients with toxic shock syndrome. Longitudinal clinical and laboratory findings are summarized in Table .
Additionally, a CytoSorb® filter was added for a single 24-h session to the dialysis circuit to remove excess shock-perpetuating cytokines. After 24 h of treatment, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) could be maintained above 65 mmHg with markedly reduced need for vasopressors, now even allowing the removal of excessive fluids by ultrafiltration. A clinical observation that might be indicative for stabilization of vascular alterations assumed to contribute to the development and maintenance of shock (such as loss of tone and barrier breakdown). Unfortunately, clinical and radiologic signs of severe hypoxic brain injury forced us to switch our therapeutic strategy to comfort care and the patient died the next day.
Cytokine, chemokine, and growth factor concentrations in supernatants in serum from our patient were quantified by the Luminex-based multiplex technique according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad, USA). Efficacy of cytokine removal by extracorporeal CytoSorb® could be confirmed by comparing pre-treatment and 24 h cytokine levels . The observation that some cytokines increased during the treatment might be due to a high biosynthesis overreaching the removal rate. Of note, pre- and post-CytoSorb® drug levels of antibiotics yielded a 76% reduction for meropenem (25.5 to 6.4 μg/mL) and a 58% reduction for piperacillin (11.7 to 4.9 μg/mL). Clindamycin was only reduced by 15% comparing pre- and post-adsorber concentration (14.0 to 11.9 μg/mL). Based on this observation, we highly recommend a thorough therapeutic drug monitoring in septic patients when using extracorporeal removal strategies.
Most notably from the clinical point of view, we found improved hemodynamic stability within the process of cytokine removal . In order to experimentally analyze putative cellular effects of the cytokine removal on the vasculature, we used a previously described cellular in vitro system . We therefore collected serum from this patient immediately before and 24 h after cytokine removal. ECs were then challenged with these serial human serum samples for 30 min, and their morphology was investigated by fluorescent immunocytochemistry for the adherence junction protein VE-cadherin (green) and for a major component of the cytoskeleton, i.e., F-actin (red). Of note, intense stress on ECs leads to a polymerization of F-action resulting in the formation of so-called stress fibers. These contraction forces from the cytoskeletal architecture then contribute to the formation of visible gaps between adjacent cells, the cellular correlate for the clinical “vascular leakage syndrome” . When ECs were challenged with serum from the same patient after cytokine removal, the cells showed slightly less formation of stress fibers and were protected from the development of intracellular gaps . All together, the endothelial phenotype after cytokine removal was comparable to cells that were stimulated with serum from a healthy control person .
Next, TER measurements were performed in real time to objectively quantify the functional permeability consequences of these intercellular gaps . ECs were incubated with our patient’s serum before and after cytokine removal analogously to the staining experiment. Serial TERs were recorded every minute with a real-time electric cell-substrate impedance sensing (ECIS) approach in triplicates over 120 min. ECs challenged with serum before cytokine removal showed a rapid drop in mean resistance (consistent with an increase in permeability) whereas serum from the same patient after cytokine removal evidently blunted the permeability response .