A 67-year-old man suffered from progressive central vision loss OD for one month with no photopsia, night blindness, or extraocular symptoms including headache. The patient had medical history of pulmonary emphysema and non-contributory family history. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.08 OD and 1.2 OS. Relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was negative. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed moderate cells in the anterior vitreous OU. Funduscopy revealed swollen optic disc surrounded by serous retinal detachment (SRD), dilated tortuous veins OU, and subretinal opaque exudation at the fovea OD . Fluorescein angiography showed initial hyperfluorescence with late leakages from the optic disc and retinal venous wall staining OU, and hyperfluorescence from the initial phase at the fovea OD . Indocyanine green angiography revealed normal appearances OU except for slight hypofluorescence on the late phase corresponding to the foveal lesion OD. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed SRD adjacent to the optic disc OU and a dome-shaped hyperreflective lesion that extended from the inner nuclear layer to the photoreceptor layer corresponding to the foveal exudation OD . In the left eye, the photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment junction (IS/OS) line was intact at the macula . Goldmann perimetry showed blind spot enlargement of 20 × 20 OU and central scotoma of 10 × 10 OD. P100 latency of visual evoked potential (VEP) responses showed no prolongation OU (R: 111.3 ms L: 112.3 ms). Brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no abnormalities.
Two weeks after the first visit, BCVA decreased to 0.02 OD and 0.3 OS, with aggravation of the optic disc swelling OU and development of SRD at the macula OS . Single bright-flash electroretinography (ERG) showed normal a-wave OU and slightly reduced b-wave OS . Results of serological screening tests for infection, including syphilis and anti-Bartonella henselae antibody, as well as autoantibodies for autoimmune diseases were within normal limits.
Oral administration of prednisolone (PSL) at the dose of 30 mg a day was initiated and was continued during 5 months, based on a diagnosis of bilateral neuroretinitis. Swollen optic disc and SRD quickly reduced after treatment. Systemic screening detected lung small cell carcinoma of extensive-stage disease and systemic chemotherapy was initiated. Five months after treatment, optic disc swelling disappeared OU with foveal scar formation OD . On OCT, SRD and a foveal hyperreflective lesion disappeared with intact IS/OS line OS . BCVA increased to 0.08 OD and 1.2 OS. Immunoblot analyses using the patient’s serum detected autoantibodies against recoverin, CRMP-5, and α-enolase , but not carbonic anhydrase II (data not shown). Chemotherapy was discontinued because imaging showed near-complete disappearance of lung carcinoma. One month after withdrawal of chemotherapy, lung carcinoma recurred and systemic chemotherapy was resumed. Two months after recurrence of carcinoma, optic disc swelling also recurred and oral PSL was restarted. At the last visit, 3 months after the initiation of retreatment with PSL, optic disc swelling disappeared again OU. In OCT, the IS/OS line remained intact OU except for the fovea OD. The results of single bright-flash ERG were normal OU.
The human Recoverin cDNA (GenBank No. NM_002903) was subcloned into pGEX4T-2 vector (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ), and glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion recoverin protein was expressed in Escherichia (E.) coli strain Rosetta-gami 2 (DE3) (Novagen, Madison, WI). GST fusion proteins were purified through binding to Glutathione-Sepharose (GE Healthcare).
Recombinant human CRMP-5, α-enolase, and carbonic anhydrase II proteins were purchased from Abnova (Taipei, Taiwan), Biovision (Milpitas, CA), and ATGen (Gyeonggi-do, South Korea), respectively. Proteins were solubilized in 2 × SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) sample buffer by heating to 100°C for 5 minutes and separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. Then, proteins were transferred to PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride) membrane by electroblotting, and immunoblot analyses were performed using patient’s and control’s serum (1/2000 dilution), anti-recoverin antibody (1/20000, Millipore, Billerica, MA), anti-CRMP-5 antibody (1/2000, GeneTex, Irvine, CA), anti-α-enolase antibody (1/2000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), and anti-carbonic anhydrase II antibody (1/2000, Abcam, Cambridge, MA), as previously described .