A 54-year-old Iranian woman, married, resident in Shiraz, Fars Province in the south of Iran, referred to the ophthalmologist for routine eye examination. Her past medical history included only type II diabetes mellitus treated with 1000 mg metformin and 50 mg sitagliptin daily. The patient’s social history was negative for cigarette smoking or alcohol use. Her family history for malignancy was negative.
Due to suspicious lesion on dilated eye examination by ophthalmologist, sonography was requested. Sonographer reported a mushroom-shaped filling defect with homogeneous echo pattern arising from the anterior third of the temporal side of the globe wall, suggestive of melanoma; this 10 × 9.8 mm2 lesion could arise from the ciliary body and the choroid.
In tumor surveillance, thoracic and abdominal CT scan with IV contrast were normal. FDG-PET/CT scan showed low-grade metabolically active tumoral involvement in the anterolateral aspect of the right lobe of thyroid as well as hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy at cervical zone VI .
Right globe enucleation and implant replacement was performed for the patient; pathologic report revealed 9 × 10 mm2 malignant melanoma in choroid anterotemporal area with 0–1 mitotic area per 10 high-power fields (HPF) and involvement of anterior chamber and focal retina. Histologic type was mixed epitheloid (25%) and spindle cell melanoma (75%). Tumor cells were positive for HMB45 and Melan A. According to the AJCC 8th edition, tumor wasT3aN0M0, G1, at least stage IIB .
High-resolution ultrasonography of the neck soft tissue revealed normal thyroid gland without any sign of solid or cystic lesion, and a suspicious enlarged significant hypoechoic lymph node measuring about 12 × 12 mm2 in the right jugular chain at zone II. Sonography-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of this lesion revealed some clusters of malignant looking cells with high N/C ratio, hyperchromasia, and a few nuclear inclusions, suggestive of malignancy.
At this time, right-side parotidectomy and fascial nerve trunk exploration and right-side modified neck dissection was performed.
Pathologic report showed parotid gland without specific pathologic change, and seven lymph node labeled as level II and III; and four lymph node labeled as level IV, which were all reactive lymph nodes without evidence of malignancy.
One month later, high-resolution ultrasonography of the thyroid and neck showed an oval-shaped hypoechoic structure measuring 13 mm in right para tracheal area attached or invading right border of thyroid capsule with central echogenic hilum and central internal hypervascularity, which seems to be metastatic or suspicious lymph node.
The patient subsequently underwent thyroidectomy and submandibular lymphadenectomy. Pathologic report demonstrated micropapillary carcinoma (9 × 8 mm2), tall cell variant without lymphovascular or perineural invasion in the base of lymphocytic thyroiditis. One tissue labeled as right cervical lymph node revealed soft tissue with chronic inflammation and foreign body giant cell reaction . Postoperative ultrasonography of the neck did not show any evidence of lymphadenopathy.
Seventy-five days after thyroidectomy, 125-mCi I-131 was administered to the patient, who was off levothyroxine for 4 weeks. Whole-body scan after 7 days showed evidence of thyroid remnant and possibility of cervical lymph node involvement without evidence of distant metastases . At time of iodine administration, she had TSH > 100 mIU/ml, thyroglobulin < 0.04 ng/ml, and negative antithyroglobulin antibody. Eight months later, whole-body scan 2 days after oral administration of 5-mCi I-131 did not show any evidence of abnormal radioiodine-avid lesion throughout the body. At time of iodine administration, she had TSH > 100 mIU/ml, thyroglobulin < 0.2 ng/ml, and negative antithyroglobulin antibody. At this time, the patient is in good health state and takes levothyroxine with daily dose of 125 µg.