A 60-year-old woman with acromegalic cardiomyopathy underwent HeartMate II (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA) LVAD implantation and aortic valve (AV) closure using a bovine pericardial patch 4 years prior. Post-operative bacteraemia, de novo AR, and vegetations were observed; hence, consecutive repeat AV closure and omental flap transposition were performed. During the outpatient follow-up, the patient had recurrent severe AR and three cerebral haemorrhages caused by bacteraemia. The patient did not develop sepsis with oral antibiotic therapy, but the activities of daily living (ADLs) were severely limited.
Laboratory test results showed the following: white blood cell count, 5260/μL; C-reactive protein levels, 2.1 mg/dL; creatine levels, 1.62 mg/dL; and brain natriuretic peptide levels, 1138 pg/mL. Blood culture results continued to show methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a low left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF, 12%), a dilated left ventricle [left ventricular end-diastolic dimension/end-systolic dimension (LVEDD/SD), 73/69 mm], and severe peri-annular AR.
The donor, whose cause of brain death was subarachnoid haemorrhage, was a 41-year-old man, who underwent pulmonary valve-sparing TOF repair at the age of 3 years. The donor’s TOF repair preserved the pulmonary valve and did not require plication, only enlargement with pulmonary artery (PA) and right ventricle (RV) patching. After that surgery, there was no finding of heart failure and no need for reoperation. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal cardiac function (LVEF, 66%), a normal-sized left ventricle (LVEDD/SD, 48/31 mm), mild pulmonary valve stenosis (PS) (peak velocity 2.5 m/s), mild pulmonary valve regurgitation (PR), and no other notable findings.
The patient underwent heart transplantation using the modified bicaval technique. Recipient heart was resected just above the pulmonary valve for keeping the main pulmonary trunk. When the donor heart was inspected, a 2 cm square patch was placed in front of the slightly stenotic donor’s RV outflow tract, and the pulmonary valve was bicuspid valve. The ascending aorta was anteriorly deviated, but an anatomical anastomosis was possible . Weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass was uneventful, and intraoperative right ventricular function was preserved. The donor ischaemia time was 155 min. Vegetation was found on the inside of LVAD but not at the AV patch. Bacteriological examination revealed MRSE in the vegetation.
Blood culture results on post-operative Day 2 were negative. Post-operative pancreatitis developed but improved with medical therapy. The patient was weaned off inotropic agents on post-operative Day 12. Post-operative echocardiography showed normal cardiac function (LVEF, 77%), a normal-sized left ventricle (LVEDD/SD: 42/23 mm), mild PS (peak velocity 2.8 m/s), and mild PR. Post-operative right heart catheterization (RHC) at 1 month revealed the following pressure values: right atrium (RA) 4 mmHg, RV 46/7 mmHg, PA 24/12 mmHg, cardiac output (CO) 4.5 L/min, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) 1.3 Wood unit . The patient was discharged on post-operative Day 116. Right heart catheterization at the 1 year follow-up after heart transplantation revealed the following: RA 5 mmHg, RV 47/6 mmHg, PA 28/12 mmHg, and CO 5.3 L/min . She had no signs of infection, heart failure, arrhythmia, and immune rejection 15 months after the heart transplantation.