A 40 year-old-man was evaluated at our out patient clinic complaining of recurrent compressing retrosternal chest pain of 2 months duration. That pain occurred at rest or with exertion and sometimes awake the patient from sleep. He had history of smoking but no history of diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and no family history of coronary artery disease. His body mass index was 37 kg/m2 and waist circumference 115 cm.
No physical abnormalities were detected by clinical examination and blood pressure was 130/85 mmHg.
Resting ECG was normal and blood tests revealed triglycerides 1.8 mmol/L, high density lipoprotein cholesterol 0.57 mmol/L, total cholesterol 4.15 mmol/L, low density lipoprotein cholesterol 2.77 mmol/L, fasting blood glucose 6.8 mmol/L, post prandial glucose 9.9 mmol/L, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) 7.0%. All other blood tests were normal.
We decided to perform exercise stress test using CAEP protocol (The Chronotropic Assessment Exercise Protocol). Blood pressure, heart rate and 12-leads ECG were recorded at rest, at two-minute intervals during exercise, at peak exercise, and through the recovery phase. The ECG and ST-segment were continuously displayed and measured automatically by a computer-assisted system in all 12 leads. At heart rate of 144 beat/minute, the ST segment showed progressive elevation and the patient reported chest pain that necessitated termination of the test. The patient received oxygen and sublingual nitroglycerin and was reassured until disappearance of chest pain accompanied with complete recovery of ST-segment after about 15 minutes from cessation of exercise .
The patient was transferred to the CCU for observation and medical treatment. He was given oral acetylsalicylic acid, 300 mg per day; clopidogril 300 mg 1st day,75 mg thereafter; enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg/12 h; metoprolol, 50 mg per day;atorvastatin 20 mg per day. Serial cardiac enzymes values were normal.
Two days later, coronary angiography and left ventriculography were performed. The left coronary system was imaged at left and right oblique, right cranial and caudal and anteroposterior cranial positions. Significant coronary artery systolic luminal narrowing was observed in the mid segment of the left anterior descending coronary artery at left anterior oblique cranial position on coronary angiogram . The right coronary artery was normal and ventriculogram revealed preserved systolic function without wall motion abnormalities, or mitral regurge.
The patient was discharged on metoprolol 50 mg per day, oral acetylsalicylic acid, 81 mg per day, and atorvastatin 20 mg per day with complete instructions for risk factors modification.
At the one year follow up, our patient was healthy and had no cardiac complaints.