Three hours after being shot in the back, a 29-year-old Albanian man was admitted to the Surgical Department of our Emergency Center. An examination revealed two small caliber bullet holes over his thoracolumbar spine and sacrum, paraplegia and absence of the pulses. The deteriorating condition of our patient led to the decision to surgically explore his abdomen. No injuries to the viscera were found. A small retroperitoneal hematoma on his right side was opened. His pulse over his common iliac arteries was normal and there was no active bleeding at the area. Drains were placed and his abdomen was closed in layers. Because of an insufficient improvement of the monitored parameters, our patient was intubated and transferred to our intensive care unit for further resuscitation. Three hours later he developed ischemia in his left leg. His leg was cold, with no pulse up to the common femoral artery and there were signs of discoloration. Computed tomography of his chest and abdomen revealed two bullets - one in his left iliac fossa and a second in front of his sacrum . Color Doppler imaging revealed an obstruction of the external iliac artery on his left side. No free fluid was found in his abdomen. There was also a multiple fracture of his twelfth thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae with no free fluids in his abdomen . These findings alerted the vascular surgery team and after a consultation, a tentative diagnosis of a gunshot injury was made. The decision was made to re-enter the abdomen.
A second surgery was performed eight hours after the first one. At his left iliac fossa no significant hematoma was noted. However, there was no pulse over his external iliac artery. After the division of the surrounding tissues it was possible to feel the obstructing foreign body within the common iliac artery. Once vascular control was obtained the artery was opened and the bullet removed . The embolectomy of the distal arteries was performed using a Fogarty catheter and a significant amount of thrombi was removed . A pulse then returned to his leg. To alleviate developing compartment syndrome, crural and femoral fasciotomy were performed .
Although the leg performed well after the surgery, the postoperative period was complicated by multiorgan failure, which resulted in the death of our patient eighth days after receiving the injury.