A 65-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our bariatric surgery department with a BMI of 47.7 kg/m2. The patient had several obesity-associated comorbidities: type 2 diabetes, arterial hypertension, coronary heart disease with heart failure with New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification III, hepatic steatosis, hyperlipidemia, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), and arthrosis in the lower limbs. Due to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), we planned a laparoscopic proximal Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) for the patient. However, gastric biopsies taken during routine esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) prior to surgery revealed the presence of epithelioid cell granulomas suspicious for CD. An additional finding was a short segment Barrett’s esophagus without intraepithelial neoplasia. A subsequent colonoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of CD. Retrospectively, the patient reported diarrhea three times daily without blood admixtures or tenesmus. A systemic therapy with corticosteroids was initiated and surgery postponed. Six months later, after steroid weaning, the patient was asymptomatic concerning his CD. Weighing the risks for postoperative adverse events due to the inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) against the GERD and Barrett’s esophagus, a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) was performed instead of the initially planned RYGB. The patient’s weight at time of surgery was 165 kg. His laboratory workup showed a normal kidney function and inconspicuous liver chemistry. An abdominal ultrasound had been performed earlier without noteworthy findings. Intraoperatively, a suspicious tumor with increased vascularization and a diameter of 2.5 cm was incidentally discovered at the margin of the steatofibrotically altered liver in segment 3. It was removed in toto with 1 cm margin by laparoscopic wedge resection and extracted via endobag. There were no further significant findings in the abdomen: no ascites, enlarged lymph nodes or peritoneal lesions, and no signs for portal hypertension. Thus, surgery was continued as planned: utilizing a 36 French bougie for calibration, a gastric sleeve was formed, thereby resecting an 800 ml portion of the stomach. A ventral repair of a 3 cm measuring hiatal hernia completed the procedure. Total operating time was 140 min. The postoperative course was uneventful and corresponded to the routine stay at our clinic. The pathological report of the liver tumor revealed a HCC stage pT1b G1 with tumor-free resection margins and no involvement of blood or lymph vessels. The surrounding liver tissue showed a grade 3 steatosis and stage 2 fibrosis, but no cirrhosis. Postoperative staging via chest computed tomography (CT) and abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans did not show any signs for metastatic spreading. However, an additional tumor, highly suspicious for malignancy, was discovered at the left kidney. Four months after LSG, a robot-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy was performed. A completely resected clear-cell RCC stage pT1b G2 was confirmed pathologically. For both early stage malignancies, the patient was put on regular follow-up and did not receive systemic chemotherapy. He attended regular routine bariatric follow-ups, where he reported to be satisfied with his bariatric outcome. Total weight loss (TWL) was 23% and excess weight loss (EWL) was 49%. He never experienced any relapse of his CD, nor did he suffer from GERD symptoms. A control EGD was scheduled but had to be referred to an outpatient service due to capacity restrictions during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The results of the examination could not be obtained. The severity of several of his obesity-related comorbidities significantly improved (see Table ). Follow-up care after HCC and RCC was carried out at a clinic closer to the patient’s home in compliance with the German guidelines. Accordingly, abdominal MRIs were performed every 3 months in the first year, every 6 months in the second year, and thereafter once per year. Thoracic CT scans were done after 12 and 24 months. Three years after nephrectomy, when his weight had remained constant over half a year, the patient consulted with us to be planned for an abdominoplasty. Until that time, his malignant diseases had remained in full remission, but the 36 months follow-up imagings had not been performed yet. Unfortunately, during the preoperative work-up for plastic surgery, three small bilaterally localized pulmonary lesions were discovered by CT scan and were later histologically confirmed to be metastases of the RCC, in spite of the initially low tumor stage. Other signs for metastatic spreading were not discovered by positron emission tomography (PET)–CT. The patient was referred to his urologist for further oncologic care and did not present at our clinic thereafter.