Vulvar mass, irregular vaginal bleeding and night sweats for 1 mo.
A 26-year-old nulliparous woman came to our gynaecological department, complaining of a vulvar mass, irregular vaginal bleeding and night sweats for 1 mo.
The patient had no past illness.
The patient had no personal or family history.
Pelvic examination found that her left vulva, vagina and cervix were swollen. The bimanual examination revealed a vulvovaginal mass fixed to the pelvic wall.
Serum tumour markers, including a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, CA19-9 and human chorionic gonadotropin were all within the normal range. Immediately after her admission, the peripheral blood count showed that the white blood cell count was 3.7 × 109/L, haemoglobin and platelets were normal, and blasts were detected. A vulvovaginal mass biopsy was performed, and the initial result was a malignant small round cell tumour. Two weeks later, the patient had the peripheral blood count retested, and the white blood cell count was 18.9 × 109/L, haemoglobin 102 g/L, and platelets 24 × 109/L. Her peripheral blood smear revealed 79.0% blast cells. Immunohistochemical staining of bone marrow demonstrated positive reactions with myeloperoxidase (MPO) blast cells and the others were all negative. A bone marrow biopsy was performed, and a bone marrow smear showed that the proportion of myeloblasts was 64.5%, and that of erythroid cells was only 6.5%. Mature lymphocyte accounted for 11%, and only two megakaryocytes and a few platelets were seen. Flow cytometric studies in bone marrow showed that myeloblasts accounted for 76.0% of the nucleated cells, which expressed HLA-DR, CD117, CD13, CD33 and cMPO, and were weakly positive for CD34, CD123, CD38 and CD64, while negative for CD14, CD36, cCD3, CD5, CD7, CD56 and CD19. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation detected mutation in ETV6 and NPM1. Further immunohistochemistry of the vaginal mass biopsy was positive for CD99 and MPO .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast enhancement of the pelvis demonstrated an ill-defined, irregular, diffuse mass with involvement of the vagina, paravaginal tissue, urethra, posterior wall of the bladder, left ischiorectal fossa, left side of the pelvic diaphragm and pelvic floor, with a maximum diameter of 10.5 cm × 9.0 cm in the axial plane. The lesion was homogeneously isointense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) (b = 800), and hypointense on apparent diffusion coefficient images with homogeneous enhancement greater than the muscle . Bilateral obturator lymph nodes were enlarged, especially on the left side. The signal and enhancement of the uterus, cervix and bilateral ovaries were normal. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed high fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the mass and bilateral obturator lymph nodes, indicating malignancy . Thoracic CT was performed with no positive findings.