A 57-year-old man was admitted to our institution with repeated attacks of high IOP accompanied with AU in left eye for 4 months in 2016. He had a history of Posner–Schlossman syndrome (PSS) in left eye with recurred several times 20 years ago. According to outpatient medical records , the maximum IOP is 36 mmHg and the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) is 20/25 with deep anterior chamber, fine pupillary light reflex and a few anterior chamber inflammations during 4-month follow up period. Examinations found significant thinned retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) at superior and nasal side corresponding to visual field defects in inferior temple quadrant for the infected eye on his first visit in our outpatient center in May 2016. Topical corticosteroids and anti-glaucoma agents were treated then while IOP elevated repeatedly.
On admission in September, his BCVA is 20/25 for right eye, and 20/200 for left eye. The IOP is 18 mmHg and 40 mmHg respectively. The main features in his left eye are cornea edema with bullous keratopathy, fine white keratic precipitates (KPs), deep anterior chamber, 2+ flare counts in aqueous and patched iris atrophy. Meanwhile, visual field defects and glaucomatous optic nerve defects were enlarged . Quantitative PCR testing for CMV-DNA was immediately performed in samples from aqueous humor and serum. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other infection antibodies in serum were also tested. Results showed serum IgG for CMV but no IgM, HIV and other infectious diseases. The CMV-DNA in aqueous sample was positive (1800 copies/ml). Then the patient was treated with 2-week systemic antiviral therapy (ganciclovir 5 mg/kg twice a day intravenously for a week, followed by once a day for another week), topical 0.15% ganciclovir gel four times daily, 1% prednisolone acetate eye drops (Pred Forte) four times daily and local anti-glaucoma medications (brinzolamide and brimonidine). The IOP became normal 3 days later and the patient was asked to follow up.
However, 12 days after cessation of systemic use of genciclovir, the IOP in patient’s left eye reached to 33 mmHg with topical genciclovir gel, corticosteroid (Pred Forte) and NSAID (Pranoprofen) consistently used . The patient was readmitted because of the persistence of elevated IOP despite additional medication treatments for 20 days. After readmission, test showed that CMV-DNA was only 526 copies/ml in aqueous. But the IOP maintained a high level of 50 mmHg or above . To exclude corticosteroid glaucoma, NSAID were applied topically without steroid, accompanied with genciclovir gel and glaucoma medications. In addition, systemic therapies were administered for anti-virus (ganciclovir 5 mg/kg twice a day intravenously), anti-inflammatory (vein injection of methylprednisolone 80 mg per day) and anti-glaucoma (anterior chamber penetration, intravenous mannitol) in subsequent 15-day. Nevertheless, in view of the persistence of high IOP, corneal opacity with no cornea endothelial cells (CEC) could be measured and the development of glaucomatous damage , trabeculectomy was operated for refractory glaucoma of left eye in Nov. 2016. At this time, the test for CMV-DNA of the eye was negative (10 copies/ml) and the postoperative IOP has been controlled (8-13 mmHg) with BCVA of 20/25 a year later . However, the count of CEC in the infected eye has much lesser than that in the fellow eye after 6 months .