A 72-year-old man with already diagnosed metastatic NET and suffering from abdominal cramps, diarrhea and weight loss since 3 weeks was referred at our outpatient department. The NET had been located in the terminal ileum and had been diagnosed from biopsy of multiple liver metastases evidenced on CT-scanning nineteen months ago. Before undergoing clinical work-up and diagnosing the NET, the patient related an almost 12 month history of increasing diarrhea (up to 15 bowel movements per day) with weight loss of 11 kg. The tumor was rated G1 with a Ki-67-labeling index of 1 % , and the primary in the terminal ileum was resected. At diagnosis, the serum level of tumor marker chromogranin A was elevated at 1080 ng/ml (normal range <100 ng/ml), and the urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) was 29 mg/24 h (normal range 2 – 9 mg/24 h). After perioperative prevention with short-acting somatostatin (SST)-analogue octreotide subcutaneously, the patient was put on long-acting release depot octreotide LAR (OCT-LAR) 30 mg intramuscularly every 28 days, resulting in decrease of stool frequency to 2–3 bowel movements/day and weight gain by 7 kg.
Nineteen months after initiation of OCT-LAR, however, the patient again complained of severe diarrhea with up to 10 bowel movements with weight loss of 4 kg over 3 weeks. As progression/tachyphylaxis in symptomatic patients with carcinoid syndrome undergoing therapy with SST-analogues, reassessment of disease status performing a PET/CT with a SST receptor PET tracer [68Ga-DOTA,1-Nal3]-octreotide (68Ga-DOTANOC) and analysis of tumor markers was initiated, and the interval of OCT-LAR intramuscular injections was shortened to 21 days. However, radiological findings disclosed no evidence of NET progression. Also the regularly monitored tumor marker levels of chromogranin A and serotonin had been stable over the last months and were not indicative of progression (chromogranin A: 215 ng/ml; normal range <100 ng/ml and serotonin: 394 ng/ml; normal range 40–400 ng/ml). After 4 weeks with symptoms the patient developed additional fever up to 39 °C and night sweats for 2 days. Because of elevated signs of systemic inflammation (CRP: 20 mg/dl; normal range <0.5 mg/dl) and acute renal failure (serum creatinine: 6.7 mg/dl; normal rage 0.7–1.2 mg/dl) the outpatients was hospitalized and supportive therapy with intravenous hydration and maintenance of electrolyte balance plus empiric antimicrobial therapy with ciprofloxacin and metronidazole was started. At this time-point the first stool cultures were taken to identify microorganisms causing diarrhea like Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella and Yersinia. Stool samples were plated onto MacConkey agar (Oxoid, UK), Hektoen agar (bioMérieux, France), Cefsulodin-Irgasan-Novobiocin (CIN) agar (Becton Dickinson, Germany) and Campylosel agar (bioMérieux, France) as well as inoculated in Selenite F broth. All samples were incubated at 35–37 °C for 24 h. Suspicious colonies growing on Campylosel agar (a selective medium for the isolation of Campylobacter) were identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF, Bruker, Germany) as described by the manufacturer. The result obtained by MALDI-TOF was consistent with the presence of C. coli. The following antimicrobial susceptibility testing according to European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) disclosed a multidrug-resistant (MDR) C. coli (resistant to all 3 antimicrobial classes, the macrolides, fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines). Blood cultures and stool testing for Clostridium difficile toxins were negative. In view of limited therapeutic options due to the MDR and the usually self-limiting nature of campylobacteriosis, the antimicrobial therapy was stopped after 5 days and a wait and see approach was chosen. The patient became symptom-free with normalization of serial stool cultures 6 weeks later, resulting in a total duration of symptoms of 13 weeks.