A 33-year-old woman (gravida 2, para 0) with a regular menstrual period denied any symptoms or signs such as abdominal pain, dysmenorrhea, or menorrhagia. During a routine physical examination, ultrasonography revealed two right-side adnexal masses. One measuring 3.7 cm × 3.0 cm was suggestive of a right-side chocolate cyst. The other one measured 6.9 cm × 4.1 cm with vascularity on color-flow Doppler study. A computed tomography scan revealed a right-side heterogeneous pelvic mass posterior to the urinary bladder pushing the uterus to the left side ; it was suggestive of a complex of right-side ovarian tumor. A provisional diagnosis of retroperitoneal pelvic mass, probably a benign ovarian tumor, was made.
Excision of the right-side pelvic mass and a right-side ovarian cystectomy were performed. The uterus was normal in size. One 3-cm right-side chocolate cyst was visualized, and cystectomy was performed. The other 4-cm right-side pelvis mass was identified, and tumor excision was performed. We sent the specimens for frozen pathology, which indicated (a) a spindle cell tumor and compatible with neurofibroma and (b) lipomatous tumor and that the possibility of liposarcoma cannot be excluded. A segment of the obturator nerve was attached to the tumor and was severed. A right-side obturator nerve tear during tumor excision was observed, and a neurosurgeon was consulted for obturator nerve grafting and repair. A Jackson–Pratt drain was kept on the right side of the abdomen, and the patient stood for the duration of the entire procedure—7 h and 30 min. The patient complained of mild weakness and paresthesia affecting the right leg, and we consulted a rehabilitation doctor for neuron injury. The patient’s recovery was uneventful, and the drain was removed on postoperative day 7, and she was discharged eight days after the drain was removed. Further rehabilitation treatment was arranged.
The surgical pathology report included a picture of the neurofibroma , which comprised oval to eel-like spindle nuclei on a background of generally wavy, arranged collagenous fibers and myxoid matrixes. Many areas contained schwannoma-like features, characterized by a biphasic pattern with compact areas of spindle cells alternating with loosely arranged foci containing collections of foamy histiocytes. The tumor was diffusely positive for S100 and SOX-10. Several axons within the tumor were demonstrated with NF immunostain .