A 50-year-old African American female with a past medical history of uncontrolled hypertension, membranous ventricular septal defect, and nonobstructive coronary artery disease presented with complaints of pressure-like substernal chest pain, nausea, and vomiting of 2-h duration. She complained of constant dry heaves and had three episodes of vomiting while in the emergency room (ER). She also complained of intermittent dizziness, nausea, and vomiting for the past 2 months.
Her vitals on admission were as follows: temperature of 98.6°F, heart rate of 60/min, respiratory rate of 20/min, oxygen saturation 98%, and blood pressure of 209/123 mm Hg. Physical examination was normal except for a systolic murmur along the left sternal border. Initial electrocardiogram (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm, and initial troponin was 0.01 ng/dl.
While interviewing the patient, her monitor read as asystole on two occasions lasting for 9-11 s [see and ]. She was, however, awake and alert at that time but complaining of nausea. The telemetry strips on detailed examination revealed presence of P waves with very infrequent QRS complexes. This was consistent with VS. The rhythm, however, spontaneously reverted to normal sinus with consistent 1:1 conduction. Hence, despite having no ventricular contraction for about 10 s, she had no symptoms. She was then transferred to telemetry for observation.
At 5 am the next morning, the on-call physician was informed by the telemetry technician that the patient had been in VS for more than 10 s, which was preceded by a high-degree atrioventricular (AV) block . Patient was found to be asleep and was totally asymptomatic on waking up. Because this was the third episode of VS, though not accompanied by syncope, we decided to intervene. Her frequent episodes of VS were attributed to increased vagal response from nausea and vomiting as well as REM (rapid eye movement) sleep. In view of this being a marked response, a permanent dual chamber pacemaker was implanted, following which, she remained asymptomatic.