A 22-year-old previously healthy man initially presented to an outside hospital with rapidly progressive quadriplegia, found to have an acute spinal cord infarction secondary to fibrocartilaginous emboli from disc material, complicated by respiratory failure requiring chronic mechanical ventilation. The patient underwent diaphragmatic pacemaker system (DPS) implantation to liberate him from the ventilator with no complications. The pacemaker voltage was up-titrated with a stimulus amplitude of 25 mA and pulse width of 200 µs over several weeks and the patient was discharged to a long-term acute care hospital. Two months later, the patient developed frequent premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) on telemetry while afebrile, normotensive and not hypoxic. Three hours afterwards, he developed polymorphic VT followed by VF and cardiac arrest . Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved after prolonged cardiopulmonary resuscitation by advanced cardiac life support algorithm including numerous shocks. The DPS was subsequently turned off and the patient was transferred to the hospital. Potassium and magnesium were within normal limits, and initial lactate was 1.9 mmol/L. Troponin-I down-trended from 5.98 to 5.51 ng/mL. Diphenhydramine was the only potential QT-prolonging medication the patient took, but there was a normal QT interval on the admission electrocardiogram (EKG) taken post-arrest , which excludes drug-induced QT prolongation. Of note, there was J-point elevation in precordial leads suggestive of early repolarization, which has been associated with idiopathic VF. An echocardiogram was obtained, which showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30% and right ventricular systolic pressure of 33.7 mmHg. Coronary catheterization showed normal coronaries, and computed tomography (CT) of the head and chest showed no acute pathology. A repeat echocardiogram was obtained prior to discharge showing full recovery of LVEF and no structural abnormalities. The initial echocardiogram was thought to represent stunned myocardium in the setting of resuscitated cardiac arrest as evidenced by normalization of LVEF and overall clinical time course. An initial trial of manipulation of the DPS at low voltage was unable to provoke VT . Given the initially unclear aetiology of VT and the patient’s young age and good prognosis, a single chamber implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) was implanted. Subsequently, the DPS voltage was increased, resulting in recurrent nonsustained VT on telemetry which resolved when the DPS was turned off. It was restarted at a lower voltage with a stimulus amplitude of 15 mA and pulse width of 130 µs on the left side resulting in no ectopy recurrence. An ICD interrogation 1 month after discharge showed no evidence of further arrhythmias.