The patient was a 68-year-old-man admitted to our tertiary referral hospital with complaints of progressive drowsiness and confusion from 2 months before.
In 2011, the patient was diagnosed with B-CLL through the detection of a long arm deletion of chromosome 13 at position 14 via fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, flow cytometry, and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Initially, he didn’t receive treatment as being asymptomatic until 2015, when cyclical chlorambucil was started only until 2020. He also had a documented history of basal cell carcinoma diagnosed in a facial papule which was resected with a normal margin 2 years before without any local recurrence.
The patient was doing well until August 2021 when he presented with fever, imbalance, and restlessness 4 days after the second dose of the Sinopharm vaccine (second 0.5 mL intramuscular injection of the inactivated virus). Initially his fever subsided but he gradually started to experience memory disturbances, difficulty keeping focus and finding directions accompanied by behavioral and personality changes.
In late September, urinary and stool incontinence were added to the symptoms and he was admitted for a primary evaluation in another center; there empirical treatment and evaluation for meningoencephalitis was initiated. At the time of admission to our tertiary center, the patient was drowsy, answering questions with short sentences and was confused especially in performing multi-step tasks. In the Mini- Mental State Exam (MMSE) his score was 17 points (mostly impaired in recall and calculation parts). He wasn’t febrile and a general examination revealed no obvious meningismus or lymphadenopathy. In neurological examination, cranial nerves were intact, and no hemiparesis or hemi-sensory loss was detected while having an unsteady gait. Plantar reflexes were both downward. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple areas of hypo-densities without any mass effect. On brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), T2/FLAIR sequences revealed relatively large areas of intensity alteration and gliosis at subcortical white matter of both parieto-occipital lobes. Similar changes in the left hemisphere of the cerebellum as well as in the midbrain were seen . In diffusion weighted image (DWI) sequences, the lesions showed peripheral restriction and in post gadolinium T1 sequence, hazy peripheral punctate enhancement in the frontal region was seen. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) revealed a mild decrease in N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) and also in Choline in the abnormal area. Choline/Creatine Ratio was about 0.8, excluding the possibility of neoplastic lesions (primary or secondary) and suggesting of demyelinating/inflammatory process like PML .
Laboratory tests showed an abnormal CBC in the form of anemia and thrombocytopenia (White blood cell: 36,000 (95% lymphocytes), (Hemoglobin: 10.9 g/dl; Mean corpuscular volume: 88.5) (platelet count: 91,000)). Liver, renal and thyroid function tests, serum electrolytes and C-reactive protein (CRP) all reported within normal limits. The encephalitis panel in Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for viral, bacterial and fungal etiologies (HIV, HSV1, HSV2, CMV, TB, Cryptococcus, Toxoplasmosis), blood vasculitis markers (antinuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA (Anti-dsDNA) antibodies, antiphospholipid antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, rheumatoid factor) and also viral markers (hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) antibody and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody tests) reported negative. Also, at the beginning of his admission COVID-19 PCR was negative. Serologic evaluation for Brucella and toxoplasmosis IgM were negative.
A second lumbar puncture showed normal cell count, protein (0.28 mg/dL) and glucose. There were no abnormal cells on direct smear and fungal evaluation. No abnormal cell was detected in the CSF cytology and CSF cytometry was negative. JCV PCR was positive in the CSF. Consequently, the diagnosis of PML was made.
Unfortunately, during hospitalization, the patient’s level of consciousness gradually worsened leading to concerns of COVID-19 involvement considering the existing pandemic. This concern was later, proven with a second chest CT scan and a positive COVID-19 PCR .
While under conservative and supportive treatment for COVID-19 infection, he revealed early signs of rhinosinusitis. Ear, nose, and throat (ENT) evaluation with nasal direct smear demonstrated septate hyphae, suggesting mucormycosis involvement as the patient was predisposed due to underlying immunosuppression, diabetes mellitus with recently poor blood glucose control. Despite all efforts for treatment, the patient eventually passed away of multi-organ failure after 3 months of his initial symptoms .