In April 2020, a 73-year-old white male nursing home resident with known history of obesity, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on chronic oxygen supplementation on 2 L with rest, obstructive sleep apnea, stroke, pancreatic insufficiency, and type II diabetes mellitus presented with shortness of breath and a positive COVID-19 nasal swab polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. Vitals were within normal limits, and he was saturating 96% on 2 L nasal cannula, which was his baseline. Pertinent laboratory results included white blood cell (WBC) 6.4 K/mm3, Absolute Neutophill count (N#) 4.1 K/mm3, Absolute Lymphocyte count (L#) 1.5 K/mm3, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 131 unit/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 5.5 mg/L, and ferritin 221 ng/ml. Kidney and liver function tests remained within normal limit. Chest x-rays showed an obese body habitus with mild-to-moderate cardiomegaly and clear lung fields . This was similar compared with his previous chest x-rays since 2018. He was monitored in the hospital and discharged after 3 days. Two nasal PCR tests were negative; one performed on the day of his hospital discharge and the second one repeated after 14 days of discharge.
Two months later, in June 2020, he presented to the hospital again, this time with progressive dyspnea, subjective fevers, and confusion. Vital signs were remarkable for blood pressure (BP) 96/52 and SpO2 60% on arrival. Examination was notable for encephalopathy; auscultation was limited by body habitus. He was initially placed on bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) with improvement in his oxygen saturation. Initial arterial blood gas (ABG) was 7.22/107/52 on 0.4 FiO2, confirming he was in acute hypoxemic and hypercapnic respiratory failure. His COVID-19 PCR test was positive on admission. Of note, SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies were detected on assays on admission. Chest x-ray was notable for diffuse infiltrates . Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed bilateral pleural effusions with consolidation or atelectasis in the lower lobes and patchy air space opacities involving the right upper lobe . He was intubated because of persistent hypoxemia. He was treated with a 10-day course of remdesivir, convalescent plasma, and dexamethasone 6 mg daily. Piperacillin–tazobactam was also started to cover for bacterial pneumonia. He was extubated after 4 days and discharged back to the nursing home after 2 weeks in the hospital. Before discharge, two COVID-19 PCR tests were done, which were negative. At the time of writing this case report, he remains at his nursing home and has received his COVID-19 vaccine.