A 48-year old Caucasian man with locally advanced PC was treated with five cycles of neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy followed by pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple's procedure) in August 2016. Histopathology confirmed moderate to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with evidence of perineural but no lympho-vascular infiltration. Margins were clear, and the UICC staging was ypT1N1M0 (AJCC 7th Edition.) He then had one cycle of adjuvant FOLFIRINOX (minus oxaliplatin due to grade 2–3 peripheral neuropathy from prior chemotherapy), but suffered significant side effects, precluding further adjuvant chemotherapy.
Follow-up clinical examination, blood tests and computed tomography (CT) were performed every 3 months. Tumour markers carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) remained within the normal range. In February 2019, a small (5 mm) lung nodule was noted with subtle increase in size over 1 year. Eventually, in October 2019, a PET scan demonstrated low grade but suspicious fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in right lung upper (SUV max 1.7) and lower lobe (SUV max 1.8) nodules and an equivocal right hilar node (SUV max 2.4), with no evidence of loco-regional recurrence or other distant metastases. The patient remained asymptomatic during this period.
The right hilar node was biopsied, confirming metastatic adenocarcinoma consistent with a gastrointestinal tract primary. He underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic right hilar node resection, wedge resections of the right upper and lower lobe lesions, and excision of a right para-tracheal node in February 2020, with uneventful recovery.
Histopathology was consistent with metastatic moderate to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in the right hilar node and in the two right lung parenchymal metastases, all three with positive margins. The hilar lesion also demonstrated extra-nodal extension . The tumours were negative for both TTF1 and Napsin A, supporting the diagnosis of metastatic PC. The para-tracheal node was negative for malignancy.
He was referred to the Radiation Oncology clinic for consideration of SABR. The treating medical oncologist favoured radiotherapy over systemic therapy, given the low burden of disease as well as his documented chemotherapy related toxicities. He had excellent performance status (ECOG 0) and denied any respiratory symptoms. He lived at home with his wife and lived an active lifestyle. He was a non-drinker and a non-smoker. There was no other significant past medical history apart from depression and physical examination was unremarkable. His medications prior to diagnosis included tramadol 50 mg bd, diazepam 5 mg bd, mirtazapine 60 mg od and a daily adjusted dose of Creon. Recent pulmonary function tests were normal (FEV1 4.6, DLCO 76%).
His case was discussed at our departmental SABR meeting. Taking into consideration his relatively long disease-free interval, good performance status, and relatively young age, as well as the positive surgical margins and extra-capsular nodal extension of the right hilar node, SABR was advised to all three sites aiming to decrease the chance of local recurrence.
The patient underwent treatment in April 2020. Simulation utilized a free breathing 4-Dimensional CT (4D-CT) technique. Internal target volumes were created based on the 4D-CT. The surgical bed was delineated with the aid of surgical clips and pre-operative diagnostic imaging which was fused to the 4D-CT. For planning target volumes (PTV) 1 and 2 (hilar nodal bed, 26.5 cc, and right upper lobe tumour bed, 34.2 cc, respectively), the dose prescription was 60 Gy in 15 fractions to the 91% isodose line for each; PTV3 for the lower lobe lesion (38.5 cc) was prescribed 48 Gy in 4 fractions to the 86% isodose line. Treatment was delivered over three weeks with sessions at least 48 h apart using a flattening filter-free linac based volumetric modulated arc radiotherapy (VMAT) technique .
Daily on-board imaging was utilized with cone-beam CT matching with 0 mm tolerance for couch shifts.
The patient tolerated radiation well, with no acute or late side effects. He was followed up at 3-monthly intervals, disease control defined by stable findings on CT scan in the absence of clinical or biochemical evidence of progression. CT scans 3 and 6 months post-SABR demonstrated no evidence of recurrence and CA 19-9 remained normal until the last reading of 2 U/mL (normal range 0–37 U/mL) which was taken on 14/9/2021.
The 9 month follow up CT in January 2021 was stable with respect to the areas of the right lung treated with SABR, but did show an enlarging pre-tracheal lymph node measuring 15 mm in the short axis . This was confirmed to be consistent with metastatic PC via endobronchial ultrasound biopsy. He underwent high dose palliative RT to this isolated metastatic site, receiving 54 Gy in 30 fractions in March–April 2021. CT chest in June 2021 showed response in the treated node, now measuring 11 mm. A developing soft tissue opacity in the previously treated region of the right lower lobe was considered consistent with post-treatment effect/pseudoprogression and further surveillance imaging was favoured. Some nodularity of the right lung pleura was also noted at this time.
At 18 months post-SABR in October 2021, the CT reported a 10–15% increase in size of the right lower lobe mass . Other findings were stable. In January 2022, CT and a subsequent PET-CT confirmed the development of diffuse metastatic disease with adrenal, bone and left lung metastases as well as progressive pleural disease. He was admitted under the palliative care unit for pain management and received 20 Gy in 5 fractions for right chest wall pain. On examination he was found to have widespread pain in the back, arms and hips. There was numbness in both upper limbs, the left buttock and the right lateral thigh. He was hypercalcaemic with a corrected calcium of 3.69. Unfortunately, a CT head performed to investigate delirium identified a cerebellar metastasis causing effacement of the 4th ventricle, and the patient died a few days later in February 2022, 5½ years after his initial treatment. An autopsy was not performed.