A 41-year-old married male patient presented to our outpatient clinic with complaint of severe dysuria, weak stream and suprapubic pain that had lasted for 1 week accompanied by complete urinary retention and a month history of incontinence. Due to incontinence, he began self-treatment by instilling superglue into his urethra for 2 weeks. The patient had no urination problem during the early days of insertion. After 4 days, he complained about oliguria and dysuria which emerged simultaneously. By the time of referral to our center (2 weeks later), he was suffering from urinary retention. There was no history of psychiatric disorders. On perineal examination, his penis had erected form. A FB was palpable within the penile urethra and brittle fragments of superglue were seen on the meatus. An abdominal ultrasound revealed bilateral mild hydronephrosis, with normal cortical thickness, and without any sign of stone in the bladder. Laboratory examinations were normal. The patient was taken to the operating room urgently. He underwent a cystoscopy however, it failed due to obstruction.
So the glance was incised in 2 cm length at 6 o'clock position .
The urethra was then washed with 3 liters of normal saline for approximately 15 minutes. During that period we managed to make the solution permeate across the solid material by performing certain maneuvers thereby shedding the adherent layer off the urethral wall. Eventually, a 10 cm rod-shaped solid block of dried superglue came out with the aid of forceps and was removed successfully. The incision was sutured with nylon. After surgery, urination was normal in caliber and direction and the patient was satisfied with urinary drainage. The urine analysis was normal and we did not have requirement for cystoscopy. A 16F Foley catheter was left in place for 10 days. Amikacin 500 mg BD and cefazolin 1gr QID were administrated and he was discharged on the 5th postoperative day without any complication. By the 6th week postoperative, he had no clinical complaints and his uroflow test remained normal.