A 67-year-old woman with obstructive jaundice was referred to our hospital. Laboratory data on admission showed elevated levels of serum total bilirubin at 15.5 mg/dL, γ-glutamyltranspeptidase at 1347 IU/L, carcinoembryonic antigen at 14.1 ng/mL, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 at 609 U/mL. Multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) revealed the tumor at the fundus of the gallbladder infiltrating the liver parenchyma and bulky lymph node metastases on the posterior surface of the pancreatic head infiltrating the common bile duct . The para-aortic lymph nodes were also swollen . Positron emission tomography showed the accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the tumor and lymph nodes, including the para-aortic lymph nodes . Therefore, although pathological confirmation was not obtained, the diagnosis of unresectable GBC was made based on the markedly elevated tumor markers and obvious imaging findings. A percutaneous transhepatic bile duct stent was placed for biliary decompression, and the carcinoembryonic antigen level was 10.9 ng/mL, and the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 level was 599 U/mL after improvement of jaundice.
Systemic chemotherapy with the GC regimen (gemcitabine: 1000 mg/m2, days 1 and 8; cisplatin: 25 mg/m2, days 1 and 8; 1 course for 21 days) was started, and the subsequent treatment process is summarized in Fig. . One month after the start of GC therapy, the tumor marker levels had markedly decreased, and MDCT revealed a reduction of the primary tumor and metastatic lymph nodes . The dose of cisplatin was gradually reduced due to adverse events of renal dysfunction and peripheral neuropathy, and gemcitabine alone was administered from 10 months after the start of GC therapy. Chemotherapy was then switched to biweekly gemcitabine monotherapy due to repeated anemia. In addition, steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head occurred, and right total hip arthroplasty was performed 35 months after the start of GC.
Computed tomography, abdominal ultrasonography and positron emission tomography performed 4 years after the start of GC therapy showed that the primary tumor and metastatic lymph nodes remained shrunken without the accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose, so we decided to perform conversion surgery. At 49 months after the start of GC therapy, gallbladder bed resection and regional lymph node dissection (with preservation of the extrahepatic bile duct) and sampling of the para-aortic lymph nodes were performed . All of the para-aortic lymph nodes sampled for intraoperative frozen section examinations were negative for cancer. The posterior pancreatic lymph nodes that initially infiltrated the common bile duct were able to be dissected from the bile duct. The pathological findings of the resected specimen, including the entire part of the gallbladder, showed only partial fibrosis in the gallbladder wall and no malignant findings in the dissected lymph nodes, resulting in a pathological CR . Adjuvant chemotherapy was not performed. As of 24 months after the operation, she is alive without recurrence.