A 74-year-old man presented with a left lung nodule and left adrenal tumor based on computed tomography (CT) and was referred to us. He had a history of emphysema, pneumoconiosis, and chronic bronchitis. He had a history of smoking with a Brinkman index of 750. Serum tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, cytokeratin 19 fragment, and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide were within the normal ranges. Chest and abdominal CT showed a well-circumscribed, 1.6-cm mass in the S6 segment of the left lower lobe and a 3.5-cm mass in the left adrenal gland. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT imaging revealed 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation of a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV max) of 3.88 and 6.14 in the lung nodule and adrenal mass, respectively. We suspected clinical T1bN0M1b, stage IVB lung cancer of the left lower lobe and performed bronchoscopy. We performed left adrenalectomy to obtain a definitive diagnosis. Operation time and blood loss were 115 min and 56 ml, respectively. The left adrenal tumor was gray-white with a clear border of 3.5 cm consisting of solid, proliferative, short spindle cells without clear differentiation . Since a part of the tumor showed slight epithelial differentiation and most immunohistological epithelial markers were positive, metastatic cancer was considered. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and vimentin but negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, and PE-10. Although it was TTF-1 negative and the lung lesion could not be determined as the primary lesion, there was a high possibility of metastasis of the primary PPC. CT after left adrenalectomy showed spontaneous regression of the lung lesion . Therefore, the possibility of inflammatory changes in S6 lung nodules could not be ruled out. Moreover, the possibility of cTXN0M1b, stage IVA lung cancer of unknown origin remained. Subsequently, chemotherapy with cisplatin and docetaxel was administered according to adjuvant chemotherapy of non-small cell carcinoma regimen. Finally, two courses of chemotherapy were administered. Chemotherapy was discontinued after two courses at the patient’s request due to nausea. After chemotherapy, the lung lesions became linear and nearly disappeared . Since lung lesions re-enlarged 11 months after adrenalectomy , PET-CT was performed that showed an FDG accumulation with SUV max of 2.72 in the lung nodule. Eventually, the pulmonary nodule was determined to be the primary lesion, and we decided to resect it for definitive diagnosis. In the respiratory function test immediately before the operation, both the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (1.24 l) and the forced expiratory volume 1 s percent (40.5%) were low. Due to high emphysema and poor lung function, we proposed a partial resection, and the patient agreed. Therefore, partial resection of the left lower lobe was performed. Operation time and blood loss were 60 min and 1 ml, respectively. Macroscopically, a solid white tumor with a clear border of 1.4 cm was observed . Histologically, there was no clear keratinization, inter-tissue bridge, or ductal structure, and the findings were similar to those of adrenal tumors . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, EMA, and vimentin, and negative for TTF-1, SMA, desmin, and PE-10. The diagnosis was consistent with the primary lesions of adrenal tumors. Thus, three courses of chemotherapy with cisplatin and docetaxel were administered. There was no recurrence for 4 years and 3 months since the last treatment, and the patient was followed up at another hospital. After 8 years and 4 months since the lung resection, endocrine therapy was administered for the diagnosis of advanced prostate cancer. However, no recurrence of PPC was observed.