A 62-year-old white woman (Patient II-1 in Fig. a) with DM1 was investigated after routine testing in a specialist DM1 clinic found the serum IgG concentration was 2.78 g/L (reference range 7.0–16.0 g/L). IgG concentration a year prior had also been low at 4.0 g/L. There was no recent history of recurrent sinopulmonary, gastrointestinal, or unusual infections.
Her past medical history included recurrent upper respiratory tract infections during childhood with adenoidectomy and tonsillectomy. Her DM1 symptoms were recognized only after the birth of her son (Patient III-1 in Fig. a), when he was diagnosed as having congenital DM1. Her past medical history also included psoriasis that was never treated with systemic immunosuppression. In regard to family history, she believes her deceased father also displayed ptosis and distal weakness; however, he was never formally diagnosed as having DM1. In regard to social history, she was born in Ireland and she did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. There were no pets at home. She worked part-time in a small business and there were no discernible environmental exposures. Patient II-1’s medications were: conjugated estrogen hormone replacement therapy, ezetimibe 10 mg daily, cholecalciferol 1000 IU daily, and acitretin 10 mg daily. The clinical features of Patient II-1 are summarized in Table .
A neurological examination found facial weakness, ptosis, handgrip and percussion myotonia, distal wasting, and weakness of her upper and lower extremities with bilateral foot drop requiring a walking cane. There were psoriatic plaques on her hands and forearms bilaterally. There was no active synovitis or palpable lymphadenopathy. Her mouth was clear. Her heart rate was 60 beats per minute and regular. Her heart sounds were dual with no murmur. Her chest was clear to auscultation. Her abdomen was soft and non-tender and there was no peripheral edema.
Laboratory investigations revealed unremarkable full blood count (FBC), electrolytes, urea, and creatinine (EUC), and liver function tests (LFT) . The serum albumin was within normal limits. There was no evidence of urinary protein loss . Further investigations into secondary causes of hypogammaglobulinemia found no abnormal lymphocyte populations by flow cytometry with normal proportion of switched memory B cells . Serology testing showed protective levels of IgG to diphtheria, Haemophilus influenzae, and tetanus, and low to pneumococcus . Serum and urine protein electrophoresis confirmed hypogammaglobulinemia without evidence of significant proteinuria and immunofixation did not detect a paraprotein.
Patient II-1 was commenced on 36 g Intragam® P (CSL, Behring, Australia) IVIg (that is, 0.4 mg/kg) monthly due to significantly low IgG. We performed in vivo pharmacokinetic (pK) investigations by measuring serial serum IgG at 1 hour, 48 hours, and 14 days after the initial infusions . The estimated elimination t1/2 of IgG was 12.7 days for Patient II-1 which was markedly reduced when compared to the reported t1/2 of IgG after Intragam P administration of 39.7 (+/− 7.8) days .
Over the following 6 months, Patient II-1 remained well and received 4-weekly IVIg. Monitoring of pre-infusion serum IgG levels revealed that Patient II-1’s serum IgG remained low at 5.0 g/L despite standard dose and timing. Increasing Patient II-1’s IVIg dosing to 21 g fortnightly increased her trough IgG to 7.8 g/L which is within normal limits. At the time of writing, Patient II-1 was in a stable condition.