As part of a routine workup of unexplained weight gain in a 28-year-old Caucasian woman, a pHPT was diagnosed with a calcemia at 2.67 mmol/L (normal 2.12–2.52 mmol/L), a phosphatemia at 0.8 mmol/L (normal 0.81–1.58 mmol/L), a parathormone (PTH) concentration of 66.2 ng/L (18.4–80.1 ng/L), and a 24-h calciuria level of 8.58 mmol/24 h (normal 1–8.80 mmol/24 h). An ultrasound performed found in the posteroinferior part of the right lobe a small hypoechoic pseudo-nodular structure with a regular contour measuring 9 mm which could correspond to a parathyroid hypertrophy. Choline PET/CT found a hyperfixation more focused posteroinferior right thyroid, well separated from the thyroid lobe, which may correspond to a parathyroid adenoma P3 right (SU VMAX = 3.62) (Figure ). [99mTc]TC-MIBI scintigraphy Methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile scintigraphy appeared negative. Waiting for genetics results, a screening of MEN1-associated lesions was performed. Pituitary MRI found about a right lateralized hypoenhancement without abnormality in the other sequences measuring 5 × 4 mm that requires new look. A thoracic-abdominal-pelvic CT scan (TAP-CT) found a pancreatic mass at 7 mm, not confirmed using echo-endoscopy. Plasma chromogranin A, gastrin, and pancreatic polypeptide were within normal limits, as were pituitary bioassays. Renal ultrasound was normal, while bone densitometry showed osteopenia with a femoral T-score of −2.4.
Her family history is marked by the occurrence of a pHPT in her mother, discovered at 50 years old, induced by a parathyroid adenoma operated at 52 years old, discovered incidentally during a routine blood test. This patient had a total hysterectomy at the age of 48 years for menometrorrhagia, present since one year and unresolved by progestin and levonorgestrel treatment. Anatomopathology concluded to a moderate uterine parietal adenomyosis with no sign of malignancy.
Due to the young age of the index case (<50 years old) and family history (two first degree relatives is an indication for analysis Figure ), a first-line panel by NGS of the genes involved in pHPT was undertaken . A heterozygous pathogenic variation in the CDC73 gene was found: c.687_688dup, p.Val230Glufs*28 (or previously reported as c.679_680insAG; p.Arg227fs*31) which inserts two nucleotides in exon 7 causing a frameshift at codon 230, this creates a stop gain and a loss of function of the allele . This variation was confirmed by Sanger method on a second independent sample. The familial genetic investigation found the variant in her mother. The at risk relatives in this branch refused the genetic analysis. Following the discovery of this variation, an extension workup was undertaken in the two patients, associating a dental panoramic, a renal and pelvic ultrasound to look for tumors of the jaw, uterine lesions, or renal abnormalities, respectively, found no anomalies. Preoperative neck ultrasound do not show features suggestive of parathyroid carcinoma such as infiltration, calcification, irregular borders, or signs of local invasion. Therefore, mini-invasive surgery of right P3 parathyroid gland was performed. Histological examination found no malignancy criteria. Calcemia was normalized after surgery. Follow-up two years after diagnosis did not found any new lesions in these patients.