The proband is a 37-year-old white female a history of PDA ligation as a 6-week-old. A cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan performed at the time of acute onset of left-sided weakness and choreiform movements of the left arm at age of 11 revealed extensive periventricular deep white matter hyperintensity and a lesion in the right basal ganglia. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) a year later showed MMD of the anterior circulation. At age 26, a referral to the neurologist for further assessment of ongoing minor choreiform movements and left sided paraesthesia led to the observation of fixed-dilated pupils. At age 30, she represented with expressive aphasia and right-side weakness which resolved within 6 h. MRI/MRA demonstrated acute left middle cerebral artery (MCA) branch infarct involving left insula, inferior frontal gyrus and superior temporal gyrus. Subsequent cerebral angiography confirmed an occlusive cerebral angiography that is distinct from MMD characterised by severe tapering stenosis of the supraclinoid segment of the internal carotid arteries (ICA) with dilatation of their proximal portions, straightening of cerebral vessels and absence of basal collaterals . Echocardiogram of the heart and aortic root and Doppler ultrasound of the lower limb arteries were normal and autoimmune serology was negative. Consideration was given to an external carotid-internal carotid bypass but this was not undertaken as she was asymptomatic. Therapy with aspirin was continued.
The older sister of the proband is a 41-year-old mother of 2 with a history of PDA ligation as a newborn. Fixed dilated pupils were noted as a child and diagnosed as congenital mydriasis by an ophthalmologist. At age 36, she presented to the neurologist with tension headache, a cranial computed tomography (CT) scan showing hypodensity white matter lesions. She had a normal neurological and systemic examination except for the non-reactive mid-dilated pupils. Her 2 children had reactive pupils. The proband’s mother, at the age of 66 years, has a history of hypercholesterolemia adequately controlled with statins. She was well and physical examination was essentially normal except for poorly reactive small pupils which dilate from 3 to 5 mm with 1% tropicamide. MRI/MRA performed in the older sister and the mother showed similar ischaemic and vascular changes to those in the proband . Echocardiogram in all 3 patients revealed normal aortic root size.
Ophthalmic clinical findings are summarised in Table . Ophthalmic investigation included iris and retinal spectral-domain OCT using the Spectralis HRA + OCT (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany). Ultra-widefield fundus photography was performed using the California (Optos plc, Dunfermline, Scotland). Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) was performed using the AngioVue Avanti XR (Optovue Inc., Fremont, USA) in AngioRetina mode. ReVue software (Version 2017.1.0.155) was used for reducing motion artefacts and en face view reconstruction.
Iris OCT showed absence of thickening in the central portion, a smooth anterior surface and a distinct hyporeflective layer just anterior to the iris pigment epithelium (IPE) near the pupillary border, coinciding with iris discoloration and hyporeflectivity on infrared reflectance imaging . Iris OCTA (supplementary material ) showed flow signal within the radial filiform projections and paucity and straightening of iris stromal vessels . AO imaging (supplementary material ) showed a similar mean (SD, range) age-adjusted wall-to-lumen ratio (WLR) of 0.27 (0.03, 0.23–0.29) and 0.24 (0.03, 0.20–0.29) between patients and controls suggesting lack of eutrophic remodelling (p = 0.24, supplementary material ). Mean (SD, range) age-adjusted wall cross-sectional areas (WCSA) were 4.5 (1.4, 3.2–6.0) × 103 μm2 in patients and 3.9 (1.2, 2.2–5.9) × 103 μm2 in controls, but this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.54) suggesting lack of hypertrophic remodelling in the immediate branches of the central retinal artery (supplementary material ). Retinal OCTA showed no evidence of aneurysmal dilation but retinal arterioles were seen to dive into outer retinal layers as a result of excessive elongation of the vessel .
In view of the dominant inheritance of the cerebral arteriopathy, the differential diagnosis included cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CADASIL, related to NOTCH3 mutations, and MMD-like cerebral arteriopathy in association with PDA and congenital mydriasis, related to ACTA2 mutations. Although Sanger sequencing (Mutalyzer) of the hot spot regions for NOTCH3 mutation (exons 2–8, 11, 18, 19, 22 and 23) in the proband (III:1) failed to show any pathogenic variants, a heterozygous sequence variant c.351C > G was identified in exon 4 of ACTA2. This variant results in an asparagine (AAC) to lysine (AAG) amino acid change at codon 117 (p.(Asn117Lys)). The same variant was identified in the heterozygous state in the affected sibling of the proband (III:3). It was not identified in the DNA sample from the father (II:4), but was present at a lower level, as judged by the height of the Sanger sequencing peak, in the DNA sample from the mother’s peripheral blood (II:5, supplementary material ), indicating that the mother was a somatic mosaic. Although this sequence variant has not been described previously, it is considered likely to be pathogenic (ACMG Class 4): it is not present in gonomAD, it affects a highly conserved residue in a functional domain of the protein and in silico analysis software suggests it is disease-causing (VarSome). A family pedigree showing variant segregation, ocular and cerebral manifestation is summarized in supplementary material .