A 45-year-old gentleman, the clerk by occupation, presented to us in the OPD with pain in the lower half of posterolateral aspect of left thigh travelling down the lateral aspect of leg till ankle since 3 months. The pain was insidious in onset and gradually progressive, worse since a month. He had worsening of pain on taking a few steps and needed to sit after walking 50 m. He did not have any pain when sitting or lying down. He complained of mild paresthesias in left lateral aspect of leg on walking. He did not complain of numbness. There were no symptoms in the right lower limb. He did not have any back pain. There was no history of recent more than usual physical activity or trauma. For the last 1-month he was being treated by a local doctor as L5 radiculopathy. He was on oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and pregabalin, with temporary and partial relief. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ordered by the same local doctor, due to resistant symptoms, showed diffuse disc bulge at L4-5 and lateral recess stenosis. He was later given transforaminal nerve root block at his local center with no relief. He had taken a course of injectable vitamin D3 without prior estimation of its serum levels. He was finally referred to our center for surgical L4-5 root decompression. On clinical examination at our center, the patient had tenderness at the lateral aspect of proximal left leg. There was a pain on compression, bringing the fibula closer to tibia. The left knee had a varus deformity . Knee joint examination revealed medial joint line tenderness and crepitus on a range of motion testing. There was no joint laxity and the knee range of motion was full. The patient had an antalgic gait. The spine and neurological examination was within normal limits. There was no thickening of the common peroneal nerve at the fibular neck. On percussion at the fibular neck, Tinel’s sign was negative. As, the signs were not clearly indicative of spinal or peripheral nerve pathology and the presence of localized tenderness in the leg; we got radiographs of the left leg done. They revealed callus formation at the junction of proximal and middle third of fibula along the posterior and lateral cortex . MRI of the leg revealed the fracture line along with periosteal edema and marrow edema ( and ). There was no evidence of any soft tissue on MRI .