A 34-year-old man with no significant past medical history presented with mild iron deficiency anemia (Hemoglobin 13.2 g/dL) and hematochezia for a month. He had no significant weight loss and had no family history of colorectal cancer, polyps or inflammatory bowel disease. The patient underwent a colonoscopy, which showed ileocecal valve to be edematous and inflamed with overlying frond-like/villous mucosa. . A biopsy was taken, which was reported as ulcerated mucosa, and was negative for malignancy.
An abdominal MRI scan was performed, which demonstrated a 4.1 × 4.0 × 2.9 cm mass with enhancement, located just distal to the ileocecal valve. This submucosal mass was thought to be most likely a gastrointestinal stromal tumor . Thereafter the patient underwent right hemicolectomy.
Grossly, there was a tan ulcerated polypoid submucosal mass close to ileocecal valve measuring 4.5 × 3.7 × 2.8 cm . Microscopy revealed a multi-lobated mass centered in the muscularis propria, with extension into subserosa and focally extending into colonic mucosa. The lesion was composed of ovoid to spindle cells arranged in fascicles, storiform and whorled architecture . The tumor cells were focally clustered and intimately mixed with small lymphocytes . The neoplastic cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct cell border, ovoid to spindled nuclei, vesicular chromatin and small nucleoli. There was mild cytologic atypia, but no coagulative necrosis was identified. Mitotic figures were found up to 10 per 10 high power fields. Immunohistochemical studies showed that tumor cells were positive for CD21 , CD23 , and CD35 , while negative for CD1a , C-kit, DOG1, SMA, AE1/3 , S100, SOX10, CD34, ALK, and EBER . A diagnosis of extra-nodal FDCS, French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group (FNCLCC) grade 1 was rendered. No post-operative chemoradiation was administered given its morphological features and stage.
During the workup of FDCS, he was also found to have a left thyroid nodule measuring 4.5 cm. Total thyroidectomy revealed a macrofollicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma, which was encapsulated with multiple foci of capsular invasion. Furthermore, the patient had family history of melanoma, osteosarcoma and spontaneous pneumothorax. Therefore, a genetic testing of 47 hereditary cancer genes including TP53, BAP1 and FLCN was performed, demonstrating a pathogenic heterologous germline mutation in the FLCN gene (c.1021delC). Thus the patient was diagnosed to have Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. He was found later by a dermatologist to have fibrofolliculomas, skin tags, and multiple benign nevi on cheeks and upper back, but no renal tumor and pneumothorax was found.
After the initial presentation, the patient had been followed up for 3.5 years with no signs of local recurrence and distant metastasis of FDCS.