A 16-year-old male patient was diagnosed with very severe aplastic anemia (VSAA) after a brief history of petechiae and pale skin. The results of the standard diagnostic procedures for acquired bone marrow failure had ruled out acute leukemia, Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita (DC), paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and a primary immunodeficiency (PID) syndrome. The patient's family history was uneventful. Allogeneic HSCT from an HLA-identical brother was postponed for several months as the family hoped that identifying a causal agent and its treatment could reverse the effects on the bone marrow. Supportive care during these few months included frequent, mostly weekly transfusions with platelets and packed red cells and antimicrobial prophylaxis with topical amphotericin B, oral fluconazole, and cotrimoxazole. The patient's neutrophil count was permanently below 500 µl. Consent for HSCT was obtained after 6 months of neutropenia when the patient had developed a threatening soft tissue infection by Streptococcus anginosus in his left hand, requiring surgical treatment.
The patient's allogeneic HSCT was performed with unmanipulated bone marrow (2.4 × 106 CD34-positive cells/kg) from his HLA-identical sibling after conditioning with cyclophosphamide (CYC, 50 mg/kg/day for 4 days) and antithymocyte globulin (ATG, 15 mg/kg/day for 4 days). On day (day) −4, a first febrile episode in neutropenia occurred due to a bloodstream infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The patient was successfully treated with piperacillin/tazobactam and tobramycin. Antimicrobial prophylaxis included aciclovir (post-transplant switched to foscarnet because of cytomegalovirus-positivity of donor and recipient) and micafungin (1 × 50 mg). For prophylaxis of GvHD, methotrexate (10 mg/m2/day on day +2, +4, +7) and ciclosporin A (CSA) were administered. On day +23, CSA was replaced by tacrolimus because of peripheral neuropathy. On day +8, the patient developed a second episode of fever with rising inflammatory markers. His blood cultures remained sterile. The patient's antibacterial treatment was switched to meropenem and teicoplanin resulting in rapid resolution of the fever. Two days later, a painful fissure between the 4th and 5th left toe appeared without any physical injury. Microbiological samples revealed the presence of multisensitive Escherichia coli, so the antibacterial treatment was maintained. The lesion became necrotic and cavernous with a maximum depth of 1.5 cm. On day +15, painful, erythematous skin nodules were found affecting the entire integument. As infectious metastases of fungal origin were suspected, micafungin was switched to liposomal amphotericin B (LAmB, 1 × 3 mg/kg, from day +31 5 mg/kg, stop date day +34) and intravenous (i.v.) voriconazole (VCZ, loading dose 2 × 6 mg/kg, maintenance therapy 2 × 4 mg/kg).
Several cutaneous biopsies were taken on day +17, which histologically proved hyalohyphomycosis, compatible with invasive aspergillosis. Serum Aspergillus-galactomannan antigen on day +21 was negative. One of the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) skin biopsies was sent to the Mycologic Laboratory at the Robert Koch Institute Berlin for further analysis.
Histopathology after Grocott's methenamine silver (GMS) stain showed vascular invasion and infarction by strongly stained small, septated hyphae with acute angle branching and small, single-celled chlamydoconidiae . DNA was extracted by the protocol described by Rickerts et al. and studied by five different qPCRs. To document successful DNA extraction a qPCR detecting the human 18S rRNA gene was used . An internal amplification control DNA (IAC qPCR) was used to exclude PCR inhibition. Fungal DNA was amplified using a broad range 28S qPCR (primer 10F and 12R) (–), and the DNA was sent to a collaborating laboratory for two specific qPCR assays to detect Aspergillus DNA (, , ) and DNA of Mucorales (, ). No inhibition, defined as a delta CT of more than two cycles , was detected. The broad range qPCR amplified fungal DNA in duplicates in less than 40 cycles (CTs) with identical peaks in the melting curve analysis in the absence of positive no-template-, or extraction negative controls. The identification of the resulting sequences by BLAST search in GenBank yielded an identity of 99.7% with the sequence of an ATCC Fusarium solani (accession number FJ345352) strain. Both the Aspergillus and Mucorales qPCRs were negative.
The patient's first VCZ level on day +21 6 days after the start of treatment was 12 mg/l. However, multiple further tests did not detect VCZ levels above 2 mg/L despite continuous intravenous administration of VCZ. To exclude false-negative results, VCZ tests were performed in two different laboratories revealing identical findings. After obtaining these low trough levels, VCZ was increased to 12 mg/kg i.v. until the patient's discharge to his home.
Neutrophil engraftment with full donor chimerism was documented on day +22. Massive capillary-leak syndrome with lung and peripheral edema and acute renal failure caused by the interaction of tacrolimus and i.v. VCZ required continuous venovenous hemodialysis from day +27 to +30 and invasive mechanical ventilation due to uremic encephalopathy. Despite these transient, however serious organ failures, the patient's antimycotic treatment was maintained without interruption with i.v. VCZ. Cultures of tracheal samples and wound swabs during this first period in the pediatric intensive care unit grew hyphomycetes, which were identified as Fusarium species. An antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) was done and showed sensitivity to VCZ and resistance to LAmB.
Besides the cutaneous foci, ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) also showed mycotic lesions in his lungs, liver, both kidneys, and most impressively, in the patient's spleen. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain and an ophthalmological examination were unremarkable. On day +46, a sudden circulatory failure resulted in a life-threatening emergency caused by a splenic rupture as demonstrated in an abdominal CT scan. Most likely, the event was caused by an initial hemorrhage into one of the mycotic lesions of the spleen, followed by the rupture of the splenic capsule. A splenectomy was performed immediately. Diffuse involvement of the spleen with mold species was confirmed upon pathological examination .
The patient's condition gradually improved; his skin lesions healed with residual small scars. However, several episodes of fever were noticed from day +48 until his discharge on day +69. Blood cultures and viral monitoring remained unremarkable. Imaging studies (MRI, CT, transthoracic echocardiography) did not reveal new findings. An episode of upper abdominal pain was caused by biliary tract obstruction, which was solved by an endoscopic procedure. The patient was discharged on day +69. He was re-admitted on day +72 because of reduced general condition and insufficient eating and drinking. Supportive treatment was initiated. On day +76, the patient experienced sudden right-sided hemiparesis caused by pontine ischemia. In transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), a floating thrombus in the outflow tract of the left ventricle with a size of 1.5 cm was found . A multi-disciplinary case discussion was initiated. Considering the severe previous organ failures, a surgical procedure was not favored at first. The patient received low-molecular-weight heparin and broad empirical antibacterial treatment in addition to his antifungal therapy. He continued to have regular fever spikes; blood cultures remained sterile. In a follow-up TEE 7 days later, the size of the thrombus had increased. MRI revealed a second ischemic area in the cerebellum which was asymptomatic. The patient's situation was discussed with the patient, his parents, and each involved medical department. A cardiac surgical procedure with thrombectomy was regarded as unavoidable. Although the patient acknowledged the risk of the procedure, he clearly wished to take this option as he increasingly suffered from his condition. Despite broad analgesic treatment, including opioids, he complained about persistent, severe headaches and, in addition, felt miserable because of his unchanged hemiparesis. After the removal of the left ventricular thrombus on day +91 in a nearby cardiac surgery clinic, the patient did not regain consciousness. A CT scan revealed diffuse bilateral ischemia and edema in the brain. With respect to the expected poor neurological outcome, the parents decided not to proceed with a neurosurgical procedure. On day +92, the patient was disconnected from the respirator and died. The timeline of major events is provided in .
A post-mortem examination was not permitted. Microbiological investigation of the thrombus confirmed the presence of Fusarium solani by culture. In a family conference a few months after the patient's death, the parents expressed their regrets about giving their consent to their son's allogeneic HSCT. They felt he should have been granted more time to enter the procedure in a more stable physical condition.