A 23-year-old Japanese man was referred to our institution for evaluation of overt proteinuria. Proteinuria was detected through an annual health checkup when he was 13 years old. First renal biopsy was performed at a nearby hospital at the age of 19. Urinary protein excretion was 7.0 g/day; hematuria, negative; serum albumin level, 1.9 g/dL; total cholesterol level, 437 mg/dL; and serum creatinine level, 0.6 mg/dL.
Renal biopsy revealed segmental sclerosis with foamy change in four out of 13 glomeruli, some of which were adherent to Bowman’s capsules . No glomerulus had global sclerosis. Several glomeruli had collapsed tufts in widened Bowman’s capsules forming glomerular cysts . Tubular cysts were not found. Since the histology was compatible with FSGS, prednisolone was started at 40 mg per day. However, urinary protein excretion remained high. Prednisolone was tapered to 5 mg per day. Lower leg edema developed and renal function worsened, and he was referred to our hospital at the age of 23.
On admission, the patient was 185 cm tall and weighed 72.4 kg. Blood pressure was 190/100 mmHg. Edema was present in palpebra and in the lower extremities. Laboratory findings were as follows: the erythrocyte count was 3.44 × 106/μL; hemoglobin, 10.9 g/dL; hematocrit, 33.1%; leukocyte count, 7200/μL; platelet count, 268 × 103/μL; total protein concentration, 5.1 g/dL; albumin, 2.2 g/dL; urea nitrogen, 71.0 mg/dL; creatinine, 4.8 mg/dL; and C-reactive protein, 0.1 mg/dL. Urine protein excretion was 17.9 g/day, and urinary sediment contained 11–30 erythrocytes per high-power field. Creatinine clearance was 16 mL/min. Ultrasonography showed multiple cysts up to 2 cm in diameter in both kidneys . According to computed tomography (CT) images the right kidney measured 13 × 7 × 6 cm and the left kidney 13 × 7 × 8 cm . Bilateral renal cysts showed high signal intensity on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) .
A second renal biopsy was performed to reevaluate the pathology behind worsening proteinuria and renal function. Microscopy revealed substantial progression of segmental and global sclerosis of the glomeruli: out of 13 glomeruli in total, four had global sclerosis and seven glomeruli had segmental sclerosis, with a greater number of segments adherent to the Bowman’s capsules compared to the first biopsy . More glomeruli had collapsed tufts in widened Bowman’s capsules and were forming glomerular cysts . These glomeruli had fibrous thickening around the Bowman’s capsules. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated deposition of immunoglobulin M in segmental sclerotic lesions . Electron microscopy showed diffuse foot process fusion . There were no cystic lesions in the tubules or in the interstitium.
The patient’s father and uncle were also found to have PKD. The patient and his father were screened for PKD1 mutation, which turned out to be positive in both. Thus, he and his father were diagnosed with ADPKD. His father had normal kidney function (creatinine level 0.7 mg/dL), no proteinuria, and small kidney volume regardless of having ADPKD.
The patient’s FSGS was unlikely to be hereditary, because his father did not have proteinuria. The patient had no viral infection, medication use or other factors associated with the development of FSGS. Therefore, his FSGS was likely of primary nature.
Massive proteinuria was thought to be due to progressing FSGS. Despite 8 months of low-density lipoprotein apheresis in addition to diet therapy, his renal function gradually declined. He started hemodialysis 2 years later, and underwent living donor kidney transplantation subsequently. Proteinuria did not worsen after transplantation and has been consistently below 1 g/day. Twelve years after renal transplantation, his serum creatinine level is stable at around 1.5 mg/dL with oral prednisolone 10 mg, tacrolimus 5 mg, and mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg per day.