Patient data: A 74-year-old, 65 kg, 156 cm tall, male known to have type II diabetes mellitus presented to the department of surgery at our institution with a one-month history of generalized abdominal pain. The patient did not complain of melena or GI bleeding. His past medical history included a cerebrovascular accident and a myocardial infarction.
His surgical history included an emergency Billroth I procedure performed after gastric ulcer perforation with uncontrollable bleeding. On physical examination, the patient had epigastric pain and tenderness. His preoperative laboratory findings were normal, with an erythrocyte count of 5.20 × 1012/L, a haemoglobin concentration of 15.2 g/dL, a c- reactive protein (CRP) level of 1.0 mg/L, a leucocyte count of 7.16 × 109/L, and a haematocrit level of 46%.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computerised tomography (CT) revealed a mass with a disorganised tangle of vessels in the proximal jejunum and jejunal mesentery, with the main arterial supply arising from the superior mesenteric artery and multiple arterialised veins. These findings indicated the presence of an AVM. However, malignancy still needed to be ruled out. Therefore, an exploratory laparotomy was indicated; eventual tumour resection was also indicated once malignancy was confirmed .
Since the patient was in good clinical condition (ECOG-scale 0, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance scale), did not present with active GI bleeding and all of his laboratory findings were normal, our primary choice for his management was surgery. Other interventions, including radiological embolization and endoscopy, were avoided to reduce the risk of bowel infarction or perforation.
His past medical history included a cerebrovascular accident and a myocardial infarction.
There were no records of family history available and the patient had no information about related diseases in the familiar background.
A 74-year-old, 65 kg, 156 cm tall male known to have type II diabetes mellitus presented to the department of surgery at our institution with a one-month history of generalised abdominal pain. The patient did not complain of melena or GI bleeding. His past medical history included a cerebrovascular accident and a myocardial infarction. His surgical history included an emergency Billroth I procedure performed after gastric ulcer perforation with uncontrollable bleeding. On physical examination, the patient had epigastric pain and tenderness.
His preoperative laboratory findings were normal, with an erythrocyte count of 5.20 × 1012/L, a haemoglobin concentration of 15.2 g/dL, a CRP level of 1.0 mg/L, a leucocyte count of 7.16 × 109/L, and a haematocrit level of 46%.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed a mass with a disorganized tangle of vessels in the proximal jejunum and jejunal mesentery, with the main arterial supply arising from the superior mesenteric artery and multiple arterialized veins. These findings indicated the presence of an AVM. However, malignancy still needed to be ruled out. Therefore, an exploratory laparotomy was indicated; eventual tumour resection was also indicated once malignancy was confirmed .
Since the patient was stable, didn’t experience any gastrointestinal bleeding and all the laboratory tests were normal, no further interventions, such as radiological embolization or endoscopic treatment, were performed to avoid the risk of bowel infarction or perforation. Instead, elective surgery was scheduled.