A 29-year-old primigravid woman with severe aortic stenosis was admitted to the obstetrics department for programmed labor induction. She weighed 54 Kilograms (Kg), was 160 cm (cm) high, and had no allergies. The patient had undergone valvuloplasty at the age of 2 years for the correction of congenital aortic stenosis, followed by total valve replacement (with a biological prosthesis) at the age of 21. Over the last 2 years (prior to and during her pregnancy), the patient had presented episodes of supraventricular tachycardia/atrial fibrillation, treated successfully with flecainide. At the last echocardiography performed at 36 weeks and 4 days gestation, she presented a left ventricle with normal dimensions, thickness and systolic function, a biological prosthesis on site with a thick and less mobile right coronary cusp, and normal motility of the left coronary and non-coronary cusps (Videos 1 and 2) with a maximum pressure gradient of 52 mmHg and an average of 31 mmHg .
The aortic valve area (AVA) was 0.9–1.0 cm2. She presented mild mitral insufficiency, an estimated pulmonary systolic pressure of 27 mmHg and a normal left atrium . Electrocardiography revealed a normal sinus rhythm . The patient was medicated with enoxaparin, 4000 international units (IU), twice daily.
The patient was followed by the ‘high-risk pregnancy service’ provided by our institution. Gestational age was calculated at the first trimester ultrasound scan. Her risk for chromosomal anomalies was low, and early and late fetal anomaly scans described normal fetal anatomy. An ultrasound scan performed at 35 weeks and 5 days gestation revealed normal fetal parameters and growth and an estimated fetal weight of 2888 g (65th percentile). A multidisciplinary team followed the patient, providing tailored therapy (anticoagulation), and following evaluation (a detailed obstetric visit and fetal weight estimation) the date of delivery was set to 38 weeks and 4 days of gestation. Considering the clinical history of the patient and her own preferences, and in accordance with the obstetricians, we opted for epidural labor analgesia. On the morning of the programmed labor induction, the patient’s vital parameters were monitored: electrocardiography (ECG), oxygen saturation (SpO2), non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP), and cardiotocography. A defibrillator was ready and nearby. We placed two large-bore intravenous catheters and started infusion with Ringer’s acetate solution. We then added a non-invasive hemodynamic monitoring system, using the ClearSight™ and EV1000 Platform (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California, USA).
A trans-abdominal ultrasound scan with a convex probe 3.5 MHz (Voluson E, GE Healthcare, Chicago, Illinois, USA) showed a cephalic presentation, a maximal vertical pocket (DVP) of 80 mm, and an umbilical artery pulsatility index (UA PI) of 0.80 . Vaginal examination revealed the cervix to be 2 cm dilated, 50% effaced, and to have a Bishop Score of 6. The patient’s baseline vital parameters were: heart rate (HR), 82 beats per minute (bpm); median blood pressure (mAP), 85 mmHg; SpO2, 100%; fetal heart rate (FHR), 159 bpm; cardiac index (CI), 4 L/min/m2; stroke volume index (SVI), 56 ml/m2.
Her laboratory exams reported: 11.1 g/dL hemoglobin; 220.000 platelets; international normalized ratio (INR), 0.91; activated partial thromboplastin time ratio (aPTTr), 0.89; fibrinogen, 551 mg/dL. Enoxaparin therapy was suspended 24 h before induction.
Using an 18-gauge (G) Tuohy needle, an epidural 20 G catheter (B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) was placed into lumbar (L) vertebral space 2–3 and tested with ropivacaine 0.2%, 5 mL, fractionated into small boluses. All vital parameters were constantly monitored and induction started with a low dose oxytocin infusion .
Five hours later, good progression of the first stage of labor was evident, with 5 cm cervical dilation and good effacement. An amniotomy was performed at this point. The patient gave a pain rating of 5 out of 10 (using the numeric pain rating scale, NPRS) and her hemodynamic parameters were stable. We started with an epidural infusion of ropivacaine 0.1%, 5 mL, and sufentanil, 3.75 mcg. After 30 min, the patient had a dermatomal level around thoracic (T) spinal nerve T10 .
During the following hours, we maintained an acceptable level of analgesia, a constant dermatomal level, and stable hemodynamic parameters with small boluses of ropivacaine 0.1% and sufentanil, ranging from 5 to 10 mL. During this period, the dose of oxytocin was increased by the obstetrician, and cervical dilation proceeded until complete dilation. At this point, in order to guarantee accurate hemodynamic monitoring, an artery line was put in place and connected to the FloTrac™ system (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California, USA).
Three hours later, following episiotomy, the fetus was extracted using a vacuum (Kiwi Omni-C Cup, Ri.mos., Italy) to avoid excessive exertion by the mother and in response to initial alterations in the fetal cardiotocograph. Pain was controlled with alkalinized lidocaine 2%, 4 mL, given before extraction, and all vital and hemodynamic parameters remained stable . A male baby weighing 3270 g was delivered with Apgar scores of 8 and 8 at minute 1 and 5, respectively. Blood loss did not exceed 100 mL. All the patient’s vital parameters were monitored for the next 10 h; we then removed the epidural catheter and all other monitoring devices and the patient was dismissed to the obstetrics ward with stable parameters. Pain was treated with 1000 mg paracetamol and 600 mg ibuprofen every 8 h, with an NRS < 3.
The post-partum period was characterized by episodes of fever and a suspected phlebitis of the hand. Considering the high cardiovascular risk of the patient, the infectologist suggested antibiotic therapy with daptomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam, then de-escalated to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid for a total of 20 days. One week after labor, echocardiography was repeated and shown to be equivalent to the one performed pre-partum. The patient was discharged from the hospital 11 days post-partum.