A 63-year-old man with a history of prior light tobacco use, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus presented with several months of progressive fatigue, weakness, and shortness of breath. CT chest demonstrated a left suprahilar mass, moderate left-sided pleural effusion, and numerous pulmonary, pleural, hepatic, and mediastinal metastatic lesions. Left upper lobe endobronchial ultrasound biopsy confirmed non-small-cell lung adenocarcinoma that was positive for an EGFR-L858R mutation. PET/CT demonstrated ~ 2 cm, PET-negative circumferential pericardial effusion. Pre-treatment transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 65%) and grade I diastolic dysfunction, as well as a 1.5 cm pericardial effusion with no evidence of tamponade. He was started on osimertinib 80 mg daily. Four months later, follow-up PET/CT demonstrated reduction in overall disease burden as well as a stable circumferential pericardial effusion.
The patient had a repeat transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) after three months of osimertinib treatment that demonstrated normal left ventricular size and function (LVEF 65%) with normal right ventricle function, and a moderate-large circumferential pericardial effusion. The patient had no signs or symptoms of tamponade. Due to persistence of the large pericardial effusion, which was presumed to be malignant, elective pericardiocentesis was discussed to avoid life-threatening tamponade. However, the patient deferred due to absence of symptoms or evidence of elevated right-sided filling pressures on exam at the time.
The patient was referred to cardio-oncology for a second opinion on management of the pericardial effusion. He denied angina, shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, dizziness, weight gain, or lower extremity edema. His blood pressure, heart rate, and oxygen saturation were normal. On cardiac exam, he had normal rhythm, distant heart sounds, normal S1 and S2, and no murmurs, rubs, or gallops. Jugular venous pressure (JVP) was less than 6 cmH2O and pulsus was less than 10 mmHg. Repeat TTE after four months on osimertinib demonstrated normal left and right ventricular function with normal LVEF (55–60%), large free-flowing pericardial effusion (measuring up to 2 cm), and exaggerated respiratory variation across the tricuspid valve inflow consistent with early tamponade. Semi-urgent pericardial window was recommended due to the risk of progression to tamponade. However, the patient declined intervention as he remained asymptomatic. Osimeritinib was continued due to absence of LV dysfunction.
Four weeks later, the patient reported rapidly progressive weight gain and abdominal distention despite reduced oral intake and worsening dyspnea on exertion. He presented to his local emergency department (ED). Diminished breath sounds at the right lung base were noted on exam. ECG demonstrated sinus tachycardia. CT chest demonstrated a large pericardial effusion and moderate left pleural effusion. He underwent left-sided thoracentesis with removal of 850 cc pleural fluid and was advised to follow up with his outpatient cardio-oncologist regarding the pericardial effusion. Over the next three days, he experienced progressive shortness of breath and weight gain. He was advised to present to the ED emergently due to concern for cardiac tamponade. On exam, he was afebrile, tachycardic to 125 bpm, normotensive (BP 129/95 mmHg), and mildly hypoxic, requiring 2 L/min supplemental oxygen. Cardiac exam was notable for an elevated JVP at 14 cm H2O. Labs were significant for mild leukocytosis (WBC 10.7 × 10E9), C-reactive protein of 59.3 mg/L and sedimentation rate of 31 mm/hr. ECG demonstrated electrical alternans . Point-of-care ultrasonography (POCUS) demonstrated a large pericardial effusion with beat-to-beat swinging of the heart within the effusion. Due to clinical tamponade, he underwent emergent pericardiocentesis with removal of 1.1 L serosanguinous fluid and pericardial drain placement. In discussion with oncology, osimertinib was held in the emergent setting.
Repeat ECG following pericardiocentesis demonstrated sinus tachycardia with resolution of electrical alternans and without evidence of ischemia . The following day, the patient reported new-onset orthopnea. On exam, his BP was 90/68, HR 125 bpm, and JVP was elevated to 13 cmH2O. The pulsus was less than 10 mmHg. Furosemide was initiated to manage intravascular volume overload. After clamping of the pericardial drain, limited TTE showed a small to moderate pericardial effusion and newly reduced biventricular function (LVEF 30–35%) with akinesis of the mid-left ventricle, and anteroseptal wall motion abnormality. Initial troponin was 1.4 ug/L and peaked at 2.2 ug/L six hours later. Brain natriuretic peptide was 666 pg/mL. The patient underwent coronary angiography which showed mild, non-obstructive coronary artery disease and an elevated LVEDP of 17 mmHg.
The patient underwent minimally invasive pericardial window. Cytology results of the pericardial fluid demonstrated slightly dispersed and small cohesive clusters of neoplastic cells with intracytoplasmic vacuoles, enlarged nuclei and prominent nucleoli, with TTF1 positive and Napsin-A positive immunohistochemical stains, consistent with primary lung adenocarcinoma. Fluid analysis demonstrated hazy, light yellow liquid with negative bacterial culture (pH 7.33, protein 2.8 g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 137 U/L, bilirubin 2.8 mg/dL, triglycerides 39 mg/dL, hematocrit 13%, WBC 1.775 × 10E9, RBC 0.88 × 10E9).
Given the absence of obstructive coronary disease, osimertinib-induced cardiomyopathy was suspected. For management of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), the patient was initiated on empagliflozin, spironolactone, and metoprolol. Due to low blood pressures, further up-titration of goal-directed medical therapy was limited. The patient had a heart rhythm monitor that showed normal sinus rhythm without evidence of arrhythmia. Cardiac MRI seven weeks after the initial diagnosis of cardiomyopathy demonstrated LVEF of 45%, mid-wall pattern late gadolinium enhancement, and elevated T2 mapping values at the mid-inferior left ventricular wall reflecting non-ischemic cardiomyopathy with associated myocardial edema . Interval TTE three months after discontinuation of osimertinib showed normalization of the LV ejection fraction (65%) and trace pericardial effusion. The patient denied heart failure symptoms and was euvolemic on exam.
After a follow up PET/CT scan showed increased metabolic activity in several lymph nodes, the patient was started on afatinib 40 mg daily, a second-generation EGFR-TKI. Follow up PET/CT scan six weeks after initiating afatinib demonstrated stable to improved hypermetabolic disease, consistent with treatment response. Follow up TTE six months after initiating afatinib showed normal LV function and a stable trace pericardial effusion.