A 12-month-old baby boy of African descent presented to us with a history of global developmental delay, erratic sleep patterns, and poor weight gain. He was the first born to a 28-year-old woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus diagnosed at the age of 9. The mother attended antenatal clinic from the 16th week of gestation and received all routine antenatal care as per the Tanzanian protocol (antihelminthics, antimalarial medications, hematinics, and tetanus toxoid). She tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, and syphilis. The mother denied history of toxoplasmosis, other (syphilis, varicella-zoster, parvovirus B19), rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes (TORCH) infections, trauma, or chronic drug use; however, she had a urinary tract infection during her first trimester which was successfully treated with oral cephalexin 500 mg four times a day for 5 days. Apart from the insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, no other history of familial genetic disorders was elicited. Sonographic evaluation at 16th and 36th week of gestation revealed a normal singleton pregnancy. Despite a fairly good sugar control before pregnancy, the mother had poor glycemic control during pregnancy and her glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) taken at 7 and 29 weeks of gestation was 8.3% and 7.9% respectively. She gave birth at 39+ weeks by emergency cesarean section due to fetal distress and breech presentation. The baby weighed 2315 g and had Apgar scores of 6/10 and 8/10 at 1 and 5 minutes respectively. His head circumference at birth was 38.9 cm (97th percentile). Chromosome analysis (karyotyping) is not a routine practice in Tanzania and it was not performed.
The boy weighed 8.5 kg at 6 months, which was the exact same weight measured during his visit to our institution at 12 months of age. His head circumference at 1 year was 49.1 cm (99th percentile). He had stable vital signs but a physical examination revealed a small-for-age child with conjunctival and palmar pallor. All his growth parameters were below the 5th percentile and he had a developmental age of 2 months. He scored 4 on neurocognitive assessment using the Carter Neurocognitive Assessment Severity Scale. He had normal facies but a neurological examination revealed hypotonia in all four limbs. Other systemic examinations were unremarkable. He underwent a series of blood work-up, cardiac echocardiography (ECHO), and renal ultrasound all of which revealed normal findings except for iron deficiency anemia: hemoglobin (Hb) 8.7 g/dL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 21 pg/cell, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 69 fL, and red cell distribution width (RDW) 15.1%. The child also underwent MRI of his brain which revealed an incompletely formed interhemispheric fissure, a monoventricle with partially developed temporal and occipital horns, partial fusion of his frontal lobe, hypoplastic corpus callosum, and volume loss bilaterally at temporal lobes . His cerebellum and brain stem appeared normal. Based on the clinical presentation and MRI findings the diagnosis of semilobar HPE was entertained. The child was treated for iron deficiency anemia with Hemovit syrup (ferric ammonium citrate, folic acid, pyridoxine hydrochloride, cyanocobalamin, and zinc sulfate) 10 ml thrice daily, ferrous sulfate 10 mg once daily, folic acid 1 mg once daily, and multivitamin syrup 5 ml once daily. Furthermore, nutritional and genetic counseling was offered to his parents.
The child continued to be attended by a developmental pediatrician and pediatric dietician on a regular basis at our institution. An assessment conducted at 12 months post-initial visit showed improvement in his neurocognitive status (Carter Neurocognitive Assessment Severity Scale score = 2). Furthermore, he had attained an acceptable weight for his age (12.6 kg) and his sleeping pattern was stable. In the long run, he is scheduled for both physical and occupational therapy aiming to enhance his motor skills and maximize functional independence.