The patient was a 52-year-old male, who initially found a 3-cm sized mass in the left breast region. He had a history of Poland's syndrome and underwent unilateral breast prosthesis implantation 18 years previously to reconstruct the deformed left breast. More than 1 year after the mass was detected, the patient started to have continued swelling and increased pain as the multinodular mass gradually increased to the size of 20 cm. Serial positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed undetermined primary mass on the capsule surrounding the breast implant. No other lesions were observed in skin, oral cavity, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, bladder, and other areas.
Physical examination at the time of admission revealed a 25 cm × 12 cm × 8 cm multinodular mass on the left breast and chest wall with an irregular surface uplift. The skin aspect was normal, without inflammation, ulceration, pigmentation, etc. . No record of breast tumor was found among the patient's family members. Routine clinical biochemistry and laboratory tests failed to show any abnormal index.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed at the time of admission showed that the pectoralis muscle in the left chest was congenitally absent. A 20-cm sized polycystic mass was seen in front of the breast implant. Moreover, multiple irregular masses were observed between implant and ribs. Localized bone destruction occurred in the 3rd, 4th and 5th ribs ribs, accompanied by a large amount of wrapped liquid around the prosthesis and the outer and posterior chest. The bilateral axillary lymph nodes were enlarged with bilateral pleural thickening and a small amount of hydrothorax in the left pleural cavity. Furthermore, CT demonstrated a similar result .
Sonography revealed a heterogeneous multinodular mass. Multiple papillary projections were observed posterior to the implant. The nature of these nodules was undetermined. However, an ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed that no malignant tumor cells were found in the cystic fluid and section of cell block.
After completing all examinations, the patient received tumor excision surgery, implant removal surgery, complete capsulectomy, and sentinel lymph node biopsy. Fibrous tissue envelope was observed on the surface of the implant during the operation. The implant was of textured surface type with a volume of 150 cc, and the name of the manufacturer was unknown. The tumor was a heterogeneous multinodular mass in front of the implant, with a volume of about 1,500 cc. The mass was polycystic, with irregular structure and a large amount of clear liquid in the fibrous tissue capsule. After excision of the capsule and the huge polycystic mass, the surgeon removed the implant. Multiple irregular masses were detected in front of the ribs posterior to the implant. It was observed that papillary projections invaded into the thoracic cavity and left axilla . Therefore, the nodules and the sentinel lymph node were resected and sent for pathological examination together with the voluminous tumor and the capsule. The final microscopy assessment revealed that the papillary projections were moderately and poorly differentiated SCC arising from the implant capsule and measuring 2.5–3.5 cm . Squamous metaplasia of duct epithelia was observed in the capsule, as well as acute and chronic inflammation, and fibrous tissue hyperplasia . The tumor was negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, HER2/neu, and calponin, and positive for Ki67, P16, P40, and P63 . The sentinel lymph node tested negative for metastatic disease. After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the Oncology Department for further adjuvant systemic therapy and radiotherapy. At the request of the patient and his family, the patient was discharged on September 14, 2020 and accepted adjuvant systemic therapy at a local hospital. The systemic therapy was unknown. Follow-up within a year indicated a defavorable prognosis and occurrence of multiple metastases, including the skin of the chest, axillary lymph nodes and pleura.