An 81-year-old male came to E.R. with the complaint of abdominal pain of 1 day’s duration. His past medical records were significant for basal cell carcinoma, alcoholic liver cirrhosis with a history of an intrahepatic portosystemic shunt procedure, complicated by staphylococcus bacteremia, pituitary tumor, glaucoma, and hypothyroidism. The abdominal pain had been constant, non-radiating, diffuse, burning in nature, 10/10 in intensity, and associated with chills. He denied any associated fevers, cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, chest pain, headaches, shortness of breath, recent travels, or sick contacts.
On physical examination, his temperature was 98 °F, pulse 104 bpm, blood pressure 133/74 mmHg, respiratory rate 18 beats per minute, O2 saturation 99%. An abdominal exam revealed an obese body habitus, distention, and periumbilical tenderness with a negative Murphy’s sign.
Initial blood work showed normal leukocyte count white blood cells (WBC) 4.5 K/uL, Creatinine 1.2 mg/dL, elevated aspartate aminotransferase (A.S.T.) 62 U/L, elevated Lipase 451 u/L, elevated Lactate 8.8 mmol/L, and normal serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (A.L.T.) 28 U/L, Alkaline Phosphatase 99 U/L, and total serum bilirubin 1.1 mg/dL. The sonogram and C.T. scan of the abdomen revealed perihepatic ascites, nodular liver contour, cholelithiasis, and gallbladder sludge with mild gallbladder wall thickening up to 4 mm without any radiographic evidence of acute cholecystitis .
The patient was not a surgical candidate due to his advanced age and multiple comorbidities, and a CT-guided percutaneous cholecystotomy was performed for drainage of biliary fluid by Interventional Radiology. The biliary fluid was sent for culture, and cefepime and metronidazole were started empirically.
On the second day of hospitalization, the periumbilical pain improved, but right upper quadrant tenderness increased, and Murphy’s sign was elicited. The patient concurrently developed fever, leukocytosis (16.5 k/uL) with predominant neutrophilia (81%), and worsening acute kidney injury. Blood specimens drawn on admission were positive for gram-negative rods, which speciated to C. sakazakii on PCR studies. The PCR assay was performed using BioFire FilmArray.
Body fluid samples underwent protein extraction, priming, and drying before matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry was applied to the resultant intact cells and extracts from cells. Identification targets other than C. sakazakii were Enterococcus including vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, L. monocytogenes, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, S. aureus, S. agalactiae (Group B), S. pneumoniae, S. pyogenes (Group A), A. baumannii, E. cloacae, E. coli, K. oxytoca, K. pneumoniae, Proteus sp., S. marcescens, H. influenzae, N. meningitidis, P. aeruginosa, C. albicans, C. glabrata, C. krusei, C. parapsilosis, C. tropicalis and the K. pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC) resistant gene. Microflex L.T. and MADLI Biotyper by Bruker Daltonics, Germany was employed in our institutional laboratory for mass spectrometry measurements and microorganism identification. The same organism was found in the biliary drain culture, confirming acute cholangitis due to C. sakazakii complicated by bacteremia. Susceptibilities of C. sakazakii were obtained against 17 antibiotics .
Antibiotic coverage was consequently expanded to IV meropenem. His clinical picture and blood work improved exponentially with a downtrend of leukocytes, lactate, lipase, bilirubin, and liver enzymes . He was discharged home on hospital day seven on oral ciprofloxacin and metronidazole for 10 days and was reported doing well on telephonic follow-up. The patient was later seen in outpatient clinics (Surgery and Infectious diseases) 2 weeks later. He was asymptomatic without any residual disease, and the biliary drain was removed successfully. The patient underwent an elective cholecystectomy a few weeks later with no complications.