A 27-year-old woman without prior medical history came to the emergency ward with dyspnea, epigastric pain, diarrhea, chest stuffiness, headache, emesis, and diaphoresis. All of these symptoms except dyspnea had been ongoing for a month and the patient was treated with antispasmodic and proton-pump inhibitors at a local hospital before admission. She complained of mild dyspnea after daily activities for half a month, which gradually developed into paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. The patient had a history of cesarean delivery six years ago. She disclaimed any family history of pulmonary or cardiovascular diseases or malignant tumors.
At presentation, the physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 88/65 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute, and a pulse of 145 beats per minute. Lung auscultation revealed diffuse moist rales in the lungs. An abdominal examination showed epigastric tenderness. The remainder of the examination results were unremarkable. During her stay in the emergency ward, the patient was treated with phloroglucinol, promethazine, and an injection of saline for gastrointestinal symptoms. She later displayed orthopnea, profuse sweating, severe coughing with pink frothy sputum, and a drop in blood pressure (80/55 mmHg). Table shows significant laboratory test results on admission. The arterial blood gas (ABG) was potential of hydrogen (PH) 7.46, arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) 72.80 mmHg, and base excess (BE) -6.1 mmol/L. The N terminal pro B type natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP) was 1720.0 pg/ml (less than 300 pg/ml can rule out heart failure). Other laboratory findings showed that the white blood cell count (WBC) was 18.2×109/L (reference range: 4−10×109/L), the neutrophil ratio was 87.4% (reference range: 50-75%), creatine kinase MB (CK-MB) was 20.1 ng/ml (reference range: 0−3.10 ng/ml), troponin I 8.1 ng/ml (reference range: 0-0.034 ng/ml), myoglobin (MYO) was 132.6 ng/ml (reference range: 3.5-22.8 ng/ml). Electrocardiograms (ECGs) on admission suggested sinus tachycardia and ischaemic changes (ST-segment depression in II, III, AVF, V3, and V4 tracings) . A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral pulmonary edema and an abdominal CT scan revealed a left adrenal mass measuring 4 × 5 cm.
Considering all the symptoms and the chest and abdominal CT results, the diagnosis was suspected to be acute heart failure, pheochromocytoma, and catecholamine cardiomyopathy. The patient was placed in Coronary Care Unit (CCU). Non-invasive ventilator-assisted ventilation was given. Torasemide, Recombinant Human Brain Natriuretic Peptide, and digoxin were given to correct heart failure. After the above treatment, the patient’s symptoms improved, and the levels of Troponin I, MYO, CK-MB, and NT-ProBNP gradually recovered normally. Plasma metanephrines (3 items) showed that 3-methoxytyramine was 0.11 noml/L (reference range: ≤ 0.18 nmol/L), metanephrine was 1.04 noml/L (reference range: ≤ 0.50 noml/L), and normetanephrine was 20.56 nmol/L (reference range: ≤ 0.90noml/L). 24-hour urinary vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) was 48.51 mg/24h (reference range: 0-12 mg/24h). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed diffuse hypokinesis of the left ventricular wall with a left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) of 23%. On day 7 of admission, reexamination of TTE shows a reduction of abnormal systole and an improvement of LVEF, with recovery to 50%. Bedside chest radiography showed that the lesions of pulmonary were markedly improved. Subsequently, adrenal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cardiac MRI were performed. Adrenal MRI reveals a left adrenal tumor measuring 5.6 × 4.6 cm with hemorrhage . There was no evidence of extra-adrenal lesions, so we recommended left adrenalectomy after sufficient preoperative preparation. Doxazosin was prescribed to provide a sufficient alpha-blocker before the operation. She was transferred to our center in a relatively stable condition.
The patient was admitted to the endocrinology department for adequate preoperative preparation, which included BP control with phenoxybenzamine and metoprolol and an injection of normal saline for preventing severe hypotension after tumor resection. During the period of preoperative preparation, and an enhanced adrenal CT showed a left adrenal mass with an uneven density measuring 4.8 × 4.1 cm . Whole-exome sequencing genetic testing reported that no genetic mutations associated with pheochromocytoma were detected.
Three weeks after her referral, laparoscopic adrenalectomy was successfully performed with the assistance of the da Vinci Surgical System. The report of pathological examination confirmed a pheochromocytoma with hemorrhage and necrosis . Immunohistochemistry showed Syn (+), CD56 (+), CgA (+), S-100 (+), α-inhibin (-), HMB45 (-), Melanie (-), Ki-67 (5% +). In immunostaining of the resected adrenal tumor, focal necrosis was observed. Therefore, pheochromocytoma of adrenal gland scoring scale (PASS) was 2 points. Seven days after surgery, she was discharged from the hospital in good condition. During five months of regular follow-up, her BP and heart rate normalized, and she had no dyspnea, headache, emesis, or abdominal pain. Her levels of the myocardial enzyme, plasma metanephrine, 24-hour urine VMA, calcitonin, and parathyroid hormone were within the normal range. The findings of 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, ECG, and TTE were normal. Furthermore, adrenal CT did not reveal new lesions. Although the pathological examination of the tumor was benign and the genetic test showed no mutation, we recommended that she come to the hospital for a follow-up survey regularly.
We performed a literature search and identified 87 pheochromocytoma cases with Takotsubo Syndrome or cardiomyopathy. Of the 87 cases, 56 patients were selected from a review . Presentation and outcome of the 88 cases (including our case) are summarized in Table , and detailed clinical descriptions and references are available in Supplemental Table .
Of the 88 cases, sixty-two (71%) were women, and the mean age was 42 years, ranging from 21 to 81 years. One of the patients was a pregnant woman. Twenty-five (29%) were men and mean age was 46 years, ranging from 23 to 86 years. A trigger event was difficult to identify in most patients. The most common initial presentation of patients is chest pain in 47 patients (53%), similar to that of acute myocardial infarction. Other classic presentations pheochromocytoma including, headache (20.4%), palpitation (15.9%), diaphoresis (20.4%) and hypertension (52.6%). Initial low blood pressure was reported in 7 patients including our case.
Information about cardiac biomarkers was available in 70 (79.5%) cases, and 68 (97.1%) had increased troponin. Initial echocardiography was completed in 53 (60%) cases. ECG was reported in 82 (93.2%) cases. The most common ECG changes were ST elevation or ST depression. Coronary angiography was completed in 78 (88.6%) patients, showing no coronary disease in 70 (89.7%) cases and minor disease in 8 patients. Genetics tests were only completed in 8 cases (9.1%). Complications were described in 50 patients (56.8%). Cardiogenic shock and heart failure were reported in 26% and 42% of them respectively. Five patients (5.7%) required the support of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). The prognosis of most patients was good after adrenalectomy. There were no recurrent cardiovascular events were reported. The mortality rate amongst the patients on admission was 6.8%.