A 7-day-old boy.
Erythema and swelling around the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint of the right index finger.
The mother had her first pregnancy through ovulation induction. She delivered diamniotic dichorionic twin boys at 36 weeks and 6 days by scheduled cesarean section. He was the second child of twins.
The patient has no family history of immunodeficiency, such as chronic granulomatosis or neonatal early-onset bacterial infection. The family history accounts for his twin brother as well.
The patient was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) of previous doctor because he was a preterm infant with low birth weight (2,012 g) and hypoglycemia (42 mg/dL). A doctor wearing non-sterile gloves secured the infusion route for 10% dextrose at the dorsal right hand after wiping with an alcohol swab. A sterilized film protected the insertion site, which was non-erythematous upon observation, and was performed every 8 h. Oral feeding was started at 10 h of age, and fluid infusion was gradually reduced. On postnatal day 3, non-erythematous swelling was noted at the infusion site, and the needle was removed and wiped with alcohol. The patient deteriorated on postnatal day 6. The following day, his right index finger was erythematous and swollen. The patient also became apneic. After collecting blood cultures, sepsis and bacterial arthritis were considered, and the patient was transported to our NICU for orthopedic surgery therapy.
Body temperature, 38.5 °C; heart rate 186/min, respiratory rate 52/min, blood pressure 72/51 mmHg, SpO2 100% (FiO2 0.21). The right index finger was red and swollen, and the distal interphalangeal (DIP) and PIP joints were extended with no spontaneous flexion . Scab formation and peripheral erythema were observed around the indwelling needle removal mark on the dorsomedial aspect of the right hand , and purpura was observed on the wrist . Redness was also observed around the interphalangeal (IP) joint of the left thumb and the sacral region. His laboratory data are shown in Table .
FDP was 3.2 times higher than our hospital standard. He was diagnosed with overt disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) based on Japanese diagnostic criteria (platelet ≤ 70,000/μL, PT-INR ≥ 1.8, FDP ≥ 2.5 times the institutional standard).
The right index finger revealed a flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon rupture , a flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) tendon rupture , and a hypoechoic area in the tendon sheath from the metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint to the PIP joint. The continuity of the flexor pollicis longus (FPL) tendon in the left thumb was preserved , but a hypoechoic area was found within the tendon sheath and was thought to be fluid accumulation. The next day, redness and swelling of the right elbow joint were noted. US showed hyperechoic fluid accumulation and floaters in the right elbow joint capsule, and a sub-echo puncture collected 5 mL of pus. Radiographic examination showed no abnormal findings, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an abnormal signal under the skin of the right upper arm, but the subject area was small and difficult to evaluate in detail.
Meropenem (MEPM; 60 mg/kg/day) and vancomycin (VCM; 40 mg/kg/day) were administered for 10 consecutive days to cover for suspected methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. Final blood culture reports showed MSSA, and antibiotics were consequently changed to flomoxef (FMOX; 130 mg/kg/day). C-reactive protein (CRP) became negative on the 17th day of admission. FMOX was administered for 32 consecutive days because weekly radiographic examinations showed findings suggestive of osteomyelitis, such as irregular shadows at the proximal ends of the right radius and ulna on the 28th day of admission. Oral cefaclor (40 mg/kg/day) was subsequently administered for a total of 4 weeks.
The patient was discharged after 49 days after admission. However, a rupture of the left FPL tendon was found on regular ultrasound examination. Silicone rods were inserted into the right index finger and left thumb to induce the formation of a tendon sheath at 11 months. The rods were removed 1 month later because of postoperative MSSA infection. At the age of 1 year and 11 months, a silicone rod was re-inserted into the right index finger for the same purpose . At 2 years and 1 month, the right palmaris longus (PL) tendon was transplanted into the tendon sheath . Follow-up by orthopedic surgeons is ongoing.
The bactericidal capacity of neutrophils and monocytes was within the normal range. Flow cytometry of lymphocytes confirmed that the number and percentage of T cells, B cells, and NK cells were likewise normal, as were the maturation of T cells and B cells. Serum CH50 levels were within the normal range at 3 months of age. There were no symptoms suggestive of a compromised immune system after this infection until 2 years of age.