An 84-year-old woman with a recent diagnosis of hemolytic anemia referred to our hospital because of acute respiratory failure. During the 64 days before this referral, the patient received prednisolone titrated between 10 mg and 80 mg daily. As of the referral, she received 40 mg/day of prednisolone. A few days prior, she developed a fever without any accompanying symptoms. On the day of the referral, she developed dyspnea, desaturation, and altered mental status while eating, and was transported to our hospital. We supposed that the patient inspired food while eating and that inspiration-induced hypoxia caused deterioration of her mental status. Her vital signs on arrival were a body temperature of 37.0 °C, heart rate of 150 beats/min, blood pressure of 170/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 24/min, and 88% oxygen saturation on a reservoir mask of 10 L/min. Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 7 (E2V1M4). She had hypoxemia refractory to full mask oxygenation and was eventually intubated in the emergency room. The white blood cell (WBC) count was 9200 cells/mcL (neutrophils, 97.5%; eosinophils, 0.0%; basophils, 0.0%; lymphocytes, 1.5%; and monocytes, 1.0%). Computed tomography (CT) identified patchy infiltrates along the bronchi in her right lung, with consolidation and ground-glass opacity in her left lung . Physical examination revealed diminished right breath sounds and a vesicular rash on the left side of her neck. We diagnosed the rash as herpes zoster based on cutaneous findings and initiated valacyclovir (1 g daily). Because her oxygenation and mental status deteriorated while eating, we suspected aspiration pneumonia and sulbactam/ampicillin (3 g every 12 h) was initiated. Prednisolone (5 mg daily) was continued because of her corticosteroid history.
Her mental status remained unchanged after oxygenation recovery following tracheal intubation. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis, brain CT and magnetic resonance imaging, and electroencephalogram were non-contributory. To exclude valacyclovir-induced encephalopathy as a cause of her coma, we discontinued valacyclovir on hospital day 6.
Sputum cultures on admission and on hospital day 4 were positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae, extended-spectrum-beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli, and Corynebacterium striatum. We changed her antibiotics to cefmetazole (2 g every 12 h) and vancomycin (500 mg to 1 g at a time). However, both respiratory status and pneumonia were refractory to the current antibiotic regimen and her condition worsened. Specifically, the worst PaO2/FiO2 ratio was 120. The β-D-glucan value measured on hospital day 6 was elevated at 285.6 pg/mL (reference, 0.0–19.9 pg/mL). We started sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim (7.5 mg/kg/day) therapy, and increased her prednisolone to 80 mg/day to treat the presumptive PJP. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of her sputum for PJ and VZV was positive, which confirmed a diagnosis of pneumonia due to PJ and VZV co-infection. We added intravenous acyclovir (500 mg every 12 h). At that time, we observed eschars on her left neck and external ear canal, which suggested systemic VZV infection. The patient remained comatose and her respiratory status and renal function continued to decline despite the treatment. The patient’s family opted for palliative care and she died on hospital day 19.