Herein, we present the case of a 76-year-old man with no clinical history other than well-controlled arterial hypertension, who came to the emergency department accompanied by his daughter, after a 20-day period of progressive cognitive impairment, characterized by forgetfulness, and decreased attentional capacity. Initial physical and neurological examination was notable for confusion, as the patient was not oriented to time nor space. No other clinical signs were detected.
A computed tomography (CT) brain scan was performed, showing two brain-occupying lesions; one located in the right frontal lobe, and the second in the left basal ganglia, both with peripheral contrast ring-enhancement, and vasogenic edema, suggesting brain metastases as the most likely diagnosis.
The patient was subsequently admitted and administered IV corticosteroids (Dexamethasone 4 mg/8 h) for symptomatic treatment. As he had no known medical or family history of an oncologic disease, the detection of a possible primary tumor, once the patient was stabilized, became the priority. A whole-body CT and a 18F-FDG PET/CT scan were performed . The whole-body CT scan showed mural thickening extending 30 mm at the level of distal ileum, close to the ileocecal valve . The PET/CT showed a significant pathologic uptake of 18F-FDG, represented by a 10.2 SUVmax (Maximum Standardized Uptake Value) at the same site of detected mural thickening [ and c]. A diagnostic colonoscopy was performed, revealing an ulcerated and mural-engrossed ileal segment , corresponding to the location of mural thickening and increased 18F-FDG uptake noted in the aforementioned imaging. An incisional biopsy of the borders of the ulcerated lesion was made, though the pathological results were found to be indeterminate.
A brain biopsy was proposed and accepted by the patient and family, and planned for the next few days, after informed consent was signed. However, the patient began presenting with gait instability and a significant neurological decline, with progressive loss of strength in his right leg; thus, the brain biopsy was prioritized and performed the next day.
An open brain biopsy targeting the right frontal lobe lesion was performed under general anesthesia and a burr-hole was made in the bone overlying the lesion. A cruciate opening of the dura was made, exposing a gray tumor-like infiltrated cortex underneath. Macroscopic pathologic material was obtained in all directions. Adequate hemostasis was assured, and soft-tissue closure was completed without difficulty. There were no intraoperative complications and sufficient tissue was obtained for a pathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) examination.
Pathological examination showed the presence of an abundant number of signet-ring cells, with large amounts of mucin displacing the nucleus to the cell periphery, as classically described in the literature. These findings are shown in .
The IHC analysis showed a particular pattern (CK7−, CK20+, CEA+, and CDX2+) suggestive of gastrointestinal tract origin .
Given the imaging and pathology findings, a diagnosis of the primary SRCC of the gastrointestinal tract with brain metastases was made, establishing the location of the primary tumor at the distal ileum.
A therapeutic plan for systemic chemotherapy and holocraneal radiation was proposed and discussed in a multidisciplinary committee. However, the patient’s clinical and neurological status rapidly declined, and he had become aphasic, apathetic, and abulic with impairment in motor function and gait, limiting his ability to eat, bathe, or move independently. After discussion with a second multidisciplinary committee, he was transferred to a medium-stay center for palliative care and symptomatic treatment, where he died shortly thereafter. The total time course from the initial diagnosis of brain metastases to his death was 2 months.