A 1-year-8-month-old girl was brought to the endocrinology outpatient clinic due to abrupt bilateral breast development and rapid growth velocity (2.0 cm/month) within 2 months. She had no perinatal or morbid records of relevance, and no use of medicine or products with phytoestrogens. On examination, her body length was 87.5 cm (90-97th percentile) and body weight was 11.3 kg (50-75th percentile). Bilateral breast showed Tanner stage III with nipple hyperpigmentation. Her pubic hair development was at Tanner stage III but there was no axillary hair development. In addition, there was no café-au-lait spots. Endocrine function test disclosed excessively high estradiol (E2) level with undetectable FSH and LH values . Bone age study was read between 2 years old and 2 years and 6 months old at her chronological age of 1 year and 8 months.
She was then admitted for further evaluation due to precocious puberty. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulation test revealed complete suppression of baseline and peak values of LH and FSH (all < 0.1 IU/L), while baseline and peak values of E2 were 1859.5 pmol/L and 1796.4 pmol/L, respectively , implying estrogenic development without activation of the HPG axis. Furthermore, serum tumor markers all disclosed normal. Pelvic ultrasound showed uterus size of 3.57 × 1.47 × 1.96 cm (estimated volume 5.38 cm3; normal: 1.05 cm3 on average). Right ovary was 0.96 × 0.50 cm in size with few small follicles, and left ovary was 2.93 × 1.79 cm in size with a heterogeneous hypoechoic cystic mass of 1.86 × 1.39 cm in size inside . Therefore, she was diagnosed as isosexual PPP on the basis of suppressed gonadotropin response to GnRH stimulation test and left ovarian mass lesion. Laparoscopic-assisted left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. Grossly, the tumor was circumscribed and the cut surface reveals nodularity . Its color was golden-yellowish with hemorrhagic content. Microscopically, the tumor cells were polygonal with abundant cytoplasm ranging from vacuolated (lipid-rich) to eosinophilic (lipid-poor) . The nuclei were typical round with a prominent central nucleolus. The stroma ranged from scant to prominent with fibrous bands and conspicuous vasculature. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed positive staining for alpha-inhibin and adipophilin (not shown), confirming its nature of a sex cord-stromal tumor with steroid secreting.
One day after operation, baseline gonadal function still showed suppressed levels of gonadotropin (both FSH and LH < 0.10 IU/L), but E2 value was undetectable dramatically (< 18.4 pmol/L). Five months later, physical examination revealed bilateral breast development at Tanner stage II and disappearance of pubic hair. Follow-up pelvic ultrasound revealed a shrunk uterus of size 2.41 × 1.15 × 1.49 cm (estimated volume 2.16 cm3), no specific findings in left ovary, and right ovary 1.25 × 1.01 cm with few antral follicles, indicating salient improvement of pubertal progression after resection of the ovarian tumor.