A 71 year old male patient was admitted to our tertiary care center from another hospital with dyspnoe and massive thoraco abdominal pain. At arrival he presented with cardio respiratory instability (125 bpm average heart rate with blood pressure of 95/45 mmHg) requiring positive inotrope support to maintain at least these values using high dose noradrenaline (Arterenol 0,14 yg/kg bodyweight). No family history on pulmonary diseases was present nor any active Covid 19 infections in the patients close environment had been reported.
His main concern was that he presented with massive abdominal and thoracic pain that had started on transport to our center which took approximately 90 min.
Apart from elevated white blood cells (16.3 G/L Ref: 4.4–11.3 G/L) and elevated lactate (2.9 mmol/L Ref: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L) the patient suffered from dyspnea which was reflected in respiratory acidosis (pH 7.107, pO2 16.6 mmHg, pCO2 68.9, HCO3 21.7 mmol/L, Base Excess − 8.3 mmol/L). After initial CT scan the patient was transferred to the operation room immediately. The thoraco abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a left sided diaphragmatic rupture with herniation of the left hemicolon as well as of parts of the jejunum. The diaphragmatic gap was measured with a diameter of 4 cm on preoperative CT scan. .
The patient had undergone Covid 19 infection 4 months prior to his admission showing the diaphragmatic rupture. During his Covid 19 infection the patient had been continuous positive airway pressure support for 5 days but had never required invasive ventilatory support leading to intubation. The Covid 19 infection lasted for 19 days in this patient, requiring 8 days of ICU care and subsequent 11 days of regular hospital treatment. The patient had fully recovered from his Covid 19 infection but reported continuous coughs as residual effects after severe Covid during the period between the infection and the admission to our clinic.
Operative exploration via laparotomy showed an approximately 7 cm wide diaphragmatic rupture at the left lateral end of the diaphragm with herniation of the stomach, the spleen, the transverse colon as well as parts of the jejunum. Incarceration was present for the jejunal parts and the mesenteric arteries of the affected jejunal segments were avulsed resulting in massive haemorrhage into the abdomen. After bleeding control was achieved with clamping and stitches, the diaphragmatic hole was enlarged in the direction of the esophageal hiatus, the displaced organs were removed and relocated in the abdominal cavity. Two jejunal segments had to be resected with jejuno-jejunal reconstruction using PDS 4/0 continuous sutures for the two layered anastomosis. The stomach as well as the transverse colon recovered and did not require surgical treatment. The spleen was resected after re location into the abdomen. Diaphragmatic reconstruction was performed with direct repair using Ethibond 1/0 sutures and a thoracic drain was placed on the left side. After decompression of the thorax and closure of the diaphragm the patients cardio respiratory situation stabilized.
Postoperatively the patient was transferred to an ICU and remained on inotropic support for 24 h and required ventilatory support for 36 h postoperatively. He was extubated successfully and was eventually transferred into the primary care hospital on postoperative day 10. He remained stable after the operation and did not require any more interventions. He was discharged from the primary referral hospital after another 10 days of recovery. The patient is well and alive after the diaphragmatic repair.