A 17-year-old female presented with a week history of sudden onset of limping on her left leg. She woke up in the morning and had difficulties moving her left lower limb. Clinically, she had a small swelling on her spine. Initially, an ultrasound scan of the swelling was reported as a lipoma. She was reassured of gradual improvement and allowed home with a temporary improvement reported. Two months later, the limping recurred and she was unable to move the left lower limb anymore. A month after, she was unable to walk and was wheel-chair bound. Besides she developed prolonged urine retention that was followed by urinary incontinence. She was then referred to our center for further evaluation and management.
On general clinical examination, she was in a good nutritional status, her pamper was socked with urine, and there was no notable skin lesion. Her vitals were blood pressure 100/60mmhg, pulse rate 80/min and temperature 36.2 degree Celsius. On neurologic examination, she was oriented in time, person and place. The cortical sensation was intact but the superficial temperature and vibration senses were impaired. The limbs demonstrated no marked muscle atrophy in the left or right leg and no rigidity was noted. There was left leg muscle weakness with muscle power of 1/5 and the right leg showed muscle power of 3/5. The deep tendon reflexes of patellar (L3-L4) and Achilles tendons (S1-S2) were depressed (+1). The Babinski’s sign was negative. There was no clinical bowel incontinence. There was a hump in the back extending fromT8 to T12 vertebral bodies.
Baseline investigations were done. Complete blood count, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and renal function tests were all normal.
MRI revealed, a large dumbbell – shaped soft tissue mass in the left para-spinal area T10-T12 with components anterior (5.4X4.9cm) and posterior (7.5X3.7cm) to the spine. The mass involved the left nerve exit foramina of T11/T12. There was also associated intraspinal lesion. The spinal cord was severely compressed and displaced to the right at the level of T10-T12. The mass was iso-intense on T1 weighted image (WI), hetero-intense on T2WI, hyper-intense on T2 short-tau inversion recovery (STIR) and hetero-intense on T1 post gadolinium administration. The mass had an enhancing (capsule) rim on the post gadolinium sequence. There was scalloping of T11 and widening of the spinal canal at the same level with maximum widening at the level T11 body measuring 2.3 cm. There was hypolordosis of the lumbar spine with normal vertebral body size, shape and height. The vertebral bodies had normal signal intensities . The radiologic differential diagnosis of the mass was nerve sheath tumor of the spinal cord most probably neurofibroma or schwannoma.
After the MRI exam results, a complete en-bloc resection was done via a left (unilateral) laminectomy and facetectomy. The involved sensory and motor nerve roots (left T11/T12) were sacrificed. The excised tissue was sent for histopathology and immunohistochemistry analyses. The histopathology results revealed spindle stromal cells and foamy vacuoles with a “patternless” pattern. There were dilated vessels without a “staghorn” pattern. There were no mitoses. There was neither pleomorphism nor malignant features. The histopathologic report given was hemangioblastoma with a differential diagnosis of solitary fibrous tumor of the spinal canal. Solitary fibrous tumor was considered less likely since there were no staghorn vessels . The immunohistochemistry showed positivity for inhibin-α, CD 34, CD56, S-100 protein, and negative for cytokeratins (CK), Bcl-2 and CD31.
During the early postoperative period, the patient showed mild improvement of the neurologic deficit, notably the improvement of deep tendon reflex and urine incontinence. Following her discharge from the facility we lost her to follow up.