A 40-year-old Japanese man was referred to Kochi Medical School Hospital for treatment of GPA. The diagnosis of GPA had been made by symptoms of multiple lung nodule, otitis media, sinusitis, skin ulcer, and periocular granuloma 20 years ago. Furthermore, histopathological finding from skin ulcer revealed granulomatous vasculitis and blood examination showed positive of cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (C-ANCA). He had been treated for GPA by his general practitioner with corticosteroids and methotrexate for 20 years. He was started on anti-cluster of differentiation (CD) 20 antibody (rituximab) and prednisolone combination therapy due to fever and advance of skin vasculitis, after admission to our hospital. Rituximab was injected day 1 (500 mg/body), and prednisolone was taken orally from day 1 to 14 (30 mg/body). Skin vasculitis had improved slightly; however, he suffered high-grade fever and severe abdominal pain at day 14. Blood analysis revealed high levels of creatinine (1.93 mg/dL; normal range, 0.65–1.07 mg/dL) and blood urea nitrogen (24 mg/dL; normal range, 8–20 mg/dL). He was also found to have leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 30,200/μL; normal range, 3,300–8,600/μL), a C-reactive protein level of 11.41 mg/dL (normal range, < 0.14 mg/dL), and a procalcitonin level of 0.72 ng/mL (normal range, < 0.05 ng/mL).
Computed tomography showed mesenteric emphysema of the sigmoid colon with inflammatory changes in the surrounding tissue . After a clinical diagnosis of sigmoid colon perforation was made, we performed emergency surgery. During surgery, a sigmoid colon perforation of 3 cm in diameter was found. Although descending and sigmoid colon was edematous due to inflammation, there were no abnormal findings in the other part of the colon and small intestine. Resection of 23 cm of sigmoid colon and rectum with colostomy formation was performed in accordance with Hartmann’s approach . Histological examination of the colon showed ulcerative lesions without cancer , and vessels around the ulcer showed loss of wall structures and neutrophil infiltration .
The patient had a postoperative complication of superficial surgical site infection, which was treated by opening, draining, and debriding the wound. After the wound healed, he was treated with intravenous immune globulin. He was discharged from our hospital 55 days after the emergency surgery with no other complications. The patient was asymptomatic and received medical treatment for GPA after the sixth postoperative month.