A 67-year-old Caribbean man treated as conjunctivitis for 15 days was referred to our tertiary eye care center (Quinze-Vingts National Ophthalmology Hospital, Paris, France) for a deep nasal juxtalimbal ulceration of the left eye. His medical history revealed type 2 diabetes and asthma. Furthermore, following a routine medical check-up for colorectal cancer screening ten years earlier, he had been diagnosed with non-symptomatic ulcerative colitis that was confirmed histologically. On presentation, the patient complained of burning and tearing in his left eye. On examination, the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/32 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed a crescent-shaped left peripheral ulcer with mid-stromal corneal thinning, extending to the limbus from 8 to 10 o’clock with no lucid interval . A limbal inflammatory conjunctival bulge adjacent to the ulcer and scleritis were associated. Corneal sensitivity was preserved and no palpebral or blinking abnormalities were found. Slit-lamp examination of the right eye and dilated fundus exam were insignificant except for a right nasal pterygium. Anterior segment-Optical Coherence Tomography (AS-OCT) was performed and the minimal residual corneal thickness was measured at 150 μm .
The patient was diagnosed with PUK and treatment was given accordingly. Dexamethasone (1 mg) was injected sub-conjunctively. A topical steroid (dexamethasone 1 mg/ml) and a topical antibiotic (norfloxacin 3 mg/ml) were introduced 4 times a day. The patient was also treated with dorzolamide eye drops for ocular hypertension, non-preserved artificial tears, vitamin A ointment, and oral steroids (i.e., prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day) followed by a deworming drug (ivermectin). Blood test investigations were performed by an internal medicine specialist before initiating systemic therapy.
The patient was seen five days later. He had failed to follow his oral steroids regimen and AS-OCT showed further thinning with 100 μm of residual corneal thickness. A microbiological corneal scraping was performed to rule out differential diagnosis. Because of worsening and impending perforation, the decision was made to perform emergency surgery to preserve globe integrity without waiting for the microbiological results. First, a 4 mm wide segment of perilimbal bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the ulcer was resected. Then, an amniotic membrane graft was performed in two steps. Two layers of FD-AM with a spongy layer (Visio Amtrix® S, Tissue Bank of France, France) were successively sutured with interrupted 10 − 0 Nylon® to the deepithelialized thinned cornea as an inlay graft (epithelial side up). A third layer of spongy FD-AM was fixed to the conjunctiva using simple interrupted 8 − 0 Vicryl® sutures, as an overlay patch graft (chorion side up) . The patient received three intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone (1 g per day for 3 consecutive days) and was discharged on oral prednisone 40 mg per day.
Direct examination, microbiological culture, and polymerase chain reaction testing for herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis were all negative. Infectious diseases (tuberculosis, syphilis, Lyme, hepatitis C, and ascariasis) were also ruled out. No clinical nor biological arguments were found for connective tissue diseases or vasculitis such as rheumatoid arthritis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, periarteritis nodosa, Behçet’s disease, Horton’s disease, or sarcoidosis. A thoracoabdominal CT scan was performed and showed no deep adenomegaly and no identifiable parenchymal lesions. Although the patient had no digestive symptoms, the retained diagnosis was that of PUK in the context of ulcerative colitis.
Two weeks after surgery, the juxtalimbal conjunctiva was no more inflammatory and the AM remained attached . Topical dexamethasone and oral steroids were progressively tapered. One month after surgery, the FD-AM graft was fully integrated without fluorescein staining. Corneal thickness in the area of the former ulcer was measured at 165 μm with AS-OCT . At two months, visual acuity improved to 20/25 in the left eye, and corneal thickness was measured at 340 μm with epithelial and stromal thickening opposite to the ulcer. Corneal inflammation of the left eye was under control, but examination of the fellow eye revealed a peripheral inferonasal ulcer with stromal thinning (431 μm) despite the patient still being on oral prednisone (15 mg/day). Dexamethasone eye drops were immediately initiated (4 times a day) and the right eye underwent the same surgical procedure: conjunctival resection, followed by a spongy FD-AM inlay graft and a spongy FD-AM patch graft. Three pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g per day for 3 consecutive days) were given and an immunosuppressive treatment with adalimumab (human monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor-alpha) was introduced in the context of persistent inflammatory activity despite steroids. The postoperative follow-up was uneventful and systemic treatment was well tolerated. Six months after surgery of the left eye and four months after the right eye, the corneal thickness was respectively 525 μm and 540 μm in the areas of the former ulcers. In confocal microscopy, a hyperreflective layer corresponding to the spongy amniotic membrane was integrated between the newly formed corneal epithelium and the anterior stroma . The epithelium covering the AM graft featured normal stratification with basal, wing, and superficial cell layers similar to the normal corneal epithelium. The AM was visualized as a homogeneous, acellular, hyperreflective layer as described .