A 43-year-old woman with no systemic disease, gravida 4, para 1, conceived after the transfer of three frozen embryos. By the 8th week of gestation, a single gestational sac along with a thickened placenta was recorded. At 14th week gestation, the placenta thickened to 3.48 cm and presented with multiple vesicles. The fetus was nevertheless grossly normal. The initial differential diagnosis included partial mole, complete mole with a co-twin, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), and PMD. Afterwards, blood test revealed an extremely high maternal serum human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) level of 192,817.9 mIU/mL (MoM: 6.51) and an elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level of 397.2 ng/mL (MoM: 9.57). Amniocentesis confirmed a normal karyotype of 46, XX. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR) showed no abnormal methylation in the imprinting control region H19 and KvDMR of chromosome 11p15, indicating that the fetus was not a case of BWS. Therefore, PMD was highly suspected.
Ultrasound surveillance was performed on a weekly basis. During the following weeks, we observed progressive enlargement of the hydropic placenta, and tortuous chorionic vessels with turbulent blood flow . The hydropic placenta occupied the entire lower segment of the uterine cavity, resulting in placenta previa totalis. A symmetric growth delay of 1 week was first documented in the 21st week, while the amniotic fluid amount remained ample. The fetal umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery blood flow remained unremarkable until 25 weeks and 4 days gestation, when the patient came to our emergency department due to decreased fetal movements. After admission, ultrasound revealed placenta previa totalis, oligohydramnios and symmetric growth lag of 2 weeks. Color Doppler showed an unprecedented cerebroplacental perfusion ratio (CPR) of < 1, whereas the ductus venosus (DV) a-wave was normal. An elevated blood pressure and spot urine protein-creatinine ratio of 7.912 confirmed the diagnosis of preeclampsia. The ratio of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 to placental growth factor (sFlt-1/PlGF) was 124.6. Tococardiography showed a category 2 fetal heart rate tracing. Preparation for preterm delivery using magnesium sulfate and betamethasone was initiated. However, on the second day of admission, the fetus demised in utero.
After confirmation of fetal demise, the patient experienced uterine contractions along with antepartum hemorrhage. Emergent cesarean section was immediately performed under general anesthesia due to active vaginal bleeding of 228 g in an hour and insufficient fasting time. During the operation, within 3 min following placental expulsion, the patient experienced a sudden blood pressure drop (from 141/76 mmHg to 42/32 mmHg), bradycardia (heart rate dropped from 92 bpm to 59 bpm), followed by desaturation (SpO2 80–83%). Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography revealed a dysfunctional right ventricle. Therefore, AFE was suspected. Inotropic agents, massive blood transfusion and coagulation factor VII were instantly administered. Meanwhile, her blood test revealed a low platelet count of 58,000/μL (reference range 150,000-400,000/μL), prolonged prothrombin time of 15.6 s (reference range 9.5–11.7 s), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 68.0 s (reference range 24.3–3.27 s), a low plasma fibrinogen level of 53.7 mg/dL (reference range 200–400 mg/dL), and an elevated fibrin degradation product (FDP) level of 369.3 μg/ml (reference range < 5 μg/ml). Rotational thromboelastometry was used for optimal correction of the coagulation profile. A Bakri intrauterine balloon was inserted, yet fresh blood oozing from the vagina persisted despite adequate uterine contractions. We discussed with the patient’s husband and the necessity to proceed with hysterectomy if the bleeding persisted. However, concerning the patient’s desire for fertility and her relatively acceptable vital signs following blood transfusion (BP: 100/62 mmHg, HR: 71 bpm), we decided to try trans-arterial embolization (TAE) firstly. The patient later underwent TAE, and her condition was finally stabilized. The estimated intraoperative blood loss was 890 ml, and postpartum blood loss was 1500 ml initially. The total blood products transfused included 14 units of pRBC, 18 units of fresh frozen plasma, 2 units of single donor platelets, and 50 units of cryoprecipitate. A tranexamic acid pump was administered with continuous infusion for 1 day. The patient was discharged on day 9 of hospitalization.
The demised fetus was grossly normal, yet the specific cause of death could not be assessed due to the patient’s refusal for autopsy. The placenta weighed 1400 g (MoM = 5.19), sized 31 × 21 × 8 cm3. Under gross inspection, the placenta appeared edematous and was composed of grape-like vesicles . The fetal surface showed dilated chorionic vessels, up to 3 cm in diameter. Another 7 × 6 x 2cm3 chorioangioma was attached to the placenta via a feeding vessel . Microscopically, the hydropic stem villi were abnormally enlarged, with central cistern formation. The terminal villi appeared normal, with no excessive proliferation . All the above findings were consistent with PMD. The specimen collected from the placenta was further examined by MS-PCR, with hypermethylation found on the H19 gene and hypomethylation on the KvDMR gene, suggesting that androgenetic/biparental mosaicism is the etiology of PMD in this case.