An 18-year-old female with suspected end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) was referred to our hospital for the presence of acutely deteriorating heart failure. Despite being on mechanical ventilation, inotrope infusion (dopamine 3.3 µg/kg/min, dobutamine 3.3 µg/kg/min), and intra-aortic balloon pump support, the patient developed severely decompensated heart failure complicated by multiple end-organ dysfunction [B-type natriuretic peptide, 2388.3 pg/ml; bilirubin, 2.1 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 1090 U/L; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 49 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.12 mg/dL]; therefore, implantation of paracorporeal ventricular assist device was considered for bridge to decision. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed severely reduced left ventricular contraction with diffuse left ventricular wall thinning complicated by massive left ventricular thrombus .
Right heart catheterization also showed severely elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP, 30 mmHg), with a low right ventricular stroke work index (RVSWI, 298.13 mmHg*ml/m− 2), a low pulmonary arterial pulsatility index (PAPi, 0.87), and a low cardiac index (CI, 1.59 L/min/m2), which implied a potential risk for developing post-implant RHF . Left ventricular thrombectomy and paracorporeal pulsatile-flow LVAD implant (Nipro-VAD®, Nipro Corporation, Japan) were successfully done, and the patient returned to the intensive care unit on 4.0 mg/kg/min of dobutamine and 15 ppm of inhaled nitric oxide. The early postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was extubated on postoperative day (POD) two. She was transferred to the advanced heart failure ward on POD four and daily echocardiogram revealed no signs of RHF while on 2.5 mg/kg/min of dobutamine infusion, and the mean arterial pressure was maintained approximately at 60–80 mmHg. On the morning of POD six, an echocardiogram revealed a severely enlarged right ventricle (RV) and decompressed LV combined with septal shift to the LV, suggesting the development of early post-implant RHF, with LVAD settings of 35% systole and a pump rate of 100 bpm . Retrospectively, central venous pressure (CVP) was initially 15 to 20 mmHg on POD one, and it gradually decreased to below 10 mmHg on POD six. Therefore, early post-implant RHF due to insufficient preload to the RV was suspected, and we performed bolus saline infusion and adjusted the LVAD pump flow under the guidance of TTE findings. The Nipro LVAD pump flow could be changed by adjusting the percentage systole and interval rate; accordingly, the interval rate was adjusted from 100 to 50 bpm to reduce pump flow. Since one stroke volume of this device is approximately 50–70 ml, the predicted pump flow was estimated to have decreased from 6.0 L/min to 3.0 L/min if fully charged. In response to the reduced LVAD flow, both ventricular shapes were rapidly normalized in 30 s based on TTE. We continued to administer 2.5 mg/kg/min of dobutamine and started 0.125 µg/kg/min of phosphodiesterase − 3 inhibitor (milrinone) and oral phosphodiesterase—5 inhibitor (sildenafil). Fluid balance was strictly adjusted under close observation of the daily echocardiogram, and milrinone and dobutamine were successfully discontinued on PODs 18 and 21, respectively, with no signs of post-implant RHF. The patient was listed as a candidate for a heart transplant on POD 40. Despite reduced RV function (RVSWI 182.34 mmHg*ml/m− 2), the patient was successfully converted to an implantable LVAD (HeartMate IITM, Abbott Laboratory, USA) on POD 44 without recurrence of RHF until she received a heart transplant four years after LVAD implantation .