A 70-year-old female with progressive vision impairment and headaches of at least 6 months duration presented to her ophthalmologist for eyeglasses replacement. She was found to have bitemporal visual field defects, left worse than right. She had no relevant medical history and physical exam was unremarkable except impaired vision. The patient had no significant symptoms of hypopituitarism and pituitary function was not evaluated by a neuroendocrinologist at this time.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast revealed a 2.9 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm well-defined parasellar mass in the region of the hypothalamus and optic chiasm. The lesion was isointense on precontrast T1 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), hypointense on T2 with homogeneous enhancement . The mass was inseparable from the superior aspect of the optic chiasm which was displaced inferiorly. It extended superiorly into the inferior margin of the third ventricle and was closely abutting the superior aspect of the pituitary infundibulum. There was no evidence of cystic component or calcification. There was increased signal along bilateral optic tracts and visualized a portion of the optic chiasm particularly on the left side, suggesting optic tract edema (OTE) .
Based on these findings, the initial differential diagnosis included hypothalamic chiasmatic glioma, choristoma and less likely lymphoma. The patient underwent right frontotemporal orbital craniotomy with intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring and image-guided neuronavigation for partial resection of the tumor and decompression of the bilateral optic nerves. Intraoperatively, a large suprasellar mass extending over the optic chiasm was identified. The optic chiasm was almost inseparable from, hard to define from the tumor. Frozen section histology was consistent with possible GCT or less likely plasmacytoma. Given the pathologic diagnosis, debulking of the tumor was completed in order to decompress the optic nerves.
The formal pathology report identified the tumor as GCT of the sellar region, World Health Organization (WHO) Grade I. The tumor consisted of epithelioid to vaguely spindled cells with round to ovoid nuclei and abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm [ and ]. The tumor cells displayed mild to moderate nuclear pleomorphism with occasional distinct to prominent nucleoli. No mitotic figures or necrosis was seen. The periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain largely highlighted the cytoplasmic granularity . The tumor showed diffuse positive nuclear staining for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and weak, patchy staining for S-100 and glial fibrillary acid protein. There was a lack of staining for cluster of differentiation 1a and synaptophysin. The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 1% indicating a low proliferative index.
Immediate postoperative MRI showed a 2.6 cm × 2.4 cm × 2.4 cm anteriorly resected mass in close proximity to the optic chiasm. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 3 with no new neurologic deficits. Her vision improved minimally after the surgery. MRI 3 months and 11 months after the surgery showed that the residual mass was stable in size. There was persistent abnormal T2-FLAIR signal hyperintensity in the left optic radiation consistent with persistent edema along the left optic tract. She did not develop diabetes insipidus after the surgery but she complained of excessive fatigue at 5 months follow-up. Evaluation of pituitary function at the time showed a low normal free thyroxine at 0.63 ng/dL (normal range: 0.61−1.76 ng/dL) and a low normal morning cortisol at 8.9 µg/dL (normal range: 6.7–22.6 µg/dL). Her insulin-like gorwth factor-1, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was normal. She was placed on levothyroxine and hydrocortisone replacement due to the concern of central hypothyroidism and adrenal insufficiency. Hydrocortisone was discontinued after 3 weeks due to a normal ACTH stimulation test.