A 92-year-old man with no previous medical history who was admitted to the emergency department for sudden dyspnea, cyanosis, and severe fatigability. No fever, cough, anosmia, or other possible sign of Covid-19 infection was reported in the days preceding his admission, and none of his family members were symptomatic or suspected of having Covid-19 virus infection. On admission, the clinical examination revealed a confused and short of breath patient in a state of shock, as vital signs were as follow: blood pressure was 80/50 mmHg, heart rate was 112 bpm, respiratory rate was 28 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation was 65% on room air. Physical examination revealed an edematous, cyanotic left lower limb with a positive Homans' sign and absence of peripheral pulses; according to the family, this condition of the lower limb had lasted progressively for at least 10 days.
While the patient was receiving oxygen-therapy via a high-flow mask, bedside transthoracic echocardiography revealed a thrombus in the right atrium (43 × 12 mm), dilated right ventricular (VD/VG: 1.6) in systolic dysfunction (Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion:12mm, peak systolic velocity of annulus tricuspid: 7cm/s) associated with severe pulmonary hypertension (67 mmHg) and abnormal septum motion and dilated pulmonary artery trunk (29 mm) . The left ventricular ejection fraction was around 55%. Venous Doppler ultrasound showed a thrombus in the left common femoral vein . The CTPA was immediately performed, which confirmed bilateral massive pulmonary embolism , lung windows demonstrate peripheral patchy ground-glass opacities consistent with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia with an estimation of only 25% of lung damage.
Laboratory work revealed significant elevated C-reactive protein at 161 mg/l, white blood cell count of 24,610/μl, hemoglobin at 15/dl, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (1536U/L), elevated liver enzymes with ALT 727U/L and AST 429 U/L, troponin I was elevated to 317 ng/mL and PCR SARS-Cov2 was positive.
According to his clinical state, echocardiography and scanner findings and after checking the absence of any contraindications, the patient was immediately put on systemic thrombolysis using rt-PA with the following protocol: 100 mg IV infusion pump over 2 hours. The hemodynamic and neurologic status of the patient were being closely monitored, the procedure was expeditiously accomplished without any bleeding, oxygen saturation was gradually increasing to 89% with 6 L of oxygen, blood pressure raised to 100/60 mmHg, the patient was transferred to the ICU to continue assessments and begin unfractionated heparin infusion along with antibiotics.
Follow up and outcome:
Day 3: The patient was no longer dyspneic, with oxygen saturation at 95% under 4 L of oxygen per minute and blood pressure at 120/70 mmHg, and the physical examination showed a significant improvement of the blue phlebitis, notably a marked regression of the volume of the left leg with resumption of the perfusion of the peripheral arteries.
Day 5: In breathing ambient, oxygen saturation was 94%.
Day 8: He was discharged from the hospital on Dabigatran 110 mg twice a day along with Covid −19 treatment.
Day 30: The patient returned for consultation 30 days after being discharged; he was fine and eupneic, and the TTE revealed a slightly dilated right ventricle with good systolic function and no thrombus.