A 57-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to our hospital presenting with focal ischemic cerebral neurological deficit of acute onset. The patient had had an acute non-Q-wave myocardial infarction episode 11 years ago and post-infarct had undergone percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty: ramus circumflexus in 1995 and ramus diagonalis I in 1997. Eleven months before admission, an evaluation elsewhere had revealed persistent atrial fibrillation and since this evaluation the patient had been receiving Warfarin and had maintained INR = 2.0–2.5.
On the day of admission, examination of the patient revealed intense dizziness with diplopia, instability and complete left-sided homonymous hemianopsia. The findings suggested a transient ischemic attack involving the anterior circulation: carotid artery territory.
There was no personal or family history of coagulopathy or stroke, valvular heart disease trauma, chest pain or illicit intravenous drug usage. He smoked 20 cigarettes daily and consumed alcohol in moderation in the past.
The prothrombin was normal, INR = 2.4, the partial thromboplastin time was 45 seconds, the values for urea, nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, uric acid, bilirubin, phosphorus, electrolytes, creatinine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, amylase and alkaline phosphatase were normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial fibrillation at a rate of 110, with nonspecific ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities. A radiograph of the chest showed clear lungs and slight cardiac enlargement. A cardiac ultrasonographic examination showed no vegetations, intracardiac thrombus, segmental wall-motion abnormalities or intracardiac shunts. A test for the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal, as were tests for antinuclear antibodies, lupus anticoagulant and antiphospholipid antibody.
Computed tomography (CT) brain imaging was performed without the use of contrast material, but failed to indicate hemorrhage, infarct, abscess, tumor or cerebral metastasis. Heparin 20,000IE/24 hours intravenously and Metoprolol 100 mg by mouth were administered. Repeated physical examinations and ECGs showed no changes.
On the second hospital day the patient awoke with a slight neurologic deficit that gradually progressed in a stepwise fashion. Hemiplegia (upper left extremity and face were involved), hemianesthesia and Babinski sign contralateral to the hemiparesis were established. He had mild dysarthria, but his speech was fluent and his comprehension, repetition and naming abilities were intact. CT brain imaging was performed and no hemorrhagic transformation was found. Dipyridamole 200 mg/day, Aspirin 25 mg/day, Heparin 20,000IE/24 hours and Mannitol 20% solution (1 g/kg) were administered. Daily monitoring of ECG, vital signs, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, urine output showed no changes.
On the fifth hospital day the patient noted the acute onset of pain in the lower right abdominal quadrant and lumbar region accompanied by mild nausea. The patient held the right hip in flexion and external rotation. Any attempt to straighten the leg aggravated the pain with radiation to the medial and anterior portions of the lower extremity Weakness of the right quadriceps femoris muscle, paresthesia over the anterior thigh and right flank were evident. The partial thromboplastin time was 43 seconds and INR = 2.4.
Hematocrit level fell as did hemoglobin . CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the abdomen and the pelvis was obtained and revealed extensive enlargement and heterogeneity of the right iliopsoas muscle as well as displacement of the right kidney. The high-attenuation component in the absence of intravenous contrast enhancement is a finding that is usually consistent with the presence of a large retroperitoneal hematoma.
Transfusion of six units of packed red cells and the administration of two units of fresh frozen plasma was followed by fluid overload. The patient was treated conservatively and his condition promptly stabilized after the restoration of normal blood coagulation; however, he remained in the hospital for 38 days. Three months later he had signs of partial lateral paresis of the right quadriceps muscle and thigh adductors and, at 1-year follow-up, the only findings were suggestive of the previous transient ischemic attack involving the carotid artery territory; he had recovered completely from the femoral neuropathy.