In late July 2021, a 67-year-old woman was referred to another hospital with a complaint of fever, myalgia, mild dyspnoea, headache, and non-productive cough that started 4 days ago. She had no underlying diseases. No other complaint was noted. At first clinical evaluation in the emergency department, the blood pressure were 115/75 mmHg, a heart rate of 90 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per min, a temperature of 38.3°C, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 91%. In physical examination, no remarkable findings were have existed. SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction test from the upper respiratory tract was positive. Because of mild dyspnoea and decreased SpO2, a Chest computed tomography scan was performed. Peripheral consolidation and ground glass opacities were seen, as shown in Figure . Dexamethasone 8 mg/day for 10 days with Remdesivir 200 mg on the first day, then 100 mg/day for the next 4 days was initiated with supplemental oxygen. After 3 weeks, she was discharged while she had a mild weakness with normal vital signs (SpO2= 97%) and no significant findings in the physical examination.
After about 2 months, in late October, she was referred to the emergency department (ED) of the Razi hospital, Qaemshahr, northern Iran, with severe weakness in upper and lower extremities, which had begun gradually from prior hospitalization and exacerbated in these 2 months. She also complained of sensory disturbances. No other complaints were noted. Vital signs and SpO2 were normal. In physical examination, weakness grade 1 (according to Medical Research Council Scale for muscle strength) in upper extremity and grade 0 lower extremity, distal and proximal were found with the sensory deficit and areflexia in all limbs. Other organs were normal in physical exams. According to her clinical manifestations, we suspect immune-mediated polyneuropathies, especially after viral infection. We consulted with a neurologist, and an operating nerve conduction study and electromyography (EMG-NCV) were recommended. In the NCV study, conduction slowing velocity and axonal sensory and motor polyneuropathy was found that be consistent with CIDP according to established criteria.
So, the patient was treated with Immunoglobulins, Intravenous (IVIG) 25 g daily (about 0.4 g per kg) for 5 days. After 1–2 weeks, symptoms improved, upper and lower extremities strength were 4–5, reflexes and sensory deficits recovered, and gradually she was able to walk with a two-wheel walker. The 25-g IVIG per month was repeated for the next 3 months and then stopped.
Six months later, she returned to the hospital with similar symptoms, motor and sensory deficits with hyporeflexia. Prior treatment with the 25-g IVIG daily for 5 days was repeated. Partial improvement after 1 week occurred, and the patient was discharged.