A 26-year-old man sustained a high voltage electrical injury (> 1000 V) while he was working with a concrete mixer pump that came in contact with high voltage cable of 10,000 V. The patient was disconnected from the tube immediately due to the jolt, lost consciousness and a cardiac massage was launched within 3 min by witnesses. Then, advanced life support was supplied by paramedics as ventricular fibrillation was detected. He was referred to the nearby emergency room (ER) of a secondary hospital with cardiogenic shock, being chest compressed by a LUCAS machine. In the ER, advanced cardiovascular life support continued for more than 30 min.
After resuscitation, the patient was still supported with IV Noradrenaline. He was then referred to our institute. A physical exam conducted upon his admission showed an unconscious ventilated patient with reactive dilated pupils, tachycardia and a normal bilateral vesicular breathing sound. Electrical entry point was detected on the left hand; exit points were on the feet, bilaterally. ECGs showed sinus tachycardia with PVCs. The arterial blood test showed: PH 6.8, PCO2 53mmHG, PaO2 57 mmHg, lactate 8 mmol/l, and troponin 38,000 ng/dl. The ECG showed an estimated ejection fraction (EF) of 10%, with global dysfunction and a reserved valves’ function. After the heart team consulted, the patient was then connected to the VA-ECMO within 30 min of his admission, via a right femoral approach with distal perfusion.
VA-ECMO support was supplied for 86 h (3.6 days).
During this period, multiple signs and blood tests were performed, among them those related to VA-ECMO .
Other points of care included: suspicion of aspiration on the day of admission; he was treated by antibiotics. Diagnosis of right pleural effusion which was drained by a chest tube. Fluid administration to prevent rhabdomyolysis induced acute kidney injury. Total parenteral nutrition for visceral electrical injury, which resulted in decreased enteral absorption. Burn wounds were treated locally by utilizing silver sulfadiazine cream (Silverol) and Granuflex dressings.
Within the first day, the patient had been weaned from noradrenaline. The lactate level declined gradually down to 0.6 mmol/L. A follow up echocardiography on the third day showed improvement in cardiac function, with an EF = 50% and normal right ventricular function. After 86 h of mechanical support, the patient underwent decannulation from VA-ECMO successfully.
The weaning process was gradual, starting with decreasing the VA-ECMO to 1 l/min for 24 h before decannulation, during this period a trans oesophageal echocardiography was completed, making sure biventricular functions were within the normal range and there was no ventricular dilatation. Chest X-rays showed no new opacities or indications of ARDS. Other parameters that we followed within this period were Central Venous Pressure (CVP), PH, lactate and target organ blood test, to endure normal function.
On the day of decannulation, we stopped heparin, once ACT was less than 160, we conducted decannulation successfully. A transthoracic echocardiography conducted 1 day after the decannulation showed normal biventricular and valves function.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) was diagnosed on the 6th day of hospitalization and was treated accordingly Fig. .
On the seventh day, the patient was referred to the ARDS specialized department in a primary medical centre, being anesthetised and ventilated for continuous treatment. There, he was hospitalized for almost a month. During this period he passed tracheostomy and then was gradual weaned and underwent respiratory physiotherapy up until discharge. No plastic surgery was done and the burns were treated topically. Two months after the accident, he was discharged and moved to rehabilitation centre.
His chest X-rays at the discharge from the ARDS specialized department is shown in Fig. . His blood tests at discharge were normal, especially renal functions – creatinine 0.7 mg/dl.
A follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed – left ventricle with normal global systolic function (EF = 65%) with no regional wall abnormality. The right ventricle was found to be normal size and properly functioning. The aortic valve was normally functioning, as were the mitral, tricuspid and pulmonary valve, with minimal regurgitation.