A 40-year-old male patient was admitted to Xuzhou Central Hospital, Jiangsu, China on December 2020 with a 3-year history of episodic oppressive chest pain that had worsened during the previous month. The patient had a history of smoking for more than 20 years, hypertension for 4 years, type 2 diabetes mellitus for 10 years and hyperlipidemia for 4 years. There was no history of recurrent high fever, skin rashes, oral mucoconjunctivitis or lymph node enlargement, and Kawasaki disease. No family history of cardiomyopathy or sudden death was reported.
Physical examination on admission revealed that the patient had a blood pressure of 130/70 mm Hg in the left upper limb and 140/72 mm Hg in the right upper limb. The patient was in normal sinus rhythm and physiological heart murmurs. There were no dry or moist rales in the lungs or edema of the lower limbs. The electrocardiogram showed that the patient was in sinus rhythm on admission. Echocardiography revealed a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 51 mm and an ejection fraction of 58%. The results of laboratory investigations were normal except low-density lipoprotein cholesterol: 3.67 mmol/L (reference range: 2.20–3.60 mmol/L). coronary arteriography (CAG) showed no stenosis of the left main coronary artery or left circumflex artery, total occlusion of the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) distal to the origin of the first diagonal artery , and total occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery with a bridging lateral branch between the segments proximal and distal to the occlusion. The patient was diagnosed with atherosclerotic coronary heart disease and unstable angina.
The occlusion of the LAD was treated by percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Initial attempts to deliver Fielder XT-R, Gaia 2 or Gaia 3 guidewires (Asahi Intecc, JPN) through the occluded segment of the LAD failed. Subsequently, an antegrade ConquestPro guidewire (Asahi Intecc, JPN) was inserted successfully to open the occluded segment, and visualization of the microcatheter confirmed that the distal end of the guidewire was in the distal true lumen of the LAD. Tandem implantation of 2 Firehawk drug-eluting stents (Shanghai Microport, China) between the middle-distal segment and proximal segment of the LAD was performed . PCI of the right coronary artery was scheduled for 5 weeks later.
reexamination by CAG on January 11, 2021 showed irregular fusiform ectasia of the middle segment of the stented LAD, and the base of the aneurysm was relatively wide and connected to the true lumen . Further examination by optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed loss of vascular wall integrity in the aneurysm with interruption of the 3 layers of the vascular wall and outward protrusion of the adventitial layer , suggesting that a CPA had formed. The CPA was treated surgically by the implantation of a Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)-coated stent. A 3.5 mm × 26 mm Graft master coated stent (Abbott Vascular, USA) was placed and deployed at 16 atm in the middle segment of the LAD under OCT guidance to cover the aneurysm opening, and QuantumNC balloons (3.5 mm × 15 mm deployed at 16 atm, and 4.0 mm × 12 mm deployed at 12 atm) were used for postdilation. Subsequent CAG showed that the body of the aneurysm had disappeared . reexamination by OCT showed that the pseudoaneurysm was covered and that the Graft master stent was expanded and well adhered to the vessel wall . The patient was given maintenance dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg qd and ticagrelor 90 mg bid) postoperatively.
No adverse cardiovascular events occurred during the 5-month follow-up. reexamination by CAG showed a patent stent in the LAD and no signs of coronary artery ectasia . Intravascular ultrasound performed 5 months after implantation of the coated stent demonstrated good adhesion of the stent in the LAD and no evidence of intimal hyperplasia, restenosis or in-stent thrombosis .