Diarrhea for 1 mo, shortness of breath with fever for 1 wk.
A 46 years old male patient was enrolled at the affiliated hospital of Guizhou Medical University for the uremic stage of chronic renal failure (primary nephropathy unknown) and underwent a living donor kidney transplant in July 2019. The patient received left kidney of his father. The donor-recipient blood type is A. The human leukocyte antigen mismatch was 2. The recipient had a negative preoperative penal reactive antibody and a complement-dependent cytotoxicity test of 3%. The donor underwent laparoscopic kidney resection, and the recipient underwent conventional kidney transplantation at the right iliac fossa. The rabbit anti-human thymocyte immunoglobulin (r-ATG) was administered intra- and post-operatively at 50 and 25 mg from D1 to D4, respectively. There were no postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged 14 days after the surgery. With regular follow-up after discharge, a triple immunosuppressive regimen of tacrolimus + morte-tacrolimus + glucocorticoids was used to prolong anti-rejection and tacrolimus trough maintained between 5 and 10 ng/mL was prescribed. The patient with 1 mo of diarrhea visited the hospital; he had 5-6 stools per day, diluted and watery, without mucus, pus, and blood. Outpatient treatment with symptomatic anti-diarrhea and intestinal flora regulation did not significantly relieve diarrhea symptoms. Subsequently, the immunosuppressive regimen was adjusted, and diarrhea frequency decreased to 2 to 3 times daily. After one week, the patient developed shortness of breath with fever after activity with no apparent cause, with a maximum temperature of 38.5 °C. He was diagnosed with “diarrhea and fever to be investigated” and was admitted to the hospital without cough, sputum, nausea, vomiting, and frequent and urgent urination. On the day of admission, he relieved loose stools twice and urinated 1200 mL. He had lost about 2.5 kg of weight in the past month.
Denied unclean diet, cold and close contact with febrile patients before the disease onset, hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, tuberculosis, hepatitis B, etc. There was no history of trauma, blood transfusion, drug or food allergy, living in infected areas, contact with infected water or sources, or exposure to radiation, toxins, or drugs. Furthermore, there was no residence history in areas with medium to high risk of neoconiosis or close contact.
Born and raised in Guizhou Province, no history of extended travel outside the country, no smoking or drinking. Parents, children and spouse are all healthy.
The initial checkup indicated a temperature of 37.8 °C, pulse 106/min, respiration 28/min, blood pressure 123/85 mmHg, and finger pulse oxygen 91%. After a physical examination, he was clear and had shortness of breath, with a medium body shape, general nutrition, and cooperation. The pupils were equally large and rounded bilaterally, and the light reflex was sensitive. There was no yellowing of the skin and sclera, and no petechiae were observed on the skin mucosa. No enlargement of superficial lymph nodes was detected throughout the body. Breath sounds were coarse in both lungs, and a few wet rales could be heard in the middle and lower lungs. He had a uniform heart rhythm with no murmur in the valves. Abdominal and neurological investigations were negative; no abnormal external genitalia development or external urethral discharge was identified. Furthermore, there was no abnormal joint movement of the limbs.
The blood profile revealed the following: Leukocytes = 8.94 × 109/L, lymphocyte = 4.3%, absolute lymphocyte value = 0.38 × 109/L, neutrophil = 90.5%, absolute neutrophil value = 8.09 × 109/L, calcitoninogen = 0.45 μg/L, creatinine = 131.0 μmol/L, blood sodium = 132.1 mmol/L, blood chloride = 79.9, blood glucose = 8.43 mmol/L, albumin = 32.5 g/L, and ultrasensitive C-reactive protein = 24.94 mg/L. The routine stool test and Vibrio cholera, Salmonella, and Shigella culture were negative. Tacrolimus blood concentration was 4.76 ng/mL.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple exudates in both lungs, and infection was considered.