A 29-year-old Taiwanese man presented to our emergency department with persistent dull pain over his right chest wall for 2 weeks. His chest pain was characterized by a persistent dull ache in his right lateral chest wall. No other constitutional symptoms were noticed. Furthermore, he did not have a palpable mass over his right chest wall and the external appearance of his body was normal. A physical examination was unremarkable except for mild tenderness over his right chest wall.A chest X-ray showed a faint patchy opacity over the periphery of his right upper lung zone . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a lobulated mass approximately 5.5×4.5×4.3cm in size at the intercostal space between his right fifth and sixth ribs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his thorax revealed a 5.2×4.5×4.6cm lobulated mass with bone invasion of the adjacent ribs . The mass was isointense to hypointense relative to the muscle on T1 pregadolinium, and heterogeneously hyperintense on fat-suppressed T2 pregadolinium with some low-signal spots and tube-like structures. It showed inhomogeneous contrast enhancement with gadolinium injection. Malignancy could not be excluded according to the image studies.We expected to perform a CT-guided needle aspiration biopsy initially, but it failed due to the barriers of right serratus anterior muscle, latissimus dorsi muscles and scapula. Subsequently, we performed a standard thoracotomy and excised the tumor . During surgery, the tumor was found not to adhere to the lung parenchyma. After separating the latissimus dorsi muscles and serratus anterior muscles, we noted a solid and firmly fixed tumor measuring 5.0×5.0×4.2cm in size over his fifth to sixth intercostal space and it could not be dissected off his fifth and sixth ribs. Subsequently, tumor excision along with segmental resection of his fifth and sixth ribs was done. The defect of his chest wall was reconstructed with Marlex mesh. Grossly the tumor was white-yellow in color and had a smooth appearance. On histological examination, the lesion presented as a hypocellular myxoid tumor composed of short fascicles, tumor cells and abundant myxoid stroma . Neither cytologic atypia nor pleomorphism was observed. The findings were compatible with the diagnosis of a chest wall myofibroma. After surgery, he recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative day 6. No recurrence was detected at the 1-year follow-up examination.