A 38-year-old male military personnel presented to our outpatient department with a complain of pain over the posteromedial aspect of his right ankle associated with swelling, for a duration of seven days following an awkward landing during one of his training drills resulting in forced pronation and dorsiflexion of his ankle. He was unable to bear weight on the affected limb due to pain.
On physical examination, tenderness was elicited diffusely over the posteromedial aspect of his right ankle, however maximum point of tenderness being more posterior compared to the site of a typical sprain. The posteromedial ankle pain intensified with forced plantar flexion but not dorsiflexion. There was pain associated with active flexion of the great toe. Passive flexor hallucis longus tendon movement was also painful.
He had a radiograph, that was done elsewhere four days after the trauma which did not reveal any gross bony abnormality . We ordered for a 30-degree external rotation lateral view of the ankle7, which showed a hypo lucent shadow posterior to the posterior talar process .
A computed tomography (CT) of the ankle was scheduled for a more detailed assessment, and a fracture of the posteromedial tubercle of talus was found on CT scan. As it was a displaced avulsion fracture with some comminution , we planned for an internal fixation of the fracture. The patient had no other medical comorbidity, and all blood investigations were within normal limits. Informed patient consent was taken for the procedure.
Under spinal anaesthesia, the patient was positioned prone on a fluoroscopy assisted table. Considering the vulnerability of talar perfusion, percutaneous fixation of the fracture was planned to reduce the chances of osteonecrosis. No tourniquet was used. A superficial 5mm vertical stab incision was made, about 2 mm proximal to the tip of the medial malleolus and just medial to the Achilles tendon, and the bone was reached by minimal soft-tissue dissection using mosquito artery forceps utilizing the interval between the FHL and Achilles tendon. A 2 mm guide wire was used as a joystick to facilitate fracture reduction under fluoroscopic guidance . After fluoroscopic confirmation of reduction, the fracture was provisionally fixed with the guide wire , over reamed and a lag compressive fixation was achieved using an appropriately sized single partially threaded cannulated cancellous screw . Impalement of FHL was avoided by ensuring absence of guide wire movement upon passive great toe movement. Reduction was reconfirmed under fluoroscopy post fixation.
Postoperatively, the limb was immobilized in a below knee plaster of paris back slab incorporating the great toe, for a duration of two weeks. A below knee cast was done after stitch off, with the foot in neutral rotation and the patient was mobilized by non-weight bearing crutch walking ( & ). Plaster cast was removed and non-weight bearing range of movement exercises for the ankle were begun at four weeks postoperatively. Patient was allowed to bear partial weight at eight weeks postoperatively when the pain had subsided completely. Full weight-bearing was allowed after another 2 weeks, when partial weight-bearing remained uneventful. Twelve weeks postoperatively, he was allowed to perform all activities from our side with no residual pain and X-ray confirmed satisfactory position with good progression of bony union .
Patient at six months follow up did well with no residual pain and full range of ankle motion .