The patient was a 61-year-old Japanese man. He had been aware of gradually worsening dyspnea for one month. He visited a local clinic and was diagnosed with pneumonia, with referral to our hospital for treatment. He was admitted to our hospital on the day of referral. His initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 116/77 mmHg; heart rate, 102 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 20 breaths per minute; SpO2, 98% in room air; and temperature, 36.7 °C. His white blood cell count was 12,800/mm3; neutrophil count, 9,900/mm3 (77.3%); lymphocyte count, 2,300/mm3 (18.1%); hemoglobin, 10.5 g/dL; platelet count, 400,000/mm3; total serum protein, 5.8 g/dL; albumin, 2.2 g/dL. No liver dysfunction was observed. His blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 68 mg/dL; creatinine (Cr), 5.3 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), 9.6 mL/min/1.73m2; uric acid, 9.0 mg/dL; sodium, 135 mEq/L; potassium, 4.3 mEq/L; chloride, 101 mEq/L; calcium, 8.6 mg/dL; phosphate, 5.9 mg/dL; and c-reactive protein (CRP), 8.7 mg/dL. His urinalysis revealed granular casts but no red blood cells. The protein-to-creatinine ratio in his spot urine sample was 0.18 g/gCr. Cells in his urinary sediment showed nuclear enlargement and inclusion bodies, suggesting viral infection. The urinary Papanicolaou stain test revealed intranuclear inclusions in swollen, ground-glass nuclei, suggestive of decoy cells . Additional laboratory results were as follows: rheumatoid factor, < 5 U/mL; IgG, 562 mg/dL; IgA, 60 mg/dL; IgM, 47 mg/dL; C3, 164 mg/dL; C4, 64 mg/dL; and CH50, 55 U/mL; he was negative for antinuclear antibody, anti-myeloperoxidase antibody, anti-proteinase 3 antibody, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody. Chest radiography showed an infiltration shadow in bilateral middle and lower lung fields . His chest computed tomography scan revealed infiltration and fine granular shadows with air bronchogram . Kidney ultrasonography showed no kidney atrophy or cortical thinning. Regarding pneumonia, β-D-glucan was high (300 pg/mL) and Pneumocystis jirovecii DNA was positive in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. He was diagnosed with Pneumocystis pneumonia. Submitted sputum culture was positive for α-hemolytic Streptococcus and Neisseria spp. but were not determined to be the causative organism. No evidence of mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterial, bacterial, or SARS-CoV-2 viral pneumonia was found, and serological test was negative for anti-Trichosporon asahii antibody. Because the bronchoalveolar lavage test diagnosed Pneumocystis pneumonia, no other viral serological tests such as cytomegalovirus, measles, or varicella virus, which could cause pneumonia, were performed. An additional test was performed to scrutinize the cause of immunodeficiency. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody was negative. The results revealed that the patient was infected with HTLV-1, with a high titer (≥ 256 times) of anti HTLV-1 antibodies and positive polymerase chain reaction for the HTLV-1 provirus. However, no atypical lymphocytes were observed in the peripheral blood and no notable findings were found in the bone marrow pathological findings. Additional pathological examination was not performed because no lymph node or skin lesion involvement was noted. Therefore, this patient was determined not to have developed ATL.
His clinical course is shown in Fig. . Ceftriaxone was administered for pneumonia and was changed to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole after diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia. Methylprednisolone 1 g per day was administered intravenously for 3 days and was switched to oral prednisolone afterwards. The patient did not require oxygen therapy on admission; however, respiratory distress worsened, and oxygen therapy was started on the third day of the hospitalization. Oxygen therapy was continued until hospital day 52. On hospital day 17, kidney function showed worsening (Cr, 5.6 mg/dL; eGFR, 9.1 mL/min/1.73m2) with an elevated BUN (122 mg/dL); therefore, hemodialysis therapy was initiated as an adjunct for infection control on hospital day 20. Kidney biopsy to determine the cause of acute kidney failure was considered but could not be performed immediately because of worsening inflammatory responses and drug-induced thrombocytopenia. Kidney biopsy performed on hospital day 54, after inflammatory response easing and platelet count recovery, showed diffuse degeneration of tubules with epithelial enlargement, vacuolar degeneration, nuclear inclusion bodies, and detachment from the tubular basement membrane . Immunostaining for simian virus (SV) 40 large T-antigen was positive in tubular epithelial cell nuclei . Electron microscopy showed intracellular spherical viral particles in tubular epithelial cells . PCR for BKPyV sequenced with ABI PRISM 7900 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems) was positive, with 6 × 103 copies/mL in plasma and 3 × 107 copies/mL in urine. These findings resulted in the diagnosis of BKPyVAN. After diagnosing BKPyVAN, oral prednisolone was tapered. However, kidney function did not improve. On hospital day 87, his IgG level was even lower, at 518 mg/dL after improvement of pneumonia. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) infusion therapy was performed for BKPyVAN, but the patient’s renal function did not recover. Therefore, he was discharged with maintenance hemodialysis.