A 78-year-old Hispanic man presented to the emergency department (ED) of our hospital with abdominal pain accompanied by nausea and bilious emesis. His history was significant for an open appendectomy, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and umbilical hernia repair. He had no significant family history and did not smoke, drink alcohol, or use illicit substances. The patient denied fever or night sweats but complained of anorexia and unintentional weight loss in the month leading up to admission. His physical examination revealed normal bowel sounds, no tympani on percussion, no palpable masses, no hepatosplenomegaly, no fluid wave, and a soft but diffusely tender and distended abdomen. Computed tomography (CT) of his abdomen and pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast revealed small bowel distention and a short segment of bowel wall thickening with enhancement in the right lower quadrant consistent with a partial SBO, likely arising from either local inflammation or adhesion . He was treated medically with bowel rest and decompression with nasogastric tube placement. The patient reported significant relief shortly after decompression, with complete resolution within 48 hours. His diet was advanced, and he was discharged to home with close outpatient follow-up.
He returned to our ED 2 days after discharge with recurrence of abdominal pain, distention, nausea, and bilious vomiting. Repeat CT of his abdomen and pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast showed a moderate increase in the small bowel distention with a transition point in the left middle abdomen consistent with moderate progression of the partial SBO. CT also revealed a 1.6-cm nodular density abutting the anterior aspect of the gastric antrum and lobulated anterior gastric antral wall thickening concerning for atypical gastritis or a gastric tumor . Because of an unsuccessful trial of decompression, the patient was taken to the operating room for adhesiolysis and possible bowel resection.
Intraoperative findings included a completely obstructive mass within the ileum, a partial obstruction by two masses within the jejunum, and a nonobstructive gastric antral mass. He underwent two small bowel resections with excision of the small bowel tumors. Intraoperative frozen section analysis of the small bowel tumors was consistent with lymphoma. The tissue sample was positive for cluster of differentiation (CD)20, paired box protein 5 (PAX5), B-cell lymphoma protein (BCL)-6, and cellular myelocytomatosis (c-Myc), and it was negative for BCL-2, CD3, and CD5 . The result of Epstein-Barr virus polymerase chain reaction testing was also positive. Flow cytometry showed an abnormal B-cell population positive for CD10, CD19, CD20, CD22, CD38, and CD45 with kappa-light-chain restriction, but it was negative for T-cell markers, CD5, and lambda light chain . The final pathology was consistent with BL. He underwent a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate that was negative for lymphoma. Positron emission tomography (PET) demonstrated active disease on both sides of the diaphragm, including adenopathy in the chest, gastric antrum, and the greater gastric curvature, consistent with a stage III BL .
After postoperative recovery, the patient was initiated on six cycles of adjuvant combination chemotherapy with dose-adjusted etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, and rituximab (DA-EPOCHR), as well as intrathecal (IT) methotrexate for central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis. Overall, he tolerated the chemotherapy regimen well, except for a subsequent SBO during the sixth cycle that was managed conservatively. A post-treatment PET scan showed complete remission , and the patient is still being followed 14 months after initial resection.