A 65-year-old man was admitted to hospital because of chest pain with an ST-segment elevation of electrocardiogram (II, III, and aVF). His past medical history included hypertension and hyperlipidaemia. Emergency percutaneous intervention for inferior ST-elevation myocardial infarction due to total occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery was performed under intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) support at 5 h after onset. However, haemodynamic instability continued under noradrenaline administration (0.04 γ). At 10 days after onset, he was diagnosed with inferior PIVSD by echocardiogram and transferred to our hospital. Blood pressure was 74/51 mmHg and heart rate was 81 per minute. Cold sweating and pulmonary rales were observed. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed left-to-right shunt via the ventricular septal defect (VSD) opening near the base of the heart (2.5 cm) ( and Video 1). Diastolic and systolic left ventricular dimension was 46 (normal range; 40–56) and 33 (normal range; 20–38) mm. The right ventricular function declined and left ventricular ejection fraction was 50% (normal range; >50%). Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 50 mmHg (normal range; 15–30 mmHg). To stabilize haemodynamics, we initiated venoarterial ECMO. Aspirin (100 mg) and heparin (10 000 U) per day were administered. Three days after ECMO initiation, pulmonary congestion worsened and an echocardiogram revealed a closed aortic valve and spontaneous echo contrast at the aortic root. After an Impella 2.5 was inserted for unloading of the left ventricle (LV), oxygenation level and cardiac function rapidly declined. An echocardiogram showed an unexpected right-to-left shunt (to-and-fro pattern) via VSD ( and Video 2). By increasing ECMO and decreasing Impella flow, the shunt flow changed to left-to-right, and oxygenation level and cardiac function improved . Ten days after the start of ECMO, elective surgical repair was successfully performed. Although postoperative echocardiogram showed no residual shunt, biventricular dysfunction did not recover sufficiently and the patient was unfortunately died due to new-onset cerebral infarction at 5 days after operation.