A 35-year-old female of the Indian subcontinent, from a rural background, was referred to our center complaining of pain in left hip and limp since 1 year. The pain was insidious in onset and was associated with difficulty in squatting and sitting cross-legged. The patient had anorexia and undocumented weight loss.
There was no other significant past medical history. Family history revealed that her husband had been previously treated for pulmonary tuberculosis 10 years back.
The hip was tender on palpation and associated with fullness in the iliac fossa. She had flexion deformity of 30°, with only jog of movement at the hip joint, and true shortening of 3 cm.
Plain radiographs showed obliteration of joint space with the destruction of femoral head and acetabulum. Osteolytic lesions were seen in the supra-acetabular region and superior pubic ramus. Laboratory investigations revealed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 52 mm/h and eosinophilia, with absolute eosinophil count (AEC) of 930/mL (30-350/mL). Based on this, a provisional diagnosis of tuberculosis of the hip was made. Baseline liver function tests (LFT) before starting anti-tubercular therapy (ATT) revealed mild hyperbilirubinemia (T. Bil -2.1 mg/dL) and elevated serum transaminases (alanine aminotransferase [ALT] -136 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase [AST] -145 U/L). Within 1 week of starting ATT, the patient developed abdominal pain with vomiting and icterus. LFT revealed a further rise in bilirubin levels (T. Bil -3.2 mg/dL) and serum transaminases (ALT -286 U/L, AST -312 U/L). ESR also increased to 64 mm/h and eosinophilia persisted (AEC -740/mL). ATT was withheld; however, derangement of LFT persisted.
This prompted an ultrasound of the hepatobiliary system which revealed a well-circumscribed multilobulated lesion in segment V of the right lobe of the liver with peripheral daughter cysts. There was an associated large exophytic component extending medially beyond the hepatic capsule, suggestive of hydatid cyst.
Henceforth, abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was done revealing 10.2 cm × 5.6 cm exophytic multiseptated thick-walled cystic lesion arising from the right lobe of the liver. There was an associated smaller (3.3 cm × 2.3 cm) multiseptated cystic lesion with evidence of rim calcification.
CT scan of the pelvis revealed a large multiseptated cystic lesion with the osseous destruction of the left iliac bone, acetabulum, and proximal femur. It showed complete destruction of the acetabulum with evidence of protrusio acetabuli. The cystic component of the lesion involved muscles around the hip joint and left hemipelvis. This extended into the ischiorectal fossa, gluteal region, and iliopsoas, with a cold abscess in pelvis tracking along the anterolateral aspect of the thigh. Multiple small bony fragments were seen in the cystic lesion.
Surgical debridement was done 1 week after commencing oral treatment with albendazole 10 ?mg/kg/day. A lateral approach was used to expose the hip joint through an incision starting from the highest point of iliac crest extending distally along the posterior border of the greater trochanter . On separating the fibers of gluteus medius, hydatid cyst, and debris from destroyed hip joint were encountered. The cyst was injected with 50 mL 10% povidone- iodine solution. Carefully, the extraosseous part of the cyst was dissected and excised. Using a bone saw, osteotomy of the femoral neck was made at the upper border of the lesser trochanter. The diseased and deformed femoral head was removed revealing an enlarged acetabulum filled with osseous debris, cartilage flakes and hydatid cyst. The cyst was seen to be communicating to the endopelvic. Again, 50 mL of 10% povidone-iodine solution was injected into the cyst.
For endopelvic exploration, the anterior approach was made through an incision from pubic symphysis to anterior superior iliac spine and along the iliac crest to join the first incision at the highest point of the crest. The femoral neurovascular bundle was identified and preserved. Anterior abdominal wall muscles were reflected off the superior pubic ramus, inguinal ligament, and anterior portion of the anterior iliac crest. Dissection was continued in the extraperitoneal plane by retracting the peritoneum away from the affected side. Lesser pelvic wall and quadrilateral plate were identified and were observed to be involved in the parasitic infestation. Cysts were found bulging into the endopelvic from the medial acetabular wall. This cyst was communicating across the acetabulum. Careful excision of the cyst was performed. Surgical wounds were thoroughly washed with 0.9% saline and 10% povidone-iodine mixture (2:1) and closed in layers over suction drains. Fistulae were debrided and excised. No anaphylactic reaction has been observed during the surgery. Femoral head and synovial biopsy confirmed hydatid disease. Since the disease was infective in nature, we did not opt for reconstruction of the hip joint with endoprosthesis for fear of surgical site infection.
Albendazole was continued for 3 months after the surgery. Skeletal traction through upper tibial Steinman pin was applied postoperatively. Gentle hip adduction/abduction skateboard exercises were initiated 2 weeks postoperatively. Hip flexion/extension exercises were added at 3 weeks. Surgical wound dehiscence occurred at 2 weeks after the surgery, but with regular dressing and oral antibiotic coverage, the wound healed within 3 weeks. At 3 months postoperatively, the patient was allowed crutch-assisted full weight- bearing ambulation.
At 6-month follow-up, the patient was able to walk with the help of a stick, squat, and sit cross-legged . At 3-year follow-up, the patient was walking pain- free and unaided. There was no clinical evidence of disease recurrence.