A 55-year-old woman consulted our hospital for investigation of upper abdominal discomfort, and then, a liver lesion was detected by computed tomography (CT) scan in April 2021. She did not have nausea, fever, fatigue, jaundice, weakness, night sweats, or weight loss before admission. The patient was previously healthy and had no history of hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, surgery, or allergies. Also, she had no remarkable personal history and no special family history. Physical examination at the time of admission to the hospital revealed no tenderness or rebound pain in the abdomen; furthermore, no lymphadenectasis, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or palpable mass was noted.
Laboratory data are shown in . Peripheral blood cell counts revealed decreased white cell count (2.8 × 109/L, normal range 3.5%–9.5 × 109/L) without anemia. Liver function and renal function were normal, and blood glucose, electrolyte, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were in the normal range. Total cholesterol was slightly elevated (5.54 mmol/L, normal range 2.8–5.2 mmol/L). Serological tests for hepatitis B and C viruses (HBV and HCV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were all negative. Levels of tumor markers, such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9), were within the normal range at 2.59 ng/ml, 1.01 ng/ml, and 5.62 U/ml, respectively.
Abdominal CT revealed an elliptic low-density shadow occupying the left inner lobe of the liver. Then, abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which showed a slightly longer signal with heterogeneous density in both T1 and T2 sequences. The mass measured 4.7 × 4.2 cm , after intravenous injection of contrast agent, and the lesion was significantly strengthened in the arterial stage and decreased in the portal and delayed stages, which was similar to the liver parenchyma enhancement. In addition, no neoplasm was found in subsequent CT scans of the cephalothorax, abdomen, and pelvic cavity.
According to the laboratory examination and imaging results, the liver lesion was suspected to be a hepatic adenoma, but the possibility of a malignancy like hepatocellular carcinoma was not excluded. The patient did not consent to a liver biopsy because of concerns about needle tract metastasis. The tumor was likely to be resectable, therefore, an exploratory surgery was performed three days after admission. During the surgery, a solid and well-circumscribed mass was found on the lobus quadratus adjacent to the portal fissure, and then, hepatectomy of segment 4b and cholecystectomy were performed. There were no palpable lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament or mesentery. The gastrointestinal tract was also normal. After the operation, the patient was treated by fasting prohibition, acid inhibition, and nutritional support, but she refused to undergo subsequent chemotherapy or radiotherapy. She had an uneventful recovery without postoperative bleeding or bile leakage, and the standardized classification of surgical complications (Clavien–Dindo) was stage I.
Unexpectedly, a hepatic lymphoma was diagnosed by postoperative histopathological examination, which showed medium-sized lymphocyte infiltration in the hepatic sinuses . These heterotypic lymphocytes morphologically resemble central cells, which are arranged concentrically around reactive lymphoid follicles. Immunohistochemistry was positive for the pan-B-cell marker CD20 and for CD79α, CD43, and Bcl-2; conversely, it was negative for CD3, CD5, cyclinD1 . Moreover, CD21 shows irregular follicular dendritic cell networks . The lymphoid cells showed a relatively low proliferation fraction as detected by Ki67 immunostaining (Ki-67 proliferation index: ∼13%, ). All these histologic findings confirmed B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of MALT type.
After discharge, this patient was referred to the department of hematology for follow-up. However, as the patient was reluctant to undergo chemotherapy or radiotherapy, she was reviewed approximately every six months without special intervention or medication. Fortunately, she was disease-free 18 months after the operation and the recent systemic CT scan revealed no recurrence .