On June 12 2014, a 70-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to the fast track cancer referral programme at Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark, due to a palpable abdominal mass, a 4–5 kg weight loss, and fatigue. Six years previously the patient had undergone a Whipple operation where a 3.8 cm duodenal GIST tumour was radically resected. After surgery the patient was followed with regular CT scans for four and a half years. No adjuvant treatment with imatinib was given, as this was not standard of care for high risk patients in Denmark in 2008. After the cessation of her follow-up, the patient had been well until her weight loss in spring 2014.
Initial routine biochemistry revealed elevated p-ionized calcium; 2.11 mmol/L, suppressed p-PTH; 1.5 pmol/L, and impaired renal function with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 37 mL/min, one year previously eGFR was 88 mL/min. Finally, p-total alkaline phosphatase was slightly elevated to 148 U/L but other routine biochemistry was normal. At the time of surgery in 2008 p-total calcium was not elevated, and p-ionized calcium was not measured.
To further characterize the cause of hypercalcemia, plasma levels of monoclonal protein, calcitriol and PTHrP were measured. Monoclonal protein and PTHrP were undetectable but calcitriol was more than twofold elevated (375 pmol/L). See Table for biochemistry.
A regular CT scan was followed by a PET-CT scan and two hepatic tumours, measuring 11.0 × 8.6 cm and 9.2 × 8.2 cm were found, but no bone lesions. Ultra-sound guided biopsy from one of the hepatic tumours concluded recurrence of GIST with the following morphological and immunohistochemical characteristics: Two mitoses per 8 HPF; Ki-67 was 5 % on average but up to 20 % in hot spots; mutation in KIT exon 9 but no mutations in PDGFRA Exon 18.
The hypercalcemia was initially treated with intravenous saline and 600 IU of calcitonin and the day after oral prednisolone 37.5 mg/day was initiated. P-ionized calcium initially decreased to 1.71 mmol/L but on day four increased again to 2.17 mmol/L and another dose of calcitonin was administered. The results of the p-25-hydroxy vitamin D analyses appeared on day five and as expected, 25-OH Vitamin D2 was unmeasurable and 25-hydroxy vitamin D3 normal (81 nmol/L). Hence, as the risk of bisphosphonate-induced hypocalcemia was thought to be minimal, intravenous zoledronic acid (4 mg) was administered .
The patient was discharged on day 7 with the recommendation of increased oral fluid intake.
Oral imatinib therapy started on day 10 at the oncology department, and the patient was followed up by regular controls. Plasma level of ionized calcium was normalized on day 16 and prednisolone was tapered off and ultimatively stopped on day 33. There were no adverse or unanticipated events related to the treatment.
Two weeks after initiation of imatinib, p-calcitriol had decreased to 224 pmol/L. A follow-up CT scan eight weeks after the first showed a significant reduction in tumour size. Imatinib was continued and after 15 weeks of treatment p-calcitriol was nearly normalized at 181 pmol/L. P-ionized calcium remained in the reference interval.