A 49-year-old male had severe bronchial asthma according to ATS/ERS definition . Although the bronchodilator reversibility test was positive (FEV1 + 14% versus a baseline of 66% predicted), a fixed obstruction was present in stable conditions. He was a non-smoker patient, with prior nasal polypectomy, and he had common variable immunodeficiency as comorbidity. Normal ANCA levels excluded a Churg-Strauss syndrome. Asthma control was very poor (ACT score 18) with a very low quality of life (AQLQ 3.3) despite high dose inhaled therapy (budesonide 800 mcg/die, formoterol 24 mcg/die and as needed, tiotropium 18 mcg/die), and oral prednisone 8 mg daily. The use of anti-IgE monoclonal antibodies was not allowed, because serum IgE levels were above the upper safety limit for indication. The patient was referred to BT and enrolled in an experimental clinical BT-ASMN trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01839591) . Standard procedures of premedication were applied, with prednisone 50 mg as required by protocol for three days, i.e. the day before, the same day, and the day after the procedure.
The first session of BT was performed on spontaneous breathing in deep sedation with remifentanil 0,10 mcg/Kg/h and propofol 8 mg/Kg/h administered under anesthesiology assistance. Copious mucus secretions and hyperemic bronchial mucosa were found at bronchoscopy examination. Fifty valid activations were administered in the bronchi of the right lower lobe without complications, such as O2 desaturation or bleeding.
After one hour, acute respiratory failure occurred with PaO2/FiO2 < 300. On physical examination, there was a reduction of breath sounds in the right lower lobe, severe bronchospasm elsewhere with tachypnea. A CT scan showed atelectasis of the right lower and middle lobes . A new bronchoscopy was performed on non-invasive ventilation with face mask (Esprit ventilator Philips-Respironics inc. PVC/AC mode; Performax face mask Philips-Respironics inc.) through Respironics swivel connector to ensure adequate gas exchange. Right lower and middle lobe bronchi were almost completely occluded by bronchus-shaped plugs . The removal of the plugs was very hard despite repeated washings with physiological saline and mechanical fragmentation with forceps . The patient had a rapid resolution of respiratory failure with progressive improvement of gas exchange, and was discharged after twelve days.
Four weeks later, a second session of BT was performed after the same premedication and deep sedation protocols. Sixty-one valid activations were administered in the bronchi of the left lower lobe. Bronchoscopy showed reduction in secretions as compared to the first session. Six hours later, a severe bronchospasm occurred with respiratory failure. Chest X-Ray showed a partial atelectasis of the left lower lobe. A flexible bronchoscopy on non-invasive ventilation showed again a plug occluding the left lower lobar bronchus. The plug was removed with forceps fragmentation and washings. After five days the patient was discharged.
The histological analysis of the plugs demonstrated a massive presence of fibrin with mucus debris, rare Charcot-Leyden crystals, scattered macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils and bronchial epithelial cells . Grocott staining was negative for microorganisms. Pan-cheratin immunostaining was negative for neoplastic cells.
The third session of BT was performed after one month. Eighty two valid activations were administered in the bronchi of the two upper lobes, without any complications.
The clinical and functional evaluation performed 12 months after the end of BT showed a good control of asthma without any kind of exacerbations. The FEV1 value is increased from 66% at baseline to 75% after 12 months, AQLQ score from 3.3 to 5.8 and ACT score decreased from 18 to 6.