A 30-day-old male infant was transferred to our institution for persistent high-grade fever lasting 16 days. Symptoms started on day 14 of life, and he was admitted to a tertiary-level children’s hospital on the second day of illness, at which time he had no skin, respiratory, gastrointestinal, or nervous system symptoms. Admission laboratory tests revealed a normal complete blood count, serum transaminase levels, albumin, antinuclear antibodies, immunoglobulin levels, and CD markers, but elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (50 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (55 mm/h), ferritin (348 ng/ml) and procalcitonin (0.96 ng/ml). His chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound were unremarkable. Empirical antibiotic therapy comprising of ampicillin and cefotaxime was started for presumed neonatal sepsis. Physical examination was within normal limits except for a transient day-long generalized reddish rash and mild conjunctival congestion on day 6 of fever, which was considered by the neonatologist to be a manifestation of infection. However, bacterial cultures of blood, urine, stool, and cerebrospinal fluid, as well as viral screens for toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, Influenza A and B, Epstein Barr virus, and rotavirus were all negative. Unfortunately, his fever persisted even after antibiotics were upgraded to vancomycin and meropenem.
By the time he was admitted to our hospital, his white blood cells, platelets, CRP and ferritin had risen to 26.8 × 109/L, 470 × 109/L, 160 mg/L and 595 ng/ml, respectively. In contrast, his procalcitonin had decreased to 0.50 ng/ml, while at the same time having hypoalbuminemia (25 g/L) and anemia (95 g/L). At this point, as no clear etiological evidence was found, KD as a noninfectious cause of fever was the first to be considered according to the 2017 American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines . On day 2 of admission, echocardiographic findings of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and right coronary artery (RCA) revealed medium CAAs, confirming our suspicions . The internal diameter of the LAD and RCA were 3.5 mm (z score = 6.7) and 2.9 mm (z score = 5.8), respectively. Full-body magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), performed routinely in patients with medium to giant CAAs in our institution , also revealed bilateral axillary artery aneurysms that could not be palpated on physical examination . Syphilis, which can also cause multiple aneurysms, was unlikely given a negative rapid plasma regain test and Treponema pallidum particle agglutination test. Considering the early age of onset, we also did whole-exome sequencing to identify mutations in known candidate genes (such as Adenosine deaminase 2 gene) or other unknown genes which may have a potential role in the development of this presentation.
Intravenous gamma globulin (IVIG) (2 g/kg), methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg.d), aspirin and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (75u/kg.dose q12h) were administered immediately. The next day, his fever resolved and his CRP level began to decrease, and 1 week later, slight periungual desquamation of the fingers and toes was noted. Subsequent echocardiographic follow-up revealed no worsening of the coronary lesions. On day 30 of admission, glucocorticoids were stopped, and he was discharged home on warfarin and aspirin. Three months after diagnosis, echocardiography showed that the diameter of the LAD and RCA had been reduced to 2.3 mm (z score = 2.3) and 2 mm (z score = 2.1), respectively, and MRA showed complete resolution of the axillary artery aneurysms. Warfarin was thus discontinued. Gene sequencing revealed no gene mutations associated with his symptoms. Aspirin was stopped 6 months after diagnosis, by which time the diameter of the coronary arteries had returned to normal.