A 13-year-old female patient visits the orthodontic consultation with a normal medical history and without a family medical history, without medication allergy. In the extraoral photos, a facial biotype was presented, with a slightly concave straight profile .
In the intraoral photos, we can observe a coincident midline, anterior diastema in the upper and lower arch, anterior crossbite, molar and canine Class III .
In the orthopantomograms, the third molars in formation process and eruption with bad position can be observed. The presence of spaces in the lower anterior sector is shown in .
In the cephalometric analysis of Jarabak, the patient presented Class III skeletal by mandibular prognathism, a horizontal growth type, maxillary dentoalveolar proclination, biretroquelia, and a large mandibular body .
The treatment plan was to align and level, closure of spaces, distalization of lower canines, retraction of the lower anterior segment, a possible therapy with Class III ligatures, lower posterior stripping if necessary, paralleling roots and containment with superior circumferential Hawley and fixed 3 to 3 lower.
The orthodontic camouflage treatment was performed in the growth stage (13 years) since the patient and her parents did not agree with the use of extraoral devices; in addition, they stated that they did not have the economic resources to pay for orthognathic surgery in future. That is why we sought the most convenient option for the patient at that time.
The prognosis of the case was favorable since the patient presented spaces in the anterior sector, which allowed to avoid extractions of premolars and thus to be able to perform the treatment with orthodontic camouflage.
We worked with the Alexander technique with slot 022 brackets. Initial and lower initial 0.012 arches were placed on July 30, 2012. After the distalization of lower canines on January 7, 2013, we proceeded to place a 0.016 × 0.016 upper arch and a simple retraction arch in 0.016 × 0.016 lower steel .
By April 1, 2013, total retraction of the lower anterosegment had been achieved, proceeding to place a 0.016 × 0.022 steel bow and mooring with molar to molar metal ligation to avoid opening of spaces. In the upper jaw was placed an arch of 0.017 × 0.025 niti, in addition to a chain of 11–21 for closing diastema.
Once the diagnosis of skeletal Class III with crossbite and horizontal growth of the patient was determined, once the distalization of canines was achieved, the anterior sector was retracted. This allowed, together with the use of Class III intermaxillary ligatures, to redirect the mandibular growth of the 13-year-old patient. It is necessary to remember that a solution of the problem (previous crossed bite) of the patient should be sought, due to the few financial resources of her parents to plan future orthognathic surgery.
For July 08, 2013, stripping was carried out in the right lower posterior sector, to gain space and achieve correction of the lower midline; in addition, a league of 1/8 median was placed in a triangle of 23 a 33–34 to obtain a correct intercuspation.
The treatment of orthodontics was completed on December 11, 2013. Below are the final photos and their comparisons with the initials. It can be noticed that the facial biotype (Dólico) has not varied with the treatment of orthodontics .
The cross bite present at the beginning of treatment could be corrected correctly. In addition, a good alignment of the teeth was achieved and a slight deviation of the upper middle line. The molar classes continued in III but functional and Class I left canine and right canine Class III were obtained .
In the lateral radiograph of the skull, as well as in the cephalometric tracing after treatment, we can see that the mandibular prognathism persists, with an ANB angle of −3, proclination of the upper teeth and slight retroclination of the lower ones, besides continuing with a growth in the horizontal direction .