A 50-year-old male presented to the emergency ward with acute right hip pain for 1 day. He was unable to bear weight on his hip, and localized the pain to his right groin. He denied trauma, fevers, chills, numbness, or paresthesia to the right lower extremity. His medical and surgical history was noncontributory. He had no allergies and denied abuse of tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drugs. He was afebrile with stable vital signs at presentation. The right hip was held in a flexed and adducted position. He complained of pain with attempted range of motion (ROM) and log-roll, and he had a normal neurovascular examination.
X-rays of the right hip demonstrated no fracture or acute osseous abnormality but MRI revealed a right hip effusion (, ). Laboratory workup demonstrated no leukocytosis, but elevated inflammatory markers (WBC 7.5 × 10^9/L, ESR 60 mm/h, and CRP 9.04 mg/dL). A hip aspiration under fluoroscopy was performed, revealing a cell count of 100,600/cm3 with 91% neutrophils. There were no crystals on microscopy. PCR was positive for Group B Streptococcus. Both blood cultures and aspiration culture later demonstrated growth of Streptococcus agalactiae.
The patient was brought to the operating room for an irrigation and debridement. After administration of anesthesia, he was placed in the left lateral decubitus position . A muscle-sparing anterolateral approach (Rottinger) was used to gain access to the hip . The fascia was divided, and the plane between the tensor fascia lata (TFL) and gluteus Medius was bluntly developed. The capsule was incised . Cultures were obtained. Gross purulence was irrigated with 9 L of normal saline. A Hemovac drain was placed and the capsule was left open. The overlying fascia and skin were closed.
He was placed on vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam as empiric coverage postoperatively. The drain was removed on post-op day 2. He was transitioned oral antibiotics following availability of culture sensitivities for a 4 weeks course, in consultation with an infectious disease specialist. He had pain free ROM of his hip at final follow-up. His gait was symmetric, with equal standing time bilaterally. A radiograph at follow-up was unchanged from his initial examination.