A 33-year-old woman, who was on maintenance chemotherapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), presented to our clinic with chief complaints of severe headache and nausea. She had been diagnosed with ALL 2 years before this event and was in the process of receiving maintenance treatment under the Japan Adult Leukemia Study Group ALL202-U protocol . Her headache and nausea had started after receiving an intrathecal chemotherapy (methotrexate, cytarabine, and prednisolone) 2 weeks before; thus, she initially interpreted the headache as post-lumbar-puncture pain and consumed painkillers (loxoprofen and tramadol) that partially relieved her symptoms. However, her symptoms continued, and by the time of her visit to our clinic, she also developed other symptoms, such as photosensitivity, appetite loss, left temporal and eye pain, and tinnitus. She had no gastrointestinal symptoms or fever during the 2 weeks. She had no medical history before her diagnosis of ALL and had only one episode of septic shock with lung abscess during her course of chemotherapy, which was caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae. She was on prophylactic antimicrobials, including atovaquone (leukopenia due to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole), fluconazole, and acyclovir. Notably, she had eaten undercooked beef 2 days prior to admission. On admission, the patient experienced acute distress, had a body temperature of 36.2 °C, blood pressure of 130/88 mmHg, pulse rate of 87/min, respiratory rate of 18/min, and oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry of 100% on room air. The patient did not have neck stiffness, jolt accentuation, or any other neurologic deficits, such as cranial nerve abnormality, ataxia, or muscle weakness in her extremities. She had no abdominal tenderness or normoactive bowel sounds. Laboratory findings were the following: white blood cell count, 2400/μL (neutrophils, 58%; lymphocytes, 27.5%; monocytes, 11.5%); hemoglobin level, 11.5 g/dL; platelet count, 336,000/μL; blood urea nitrogen level, 10.2 mg/dL; creatinine level, 0.48 mg/dL; and C-reactive protein level, 3.74 mg/dL. Computed tomography of the brain did not reveal any abnormalities. Incidentally, her neutrophil count had been hovering around 1000/μL, a month prior to her admission. Her headache was so intense that we started intravenous patient-controlled analgesia with fentanyl.
On day 2, her temperature rose to 38.0 °C and jolt accentuation was observed. Lumbar puncture was performed, and CSF analysis showed a cell count of 71 (polymorphonucleocytes 59.2% and mononucleocytes 40.8%), protein level of 87 mg/dL, and glucose level of 82 mg/dL (serum glucose 124 mg/dL). No bacteria were observed under gram staining. We empirically initiated ampicillin 2 g intravenously (IV) every 4 h and ceftriaxone IV 2 g every 12 h. Her symptoms gradually improved. On day 4, spiral gram-negative rods were detected in blood cultures obtained on admission, and ampicillin was discontinued. On day 6, blood and CSF cultures revealed C. fetus, which was identified by an aerobic bottle, BacT/ALERT (bioMérieux, Inc., Durham, NC). The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of this strain measured by E-test (bioMérieux) were as follows: meropenem, 0.064 μg/mL and cefotaxime, 16 μg/mL. Stool cultures were negative on day 9, and we switched from ceftriaxone to meropenem 2 g IV every 8 h . We excluded other metastatic foci, such as infective endocarditis, splenic or renal abscess, septic pulmonary emboli, or infected aneurysm. We continued meropenem for 3 weeks, and she was discharged without neurological sequelae.