A 15-year-old female patient visited the Department of Orthodontics at Tianjin Stomatological Hospital with the chief complaint of an anterior open bite. In addition, she also had a problem with her bilateral temporomandibular joint. She wanted to correct her occlusion through orthodontic treatment.
The asymmetry of the face with a chin deviating to the right was observed on the frontal facial photograph . The lateral facial photograph showed that the patient’s jaw was retracted and the mento labial sulcus was slightly flattened. Her maxillary dental midline was in line with the facial midline and the mandibular dental midline was shifted 1.0 mm to the right. Intraoral photographs showed an open bite measuring 3.4 mm. The overjet was 8.4 mm. The patient presented with a Class II molar relationship on the right side, and a Class III molar relationship on the left side. Class II canine relationships on both sides. The dental space discrepancies were 5.5 mm in the maxillary arch and 4.5 mm in the mandibular arch . According to the cervical vertebral maturation method (CVM), the girl was classified as CVM stage 5, and the peak of growth and development had been completed for at least one year.
The panoramic radiograph showed the presence of all teeth, including the third molars in the budding stage . Cephalometric analysis showed a skeletal Class II malocclusion (ANB = 10.3°;Wits = 3.1 mm). The vertical facial pattern was hyperdivergent (MP-SN,40.0°, S-Go/N-Me:60.1%). The axial inclination of the mandibular incisors to the mandibular plane exceeded the normal value, indicating that mandibular incisors were inclined labially.
The analysis of the condylar trajectory showed that the bilateral short condylar border movement is within the normal range. However, the condylar trajectory indicated that the functional movement is impaired. At the same time, the stability of the bilateral condyles is poor .
The patient’s diagnosis was Class II malocclusion with moderate interdental space, moderate protrusion of the maxilla, slight retrognathism of mandibular and severe chin retraction. Genetics and poor oral habits may play an important role in the underlying skeletal pattern and dental anomalies.
Considering the great improvement in the patient’s profile, growth modification and tooth alignment, we offered this patient two alternatives. The first alternative was a combined orthodontic-orthognathic treatment. As the patient is not yet 18 years old, we advised her to opt for this option when she is an adult in order to achieve the great improvement of her profile and occlusion. The second alternative was an orthodontic camouflage treatment with no extractions except for the third molars. In this option, we pretended to use multiloop edgewise arch wire (MEAW) technique to upright and lower posterior teeth. To improve the open bite of the anterior teeth, reverse-curve arch wire and vertical elastics in the anterior region is necessary. Teeth #38 and #48 should be extracted to make room for tooth movement. If necessary, miniscrews are used for intruding posterior tooth.
In fact, a combined orthodontic-orthognathic treatment was recognized as the best alternative for this patient to improve her esthetics and occlusal function. However, the patient and her family strongly rejected option 1 and preferred the orthodontic camouflage treatment instead. They also accepted the possibility of option 2, that could not achieve the desired profile. Ultimately, the second option was chosen and accepted by the patient after she had fully considered the potential risks and outcomes.
A preadjusted fixed appliance with 0.022 × 0.028-inch slot (Damon Q U/L 5–5 Standard Torque, Brea, Calif) was placed in both arches. Initially, the teeth were leveled with a sequence of 0.013-inch and 0.016-inch nickel-titanium wire for 4 months. The patient was unable to seek timely follow-up for the reason of COVID-19 and the aligning stage lasted for up to 5 months. During the leveling phase, 0.014 × 0.025-inch rectangular nickel-titanium wire, 0.016 × 0.025-inch rectangular nickel-titanium wire, and 0.018 × 0.025-inch rectangular nickel-titanium wire were sequentially applied. At this stage, the residual spaces were closed by elastic chain wiring at the phase of 0.018 × 0.025-inches rectangular nickel titanium wire. To expand the width of the anterior maxillary arch, offsets at tooth #13 and tooth #23 were added to the arch wire. After 13 months of treatment, an assistant expansion arch wire was attached to these main arch wires from tooth#13 to tooth #23 to expand the width of the anterior arch . The patient was also asked to wear up-and-down elastics for correcting anterior teeth open bite in this phase. Last but not least, myofunctional therapy was recommended to eliminate the tongue-thrusting habit from beginning to end. We instructed the girl to click her tongue against the upper palate and make a sound. When the patient initially instructed the tongue movement, she trained the tongue to lift and make contact with the upper palate. In the intense adjustment of the end stage in the treatment, we applied multiloop edgewise arch wire 0.017 × 0.025 stainless steel in the maxilla and a multiloop edgewise arch wire 0.017 × 0.025 stainless steel were used in the mandible, Up-and-down elastics (1/8-inch 3.5 oz) were applied to retract and extrude the maxillary anterior teeth at this phase .
The entire orthodontic treatment process lasted for 29 months. Class I molar and canine relationships with adequate overbite and overjet were achieved. In the meantime, the appliances were removed. The maxillary and mandibular teeth were then stabilized with orthodontic film-pressure transparent retainer.
After 29 months of orthodontic treatment, Class I molar and canine relationship was achieved. The post-treatment records showed well-aligned teeth in both arches with tight interdigitation . Adequate overjet and overbite were achieved. The protrusion was greatly improved to a certain degree and the patient was satisfied with the treatment result. The Post-treatment panoramic radiograph showed satisfactory root parallelism and dental space closure. The cephalometric analysis showed a slight counterclockwise rotation about occlusal plane (OP-MP, from 21.1° to 20.4°；PP-OP, from 23.5° to 22.4°), a flat occlusal plane was achieved. The ANB improved from 10.3° to 8.4° .
After the appliance had been removed for a month, the patient had no complaints in the TMJ. We performed a condylar trajectory analysis on the patient. The patient showed stable functional movement of the mandible. The result showed that the border movement of the mandibular remained within the normal range .