A 68-year-old man had a history of chronic systolic heart failure and dilated cardiomyopathy, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 32% and a left ventricular internal diastolic diameter of 81 mm. His electrocardiograph had revealed a sinus rhythm with a QRS duration of 140 ms along with a left bundle branch block morphology. He underwent a cardiac resynchronization therapy-defibrillator (CRT-D) device implantation. However, 2 weeks after the procedure, he was re-admitted to our hospital with a 4-day history of pain and swelling at the CRT-D pocket site, associated with scant serous drainage. Prior to this admission, he had undergone a skin incision and drainage at another hospital, but the procedure had failed to relieve his symptoms. The patient had a history of hypertension, a myocardial bridge in the left anterior descending coronary artery and diabetes mellitus (on irregular therapy). He also had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis 40 years previously and had completed the curative treatment course successfully, at the time. His regular medications included metoprolol, perindopril, torsemide, and amiodarone.
During re-admission, the patient did not have complaints of fever, chills, or fatigue. The physical examination was unremarkable, except for a 2-cm long, open incision on the upper left side of the chest, with mild localized edema over the CRT-D pocket. The skin around the incision was erythematous, and a small amount of scant serous discharge was noted on pressing the pocket site. Considering the likelihood of CRT-D infection, we collected the patient’s blood samples to perform cultures for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. The samples of the exudate were also tested, using microscopic examination and culture, not only for the usual causative bacteria but also for the rarer acid-fast bacilli. On initial microscopic examination, the exudate smear did not reveal any organisms. An echocardiogram showed no evidence of vegetation or thrombosis. Other laboratory test results, including a routine blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were within normal limits. The patient also tested negative for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the hepatitis B virus. He was started empirically on intravenous vancomycin and cefepime.
On the 3rd day of hospitalization, we performed a pocket reconstruction. The CRT-D was re-implanted below the pectoralis major muscle in the left pectoral region and connected with the pacing electrodes placed in the earlier pocket site through a subcutaneous tunnel. However, the incision site did not heal, and the localized edema worsened, with copious exudation from the drainage site. After the reoperation, the exudate was collected and cultured. Within 3 days, a smear test of the exudate revealed an acid-fast bacillus, and culture results showed a rapidly growing nontuberculous mycobacterium (RGM). As recommended by our infectious diseases department, the isolate was sent to the microbiology laboratory for a polymerase chain reaction test. An amplification of the bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA gene, helped us identify the bacterial species as Mycobacterium fortuitum (M. fortuitum). The patient was therefore diagnosed with CRT-D infection due to M. fortuitum.
Once the causative organism was definitively identified, the patient’s therapeutic antibiotic regimen was empirically changed to intravenous clarithromycin, moxifloxacin, and amikacin. At the same time, an incision and debridement of the first pocket site was performed, and the entire device along with the leads were extracted, percutaneously. With dedicated wound care, the swab culture tests eventually yielded negative results and the incision healed well. After 2 months of administration of combined intravenous treatment, the patient was discharged. He was further administered oral clarithromycin and moxifloxacin for 1 year. He was continued to follow up for next 2 years. During 3 years, we checked the pocket site every 3 months and evaluated his cardiac function by echocardiography, as well as recorded the QRS complex width by ECG. He remained asymptomatic of incision infection but we found that the patient’s heart failure condition had gradually deteriorated (left ventricular ejection fraction decreased from 32 to 26%) and life-threatening rapid ventricular arrhythmias occurred even under the optimal drug treatment. The patient was then re-implanted with another CRT-D device at nearly the same previous site. The symptoms of heart failure were significantly improved. ECG showed the QRS complex width was decreased from 140 ms to 112 ms. Echocardiography showed the LVEF were increased to 45% after 6 months of the re-implantation. The patient has now remained free of infection over 4 years .