Our patient was an 18-year-old Caucasian man with a history of anxiety and depression managed by a psychiatrist since age 10 years. At the time his present psychiatrist took over his care, our patient, then aged 15 years, was most compromised by anxiety with frequent panic attacks and constant manifestations of anxious arousal with tachycardia, lightheadedness and sweaty palms. Our patient was also agitated and hypervigilant, feeling bullied by his schoolmates; symptoms that were exacerbated by going to school and socializing. As a result, our patient completed his last two years of high school being tutored at home. Depression, although present, was a secondary problem. Our patient was treated with serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, atypical antipsychotics, benzodiazepines and l-methylfolate, all without satisfactory control of his symptoms. At the age of 17 years, our patient’s depression worsened. He became sad and anhedonic with sleep complaints and vague threats of self-harm. His anxiety and hypervigilance continued. He was treated with lithium, fluoxetine, venlafaxine, lamotrigine and quetiapine, all without consistent improvement.
Because of the failure of medication to improve our patient’s symptoms, his psychiatrist had him evaluated by a psychiatrist specializing in electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). He received a course of ECT of three weekly treatments for eight weeks. The treating psychiatrist monitored our patient’s response and at the conclusion of ECT, our patient rated his own mood at ‘nine out of a possible 10’, 10 being the best mood. During our patient’s ECT, his parents spoke with a physician at the local sleep disorders center who suggested that, at the conclusion of his ECT, our patient be evaluated for sleep disordered breathing (SDB). One month following ECT, our patient came to our sleep disorders center for a consultation.
Our patient had mild difficulty falling asleep, taking 10 to 30 minutes. While awaiting sleep, he experienced some intense thoughts, but no restless legs. He had no trouble staying asleep. According to his parents, our patient did not snore or stop breathing, but tossed and turned throughout the night. After 10 to 12 hours of sleep, he would awaken unrefreshed with a headache and with his bed in disarray. He evaluated himself as mildly sleepy (a score of 7/24 on the Epworth sleepiness scale) with moderate/severe fatigue (a score of 5.2/7.0 on the fatigue severity scale) and somatic arousal (a score of 31/85 on the Mood and Anxiety Symptoms Questionnaire (MASQ) anxious arousal subscale, reflecting the somatic manifestations of increased sympathetic tone: for example, palpitations, sweating, tremulousness, frequent urination, feeling hot).
Our patient’s medications included lamotrigine (50mg) and quetiapine (50mg) for his anxiety, esomeprazole for gastro-esophageal reflux, cetirizine for seasonal nasal allergies and metformin for hyperglycemia.
On physical examination, our patient was found to be obese. He was 1.73m in height and weighed 101.15kg with a body mass index of 33.9kg/m2. His blood pressure of 140/85 and his pulse of 88 beats/min were both elevated. His upper airway examination revealed a narrow maxillary arch with a high arched palate, an elongated soft palate and uvula, a Mallampati score of 3 and a neck circumference of 40.64cm. The tonsils had not been removed but were not visible. The remainder of his physical examination was unrevealing.
Polysomnography was performed eight days following his consultation. Our patient took 14.5 minutes to fall asleep and slept for 429 minutes of the 478.5 minutes he spent in bed (a sleep efficiency of 89.7 percent). His percentage of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) stage 1 sleep was increased at 15 percent of his total sleep and his REM percentage was decreased at 15 percent. During the night, our patient experienced 276 leg movements (41.8 events/hour) that were not unassociated with arousals. His apnea hypopnea index was 4.1 events/hour (below the threshold for a diagnosis of sleep apnea) and his frequency of respiratory effort-related arousals (RERAs) was 8.8 events/hour. His minimum oxyhemoglobin saturation during the night was 90 percent. Throughout the night, our patient demonstrated mild inspiratory airflow limitation intermittently associated with light snoring . His thoracoabdominal motion was paradoxic, consistent with his upper airway obstruction. His average heart rate during sleep was 88 beats/minute.
Based upon our patient’s history of borderline sleep-onset insomnia, restless, non-restorative sleep associated with a morning headache and moderate to severe fatigue, and his sleep study demonstrating obstructive SDB below the threshold for a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, a diagnosis of UARS was made. As treatment, our patient was referred to an orthodontist for RPE, an orthodontic treatment that has been shown to relieve mild obstructive sleep apnea in both children and adults .
Upon examination, our patient’s bite was classified as Angle's Class I (he did not have a cross-bite requiring RPE for orthodontic purposes). Regardless, to treat his SDB, RPE was performed using a Haas acrylic-bearing RPE appliance. Palatal expansion continued for a period of seven weeks during which the appliance widened 7.5mm. To maintain a proper bite, a heavy labial arch lip bumper was applied to the mandibular teeth. This moved the lip away from the teeth and allowed the tongue to push the mandibular teeth outward to correct the bite . Two-and-a-half weeks following completion of the palatal expansion, our patient reported improved nasal breathing during wakefulness.
Approximately four months after RPE (with the appliance still in place), our patient returned to the sleep disorders center for follow-up. He remained without symptoms of depression off antidepressant medication. His anxiety had remitted and he was no longer taking lamotrigine or quetiapine. His sleep was much improved and he was no longer awakening with a headache or complaining of fatigue. The subsequent evolution of our patient’s questionnaire scores for the Epworth sleepiness scale, fatigue severity scale and MASQ anxious arousal subscale is demonstrated in Figure which illustrates the persistent improvement in our patient’s sleepiness, fatigue and somatic manifestations of increased sympathetic tone. In addition to the improvement in symptoms, our patient grew 1.27cm while losing 4.5kg in weight. His dose of metformin was halved without loss of glycemic control.
At 16 months following RPE, with the appliance no longer in place, our patient had a post-treatment polysomnogram performed. On this occasion, he complained of being unable to fall asleep (he took 24.0 minutes) and he slept less continuously at the start of the study, suggesting that his decreased sleepiness made it more difficult for him to fall asleep in an unfamiliar bed . Our patient slept for 271.5 minutes of the 426.5 minutes he spent in bed (a sleep efficiency of 63.7 percent). His percentage of NREM stage 1 sleep continued to be increased at 19 percent of his total sleep and his REM percentage continued decreased at 16 percent. Figure demonstrates that once our patient achieved continuous sleep (after 3:00 a.m.), his frequency of shifts from deeper to lighter sleep stages was decreased compared to his first study (his deep sleep was more consolidated). In contrast to the 41.8 leg movements/hour that were present during the first polysomnogram, no leg movements were observed during the second . Our patient’s apnea hypopnea index was unchanged at 4.4 events/hour and his RERA index was unchanged at 10.0 events/hour. His minimum oxyhemoglobin saturation during the night was 92 percent. The mild inspiratory airflow limitation that was present during the first polysomnogram was also present during the second . The paradoxical thoracoabdominal motion observed during the first polysomnogram was no longer present and the inspiratory airflow limitation that was present was not accompanied by audible snoring . Several additional qualitative differences in our patient’s sleep were also observed between polysomnograms. Inspection of our patient’s electroencephalogram during sleep demonstrated a decrease in the waking alpha frequency (7 to 11Hz) following RPE . Figure also demonstrates that both heart rate and respiratory rate during sleep decreased after RPE (average heart rate during sleep decreased to 76 beats/minute compared to the 88 beats/minute during the pre-treatment polysomnogram). Taken together with the decreased frequency of shifts to lighter sleep stages between studies , the second polysomnogram suggests a decreased level of vigilance during sleep after RPE.
Two years following his ECT, our patient remained without symptoms of depression, chronic anxiety or sleepiness/fatigue off psychotropic medication. He no longer requires home tutoring, attends college and is doing well scholastically.