On July 20th, 2020, a 62-year-old female was admitted to the affiliated hospital of Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine. The patient had experienced cough, expectoration, and hemoptysis for one week and fever for three weeks. The patient had hypertension for 6 months but no difficulties in breathing and reported no prior history of allergy or smoking. One month ago, she visited a local hospital and the blood test showed 19.83 × 10^9/L WBC, 85% GR, 108.3 mg/L CRP and 0.056 ng/mL PCT. She was diagnosed with lung abscess in the left lower lobe. Therefore, piperacillin and levofloxacin were administered. However, three weeks prior to admission, the patient started to experience fever with a highest armpit temperature of 40 °C. The patient was then transferred to another two hospitals, where clinicians maintained the diagnosis of lung abscess. Antibiotics were adjusted to moxifloxacin and cefotaxime but with no relief of symptoms.
Upon admission, the patient’s body temperature was 37.5 °C, respiration rate was 18/min, blood pressure was 102/71 mmHg, heart rate was 89/min. The patient was conscious with normal nutritional status.
The blood test showed WBC of 30.64 * 10^9/L, Neutrophil of 25.94 * 10^9/L (86.1%), CRP of 72.67 mg/L, and PCT of 2.25 ug/L. The serological tests including G test, GM test, TB antibody test, SARS-CoV-2 antibody test, HIV, HCV, HBsAG and TP tests were all negative. Biochemistry analysis and BNP level were normal, with coagulation D-D concentration of 0.74 mg/L. As for tumor markers, the CEA was 8.68 ng/mL, the SCC was 3.10 ng/mL, and the CYFRA21-1 was 6.37 ng/mL.
The patient’s abdominal CT scan revealed small nodules in the bile duct and hepatic cysts . Chest color Doppler ultrasound showed mixed-echo pattern in the right lower lobe . No neoplasia, foreign body or bleeding were observed in the lumen of the left and right main bronchus and segmental bronchus of each lobe. A small amount of white mucus was seen in the bronchial lumen of the dorsal segment of the lower right lobe . Chest CT scan showed highly concentrated masses (5.5 cm × 8.69 cm) on the inferior lobe of right lung and cavitary lesion, which was the main basis for the diagnosis of abscess . The tracheoscopy showed that the main trachea was unobstructed with no secretions. The mucus culture reported Candida species and BALF culture reported Aspergillus species. Blood and pus cultures were negative.
Vancomycin was given for three days, but the patient remained febrile with an elevation of WBC, GR and CRP levels . The treatment was then adjusted to voriconazole and meropenem. WBC and GR decreased but still higher than normal .
Due to the unsuccessful treatment, the patient’s BALF was sent for mNGS. No pathogens were detected other than common respiratory colonizers, indicating an etiology of non-infectious diseases . Moreover, mNGS data also suggested the presence of malignant tumor, which was based on the copy number variation (CNV) analysis of the host DNA. Using a read depth-based approach , the normalized copy number of the patient showed abnormalities (duplications and deletions) on several chromosomes when compared to a healthy individual, which was likely caused by chromosomal instabilities of tumor cells .
Clinicians performed percutaneous transthoracic lung biopsy of the abscess and collected 20 mL of fluid. Thinprep liquid-based cytology combined with H&E staining were carried out, and malignant tumor cells were seen . Immunohistochemistry further supported the diagnosis of lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) . The patient received radical resection of tumor and was given cefoperazone sodium sulbactam. One month following the surgery, the serological level of tumor markers (CEA, SCC, CYFRA21-1) returned to normal, and pulmonary lesions were largely removed .