A 45-year-old man was admitted under a urology team for elective cystoscopy and perineal urethrostomy for urethral stricture and intermittent urinary retention. He initially presented to his general practitioner with a 2-year history of dysuria, haematuria, and the passing of blood clots via the urethra. Despite multiple courses of antibiotics and anti-inflammatory agents, they only offered temporary relief and did not resolve his problem. He was referred to the urology team for further investigation. He was electively admitted and had multiple investigations, which included rigid cystoscopy with meatal dilatation, as well as a computed tomography (CT) urethrogram; a urethral biopsy was subsequently performed. He was diagnosed with a stricture affecting the penile urethra.
He was then referred for a second opinion for urethroplasty; however, he was deemed not suitable for the procedure. Since then, he had been experiencing intermittent urinary retention; therefore, a long-term urinary catheter was inserted and it was planned that he would undergo elective perineal urethrostomy to defunction his urethra with the aim of improving his symptoms. The urology team diagnosed that his chronic urological problem was due to repeated self-instrumentation. Upon this admission, our patient had an initial cystoscopy performed, which showed a rigid anterior urethra with a tight circumferential fibrotic penile urethra; a foreign body (a small piece of plastic) was found and removed. There was evidence of necrotic debris secondary to self-instrumentation.
During this admission, our patient told the urology team that he believed there were ticks coming out from his penis and that they had ‘clogged up’ his penis, which caused the pain and retention. The urology team requested a psychiatric evaluation to assess our patient’s mental state and capacity to consent for perineal urethrostomy. On psychiatric assessment, he reported a 4-year history of dysuria, haematuria, urethral discharge, and intermittent urinary retention. On further questioning, he believed that his symptoms were due to tick colonization in his urethra. He was unsure as to how he contracted the parasites, but he believed that the dampness of his house had become a breeding spot for ticks. He reported intermittent penile pain, pin-prick biting sensations in his penis, and a burrowing sensation. He also reported that he has seen the tick from the urethral discharge and that it was as big as few centimetres. He also believed the sediments in his urinary bag were fragments from dead ticks. In addition, he further expressed fear that the ticks would multiply and spread to the rest of his body.
Our patient had been conducting research on the Internet to determine how to fix his problem. To alleviate his symptoms, he had been injecting an antiseptic liquid into his urethra using a syringe three times a day for the last 2 years. He had also has been using a cotton-tipped swab with over-the-counter anti-parasitic ointment, and had inserted them into his urethra to ‘burn’ the ticks out. He also expressed his frustration, and at times he was thinking of ‘cutting out’ and surgically removing the tick. Apart from encapsulated delusional parasitosis and somatic delusions, there was no evidence of any other delusions (paranoid, grandiose, nihilistic, guilt) or hallucinations (visual, auditory, olfactory). There was no evidence to suggest thought interference or passivity phenomenon. He denied any pervasive low mood or any other depressive features. He denied any loss of appetite or weight loss. His function remained unchanged over the last 4 years.
Upon mental state examination, he presented as somewhat dishevelled and maintained intermittent eye contact. He was calm and cooperative throughout the interview. His speech was coherent and spontaneous with a normal rate and volume. There was no latency of response evident. There was evidence of poor cognitive flexibility. His mood was low, but he presented with reactive affect. There was no evidence of a formal thought disorder. There was no observed perplexity or distractibility to suggest overt hallucination. He reported delusional interpretations of his somatic symptoms rather than a true tactile hallucination. He has firm and fixed delusional beliefs that did not respond to challenges. He had poor insight into his condition and his judgement was severely impaired. He was orientated to time, place, and person with preserved attention, recall, and short-term memory. He denied thoughts of self-harm or suicidal ideation. He was expressing thoughts to self-inflict injury; however, he denied any active intent or plan.
He has a history of attending a local community psychiatric service 3 years ago for alcohol abuse and behavioural difficulties. There was no axis one psychiatric diagnosis made at the time, and he only required brief social intervention. He had a previous history of alcohol abuse in the past, but he denies any recent alcohol abuse or drug misuse. He also had minor public disorder offences in the context of alcohol intoxication. He denied any past medical history and he denied any previous diagnosis of sexually transmitted infection. He reported that he stopped schooling at the age of 11 years. He has been unemployed over the last 10 years. He has been living alone throughout his life and does not have any close relationships. He denies any known mental health illness in the family.
Examination under anaesthesia and rigid cystoscopy showed a rigid anterior urethra with a tight circumferential fibrotic penile urethra. Stricturoplasty was performed and a foreign body (a small piece of plastic) was found and removed. A subsequent CT urethrogram was normal and urethral biopsy showed chronic inflammation with a differential diagnosis of balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO) or self-inflicted trauma. Blood investigations, which included a full blood count, urea and electrolytes, inflammatory markers, and a liver function test, were normal. A brain CT scan was not performed. A thyroid function test and B12, folate, and ferritin levels were normal. The urinary drug screen was negative. Syphilis serology was not performed.
This patient’s presentation was consistent with a non-affective psychosis. He displayed a solitary, encapsulated, monohypochondriacal psychosis with no other features of other psychotic disorder. However, his background history of poor academic attainment and significantly impaired social and occupational function dating back to his early twenties suggest that this is a delusional parasitosis secondary to probable undiagnosed schizophrenia.
Our differential diagnosis of this patient includes psychotic disorder secondary to schizophrenia, drug-induced psychosis, organic psychosis, mood disorder with psychosis, and schizoid personality disorder.
Our patient was commenced on oral risperidone 2mg for 1 day and it was increased to 4mg. He was reluctantly agreeable to taking the antipsychotic medication and he tolerated it well. Following consultation with the urology team, it was decided that the surgery would be postponed until his mental state improved. After 5 days in a surgical ward, he was transferred to an acute in-patient psychiatric ward with a long-term urinary catheter in situ. Our patient was voluntarily admitted to an acute in-patient psychiatric ward. He was continued on oral risperidone 4mg once daily. His mental state improved over a 3-week admission. He indicated that he was less bothered and distressed by his thoughts. He was discharged with a plan for follow-up on an outpatient basis by the community mental health team and urology team.