An 84-year-old man presented with frequent episodes of syncope due to hypoglycemia and was diagnosed as a recurrent left pleural SFT. He underwent the left pleural malignant SFT resection with uneventful course at the age of 75 years. The laboratory examination before the first surgery demonstrated a fasting plasma glucose level of 43 mg/dl. The low immunoreactive insulin (IRI) level of 9.5 μU/ml at 2 h after a meal indicated suppressed insulin secretion, and the western blot revealed an elevated plasma level of high molecular weight IGF2.
On admission for the second surgery, his height and weight were 169 cm and 66 kg, respectively. His medications included antagonists of aldosterone, calcium, and alpha-adrenergic receptor. His blood pressure and heart rate were 120/58 mmHg and 90 beats/min, respectively. He had a giant left pleural mass (11 × 16 × 22 cm; Fig. ) and exhibited dyspnea. He had oral intake during the day and received continuous glucose infusion at a rate of 0.2 g/kg/h at night. His glucose level in the early morning sometimes decreased to approximately 30 mg/dl; thus, glucose boluses were administered as needed.
Anesthesia was induced with propofol, fentanyl, and rocuronium and maintained with propofol, remifentanil, and rocuronium. The radial artery and internal jugular vein were catheterized to monitor the arterial and central venous pressure, respectively. After induction, a 20-gauge peripheral catheter (Becton Dickinson Insyte™, UT, USA) was inserted into a lower-extremity vein and connected to an AP, STG-55 (Nikkiso, Tokyo, Japan); continuous blood glucose measurement was then started. The target blood glucose concentration was set at approximately 150 mg/dl. The patient’s blood glucose concentration was 58 mg/dl immediately after anesthetic induction; then, we infused 10 g of glucose. Insulin (1 unit/ml) and 10% glucose were automatically and continuously infused from the central venous catheter. The blood glucose level was charted over time to visualize the patient’s glycemic fluctuation during the operation . The blood glucose level was stable at around 150 mg/dl during surgery, while the difference between the glucose values of the AP and those measured by arterial blood sampling was within approximately 10 mg/dl. The operation time was 178 min, anesthesia time was 278 min, bleeding volume was 1190 ml, and packed red blood cell transfusion volume was 560 ml. The AP was disconnected from the patient at the end of the surgery. The postoperative blood glucose levels were measured 20 times for 4 days at intensive care unit, and totally, 8 units of insulin were administered . After discharge to the ward, his glucose levels were measured 3 times a day within the normal range. Although he spent almost 10 days to start oral glucose intake and approximately 3 weeks undergoing rehabilitation, his postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged with no complications.