An otherwise healthy 29-year-old woman came to the clinic complaining of bilateral ocular redness and discomfort in the past 4 months and her condition gradually deteriorated. The patient had undergone bilateral CXL using the standard Dresden protocol to treat progressive KC in another center 10 months ago. She had no history of other ocular and systemic diseases and did not use any topical or systemic medications. Systemic examinations focusing on the head and neck lymph nodes, thyroid, skin, and joints revealed no pathologic findings.
At the presentation exam, the uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/200 in both eyes using the Snellen chart. The best spectacle corrected visual acuity (BSCVA) was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye with −4.50-5.00 * 90 and −4.00-4.25 * 90, respectively.
On the slit-lamp examination, both eyes showed moderate conjunctival hyperemia and dilation and engorgement of the perilimbal episcleral vessels. There was peripheral corneal stromal infiltration, extending 360 degrees from superior to inferior, with a lucid interval from the limbus as well as an area of overlying epithelial defect in the right eye . The left eye was similarly affected but to a lesser extent. The anterior chamber was deep and had trace cell in the right eye. Intraocular pressure measured by a Goldmann applanation tonometer was 18 mmHg and 14 mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively, and posterior segment examination of both eyes was unremarkable. All laboratory tests including a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and thyroid function tests were normal, and the levels of serum C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody, and angiotensin converting enzyme were within normal limits. The corneal smear and culture obtained during the symptomatic phase of the disease revealed no bacterial growth, indicating the presence of sterile ulcerative keratitis.
The patient was treated with frequent application of lubricating eye drops and ointments and 0.1% betamethasone in the form of eye drops every 3 hours for 2 weeks which was then tapered off. At the short interval follow-up, after achieving an improvement from the first episode, she experienced multiple similar recurrences which were treated like the first episode. Each episode lasted for about 2 weeks and disease-free intervals were about 3 to 4 months. No specific trigger was noted by the patient. In two years, at her last follow-up, she showed significant improvement in both subjective symptoms and corneal signs. Her BSCVA was 20/30 with −3.00-5.50 * 90 in the right eye and 20/40 with −4.00, −4.50 * 90 in the left eye. shows her last photo-slit: a 360 degrees scar in the peripheral zone of the cornea of the right eye. The thinned area, obvious in scarred regions, had no significant influence on her visual acuity. Based on Galilei tomography, the maximum keratometry (Kmax) and corneal astigmatism were nearly stable during the course of follow-up.