A 40-year-old slim healthy female, working as a housemaid, was brought to the emergency department (ED) complaining of drowsiness and left hip pain which started in the afternoon one day following the use of burning charcoal in a closed room to keep herself warm at night. She woke up, after being down for over 16 hours, with severe left hip pain, which was associated with weakness and numbness. The patient denied any history of trauma, smoking, substance abuse, or medication administration.
Upon ED presentation the patient was found to be drowsy, but oriented to time, place, and person with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15/15 with reactive pupils, her heart rate was 110 beats/minute, and Oxygen saturation on room air was 99% with normal respiratory rate and normal blood pressure and body mass index (BMI) of 23.2. Supplemental 100% oxygen was administered, which improved the patient's drowsiness.
Local examination of the left hip showed firm diffused swollen left gluteal area with intact skin . Patient complained of pain on passive movement of the hip. Stryker pressure gauge was not immediately available to record compartment pressure.
Compared to the contralateral side, the thigh circumference was greater by 3 cm. Neurovascular examination of the left lower limb showed decreased power of left hip and knee flexors and extensors with power 4/5, while ankle dorsiflexion, ankle plantarflexion and extensor halluces longus power were 0/5 with absent sensation over the dorsum of the foot.
Initial investigations showed: White Blood Cells (WBC): 21.0 × 10^3/μL, Hemoglobin (Hb): 18.6
g/dL, Potassium: 4.5 mmol/L, C-Reactive Protein (CRP): 100.6 mg/L, Procalcitonin: 1.23 ng/mL, Carboxyhemoblobin (CoHb): 1.8 %, Lactic acid (LA): 3.20 mmol/L, Serum creatinine: 81 μmol/L, Deranged liver enzymes – ALT: 571 U/L, AST: 952 U/L, Elevated Serum creatinine kinase (CK): >22000 U/L, and Serum Myoglobin: 12,911ng/mL suggesting rhabdomyolysis. Blood cultures ruled out infection. Radiographic examination of the left lower extremity ruled out any obvious fractures. Due to intermittent drowsiness of the patient, Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the head was done which showed hypodensities within the globus pallidus of both lentiform nucleus .
Left gluteal ultrasound (USG) showed fluid collection in the posterolateral aspect of left thigh, in the intermuscular plane, measuring 3.1 × 0.5 cm .
The patient was initially managed with conservative management, hydration with close monitoring of the thigh and gluteal compartments in addition to close assessment of the neurovascular status as the patient wanted to observe for improvement before surgical intervention .
On reassessment, the patient's drowsiness improved. However, the left lower limb did not show any clinical improvement. Repeat USG of left gluteal region showed no significant changes. Based on the patient's history and assessment, the diagnosis of left gluteal compartment syndrome was made. Hence, the patient underwent fasciotomy of the left gluteal region and upper thigh.
Intra-operatively, the patient was positioned in right lateral decubitus position. Kocher Langenbach approach was utilized . The subcutaneous tissues and gluteal muscles appeared edematous with dark red discoloration of gluteus maximus and gluteus medius muscles.
. There was hematoma surrounding the sciatic nerve and it was evacuated while protecting the sciatic nerve. Release of tensor fascia lata, Gluteus maximus and Gluteus medius was done by incising the intermuscular fascia and passing between the intermuscular planes.
Fasciotomy and decompression of the anterior and posterior thigh compartments was done. The surgical wound was irrigated. Skin and subcutaneous tissue were partially approximated using non-absorbable monofilament nylon sutures . Dressings included moist normal saline gauze.
Postoperatively the left lower limb was positioned in hip extension and knee flexion to relax the sciatic nerve. On postoperative day one, the swelling was reduced. Sensation over the dorsum of the foot was still diminished with flickering movement of the toes. The power of dorsiflexion in ankle and toes improved to 1/5. Dressing was soaked with serosanguinous discharge and changed. On postoperative day 2, the thigh swelling had improved significantly allowing bedside fasciotomy wound closure. Then, the patient started to regain her foot sensation.
On the fourth postoperative day, the labs improved – Potassium: 3.7 mmol/L, ALT: 324 U/L, AST: 457 U/L, CK: 14,261 U/L and myoglobin: 167 ng/mL. On postoperative day seven, wound closure was completed with nylon 0 monofilament sutures. On post-wound closure day one, toes dorsiflexion power improved to 2/5, ankle plantar flexion power was 2/5, and ankle dorsiflexion power was 1/5. Patient started ambulation with left lower limb partial weight bearing.
On post-wound closure day three, the patient had improved sensation over the heel and medial arch, power of both the ankle and toes dorsiflexion improved to 3/5. The patient was clinically doing well, hence discharged. An early clinic follow-up and physical therapy appointments were arranged. However, the patient missed her appointments.
Two weeks after being discharged from hospital, the patient came to outpatient clinic, the surgical wound was healed, and the sutures were removed. The left foot sensation was intact, with ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion power of 3/5, and full power of 5/5 in the knee flexion and extension.
Seven weeks following the incident, the patient was brought to the emergency department with complaints of personality changes, memory loss and drowsiness. On examination, she was found to be conscious, oriented to place and person, while she appeared lethargic. She had hypokalemia (3.3 mMol/L), which was corrected after administration of 30 mEq potassium chloride. While the rest of her lab results were within the normal.
She was admitted under the medical team and underwent investigation including brain magnetic resonant imaging (MRI), which revealed hypoxic leukoencephalopathy in bilateral centrum semiovale and periventricular area, globus pallidum. The patient was diagnosed as a case of Carbon monoxide poisoning - neuropsychiatric sequelae. The patient was asymptomatic when assessed by the medical team. However, in absence treatable symptoms, she was discharged without medications.
During the second month after the operation, she was seen twice in outpatient physiotherapy department two weeks apart. The left ankle and toes dorsiflexion power improved to 4/5. A month later, the patient travelled to her home country.