A 50-year-old Virgo woman in perimenopause presented to the emergency department with a 24-h history of intermittent abdominal pain and subfebrile body temperature up to 38 °C, associated with vaginal spotting for several days. She denied experiencing recent weight loss, diarrhea, vomiting, abnormal vaginal discharge, dysuria, or increased urinary frequency. She reported irregular menses with metrorrhagia in the last 12 months. The patient reported being a Catholic sister and denied having had past oral, vaginal, or anal intercourse.
Her past medical history was significant for perforated acute diverticulitis of the sigmoid colon, which had been managed with laparotomic sigmoidectomy and antibiotic therapy 2 years earlier. Following this event, her gyneeologist observed the apparition of a left hydrosalpinx that was 8.1 × 2.0 cm in size and filled with anechoic fluid on ultrasound . The patient appeared asymptomatic and no other relevant elements were found.
Upon presentation to the emergency room, the patient’s vital parameters were stable, and she was subfebrile (37.7 °C). A physical examination demonstrated bilateral lower abdominal quadrant tenderness without involuntary guarding or rebound pain. Blood analysis showed a white blood count of 10.9 × 109/L (normal 4.0–10.0 × 109/L) and C-reactive protein count of 128 mg/L (normal < 5 mg/L). A urine pregnancy test and urinalysis were both negative. An abdominopelvic rectal-contrast computed tomography scan excluded diverticulitis and other intestinal abnormalities, and revealed a left complex adnexal mass measured to be 7.5 × 4.4 cm in size. The patient was then referred to our gynecology department. A gynecological exam revealed the presence of bloody vaginal discharge with an elevated number of leukocytes upon microscopic exam. A vaginal ultrasound showed a dilated tubular structure 7.3 × 2.1 cm in size, filled with low-level echogenic fluid in the left pelvis . The patient was presumed to have left pyosalpinx as a complication of hydrosalpinx superinfection, and she consented to an urgent exploratory laparoscopy. Preoperatively ceftriaxone IV (2 g) and metronidazole (500 mg) were given.
Upon entry, important adhesions in the entire abdominal cavity were noted. The small and large bowels were explored and appeared normal. A left pyosalpinx was noted and appeared to be firmly adherent to the uterus and rectum. During its liberation, unintentional pyosalpinx perforation occurred, and purulent drainage was noted. The fluid was sent for microbiologic and cytologic analysis. A left salpingectomy was performed, with consequent retrieval of the specimen in an endobag. Both ovaries appeared normal. The right uterine tube appeared slightly hyperemic, but pyosalpinx and tubo-ovarian abscess were excluded. A percutaneous drain was placed in the left pelvis. The abdomen was then irrigated with 2 L of 0.9% sodium chloride solution and closed.
Postoperatively, the patient received parenteral antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h) and metronidazole (500 mg every 8 h) until discharge on postoperative day three. Nucleic acid amplification to identify cervical gonorrhea or chlamydia had negative results. The pyosalpinx pus, vaginal swab, blood, and urine cultures were all negative, and empiric oral antibiotic therapy with metronidazole (250 mg every 8 h) and levofloxacin (500 mg every 12 h) was pursued. The cytologic and histologic analysis results were consistent with a diagnosis of pyosalpinx without other pathologic findings. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home with gynecological follow-up 10 days later.
At the follow-up visit, the patient reported the near resolution of her pain, and no clinical, ultrasonographic, or laboratory abnormalities were found.