A 62-year-old Chinese man presented with jaundice for 1 wk.
The patient complained of yellowing of the sclera, darkened urine, fatigue, loss of appetite without significant weight loss, abdominal pain and bloating for 1 wk.
The patient had a history of lower limb deformity due to trauma at an early age, head and lower limb fracture caused by a car accident 4 years ago and surgically treated; details unknown.
The patient’s family members have no history of specific genetic or infectious diseases.
Physical examination showed double lower limb deformities. The patient’s temperature was 36.7 °C, the pulse was 65 beats/min and the blood pressure was 135/92 mmHg.
The laboratory test findings were not specific . Biochemical tests showed that total bilirubin (380.6 μmol/L), direct bilirubin (347.9 μmol/L) and indirect bilirubin (30.9 μmol/L) were elevated, with normal electrolyte profiles and renal function. Elevated glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase and glutamic pyruvic transaminase levels indicated impaired liver function. Tumor markers such as α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 199 were negative, and there was no evidence of hepatitis A, B, C or E virus infection.
Abdominal CT showed a large patchy hypodense shadow in the left lobe of the liver and hepatic hilum with striped calcified foci . This mass measured 9.2 cm × 6.0 cm × 5.8 cm, and mild enhancement was visible at the edges with extensive intrahepatic biliary ductal dilatation in the right lobe of the liver . Chest CT showed only a few areas of fibrosis and hard nodules, with no obvious signs of active TB. We considered hepatic schistosomiasis or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma based on the CT findings. Abdominal MRI demonstrated that the left lobe and caudate lobe of the liver were atrophied, with a lesion measuring 8.7 cm × 6.8 cm × 5.2 cm. A slightly hypointense signal on T1-weighted and mixed hyperintense and hypointense signals on T2-weighted fat suppressed images were observed , with mild restricted diffusion and a low apparent diffusion coefficient value of 0.764 × 103 mm2/s . The left branch of the portal vein and the left hepatic vein could not be visualized in the portal venous phase . In the arterial phase of both CT and MRI scans, the main trunk of the portal vein and the right branch of the portal vein were partially visualized . The bile ducts in the hilar region and most of the intrahepatic bile ducts in the left lobe of the liver could not be observed, and the above intrahepatic bile ducts showed varying degrees of dilatation on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) . This was the main clue that led to our misdiagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma. Enlarged lymph nodes were seen in the retroperitoneum, and the larger lymph node was approximately 1.3 cm × 1.2 cm, with uniform strengthening after enhancement.
Intraoperative exploration of the abdominal cavity showed multiple space-occupying masses of variable size in the left liver that protruded from the surface of the liver by approximately 1 cm and were yellowish-white in color and hard in texture; there were multiple scattered small nodules in the hepatic round ligament, small omental sac and other sites, and these nodules were yellowish-white in color. Two yellow nodules were partially removed from the left liver by an ultrasonic knife and then sent for rapid frozen biopsy. Liver tissue was seen, with focal visible necrosis and granulomatous nodules around the necrosis, which were considered to indicate a microbial infection . The nodules in the lesser omentum and the liver nodules were again sampled and sent for rapid analysis: necrosis and granulomatous nodule formation were seen, microbial infection was considered, and TB was not excluded. The left lobe of the liver, the lymph nodes of the duodenal ligament and the omentum were granulomatous.