An 84-year-old woman with depression had a stab injury in the neck and was brought to our facility in an ambulance. There was a broad-bladed kitchen knife lodged above her substernal notch with about 15 cm of the blade inside her body . The patient was conscious and able to speak. Her blood pressure and heart rate were 187/126 mmHg and 127 bpm, respectively, and her percutaneous oxygen saturation was 98% under 5 L/min of oxygen administration. The computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the blade had penetrated the right thoracic cavity from the left side of the right brachiocephalic vein. A right hemopneumothorax, with collapse of about half of the right lung and a small amount of thoracic effusion, was observed, and laceration of the right upper lobe (RUL) was suspected. It was unclear at that time whether there were any massive vascular or hilar injuries . Therefore, considering the importance of securing the blood vessels, we decided to extract the knife in the operating room. A cardiovascular surgeon was included in the surgical team considering the possible need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and repair of large vascular injuries.
After careful induction of anesthesia, a median sternotomy was performed, and the right pleural cavity was opened (Additional file : Video S1). The blade had penetrated between the right brachiocephalic artery and vein and had reached the right pleural cavity. While dissecting around the blade, the patient suddenly began to bleed, and hemostasis was achieved by compression with a cotton swab (Naruke-type Thoraco-cotton™, KENZMEDICO CO., LTD., Saitama, Japan). A 1.5-cm injury to the right internal jugular vein was found . The vascular injury was repaired by continuous sutures with 5-0 PROLENE® (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA), clamping the proximal and distal sides. The blade tip was embedded in the RUL but did not reach the hilum; therefore, we were able to carefully extract the blade . The damaged RUL area was removed by wedge resection with automatic suturing instruments (Tri-Staple™ Radial Reload Black cartridge and Tri-Staple™ Black cartridge 60 mm with the Signia™ stapling system, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). There was no injury to the vagus nerve or any other nerves. On postoperative day (POD) 3, the patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation, and the right chest drain was removed. On POD 5, she was transferred to a psychiatric ward for the treatment of depression. She has remained healthy for 3 years with no infections or other complications.