We describe the case of a 67-year-old man with evidence of right paratracheal lymph node metastasis three years following the diagnosis of rectosigmoid carcinoma. In October 2004, the patient initially presented with symptoms and signs of intestinal obstruction. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed diffuse circumferential intramural thickening with associated streaking of the adjacent fat planes in a short segment of the sigmoid colon. Sigmoidoscopic biopsy revealed an infiltrating moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Subtotal colectomy was eventually performed. Pathologic examination of the resected tissue revealed a five centimeter tumor invading the muscularis propria and pericolonic fat. Metastatic adenocarcinoma was noted in ten out of fifty peri-tumoral and mesenteric lymph nodes with extracapsular extension. The patient was eventually diagnosed with stage III adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid colon and given six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. In December 2006, a follow up total body CT scan identified an enlarged 1 × 1 cm right paratracheal lymph node, with no evidence of pulmonary infiltrates, masses or fluid in the pleural cavities. There were no other significant findings in the pelvis or abdomen. The recommendation was to perform a fluor-18-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET) scan, which did not show any evidence of active disease; and hence, tumoral metastasis was ruled out and no action was taken. In October 2007, the previously identified lymph node appeared to have increased in size to approximately 2.2 cm, with the remainder of the CT scan being insignificant. Mediastinoscopic biopsy of the lymph node was done and revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma, similar to that of the colon . Biopsy of another paratracheal lymph node showed two cell clusters of metastatic adenocarcinoma that were only identified by immunohistochemical analysis . The metastatic tumor was positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and cytokeratin 20 , weakly positive for cytokeratin 7 , and negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1), confirming its colonic origin. Consequently, a total body 18F-FDG PET scan was requested which now identified the lymph node , and revealed no other significant findings. All through out the follow-up period the patient never had any respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms. Ca19-9 and CEA serum levels were always within the normal range.