A 23-week-old primigravida patient was admitted in the emergency room of the University Emergency Hospital Bucharest for acute pelvic-abdominal pain and lipothymia. Following the immediate stabilization of the vital functions, all the necessary diagnostic steps were taken in order to establish the initial cause. According to her general history, after a normal hysteroscopic evaluation, in vitro fertilization was successfully attained, all prior routine examinations revealing normal results and being uneventful. The emergency ward general and genital examination established a distended painful acute abdomen with a fundal uterine height of approximately 23 weeks without any associated vaginal bleeding or cervical modification. The emergency sonographic evaluation rendered with high suspicion an extrauterine abdominal pregnancy corresponding to the gestational age mentioned - about 23 weeks - without any fetal cardiac activity, an empty uterine cavity and a considerable amount of fluid located in the rectovaginal sac and around the uterus. While the patient’s general state improved, with resumption of lipothymia but persistency of acute abdominal pain with positive signs for peritoneal irritation, the laboratory tests only showed minor anemia (9 g/ dl haemoglobin). Upon establishing the final diagnosis – acute abdomen, suspicion of 23 weeks old abdominal pregnancy with no fetal cardiac activity, transient lipothymia state - an emergency laparotomy was decided. The following intraoperatory findings were discovered: 600 ml of blood associated with clots and a 23-week-old abdominal pregnancy with a partially detached fundal uterine placental implantation site (-).
A fundal uterine wedge resection successfully eliminated the residual placental villi, which were until the middle third, macroscopically visualized (-).
Mattress sutures were used in order to safely close the excised fundal myometrium (-).
No other abdominal findings were observed upon a very thorough examination. The patient recovered without any other complications being released from hospital in 7 days and registering uneventful and satisfactory follow-ups. In order to avoid a premature uterine rupture, a decision regarding a surrogate mother was elected.