The patient is a 52-year-old married Filipino man who developed weakness greater than 10 years ago. Our first encounter with the patient was in May 2011 when he was referred to our infusion center for intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment for presumed PM. He first noticed difficulty with ambulating especially climbing stairs and standing up from a seated position. In addition, he had difficulty reaching for items from cabinets, complained of some difficulty with swallowing liquids, and stated that he had decreased libido and significant difficulty achieving an erection and lacked any active sexual life. He denied any associated pain, sensory symptoms, cardiac involvement, or muscle hypertrophy. Interestingly, the patient noted an older deceased brother who had similar symptoms along with a maternal uncle and maternal cousins with similar symptoms.
The patient carried a diagnosis of polymyositis dating back to 2000. At that time investigations included an elevated creatine kinase (CK) of 1522 IU/L, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the leg showing atrophy and increased signal on short TI inversion recovery (STIR) images, but no electromyogram, nerve conduction studies, or muscle biopsy. Given these findings along with his clinical picture, he was however diagnosed with polymyositis and treated with a trial of high-dose prednisone, which did not improve his clinical symptoms but did improve his CK levels according to his wife. He was also treated with various immunosuppressive medications, which he failed, including methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, and mycophenolate.
A muscle biopsy performed in 2007 showed end-stage muscle atrophy with severe myofiber atrophy and fatty replacement of muscle. A follow-up MRI of the right thigh in January 2011 showed muscle atrophy and edema in the right thigh. A formal swallow evaluation in April 2011 showed trace aspiration with a large bolus of thin liquids with residual in the valleculae. He then received IVIG treatment at a dose of 2 g/kg on 5/31/2011, divided over 3 days. The patient indicated no improvement similar to the prior treatments with prednisone and multiple immunosuppressive medications.
Upon examination of the patient, gynecomastia was noted. The neurological exam was positive for lower facial weakness with evidence of myokymia in the chin muscles and tongue atrophy with fasciculations. Strength testing demonstrated proximal weakness in the upper and lower extremities with trace to absent reflexes.
An electrodiagnostic study showed evidence of diffuse chronic lower motor neuron changes with active and chronic denervation potentials seen in cervical, lumbosacral, and cranial-innervated myotomes. Based on the history, examination findings, electrodiagnostic results, and X-linked inheritance pattern, Kennedy disease was highly suspected. The genetic test for Kennedy disease was sent and came back positive, showing that in 1 allele there was expansion in the number of CAG repeats, 49 repeats, consistent with full mutation of the gene thereby confirming the suspected diagnosis of Kennedy disease. The patient was without offspring. He accepted the diagnosis, and was grateful for knowing the correct diagnosis and not needing inappropriate therapy. He was counseled about the diagnosis, mode of inheritance, course, and prognosis.