A 30-year-old man presented with visual loss and pain for 6 h after a thin wire injured his right eyeball. The best-corrected visual acuity was hand movement at 10 cm, and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 26 mmHg in the right eye. Extraocular muscle movements and external examinations of both eyes were unremarkable. Slit-lamp microscopic examination revealed a 2-mm full-thickness oblique laceration on the inferior-nasal aspect of the cornea 2 mm from the limbus and complete hyphema. A Seidel test showed no leakage from the anterior chamber. B-scan revealed mass opacity in the vitreous cavity, possibly due to hemorrhage . Computed tomography scan revealed no signs of injury and intraocular foreign bodies . His past history and family history were unremarkable. Compound eye drops containing antibiotic and glucocorticosteroid were instilled and patch was applied to immobilize the traumatic eye.
A deep anterior chamber, intact clear lens, Zinn’s zonules, and complete loss of the iris were observed after to resolution of the hyphema 1 day after the initial examination . Vision of the right eye improved to 0.3 Snellen and IOP improved to 14 mmHg. The dilated fundus examination showed trace hemocytes, healthy macula, and attached retina with intact vasculature. However, the presence of donut-like brown iris tissue in the inferior-nasal field of the vitreous cavity was noted . Ultrasonography showed clumpy high echo for the dislocated iris, which was overlooked on the first scan for its insidious peripheral position . Gonioscopy revealed a 360° absence of the iris, with a clear view of the ciliary body, and a hematocele band between the corneal endothelium and ciliary process below the laceration . Ultrasound biomicroscopy showed no cyclodialysis or angle recession . The patient's vision returned to 0.6 after 10 days of trauma.
Closer inspection with a slit lamp revealed a local loss of the zonule below the corneal laceration. This explained how the iris entered the vitreous cavity even when the transparent and intact lens was in situ. Medical history revealed that a steel wire with a diameter of less than 1 mm was bent when it was accidentally released, consequently propelling the wire into the eyeball and quickly bouncing off.
The patient’s vitreous chamber was unremarkable until 50 days later when opacities and pigment particles appeared in the vitreous cavity around the dislocated iris. The patient was treated with pars plana vitrectomy to remove the iris and prevent proliferative vitreoretinopathy and secondary glaucoma. Upon telephone follow-up 1 years after surgery, the patient has since maintained a visual acuity of 0.6 with mild photophobia. Artificial iris implantation was recommended. However, this recommendation was not complied with because of the operative risk that accompanies the procedure. Aniridia does not interfere with his daily life since the patient works indoors and goes out on sunny days with sunglasses.