An 87-years-old female obese patient with Body Mass Index (BMI) of 31,25 kg/m2 (80 kg, 1,60 m) was admitted to our emergency department, in poor general conditions complaining of abdominal pain, bowel occlusion and a 1-week history of diarrhoea. She had a long history of chronic constipation. The patient suffered from arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia and gallbladder microlithiasis. She denied any allergy. Past history was positive for hysterectomy due to uterine fibroma. Physical examination showed abdominal distension and a positive Blumberg sign. Laboratory findings on admission showed 14.7 g/dL haemoglobin, 17.0 × 109/L white blood cells, 1.18 International Normalized Ratio (INR), 40.4 s Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT), 2.6 mmol/L serum potassium, 142 mmol/L serum sodium; the other laboratory values were unremarkable. Plain radiograph and computed tomography of the abdomen showed wide free air in peritoneum, associated to a moderate free air in retroperitoneum, predominantly localized in the peripancreatic region and that goes up through the esophageal hiatus in the posterior mediastinal region; the scan showed also an important diffuse gaseous distension of the entire colon, with air-fluid levels, a small intestine almost completely sagged, however no direct signs of bowel perforation were found (, ). Due to the clinical condition the patient underwent an emergency laparotomy. On surgical exploration, the digestive tract displayed normal anatomy, with no evidence of adhesions, volvulus, intussusception, or torsion but did exhibit massive dilatation of all the colon from the recto-sigmoid junction to the ileocecal valve and perforation of the posterior wall of the transvers colon . Due to these findings a subtotal colectomy with terminal ileostomy was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged in postoperative day 8th. The histopathological examination documented a 3 cm transverse colic continuous solution surrounded by fibro-granulocyte material and faecal residues; the submucosa showed marked hyperaemia and zonal sclerosis, the mucosa was characterized by diffuse light-moderate chronic inflammation; ganglion cells were well represented both in the myenteric and in the submucosal nervous plexus. At 1, 6 and 12 months follow-up the patient result in good condition.