A 56-year-old Caucasian man with a known 5-year history of an infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm was admitted due to critical ischemia of his right lower limb. The patient's left leg had been amputated at the left common femoral artery level (very high femoral amputation) following a car accident 25 years previously. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) 8 months earlier showed a 4 cm infrarenal aneurysm and severe atherosclerosis of both common iliac arteries. Physical examination on admission revealed absent femoral pulses bilaterally with an ankle-brachial index (ABI) on the right of 0.50. A contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrated complete aneurysm thrombosis extending from the aortic neck to both common, external and internal iliac arteries. Maximal aneurysm diameter was 4.3 cm . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed complete aneurysm thrombosis and obstruction of both common iliac arteries .
Intra-operatively, after dissection of the aneurysm and before aortic clamping, intrathrombotic pressures were simultaneously measured at three levels, with 18-gauge needles inserted into the thrombus 3 cm distal to the renal arteries (level 1), at the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery (level 2), and 2 cm distal to level 2 (level 3). Systemic arterial blood pressure and intraluminal pressure were also simultaneously measured by a radial catheter and an 18-gauge needle, respectively, 1 cm above the renal arteries (level 0) . Table shows systemic, intraluminal, and intrathrombotic pressures and systolic and mean intrathrombotic pressures at the three levels as percentages of the systolic and mean intraluminal and systemic pressures (also Figure ).
After the completion of measurements, the aneurysm was repaired by standard aortofemoral grafting. Aortobifemoral bypass is the procedure of choice for the majority of patients with aorto-iliac occlusive disease. In our patient, an aortofemoral bypass was used to treat the right-limb-threatening ischemia secondary to atherosclerotic occlusive disease of both common, internal and external iliac arteries and the completely thrombosed aneurysm extending from the infrarenal aorta to both iliac systems. The patient was anesthetized with a combined general and epidural technique. Dissection was carried out directly onto the anterior surface of the common femoral artery and continued cephalad to the inguinal ligament and caudally to expose the common femoral bifurcation and proximal ends of both superficial and profunda femoral arteries. The infrarenal aorta was exposed by a midline vertical incision, with retraction of the abdominal organs and incision of the posterior parietal peritoneum. After dissection, retroperitoneal tunnels were made for the passage of each graft limb from the aorta to the groin. After applying proximal and distal vascular clamps, the aorta was incised longitudinally to remove the thrombus and then incised horizontally to perform an end-to-end proximal anastomosis of the infrarenal aorta (under the renal vein) to a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) bifurcated prosthetic graft. The distal end-to-side anastomosis was performed placing the toe of the graft on the profunda femoral artery beyond the diseased femoral artery.
The patient had the surgery two days after admission, had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.