A 40-year-old woman with a well-established clinical diagnosis of classic FOP presented to the emergency department of a local hospital with intractable pain of the right thigh and a several week history of a spontaneous FOP flare-up of the right thigh unresponsive to prolonged prednisone therapy and narcotic analgesia.
The right thigh was massively swollen and tense. Passive flexion of the knee caused extreme discomfort. Distal pulses were intact. The neck, back, both shoulders, and both elbows were fused. The left hip showed slight decreased motion, especially in rotation. The left knee and ankle had a normal active range of movement. The great toes were short with hallux valgus malformations , and the interphalangeal joints were fused.
Doppler ultrasonography was performed for the evaluation of deep vein thrombosis and was negative. Plain films showed developmental dysplasia of both hips but no heterotopic ossification. A computed tomographic scan of the thighs revealed swelling and heterogeneity of the quadriceps musculature. The iliopsoas was enlarged (according to official radiographic reports; radiographs and scans are no longer available). Complete blood count and clotting factors were normal. The alkaline phosphatase was 147 IU/L (normal: 43–122 IU/L). The sedimentation rate was 30 mm/h (normal: 0–25 mm/h). Creatine kinase levels were not obtained.
An acute compartment syndrome of the anterior thigh was suspected. Intracompartmental pressures of the right thigh were measured and recorded at 110 mm of mercury in the right mid-quadriceps and 95 mm of mercury in the right distal quadriceps. The device used to measure the intracompartmental pressures was not listed in the emergency room records. An extensive fasciotomy and decompression of the anterior and posterior compartments of the thigh were performed from a single lateral incision with immediate post-operative relief of pain. A secondary closure of the skin and fascia was performed 2 days later . The patient was sent to a rehabilitation facility for ambulatory therapy. Radiographs performed 7 months after the fasciotomy were reported as showing extensive heterotopic ossification of the lateral thigh musculature from the anterior inferior iliac spine across the hip joint down to the knee. The hip and the knee were functionally ankylosed.