A 22 year-old single, Caucasian female Business-school student developed a low fever, headache and sore throat, which remitted spontaneously after three days. Seven days after the start of these symptoms she suddenly became agitated, physically and verbally aggressive, with total insomnia and disrupted behaviour. She was taken by her parents to the Emergency Department of S. Francisco Xavier Hospital, Lisbon, and was compulsorily hospitalised in the acute psychiatric ward under the Portuguese Mental Health Law. The mental state examination revealed a vigil and fully oriented patient. She appeared distrustful, collaborated poorly and was easily distracted. She had false delusional memories and paranoid delusional, poorly structured ideas of persecutory, magical and grandiose content, as well as a disrupted awareness of the boundaries and vitality of the Self. She also claimed, in what appeared to be a delusional misidentification of the Capgras syndrome type, that robots had replaced her parents. She appeared to be suffering complex auditive hallucinations in the 2nd and 3rd person, with a menacing content. Her mood was dysphoric, with poorly contained, labile affects. Her past medical record and family history were irrelevant. Neurological and general physical examinations were normal. She was started on haloperidol 10 mg tid ev (she refused oral medication), with no improvement of her mental state, although she did have unpredictable, short-lived intervals of remarkable lucidity with almost total absence of psychiatric symptoms apart from a depressed mood. 20 days after admission she developed a high fever with a white-cell count of 27 × 109/L, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 100 mm/h and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 15.3 mg/L. Routine biochemistry studies were normal. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was clear, with normal protein and glucose concentrations and 20 × 106 lymphocytes per litre. Microbiological investigation of CSF was negative. Her chest film and brain CT-scan showed no changes. Brain MRI showed irregular thickening and nodularity of the lateral ventricles' lining. A complete neuropsychological evaluation was performed revealing a mild impairment of her external visual attention and visuo-constructive reproduction capacity. The EEG displayed symmetrical, irregular, high amplitude, slow wave activity with frontotemporal predominance. An ophthalmologic examination revealed lymphocytes in her vitreum. A skin biopsy was taken for Lupus Band Test, which was negative. Serologic testing of serum and CSF was performed for systemic lupus erythematosus (including anti-ribosomal P antibodies) and other connectivites as well as for most known neurotropic viruses and bacteria. An IgG antibody titer to CP of 22 IU/ml was detected in the serum, with an IgM antibody titer of 85 IU/ml. No anti-CP antibodies were detected in the CSF. All her psychotropic medication was stopped and she was started on levofloxacin (due to dysuria and leukocyturia) and acyclovir. Five days levofloxacin was changed to gentamicin plus piperacillin/tazobactam for due to Escherichia coli-positive blood-cultures (serological results were not yet available at that time). She finally received three consecutive ev pulses of methylprednisolone (1 g each), before being transferred to a Neurology unit. During the following week she progressively became apyretic and her psychotic symptoms gradually remitted. At the time of discharge, eight weeks after admission, she still had an ESR of 55 mm/h and a CRP of 9.03 mg/L, with normal blood count and biochemical parameters as well as a normal CSF. Brain MRI nine weeks after admission showed complete remission of the initial changes. At the time of discharge, the EEG still displayed symmetrical, irregular, high amplitude, slow wave activity with frontotemporal predominance, although much less severe than in the first EEG record.
Psychiatrically she remained slightly disinhibited, both verbally and affectively, with pedolalia and mildly childish behaviour. There were no signs of delusional ideas or hallucinations and she could only vaguely remember the period when she had been psychotic. Two months after discharge she had resumed her studies and concluded her Business School degree.