A 67-year-old white Caucasian man with chronic pancreatitis, cholelithiasis and impaired renal function presented to our emergency department for anorexia and moderate to intense pain in his epigastrium radiating to his back. His usual analgesics had not lessened the pain, which had worsened in the previous four days. On physical examination he was cachectic, pale, oriented and apyretic (36.8°C). He had normal heart sounds (78 beats per minute) and a slightly high arterial pressure (147/80mmHg). His abdomen was particularly tender in the left upper epigastric area and the tenderness increased with palpation. Laboratory tests revealed the following data: leukocytosis at 11×10−3/μL, low hemoglobin level of 8.1g/dL, platelet count of 258×10−3/μL, serum creatinine of 2.35mg/dL, lipase level of 420IU/L, amylase of 220IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 450IU/L, glucose of 76mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 45IU/L and total bilirubin of 1.1mg/dL. He had no history of previous upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
We performed contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT), which showed a normally enhancing pancreas, with enhancement comparable to that of his spleen even though the head and body of the pancreas were slightly enlarged with subtle peripheral fat-stranding. Prior to contrast medium (CM) administration, subtle calcifications had been visible throughout the pancreas body. These findings were suggestive of edematous, interstitial pancreatitis superimposed on chronic calcific pancreatitis. A 5.1cm pseudocyst was visible in the pancreatic tail, characterized by hyper-dense content in the non-enhanced contrast scan (mean density 54 Hounsfield units, standard deviation 13.8), that did not enhance after CM administration. We first suspected proteinaceous content, but then detected enlarged, twisty, dilated vessels within the cyst, arising from a branch of the patient’s splenic artery. This was highly suspicious for the presence of a bleeding pancreatic PSA. On the basis of the density values of the pseudocyst without and after intravenous CM administration , we could not exclude a recent bleed.
The possibility of surgical hemostasis was discarded by surgeons because of his multiple severe systemic illnesses and very poor general performance. He had severe pulmonary hypertension due to an advanced idiopathic interstitial fibrosis, and severe impaired renal function (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) using the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD)a = 28mL/min/1.73m2. Because of his low hemoglobin level, an emergency celiac angiography was planned after collegial discussion with surgeons to exclude an active bleeding arising from the PSA. A splenic angiogram showed an active extravasation of CM originating from the PSA, which showed well after a super-selective catheterization obtained with a 2.7-F coaxial micro-catheter (Progreat, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). Therefore, an endovascular ligature was tried as first-line therapy. Considering the tortuosity of his splenic artery, the micro-catheter was placed into his splenic artery distal to the pseudoaneurysm to achieve distal embolization with three (two 5mm and one 6mm) metallic microcoils (VortX; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA). After micro-catheter retraction proximal to the pseudoaneurysm, two (one 5mm and one 6mm) metallic microcoils (VortX) were deployed . Angiography after endovascular ligature showed exclusion of the PSA with stagnation of CM within the pseudocyst .
Our patient’s clinical course was acceptable with progressive hemoglobin recovery up to 11.4g/dL 48h after the transarterial embolization. Wide-spectrum antibiotics and analgesic and antipyretic drugs were administrated to prevent infectious complications and to control pain. Six days after the procedure, CECT confirmed the complete exclusion of the splenic pseudoaneurysm with the same ‘stagnation’ of CM that was appreciable on the post-embolization angiogram. Some ischemic damage of the spleen was identified, but most of the splenic parenchymal vascularization was present.
Our patient was discharged in a stable condition. Follow-up at three and six months comprised combined color Doppler ultrasound with CEUS using a dedicated CM (Sonovue, Bracco, Italy) because of the persistent elevation of his serum creatinine levels (1.7mg/dL and eGFR with MDRD = 40mL/min/1.73m2). This choice was concordant with European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR) guidelines to consider an imaging method that does not use iodine-based CM in order to reduce the risk of a CM-induced nephropathy (CIN) in a patient at high risk (eGFR lower than 45mL/min/1.73m2). Both examinations confirmed the presence of a pancreatic pseudocyst with a slightly increased diameter (60mm) without signs of active bleeding inside the cyst .