A 65-year-old man visited our hospital for follow-up esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) after four times undergoing endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for early esophageal cancer. He had no habit of drinking, but had a history of smoking (20 cigarettes per day for 40 years) until POEM. He also had a past history of esophageal achalasia classified as type II according to the Chicago classification system (straight type, grade II), for which he had received POEM 6 years earlier as follows: mucosal incision creation at 2 o’clock position, 32 cm from an incisor, followed by anterograde submucosal tunneling and myotomy at a distance of 34–50 cm from the incisor, with the EGJ being 48 cm from the incisor. His symptoms markedly improved after POEM, and his Eckardt score improved to 0. He underwent follow-up EGD every 6 months after POEM and ESD.
EGD examination revealed a tumorous lesion in the middle thoracic esophagus at 4–5 o’clock position . Endoscopic biopsy specimens from this lesion, which had never been treated with ESD were indicative of squamous cell carcinoma. Computed tomography showed slight wall thickening in the middle esophagus without lymph node swelling , and positron emission tomography demonstrated high accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose with a maximum standardized uptake value of 11.6 at the tumor lesion . Fluoroscopy with gastrografin revealed a cancer site and smooth passage of gastrografin around the EGJ despite the dilatation of the esophagus . On the basis of these findings, we reached the clinical diagnosis of cT2-N0-M0 (stage II) ESCC according to the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification (eighth edition). Thus, neoadjuvant chemotherapy with fluorouracil and cisplatin was initiated for the patient. Five weeks after the end of the chemotherapy, thoracoscopic esophagectomy was performed via the right thoracic approach in the prone position under artificial pneumothorax induced by carbon dioxide insufflation at a pressure of 6–8 mmHg. During surgery, the esophagus was found to be dilated which suggested esophageal achalasia. However, there were very slight fibrous adhesions between the esophagus and the pericardial surface despite the POEM procedure formerly conducted through an anterior incision . A hand-assisted laparoscopic method was applied for the abdominal procedure, and reconstruction was conducted with a gastric tube positioned in the posterior mediastinal route. The total operation time and total intraoperative blood loss were 570 min and 113 g, retrospectively. There was no severe postoperative complication, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11. The pathological TNM stage of the tumor was postoperatively identified as ypT2-N0-M0 (stage IIA). Gross examination of the surgical specimen revealed that the esophagus was extremely dilated and that the mucosal surface of the esophagus was visually rough with scars of ESD . The histopathological analysis of the surgical specimen indicated esophageal wall thickening along with edema and fibrosis extending from the lamina propria to the submucosa. Moreover, three quarters of the inner layer and some proportion of the outer layer of the muscularis propria were missing, with some degree of atrophy present in the inner circular muscle layer at the EGJ level . Moreover, the inner circular muscle of stomach was sufficiently incised . Ganglion cells could not be detected in the normal location of the Auerbach’s plexus .