A 51-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with multiple enlarging masses in the inguinal and thoracal areas of2 months' duration, which progressively enlarged and spread around the whole body. In the 2 weeks before presentation, the lesions had became darkly pigmented, suggesting melanoma. At the time of presentation, he complained of dyspnea, cough, fever and night sweats. He had a smoking history of 20 cigarettes a day for the last 30 years. Dermatological examination revealed multiple, dark colored, firm, nodular lesions varying in size . Rhonchi over the whole lung area were noted on auscultation. The results of routine laboratory studies of blood and urine were normal except for raised ESR (98 mm/hour), LDH (1311 U/ml) and uric acid (12.8 mg/dl). Peripheral blood smear and bone marrow examinations were normal. Chest X-ray showed the presence of heterogeneous opacities in the right lung field suggestive of multiple pulmonary metastases. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen demonstrated a low density soft tissue lesion 7 × 4.5 cm in diameter with irregular margins, located within the right atrium, which was also consistent with the presence of metastases . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the thorax showed conglomerated mediastinal lymph nodes and numerous nodular pulmonary lesions, findings that suggested the presence of metastases. Pleural and pericardial effusions were also present as well as numerous subcutaneous lesions in the chest wall and brain metastases confirmed by computed tomography of the brain . On fine needle aspiration, the nodular lesions were diagnosed as melanoma . Although the classification was not based on histological examination, the appearance of the masses and the clinical findings of the patient were consistent with the diagnosis of nodular melanoma. Temozolomide was administered for 5 consecutive days at a daily dose of 150 mg/m2/day but the patient died of respiratory failure within a week after diagnosis.