A 70-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of right knee dislocation after TKA was performed on her right knee due to severe varus deformity and flexion contracture . Before TKA, the patient had a 45° flexion contracture and severe varus deformity, according to the patient's records. The patient's knee had dislocated when she first tried to stand and walk on the second day after surgery. The day after the dislocation, the patient was referred to our institute . We attempted closed reduction of the dislocated knee in the operating room, but this was unsuccessful. In the first operation, size 5 femoral and size 4 tibial components (Genesis II, Smith & Nephew) of a non-posterior-stabilized prosthesis with a size 11 liner were inserted. Paramedian arthrotomy was performed via the previous longitudinal incision, and the knee was exposed. Eversion and lateral dislocation of the patella were attempted; however, the surrounding soft tissues were very tight and further proximal dissection and patellofemoral ligament resection was required to enable patellar eversion and knee flexion to 90°. The liner was then removed. After placing the retractors in the appropriate sites, we observed that the lateral collateral ligament, arcuate ligament, and popliteus tendon were severely torn, with inadequate release of the medial structures, including the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and intact medial sleeve with pes anserine tendons. The tibia dislocated laterally, even in the absence of a laterally applied force. First, a periosteal elevator was used to strip the superficial MCL from the proximal tibia, up to the diaphyseal region. Subsequently, the insertion of the pes anserine tendon was released with a cautery. The posterior capsule was released from the top of the tibia and the back of the posteromedial femur with an electrocautery and the curved tip of the osteotome, respectively. A second incision was made, extending from the lateral femoral condyle to the head of the fibula. Since grade III acute injury of the posterolateral corner of the knee was present, we preferred direct repair of the injured structures . Upon incision of the fascia between the iliotibial tract and the biceps femoris, midsubstance tears of the lateral collateral ligament, arcuate ligament, and popliteus tendon were revealed. These were treated by performing an end-to-end repair with Bunnell-type crossing sutures . The popliteus tendon was also found to be avulsed from the femur, and transosseous sutures were used to attach the tendon to its proximal insertion site. Posterolateral capsular repair and plication were performed, and the tendon of the lateral gastrocnemius muscle was sutured to the adjacent capsule. Subsequently, a size 15 deep-dish liner was inserted in order to optimize soft tissue tension. Rotational alignments of the tibial and femoral components were normal so they were not revised; further, there was no malalignment of the limb after the reduction of the knee prosthesis.
During knee flexion, the patella subluxated laterally; hence, lateral retinacular release was performed. Furthermore, 2 suction drains were applied for 4 days until hematoma drainage ceased, and the patient's knee was kept in a brace for 2 months. Culture of the synovial fluid that was collected during the second operation revealed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA); therefore, parenteral teicoplanin (Targocid®) treatment was started. Antibiotic therapy was continued for 1 month, and the eradication of the infection was confirmed clinically and with the help of laboratory tests. During this period, the patient was enrolled in a physical therapy program that included. Only isometric quadriceps exercises with no flexion and walking without weight bearing for 1 month. After 1 month, range of movement (ROM) exercises was begun, and the patient started to walk with full weight bearing and was able to achieve full knee extension. After the end of 14 postoperative months, the patient had a knee flexion of 100° and no varus or valgus instability .