A 55-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital because of hepatic tumors detected by abdominal ultrasonography during a screening examination. Her medical and family history was unremarkable; her occupational and residential history showed no apparent exposure to asbestos. She received no medical drugs, and neither smoked tobacco nor drank alcohol. On admission, her general status was unremarkable; her temperature was 36.2 °C and her blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg with a regular heart rate of 80/minute. A physical examination revealed no abnormal findings; neurological examinations were unremarkable. All laboratory data, including levels of the serum tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 19-9, alpha fetoprotein, protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II, and cancer antigen 125 were within normal ranges . An abdominal enhanced CT scan revealed four hypervascular, round hepatic tumors. One tumor, which was 32 mm in diameter, was in contact with the lateral liver segment and the hepatic hilus; the other three tumors were in contact with the diaphragm and measured 7 mm in segment 4, 17 mm in segment 7, and 15 mm in segment 8 . There was no pleural effusion or ascites, and no other nodular lesions in her chest or abdomen were observed. Similar to the CT findings, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor of lower intensity than the liver on T1-weighted images, and with higher intensity than the liver on T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images . Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopic examination findings were normal. We hypothesized that the tumor arose from her liver, and diagnosed our patient as having multiple hepatic hemangiomas, at first. However, imaging findings were not typical of hepatic tumor: all tumors were on the edge of the liver and the tumor margins were clear. Moreover, the tumor in segment 7 appeared continuous with the diaphragm with similar high-density contrast medium . We then performed CT angiography to obtain further details.
CT findings during arterial portography showed enhancement in none of the tumors , but CT during hepatic arteriography revealed strong enhancement in the tumor in the lateral segment and that this tumor was fed by the left gastric artery. In contrast, the remaining three tumors had no enhancement and were fed by the right inferior phrenic artery . Imaging findings indicated that the liver was not the origin of these tumors. Moreover, all tumors exhibited increased uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, with a standardized uptake value of 7.8 with positron emission tomography (PET)-CT . We considered these tumors to be peritoneal malignant tumors, preoperatively, and performed surgical resection. Laparotomy revealed that the tumor in the lateral segment was clearly in contact with the hepatoduodenal ligament, and that the other three tumors were on the diaphragm . We performed tumorectomy with left liver lobectomy and partial diaphragmatic resection. Histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations of the resected specimens were positive for CD34, CD31, D2-40, and calretinin, which confirmed epithelioid mesothelioma . Our patient was not given any medication except a general drip infusion and prophylactic antibiotics; she was discharged 10 days after surgery without complications. CT and PET-CT revealed no recurrence 20 months after surgery without adjuvant therapy.