A 48-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history of chronic active hepatitis C, anisocoria, and long-standing history of treatment-resistant schizophrenia was referred for inpatient psychiatric hospitalization (at a non-smoking facility) after experiencing worsening psychosis in the context of recent methamphetamine use and self-discontinuation of olanzapine. Prior to the admission, the patient was smoking approximately 10 cigarettes daily. Given the prior history of therapeutic response to olanzapine, the patient was started on olanzapine 5 mg/day. Olanzapine was titrated to 40 mg/day on day 6 of hospitalization, which was chosen due to moderate evidence for efficacy at this dose supported by a double-blind, controlled clinical trial in patients with severe/persistent psychotic symptoms . On day 12, the patient continued to suffer from auditory hallucinations and disorganized (but not violent) thought, speech, and behavior and was thereafter planned for cross-titration to clozapine due to persistent treatment-resistant psychosis on high-dose olanzapine. The patient received clozapine 12.5 mg with plans to titrate it to a therapeutic dose before tapering olanzapine. The patient received no other psychotropic medications during this hospitalization.
Clozapine continued to be titrated up to 250 mg/day with a reduction of olanzapine dose to 30 mg/day in the hospital on day 22 and with the patient clinically tolerating the psychotropic regimen up to this point. In the early morning of day 23, the patient had rapidly fluctuating mental status between somnolence and agitation. Specifically, the patient had rapid fluctuations between sleep with loud snoring and violent agitation within 20–30 s of intervals. The patient’s presentation was concerning for an episode of psychotic-related agitation, and the patient was administered 50 mg of chlorpromazine one time, with no significant improvement. However, as the night progressed, symptoms resolved, and the patient did not have similar relapsing symptoms until the following night. Overnight in the hospital on day 24, the patient continued to exhibit rapid fluctuations between somnolence and agitation. The severity of agitation required 4-point restraints for safety, and the patient received 25 mg of intramuscular chlorpromazine and later 2 mg of oral lorazepam with no therapeutic response. The patient was transferred to the internal medicine service for the evaluation of encephalopathy. Differential diagnoses at the time included neuroleptic malignant syndrome, catatonia, acute medical illness (i.e., acute hepatitis or SARS-CoV-2 infection), and medication-induced delirium.
During these episodes, the patient’s cognition was tested and noted to have significantly deviated from his baseline. The patient had impaired short-term memory, disorientation, reduced attention, and concentration. Orthostatic vital signs were within normal limits. Physical exam was negative for clonus, hyperreflexia, muscle rigidity, or signs of catatonia. Miosis was not appreciated outside of the patients’ previously documented anisocoria. An extensive medical workup to investigate the causes of altered mental status was completed with unremarkable findings for the following: complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic count (CMP), ammonia, thyroid studies, creatinine kinase, troponins, urinalysis, urine culture, urine toxicology, SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), human immunodeficiency virus antibody/antigen 4th generation testing, syphilis antibody ELISA testing, electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and non-contrast head computed tomography (CT). The patient was unable to have a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) completed due to having metal in his body from a prior gunshot wound. Lumbar puncture revealed normal opening pressure, mild lymphocytic pleocytosis (white blood cells 6/μl), normal glucose (48 mg/dl), and elevated protein level (70.8 g/dl). The autoimmune encephalitis evaluation CSF panel (anti-NMDA receptor, anti-LGI1, anti-GAD65, anti-GABA-B, anti-CASPR2, and anti-AMPA-R) of the University of Pennsylvania showed negative results.
For the next 3 days, the patient was continued on the same dose of medications as there was initially low suspicion for medication-induced delirium as the patient had previously clinically tolerated clozapine 250 mg/day with olanzapine 30 mg/day. Furthermore, clozapine serum level was 415 mg/L (reference 350–600 ng/ml), norclozapine level was 116 mg/L, and olanzapine level was 38.6 ng/ml (reference 20–40 ng/ml, toxic > 80 ng/ml) [5,6]. An electroencephalogram (EEG) conducted for 1 h showed a mild decline in diffusion but no seizures or epileptic discharges. The patient developed new mild transaminitis (ALT 114 unit/L and AST 55 unit/L), hepatitis C viral load returned to 2,120,000 RNA copies/mL (consistent with previous levels), and liver ultrasound was unremarkable. Genetic testing for cytochrome P450 (CYP) metabolism indicated the patient had CYP1A2 genotype of *1F/*1F (phenotype for rapid metabolizer). These findings suggested a concern for antipsychotic toxicity secondary to altered medication metabolism, and olanzapine was discontinued.
The day after olanzapine was stopped, the patient had significant clinical improvement including full orientation, improved concentration, and attention, but still with auditory hallucinations. The patient thanked the treatment teams for his return to his baseline state of cognition and reported that he physically felt much better after olanzapine was discontinued. For the schizophrenia of patient, he was able to return to the behavioral health unit, and no adjustments of clozapine were indicated for the remainder of hospitalization. Outpatient evaluation 6 months after hospital discharge, the patient continued to tolerate clozapine 250 mg/day with no adverse reactions.