A 70-year-old female patient presented with erythema and blistering on her left waist and abdomen, which were accompanied by pain.
Five days prior to presentation at our clinic, the patient had developed a small swath of red bullous eruption on the left side of her waist and abdomen, with mild pain (pain score of 3 on the visual analogue scale [VAS 3]). Three days previously, the blisters had rapidly increased, involving the lower back, waist and abdomen, and perineum, accompanied by severe pain (VAS 5). The patient was diagnosed with HZ in the outpatient department and treated with oral acyclovir; however, the area of the lesion continued to expand, blood blisters and bullae appeared, and the pain continued to worsen (VAS 8), which seriously affected the patient’s sleep and daily life.
The patient was diagnosed with RA 3 years ago, and had been treated with prednisone, leflunomide, hydroxychloroquine, adalimumab, and other drugs. One year ago, for economic reasons, adalimumab was discontinued and changed to oral tofacitinib (10 mg daily). Approximately 1 mo after initiation of oral tofacitinib, painful blisters appeared on the left flank and abdomen, which were diagnosed as HZ; the blisters healed 2 wk after treatment with the antiviral drug acyclovir. Following her recovery from HZ, the patient continues to receive tofacitinib. At present, her RA is stable.
The patient’s personal and family histories were unremarkable.
On physical examination, the patient’s temperature was 36.4°C, pulse rate was 72 bpm, respiratory rate was 17 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 145/85 mmHg. Both knees and wrists were swollen without significant deformity or tenderness. Large areas of edematous erythema could be seen on the left abdomen, left perineal area, and left side of the back, with clustered blisters, bullae, and blood blisters. The herpes rash was distributed in bands and did not exceed the midline of the body surface .
Routine blood tests showed the following: white blood cell count of 3.67 × 109/L (normal: 3.5-9.5 × 109/L); lymphocyte percentage of 45.2% (normal: 20%-50%); monocyte percentage of 18.7% (normal: 3%-10%); neutrophil percentage of 35.1% (normal: 40%-75%); C-reactive protein of 7.98 mg/L (normal: 0-10 mg/L); and serum amyloid A level of 19.36 mg/L (normal: 0-10 mg/L). Routine urine tests were negative for protein, glucose, red blood cells and white blood cells. There were no abnormal findings following tests for liver function, renal function, blood lipid level, blood glucose level, electrolytes, rheumatoid factor, immunoglobulin (Ig) A, IgM and IgG levels, complement 3 and 5, lymphocytes (CD3, CD4, and CD8; immunoassay), antistreptolysin-O, and anti-HIV.
Chest and abdominal computed tomography scans were normal.