A 77-year-old woman had a history of DLB since 2013 when she was 75. She has a primary school education and was a retired saleswoman. Previous clinical history was unremarkable, she did not assume any medication, and there was no family history of psychiatric or movement disorders. Her initial motor symptoms, started approximately six months before the first examination, were bilateral bradykinesia, followed by rigidity and mild postural instability with associated marked hypomimia and mild hypophonia. Her relatives signaled also a history of likely rapid eye movement sleep behavior (RBD) disorder. Mood and affect were normal, with the exception of mild symptoms of apathy described mainly as a lack of motivation. She was initially treated with levodopa/carbidopa 400/100 mg daily with good initial improvement of parkinsonian symptoms. In agreement with the patient, no medications were introduced to treat RBD symptoms, which were considered not significant by the same patient.
However, three months later, she noticed a moderate increase of her motor symptoms and selegiline 10 mg daily was added. After another month, we were contacted by her relatives because she has started to present a significant cognitive impairment with fluctuating episodes of confusion and visual hallucinations, and, although less marked, with delusional jealousy and persecutory ideas, sometimes with behavioral problems (aggressiveness). Brain MRI was normal and without significant atrophy. Her dementia work-up did not reveal any reversible causes, while results of laboratory tests were normal. Although clinical feature were not suggestive for prion disease or epilepsy, an EEG was done and was normal.
A neuropsychological evaluation was done which showed a moderate-severe cognitive impairment mainly characterized by severe attention and executive deficits and frontal syndrome, with associated severe deficit of visual-spatial functions. Rey Copy and the Clock drawing tests are reported in Fig. . Moderate/severe impairment in long-term verbal and visual-spatial memory recall was registered with deficit of fluency for semantic categories (mainly due to attentional fluctuations). A brain 99Tc-hexamethylpropyleneamineoxime single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) was performed showing moderate hypoperfusion in both occipital lobes, and associated with marked decreased perfusion in parieto-fronto-temporal lobes bilaterally . At this time, she was diagnosed as DLB.
Thus, delusional jealousy and persecutory ideas were treated with the simultaneous suspension of selegiline and the introduction of quetiapine 12,5 mg/daily. In the following two weeks, both disappearance of these delusions and the normalization of behavioral problems were observed, although a moderate impairment of bradkynesia and rigidity was noted.
However, after four months, her family members reported the appearance of an unusual delusion, characterized by the fact that the patient, referring to the female professional caregiver engaged by her relatives for her care, constantly described the presence of two different female persons, sometimes with different physical characteristics, sometimes similar, with a disorder framed in the context of a delusion of duplication. It was reported, in fact, that the patient always talked about the "two ladies", despite the complaints of family members who indicated the obvious presence of a single person, without substantial criticism of the delusional disorder by the patient. Also in the absence of the professional caregiver, the aberrant conviction of the existence of two different ladies was constantly present, while the caregiver was never recognized as a unique person by the patient. In this respect, during the conversation the patient said: “Today I have arrived to the hospital with my son, without the two ladies who usually take care of me.”, “They are nice people, even if they do not speak much. I do not remember their names, but both speak with a foreign accent”. When we asked if they were both with blond hair, her response was: “I do not remember exactly the color of their hair, but it seems to be of a different color”.
Thus, levodopa was decreased to 200 mg/daily, with no disappearance of the delusion of duplication, but with a clear worsening of parkinsonism. At a follow-up visit, two months later, with the same professional caregiver present during the interview, the patient was referring to her as if it actually were two people. The delusional disorder of duplication was not present in relation to other people or other patient’s relatives. No visual or auditory hallucinations were referred.