The patient was a 49-year-old female farmer who had suffered from Raynaud’s phenomenon and sclerodactyly for 30 years. She experienced tightening of her fingers, face and forearm and then gradually developed restricted movement of both hands. She denied any treatment except for intermittent traditional Chinese treatment to diminish the symptoms. She did not suffer from arthralgia, acid reflux, dysphagia, cough, or shortness of breath. Importantly, the patient noted the abrupt onset of a painless inability to extent the fifth digit of her left hand in June 2015. One month later, the same symptom developed in the fourth digit. She was then diagnosed with tendon rupture and underwent tendon repair in the local hospital. In October 2016, the same symptom happened to the fifth and fourth digits of her right hand . From then on, she suffered from a disorder of the fourth and fifth digits of both hands. On physical examination, the patient was unable to actively extend the little and ring fingers at the metacarpophalangeal joints of both hands.
Results of laboratory tests showed an antinuclear antibody (ANA) count of 1:3200 with a centromere pattern and positive anti-centromere B antibody. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR) was 37 mm/hour, and serum C3 and C4 levels were slightly reduced at 0.70 g/L and 0.23 g/L. Rheumatoid factor, Scl-70, CCP antibody and other related antibodies were negative. No abnormality was shown on chest computed tomography (CT) scan or heart echocardiography. She was diagnosed as diffuse cutaneous SSc(dcSSc) with bilateral extensor tendon rupture of fourth and fifth digits. After successful tendon transfer, the function of the fourth and fifth digits of both hands was gradually improved with methotrexate and rehabilitation treatment. After half a year, ESR was decreased as 22 mm/hour, and she felt improvement of fingers tightening and hands movement restriction. A timeline for the patient is shown in Fig. .
Carpal tunnel syndrome was excluded because no abnormality of nerve conduction was detected by electromyography examination. Ultrasonography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) examination were further used to help diagnose.
On the ultrasound image, extensor tendon interruption and surrounding edema was detected in the fourth and fifth fingers of the right hand . On MRI T2-weighted image, a discontinuous high signal in the tendons of the fourth and fifth fingers and edema in the surrounding tissue were detected . Both MRI and ultrasound results suggested tendon rupture of the right fourth and fifth fingers with remarkable inflammation in the tendons and surrounding tissue.
Based on the symptoms and examinations of this patient, rupture of the fourth and fifth finger extensor tendons was suspected, and a surgical exploration was performed. The ruptured fourth and fifth extensor tendons of the right hand were confirmed during operation. The proximal stumps were located under the extensor compartment retinaculum, and distal stumps lay on the middle of the fourth metacarpal bone. Other tendons showed edematous appearance, indicating chronic inflammatory changes . Perforation of the dorsal wrist capsule and instability of the radioulnar joint were shown . The tendons lying directly on the distal radioulnar joint had a notably hairy appearance . Tendon transfer repair was performed in this patient. The tendon of extensor carpi radialis longus (ERCL) was detached at its insertion at the base of the second finger metacarpal which was transferred and sutured to the distal ruptured tendon stumps via subcutaneous tunnel . After surgery, the patient received methotrexate 10 mg/week to inhibit immune inflammation.
Histopathologic examination of the tenosynovium revealed degenerated tendinous tissue with fibrosis of advanced stage and irreversible damage. In a healthy control with tendon rupture by trauma, lines of collagenous fibers and scattering distribution of spindle tendon cells are shown in the pathological section . In our SSc patient, the tissue sections demonstrated structural disorder, the proliferation of collagen fibers and the infiltration of fibroblastic tissue. No infiltrated lymphocytes or inflammatory cells were seen in the tissue sections .