A 43-year-old man visited the emergency department (ED) due to periumbilical pain and numeric rating scale of 4 points, both subjective. The patient’s symptoms had worsened over the two days prior.
At the patient’s first visit to the ED because of periumbilical pain, he underwent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan. After conservative treatment, his symptoms improved, and he was discharged. One week later, he was having recurrent episodes of periumbilical pain, so he underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at the outpatient clinic of the digestive internal medicine department. One month later, the patient revisited the ED with severe periumbilical pain that had worsened from the previous day.
The patient was a healthy person without any underlying disease.
The patient had no family history.
On the patient’s first and second visits to the ED, his vital signs were within normal range. He had no abdominal tenderness or rebound tenderness on physical examination.
On the patient’s first visit to the ED, his laboratory test findings were within normal range. On his second visit, his laboratory test results confirmed pancreatitis as follows: Elevated amylase and lipase (120 U/L and 83 U/L), C-reactive protein (CRP, 5.73 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (285 U/L), D-dimer (2074.59 ng/mL), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (62 mm/hr).
An initial contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed clustered dilated vessels in the pancreas body and tail with small pseudocyst. Twelve days later, the patient underwent pancreatic MRI that showed multifocal tortuous arterial enhancing lesions at the mid to distal body of the pancreas with mild atrophy and pseudocyst. The possibility of pancreas AVM was suggested.
One month later, the patient underwent a repeated CT scan because of symptom recurrence, and the scan showed findings of AVM accompanied by acute pancreatitis, multifocal vascular structures, and pseudocyst in the pancreas body and tail.
Tumor markers were within the normal range. Before any intervention, the patient underwent follow-up laboratory tests. In the results, leukocytosis was newly noted, and CRP (30.04 mg/dL) was further elevated. Amylase and lipase (66 U/L and 64 U/L) were slightly lower.