A 63-year-old woman with hypertension and hyperlipidaemia developed typical angina with an inability to carry any physical activity (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Class IV) over a 6-month timeframe. Despite being on maximally tolerated doses of two anti-anginals (metoprolol succinate 100 milligrams daily and extended release isosorbide mononitrate 60 mg daily), in addition to aspirin 81 mg and atorvastatin 40 mg daily, she continued to have ongoing symptoms. She subsequently underwent a regadenoson nuclear stress demonstrating severe inferior wall ischaemia but with normal left ventricular function. The patient then underwent coronary angiography, which showed a right coronary artery (RCA) CTO with no other significant epicardial coronary artery disease. Due to her ongoing symptoms and single vessel disease, the decision was made to proceed with CTO PCI.
On the day of the procedure, the patient was found to have unremarkable vitals (heart rate 48 b.p.m., blood pressure 100/78 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air). Her physical examination demonstrated a normal cardiopulmonary exam with normal heart and lung sounds with no stigmata of heart failure. Her radial pulses were 2+, as well as her femoral pulses. Her initial electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with no ST-T abnormalities or signs of a prior infarction. Due to patient preference to immediately ambulate post-procedure, a biradial approach was chosen for her CTO PCI.
The patient was pre-loaded with aspirin and clopidogrel, and underwent CTO PCI with a 7-Fr AL 0.75 guide and a 7-Fr EBU 3.5 guide. Dual angiography revealed a mid-RCA CTO, which was approximately 24 mm in length (, Video S1). The plan was made to proceed with an antegrade approach using heparin with a target activated clotting time (ACT) of >300 s. An antegrade approach was initially attempted utilizing a TurnPike microcatheter (Teleflex, Wayne, PA, USA) and the following guidewires in serial succession: Fielder XT-A (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan), Pilot 200 (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and Gaia 2nd (Asahi Intecc). However, these wires kept going subintimal and there was also a wire exit with the Gaia 2nd wire. The CTO strategy was then switched to a retrograde approach utilizing a Turnpike 150 cm microcatheter. The ACT target was now increased to >350 s. A septal collateral to the right posterior descending artery was crossed with the use of a Sion wire (Asahi Intecc). A Gaia 2nd wire was then used retrograde to successfully cross the CTO from the distal true lumen to the proximal true lumen, which was then exchanged for a R350 externalizable wire (Teleflex). Percutaneous coronary intervention was then performed on the externalized wire via standard fashion with an excellent angiographic result.
After completion of the PCI, the retrograde hardware was removed. However, an injection in the retrograde donor artery demonstrated septal artery laceration with subsequent haematoma formation (, , Video S2). A conservative management strategy was initially chosen, where she was observed on the cath lab table for approximately 2 h. No additional fluid or anticoagulation was given. Reversal of her anticoagulation was not performed because her ACT fell to sub-therapeutic levels quickly post-procedure. She fared well without any haemodynamic stability or arrhythmias initially in the post-procedural area. However, the patient developed a sudden onset 8 of 10 chest pain. The heart rate at the time was 94 b.p.m., blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg, and 98% oxygen saturation on room air. Her electrocardiogram demonstrated only sinus tachycardia. However, she was brought back to the cath lab due to her ongoing pain where a repeat angiogram demonstrated expansion of the septal haematoma (, , Video S3). Due to the enlarging size of the haematoma, she underwent coiling of the inflow and outflow of the culprit septal collateral (Of note, the patient did receive heparin for the coiling procedure, to prevent clotting of the required catheters and devices.). The patient was then transferred to the cardiac care unit.
While initially stable post-procedure, the patient became hypotensive to 70/48 mmHg and failed to improve with over 3 L of fluid resuscitation and inotropes (dopamine and norepinephrine) over the next two hours. A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated almost complete obliteration of the entire right ventricle (RV) from the haematoma (, , Video S4), but with normal left ventricular function. The septal haematoma measured 4.2 cm in certain views, and a trivial pericardial effusion was noted. Due to severe right-sided failure, the patient underwent placement of a percutaneous RV assist device, Impella RP (Abiomed, Danvers, MA, USA) via a right femoral approach . The Impella was placed at P-9, which was the maximal performance level of the device. Her haemodynamics normalized immediately and over the next few days, the septal haematoma steadily decreased in size. The Impella RP was weaned steadily to P2 and removed. During the process, the patient was maintained on dual-antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel.
The patient was discharged after a baseline cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. A follow-up MRI scan 3 months post-procedure demonstrated resolution of the haematoma . The patient was seen 4 months post-procedure in follow-up clinic and found to be symptom free with no limitations.