A 6-month-old Syrian baby girl was referred to Children’s Hospital in Damascus with a 45 days history of chronic diarrhea and growth failure.
The patient was born at term by C-section delivery in a result of dystocia to a 14-year-old woman. The pregnancy was uneventful with no history of maternal illness, except for mention of exposure to a simple radiography without specifying trimester. The history of perinatal is unknown by parents.
The patient was fed breast milk during the first 3 months of life, without any weight gain. Many types of milk were added to the diet, including cow’s milk. Diarrhea improved with cow’s milk and then returned.
She had an abnormal psychomotor development, she is unable to hold her head, or sit with help, there is no dorsoventral or ventrodorsal inversion, although she laughs, babbles, and recognizes her mother.
On physical examination: The weight at birth was 3000 g and present weight is 3000 g, length: 68 cm, mid-upper arm circumference: 9 cm, and head circumference: 39 cm.
Loose skin folds, the baggy pants sign, visible loss of fat, and muscle were noticed, suggesting a Marasmus case . In addition to deviation of the axis of the hand laterally, bilateral absent of radii with both thumbs was noticed.
No deformities were shown in the lower limbs. The anterior fontanel is slightly open, with the existence of a depressed nasal bridge, and a prominent forehead.
Her abdominal and cranial ultrasonography were normal.
Initial laboratory investigations gave the following results: hemoglobin: 11 g/dl, mean corpuscular volumeMCV: 82fl, white blood cell: 32 200/mm3, neutrophils: 54%, lymphocyte: 37%, and thrombocytobenia with platelet count of 42 000/mm3.
There was an increasing Immunoglobulin IgA and IgM, IgA:1.01g/l, IgM:1.23g/l.
Urinalysis revealed that the urine contained reduction bodies, and stool examination showed increasing fatty substances.
The peripheral blood smear showed hypochromic, small cell size, leukocytosis, and lymphatic preponderance with some nontypical lymphocytes and thrombocytopenia.
A bone marrow biopsy was performed and revealed a normal cellularity, myeloid series: 60% shift to the left with eosinophilia, erythrocyte: 30%, hypo-megakaryocyt megaloblastic findings without megacaryoblast.
Parents refused to perform genetic testing.
X-rays of the upper limbs demonstrated a bilateral absence of the radii , whereas the lower limbs were normal .
Based on these physical findings, the low platelet count, and radiography results, the diagnosis of TAR syndrome was made.
The diarrhea stopped with lactose-free milk, then milk formula stage 1 feeding.
The managing of this case was not completed after discharging the patient under the responsibility of her parents.