A 22-years-old Caucasian female was referred to our department, complaining of a 5-year history of intermittent pain in her right knee. She did not suffer from any medical condition, she was not on any medications and never smoked. Her symptoms started insidiously, following a minor soft tissue injury (no fracture). On clinical examination, she was found to have a right knee effusion and limitation of movement (ROM 10-90°). She had severe pain over her knee. She could weight bear with significant discomfort. Her blood tests were all normal, including the coagulation screen and all inflammatory markers. The X-rays performed were unremarkable . An magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed which suggested the presence of a suprapatellar fluid collection with cysts arising from the synovium. Following these results, an arthroscopy was performed. The cysts were excised and biopsied. The biopsies revealed normal synovium. Following the procedure, the patient remained asymptomatic for approximately 3 years. She then returned with similar symptomatology. A second MRI was performed showed the presence of a suprapatellar fluid collection measuring 4.7 × 2.1 cm at the suprapatellar area. No hemosiderin was noted within the collection and no local erosion. Surgical exploration was performed, and a poorly encapsulated vascular mass was encountered extending from the distal belly of the vastus intermedius to the knee. Excessive use of electrocautery and ligation of the numerous vessels were performed during resection. The histological examination of the mass revealed a dilated vascular space containing fibrous papillary projections and organized thrombus. It was suggestive of IPEH (Masson’s Tumor) ( and ). The patient’s symptoms recurred 2 years later. An MRI scan was repeated showing a 1 × 3 × 10 cm cystic lesion of the distal anterior thigh. The patient was then referred to the vascular department for embolization of the vascular supply of the tumor. Following this procedure, the patient has recovered fully, and she now remains asymptomatic to date (5½ years follow-up).