A 75-year-old Caucasian male patient seeking treatment was referred to the School of Dental Medicine, University of Bern, Switzerland. Although the patient presented with a complex medical history involving a lung embolism, heart-acquired valvulopathy treated with an artificial biological valve, advanced diabetes mellitus with paresthesia of the limbs, and high blood pressure, under permanent anticoagulation treatment he was medically stable, being treated and annually reviewed at the Insel Hospital of Bern, Switzerland. The dental history revealed chronic sinusitis that had required several surgical interventions. Eight implants had previously been placed in the edentulous maxilla following bone augmentation procedures including a chin block, tabula externa skull bone, and sinus floor grafting on both sides of the maxilla. The patient was rehabilitated with a screw-retained IFCDP supported by seven of the eight dental implants (NobelActive; Nobel Biocare AB, Göteborg, Sweden) placed in 2010. One of the implants at the right maxillary canine site was not included in the IFCDP (Tapered Effect implant with a regular neck; Straumann, Basel, Switzerland) .
The patient had been attending regular follow-up appointments with a dental hygienist since the grafting procedure was performed, and the prosthesis was removed once a year for hygiene purposes. Over the course of 3 years post-prosthesis insertion, a deterioration of the peri-implant tissues became apparent, but the patient did not want surgical treatment of the inflammation due to his general condition and medical issues. He had already lost the implant at the right maxillary central incisor site due to advanced peri-implantitis.
At the 3-year follow-up appointment, the patient complained of a bad taste in the mouth, discomfort, and leakage of liquid from the mouth to the nose. The radiological examination revealed radiolucency around the posterior implants. In agreement with the patient’s maxillofacial surgeon and otorhinolaryngologist, a decision was made to remove and adapt the patient’s IFCDP to the existing implants prior to the surgical closure of the oroantral communication. Although the patient agreed to the treatment plan, he was not willing either to accept a removable prosthesis as a temporary solution or to leave his IFCDP for adjustments by a laboratory technician. Even though the patient had no financial limitations, he had canceled several appointments for this procedure over the course of a year due to his medical issues.
The dental treatment plan comprised the removal of IFCDP, assessment of the implants and peri-implant tissues, and diagnosis related to the oroantral communication. Because the patient demanded that he receive his fixed prosthesis immediately following the surgical intervention, and depending on the intraoperative findings, it was decided that the IFCDP should be adapted and stabilized with a recently introduced fixed attachment system (Locator F-Tx; Zest Dental Solutions, CA, USA) with the support of the unused implant at the right maxillary canine site. The dental records revealed the brand of the unused implant (Tapered Effect implant with a regular neck; Straumann, Basel, Switzerland), which was placed approximately 15 years ago.
After unscrewing the abutment screws, the IFCDP was removed, and the implant at the right maxillary second molar site came out spontaneously. Additionally, three mobile implants (right maxillary central incisor, left maxillary first premolar, left maxillary first molar) were removed due to complete loss of osseointegration. The three remaining implants (right maxillary canine, left maxillary central incisor and canine) were healthy. The oroantral communication due to peri-implant tissue loss became apparent .
After cleaning, because the posterior implants were lost, the IFCDP was trimmed distal to the first premolars and the trimmed surfaces were polished . The previously unused implant at the right canine site was accessible without the need for a surgical intervention, as it was not submerged, and an abutment with an attachment providing angular and rotational freedom (Locator F-Tx; Zest Dental Solutions, CA, USA) was tightened on this implant. The IFCDP was tried in confirming its correct positioning and to confirm whether there was adequate space for the later incorporation of the housing of the attachment system . The abutment was then tightened on the implant using a screwdriver and a torque wrench following the manufacturer’s instructions (35 Ncm) .
The IFCDP was gradually adjusted by grinding the acrylic resin using acrylic resin burrs to create sufficient space for the housing, and the acrylic resin surface to receive the matrix was roughened using acrylic resin burrs (Jota AG, Rüthi, Switzerland) . The abutment housing including the retentive matrix (processing inserts; black) was fixed on the attachment using the abutment driver, and its correct position in the prosthesis was confirmed . A block-out spacer was placed between the abutment and the abutment housing. The intaglio surface of the IFCDP to receive the housing was filled with self-polymerizing resin (Chairside Attachment Processing Material; Zest Dental Solutions), and the IFCDP was placed intraorally to incorporate the housing in the prosthesis. Then, the basal and vestibular parts were relined with a self-polymerizing poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) (UNIFAST Trad; GC Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) . The screws on the remaining implants were tightened. The occlusion was assessed to confirm proper seating. After the processing pick-up resin and PMMA had set, the abutment screws were loosened and the IFCDP was removed. The block-out spacer and the excess resin were removed, and the surfaces of the prosthesis were polished using dental silicone polishing burrs and finished with a polishing wheel (Edenta Exa Cerapol Mounted Grey HP polisher; SG, Switzerland). A universal paste was used for the resin (Renfert GmbH, Hilzingen, Germany).
The IFCDP was fixed on the new retentive abutment, and the abutment screws on the remaining implants were tightened using a torque-controlled screwdriver (35 Ncm). The fit and the occlusion were confirmed, and the screw access holes were first filled with Teflon strips and then composite resin (Telio CS, Ivoclar Vivadent, Schaan, Liechtenstein) .
Three months after the delivery of the repaired IFCDP, the patient developed a dialysis-dependent kidney insufficiency. After his kidney-related issue was stabilized by his medical doctors, he underwent surgical closure of the oroantral communications, which included decortication of the osteomyelitic foci in the maxilla and maxillary sinus floor, using intraoral access, and closure of the oroantral communication with a buccal fat pad pedicled flap. The patient was satisfied with the outcome and with the fact that the biological complications were managed by avoiding the need for additional grafting and implant placement . Later renewal of the IFCDP was deemed unlikely due to the difficult coordination of dialysis and dental appointments.
After the initial post-insertion adjustments, the follow-up visits were scheduled. The first appointment was 1 week after the prosthesis delivery and the subsequent follow-up appointments were 1, 3, and 6 months after the delivery. During the 3-month appointment, the black processing attachment was replaced by the blue low-retention attachment . During the follow-up period, no biological or technical complications were observed. The treatment timeline is displayed in Fig. .