A 27-year-old Chinese woman with hematuria and albuminuria for over 4 years was admitted to our nephrology department on December 15, 2019
After 1 mo of gross hematuria and frothy urine, the patient visited her local hospital for treatment in June 2015. Laboratory examinations showed the following: 24 h urine protein (UP) 3.09 g/d; serum albumin, 24.6 g/L; serum creatinine (Scr), 120 μmoL/L; immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE), serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), and autoimmune markers, including anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, that were negative. Histological examination of the renal biopsy at that time revealed moderate-to-severe MsPGN with crescent formation. The patient was given methylprednisolone injections (500 mg/d, 3 d in total, then 40 mg/d). A few days later, she was discharged, stopped taking the drugs on her own and then went to a private clinic in Hong Kong for further treatment. She had taken prednisone and cyclophosphamide (CTX) for 3 mo; CTX was then replaced by mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (the doses are unknown). This treatment was applied for 2 years, after which MMF was substituted with tacrolimus. The dosages were gradually reduced and then withdrawn on August 28, 2018, as prescribed. During this time, her 24 h UP fluctuated between 2 and 3 g/d, and her Scr level was in the 80 to 110 μmoL/L range. The nephritic syndrome relapsed in January 2019, and the previous specialist treated her with prednisone (500 mg/d, 3 d in total) and CTX (100 mg/d). CTX was replaced by MMF (1 g/d) 1 mo later because of severe hair loss and irregular menstruation. Prednisone was reduced gradually and then withdrawn completely in October 2019. The patient underwent a checkup on December 15, 2019, and her laboratory data were as follows: Scr, 92 μmoL/L; serum albumin, 38.3 g/L; UP, 3+; urine occult blood, 3+.
The patient had no diagnosed history of metabolic disease, coronary heart disease, or liver disease.
Slight pitting edema was noted in both lower extremities. Other physical features included a mild anemic appearance. No swelling of surface lymph nodes was found.
On admission, laboratory data revealed the following values: Hemoglobin (Hb), 71 g/L; Scr, 94 μmoL/L; serum uric acid, 528 μmoL/L; serum albumin, 24.6 g/L; globulin, 19.7 g/L; calcium, 1.97 mmoL/L; complement C3, 0.84 g/L; C4 0.19 g/L; UP, 2+; urine occult blood, 2+; 24 h UP, 1.1 g/d. Liver function was normal. We detected no anti-DNA, anti-glomerular basement membrane, or anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and no hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus (HCV), or human immunodeficiency virus. IFE and SPEP did not show any paraproteins, although the urine free light chain ratio (κ/λ) was as high as 6.7974. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis detected no enlarged lymph nodes.
No obvious abnormality.
The histological examination of the renal biopsy showed 27 glomeruli, 11 of which were globally sclerotic and 3 of which were segmentally sclerotic; no crescent was found. Marked mesangial cells and matrix proliferation were observed in the remaining glomeruli, with glomerular lobulation and focal endothelial hyperplasia. Segmental basement membrane thickening, mesangial interposition, and tram track signs were visible. Endocapillary proliferative changes were noted by electron microscopy. The glomerular capillary loops were compressed, and the lumen was stenotic. Segmental mesangial matrix interposition was found. Furthermore, electron-dense deposits were observed in the subendothelial and mesangial areas; at the ultrastructural level, the deposits were not fibrillary or microtubular structures. Part of the interstitial region was infiltrated by inflammatory cells .
Immunohistology revealed positive petaloid deposition of IgG (3+), C3 (2+), IgM (1+), and C1q (+/-) along the capillary loops; IgA and fibrinogen (Fib) were negative. According to additional tests, IgG3 (3+), Kappa (3+), Lambda (1+), IgG1, IgG2, IgG4, phospholipase A2 receptor, thrombospondin type-1 domain-containing 7A, ascorbic acid, HCV, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e antigen, hepatitis B core antigen, and Congo red and oxide Congo red staining were positive .
The clinicians who previously treated this patient kindly provided the glass slides of her first renal biopsy specimens. To determine the nature of the deposits, cryosections were freshly prepared for light chain and IgG subclass staining, and subsequent immunofluorescence analyses of these samples confirmed monoclonal deposition of IgG3κ in the glomeruli .
Bone marrow smears showed hyperplasia of the granulocyte series, erythron series, and megakaryocytic series. Biopsy revealed active bone marrow proliferation, without any obvious mutant cells. A bone marrow flow cytometry immunofluorescence assay indicated no immunophenotypic abnormal evidence of multiple myeloma, acute leukemia, plasma cells, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, or high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome. Multiple myeloma-associated gene mutation analysis, karyotype analysis of bone marrow chromosomes, and fluorescence in situ hybridization, including Vysis TP53/CEP17, cytocell RB1(13q14), Vysis IGH, and cytocell CKS1B/CDKN2C(P18), were all negative.