A 42-year-old female patient presented at a regional hospital complaining of retrosternal pain and shortness of breath on moderate efforts that started 2 weeks before. Pulmonary thromboembolism was initially suspected; however, chest computed tomography angiography ruled out this diagnostic hypothesis.
The patient had undergone a hysterectomy 2 years earlier due to leiomyoma. She had been experiencing pelvic pain during the past 6 months. An abdominal ultrasound performed 2 months prior to presentation showed an apparently vascularized left periovarian solid mass with an approximate volume of 90 mL. Surgery for resection of the mass was scheduled but could not be performed because of abrupt onset of the current symptoms suggestive of heart failure.
The patient was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation. On admission, her vital signs were within normal limits. On physical examination, we disclosed a regular cardiac rhythm, hypophonic first heart sound, and a regurgitation murmur at the left inferior sternal border associated with an increased v wave venous pulse on internal jugular vein compatible with tricuspid regurgitation. A transthoracic echocardiography performed in the emergency room revealed a mobile and well-defined mass measuring ∼3.0 × 1.6 cm located in the right ventricular cavity, apparently adhered to the interventricular septum, and a probable thickening of the tricuspid subvalvar apparatus and severe tricuspid regurgitation . The right ventricle (RV) was enlarged with depressed systolic function. Left ventricle (LV) dimension and systolic function were normal. As it was not clear if the mass was a thrombus or a tumour, the patient underwent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging which revealed two large and independent masses in the right ventricular cavity . Both lesions were iso-intense to the signal of myocardial tissue on T1 and T2-weighted imaging. The first-pass gadolinium-enhanced perfusion imaging showed heterogeneous nature of flow of contrast suggesting vascularity within the masses and both showed heterogeneous late gadolinium enhancement. These characteristics suggested the tumoural nature of the masses and ruled out the hypothesis of thrombus . The largest one, measuring 5.3 × 2.7 cm, was adhered to the anterior face of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and was responsible for a significant RVOT obstruction. The second tumour presented as a multilobulated, pedunculated, and mobile mass attached to the interventricular septum. Right ventricle enlargement and moderate global systolic deficit (estimated ejection fraction of 39%) were found and both were attributed to the RVOT obstruction. Mild pericardial effusion and bilateral pleural effusion were also observed.
Because of the significant obstruction of the RVOT, surgical treatment was mandatory. An operation was performed through median sternotomy with standard bicaval cardiopulmonary bypass. The two masses described in the CMR were carefully resected. A third small neoformation was intraoperatively detected on the tricuspid valve, adhered to the ventricular face of the anterior leaflet and to the chordae . A significant segment of the anterior leaflet was resected along with the mass and a valve replacement with bioprosthesis (St. Jude Medical Stented Porcine 31 mm) was performed. The masses were well capsulated without signs of local spread in the surrounding myocardial tissue. At gross examination, they had a nodular, fragmented appearance, elastic consistency, and presented a smooth whitish-yellow capsule. The surgery was performed with no complications and the immediate postoperative course was uneventful.
Histologic examination revealed a mesenchymal neoplasm consisting of spindle cells with predominantly uniform nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm, arranged in long bundles amid collagenized stroma and resembling smooth muscle cells. No mitosis, areas of necrosis, or signs of malignancy were found. A vascular component of varying calibre was observed, sometimes showing thickened walls and permeating the tumour . A segment of the cardiac valve accompanied the specimen and had a normal histological appearance.
Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells expressed desmin and caldesmon , corroborating smooth muscle differentiation. In addition, tumour cells were strongly positive for oestrogen receptors which is supportive of origin in female genital tissues. From both the histologic and immunohistochemistry examination the final diagnosis was cardiac leiomyoma.
The gynaecology team started to monitor the case immediately after cardiac surgery due to the knowledge of a previously identified pelvic mass which could be palpated through physical examination. The patient underwent a magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis. A heterogeneous solid mass was found in the left paramedian situation of the pelvic cavity, measuring about 8.1 × 8.0 × 6.9 cm, in close contact with the left ovary and suggestive of leiomyoma .
Due to the large size of the mass, it was decided to extract it immediately. On the 10th postoperative day of the cardiac procedure, the patient underwent pelvic tumour resection surgery. The tumour’s morphological aspect was suggestive of leiomyoma. The surgical procedure was performed with no complications.
Histologic analysis of the surgical specimen revealed proliferation of myoid spindle cells without atypia, mitosis, or necrosis , compatible with the diagnosis of leiomyoma. The tumour cells expressed desmin and caldesmon , corroborating smooth muscle differentiation.
Postoperative echocardiography revealed no residual cardiac mass, good function of the tricuspid prosthetic valve, and normal RV size and systolic function. The patient was discharged from hospital in good clinical and haemodynamic conditions with a final diagnosis of BML to the RV, tricuspid valve, and pelvic leiomyoma. Four months after hospital discharge, the patient reported being in good physical condition and denied any complications.