A 61-year-old right-handed man without particular history, or risk factors presented for otorhinolaryngology consultation after 48 h cervicalgia, dysphonia, swallowing and cognitive disorders. Examination found a right central facial palsy, a nasal voice, a rightward deviation of the tongue on protraction, an asymmetric soft palate and hanging curtain sign affecting the right side. Nasal endoscopy found right hemipharyngeal and hemilaryngeal paresis and right pyriform sinus stasis. No headache was reported. The patient showed slowed ideomotor response without detectable cognitive impairment, on usual cognitive battery (MMSE = 29/30, normal Batterie Rapide d’Efficience Fronatle (BREF), Dubois and clock-drawing tests).
Brain computed tomography (CT) scan found frontal and left temporal cortical and subcortical edema. On brain CT angiography, there was an ectatic aspect of the distal branch of the right middle cerebral artery . Cerebral catheter angiography found a focal fusiform enlargement of the distal cervical portion of the right internal carotid artery, related to a pseudo-aneurysm suggesting an evolution of a dissection, above which a string of beads suggesting a dysplastic artery . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) found frontal (left predominant) and left temporal hyperintensities on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences accompanied with hypointensities on T1, high intensity signal on diffusion-weighted sequences and increased apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). It also showed numerous punctiform cortical hyposignals adjacent to areas of white-matter infiltration on T2-weighted gradient echo sequences. There was no contrast uptake and moderate mass effect ( and ). On spectroscopy, NAA/Cr and Cho/Cr ratios were normal. There was however a slight lipid–lactate peak at 1.33 ppm . On perfusion sequences, relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) was low . Standard biological assessment was normal except for CRP at 20 mg/L (normal value < 5 mg/L). HIV, HBV, HCV and syphilis serology and immune assessment were normal. Cryoglobulinemia was negative. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal with no intrathecal immunoglobulin secretion, and normal angiotensin conversion enzyme (ACE) level. Tau and phospho-tau-181 protein levels were normal, at 335 ng/L (Alzheimer’s threshold, >350 ng/L) and 44 ng/L (Alzheimer’s threshold, >60 ng/L), respectively. β-amyloid 1-40 was normal at 10.05 ng/L. β-amyloid 1-42 was low at 436 ng/L (Alzheimer’s threshold, >700 ng/L) and β-amyloid 1-42/1-40 ratio was 0.043 (Alzheimer’s threshold, >0.075), in favor of amyloid deposits. Thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT was normal. A positron emission tomography (PET)-scan was performed and was normal with no arguments for aortitis and vasculitis.
Right frontal cerebral biopsy (arrow on ) found thick-walled arachnoid and cortical vessels, without perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, granuloma or giant cells. Specific staining revealed congophilic amyloid deposits . Genotype analysis showed that the patient was homozygous for the ε4 variant of apolipoprotein E.
The patient received 1 g intravenous methylprednisolone, after cerebral biopsy was made, for 3 consecutive days, then 1 mg/kg corticosteroids daily, progressively tapered over 6 months. At 3-month follow-up, the facial palsy had regressed, the conversational voice was of good quality, swallowing was restored and there was no more cognitive disorders. After 6-month treatment, CSF analysis was normal, tau protein levels had decreased to 241 ng/L, and β-amyloid 1-40 and 1-42 levels were stable, respectively, 10.37 and 443 ng/L. Control brain MRI showed clear regression of FLAIR hypersignals .