A 60-year-old Hispanic origin woman with no relevant history consulted for a 2-month evolution of constitutional symptoms, malaise, low-grade fever, chills, and dyspnea that had progressed from medium effort to rest over the course of a few days before consultation. She worked as a secretary in a home appliances shop. She had no history of hypertension, diabetes, or asthma and no cigarette, alcohol, or drug use or exposure to particulate matter or chemical substances. She had had two cesarean sections, the last one 30 years prior. Her father died of coronary disease at 80 years of age, and her mother died of a cerebral ischemic event at 75 years of age. She did not refer to cough, chest or joint pain, hemoptysis, rash, gastrointestinal symptoms, syncope, or neurological compromise, and she denied leaving her city of residence during the last 6 months, having pets, or taking specific medications.
Her physical examination on admission revealed the following: blood pressure (BP) of 82/57 mmHg, heart rate of 81 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/minute, and body temperature of 38.3 °C. The patient was alert, afebrile, hydrated, with pale mucous membranes, and without signs of respiratory distress. Her neck was without lymphadenopathy or jugular engorgement. Symmetric thorax with normal expansion and rhythmic heart without galloping, friction rub, or murmurs were observed. She had diminished breath sounds in both lung bases, in the abdomen, with no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, no edema in the lower limbs, and no skin lesions. The result of her neurological evaluation was normal.
Laboratory tests revealed the following values: hemoglobin 9 mg/dl, leukocytes count 10,200 per microliter, neutrophils 75%, lymphocytes 15%, platelets in normal range, creatinine 0.9 mg/dl, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 350 mg/dl, liver test results within normal parameters, and normal urinalysis. Her rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, perinuclear and cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and VDRL (i.e., Venereal Disease Research Laboratory) test results were negative. Her test results for hepatitis and HIV were negative. Her C-reactive protein was 30 mg/ml, thyroid-stimulating hormone 15 μIU/ml, and B-type natriuretic peptide 1553 pg/ml. An echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60%. Moderate pericardial effusion that could explain the presence of BP 82/57 mmHg as an incipient sign of cardiac tamponade was observed. A thoracic computed tomographic (CT) scan revealed free bilateral pleural effusion, pericardial thickening, and pericardial effusion without enlarged lymph nodes . Thoracentesis was performed, which produced a straw-colored fluid with a predominance of lymphocytes, and the result of cytology was negative for malignancy. No flow cytometry was performed. The results of direct examination and cultures for bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi were negative, as were those for blood cultures, urine cultures, and GeneXpert (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) evaluation for tuberculosis. The patient’s presentation evolved with persistent fever, so treatment for hypothyroidism was initiated. The effusion persisted, and for determination of a lymphoproliferative disease, the patient underwent bone marrow and hepatic biopsies, the results of which were inconclusive. A thoracoscopy was subsequently performed for biopsies of the pleura and pericardium and a new study of the fluid. During this procedure, when the pericardium was approached, an accidental rupture of the left ventricle occurred, which, owing to the local inflammatory process, was tightly adhered to the pericardium.
This rupture was immediately recognized, and the ventricle was sutured during the same procedure with the assistance of the cardiovascular surgery group without instant additional complications. Before the surgical procedure, the patient received antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin 2 g intravenously, and after the rupture she received cefepime 2 g intravenously every 8 hours and vancomycin 15 mg/kg intravenously for 7 days.
Biopsy of the serosal membranes showed pleura and pericardium with collagenization and fibrosis. Flow cytometry of the pleural fluid revealed a positive cell population for CD45, CD38, and HLA-DR that was negative for B and T lymphoid cell line markers. In the cell block, a lymphoid population was identified, which by IHC expressed CD45, CD38, EMA, myeloperoxidase, and HHV-8 and was negative for CD20, CD79a, CD3, CD5, CD56, BCL2, BCL6, CD117, HLA-DR, CD15, CD30, and EBV latent membrane protein 1, confirming a diagnosis of primary serous lymphoma associated with HHV-8 .
Treatment was initiated with chemotherapy, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone, eight cycles in total. The initial clinical picture improved, with effervescence of the fever and constitutional symptoms. The patient was discharged to continue outpatient management by the hemato-oncology department and has remained without evidence of disease recurrence for 2 years. Regarding the cardiac lesion, the patient had follow-up with ultrasound and CT that evidenced preservation of ventricular function and the appearance of a large ventricular pseudoaneurysm that has remained stable over time . The patient currently has a good functional status without chest pain or dyspnea and continues being seen as an outpatient by the cardiology department. She denied accepting the option of surgery to correct the cardiac injury that was offered after evaluation of the case in conjunction with cardiovascular surgery. She has been seen by the cardiology team twice each year for two consecutive years.