A 34-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of paresthesia of his left foot. On examination, he had impairment of dorsal column sensation in both feet, with intactness of other modalities of sensation, and preserved motor and bladder functions. He had no other comorbidities in the form of diabetes or coagulation disorders. He had not undergone any previous surgical procedures. He was on a short course of gabapentin prior to the diagnosis. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed an intradural extramedullary lesion arising from the T8 root on the left side compressing the spinal cord.
He underwent surgery for excision of the tumor. Under general anesthesia, a subspinous laminectomy was performed from T7 to T9, and the tumor was approached intradurally on the left side.
In subspinous laminectomy, the interspinous ligament on the distal limit of the laminectomy is cut and the spinous processes of the desired vertebrae are cut using angled bone-cutting forceps and turned proximally by preserving the interspinous ligament on the proximal limit of the laminectomy. On completion of the procedure, the spinous processes are sutured back.
A radicular vessel was seen dorsal to the tumor which was preserved. Intracapsular debulking was performed and the tumor was excised following resection of the dorsal nerve root from which the capsule was seen to arise. The tumor was yellowish-grey and bilobed and was sent for histopathologic examination. The dura was closed in the standard fashion and gel foam and a dural patch were placed epidurally. A subfascial gravity drain was placed. No suction was applied, as is the standard procedure following durotomy. Adequate hemostasis was achieved. The patient recovered from anesthesia with normal neurology. He was progressing well for the first 2 days following surgery. He was kept on log rolling (i.e. simultaneous turning of shoulder, back and pelvis with assistance) and assisted with movements of the limbs.
On the first postoperative day (POD), the drain collected 150 ml which was predominantly altered blood. During the second POD, the drain collected 200 ml which contained cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) mixed with altered blood. On the third POD, drain was 150 ml of clear CSF, indicating that hemostasis was adequate in the immediate postoperative period.
After 72 hours, our patient experienced stabbing pain in his back with radiation to the legs following repeated unassisted voluntary twisting of the body, despite being advised of the need for strict log rolling. A fresh streak of blood was observed in the drain by the attending clinician when the pain was experienced. Gradually, the patient complained of progressive numbness of both his lower limbs with deterioration in motor power to grade 3 with sensory impairment from T10 downwards. The time interval from the onset of pain to neurological deterioration was 2 hours. His motor power deteriorated further to grade 0, with complete anesthesia below T10, within a further short period of about 1 hour. By this time, the drain showed the collection of more fresh blood. This alerted us to the possibility of a bleed producing a neurological deficit. The patient was started on methylprednisolone as per the NASCIS 3 protocol . His coagulation profile was checked and was found to be normal.
Emergency spinal imaging was advised. Although MRI is the investigation of choice, it could not be carried out due to technical faults in the machinery. Hence, an emergency computed tomography (CT) scan with reconstruction was performed which showed a large extradural hematoma at the level of the surgical laminectomy. The patient underwent emergency re-exploration 3 hours following the onset of neurological deficit. There was a large hematoma (4.5 cm × 7 cm × 5 cm and approximately 150 ml) on the right side, extending into the epidural space and compressing the cord . The blood clot had pushed away the sutured spinous process superiorly and to the left. The hematoma was evacuated. It was bright red in color suggesting a fresh arterial source. While removing the clot, active arterial spurting from vessels in the right paraspinal muscles was observed at two sites and these were promptly coagulated. No active bleeding from the epidural space was seen. The dura was reopened, but there was no blood collection inside. Neural tissues were found to be normal. Dural closure was performed. Cord pulsation was felt. Spinous processes were removed and paraspinal muscle closure was performed over an epidural drain. A second drain was used in the supramuscular plane. The skin was approximated using subcuticular sutures.
Immediately postoperatively, the patient regained motor power and sensations. He had grade 4 power of both lower limbs and mild paresthesia. He showed good motor and sensory recovery during the following week. Methylprednisolone was continued for 24 hours. He was mobilized cautiously with particular instruction not to strain. He had an uneventful recovery.