A 62-year-old man with lower abdominal pain was admitted to our hospital. Fever and gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhea were not observed. The patient had no history of surgery or significant family medical history. Physical examination indicated a soft abdomen with tenderness in the right lower quadrant. Laboratory test results revealed mild leukocytosis (11,400/μL) and increased C-reactive protein levels (22.65 mg/dL). Abdominal computed tomography revealed swelling at the tip of the appendix with surrounding inflammation, leading to the diagnosis of acute appendicitis . Laparoscopic appendectomy was performed on the same day. Intraoperatively, inflammatory white pus was observed in the lower abdominal region involving the small bowel mesenterium, abdominal peritoneum, and omentum . The appendix was severely inflamed and adhered to the surrounding small bowel. Additionally, a small amount of dirty ascites was observed. The adhesions were gently mobilized. Thereafter, appendectomy was performed using two endoloops® PDS® at the root of the appendix . The patient experienced good postoperative recovery and was discharged in good condition on postoperative day seven.
The histopathological examination of the specimen collected during appendectomy revealed GCA (according to the 5th edition of the World Health Organization classification). The macroscopic examination revealed that the resected appendix had a 40- × 11- × 6-mm lesion with a positive proximal resection margin . The histopathological examination indicated that the tumor contained small lumina comprising goblet-like cells, and some tumor cell clusters lacked lumina and displayed small groups of cohesive goblet-like cells . Low-grade patterns comprised less than 50%, so we categorized this case as grade G3. On the immunohistochemical examination, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and various number of endocrine cells were positive for synaptophysin, and chromogranin A . Since the histopathological examination revealed GCA and pT4a, an additional ileocecal resection was planned. Additional laboratory test results showed carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 levels of 1.1 ng/mL and 13 U/mL, respectively. Laparoscopy was performed 1 month after appendectomy, and white nodules were observed throughout the abdominal cavity: raising the suspicion of peritoneal dissemination . Using the intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis method, these nodules were diagnosed as adenocarcinomas and considered inoperable. The Peritoneal Carcinomatosis Index was considered to be 18. Postoperative positron emission tomography showed scattered thickening of the pelvic peritoneum but no accumulation. The patient received chemotherapy and remained alive and progression-free for 6 months after surgery.