A 24 years-old man (height: 185 cm; weight: 78 kg) with a history of dilated cardiomyopathy, pulmonary hypertension, severe mitral insufficiency, and moderate tricuspid insufficiency was admitted with a New York Heart Association (NYHA) cardiac function rating of IV and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20%. He received extensive medical treatment to increase myocardial contractility, reduce pulmonary hypertension and control heart rate. Unfortunately, the patient developed persistent systemic hypoperfusion with CS. He was given temporary left ventricular assist using a magnetic levitation extra-VAD device. Before implantation, ultrasound examination showed left ventricular dilatation (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter 9.5 cm), systolic dysfunction [left ventricular ejection fraction 13%; arterial blood pressure 80/60 mmHg; N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 2,910 pg/ml], and pulmonary artery systolic blood pressure of 57 mmHg.
To circumvent the difficulties of atrial septal puncture through the jugular vein, puncture through the femoral vein was performed. A guide wire was inserted through the right femoral vein puncture to achieve right heart catheterization under the guidance of ultrasound and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) (, and a snare was placed in the right atrium along the femoral vein guide wire . The catheter was delivered through the right jugular vein, captured by a snare, and placed into the left atrium along the femoral vein guide wire . A drainage tube was placed using the guide wire approach to establish a drainage path through the jugular vein, superior vena cava, right atrium, and atrial septum to the left atrium . Finally, the axillary artery was exposed and blocked under the right clavicle, an 8 mm artificial blood vessel was anastomosed end-to-side, and the outflow tube was inserted to establish left atrium-extra-VAD-axillary artery circulation assistance. The pump flow was set at approximately 3 L/min and the speed was 2,500 rpm.
Hemodynamic and hematological parameters were monitored throughout extra-VAD implantation, and indicated good recovery. No hemolysis-related complications occurred , and liver and kidney function were unaffected . Heparin was used for anticoagulation therapy to maintain the target activated coagulation time (ACT) between 180 and 220 s and maintain the target activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) between 40 and 55 s . High-sensitivity troponin I reached 2,985.1 ng/L postoperatively and rapidly decreased to 647.7 ng/L on the second postoperative day. Similarly, lactic acid levels decreased to 0.6 mmol/L the day after surgery and remained between 0.4 and 1.0 mmol/L thereafter. These results indicated a rapid improvement in cardiac function. The extra-VAD device was removed 10 days later, and ultrasound results showed a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 7.6 cm. The patient subsequently underwent a successful heart transplant.