A 47-year-old male Han Chinese motor-repair worker was admitted to the department of ophthalmology of our hospital due to massive hemorrhage in his left eye after he bit an automobile tire tube at 12:00 a.m. on February 9, 2011. The physical examination revealed extensive rupture of the tarsal plate of his left upper eyelid, and lacrimal canaliculus rupture and bulbar conjunctival hemorrhage were observed. A computed tomography (CT) scan indicated subarachnoid hemorrhage. No abnormality was observed after abdominal ultrasound examination. A chest X-ray indicated pulmonary contusion (60% of the total volume).
Closed drainage of his right pleural cavity was performed via the second intercostal space at 4:00 p.m. on February 10, 2011. Sudden chest pain was reported by the patient 12 hours later. A physical examination showed that his heart rate was 120 beats per minute, his temperature was 38°C, his blood pressure was normal, and his respiratory rate was 25 breaths per minute. Chest ultrasound detection was then performed, which revealed severe pleural effusion in his right thoracic cavity. Subsequently, closed drainage of the pleural cavity was performed via the seventh intercostal space, and approximately 800mL of yellow hydrothorax was extracted. A chest CT and barium swallow examination showed an irregular tear in the middle and lower portions of his esophagus . The patient was then transferred to our department of thoracic surgery immediately. For the treatment, drainage of empyema (right chest), removal of thoracic esophagus, exposure of cervical esophagus, cardiac ligation and gastrostomy were performed respectively. Severe inflammation of his right thoracic cavity was observed during the operation. There was a large amount of purulent secretion (approximately 1500mL) in his right thoracic cavity. As exposure of cervical esophagus was noticed during the operation, an ostomy bag (ConvaTec Shanghai Ltd., Shanghai, China) was used to collect the secretions (e.g. saliva) from his esophagus. Meanwhile, gastrostomy feeding and therapeutic antibiotics (10 days) were given. The patient could drink water 72 hours later. The water could directly flow to the ostomy bag. The patient was discharged 10 days later. A successful esophagogastrostomy was obtained 3 months after the first surgery using a gastric tube (4cm in width) constructed from the greater gastric curvature.