A 32-year-old woman presented with a 3-week history of persistent headaches, increased thirst, polyuria and blurred vision. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) demonstrated a large suprasellar aneurysm . Diagnostic angiography revealed a left supraclinoid segment bilobulated aneurysm projecting into the pituitary fossa. Formal visual field examination revealed partial bitemporal visual field defects. Her endocrine work-up confirmed the presence of hypopituitarism and DI. Supplementation was begun according to the endocrine service recommendations. After a careful discussion of all options, the patient declined surgical clipping/reconstruction but consented to endovascular occlusion.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was fully heparinized and a 6-French shuttle sheath (Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA) was placed in the cervical segment of the left internal carotid artery. Initially, and in order to prevent coil migration from the proximal lobule, two Prowler Select Plus microcatheters (Cordis Endovascular, Miami Lakes, FL, USA) were navigated into the distal and proximal aneurysmal lobules, respectively. Then, an undeployed GDC (Guglielmi Detachable Coil, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was advanced in the distal lobule with the intent of tamponading the coils deployed in the proximal lobule. Multiple attempts at coiling the proximal lobule only failed, and we employed the reported approach.
A Hyperform balloon (MicroTherapeutics, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) was positioned inside the distal lobule, and a Prowler Select Plus catheter was navigated in the proximal one. The balloon was inflated to its maximum capacity and brought to the entrance of the distal lobule. Then, a GDC coil was advanced into the proximal lobule but not deployed. A follow-up imaging run demonstrated appropriate coil positioning, sparing the distal lobule . This coil was deployed and the proximal lobule was successively coiled with a combination of GDC and Hydrocoils (Micro Vention, Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA, USA). Next, the Prowler Select Plus was withdrawn and the distal lobule deflated by deflating and back bleeding the intra-aneurysmal balloon .
Finally, in order to withdraw the intra-aneurysmal balloon without disturbing the coil mass, a second balloon (Hyperglide, MicroTherapeutics, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) was advanced and inflated across the aneurysm neck and the intra-aneurysmal balloon was slowly removed .
Post-procedural angiography demonstrated a stable coil mass and complete occlusion of the aneurysm.
The patient was discharged 5 days later. Over the following weeks, she had progressive resolution of polyuric episodes. Three years after treatment, her angiogram revealed a stable coil mass and persistent aneurysmal obliteration . The patient was no longer in DI, but remained in hypopituitarism. Her blurred vision has resolved, and the visual field deficits have improved.