Right upper abdominal pain for 11 d.
A 58-year-old Chinese man presented with right upper abdominal pain without obvious predisposing factors 11 d prior to the visit. The symptom was not associated with eating and body position. He experienced no nausea or vomiting, no chills or fever, and no significant weight loss.
Right inguinal hernia surgery had been performed at another hospital 3 years prior to the present visit.
No history of hepatitis and family or genetic history was claimed.
Physical examination showed a flat and soft abdomen without tenderness and rebound pain, and no palpable mass was found. The rest of the physical examination showed no abnormalities.
Cholesterol (5.3 mmol/L) and low density lipoprotein (3.78 mmol/L) were elevated. Routine blood, liver function, renal function and prothrombin tests were normal. Complete quantitative detection of hepatitis B was negative. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were normal.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) and hepatic vascular imaging showed that there was a cystic-solid hypodense mass with a size of approximate 99 mm × 92 mm in the right liver. Septa, which were slightly enhanced along with the solid parenchyma, were visible in the mass. The right hepatic vein was displaced due to the compression of the mass supplied by the right hepatic artery . Abdominal CE-magnetic resonance imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed: (1) A cystic-solid mass with low signal on T1-weighted imaging and high signal on T2-weighted imaging in the right liver, about 101 mm × 98 mm in size; (2) multiple uneven septa and fluid-fluid levels in the lesion; (3) DWI and apparent diffusion coefficient showed high signal and high B value, respectively; and (4) after enhancement, solid components and internal septa of the tumor were significantly enhanced accompanied by unenhanced cystic components .
Ultrasound (US) examination showed a 123 mm × 98 mm mixed-echo mass with regular shape and clear boundary in the right liver. The anechoic dark area was the main portion of the mass. The parenchymatous septa with uneven thickness were visible in the mass in which no obvious parasitic body sonogram was found. Color Doppler flow imaging showed punctate blood flow signals in the mass. CEUS showed that the peripheral and internal septa of the tumor were hyper-enhanced in the arterial phase, iso-enhanced in the portal and delayed phases, and unenhanced in the anechoic area in these three phases . Based on the above-mentioned examination, the mass was preliminarily identified as hepatic cystadenoma.