A 62-year-old male with a history of sarcoidosis and rheumatoid arthritis on adalimumab presented to the emergency department (ED) with a 4- to 5-day history of a minimally productive cough, fever, and dyspnea. He had previously called his primary care physician’s office and had a negative COVID-19 screen and was put on, but did not start, oral levofloxacin. The patient had no hemoptysis, no nausea or vomiting, and no abdominal pain. He was a nonsmoker. Vital signs at triage were blood pressure 127/68 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 112 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 38 breaths per minute, and temperature 103.3º Fahrenheit (39.6º Celsius). The patient’s oxygen saturation was 96% on room air at rest, although it would drop to the high 80s with minimal exertion. He had bilateral rhonchi on exam. He was hyponatremic with a sodium of 129 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (reference range: 135–145 mEq/L). White blood cell count was 11.4×103 per microliter (μl) (4.5–11×103 μl), which was 83% neutrophils (40–75%). A CXR was performed and read as negative. Point-of-care ultrasound was performed after the negative radiograph. The ultrasound showed multiple B-lines with skip lesions and small consolidations .
Despite the negative CXR, the POCUS coupled with the presentation maintained pneumonia as the primary differential. Given the hypoxia and tachypnea the patient was admitted and started on a combination therapy of ceftriaxone and doxycycline. Chest computed tomography angiography was performed by the inpatient team to investigate for pulmonary embolus after the COVID-19 test was resulted negative. The study showed bilateral multifocal areas of irregular consolidation and nodularity . Ground-glass opacities and infiltrates were seen within the posterior aspects of the lower lobes. Ultimately, a urine antigen test for Legionella pneumophila was positive and his antibiotic therapy was switched to intravenous (IV) levofloxacin. With the addition of albuterol nebulizer treatment, the patient’s clinical course improved over the next couple of days. He was discharged on day three of admission and continued seven more days of levofloxacin.