A 61-year-old woman with diabetes and history of COVID-19 infection 3 weeks prior to presentation, was admitted to the emergency department on August 10, 2021, with a sudden onset of with severe pain left upper limb absent pulses, pallor, color changes of left hand, fixed mottling index and middle fingers. There was no history of trauma or neck manipulation. Initial electrocardiogram and Transthoracic echography were normal. The patient’s initial blood investigations were not significantly abnormal, with a negative PCR result for COVID-19.
The patient immediately underwent Duplex imaging, that showed acutely thrombosed and distended left ulnar artery just after its origin by few centimeters in the forearm with damped monophasic flow in the proximal segment and no flow in the rest of its segment till wrist level. Acutely thrombosed and distended left radial artery at the wrist level and its segmental course in the snuff box and hand (flow PSV nearly 5 cm/s) was also noted. The radial artery in its course in forearm showed poor filling with weak monophasic flow. Left brachial artery was patent with low PSV pattern.
Attempted thrombectomy from brachial artery was done first under local anesthesia then under general anesthesia due to severe pain. This was followed by exposure of radial and ulnar arteries just above her left wrist. Arteries filled with old, organized thrombi with no back flow. Next day nerve block was done with chemical symathectomy to improve to improve flow. Follow-up Duplex showed the subclavian, axillary and brachial arteries appear were seen patent with biphasic pattern and with no areas of segmental occlusion. The upper two-thirds of the left ulnar artery was seen patent with irregular lumen; however, its distal segment is seen attenuated and occluded. The lower two-thirds of the left radial artery was also seen attenuated and occluded.
On the third day, the patient had severe cervical and occipital pain with radiation to the left arm, repeated attacks of vertigo and vomiting, heaviness of the left upper limb with limb dysmetria and visual field defect. Computed tomography (CT) and MRI of the brain were done and showed left cerebellar, left occipital, right thalamic and right occipital recent infarctions .
128multislice CT Angiography of aortic arch, neck arteries, carotid and cerebral arteries was done and showed aortic arch appears to the left side with normal arrangement of its branches. The left subclavian artery showed focal dissection at its origin with intimal flap extending for a distance about 17 mm, and the vertebral arteries appeared well opacified bilaterally up to the skull base and the basilar artery. Otherwise, no significant CT angiography of the intra and extracranial arterial circulation . The patient was put on full dose anticoagulation.
During the patient’s whole emergency stay, he rather remained hemodynamically and clinically stable, with no new symptoms reported apart from those reported during the third day of admission, and she is currently being followed up with the neurologist, geriatrician, and vascular surgeon in the outpatient department.