A Hispanic female in her 40s presented to the ED approximately six hours after inserting a cylindrical deodorant container into her rectum. After discussing anal sex with friends, she became curious and inserted the deodorant canister into her rectum. The patient became distressed by her inability to remove the object and developed dull, diffuse lower abdominal pain that radiated to her rectum. Upon ED presentation, she was in moderate discomfort, lying in the lateral decubitus position.
On physical exam, the patient’s vital signs were normal; additionally, there was diffuse tenderness to palpation of the lower abdomen. On inspection of the perineal area, there were no signs of external trauma or other abnormalities noted. A hard, cylindrical structure was palpable approximately five centimeters (cm) into the rectum on digital rectal exam, posteriorly displaced from the anal orifice. The patient was given morphine four milligrams (mg) intravenously, and then an abdominal kidney-ureter-bladder (KUB) radiograph was ordered for evaluation of RFB. The key findings of the KUB included “a cylindrical lucency projecting over the rectum consistent with inserted foreign object” .
Based on the patient’s presentation and radiographic findings, extraction of the canister in the ED was attempted. Prior to the procedure, the patient was placed on a cardiac monitor with pulse oximetry, and given supplemental oxygen before receiving lorazepam 2 mg for anxiety, and later 4 mg morphine sulfate for pain, to facilitate the procedure. To extract the canister, three successive methods were used. The patient was placed in a lateral decubitus position, and a lubricated finger was inserted into the rectum to locate the canister (manual extraction method). Once located, a second finger on the opposite hand was inserted into the anus to gain traction with one finger on each side of the canister and pull the object out of the anus. Unfortunately, the anal orifice did not allow enough space for two fingers to be inserted far enough to obtain traction sufficient for removal.
Next, a lubricated finger was used to guide a coudé catheter past the canister, using the first finger for guidance (coudé catheter method). Then, the catheter balloon was inflated with saline and traction applied to dislodge the canister. This was unsuccessful, likely because the catheter was not rigid enough to apply the necessary pressure for extraction. Finally, a lubricated finger was used to guide a set of ring forceps around the canister. Traction was applied to the forceps while squeezing to maintain contact with the canister (forceps method). This was attempted three times, but the forceps dislodged each time. On a fourth attempt, we maneuvered the canister from its posteriorly displaced position to a position in line with the anal orifice using the forceps. Once in this position, we applied gentle traction to remove the RFB; the deodorant canister measured approximately 11.5 cm in length by 3.5 cm in diameter.
Following the extraction, the patient had complained of persistent abdominal discomfort. Therefore, an intravenous contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was ordered to evaluate for perforation or damage to the bowel. Only mild rectal wall thickening without free air or signs of perforation was seen on CT.