A 61-year-old woman with cytologically determined high-grade squamous epithelial lesion (HSIL) visited the outpatient clinic of the Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University on June 22, 2018.
In May 2018, the patient’s cytological examination still indicated HSIL. She came to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient underwent hysterectomy for a cervical HSIL in 2013 at a local hospital. She did not visit the hospital after surgery. In May 2017, she had slight vaginal bleeding and was cytologically diagnosed with HSIL. A vaginal low-grade squamous epithelial lesion (LSIL) was confirmed by colposcopy-directed biopsy. She was followed for one year.
A doctor at the clinic performed the gynecological examination and simultaneously took HPV samples. On June 29, 2018, the patient was referred to the colposcopic center in our hospital with a positive HPV 16 result. A colposcopy sample was taken and indicated HSIL. However, the left vaginal apex was too deep to be fully exposed.
HPV16+.
Therefore, we performed curettage. The biopsy results suggested LSIL in the vaginal wall and HSIL with papillary growth in the curettage of the vaginal apex . We telephoned the patient, but she did not visit until July 25, 2018. At this time, ultrasonography was performed, showing a mixed structure with a low-echo area at the top of the vagina of approximately 17 mm × 14 mm × 7 mm. One attending doctor performed another gynecological examination. She had two deep vaginal apexes . Bimanual examination suggested a thickened area at the top of the vagina. To further evaluate the vaginal apex, vaginoscopy was performed on July 26, 2018. After the lens (OD 6.5 mm) entered the vagina, 3% acetic acid solution and Lugol's iodine solution were successively used as extension media. The left apex was nearly 20 mm deep, forming a cavity beyond the vaginal top. The cavity was occupied by multiple papillary lesions of approximately 15 mm × 10 mm . Dense acetowhite lesions were observed, with atypical vessels, fragile vessels, and iodine-negative epithelium. Biopsy forceps were placed through the operating hole, and the tissue was biopsied under direct view.