A 79-year-old female presented with a long-standing bilateral stone disease causing obstructive chronic kidney diseases (CKD) II. She had undergone previous percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) on the left side and suffered from controlled hypertension. The patient had mild bilateral flank pain with no history of fever. On presentation, serum creatinine was 1.81 mg/dl, and the estimated glomerular infiltration rate (eGFR) was 26 ml/min. Also, the inflammatory markers were in the normal range, and the bladder urine culture showed no growth.
On the right side, there was an almost complete radio-opaque staghorn stone with a large branch filling most of the lower clubbed pole and two 1 cm stones, each one in the lower and middle poles, as well as a 1 cm stone in the upper ureter . Besides, there was mild hydronephrosis. However, on the left side, there was a significant obstruction by two 1 cm stones in the upper and middle ureteral parts. In addition, in the middle pole of the left kidney, there were some residual stones from the previous PCNL. The patient wished for treatment as minimally invasive as possible. After discussing the advantages and limitations of each option with the patient, an initial uneventful extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) was performed on the more distal left ureteral stone.
After two weeks of follow-up, there were no radiological signs that the SWL had any fragmenting effect on the stone. The patient agreed to a ureteroscopy (URS) with laser stone fragmentation and insertion of a JJ stent. Pyonephrosis was encountered intraoperatively during URS. So, a culture was taken from the infected urine, a JJ stent was inserted, and the operation was aborted. Urine culture from the left renal pelvis showed Pseudomonas aeruginosa > 100,000 CFU/ml, sensitive to ciprofloxacin. So, ciprofloxacin was administered for ten days.
After one week, the urine culture was negative, and the patient was scheduled for another SWL of the ureteral stones with the JJ stent in situ. Only the more distal one was safely localizable and successfully fragmented in SWL.
She was then scheduled two weeks later for URS to remove the remaining ureteral and middle pole stones. During the operation, it became clear that the stones in the left kidney were an agglomeration of small stones, with most of the material being calcified soft matrix . Stones were fragmented completely, and matrix material with cloudy urine was drained as far as possible through a flexible ureteroscope by washouts through an access sheath. A JJ stent was also left behind. Urine culture from the urine behind the stone matrix showed Escherichia coli > 100,000 CFU/ml and Streptococcus, sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and ciprofloxacin, respectively. Therefore, she was treated with both antibiotics for two weeks.
A follow-up ultrasound three weeks later still reported stones of 1 cm each in the middle and lower poles of the left kidney. After a suitable recovery period of four weeks, the patient was scheduled for a further endoscopic second look in the left kidney and PCNL on the right side. On the left-sided intra-renal inspection, the solid stones previously seen in ultrasound were found to be an accumulation of small fragments in both poles, with further calcified matrix agglutinating them . Further matrix was removed, and stones were re-fragmented to even finer gravel. A JJ stent was left in situ. In the same session, we intended to proceed to the right PCNL. The upper ureter stone was now completely obstructive and impacted. With some manipulation, we succeeded in advancing a ureteral catheter into the right kidney. Unfortunately, frank pus came out from hiding pyonephrosis behind the stone, and the operation was aborted once again at that stage. The right renal pelvic urine culture showed heavy growth of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-positive Escherichia coli and Proteus mirabilis. According to sensitivity testing, the patient was treated with nitrofurantoin and ciprofloxacin for Escherichia coli and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for Proteus mirabilis, respectively.
The patient was kept on ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for two weeks and scheduled to remove the left JJ stent and right upper ureteral URS and PCNL (endoscopic combined intra-renal surgery, ECIRS) one month later. After the fragmentation of the upper ureteral stone, a supra-XII rib percutaneous access was made with balloon dilatation into the middle pole right without the use of contrast. Most of the stone burden could be removed from the kidney's renal pelvis and upper pole. Intraoperatively, another stone was seen to be blocking the lower pole and could not be reached through this access; the lower pole remained strongly radio-opaque. Therefore, a second puncture into the lower pole was performed with the Bull's eye technique , which drained a mixture of calcified milky fluid and pus . Also, a nephrostomy tube was inserted and kept for two weeks. Culture revealed Proteus mirabilis and Klebsiella (80,000 CFU/ml) sensitive to aminoglycosides (adjusted to eGFR) and ciprofloxacin. After completing the course of antibiotics, the patient was discharged with a bilateral greatly reduced stone burden and an impaired but stable kidney function. Summarized treatment steps are demonstrated in .
The case has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .