A 36-year-old Zimbabwean black female who had presented to her General Practitioner with shortness of breath, coughing, wheezing, nasal blockage, sneezing and throat irritation was referred to the Asthma, Allergy and Immune Dysfunction Clinic in Harare, Zimbabwe for evaluation of suspected allergic asthma. At presentation she volunteered a 3-month history of a non-productive diurnal and nocturnal cough, shortness of breath, tightness of the chest, wheezing episodes and dyspnoea. She also reported a sore throat, sneezing and itchiness of both eyes and the palate. The symptoms were worse during working hours, but also occurred during working day nights when she had difficulty breathing and constantly cleared her throat. She had no personal or family history of asthma or rhinitis until diagnosed with asthma in the preceding 3 months. She associated the exacerbation of symptoms with exposure to strong smells and generator exhaust smoke. She was using a prescribed salbutamol inhaler 2–3 times per day and used her inhaled fluticasone daily as prescribed.
The patient was employed as a receptionist at the offices of a banking conglomerate whose offices were located in an affluent residential neighbourhood. She lived in the neighbourhood and had been employed at the same premises for more than 10 years. She kept no pets, never smoked cigarettes and did not drink alcohol. She had no unusual hobbies. There was no family history of atopic diseases including asthma and rhinitis.
The symptoms initially manifested in August 2015, when she was relocated to her new office. Exposure to smoke, dust and strong smells for example the diesel-powered electricity generator at the workplace increasingly aggravated the symptoms. She had twice attended an A&E Department in an “attack” and asthma was diagnosed. There was transient improvement on inhaled fluticasone and salbutamol followed by frequent and often daily exacerbations despite adherence to her prescribed medicines. The past medical history was unremarkable, specifically, she denied any previous history of shortness of breath, wheezing, nocturnal dyspnoea, sneezing, allergy, fevers, productive coughing, haemoptysis, dependent oedema, or weight loss.
On presentation she appeared well-nourished and in no obvious distress. Routine vital signs revealed a normal temperature of 36.5 °C, the blood pressure was 147/87 mmHg, the pulse was 91 beats per minute. She weighed 65 kg, stood at 156 cm giving her a healthy body mass index (BMI) of 26.7. The jugular venous pressure was not elevated. The heart was normo-rhythmic, without murmurs, rubs, or gallops. The respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min and pulmonary auscultation was normal with no wheezing. A radiologist had reported a recent chest X-ray as normal. The abdomen was soft and non-tender with normal bowel sounds. The spleen and kidneys were not enlarged. There was no palpable lymph node enlargement. The hands were pink and warm with no clubbing.
With a presumptive diagnosis of asthma and rhinitis, the first order of investigations was to confirm the diagnosis and to identify potential triggering allergen sources. The Asthma Control Test (ACT™) questionnaire was administered . Skin prick testing (SPT) with a panel of 14 common environmental aeroallergen was conducted using extracts from Stallergenes SA, Anthony, France. Immunoblotting for allergen specific IgE antibodies was conducted using the Euroline test kit, DP3712-1601E/DP3712-6401E, (Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika AG, Lubeck, Germany). Pulmonary function testing was performed using the MSA99 Table Top Spirometer (Beijing M&B Electronic Instruments, China). Laboratory tests included a complete blood count, urea, creatinine, electrolytes and T lymphocyte subset enumeration. In view of the respiratory deficit being not bronchodilator reversible, alternate explanations were explored. A 15-parameter panel of rheumatological autoantibodies was analysed to exclude pulmonary compromise associated with connective tissue diseases using the Euroimmun ANA Profile 3 (Euroline DL1590-1601-3G) kit from Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika AG, Lubeck, Germany.