A previously healthy 5-years-old girl of African origin presented to the emergency department (ED) in good clinical condition with a 4-day history of low-grade fever as well as progressive and slowly worsening asthenia.
Her medical history showed no previous hospitalization or blood testing. The baby was born in Togo by caesarean section due to fetal distress at 37 weeks of gestational age with a birth weight of 2500 g. Maternal anemia was reported during pregnancy. Four months later the family moved to Italy. The patient was regularly vaccinated and the last trip to Africa dated back to 2 years before the onset of symptoms.
On clinical examination at admission, skin and mucous membranes were markedly pale, such as palms and soles. Good neurological assessment and normal responsiveness and reactivity were observed. Vital parameters were within normal range (HR 110 bpm, RR 20/ min, blood pressure 128/61 mmHg, percutaneous oxygen saturation 100%); capillary refill time was 2 s. No rashes or hemorrhagic manifestations were detected. Cardiac tones were rhythmic with cardiac murmur about 2/6, and shocking wrists.
In contrast to good clinical condition, blood test unexpectedly showed a potentially life-threatening hemoglobin level (Hb 1.9 g/dL).
The baby was diagnosed with severe microcytic anemia (mean corpuscular volume-MCV 64 fl; hematocrit- Htc 8.4%, Red blood cells-RBC 1.760.000/mmc); platelets (PLTs 350.000/mmc) were normal; increased white blood cells (WBC) count and absolute reticulocyte count (ARC) were detected (24,470/mmc and 210.000/mmc, respectively), as usually observed in severe anemia. Peripheral blood smear showed a marked anisopoikilocytosis.
The patient received transfusions of packed red blood cells (overall 15 ml/kg) with a post transfusion Hb level 7.3 g/dL.
Patient’s origins and the clinical picture of severe anemia immediately raised the suspicion of a hidden hemoglobinopathy. Hb High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) revealed HbS 89.5%. Molecular analysis confirmed the presence of a c.20A > T mutation in homozygous pattern (HbSS).
Pretransfusion laboratory tests were suggestive for severe iron deficiency too (iron binding capacity 6%; Reticulocyte Hemoglobin Content -CHr 15.2 pg).
A careful study of patient’s food history was carried out: the baby had been breastfed until the age of 15 months; subsequently, she had a very selective diet with total rejection of fruit and vegetables and a low meat intake.
The auxological evaluation showed a faltering growth with weight of 14,5 Kg below the 3th centile according to age and sex (z-score − 1.91), height 105.7 cm (25 ° cent, z-score - 0.66) and BMI 13 (< 3 ° cent, z-score - 2.3). Celiac disease was ruled out, thyroid profile and IgG, A and M assay were in the range of normality. Low prealbumin (14 mg/dL) and Vitamin D (7.4 mcg/dL) levels confirmed a malnutritional state and hyperprolactinemia (35.2 ng/ml) was correlated to severe anemia.
Intravenous iron preparations (for a total amount of 200 mg) followed by oral iron supplements were administered with early response demonstrated by the increase in CHr and the progressive normalization of Hb levels.
The baby was discharged 10 days after the admission, in good general condition and with a hemoglobin level of 9.8 g/dl.
The timeline of diagnostic and therapeutic workout of the episode is summarized in Fig. .