An 11-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital on February 20, 2006. He complained of having swelling and pain of the lateral portion of the lower leg for 1 week, accompanied by local erythema. He had no fever or chills at the time of admission. In general, he was healthy and had no systemic chronic disease, nor a history of injury in the lower extremity. He denied recent travel or drug use. He was a native resident. The patient denied exposure to any infectious patients and any history of infusion.
Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 118/78 mmHg, heart rate of 78 beats/min, respiratory rate of 19 breaths/min, and body weight of 46 kg. The patient appeared to be in good nutritional condition. There was no lymphadenopathy or hepatomegaly noted, and findings in his heart and lungs were unremarkable. There was a 2 × 1 cm red skin nodule with mild tenderness in the lateral malleolus near the left ankle of the fibula. The movement of his ankle joint was satisfactory. His arterial pulse was detected on the dorsum of foot, and he was able to move his toe normally.
Laboratory testing indicated a blood white cell count of 8.6 × 109/L, with neutrophils accounting for 58.3% and lymphocytes for 31.6%. The hematocrit was 36.0%. He was negative for anti-human immunodeficiency virus, anti-syphilis, and anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies, anti-hepatitis A virus immunoglobulin, and hepatitis B surface antigen. The concentration of serum alkaline phosphatase was 226 U/L, slightly higher than the cutoff for abnormal values: >140 U/L), and total bilirubin was 0.19 mg/dL, which was lower than the cutoff value of 0.30 mg/dL. The concentrations of plasma electrolytes, creatinine, urea nitrogen, and albumin were within normal ranges.
Radiological imaging revealed a cystic lesion with bone growth, absorption, and diffused edges in his left ankle . Computed tomography (CT) of the lower extremities displayed possible bone cysts or osteomyelitis in the distal left fibula, accompanied by a discontinuous bone cortex and decreased cortical thickness, but without surrounding soft tissue swelling . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lower extremities found a slightly increased size of the distal left fibula with a low signal of uneven T1WI and T2WI. MRI also showed extensive low T1W1 and high T2W1 in the surrounding soft tissues with unclear edges . The patient was suspected of having a bone tumor or infectious cyst. Two days after admission, the patient underwent surgery on the distal lesion in the left fibula. During the surgery, we observed that the lateral cortical bone was still intact and that the subcortex was filled with brown fleshy tissue 3 × 1 × 1 cm in size. Intraoperative examination of a frozen section suggested nonossifying fibroma. The lesion tissues and narrow margin were scraped using a curette, and the tissue cavity was treated sequentially with carbolic acid, alcohol, and hydrogen peroxide. Finally, the cavity was filled with homologous cancellous bone and the wounds were sutured. Histological analysis revealed round and oval spores as well as granulomatous inflammatory cells in the lesion tissue sections, accompanied by positive periodic acid-Schiff staining and periodic acid methenamine-silver staining, but a negative smear for acid-fast staining, indicating H. capsulatum . The patient was diagnosed with a localized histoplasmosis osteomyelitis and was treated orally with voriconazole (400 mg once daily) for 6 months. There was no significant discomfort or adverse effects during the anti-fungal treatment. The patient was in a stable condition without fever after the surgery, and his wound healed well. The patient was discharged with outpatient instructions to avoid weight-bearing for 1 week after the surgery. The patient was followed up for 5 years . He regained normal function in his left leg without any adverse complaints.