A 60-year-old male, diabetic and hypertensive, presented to our centre with shortness of breath (SOB) New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III of 12 months duration, with a progressive course.
Twenty months ago, the patient presented with inferior ST-elevation myocardial infarction. His coronary angiography revealed multivessel disease. His transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed inferior and inferolateral akinesia with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 45% and moderately severe ischaemic mitral regurgitation (MR). He underwent coronary artery bypass surgery with four grafts plus MV repair with a radiolucent band.
There was pansystolic murmur grade IV/IV with maximum intensity at the apex propagating to the axilla. He had fine bilateral crepitations up to the mid chest.
A case of decompensated heart failure due to severe MR mostly as a result of failed surgical MV repair. There was no clinical evidence to suggest AML perforation.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed akinetic inferior and inferolateral walls with LVEF 45% and severe MR through the body of AML . Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed that severe MR jet was originating at the anteromedial commissure ( and ). Three-dimensional zoom surgical view showed MV repair band and perforation at the base of AML at A3 ( and ). Surgical view 3D full volume with and without colour confirmed that the MR jet was only through this perforation ( and ). In the Bicommissural view, there was no MR from either commissure . There was an apparent systolic reversal in the left upper pulmonary vein indicating the MR severity . There was no evidence of current or previous infective endocarditis. Further investigations revealed a normal white blood cell count, no fever, normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and negative blood cultures.
The case was discussed in the heart team meeting, the calculated Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) score was 2.3% for mortality and 16.5% for both morbidity and mortality. The surgeon accepted the patient for surgical MV repair with a patch or suture of the AML perforation. The patient refused reoperation. Percutaneous closure of AML perforation was performed successfully in our centre before. After explaining the surgical and percutaneous options to the patient, highlighting that there is no evidence for long-term outcome for transcatheter option, he again selected not to have surgery. The team decided to do transcatheter closure of AML perforation.
The percutaneous closure plan was to cross the AML perforation from the left ventricular side. The wire from the aorta had easier crossing and more precise localization of the defect. The catheter in the ventricular side of the MV always faces the mitral leaflets and does not lose continuous navigation if compared with crossing from the left atrial side. The systolic flow of MR to the left atrium makes the wire crossing easier with the direction of blood flow. Device selection was based on a double disc device with larger disc towards the LV side to give both better closure and stability. The distance between the two discs is better to match the leaflet thickness (1–3 mm), so, an amplatzer septal occluder (ASO) device was selected. The venacontracta of the perforation was 6 mm, an ASO device 6 mm was considered appropriate for closure of this hole. TOE confirmed there is enough distance between the perforation and the edge of AML to support the device.
Under general anaesthesia and TOE guidance arterial 6 and 10 F venous femoral access obtained. Transseptal access using 8.5 F SL0 sheath and BRK 0 needle targeted posterior–inferior puncture site to avoid angulation or traction to the leaflet.
Judkin’s Rt 5 F 3.5 (Terumo) and glide wire 0.035/260 (Terumo) in the RAO projection crossed from the LV to the LA through the perforated AML ( and ). Surgical view 3D zoom from left atrial side showed the catheter from AML hole to LA and from LV side showed enough distance between the hole at A3 and the edge of AML . A snare catheter size 25 mm through the SL sheath snared the wire and exteriorized creating arteriovenous loop .
Torque Vue sheath 7 F quickly crossed from the venous side across the IAS and LA to the perforated A3 segment of the MV to the ascending aorta.
An ASO device 6 mm was loaded to the delivery system till larger disc (left-sided) opened safely and freely below the MV apparatus ( and ). The disc was not interfering with the closure mechanism of the MV and away from the aortic valve. Once the left ventricular side disc opposed the ventricular surface of AML, the waist and left atrial disc were gently released ( and ).
After a meticulous and extensive assessment of the MV closure mechanism, left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient, leaflets movements, MV diastolic function and absence of any residual mitral incompetence ( and ), the device was released in a stable position ( and ). Pulsed Doppler at left upper pulmonary vein showed normalization of S/D ratio after perforation closure . The patient was discharged the next day.
After 6 months, the patient had no more SOB, he returned to his daily activity. Follow-up TTE showed no MR, the closure device was stable in place ( and ).