A 73-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history underwent RARP for prostate cancer. He had a body mass index of 22.2 kg/m2 and initial serum prostate-specific antigen level of 4.3 ng/mL. Prostate biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma, Gleason score 3 + 4 in three out of 10 sites. Metastasis was not detected on CT scans and bone scintigraphy. The patient was diagnosed with cT2aN0M0 prostate cancer.
RARP was performed via the trans-peritoneal approach. The surgical trocars were placed as shown in Figure . The prostate was removed through the extended camera port. The fascia and peritoneum of the camera port were closed together with five interrupted sutures using 2–0 absorbable threads. The operation time and console time were 352 and 276 min, respectively. The blood loss was 300 mL.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged 9 days after RARP. However, 11 days postoperatively, he reported abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The CT scan revealed dilated small bowel loops proximal to the camera port . An ileus tube was inserted, and water-soluble contrast was injected into the tube. Obstruction just below the camera port was noted . At this time, the patient was diagnosed with an adhesive ileus and was treated conservatively.
Ten days after ileus tube insertion (postoperative day 21), the patient's abdominal pain and nausea were relieved. The ileus tube was removed; however, the patient noted recurrence of nausea and vomiting. A plain abdominal radiograph showed dilated bowel loops.
Twenty-two days postoperatively, laparotomy was performed considering the possible need for bowel resection due to adhesion. The wound of the camera port was reopened, and a portion of the small intestine was found incarcerated into the peritoneal defect despite repaired fascia . These findings were consistent with Richter's hernia. The small bowel firmly adhered to the abdominal wall. The incarcerated portion of the small bowel was resected, and anastomosis was performed. The patient had a favorable recovery postoperatively.