The patient was a 75-year-old man. He underwent total pancreatectomy for stage IIA pancreatic body cancer, posterior colonic route hepaticojejunostomy, anterior colonic route Billroth II gastrojejunostomy, and Braun anastomosis. A 3-cm-diameter tumor was located in the pancreatic head. Intraoperative ultrasonography showed dilatation of the main pancreatic duct at the pancreatic tail and a nodule in the pancreatic duct, so intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma coexistence could not be ruled out, and total pancreatectomy was selected for treatment. The operating time was 443 min, and the amount of blood loss was 250 ml. The patient had a good postoperative course and was discharged on the 18th day after surgery without complications. After discharge, the patient was started on adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 for 6 months at the oncology outpatient clinic. After the start of chemotherapy, the patient had no major adverse events. Approximately 4 months after surgery, the patient presented to the emergency department with a chief complaint of fever. A CT scan showed no obvious findings other than pneumobilia, and blood tests showed an elevated inflammatory response and mild elevation of hepatobiliary enzymes. The patient was diagnosed with cholangitis and was hospitalized and treated with antimicrobial agents. The fever resolved promptly after the initiation of treatment. The blood culture was positive, and E. coli was detected. The patient was discharged after 2 weeks of antimicrobial therapy. After discharge from the hospital, chemotherapy was resumed, but the patient continued to have frequent episodes of fever, and although conservative treatment with antimicrobial agents was successful each time, the patient was repeatedly admitted to the hospital. The patient required a total of 16 hospitalizations and treatments over a 22-month period; blood cultures were positive in 11 of the 16 hospitalizations. Although the patient was managed in the oncology department, recurrent cholangitis made it difficult to continue chemotherapy; therefore, the patient was referred to the surgery department for consultation regarding treatment for recurrent cholangitis.
Since stenosis at the hepaticojejunostomy was suspected as the cause of repeated cholangitis, a small bowel endoscopy was performed. Fluoroscopic endoscopic findings showed no stenosis at the anastomosis and no stones in the intrahepatic bile duct . Small bowel endoscopy also confirmed that there was no obvious stenosis or obstruction in the gastrointestinal tract, including the afferent loop. Upon reviewing the CT scan at the onset of cholangitis, the afferent loop was noticeably dilated , and stasis and reflux in the same area were suspected of causing cholangitis. Therefore, gastrointestinal imaging was performed to confirm reflux. Gastrointestinal imaging revealed the presence of regurgitation, with findings that the orally ingested contrast agent passed through the afferent loop and then flowed back through the hepaticojejunostomy . The patient was diagnosed with reflux cholangitis due to chronic reflux into the afferent loop after oral intake.
Various treatment options were considered, and the decision was made to perform tract conversion surgery (from the Billroth II method to the Roux-en-Y type technique) as a radical treatment based on previous reports for the purpose of separating the gastrojejunostomy from the biliary tract. The patient was fully informed and consented to the procedure. The abdomen was opened through a median upper abdominal incision. As in the preoperative imaging studies, a dilated, elevated bowel was seen at the afferent loop. The afferent loop was separated with a stapler on the side of the hepaticojejunostomy near the Braun anastomosis. To prevent reflux, tract conversion was performed by refashioning the jejunojejunostomy downstream . The operation time was 1 h, and bleeding was minimal. Drinking water was started on postoperative day 1, and oral intake was started on postoperative day 3. The patient did not develop a fever after oral intake and was discharged from the hospital on the 8th day. Four years after the second surgery and 5 years after the first surgery, the patient is now cholangitis-free, and cancer has not recurred.