A 24-year-old Saudi man with type 1 DM and a history of tobacco smoking presented with bilateral severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (DR). His past medical history was unremarkable except for DM. No ophthalmic interventions, such as laser, intravitreal injections, or surgery, had been given prior to presentation. His social and family history: he had two brothers and three sisters. His mother had a history of type 2 DM and one younger sister had type 1 DM, however, none of them were known to have any DR. Environmental history: he was living in a mainland urban area working as a clerk. He was seen on 12 occasions during 18 months. Compliance with follow-up visits and instructions was variable. On presentation, his temperature was 36 °C and his heart rate was 72. His blood pressure (BP) ranged between 110/60 and 150/90 mmHg, with an average BP of 115/80 mmHg over eight measurements during 16 months. Random blood glucose ranged from 9.8 to 19 mmol/l with an average of 14.6 mmol/l (normal range is 5 to 7 mmol/l in our laboratory). His glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) was 13.6% (>6.5 is diagnostic of diabetes in our laboratory) or 125 mmol/mol (> 47 is diagnostic of diabetes in our laboratory). Urine analyses and detailed neurological examinations are not routinely performed in our hospital (which is an eye specialist hospital). Our patient was on the following medication prior to presentation and throughout follow-up: Mixtard 30 Novolet (biphasic isophane insulin) subcutaneous injections of 48 Units before midday and 38 Units after midday. His unaided visual acuity was 20/200 in his right eye and 20/300 in his left eye. Fluorescein angiography at baseline (performed with a standard, non-wide-field fundus camera) had demonstrated mild ischemic maculopathy in his right eye with no clinically significant macular edema and severe non-proliferative DR (not shown). His left eye could not be imaged at baseline with the standard fluorescein angiography camera due to poorly dilating pupil. Optical coherence tomography demonstrated a mild macular edema in his left eye (not shown). He was offered, but refused, intravitreal injections in his left eye.
Due to the unfavorable risk factor profile, he received several rounds of PRP in both eyes during the following 1 year after presentation; however, he developed PDR and the neovascularizations did not regress, in spite of the PRP . His unaided visual acuity was 20/200 improving to 20/50 with pinhole in his right eye and 8/200 improving to 20/70 with pinhole in his left eye. There was a discussion with our patient whether to proceed with additional PRP or to inject off-label intravitreal bevacizumab. A potential risk with intravitreal bevacizumab is the progression of fibrosis, which may ultimately lead to tractional RD [, ]. There were early signs of fibrosis in his left eye on optical coherence tomography .
He was recommended intravitreal bevacizumab injection, however he refused again. Instead, another round of PRP was attempted in both eyes. He presented 2 days later with bilateral extensive serous RDs involving the macula . His unaided visual acuity was 1/200 in his right eye and 5/200 in his left eye, with no improvement with pinhole correction. At this point, he accepted a single off-label injection of 1.25 mg bevacizumab (Avastin; Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA) in each eye. Eleven days after the bilateral injection, the serous RD had regressed completely in his left eye, and there was a substantial regression in his right eye , which subsequently regressed completely over the following 2 weeks. During the follow-up, his unaided vision gradually recovered up to 20/100 improving to 20/40 with pinhole in his right eye and 20/300 improving to 20/60 with pinhole in his left eye. At 3 months after the intravitreal bevacizumab injection, there was partial regression of the neovascularizations and no signs of tractional RD (not shown).
Imaging was performed using spectral domain optical coherence tomography (Heidelberg Engineering, Inc., Heidelberg, Germany) and wide-field fundus photography (Optos PLC, Dunfermline, UK).
PRP was performed using Pattern Scan Laser (PASCAL) photocoagulator (OptiMedia, Santa Clara, California, USA) and Volk QuadrAspheric fundus contact lens (Volk Optical Inc. Mentor, OH, USA). The duration was 20 ms for each spot with a spot size of 200 micrometers and spacing of 0.75 using a 2 × 2 or 3 × 3 grid pattern. The power range was 200 to 1000 milliWatt, adjusted as needed until retinal whitening was seen for each burn.