A 9-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat was brought to the Irion Animal Hospital in Korea appearing anorexic. The cat was formerly diagnosed with chronic renal failure (IRIS stage 3) and had been treated with isotonic polyionic replacement fluid for several years. Its siblings died a few years previously from renal failure. Its haematological manifestations were unremarkable. Biochemical analysis of the blood with Vettest8008 (IDEXX Laboratories) revealed highly elevated concentrations of blood urea nitrogen (>130 mg/dl; reference interval [RI] 16–36 mg/dl), creatinine (7.5 mg/dl; RI 0.8–2.4 mg/dl) and phosphate (8.8 mg/dl; RI 3.1–7.5 mg/dl). Urine specific gravity was 1.010 and urine protein creatinine ratio (URC) was 0.1 (Vettest8008; IDEXX Laboratories). Blood pressure was 140 mmHg.
Right renomegaly was noted on abdominal radiographs. Ultrasonography revealed an irregularly shaped mass that was hypoechoic to renal cortex and medulla at the cranial pole of the right kidney and a minimally hyperplastic lymph node in the cranial abdomen region. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of the renal mass was performed using a 23 G needle attached to a 10 ml syringe. Blood mixed particulate material was obtained and air dried, and 95% ethanol-fixed smears were then made and stained with Diff-Quik. The cranial abdominal lymph node was insufficiently large and surrounded with vasculatures for the performance of FNA. Cytological examination revealed moderate cellularity smears composed of epithelial cell clusters consisting of an exclusive population of oncocytic cells seen in sheets and papillary clusters, along with abundant single cells. A moderate-to-abundant amount of densely stained granular cytoplasm with round nuclei and indistinct nucleoli was seen. Intracellular eosinophilic materials were also found . A cytological diagnosis of renal oncocytic neoplasm was made. The differential diagnoses were oncocytoma, chromophobe carcinoma, clear cell renal cell carcinoma and neuroblastoma-associated renal cell carcinoma. Under general anaesthesia, a CT scan of the whole body was performed. The CT image indicated a heterogeneous, less contrast-enhanced kidney mass. No enlarged or atypical abdominal lymph nodes were found. Metastasis was not noted. Surgical removal was performed.
In gross appearance, the tumours were mahogany or dark reddish brown, well circumscribed and contained a central scar (approximate size 2.83 cm × 2.2 cm × 3.5 cm) .
The mass was sent to the Comparative Pathology Department of Asan Medical Center (Korea) for histopathological examination. The tissues were fixed with 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin; 5 μm sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Histologically, the tissue was composed of solid nests, anastomosing cords and closely packed glands separated by a delicate fibrovascular stroma. Individual neoplastic cells were cylindrical to polyhedral in shape, had distinct cell borders and contained moderate amounts of finely granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and round-to-oval nuclei . Replicate sections of selected tumour samples were used for immunohistochemistry. Commercially available antibodies against chromogranin (clone DAK-A3, 1:1600; Dako), cytokeratin (clone AE1/AE3, 1:400; NOVO), neuron-specific enolase (clone BBS/NC/VI-H14, 1:400; Dako) and vimentin (clone V9, 1:500; Zymed) were used, with various secondary polyclonal antibodies. Immunohistochemical staining was performed using a BenchMark XT autoimmunostainer with OptiView DAB detection kit (Ventana Medical Systems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and using the reagent supplied with the kit. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for cytokeratin, indicating epithelial origin. The neoplastic cells were negative for chromogranin A, neuron-specific enolase and vimentin, indicating that the origin was not mesenchymal or neuronal/neuroendocrine .
Ancillary testing using an electron microscope (JEM-1400; Jeol) was performed on slices prepared from fixed formalin mass. Ultrastructurally, neoplastic cells were interconnected via junctional complexes and contained numerous round-to-oval, electron-dense mitochondria . On the basis of the immunohistochemical staining profile of the neoplastic cells, together with electron microscopy results, a diagnosis of renal oncocytoma was made.