An 80-year-old woman was admitted in our ward because of AKI. Her past medical history was remarkable for type 2 diabetes mellitus in therapy with metformin; hypertension; breast cancer treated with mastectomy currently in remission; deep vein thrombosis diagnosed in 2014 in therapy with apixaban. She reported decrease in urine output and dyspepsia. A physical examination showed mild pedal oedema and bibasilar crackles on lung auscultation. Hemodynamic parameters were within the normal values. On admission laboratory analysis revealed the following values: serum creatinine level, 9 mg/dL (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] of 4 ml/min); blood urea nitrogen, 232 mg/dL; haemoglobin, 9.1 g/dL; leukocyte count, 5060/mm3; platelet count, 118,000/mm3; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 48 mm/h; C-reactive protein (CRP), 1.12 mg/dL; albumin, 28.9 g/L; potassium, 4.2 mmol/L; albumin-adjusted calcium, 10.8 mg/dL. Blood gas analysis was consistent with lactic acidosis. Urgent HD treatment was performed through central venous catheter.
Further laboratory tests were remarkable for 24-h proteinuria of 1,700 mg /day. Serum protein electrophoresis was positive for a monoclonal spike in the beta region. Urine protein electrophoresis detected kappa light chains. Serum free light chains (sFLC) were kappa light chains of 2894.7 mg/L and lambda light chains of 16.4 mg/L with kappa: lambda ratio of 176.5.
On day 8 renal biopsy was carried out (delay in execution of the biopsy was caused by initial alteration of coagulation parameters after immediate discontinuation of apixaban): the immunofluorescence staining showed polyclonal free light chain deposition in the tubular cells. Congo red staining did not detect the presence of amyloid. In the light of strong suspicion of cast nephropathy, the immunofluorescence analysis with the use of pronase enzyme was performed. Pronase digestion of the paraffin tissue by denaturized cell membranes demonstrated the presence of intracytoplasmic monoclonal kappa light chains in the tubular cells . It allowed to confirm the diagnosis of cast nephropathy (CN) which is the most common renal complication of MM . Positron emission tomography (PET) did not show extramedullary sites of MM. Given the age of the patient, COVID-19 pandemic emergency as well as laboratory and renal biopsy results haematologist concluded that bone marrow biopsy was not necessary to confirm the diagnosis of MM. The patient started therapy with bortezomib and dexamethasone on day 10. To improve the reduction of free light chains concurrently she received extracorporeal treatment with hemodiafiltration (HDF) using poly ester polymer alloy (PEPA) high-flux filter (Nikkiso FDY 210 GW, surface area 2.1 m2, cut off 32,600 daltons) . To enhance sFLC removal by adsorption, two filters were used in series during each 4-h length HDF session. Vascular access was a temporary central jugular venous catheter (16 cm long, diameter 11.5 French, Mahurkar®, Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA). The patient received 11 extracorporeal treatments by means of online HDF. All treatments were well tolerated. Mean blood flow was 260 ± 20 ml/min, while median convective volume was 18 (15–20) L/session. The mean ultrafiltration rate was 330 ± 30 ml/h. Low molecular weight heparin 4000 IU (enoxaparin sodium Inhixa™, Techdow Pharma, Milan, Italy) was started as anticoagulation during dialysis and as prophylaxis of deep venous thrombosis every other day. Enoxaparin was administered in a single bolus on starting dialysis in the arterial line before the filter . No clotting of the circuit was observed during all the HDF sessions carried out, also owing to the filter change at the second hour.
Bortezomib was administered the day after the HD session (Velcade® 1.3 mg/ m2, Janssen Cilag Spa, Beerse, Belgium). Those interventions resulted in improvement of urine output until 2.5 L/day.
On day 19 (9 days after starting chemotherapy) the patient contracted SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosed through nasopharyngeal swabs. The first High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed initial interstitial pneumonia . The respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation was 99%. Arterial blood gas analysis (ABG) revealed a pO2 of 76 mmHg, pCO2 of 38 mmHg and P/F (pO2/FiO2 ratio) of 361. No other symptoms were detectable. Laboratory studies were notable for WBC 4090/mm3 with lymphopenia of 540/mm3.
She started therapy with hydroxychloroquine and antimyeloma treatment was stopped but high-dose intravenous steroid was administered.
On day 26, after the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection, the patient presented acute dyspnoea. ABG revealed hypoxemia. HRCT was repeated and demonstrated severe worsening of the interstitial pneumonia with increase of ground glass areas in both lungs in central as well as peripheral regions . Due to deterioration of respiratory condition the patient was treated with CPAP (Continuous Positive Airway Pressure) and high dose steroid in the Nephrology Unit, as because of her comorbidities she was not admittable in the Intensive Care Unit. She continued CPAP treatment for 3 weeks (PEEP 10 cm H2O 16 h per day) with progressive improvement of the oxygenation and respiratory status. Therefore, the patient required to continue HDF treatment for AKI, aside from the primary goal of sFLC removal. Once the respiratory status stabilized, after haematological re-evaluation, despite the persistence of SARS CoV-2 positivity MM treatment with bortezomib was resumed from day 44 in consideration of risk/benefit ratio. In the light of resolution of all symptoms and testing with nasopharyngeal swabs resulting negative the patient was considered recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection only on day 105 of hospitalization.
The patient continued therapy with bortezomib and dexamethasone (in total during the hospitalization she received 3 cycles of therapy) and extracorporeal light chains removal treatment with optimal reduction of sFLC < 500 mg/L (kappa FLC serum level at the time of discharge: 93 mg/L).
The patient was discharged in good condition after 3 months of hospitalization. Subsequently she recovered renal effective urine output and renal function to be no longer dependent on dialysis treatment. Five months afterwards the laboratory studies showed further improvement with serum creatinine of 1.6 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen of 84 mg/dL and proteinuria within the physiological limits (240 mg/day). The patient continues haematological therapy with bortezomib and dexamethasone.