A 28 year old Caucasian female nurse, S. P., with past medical history significant for right ovarian teratoma status post removal 4 years prior to admission, presented to an outside facility with chief complaint of acute onset difficulty with word articulation. The patient, without any known past psychiatric history, was noted by observers to be increasingly confused and agitated with aggressive physical behavior for which she was admitted to a psychiatric unit with a diagnosis of acute psychosis. At the time of psychiatric admission, the patient displayed visual hallucinations, transient episodes of unresponsiveness, and lingual dyskinesias. Workup including complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid studies, blood cultures, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, venereal disease research laboratory test (VDRL) screening test were within normal limits except for a creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) level of 19,000. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed nonspecific diffuse slowing. Magnetic resonance imaging and angiography (MRI/MRA) of brain was unremarkable. Urine drug screen was negative except for benzodiazepines, which she received for agitation.
Upon transfer to our facility, the patient was noted to be mute except for occasional echolalia. Examination revealed Glasgow coma scale of 10 (E4, V2, M4), brisk reflexes, increased muscle tone with intermittent dystonic posturing of the extremities. Brainstem reflexes were intact. During hospital course, the patient developed complex partial seizures with secondary generalization. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed glucose of 80, protein 28, red blood cell count 6, herpes simplex virus polymerase chain reaction negative, oligoclonal bands and myelin basic protein negative. Autoimmune etiologies, lupus cerebritis and porphyria were excluded. A CT scan of chest/abdomen/pelvis revealed a 2.1 × 2.27 × 2.43 cm dermoid cyst of the left ovary.
CSF NMDAR antibody returned positive confirming diagnosis of paraneoplastic NMDAR antibody associated limbic encephalitis. A left salpingo-opherectomy was performed. Methylprednisolone therapy was initiated followed by plasmapheresis for total of seven treatments. Following plasmapheresis, the patient showed significant improvement with respect to language and cognitive function .Following therapy, she developed right wrist drop and left foot drop. On follow up, the patient continued to have short term memory impairment, however there was complete resolution of wrist drop and partial resolution of foot drop and no further seizure episodes were noted.