A 38-year-old gentleman presented to the emergency department with complaints of double vision and watery discharge from the right eye for two days. The patient also had a history of redness in the right eye for the same duration. He denied any weakness in her arms and legs, slurred speech, or difficulty swallowing. There was not any associated fever, headache, vomiting, limb weakness/numbness or trauma.
On examination, his vital signs were within the normal range, except for an elevated blood pressure of 170/120 mm of Hg. The neurological examination showed intact motor and sensory functions. However, eye examination revealed ophthalmoplegia of the right eye, with sluggish light reflex. The left eye examination was normal. His cardiac enzymes and electrocardiogram (ECG) were normal. The patient was discharged on request but advised to follow-up in eye OPD the next day.
The following day, detailed history and ophthalmological examination showed double horizontal vision, limited outward movement of the right eye, and blurry vision. Complete blood count, inflammatory markers, and full biochemistry tests, including thyroid and liver function tests, were within the normal range. Chest X-ray and computed tomography head scan were also normal. A provisional diagnosis of right lateral rectus palsy was made, and then discharged with oral acyclovir (400 mg) and Prednisolone (8 mg) and counselled about regular ocular exercise.
On the third day following discharge, he again presented to the emergency department with complaints of blurred vision, dizziness, and increased blood pressure. His right and left eyes had 15 and 14 mm of Hg intraocular pressure.
Non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) head revealed a small soft tissue lesion measuring 8 ×6 mm on the roof of the sphenoid sinus. Similarly, MRI demonstrated a small mucous retention cyst in the left sphenoidal sinus. Laboratory investigations were normal for muscle-specific tyrosine kinase antibodies, acetylcholine receptor binding proteins, and p-ANCA. He was medicated with oral prednisolone 60 mg (tapered over three months) and thiamine supplementation. His symptoms subsequently improved. So, he was discharged and was asked for outpatient follow-up.
Three months after the initial visit, the patients again presented to our hospital with progressive ptosis and vertical diplopia complaints. An associated headache and periorbital burning sensation over the right eye that progressed over to the left nasal bridge, left zygoma, left jaw, and left face. A detailed physical and ocular examination was done.
Ocular symptoms were found to be more severe than during the previous visit. Visual acuity was 6/12 on the right and 6/18 on the left. An ocular examination of the right eye revealed ptosis, and complete restrictions of eye movements, as seen in Fig. ; the corneal sensation was normal, the pupil was reactive to light, and a relatively apparent pupillary defect was absent. Slit-lamp examination showed no significant anterior and posterior segment findings.
Laboratory investigations that were done at this visit are shown in the .
On investigation, his liver function test, lipid profile, protein electrophoresis, CBC, magnesium, urea, creatinine, sodium, potassium, Anti-Ds-DNA antibody, p-ANCA, and c-ANCA were normal. Lyme disease antibodies Borrelia IgG was positive and IgM negative. Serology, including human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C virus, hepatitis B surface antigen, and venereal disease research laboratory test (VDRL), were non-reactive.
We repeated an MRI of the brain, and this time, there were features suggestive of Tolosa-Hunt Syndrome. There was a homogeneously enhancing soft tissue component in the left cavernous sinus in the inferolateral aspect, causing a lateral bulge of the cavernous sinus wall and laterally displacing the medial temporal lobe with mild white matter oedema.
Hence, through clinical presentation of periorbital pain, paresis of third and sixth cranial nerves, features suggestive of Tolosa-Hunt syndrome and pain and paresis resolving with corticosteroids, a diagnosis of Tolosa-Hunt syndrome was made and the patient was then started on IV methylprednisolone 1 gm/day for 3 days. The patient showed rapid improvement in his symptoms. On the third day of methylprednisolone therapy, there was decreased ptosis, diplopia, and ocular pain. Likewise, oral prednisolone 60 mg daily and gastroprotective agent, pantoprazole 40 mg daily, were started on the fourth day. Despite features of steroid-induced bilateral central serous chorioretinopathy , a follow-up study of the patient showed remarkable improvements in his symptoms .