A 58-year-old man, who underwent weight loss surgery for severe obesity in the USA in 1979, was referred to our institution with sudden-onset nausea and vomiting. He had a 20% total weight loss (body mass index [BMI] decreased from 45.2 to 36.2 kg/m2) after bariatric surgery, but the details of the surgery were unclear except for the information provided by the patient that a stapler was used, and iatrogenic splenectomy was performed. The patient started complaining of epigastric discomfort 20 years after surgery despite normal esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) findings. His body weight gradually decreased to less than 90 kg in the preceding 5 years and was 75 kg (BMI: 22.6 kg/m2) at admission. There was no history of diabetes.
EGD revealed a stoma at the greater curvature of the upper gastric body , and an 8.9-mm diameter endoscope could pass through it. The stomach distal to the stoma was intact, and gastrojejunostomy was not found. Fluoroscopy demonstrated retention of contrast medium in the fundus and poor outflow through the stoma . Abdominal computed tomography revealed a staple line partitioning the stomach at the upper gastric body from the enlarged fundus filled with food residue . Considering the preoperative investigation findings and the period when the surgery was performed, the patient was diagnosed with very late-onset stomal obstruction following Gomez gastroplasty .
For revision surgery, laparotomy was performed and a midline incision from the xiphoid process to the umbilicus was performed. Severe intra-abdominal adhesions due to the initial surgery, including splenectomy, were found. The stomach had been partitioned by a staple line extending from the lesser towards the greater curvature of the upper gastric body, and a running seromuscular suture was observed around the greater curvature channel . Wedge resection of the original channel was performed, and the diameter of the new channel increased to 30 mm . The new channel was constructed by double-layer anastomosis with interrupted sutures . The duration of surgery was 253 min, and blood loss was 135 mL. Postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 7 days after surgery. EGD performed at 3-month follow-up showed a well-formed new channel and no food residue in the proximal gastric pouch .