The patient was a 90-year-old male with a past medical history of coronary artery
disease, diabetes mellitus, benign prostatic hyperplasia, atrial fibrillation, and
hepatocellular cancer came for the evaluation of weakness. His home medications
included aspirin, metoprolol, tamsulosin, glipizide, glucophage, eliquis, and
acarbose. He quit smoking 5 years prior to admission and had a 30-pack-year smoking
history, occasionally drank alcohol, and did not use any recreational drugs. He
denied abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. He also reported no recent
sickness exposure or travel.
At 1 month prior to admission, he underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his
abdomen following complaints of abdominal pain. This revealed a mass in his right
inferior hepatic lobe measuring 8 cm. Later, a computed tomography–guided biopsy of
the mass demonstrated the scirrhous variant of hepatocellular cancer. As the patient
was not considered to be a surgical candidate, he was started on sorafenib for his
hepatocellular cancer.
He was admitted to the hospital for an evaluation of weakness 1 week later. A
physical examination revealed that the patient was of thin build, not in respiratory
distress, afebrile with a temperature of 97°F, a heart rate of 87 beats per minute,
a blood pressure of 108/60 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 12 breaths per minute, and an
oxygen saturation of 94% on 2 L of oxygen via a nasal cannula. A chest examination
indicated that he had bilateral bronchial breath sounds, while a cardiovascular
examination confirmed that his heart sounds were normal. His abdomen was soft upon
palpation, with hepatomegaly noted, and his neurological examination was
unremarkable.
Laboratory analysis performed 1 week prior to starting sorafenib and subsequent
values after sorafenib discontinuation are shown in and are notable for hyponatremia.
Further work-up of hyponatremia, including serum osmolarity, serum uric acid, urine
sodium, urine specific gravity (1.021), thyroid-stimulating hormone, serum cortisol,
and total protein, is shown in .
Our initial assessment concluded that sorafenib induced hyponatremia, so the drug was
discontinued. After starting the patient on 3% saline, his sodium levels improved
slowly. Other common causes of hyponatremia were excluded, supporting our initial
assessment that this was a rare case of hyponatremia secondary to sorafenib. Because
the patient was a poor candidate for any intervention for his hepatocellular cancer,
he was accepted to hospice.