A 91-year-old Asian man with a history of a hypertension was admitted to hospital with 2-day history of vomiting and protrusion in the left abdominal wall. He had a rash in his left abdominal wall, was diagnosed with herpes zoster infection 2 weeks before admission, and was treated with oral valaciclovir (1000 mg three times daily for 7 days). He had no history of diabetes mellitus, psychogenic disorders, or abdominal surgery. He denied any prior symptoms of delayed gastric emptying, such as postprandial fullness or early satiety. His heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, and temperature were normal. Physical examination revealed a healed herpetic skin rash on the left side of the abdominal wall in the area innervated by the 10th thoracic nerves . The ipsilateral abdominal wall was remarkably flaccid and distended, with the disappearance of abdominal wall reflexes . Bowel sounds were decreased and hematologic and biochemical tests were unremarkable, except for elevation of serum anti-VZV antibody titer. Serum thyroid hormone was within normal levels. Computed tomography (CT) was performed to rule out structural causes of the abdominal protrusion and endoscopy was used to confirm gastric distension and rule out mechanical obstruction. CT revealed no abdominal wall defect, mass, or stenosis, although remarkable distension of the stomach without volvulus was confirmed. The left flank wall bulged asymmetrically and the abdominal muscle was thinner than that on the right side . Upper endoscopy showed esophagitis, gastritis, and massive gastric enlargement with no mechanical obstruction. A biopsy of the stomach was consistent with nonspecific active inflammation without inclusion bodies or giant cells. Colonoscopy excluded any obstructive process. Although nuclear scintigraphy for quantifying gastric emptying was not available, solid meal residue was still recognized in gastroscopy 1 week after admission. Structural causes of the abdominal protrusion were ruled out with CT, and endoscopy was used to confirm gastric distension and rule out mechanical obstruction. Given the patient’s age, lack of abdominal surgery history, and recent herpes zoster infection, these symptoms led us to consider a neuropathic origin for his gastric and abdominal symptoms. He was diagnosed as AGD owing to gastroparesis and segmental paresis of the abdominal musculature, both of which were associated with herpes zoster. Considering the patient’s age, absence of mechanical obstruction, and the neuropathic nature of his condition, we opted for conservative management to avoid the risks associated with surgical intervention. At 3 days after nasogastric tube (NGT) decompression and 2 weeks after parenteral nutrition, he tolerated feeds without vomiting. Gastric distension and ipsilateral abdominal bulge were alleviated 1 month after conservative treatment with the administration of mosapride (5 mg three times daily). He was discharged 41 days after admission with uneventful recovery.