We hereby present the case of M.G., a 39-year-old male married engineer, who presented at our clinic for a major depressive episode in the context of a TRD. He had a positive psychiatric family history, since his mother suffered from MDD, while his father had an alcohol use disorder.
MDD onset in this patient had occurred at the age of 27, with a substantial recovery with the introduction of sertraline (50 mg/day) in combination with psychodynamic psychotherapy.
Despite a long disease-free period, in 2019, after his first son’s birth, M.G. experienced a relapse of MDD, characterized by a significant mood deflection, emotional lability, and severe fatigue. Hence, multiple pharmacological trials were made , with only partial benefit .
In November 2020, due to the persistence of depressive symptoms, M.G. was referred to our Treatment-Resistant Disorders Clinic at San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy by his private psychiatrist. During our first assessment, M.G. reported the persistence of anhedonia, low energy, asthenia, remarkable levels of anxiety and cognitive impairment (e.g.: persistent poor concentration and attentional deficits), which led to poor performance at work. The patient also reported to be emotionally detached from his family, friends, and environment.
Together with typical MDD symptoms, M.G. showed disabling symptoms related to OCD spectrum that led to the additional diagnosis of OCD according to the DSM-5 criteria [, ].
Indeed, over the last 2 years the patient had developed intrusive and egodystonic obsessions, consisting mainly in pathological doubts regarding his wife. Specifically, even if physically attracted to his partner, he felt forced to spend a considerable amount of time engaged in mental rituals, consisting of repetitively glancing at his partner to check her body features, such as her nose or chin and subsequently questioning himself about the meaning of these compulsions (e.g.: “Am I continuously checking her chin or nose because I don’t love her anymore?”, “I like her, so why do I have so many doubts about her?”). Such obsessive preoccupations, intrusive thoughts and rituals are what is commonly referred to as relationship obsessive–compulsive disorder [, ].
In addition, he also reported the presence of ritualistic intrusive and pervasive doubts regarding his mental health conditions. This implied the need to perform time-consuming mental rituals every morning (e.g.: independently from his psychopathological state, he used to repeat analytic checklists monitoring his conditions with precise order: “Am I feeling alright?”, “Am I depressed?”, “Am I happy?”, “Why did I cry?”, “Is it depression or something else?”, “If I feel I have little strength, does it mean that I am depressed?”).
When M.G. first came to our clinic, his therapy consisted of venlafaxine 225 mg/die, bupropion 300 mg/die, lamotrigine 150 mg/die, and olanzapine 5 mg/die.
In line with our Treatment-Resistant Disorders clinic protocol, clinical consultation, psychometric assessment , Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM) and Pharmacogenomic analysis were performed .
Even though the patient resulted to have moderate depressive and obsessive symptomatology at psychometric evaluations, the patient’s quality of life was deeply affected, as he suffered from frequent crying fits, inability to concentrate at work and to engage in leisurable activities. Following the clinical interview, the patient was diagnosed with TRD with OCD symptoms and enrolled for intranasal esketamine treatment. A standard administration scheme was followed , maintaining current patient treatment.
As a result of esketamine introduction, the patient showed a rapid resolution of depressive symptoms during the induction phase and a significant reduction of OCD symptoms during the maintenance phase .
By the time of the ninth esketamine administration, in consideration of the evident clinical improvement, olanzapine and lamotrigine were stopped after appropriate tapering. Some residual anxious symptoms were managed thanks to the introduction of pregabalin titrated up to 225 mg/die with further clinical benefit.