A 65-year-old male sustained a sudden traumatic hyperflexion, eccentric contraction of his right knee while hiking. Four days after the event, he presented to the outpatient orthopedic clinic with a massive effusion, loss of motion, and inability to achieve active terminal knee extension. His passive range of motion was 60 degrees with painlimiting knee flexion. He was able to ambulate unassisted with a mild antalgic gait with the knee maintained in extension. Both knees demonstrated large prominent ossicles over the tibial tubercles consistent with Osgood-Schlatter disease. The right knee was maximally tender over the tibial tubercle, and there was no palpable defect at the inferior pole of the patella.
The patient reported amedical history of gout and surgical history of a procedure performed in young adulthood for symptomatic Osgood-Schlatter disease. While the operative records and reports were unavailable, the patient indicated the procedure included trephination and open debridement of the tubercle with a staple inserted for fixation of the tendon to the remaining tibial tubercle. He further indicated this was conducted after reaching skeletal maturity. The patient reported no history of previous patellar instability or arthrosis to indicate the procedure may have, in fact, been a tibial tubercle osteotomy fixed with staples. He reported the procedure was considered experimental at the time and was specifically for the treatment of patellar tendinopathy.
Radiographs revealed a staple from his prior procedure. On the lateral view, several exostoses remained apparent at the tibial tubercle. There was a mild superior migration of the patella compared to a contralateral knee image .
Because of the patient’s history, atypical findings on physical examination, and radiographs; a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, revealing a tear of the medial aspect of the distal patellar tendon near the insertion on the tibial tubercle and metallic staple. The examination was limited due to artifact from the staple. MRI demonstrated a normal-appearing patellar tendon inserting onto the inferior pole of the patella .
Given the combination of an MRI confirming a compromised patella tendon and a clinical exam of tenderness over the insertion on the tibial tubercle, lack of ability to perform a straight leg raise and an extension lag; surgical intervention was determined necessary. A knee arthroscopy, examination under anesthesia, and open patellar tendon reconstruction were planned.