A 45-year-old Japanese woman with a swelling and bone exposure of the left buccal region was referred to our hospital. She had previously undergone excisional biopsy two times, which led to the same diagnosis of osteoma. She had no special medical and family history. On clinical examination, maxillary bone exposure without pain was observed around her upper left second molar. Other physical status was normal. Computed tomography (CT) showed a diffuse radiopaque lesion around the alveolar cortical bone surface of her maxilla spanning from the first molar to the second molar . A biopsy demonstrated features of necrotic bone without atypia. The exposed region in her maxilla recovered with healthy oral mucosa naturally after the biopsy without any additional treatment. However, she noticed bone exposure again in the same region after a year and swelling that tended to enlarge over time. As she did not want to undergo radical surgery requiring tooth extraction, we performed debulking surgery including biopsy twice in 2 years. However, these biopsies did not demonstrate features of malignancy. The lesion enlarged gradually during the observation period and CT showed a diffuse bone mass accompanied by radiolucent areas, which arose from the surface of maxillary alveolar bone and invaded into the pterygopalatine fossa . T1-weighted fat-suppressed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after injection of intravenously administered contrast medium showed heterogeneous contrast-enhanced masses and hypointense areas corresponding to mineralized areas on CT . Histopathological assessment showed stromal component consisting of dense atypical spindle cell proliferation and focal cartilage formation with mild atypia . Immunohistochemical staining showed diffuse expression of β-catenin and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) in atypical spindle cells. These cells were also stained by runt-related gene 2 (RUNX-2), special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2), or sex-determining region Y-box 9 (SOX9), indicating that these cells were derived from cells that had the ability to differentiate into osteoblastic cells and cartilage cells . Moreover, co-expression of murine double minute 2 (MDM2) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) along with a dedifferentiated subtype of high-grade sarcoma was seen . We excluded a diagnosis of chondrosarcoma and high-grade osteosarcoma because these histopathological features are usually negative in these conditions. Together with these findings, we arrived at a diagnosis of DPOS derived from c-POS. Indication of distant metastasis was not documented. Finally, we diagnosed this patient as stage IIB DPOS based on Enneking staging system .
The condition was treated by wide resection and chemotherapy. Since evidence-based chemotherapy for DPOS has not yet been established, we performed neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) consisting of pirarubicin (THP-ADM) and ifosfamide (IFO) based on clinical trials carried out by the Japan Clinical Oncology Group (JCOG) 0304 . THP-ADM (30 mg/m2, days 1 and 2) and IFO (2 g/m2, days 1–5) were administered and mesna (400 mg/m2) was added at 4 and 8 hours after infusion of IFO. This regimen was repeated for three cycles every 3 weeks. The administration dose was decreased by 40% for the second and third cycles, because grade 4 neutropenia and grade 3 febrile neutropenia were observed in the initial cycle. Although slight shrinking of the tumor was observed in radiological examination after three cycles of chemotherapy, the majority of the tumor did not demonstrate any other changes.
Subsequently, we performed subtotal maxillectomy using combined transcranial approach with orbitozygomatic osteotomy and transcervical approach with mandibulectomy. This approach was selected to avoid permanent surgical scar on our patient’s visible mid-face. Subtotal maxillectomy from her oral cavity was followed by a skull base surgery. Following resection of the lateral wall of the orbit, orbitozygomatic osteotomy was performed, which was contiguous to osteotomy from the oral cavity. The tumor invaded toward the foramen ovale and close to her optic nerve. We separated the tumor carefully from these anatomical structures on the upper levels of pterygopalatine fossa. Eventually, radical resection with an adequate margin was achieved followed by reconstruction surgery. After reconstruction of the lateral wall of the orbit with a titanium mesh, raw surface muscular flap reconstruction was also carried out immediately, as described previously . Since morphological reconstruction mimicking natural morphology of the palate can be achieved by using this method, it was easier to apply the dental prosthesis for our patient. Finally, the temporal bone was restored and removed zygomatic bone was restored using an absorbent plate .
The surgical specimen was examined histopathologically. Although a decrease in cell density and tumor degeneration due to NAC were observed in the high-grade component, the number of tumor cells in the low-grade component remained viable. Therefore, the chemotherapy effect was considered to be grade 1 based on the Huvos grading system (grade 1, 0–49% necrosis) . Based on the recommendation of adjuvant chemotherapy in DPOS treatment , we decided to administer additional chemotherapy using cisplatin (CDDP) + THP-ADM. Adjuvant chemotherapy consisted of CDDP (120 mg/m2, day 1) and THP-ADM (30 mg/m2, days 1 and 2), and was repeated for two cycles every 3 weeks. The administration dose was decreased by 40% for all cycles due to experiences of adverse effects of NAC. The post-treatment progress was good, and no severe functional morbidity, such as eating dysfunction or dysphonia, was observed. As for our patient’s quality of life (QOL), her General Oral Health Assessment Indices (GOHAI) were 59 and 53 points before operation and a year after surgery, respectively (generalized mean, 53.1; Table ). She has shown no indication of recurrence after 15 months.