A 25-year-old female had a history of painless swelling around the left knee for 6 months, which was progressively increasing in size. There was no associated history of trauma. Clinically, a firm tender swelling of size 5 × 5 cm arising from patella was palpable. The range of motion of the knee was 15–110° degrees. Atrophy of the left thigh muscles was noted. A plain radiograph revealed enlarged left patella with irregular, thinned out cortical shell along with multiple osteosclerotic lesions in patella with a soft-tissue mass .
Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a tumor mass of size 4.5 × 8 × 10.2 cm (AP × TR × CC) involving tendon of quadriceps femoris, patellofemoral ligaments, and patellar ligament. Post-contrast images demonstrated an enhancement in muscular plane of anterior compartment in axial cuts. Sagittal STIR images showed heterogeneously hyperintense signal within the tumor and multiple hypointense areas which are likely due to calcification and increased signal intensity in muscular planes of anterior compartment. It was reported to be a case of osteoblastic osteosarcoma on histopathology . According to the Enneking classification system, the tumor was categorized as Stage 2a.
The patient underwent three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin, doxorubicin, and ifosfamide as recommended. After excluding any surgical contraindications and taking informed consent from the patient, surgical excision of tumor was planned using a standard anterior midline approach to the knee. A midline incision of 15 cm over the anterior aspect of the left knee centering the tumor was made. Subsequently, separation of the tissue layers, including subcutaneous tissue, superficial fascia, and deep fascia, was performed until a thin periosteal shell was identified. An extensive invasion of the surrounding soft tissues and a fuzzy margin was observed. Tumor resection was done laterally up to the intermuscular septum. The tumor was excised 12 cm proximal to superior pole of patella and distally, tibial tuberosity along with the patellar ligament was removed. The tumor was found to be involving patella, patellar tendon as well in the distal 6 cm of quadriceps tendon. As the tumor was involving only the extensor compartment, resection of the tumor along with 4 cm of normal tissue cuff was done. The defect was covered by suturing back the deep fascia and subcutaneous tissue. Reconstruction of the extensor mechanism was not done. Postoperatively, the patient was managed on a cylindrical slab for 6 weeks.
Postoperatively, the patient received three cycles of chemotherapy as per protocol. At 1-year follow-up, the patient was able to perform activities of daily living without any discomfort. The range of motion was 0–90° degrees. The patient is still under regular follow-up with no evidence of recurrence. She could ambulate unaided with no extensor lag.