A 61-year-old woman was hospitalized for the second time for gradually aggravated lower limb edema on February 21, 2017.
The patient was admitted 3 years ago because of moderate proteinuria. Urine protein excretory rate (UPER) was 1.91 g/24 h, and urine sediment showed no hematuria. Serum creatinine and albumin were normal. A monoclonal serum immunoglobulin M lambda (IgMλ) was found without evidence of hematological diseases. Blood pressure (BP) was low to normal. The patient underwent renal biopsy. Mild increased mesangial matrix and mesangial hypercellularity were observed under light microscopy. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed moderate positive signals for IgA in the mesangial area of all observed glomeruli, while other immunoglobulin heavy chains, immunoglobulin light chains and Congo red staining were negative. In electron microscopy, electron-dense deposits were observed in the paramesangium . No specific fibrils were seen in the mesangial area, glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and arterioles. The patient was diagnosed with IgA nephropathy combined with MGUS. She was intolerant to renin-angiotensin system inhibitors (RASIs) because of relatively low BP. Therefore, prednisone and Tripterygium wilfordii were given. UPER decreased to an average 1.5 g/24 h in the first 6 mo, but increased to 2-3 g/24 h after 1 year. Cyclophosphamide (cumulative dosage 12 g) and tacrolimus (FK506 concentration 5.7 ng/mL) were prescribed successively. However, lower limb edema was gradually aggravated. The patient was also followed up regularly in the hematology clinic, and the diagnosis of IgMλ MGUS was maintained.
The patient had normal BP and moderate pitting edema in the lower limbs. There was no enlargement of superficial lymph nodes, liver or spleen. She had no significant past or family history.
Laboratory tests revealed a normal complete blood count. UPER was 4.5 g/24 h, serum albumin was 24 g/L, and serum creatinine was normal. Differences between involved and uninvolved serum immunoglobulin free light chain levels (dFLC) was 56.3 mg/L. Thoracic and abdominal computed tomography and bone marrow biopsy were normal.
The repeated kidney biopsy specimen had 18 glomeruli. In light microscopy, mild pale eosinophilic material in the mesangium was found, but mesangial hypercellularity was not obvious. There was marked diffuse thickening of GBM, with subepithelial fringe-like projections. The tubulointerstitium had no significant changes. Arterioles were Congo red positive, with pathognomonic apple green birefringence under polarized light. In light microscopy, diffuse mesangial deposits of IgM, κ and λ were detected. IgA was detected by immunohistochemical staining. In electron microscopy, 8-12-nm diameter, nonbranching fibrils were deposited in the mesangial area, GBM and arterioles . There were also a few electron-dense deposits in the mesangial area. Renal amyloidosis and IgA nephropathy were coexistent. Laser microdissection/mass spectrometry (LMD/MS) analysis of the Congo-red-positive area confirmed heavy chain amyloidosis (μ chain). We performed LMD/MS on the first renal biopsy specimen, and found no evidence of amyloidosis.