A 29-year-old male construction engineer presented to our center with a 4-month history of a painless mass on the radial aspect of the right forearm. No significant signs and symptoms were observed. Preoperative radiography , 3D computed tomography (CT) reconstruction , and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed. The lesion could be visualized on the distal aspect of the right forearm, in the space between the ulna and the radius, invading the radius, leading to a partial radial bone defect.
Surgical anatomy, pathological examination, and immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of a radial schwannoma. The operation was divided into a volar approach and a dorsal approach. In the volar approach, a straight incision was made on the right forearm from the styloid process of the radius to the tendon of the proximal biceps brachii. We identified the brachioradialis and flexor carpi radialis muscles and separated the vital structures, such as the radial nerve, artery, and vein. Finally, we separated the flexor pollicis longus and pronator muscles, exposing the palmar lesion of the distal radius. In the dorsal approach, an S-shaped incision was made on the mediodorsal wrist between the radius and the styloid process of the ulna. The space between the extensor carpi radialis brevis and the extensor digitorum was dissected, thereby exposing the musculi supinator and abductor pollicis longus, and the dorsal lesion of the distal radius was exposed. Complete tumor resection and surrounding lesion removal were performed using a combined palmar and dorsal approach. The lesion originated from the dorsal interosseous nerve via the volar aspect . After exposing and eliminating the lesion, a 3.5-cm-long radial bone defect was identified . Considering the patient’s need for early functional recovery and return to social activities, we used free iliac bone flaps with deep circumflex iliac vessels to repair the bone defects, and the spaces were filled with a cancellous bone to promote healing . It is worth mentioning that acquiring the targeted iliac bone flap was precisely performed via 3D imaging reconstruction. The tumor and the radius were reconstructed using Mimics Research 21.0. Segmentally, the tumor invaded the radius . The bone defect was then reconstructed , and the tumor size, i.e., the size of the bone defect, was measured. The defect’s maximum length, width, and height were calculated , which was the maximum length, width, and height of the iliac crest flap . An abrasive drill and cancellous bone were used to ensure the iliac crest flap fit the bone defect geometrically. Also, was used to illustrate the surgery procedure and mechanisms briefly. The histological features comprised intermixed Antoni A and B areas combined with Verocay bodies, which were consistent with the typical clinicopathological features . The characteristic cellular area comprised spindle-shaped turnout cells arranged in a cellular, dense fascicular pattern. Immunohistochemistry for S-100 and SOX10 revealed diffuse and significant positivity, while Vimentin demonstrated weak positivity . The Ki67 index was 1%. Other negative immunohistochemistry results were obtained for CD34, desmin, smooth muscle actin, etc. No evidence of malignancy was observed. A diagnosis of IOS was established based on these findings. Additionally, a biopsy was performed preoperatively, and its findings were consistent with the postoperative pathological diagnosis.
Follow-up radiography indicated the union of the bone gap , and a patient-rated wrist evaluation score of 5 was recorded after 12 months. The range of motion of the right wrist significantly improved compared with the preoperative status (see the ). Meanwhile, no clinical and radiography findings suggestive of recurrence were observed at the 12-month follow-up.