A 49-year-old woman, gravida 4 para 2, with abnormal genital bleeding was referred to our department with a cervical mass. She had a previous history of uterine myomectomy and cervical polypectomy, which were both benign diseases. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 28 × 25 mm solid tumor developing from the posterior of the uterine cervix , and 28 × 24 and 21 × 24 mm space-occupying lesions were also detected around the rectus, which were suspected to be lymph node metastases. Chest-abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed no enlarged lymph nodes or distant metastasis, except for the tumors already detected. Positron emission tomography-CT revealed the accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (maximum standardized uptake value, 6.60) at the cervical tumor only. Serum tumor marker levels were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen, 2.0 ng/ml; cancer antigen-125, 158.8 U/mL;cancer antigen-19-9, 137.2 U/ml; squamous cell carcinoma antigen, 0.5 ng/ml; soluble interleukin-2 receptor, 199.0 U/ml. The other results of the blood examination, including renal function, liver enzymes, and electrolytes, were within normal limits.
Biopsy of the cervical tumor was performed and a histopathological examination indicated that the tumor had atypically spindle, ovoid, and polygonal cells with an eosinophilic hyaline-rich cytoplasm, with whorled and cord-like forms. Nuclei were oval to round and had mild atypia. Inflammatory cells were scattered to various degrees around tumor cells. The results of immunohistochemical staining were as follows: cytokeratin AE1/AE3, positive; epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), negative; CAM5.2, negative; cytokeratin-MNF116, positive; S-100, negative; vimentin, positive; actin, negative; desmin, negative; cluster of differentiation (CD) 3, negative; CD8, negative; CD10, negative; CD5, negative; CD20, negative; CD79a, negative; PgR (+), PgR (+), inhibin, negative; thyroid transcription factor-1, negative; Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA in situ hybridization, negative.
Since the tumor was suspected to be undifferentiated carcinoma of the uterine cervix, the patient received chemotherapy with four cycles of paclitaxel (180 mg/m2) and carboplatin (AUC5, 700 mg/body). Massive genital bleeding occurred 5 months after the admission; therefore, the patient underwent extended total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Intraoperative findings revealed a small amount of bloody ascites and the resected specimen had a necrotic mass at the posterior side of the cervix . Tumor cells exhibited the same histopathological characteristics as those in the previous biopsy . Additional immunohistochemistry revealed cells that were positive for both CD68 and FDC , which was consistent with the diagnosis of FDCS. The tumor was completely resected and lymphovascular invasion was not detected. There was also no evidence of lymph node metastasis. She did not receive adjuvant therapy and her CA19–9 level decreased to within almost normal limits . Tumor recurrence was not detected at the 26-month follow-up after admission. The consent of the patient for publication was recorded according to the Ethics Committee of Nagoya University and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.