An 18-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for further management of a genital tract anomaly. Two months earlier, an MRI had been performed for dysmenorrhoea lasting for a year. The MRI revealed 2 separated uterine bodies and cervices. The anatomy of the vagina was difficult to view. Left-sided haematocolpos/haematometrocolpos was noted (66 × 43 × 67 mm). Both ovaries were noted to have small follicles; the dimensions of the right ovary were 31 × 18 × 25 mm, and those of the left ovary were 20 × 34 × 21 mm .
The patient attained menarche at 12 years of age. After menarche the patient experienced slightly heavy and painful regular menstruation every 28 days that lasted for 7 days each.
Menstrual history the year before the investigations revealed successively increased pain with each cycle, reaching a peak at the 3rd or 4th cycle, during which she experienced very heavy and painful menstruation. A brief spontaneous relief of symptoms was followed by successively increased pain in the manner described before. The patient was not sexually active at the time of the investigation. She denied chronic diseases, medication intake, or any surgical operations.
A 6-cm lump above the anterior vaginal wall on the left side was felt on bimanual examination. Ultrasound examination revealed the lump to be a cystic lesion with heterogenic echogenicity of the fluid content (dimensions 60 × 50 mm). Diagnostic hysteroscopy under general anaesthesia was considered.
Hysteroscopic examination revealed normal vaginal walls. A small cervix was observed to the right side of the vaginal vault. A hysteroscope was introduced through the cervical canal and reached the uterine cavity. The uterine cavity was lined with normally shaped endometrium and uterine orifice of the Fallopian tube, shown on the right side. Ultrasound-guided aspiration of the fluid in the lump was performed. The fluid had chocolate-like colour and consistency as that of haematoma. The lump’s interior was rinsed with normal saline. Ultrasound examination revealed 2 uterine cavities – the right one was filled with fluid and the left one remained empty. Both cavities had normal endometrial lining. Further extension of the surgery was halted due to bladder injury risk and performance of the procedure in the hysteroscopic unit. The patient was advised to undergo the second step of surgery in the main operating theatre.
Two months later the patient was followed up and had no complaints of painful menstruations. Ultrasound examination showed a recurrent haematoma at the same location. Additionally, the second step surgery was postponed due to relief of symptoms. Eight months later, incremental dysmenorrhoea was experienced, and the patient was hospitalized for further management by laparohysteroscopy.
Laparoscopic surgery confirmed 2 separated uterine bodies, which were fused at the level of internal cervical orifices. Both uterine bodies had regular outlines and were mobile. Each Fallopian tube was attached typically to its corresponding uterine body. Both adnexa were without macroscopic changes . Then a hysteroscope was introduced through the vagina, and the right-sided component of the uterus was visualized. The total length of the right cervix and uterus was 6 cm. The hysteroscope was introduced through the incision made for the previous procedure to a pouch filled with haematoma. The haematoma was evacuated and the hysteroscope revealed a small uterine cervix. The hysteroscope was introduced further to the left-side uterine cavity and showed the uterine orifice of the left Fallopian tube. The total length of the left-sided uterine body and left cervix was 8 cm. Excision of the partial vaginal septum was performed. The septum was the wall of the blinded space where the haematoma collected. The edges of the wound were sutured by continuous sutures. Bilateral tubal patency was confirmed with methylene blue. The postoperative period was uncomplicated.
Abdominal ultrasound was performed to identify other possible anomalies. Renal agenesis was diagnosed on the same side of the vaginal septum. The right kidney was typically located with normal echostructure and a total length of 14 cm. Diagnosis of OHVIRA syndrome was established depending on the characteristic congenital anomalies. At the 3-month postoperative follow-up of the patient, no abnormal mass was felt or observed by ultrasound and the patient did not complain of any recurrence of symptoms.