A 63-year-old man visited our hospital complaining of frequent urination and hesitancy, which had worsened a year prior to the visit. He also complained of muscle weakness and pain in the upper arms. Blood tests revealed abnormally high PSA (147.7 ng/mL), NSE (60.9 ng/mL), and CK (647 IU/L) . Prostate biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma with Gleason score 4 + 5 accompanied by neuroendocrine differentiation, which was positive for PSA, synaptophysin, and NCAM1/CD56 by immunohistochemistry . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed prostate cancer which showed invasion to the bladder, seminal vesicles, and rectum. Multiple metastases to the liver , pelvic lymph nodes, and bone were observed. The patient was diagnosed with prostate adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation, cT4N1M1. At the time of diagnosis, the use of abiraterone and docetaxel for high-risk metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (HSPC) was not yet approved in medical insurance in Japan. Therefore, combined androgen blockade (CAB) therapy with surgical castration and bicalutamide was initiated as the most intense treatment available in Japan at that time for high-risk metastatic HSPC. Chemotherapy with etoposide and cisplatin (EP) was not performed at this time because pure adenocarcinoma components dominated, few with neuroendocrine differentiation in the prostate biopsy.
Two weeks later, dysphagia, edema of both upper limbs, and erythema on the skin were identified. Bicalutamide was discontinued and high-dose glucocorticoid therapy with methylprednisolone (mPSL) was initiated at a dose of 125 mg/day intravenously (IV) for the first 3 days, 80 mg/day IV for the next 3 days, and 40 mg/day IV for the next 3 days. At this time, the symptoms were suspected to be bicalutamide-induced adverse events. One week after the initiation of mPSL, dysphagia and erythema of the skin and muscle weakness of both arms did not improve. Physical examination revealed erythema on the back of the finger joints (Gottron’s sign) , from the shoulder to the upper back (shawl sign) and around the neck (V-neck sign) , and edematous erythema on the bilateral eyelids (heliotrope rash) . Blood tests revealed abnormally high values of CK (1727 IU/L, Fig. ), aldolase (14.5 U/L), and myoglobin (435.8 ng/mL). Anti-nuclear antibody was positive at titers of 1:640, anti-ARS antibody was negative, and anti-TIF1-γ antibody was positive. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with malignancy-associated dermatomyositis. He was presented with dysphagia, which was severe and required temporary fasting and central parenteral nutrition. Glucocorticoid administration was changed from mPSL to prednisolone (PSL) at a dose of 60 mg/day IV.
Four weeks after the start of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), CT showed residual multiple liver metastases , although PSA and NSE decreased to 7.0 ng/mL and 21.9 ng/mL, respectively . Then, EP therapy (etoposide 100 mg/m2 and cisplatin 20 mg/m2, every 3 weeks) was commenced, resulting in a rapid decrease of PSA and NSE to < 1 ng/mL and < 13 ng/mL, respectively . Two weeks after EP therapy started, swallowing function improved with a decrease in CK and oral intake became possible. PSL administration was gradually tapered to 5 mg/day.
After 4 courses of EP therapy, CT showed marked reduction of the primary tumor and all metastases including those in the liver , but EP therapy was discontinued due to grade 3 malaise. Although the metastases had shrunk, they did not disappear, and we supposed that a small amount of cancer progression could lead to a relapse of dermatomyositis. The patient was therefore switched to docetaxel therapy (70 mg/m2, every 3 weeks). After 4 courses, docetaxel was also discontinued due to grade 3 malaise, and abiraterone acetate treatment was initiated. Abiraterone acetate treatment was ceased after one month because erythema on his face and extremities and serum CK level worsened (246 IU/L). Enzalutamide treatment and dose escalation of PSL to 30 mg/day were started, and dermatomyositis improved. PSA and NSE were consistently low, and no progressions were observed during the administration of docetaxel, abiraterone, and enzalutamide. At present, 31 months after the start of enzalutamide administration, no cancer progression has been observed. Dermatomyositis is in remission, and the patient is on PSL at 10 mg/day.