The patient was a 44-year-old man with past medical history of lupus erythematosus for more than eight years. He was a farmer, living in Hormozgan province, in south Iran, with the chief complaint of abdominal pain. His pain was colicky on the right lower quadrant started since three months prior to admission with many vomiting episodes .Severity of pain had increased for one month and caused the patient to wake up at nights. The pain was not related to the position. There was also a 3-month history of poor appetite, severe fatigue, nocturnal hyperhidrosis, constipation, and noticeable weight loss (10 kg during three months).He was referred to the local hospital and was treated as dyspepsia, but symptoms did not improve.
The patient was taking prednisolone and hydroxychloroquine. He recently discontinued the hydroxychloroquine due to retinopathy. Moreover, the patient had received tamsulosin for benign prostatic hyperplasia. Also, there was a history of nephrolithiasis. He was ill in general appearance. Vital signs were within the normal range. His physical examination revealed tenderness and rebound tenderness on the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. A fixed mass 10 × 10 centimeter (cm) in diameter was palpated in the same quadrant. The rest of the systemic examination did not reveal abnormalities. We considered five differential diagnoses, including malignancy, fungal infection, lymphoma, abdominal tuberculosis and actinomycosis; according to patient history, malignancy was our initial diagnosis. Laboratory and radiologic examination were requested based on it.
Laboratory tests revealed marked increase in white blood cells(WBC), estimated sedimentation rate(ESR), C reactive protein(CRP), ferritin and decreased hemoglobin(HB). The anti-double-strand (anti-ds) DNA, complements and antinuclear antibodies(ANA) suggested that lupus was controlled. Other findings were unremarkable (at the end of the folder).
Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast revealed evidence of enhancing hypoheterogenous exophytic large mass 150 × 118 × 77 mm (mm) with internal necrosis and origin of ascending colon. Also, a prolonged corticomedullary phase with moderate hydroureteronephrosis in the right kidney and one stone measuring 6 mm with two small stones in the lower pole of the left kidney were seen. Mild fluid was in the pelvic, and retroperitoneum was normal without lymphadenopathy.
Due to anemia and abdominal mass, colonoscopy was requested. Colonoscopy was done under anesthesiologist care. Anus, rectum and sigmoid were normal. The pressure effect on the sigmoid was seen. Descending colon, transverse colon, ascending colon and, cecum were normal.
Spiral abdominopelvic CT scan with contrast showed extensive wall thickening of terminal ileal loops in the right lower quadrant extending to the cecum and proximal part of ascending colon associated with surrounding fat stranding to form a large mass in the right lower quadrant . Although lymphoma is prevalent in lupus patients, we did not found any lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly, so more evaluation was recommended.
The one-third distal part of the ureter invaded by mass caused mild right-side hydroureteronephrosis delayed secretion . Due to acute ureteric obstruction and less likely pyelonephritis, a striated appearance was also present. Other abdominopelvic organs were normal. Ureteric double J catheter inserted for the patient.
The patient underwent laparotomy. A mass was seen in the terminal ileum and ascending colon with retroperitoneal adhesion and invasion to the right ureter behind it. The mass resected with the ileum terminal and the ascending colon to the splenic flexion. The resected specimen was sent to the pathology laboratory. The specimen was cut to multiple pieces in eleven blocks and 10% of it embedded. Both unlabeled surgical resected margins were viable. Basidiobolomycosis infection was confirmed on terminal ileum and ascending colon segmental resection .
Itraconazole administered 200 mg per kilogram (mg/kg) every 12 h for 3 months and amphotericin B deoxycholate 1 mg/kg/day for 3 weeks. The patient was discharged home uneventfully and no complication was observed. The patient’s dyspepsia relieved and he gained weight.