A 24-year-old man, a nursing student of African descent, was referred to us from an up-country regional hospital for further investigations and expert management. His past medical history was unremarkable and he denied any history of tobacco or intravenous drug use (IVDU), chest trauma, sexually transmitted infection (STI) or open tuberculosis (TB) contact. He was diagnosed with pulmonary TB based on constitutional symptoms and chest X-ray findings, and had completed a 6-month course of anti-TB medications (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) 7 weeks prior his visit to our institution. He was somewhat symptom-free for about 3 weeks when he developed recurrent episodes of breathlessness, awareness of heartbeats and coughing blood, which had gradually worsened and persisted for about 4 weeks prior this index visit.
On examination, he was a sick-looking but oriented and well-kempt young man. He had a blood pressure of 92/57 mmHg, pulse rate of 121 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 19 breaths/minute and temperature of 36.7 °C. His body mass index (BMI) was 21.2 kg/m2 (weight 59 kg and height 1.67 m). A physical examination revealed conjuctival and palmar pallor but there were no stigmata of connective tissue disorders, systemic vasculitides or congenital heart disease. A respiratory system examination revealed bilateral symmetrical chest movements; however, dullness and reduced breath sounds were noted on the mammary and inframammary regions bilaterally on percussion and auscultation respectively. An examination of the cardiovascular system revealed accentuated second heart sound (S2) with early diastolic (grade 1/6) and holosystolic (grade 2/6) murmurs at the pulmonic and tricuspid areas respectively.
Hematological and biochemical tests revealed iron deficiency anemia [hemoglobin (Hb) 8.18 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 61.8 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 19.2 pg/cell and red cell distribution width (RDW) 21.9%], prolonged bleeding time [prothrombin time (PT) 14.6 s and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 32.7 s], and mild hyponatremia [sodium concentration (Na+) 132 mmol/L]. Serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, and syphilis were all negative. Moreover, occult blood test was negative and an abdominal ultrasonography scan was unremarkable. A sputum culture revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa 3++ sensitive to ciprofloxacin and gentamicin. A chest X-ray showed bilateral, ovoid-shaped perihilar opacities extending to lower lung zones with loss of silhouette sign on the left cardiac border . An electrocardiogram (ECG) displayed a sinus tachycardia while echocardiography (ECHO) was evident for right ventricular hypertrophy, mild tricuspid regurgitation with estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 29 mmHg (that is, mild pulmonary hypertension) and multiple focal dilatations along the right and left pulmonary arteries. Systolic functions were, however, preserved (ejection fraction 53%). A GeneXpert test was positive. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest showed bilateral multiple pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysms with surrounding hematoma together with adjacent cystic changes, consolidations and tree-in-bud appearance . The aneurysms on the right pulmonary artery measured 3.81×2.55 cm and 6.96×5.34 cm whereas those on the left measured 2.61×2.03 cm, 6.85×4.45 cm and 7.05×4.03 cm respectively. His main pulmonary artery (2.55 cm), ascending (2.28 cm), arch (1.89 cm), and descending aorta (2.00 cm) had normal caliber and dimensions. We entertained a diagnosis of bilateral multiple pulmonary pseudoaneurysms associated with cavitary pulmonary tuberculosis and admitted him to the general medical ward. Intravenous ciprofloxacin 500 mg 12 hourly, bisoprolol 5 mg once daily, tadalafil (40 mg) and ferrous sulfate (270 mg) plus folic acid (300 mcg) were initiated. Moreover, our patient was counseled regarding surgery and prognosis of his condition; however, he refused to undergo any surgical procedure. After 9 days of hospitalization, our patient died of aneurismal rupture. Due to religious beliefs, relatives of the deceased refused an autopsy and one was not done.