Our patient, a 67-year-old Caucasian man, presented in the morning to the emergency department complaining of a sudden onset of excruciating right-sided arm and neck pain radiating to his head, followed by two episodes of vomiting. Both arms had reduced power from the shoulder distally. He complained of weakness in his legs, but denied any recent trauma, falls or loss of consciousness. On initial examination, shoulder abduction and adduction were absent, and flexion and extension of the elbow joint 2/5 on the Medical Research Council (MRC) power scale. Power in the lower limbs was normal. All modalities of sensation were intact bilaterally in the upper and lower limbs. No cranial nerve abnormalities were detected.
The patient had recently been diagnosed with hypertension and type 2 diabetes. His blood results on admission showed no abnormalities apart from a high glucose level consistent with untreated diabetes. A computed tomography angiogram showed no signs of thrombosis or dissection of the aorta. A spinal MRI scan showed a high-intensity lesion in the anterior two-thirds of the gray matter extending from C3 to C5 . He was diagnosed with anterior spinal artery ischemia secondary to dissection of a distal vertebral artery. He was started on 300 mg aspirin, and his case was reviewed by both a physiotherapist and a diabetic specialist nurse while he was an in-patient. Within three days of presentation, power in both of his arms had improved (MRC score 4/5), except for abduction of his right shoulder, which he could not lift above the horizontal position.
Spinal cord infarction and ischemia are rare and often difficult to diagnose, but they represent important differential diagnoses of acute spinal symptoms. This case presentation describes an interesting presentation of ASCIS which differs from the classically described symptoms, insofar as the patient had no clinically detectable sensory deficit. This disorder is also associated with significant morbidity and mortality. In this case, the prognosis was favorable. This led us to a review of the literature on the prognosis and outcome of acute spinal cord ischemia.