A 74-year-old Caucasian male presented to his primary care physician with a 3-month history of ataxia, diplopia, and generalized fatigue. He had a medical history of hypertension, coronary artery disease, and peripheral vascular disease. On examination, the patient had a wide-based gait with postural instability, and horizontal nystagmus. He had normal reflexes, no focal motor deficits, no focal muscle atrophy, no focal sensory deficits, and no localized deafness or tinnitus. MRI of the brain with contrast was performed, which revealed numerous 1–2 mm intraaxial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense lesions scattered predominantly throughout the central brain, with several periventricular and subcortical lesions concerning for possible central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma, metastatic cancer, or an atypical granulomatous, inflammatory, or infectious etiology. The patient was subsequently admitted for further work-up.
Lumbar puncture showed mildly elevated protein at 64 mg/dL but was otherwise unremarkable. ´There were no oligoclonal bands or malignant cells. Laboratory work including antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (anti-dsDNA) antibody, anti-single-stranded DNA (anti-ssDNA) antibody, antimitochondrial antibody, and serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) were unremarkable. The patient also tested negative for Coccidioides, toxoplasmosis, Cryptococcus, Q fever, Rickettsia typhi, Borrelia burgdorferi, syphilis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The patient underwent computed tomography (CT) imaging for malignancy work-up, which revealed a spiculated right upper lobe lung mass compatible with lung cancer.
CT-guided biopsy of the lung mass revealed primary lung squamous carcinoma. The patient underwent staging positron emission tomography (PET)/CT that showed intense fluorine-18 deoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation at the site of the patient’s known lung cancer but no pathological thoracic or mediastinal lymph nodes or any other sites suggestive of distant metastatic disease. There was relatively symmetrical FDG accumulation into the cerebral cortices, subcortical gray matter, and cerebellar hemispheres. An MRI brain stealth protocol with contrast was performed and demonstrated angiocentric enhancement predominantly in the brainstem and cerebellum, with involvement of the basal ganglia, thalami, and supratentorial white matter . This raised suspicion for CLIPPERS; however, the differential diagnosis also included neurosarcoidosis, lymphomatoid granulomatosis, angiocentric lymphoma, vasculitis, cerebral amyloid disease, and leptomeningeal carcinomatosis, though less likely given the lack of leptomeningeal enhancement.
Neurosurgery was consulted, and a brain biopsy was planned. A cerebellar biopsy was performed, given it was the area with the highest density of enhancement. The specimen showed perivascular infiltrates of lymphocytes . No malignant cells or neutrophils were seen. Immunohistochemical staining revealed mostly CD3+ T cells with scattered CD20+ B cells . Given the clinical, radiological, and pathological findings were consistent with CLIPPERS,the patient was started on an empiric trial of steroid therapy: prednisone 40 mg oral daily.
On follow-up a month later, the patient reported that he had felt “back to himself.” He reported the ataxia, diplopia, and generalized fatigue were significantly improved, though not yet completely resolved. This was confirmed on physical examination. After 2 months on steroid therapy, MRI of the brain showed dramatic improvement radiologically, with the enhancing lesions throughout the brain seen on prior studies resolved. Clinically the patient reported he was “doing amazingly well,” his ataxia had resolved, and he was no longer requiring a cane or walker to ambulate. Therefore, the patient had done well on steroids. It was determined that the patient should be tapered off steroids; the patient tapered off steroids over 1 month, for a total of 3 months on steroid therapy.
As the brain biopsy was negative for malignant cells, and the PET/CT demonstrated no overt signs of any other metastatic disease, the patient’s lung cancer was clinically stage IA. He subsequently underwent robotic right upper lobectomy with hilar and mediastinal lymph node dissection. Surgical findings demonstrated T1bN0 disease, consistent with pathological stage IA2 lung cancer. No adjuvant therapy was indicated, and surveillance CT scans as of 1 year have demonstrated no recurrence.
Four months after stopping steroid therapy, the patient began to have a return of ataxia, and during this episode he also developed intermittent expressive aphasia that would spontaneously resolve after several hours. MRI of the brain with contrast was performed and demonstrated reappearance of the multiple lesions in the brain. This was concerning for relapsed CLIPPERS. The patient was treated with intravenous dexamethasone 4 mg every 6 hours over 1 day, followed by a maintenance regimen of prednisone 20 mg once daily. On 2-month follow-up, the patient had no further events or symptoms and MRI of the brain showed improvement of the lesions in the brain.