A 53-year-old female patient was admitted to the emergency room with fever, progressive headaches, fatigue and constipation gradually developing since few days. She complained also of a recent urinary retention. Low-grade fever (38.3°C) started 2 days prior to presentation. She is known to have hypertension and diabetes mellitus treated with a synthetic oral angiotensin-II receptor antagonist and a combination of empagliflozin and metformin. The patient has taken three doses of Pfizer vaccine for COVID-19, the last one 5 months prior to her admission.
On day 1, her temperature was 38.8°C, pulse 95 bpm, arterial blood pressure 100/50 mmHg, and a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) rate of 14/15, with confusion. On neurologic exam, the motor strength and control of both lower limbs was 4/5, with no other signs of neurological deficiency. The lungs were clear with no heart murmurs on cardiac exam. A light, diffuse tenderness of the abdomen was noted on exam, possibly related to her urinary retention. Her blood tests results showed normal white blood cells count of 5.810/mm3 with 62% of polymorphonuclear cells and 20% of lymphocytes and a normal C-reactive protein, creatinine and liver function tests. The chest x-ray result was normal. A multiplex PCR for COVID-19 was negative. An urgent MRI of the brain was requested in the emergency room, showing a diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement with hyperemia, compatible with the signs of meningitis . The lumbar puncture showed pleocytosis (900 cells/mm3) with 10% of polymorphonuclear cells and 90% of lymphocytes, glucose level of (41 mg/dl), protein level of (279.7 mg/dl) and albumin level (2095 mg/dl). Rapid antigen agglutination test for Hamophilus influenzae type B (HiB), Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Escherichia coli K1 were negative. Empirical therapy was started in the emergency room which included intravenous ceftriaxone iv. (2g Q12h), vancomycin (1g Q12h) and acyclovir iv. (10 mg/kg Q8h).
A PCR panel on CSF was requested in order to search for the possible etiologic agent. HSV 1–2, varicella zoster virus, EBV, CMV, human herpes virus-6, HHV-7, human adenovirus, human parechovirus, human enterovirus, mumps virus, parvovirus B19 (B19), neisseria meningitides, listeria monocytogenes, haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus agalactiae (GBS), S. pneumoniae and E. coli K1 were requested. The test came back positive for HHV-7 on day 2, with a limit of detection of the assay about 100 copies/reaction.
On day 3, a HIV serology test was requested which returned negative and the antibiotics were dropped after the release of the negative cultures and the PCR panel. On day 4 of treatment, the patient remained lethargic with intermittent episodes of fever. A second MRI of the brain was requested to assess CNS lesions, which were noted as stable. Ampicillin iv. (2g Q4h) was added to her current regimen, while waiting for the listeria CSF culture results which were reported few days later as negative. A second lumbar puncture on day 5 was requested. The lumbar puncture showed pleocytosis (250 cells/mm3) with 20% of polymorphonuclear cells and 80% of lymphocytes, glucose level of 56 mg/dl, protein level of 85 mg/dl and albumin level of 529 mg/dl. The patient remained febrile (38.8°C) 1 week prior to her admission. Brucella serology and culture on CSF as well as tuberculosis DNA PCR were requested. They came back negative few days later. The clinical state of the patient began to deteriorate rapidly on day 8. She presented a GCS of 7 that required a rapid endotracheal intubation and transfer to the intensive care unit. The acyclovir iv. was discontinued, and ganciclovir iv. (5 mg/kg Q12h) was initiated. Meropenem (1g Q8h) was empirically added to cover possible sepsis related to resistant organisms. After multidisciplinary discussion, dexamethasone iv. was also initiated at a dose of 8 mg Q8h which was tapered every 48h to 6 mg Q8h, then 4 mg Q12h then stopped as no clinical amelioration was noted. Moreover, on day 9, and considering that the patient came from an endemic area for tuberculosis with a low CSF glucose level, a tuberculosis PCR on CSF was repeated and antituberculosis drugs were initiated empirically, consisting of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol. The tuberculosis PCR was again negative and the tuberculosis culture came back negative 8 weeks later. On day 13, the GCS of the patient was still dropping, reaching a score of 4 and an electroencephalography was requested. It showed a persistent slow waves pattern. The patient died following cardiac arrest 15 days after her admission to the intensive care unit.