A 32-year-old woman, gravida 5, para 1 (12 years ago by Cesarean section) with 4 induced abortions (the last one 2 years ago), was admitted due to amenorrhea for 38 days and left lower abdominal pain for 2 days accompanied with mild nausea, tender breasts, and rectal pressure. Eight days prior to admission, her urine human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) test was positive and blood HCG level was 1880 m-international units per milliliter (mIU/mL). There was no vaginal bleeding. Color TVS showed no intrauterine gestational sac, but there was a left adnexal heterogeneous mass approximately 21 mm × 14 mm × 20 mm in size with signs of blood supply. The right adnexa appeared normal. There was free fluid 38 mm in depth within the pouch of Douglas. The past and family histories were unremarkable. General physical examination revealed nothing remarkable and the vital signs were normal. Gynecological examination found that the uterine cervix was smooth with tenderness upon palpation and movement; the uterine body was enlarged equivalent to the size of 40-day-gestation, soft, and with smooth surfaces; the left adnexa was slightly thickened with tenderness; and the right adnexa was unremarkable. The patient was diagnosed as ectopic pregnancy and was prepared for emergent laparoscopy. Under laparoscopy, the uterus appeared enlarged equivalent to the size of 40-day-gestation, with smooth surfaces, but without bleeding; the right uterine tube and ovary appeared normal; the left uterine tube was normal ; the left ovary was slightly enlarged, partly covered by a blood clot , but had no rupture or bleeding after the clot was removed; there was a small amount of unclotted blood in the pouch of Douglas; there were no abnormal findings in the greater omentum, small intestines, colons, and mesenteries. After removing the blood clot and free blood, a circular peritoneal defect of approximately 10 mm in diameter was found lateral to the left sacrocervical ligament, anterior to the left ovarian fossa, and next to the lower edge of the left broad ligament . The surrounding peritoneum appeared bluish in color and bled when pressured with a probe. A 10-mm cut was made medial to the defect to open into the retroperitoneal space . The blood clot with gestational tissues was pulled out of the retroperitoneal space . The retroperitoneal space was cleaned and irrigated with saline, where part of the left ureter was seen with edema. Bleeding was stopped by bipolar coagulation . Absorbable hemostatic cellulose (Surgicel® Fibrillar™ Hemostat, Ethicon, LLC, San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico, USA) was inserted into the retroperitoneal space to prevent further bleeding . Pathological examination of the gestational tissues found chorionic villi . The patient lost about 300 mL of blood during the surgery, but did not need any blood transfusion. She recovered smoothly and was discharged on the next day after surgery. The patient’s blood HCG level decreased to 320 mIU/mL 1 week after surgery and returned to normal range 29 days after surgery.