A 27-year-old male had a history of road traffic accident with Grade 3 B (As per Gustilo-Anderson classification) open fracture of humerus midshaft. The patient underwent debridement and external fixator application at some other hospital, later wound healed but the bone ends became osteomyelitic. Debridement was done for the same in the same hospital, the patient presented to us with segmental bone loss (7 cm) and gap nonunion. The skin overlying was scarred and there was limb shortening .
Surgical technique involved approach of both upper and lower limbs simultaneously, with the patient in the supine position. The humeral approach was based on the previous incisions and soft-tissue defects. For non-union, necrotic bone was resected and debridement done, the ends were reamed sequentially to open the canal and to allow the fibula to go inside the humerus medullary cavity. The brachial vessels were identified for anastomosis. The osteomyocutaneous fibular graft was based on the peroneal vessels. The harvested flap included skin paddle, fibula, skin perforators (majority present on the inferomedial part of the fibula), and the peroneal vessels with the venae comitantes.
A length of 16 cm and a width of 12 cm of skin flap were harvested along with 9.5 cm of fibula bone.
The graft was inserted 2 cm at each end into the humerus, and then, the entire construct was fixed with a 4.5 mm low contact dynamic compression plate with two screws on either side getting four cortex purchase. The peroneal artery was anastomosed end-to-side with the brachial artery. The skin margins of the flap were fashioned accordingly and were sutured to the surrounding skin (, ).
Postoperatively, flap was closely monitored for vascularity and viability and the fixation was protected by a U slab, which was later converted into a functional humerus brace. Physiotherapy started with range of motion and followed by muscle strengthening. Serial X-rays were taken to assess bone union at 6 months and 1 year (, ).