This case involves an unmarried 25-year-old phenotypic Japanese female, 154.1 cm in height and 48.5 kg in weight, and without a notable medical, family, or psychosocial history. She did not consume alcohol, tobacco, or any drugs. The patient was examined at the age of 18 at a gynecology clinic for primary amenorrhea where, given the patient’s active involvement in competitive track and field, she was diagnosed with athletic amenorrhea without further tests being conducted. Afterwards, the patient underwent no treatment and did not experience menstruation. Moreover, the patient had not engaged in sexual intercourse up to this point.
Upon examination by a local physician with the main complaint of abdominal distention, the patient was referred to our hospital with a suspected ovarian tumor, as a giant 17 cm tumor was found in the pelvis. The inspection of the external genitalia revealed clitoral hypertrophy and narrowing of the vaginal opening . Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumorous lesion in the pelvis measuring 218 × 115 × 178 mm, containing a mixture of cystic and solid components. The uterus could not be found. The cystic components contained blood, and the solid portion had a contrast effect . Examination by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography/computed tomography revealed FDG accumulation in the tumor and in enlarged abdominal para-aortic lymph nodes. Blood tests revealed the following levels: white blood cells (WBC): 10.7/μL × 103; hemoglobin: 10.1 g/dL; platelets: 412/μL × 104; C-reactive protein (CRP): 18.1 mg/dL; total protein: 7.7 g/dL; albumin: 3.8 g/dL; urea nitrogen: 8 mg/dL; creatinine: 0.53 mg/dL; total bilirubin: 0.6 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 30 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 8 IU/L; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): 52.4 mU/mL; luteinizing hormone (LH): 34.4 mU/mL; estradiol (E2): < 10 pg/mL; progesterone (P4): 0.66 ng/mL; and testosterone: 0.25 ng/mL. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (2.4 ng/mL) was within the normal range, but serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (5.86 ng/mL), lactate dehydrogenase (4574 µg/L), and CA125 (165 µg/mL) were elevated. Urinalysis was normal. As DSD was suspected because of the appearance of the pelvic tumor, chromosome testing was performed. The karyotype was found to exhibit 45,X/46,XY mosaicism, and the patient was diagnosed with MGD. Since the pelvic tumor was considered to be a gonadal tumor, a resulting complication of MGD, an exploratory laparotomy was performed in order to arrive at a definitive pathologic diagnosis of the tumor.
A physical examination revealed a patient who looked unwell, with blood pressure of 119/77 mmHg, heart rate of 117 beats per minute, and body temperature of 38.7 °C. Neurological examination was unremarkable and did not offer any substantial information. Surgical findings revealed marked adhesions between the tumor and the surrounding organs, making excision difficult. Therefore, only a biopsy of the tumor was performed . The final pathological diagnosis was “seminoma” . Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with clinical stage IIB testicular cancer (seminoma) with MGD.
Postoperative systemic chemotherapy was started promptly, consisting of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP). At the time of the fourth course of BEP, tumor markers had normalized . Marked tumor reduction was confirmed with imaging, and subsequently the patient underwent interval debulking surgery. Surgery involved bilateral gonadectomy and resection of disseminated peritoneal lesions . Pathological examination of the excised specimens was consistent with necrosis of the seminoma due to the effect of chemotherapy. No viable tumor remains were found. No further chemotherapy was administered, and the initial course of treatment was completed. We notified the patient regarding MGD, and she decided her future sex as female. Therefore, we proposed some surgical options for clitoromegaly or vaginal stenosis. However, she did not wish to pursue those at that time.
Currently, 4 years and 11 months after the initial treatment, there has been no recurrence of the tumor. In addition, the patient has been on postoperative hormone replacement therapy in the form of an estradiol/norethindrone acetate patch and psychotherapy continuously.