An 8-year-old girl was diagnosed with hematuria and proteinuria during a school urine screening program. She was referred to the medical outpatient clinic. Her clinical examination and serum creatinine level were normal. She had no medical or family history of this condition. A spot urine protein to creatinine ratio was around 7 g/g Cre. She was admitted to our department because of persistent hematuria and proteinuria. Again, the clinical examination was normal. Results of the blood tests were as follows: white blood cell count, 10.6 × 109/L; hemoglobin level, 11.6 g/dL; platelet count, 240 × 109/L; sodium level, 135 mmol/L; potassium level, 3.7 mmol/L; total protein level, 5.56 g/dL; albumin level, 2.67 g/dL; urea, 13.9 mg/dL; creatinine level, 0.40 mg/dL; triglyceride level, 56 mg/dL; total cholesterol level, 267 mg/dL; complement component (C) 3 level, 104 mg/dL; C4, 29 mg/dL; total complement (CH50) level, 36.6 U/mL; immunoglobulin (Ig)-G level, 766 mg/dL; and IgA level 137 mg/dL. At admission, urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. A spot urine protein to creatinine ratio was 8.6 g/g Cre. During a routine inspection using dimercaptosuccinic acid scan (DMSA) before renal biopsy, Tc-99 m DMSA images showed a focal decreased uptake in the upper and lower portion of the left kidney .
A renal biopsy was performed from the left kidney. On light microscopy, the patient had 12 glomeruli with no crescent formation. The glomeruli showed mild proliferation of the mesangial cells. Immunofluorescence showed linear staining of IgG along the GBM . Thus, anti-GBM antibody glomerulonephritis and Goodpasture syndrome were suspected, and the serological workup (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) was positive for anti-GBM antibody elevation with a value of 29.6 U/mL (normal, <2 U/mL). Anti-nuclear and anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibodies, antineutrophil antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-proteinase 3, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C serologies were negative. The complement levels were normal. Renal ultrasonography was normal. Chest computed tomography did not show diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. All the labs and pathology suggested anti-GBM disease.
Treatment consisted of three sessions of double-filtration plasmapheresis (DFPP) every other day. Her anti-GBM antibody level decreased to <2.0 U/mL. Intravenous pulse methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg/day) was administered for three days, and prednisone (2 mg/kg every day on a weaning regimen) was continued. In addition, oral cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/day daily for 8 weeks) was administered. The treatment was rapidly effective with an immediate decrease in anti-GBM titers and proteinuria. There were no side effects from the treatment. There was a scar on the left kidney, which was observed using DMSA. Her bladder pressure was measured after 6 months of treatment, and we found low compliance in the bladder, vesicoureteral reflux (VUR)-2 of the right kidney, and VUR3 of the left kidney.