In April 2014, a 54-year-old male patient with severe aortic stenosis underwent cardiac surgery for aortic valve replacement (aortic bioprosthesis) in another hospital. The patient’s medical history was notable due to a Hodgkin’s lymphoma for which he had received chest radiotherapy and chemotherapy in 1995.
In August 2015, the patient was admitted to our institution as a result of prolonged fever. He reported the recent onset of elevated temperature and night sweats.
At physical examination he presented high fever (38.5°C), sinus rhythm (90 b.p.m. at rest), basal oxygen saturation of 90% and bilateral hypoventilation in the basal third of the lungs.
Laboratory tests showed a significant increase of NT-proBNP (10 700 pg/mL; normal range 10–125 pg/mL) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (90 mg/L; normal range 0.1–10 mg/L), significant lymphopenia (250 cell/µL; normal range 1200–4000 cell/µL), impaired hepatic profile with cytolysis (aspartate aminotransferase 162 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 109 U/L; normal range 10-40 U/L) and dissociated cholestasis pattern. Blood cultures were taken.
A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) was inconclusive; it showed a normally functioning aortic bioprosthesis with a slight periprosthetic thickening which was already evident in an echocardiogram performed in February 2015 (6 months previously). However, due to clinical suspicion of IE, the decision was taken to perform an [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography (FDG PET/CT). Images were acquired using a Siemens Biograph 6 PET/CT scanner (Siemens AG, Munich). A myocardial uptake suppression protocol was applied consisting of a low-carbohydrate/high-fat/free protein diet (started 24–48 h prior to the study) followed by fasting for 16 h. After a blood glucose analysis (<200 mg/L), 370 ± 30 megabecquerels of FDG were administered. Images were obtained for 3 min/bed position 50 min after the intravenous radiotracer injection, and selective cardiac images were acquired immediately after for 10 min/bed position. The images showed uptake in the aortic bioprosthesis . As a result, empirical treatment for blood culture-negative IE was initiated and serological studies were performed for fastidious bacteria and fungi. Nevertheless, the patient worsened. He persisted with constitutional symptoms (high temperature, night sweats, and weight loss) and developed signs of heart failure (HF) which required intravenous diuretics. In addition, persistent lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia (58 000 cell/µL; normal range 150 000–400 000 cell/µL), and anaemia (8 g/dL; normal range 12–17 g/dL) rapidly appeared.
As part of the lymphopenia study, on one hand, a flow cytometry analysis (FACScalibur flow cytometer, BD Bioscience, CA, USA) showed low T lymphocyte CD4+ titers (104 cells/mL) with appropriate cytokine production typical of an immune-competent system. On the other hand, a bone marrow biopsy found non-caseating granulomas, which were also found in a liver biopsy. Based on these findings, empirical treatment for tuberculosis was started.
A week later, Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) susceptible to macrolides and aminoglycosides were identified in urine and bone marrow cultures. With the diagnosis of disseminated MAC disease, antibiotic treatment was commenced with clarithromycin (500 mg orally twice daily), rifampicin (600 mg orally once daily), ethambutol (800 mg orally once daily), and prednisone (1 mg/kg intravenously once daily). With this new treatment the patient began to improve.
Taking into account the absence of other findings suggesting IE, it was considered that the prosthetic uptake seen in the FDG PET/CT image was a false positive image. Based on his clinical stability, in September 2015 the patient was discharged for outpatient management.
In November 2015, the patient still presented asthenia, lymphopenia, and occasional mild fever. MAC was still present in blood cultures and cotrimoxazole (800/160 mg orally every 48 h) was added to the treatment. The patient again suffered deterioration in renal function. A renal biopsy resulted in the diagnosis of interstitial nephritis (no granulomas were found). Moreover, the patient developed paraesthesias in his lower limbs, which gradually increased in intensity. After discarding other causes, ethambutol-induced peripheral neuropathy was suspected and ethambutol treatment was withdrawn.
In February 2016 (1 month after ethambutol withdrawal), the patient was again admitted due to increased temperature (38.5°C) and the appearance of a nodule in his left thigh. Laboratory tests showed a significant increase in NT-proBNP (12 500 pg/mL) and CRP (150 mg/L) as well as significant worsening in thrombopenia (50 000 platelets/µL), anaemia (8.5 g/dL) and renal function (GFR 35 mL/min/m2). The TOE showed more thickening around the aortic bioprosthesis than the previous one. The FDG PET/CT was repeated and showed pathological uptake in the aortic prosthesis and the nodule in his thigh .
One week later, microbiologists identified the strain of MAC in previous blood and urine cultures (August and November 2015). They identified M. chimaera using GenoType NTM-DR (HAIN Laboratories, Nehren, Germany), Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD), and Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP), leading to the diagnosis of disseminated disease, and IE due to M. chimaera.
Antibiotic treatment was initiated with amikacin (750 mg intravenously once daily) and levofloxacin (500 mg orally once daily) while maintaining clarithromycin and rifampicin. Amikacin levels were satisfactorily maintained within the target of 1–8 mcg/mL (trough) and 20–30 mcg/mL (peak). Despite persisting neuropathy, ethambutol was reintroduced. The case was reported to the Spanish Public Health authority.
In March 2016 (after 1 month on appropriate antibiotic treatment), the patient successfully underwent aortic valve replacement with a mechanical prosthesis. Mycobacterium chimaera was isolated in the aortic bioprosthesis . However, the suspected mycobacterial abscess in the thigh was not surgically removed because it was diminishing in size and excision was deemed to be technically difficult.
Unfortunately, after surgery the patient still presented high temperature, HF, pancytopenia and renal impairment. Antimicrobial therapy was increased by adding cefoxitin 2 g/day intravenously. Nevertheless, the infection data persisted in spite of blood cultures being M. chimaera negative. Hence, a decision was taken to use interferon-gamma 1b (INF-g) which was based on literature reports concerning the use of INF-g in patients with idiopathic CD4+ lymphopenia (ICL) as adjuvant therapy in refractory disseminated MAC disease., INF-g was initiated in mid-April 2016 at doses of 90 mcg (50 mcg/m2) three times/week. The INF-g was well tolerated; the patient only experienced mild headache, myalgia, and mild fever after the administration of each dose. The patient began to improve and peaks of high fever disappeared. Due to persistent paraesthesia, ethambutol was suspended and cotrimoxazole was reintroduced.
In May 2016, after a few weeks of clinical stability, the patient was discharged. He developed tinnitus and mild hearing loss as a side effect of amikacin.
The FDG PET/CT was repeated in June 2016 (3 months after cardiac surgery). The images showed no uptake in the aortic prosthesis . However, the uptake in the suspected thigh abscess remained . INF-g treatment was suspended after 14 weeks had been completed.
A further FDG PET/CT was performed before ending the antibiotic treatment (13 months after the first negative blood cultures). The images showed no uptake in the aortic prosthesis or the thigh . The antibiotic treatment was subsequently terminated.
In July 2017, the patient was afebrile and blood/urine cultures remained negative after 5 months without antibiotic treatment. Thrombopenia and anaemia remitted and lymphopenia slightly improved. However, peripheral neuropathy, slight deafness, and tinnitus still remained as a consequence of drug toxicity.
Unfortunately, in September 2017 the patient was admitted due to confirmed S. aureus methicillin sensitive prosthetic IE. The clinical course was complicated, and he finally died due to multiple organ failure in October 2017. Cultures of blood, urine, and bone marrow were M. chimaera negative. Necropsy findings confirmed the absence of M. chimaera infection.