A 17-year-old South Asian man was referred to our department for recurrent episodes of generalized muscle weakness, fatigue and cramps from the age of two years. Hypokalemia was initially detected at the first episode and he was treated for periodic hypokalemic paralysis. Before the age of 12 years, these episodes were mild, readily improved with ringer lactate and potassium chloride by his treating physician and occurred only twice a year. Beyond the age of 12 years, these episodes gradually worsened in frequency and intensity to the point that they were refractory to previously administered therapies and sometimes required hospitalization.
His symptoms were aggravated by physical activity and hot weather, and were associated with polyuria, polydipsia, nocturia, paresthesias and occasional painless non-bloody diarrhea. He denied the use of any medication, including laxatives and diuretics. He also had a history of short stature and poor weight gain. His birth history was unremarkable but developmental landmarks were delayed. There was no family history of renal salt-wasting syndromes or delayed puberty. However, his parents were first cousins.
An examination revealed a thin and lean, but well-oriented adolescent with no acute distress. His height and weight were below the third percentile (weight 30kg; height 147cm). His blood pressure was 95/60mmHg with orthostatic changes. His sexual development was at Tanner Stage II.
Investigations at the admitting hospital revealed a normal leukocyte count, platelet count, hemoglobin level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. His urea level was 34mg/dL, creatinine 0.9mg/dL and random blood glucose 105mg/dL. His estimated glomerular filtration rate based on the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease formula was 97.9ml/min per 1.73m2. His high blood urea nitrogen level was attributed to mild dehydration due to the hot weather. He was found to have metabolic alkalosis: pH 7.58, HCO3- 33.5, base excess +7.6. His serum electrolytes were as follows: sodium 124mmol/L, potassium 2.4mmol/L, calcium 6.5mmol/L and phosphate 3.4mg/dL. His serum magnesium level was not checked at that time. Serum albumin, creatine phosphokinase, free thyroxin, thyroid-stimulating hormone and parathyroid hormone levels were normal.
He was provisionally diagnosed with periodic hypokalemic paralysis and hypocalcemia. Treatment was started with potassium and calcium supplements. After one month, he showed little improvement and he was referred to our department for further evaluation.
Further laboratory tests revealed a low magnesium level (1.2mg/dl) and decreased 24-hour urinary excretion of calcium (25.9mg/24 h). Luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone levels were also normal. His level of testosterone was low (0.85ng/mL, normal for his age 2.67 to 10.12ng/mL). Electrocardiography showed a normal sinus rhythm and prolonged QT interval. No abnormality was found on an abdominal X-ray, chest X-ray or brain magnetic resonance imaging. A renal ultrasound revealed a prominent pelvicalyceal system. An insulin tolerance test showed normal cortisol and growth hormone response.
Based on the findings of hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis without hypertension, severe hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria, a diagnosis of GS was made. No organic cause of hypogonadism was established and the sex hormone findings were attributed to delayed puberty. Treatment was started with oral supplementation of potassium, magnesium and calcium along with spironolactone and liberal salt intake. Our patient and his parents were also counseled about delayed puberty.
A limitation to this case report was that the diagnosis could not be ascertained with sequencing of the implicated gene due to unavailability of genetic sequencing at the presenting hospital (Jinnah Hospital Lahore, Pakistan).