A 30-year-old male smoker presented with a 2 h history of compressive type of central chest pain, associated with sweating and radiation to left shoulder. It was not associated with nausea, vomiting, breathlessness, or syncope and there were no other conventional risk factors of coronary artery disease (CAD). His prior functional capacity was good without any angina or dyspnoea.
In the emergency room, he was anxious with a pulse rate of 90 b.p.m. and a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg. The neck veins were not distended. His room air oxygen saturation was 99%, with normal heart sounds and there were no murmurs or rales on auscultation. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with ST-segment elevation inferior wall myocardial infarction . Transthoracic echocardiogram showed hypokinesia of the basal and mid-inferior wall with mild mitral regurgitation and adequate left ventricular ejection fraction. He was promptly transferred to the catheterization laboratory after loading with 325 mg of aspirin, 600 mg of clopidogrel, and 80 mg of atorvastatin. Coronary angiogram via right radial access showed an occluded proximal RCA and minimal disease of the left coronary artery and its branches.
Primary percutaneous intervention was planned and the RCA was engaged using a 6-Fr JR 3.5 guiding catheter. Repeat acquisition after crossing the RCA lesion with a 0.014″ Floppy wire showed a huge ectatic segment involving the proximal to mid-RCA segment with a large thrombus within the ectatic segment. Repeated manual aspiration thrombectomy using a 6-Fr Export catheter failed to clear the thrombus. Intracoronary (i.c.) thrombolysis using 10 mg of tenecteplase induced recurrent ventricular tachycardia that was successfully cardioverted, but the thrombus burden was persistent. Our previous experience with Solitaire AB for thrombus retrieval from cerebral arteries in stroke patients prompted us to use it in this desperate situation.
The Solitaire device is a self-expanding a-traumatic nitinol stent attached to a pusher and it requires a 2.4-Fr micro-catheter (Rebar) for its delivery and re-capture. The first step is to advance the micro-catheter over the wire and to position its tip just distal to the thrombotic segment. After removing the wire, the solitaire is back loaded into the micro-catheter and pushed up to its tip that is already positioned in the coronary just distal to the thrombus. Now the micro-catheter is pulled back using one hand, simultaneously maintaining the position of the solitaire device by holding the pusher in place using the other hand. This manoeuvre will un-sheath the device across the thrombus and entangles it. Next the device is pulled back into micro-catheter along with the entangled thrombus. Finally the micro-catheter and the recaptured solitaire device (with the retrieved thrombus) are pulled out of the guide catheter with simultaneous aspiration from the proximal hub of the guide catheter. Technically this leads to loss of the wire after each retrieval, and some operators prefer complete removal of the guide catheter; this also allows the operator to flush out any thrombus that might be retained within it. A line diagram is presented here to illustrate the procedural technique.
The 153 cm, 2.4-Fr Rebar micro-catheter was pre-loaded with a 0.014″ Floppy wire and its tip was advanced distal to the thrombus in the ectatic segment over the wire. Then a 4 × 20 mm Solitaire AB stent was back loaded into the micro-catheter (after removing the wire) and delivered to its tip . The solitaire stent was unsheathed and deployed across the ectatic segment by pulling back the micro-catheter. The position of the deployed stent was confirmed by the radio opaque markers (distally four and proximally one) and its relation to thrombus was confirmed by a cine angiogram. The device was retrieved back into the micro-catheter and then into the guide catheter as an assembly to retrieve a large thrombus on the 3rd attempt . Simultaneously, the guide catheter was aspirated to prevent escape of the thrombus while the stent collapses and enters the guide catheter. Repeat acquisition showed a tight lesion just after the ectatic segment with mild residual thrombus . The stenotic segment was dilated with a 2.5 × 15 mm non-compliant balloon and then i.c. nicorandil and tirofiban were given selectively into the distal RCA, through the aspiration port of the thrombo-suction catheter to achieve thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) II plus flow. Post-thrombus retrieval ECG showed significant ST-segment resolution. The patient was monitored on the coronary care unit for 24 h whilst receiving an intravenous tirofiban infusion and back-up temporary pacing. Stenting was not considered at this stage fearing intramural haematoma with i.c. thrombolytics and worsening of slow flow. Twenty-four hours later ECG showed complete ST-segment resolution with a small Q wave in lead III. Repeat angiogram showed near total resolution of thrombus within the ectatic segment and the post-ectatic critical stenosis was further pre-dilated and stented using a 3 × 28 mm everolimus eluting stent to restore TIMI III flow in the distal RCA and its branches . Care was taken to position the proximal edge of the stent exactly at the distal margin of the CAE and the proximal stent edge was flared by high-pressure post-dilation. The pacing lead was removed 24 h later and the lead III on ECG showed Q wave with T inversions . The patient had an uneventful recovery subsequently and he is asymptomatic at 6-month follow-up. There was no history suggestive for Kawasaki’s disease in childhood or any other autoimmune disorders and the stenotic lesion distal to the ectatic segment points to an atherosclerotic aetiology for the ectasia also.