A 6-year-old Japanese boy with no relevant medical history presented with vomiting. Laboratory data revealed hypochloremic alkalemia with dehydration. Computed tomography revealed a congenital duodenal position anomaly and DDC in the second part of the duodenum . The DDC was identified as internal bleeding, but there was no air, gas, or apparent communication within the duodenum . Duodenal obstruction due to DDC was diagnosed. The cause of the duodenal obstruction was considered to be the internal bleeding of the DDC because the patient had no apparent history of obstructive symptoms such as abdominal pain and vomiting. Upper endoscopy showed that the second part of the duodenum was completely obstructed by the DDC , and the location of the papilla of Vater was at the proximal site of the obstruction. Upper gastrointestinal fluoroscopy showed a congenital duodenal position anomaly . An elemental diet tube was placed under endoscopy, and enteral nutrition was initiated. After correcting electrolyte imbalance and dehydration, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery. At first, we planned for DDC resection with mucosal stripping with or without a Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy reconstruction, considering the large defect hole of the DDC.
An umbilical Benz incision was made. A multichannel access port with two 5-mm trocars was also inserted through the incision. Subsequently, two 5-mm trocars and a 3-mm trocar were inserted into the right and left flank abdomen and epigastrium. First, Kocherization was performed to mobilize the duodenum. The DDC was opened for decompression and was found to contain old blood . The DDC originated from the distal second part of the duodenum; the distal second part was dorsal to the proximal second part of the duodenum, ascending upward from the proximal second part of the duodenum. The third and fourth parts of the duodenum ran downward to the left and posterior parts of the portal vein, forming the ligament of Treitz. The DDC lumen and protruding region into the second part of the duodenum were confirmed . The second part of the duodenum, on the opposite side of the pancreatic head, was opened to check for the protruding part of the DDC. The protruding part of the DDC was present distal to the papilla of Vater . While checking the intraluminal space of the DDC, the distal second to fourth parts of the duodenum were easily dissected from the surrounding tissue and ligament of Treitz. Hence, complete laparoscopic resection of the DDC and the second to fourth parts of the duodenum, and duodenojejunostomy with retrocolic reconstruction were performed.
The partial duodenectomy, involving the distal second to fourth parts of the duodenum, was performed laparoscopically, followed by extracorporeal retrocolic reconstruction. Then, the hole at the ligament of Treitz and Petersen’s defect was closed laparoscopically using 4-0 absorbable sutures. The remaining second part of the duodenum with the DDC was fully resected distal to the papilla of Vater. Finally, duodenojejunostomy was performed with single-layer end-to-end anastomosis using 4-0 absorbable sutures. The surgical procedure is described in the schema provided in Fig. d. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. Macroscopic examinations showed that the DDC communicated with the duodenum at the proximal second part of the duodenum . Microscopic examination showed that the DDC was partly lined by duodenal mucosa. However, the ectopic mucosa and the common muscle layer of the duodenum could not be evaluated because the hemorrhage caused granulation formation, fibrogenesis, and cystic region between the submucosa and muscularis propria. However, comprehensively, these findings were consistent with communicating type DDC. The patient remains under follow-up and 4 months after surgery he exhibits no symptoms. Long-term follow-up is planned.