A 65-year-old male patient was found to have proteinuria during a health checkup in 2014. He underwent a surgery for encephalic angioma and received massive blood transfusion in 1992. Besides, he had received a diagnosis of chronic HCV infection for 10 years. He was admitted to another hospital at first in January, 2015. Physical examination showed trace pitting edema of the lower extremities. The initial laboratory evaluation was significant for proteinuria of 2980mg/24h, serum albumin of 21g/L and HCV RNA viral load of 6.53*10^5 (copies). His HCV genotype was 1b. A renal biopsy was performed there, with histopathology consistent with membranous nephropathy. Light microscopy showed 15 glomeruli and one was global sclerotic. Thickened glomerular capillary walls were found. Tubulointerstitial lesion was mild. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed diffuse granular capillary wall deposits of IgG [IgG1 (++), IgG2 (-), IgG3 (±), IgG4 (+++)], IgM, C3. They recommended to treat HCV infection first.
From April 10, the patient was started on Ledipasvir-Sofosbuvir (1#, qd) for 3 months. In the end of April, the patient presented to our hospital with progressive foamy urine. On admission, the patient's consciousness was clear. Physical examination showed severe edema of lower extremities. Blood pressure was 143/76mmHg and no clinical chest or abdominal abnormalities were found. Laboratory investigation revealed the following: serum creatinine 121μmol/L, eGFRCKD-EPI 54ml/min/1.73m2, proteinuria 12169mg/24h, serum albumin 13g/L. Urinalysis was remarkable for protein (4+) and 31-50 red blood cells/high-power field (HPF). Complement factors, such as C3, C4, serum immunoglobulins and rheumatoid factor were in the normal range. Anti-dsDNA antibodies, anti-nuclear antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were absent. HCV RNA viral load (Roche, COBAS AmpliPrep/COBAS TaqMan HCV Test) was already negative. Main laboratory findings were summarized in Table . Chest CT revealed a small amount of pleural effusion in the left side.
His pathology slides were read again: light microscopy revealed a total of 16 glomeruli, 2 of which were global sclerotic. Suspicious eosinophilic deposits were found in epithelial side in Masson staining. A diffuse thickening of glomerular basement membrane was seen with increased mesangial matrix and mesangial cells . Tubulointerstitial lesion was mild. These features were consistent with MN. Besides, HCV antibody was found to be negative in kidney tissues.
Steroid pulse therapy (40mg/d of methylprednisolone intravenously) was initiated for 3 days, then tapered to 40 mg/d of prednisolone orally with 200mg/d of Cyclosporine A. By then, he had been on Ledipasvir-Sofosbuvir for about 3 weeks. Also, he was treated with urokinase (50000U/d) for anticoagulation, Plavix for antiplatelet aggregation, along with Caltrate D, Rabeprazole, etc. During follow-ups, HCV RNA (COBAS) remained negative, meanwhile, serum creatinine decreased to normal (84μmol/L), proteinuria gradually decreased to 763mg/24h, and serum albumin increased to 41g/L, thus prednisolone and Cyclosporine A were gradually reduced.