A 42-year-old man, known case of gastric sleeve 3 years back, presented to our clinic with the left ankle pain on and off which increased with walking and reduced by rest, and a limping gait for the past week. For the 1st time after the bariatric surgery, he went for a 30 min jog 2 weeks ago with no history of trauma. Post-sleeve he lost an approximate of 55 kg weighing from 153 kg to 98 kg. On examination, he had mild swelling at the dorsal aspect of the hind foot, decreased range of motion, tenderness on lateral aspect of left ankle, and intact neurovascular. The basic laboratory investigations were within normal range, including the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 14 mm/h. (Normal: 0–15 mm/h.), and C-reactive protein was 6.23 (Normal: <10 mg/L). X-ray anterior posterior, mortise, and lateral view of the affected ankle illustrated apparent abnormalities . The patient was reassured and discharged from the clinic with a follow-up outpatient appointment after 4 weeks. The patient presented with the same complaints with even more pain, aggravated with walking. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was arranged for the patient for the left ankle 2-month post pain, which showed diffused bone marrow edema of the talus body and neck . According to MRI results and excluding other pathology, the patient was diagnosed with TO of the talus.
It was recommended by the department to start the patient with nutritional supplementation therapy of calcium 650 mg daily and Vitamin D 50,000 IU weekly with no role for bisphosphonate or other bone resorptive initially. We also recommended protected weight bearing (pain free activity) and to wear an air cast boot to avoid complications. Paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were prescribed as pain relief medication and he was recommended rest for 6–8 weeks. At follow-up, 3-month post-presentation following the previous recommendation, the patient could walk on air boot cast with reduction of pain to 50%, and the MRI of the left ankle showed marked improvement of talar edema . At the final follow-up, 9 months after the diagnosis, the patient presented as pain free with no complaint.