This case involved a 15-year-old male patient who presented to our outpatient department due to "vision difficulty in the right eye for more than ten years.” This patient had a noticeable pupillary abnormality in his right eye at birth which was found by his parents but wasn’t given treatment.
Ophthalmic examination revealed corneal astigmatism was 5.57 diopter (D) and 2.57 D respectively for the right and left eye, respectively. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 2.0 logMAR and 0 logMAR for the right and left eye, respectively. A-Scan ultrasonography measured axial length of 23.33 mm and 23.50 mm, intraocular pressure of 14.7 mmHg and 9.1 mmHg, the number of corneal endothelial cells of 3427.2 /mm2 and 3156.7 /mm2 in his right and left eye, respectively. Slit-lamp examination of the right eye showed clear cornea, deep anterior chamber. The pupillary area is entirely covered by the iris tissue with the absence of pupillary opening, and iris hypoplasia with poor development of iris crypts and collarette. Gonioscopy revealed flat iris root, clear iridocorneal angle structures and minimal iris pigmentation. Lens status and fundus evaluation could not be commented. B-Scan ultrasound measurement was within normal limits. Constant exotropia in his right eye was observed, but extraocular muscle movements were normal. There was no other abnormality in the left eye .
The patient was diagnosed with Tourette's syndrome in 2011. He had a full-term cesarean section. His mother had no history of fever, no exposure to radiation or chemical drugs during pregnancy. The parents were not consanguineous. Parents and other family members had no eye-related medical history or family genetic history.
Based on ophthalmic examination, the admission diagnosis was given as acorea. Pupilloplasty was performed on the right eye under topical anesthesia on July 29, 2021. Two superior clear corneal incisions were made using keratomes. After injecting a viscoelastic substance into the anterior chamber and posterior chamber, an extremely small pupil was observed in the pupil area at < 0.5 mm in diameter . An iris scissor was moved along a circular path to cut off the iris tissue in the pupil area, and an auxiliary hook was used to help form a pupil of about 3 mm in diameter. During the operation, the lens was transparent without synechiae. The sterile balanced salt solution was used to hydrate the superior corneal wound. After the incision was closed, Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Ophthalmic Ointment was applied to the conjunctival sac, and the operative eye was covered after the operation.
The postoperative course was favorable, and a normal pupillary area was secured. After the operation, the patient felt the vision was much brighter than before, but blurred slightly due to the loss of pinhole effect. Postoperative examination of the right eye showed that the BCVA was 2.0 logMAR not improving further, the number of corneal endothelial cells was 3375.9 /mm2, the anterior chamber was of normal depth, the pupil was round and central, the final pupil size measured on IOL Master was 4.1 mm. Pupil responded partially to topically administrated tropicamide eye drops. This dilatation was followed by visual field improvement . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed clear iridocorneal angle structures. The lens and vitreous were transparent. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus photography revealed the macula was healthy and the architecture of the retinal layers appeared normal . There were no postoperative surgical complications, hospital discharge diagnosis was given as microcoria, and amblyopia treatment was followed.