A 46-year-old healthy man was brought to our hospital by ambulance because of sudden loss of consciousness while sitting on the edge of the bathtub. He had no known diseases or history of head trauma. On admission, he was comatose (Glasgow Coma Scale score: 4) with 2 mm round isocoric pupils. He was immediately intubated in the emergency room because of severely suppressed breathing. After achieving hemodynamic stability by administering catecholamine, a brain CT scan was performed, which showed an intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) adjacent to the right trigone with massive intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) [ and ]. A contrast-enhanced CT scan was performed to investigate the cause of ICH, which showed abnormal vessels adjacent to the hematoma . An abnormal vessel originated from the right posterior cerebral artery and connected to the hematoma, indicating that the vessel was an artery. Another abnormal vessel originated from the hematoma and connected to the right transverse sinus, indicating that the vessel was a vein. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with ICH, IVH, and SAH caused by a rupture of the abnormal vascular lesion which was suspicious of AVM or pial arteriovenous fistula. The increased intracranial pressure (ICP) was not controlled by conservative management and required the insertion of an external ventricular drain. The patient remained comatose and died 16 h after admission. Autopsy was performed 70 min after his death to identify the cause of ICH. During autopsy, the unfixed brain weighed 1610 g, indicating slight brain edema. SAH was observed along the brain surface. Sections of the fixed brain showed a hematoma in the right parahippocampal area although close to the right trigonum , with blood extending into the entire ventricular system. A mass of blood vessels (20 × 10 × 10 mm in size) was seen within the hematoma . The vascular mass had a single feeding artery originating from the right posterior cerebral artery and a single draining vein with drainage into the right transverse sinus. On microscopy, small blood vessels in the vascular mass had variable size, shape, and wall thickness . Thin-walled vessels had the appearance of veins but the presence of elastic fibers confirmed that they were arteries. Some vessels had abnormal, partially thickened walls with discontinuous elastic fibers and medial smooth muscle. There were no aneurysms or varices within the lesion. No thrombotic or calcified changes were found within the lesion. Based on the radiological and autopsy findings, an ICH secondary to Spetzler-Martin Grade I AVM (with <3 cm nidus, found in noneloquent area associated with superficial draining system) was confirmed.