The patient complained of abdominal pain and constipation.
We report the case of a 76-year-old male patient who attended the emergency room due to abdominal pain and constipation.
In the anamnesis he presented osteoporosis, parkinsonism, vertebral stabilization (metal plates and screws) for L2-L3 arthrodesis (2016), L1-L2 spondylodiscitis, chronic pain in the lumbar region, stiffness in the upper limbs and lower limbs, small steps and impairment of the extensor muscles of the spinal column with bent spine syndrome. In July 2020, due to trauma, he attended the emergency room, where, lacking diagnostic evidence, he was discharged and transferred to a rehabilitation institution. He had been taking the following drugs for the last few years at home: Pantoprazole, CardioASA, Bromazepam, Durogesic, and Cardicor.
No relevant personal and family history.
On physical examination, the patient appeared oriented, cooperative, eupnoic, malnourished, with muscle atrophy and widespread hypotonia. Abdominal examination demonstrated diffuse abdominal pain. His heart rate was 68 bpm, blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, and temperature was 36°C.
Blood chemistry showed the following: hemoglobin 11.2 g/dL; white blood cell count 10.790/μL; total bilirubin 0.50 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase 40 U/L; alanine aminotransferase 28 U/L; alkaline phosphatase 115 U/L; amylase 406 U/L; C-reactive protein: 150 mg/L.
To assess the suspicion of chronic pancreatitis, the patient underwent abdominal ultrasound, and the pancreas showed multiple calcifications in the parenchyma. Moreover, the aorta demonstrated an irregular caliber with progressive stenosis. This finding required an in-depth study; therefore, CT angiography was performed and the common right artery demonstrated CT signs of dissection and ulcerated atheromatous plaque at the origin. Dilated gallbladder, slightly dilated extrahepatic biliary tract, increased volume in the pancreatic gland with small hypodense formations in the pancreas head (maximum diameter 3 mm) were also highlighted. Due to the finding of ulcerated atheromatous plaque, Fondaparinux 2.5 mg/d was administered as suggested by the vascular surgeon consultant.
However, the persistence of continuous lumbar pain led the patient to NSAIDs and morphine-like analgesic self-administration, the dosage of which was increased and reduced according to the patient's symptoms relief. Approximately 10 d after Fondaparinux administration, the patient suddenly experienced severe anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, increased cholestasis and transaminase. On physical examination the abdomen was painless. No blood was found in the stool. An urgent abdominal ultrasound, with the patient still in bed, was performed. Evidence of distended gallbladder filled with non-homogeneous hyperechoic material and a slightly dilated intrahepatic biliary tract were observed . The common bile duct was not visible due to intestinal gas.
Therefore, the patient underwent an urgent CT scan, which demonstrated relevant distension of the gallbladder filled with hyperdense non-homogeneous content. The gallbladder walls were of regular thickness. Near the anterior wall, a focus of suspected active bleeding was noted. Intra- and extra-hepatic biliary ducts demonstrated wider dilatation when compared to the previous CT scan .