A 17-year-old girl, not sexually active presented to the Gynaecology outpatient department with chief complain of primary amenorrhea. There was no history of cyclic abdominal pain, excessive hair growth, weight gain/loss or galactorrhea. She was studied till grade 6 with otherwise normal intelligence. There was no remarkable past history. Her two younger sisters (13 years and 12 years) had normal secondary sexual characteristics but not yet attained menarche.
General physical examination revealed short height (134 cm), weight 34 kg, BMI-18.9 kg/m2, webbed neck along with an increased carrying angle of the elbow. Breast and pubic hair were Tanner 3 and axillary hair were present. Vitals were within normal limits except that her blood pressure was 200/120 mmHg. Systemic examination including cardiovascular and respiratory systems and abdominal examination were within normal limits. On local examination, a 3 × 3 cm firm, non-tender swelling was noticed in left inguinal region. The swelling had smooth and regular margins and there was no redness or local rise of temperature. Cough impulse was present and swelling was irreducible. Right inguinal region was normal. External genitalia were normal; however, examination revealed a blind vagina with no uterus felt. Per-rectal examination confirmed the same. On enquiring about the swelling in left groin, mother revealed that she had noticed this swelling when the patient was of 2 years and was initially of pea size. This swelling had gradually increased to the present size of a small lemon and was not associated with pain or dragging sensation.
With a clinical provisional diagnosis of Turner syndrome in view of primary amenorrhea, short height, severe hypertension, patient was admitted for work up and further evaluation. Baseline hormonal profile showed FSH 3.9 mIU/ml (normal range-2.8-11.3 mIU/mL); LH 13.3 mIU/ml (normal range for follicular phase 1.1–11.6 mIU/mL, for luteal phase 0–14.7 mIU/mL); TSH-1.15 uIU/ml; prolactin- 14.1 ng/ml; AMH-10.22 ng/ml; testosterone-24.4 ng/dl; E2–49.21 pg/ml. Karyotype analysis revealed Turner mosaic with 46XX (85%); 45XO (15%). MRI abdomen and pelvis revealed a hypoplastic uterine nodule on right side with normally located ovary; left ovary herniated in the left indirect inguinal hernial sac; and malrotated and ectopic left kidney . Echocardiography and CT angiography revealed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy and malrotated and ectopic left kidney. After reconfirming the karyotype and imaging, decision for reposition of left ovary was taken after thorough counselling of the patient and family. Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair was done and Mullerian structures (small uterine bud, fallopian tube) and ovary were pulled out of the left deep inguinal ring; deep inguinal ring was closed and ovary was fixed to the peritoneum . Patient had uneventful post-operative course and was discharged in stable condition after 2 days on anti-hypertensives. Family has been counselled about the condition and need of passive vaginal dilatation or vaginoplasty before marriage.