This is a case report of a 46-year-old female with a past medical history notable for depression, asthma, and uterine leiomyomas who presented to an urgent care with 5 days of progressive abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, and subjective fevers. The patient endorsed a several month history of gaining weight, though she attributed it to her lifestyle, accompanied with strong, intermittent, crampy right lower quadrant pain. The pain was random in onset and would dissipate very quickly. However, 5 days prior to presentation, her pain dramatically increased and was persistent in nature.
Her surgical history included a myomectomy performed 5 years prior followed by a laparoscopic hysterectomy 2 years later. She was a regular drinker, consuming four to five alcoholic drinks per night, but stopped when her symptoms worsened and had no history of withdrawal. Family history was significant for a maternal grandmother with breast cancer, mother with skin cancer, and an uncle with colon cancer.
Upon arrival to the emergency room, the patient was tachycardic, mildly hypotensive, and febrile to 103 °F. Her abdomen was soft, distended, and diffusely tender without peritonitis. Labs were notable for a leukocytosis of 15 K. CT of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated moderate volume, complex fluid within the abdomen and pelvis with extensive amount of gas and peripheral rim enhancement, a thickened appendix filled with fluid, and a soft tissue/cystic lesion in the anterior abdominal wall .
Differential included pseudomyxoma peritonei with a ruptured appendiceal mucocele versus PMP secondary to an adnexal ovarian neoplastic pathology with an infectious component. Per the radiology report, the origin was unclear based upon imaging and stated a ruptured adnexal cyst should be considered given the markedly enlarged septated cystic lesions in the pelvis. The patient was resuscitated, and her blood pressure and heart rate normalized with 2 L of fluid. Given the patient’s hemodynamic stability, the decision was made to attempt conservative management with antibiotics and interventional radiology (IR) biopsy and drainage.
On the floor, the patient remained hemodynamically stable with intermittent fevers. Her abdominal exam also remained unchanged, with persistent pain that was under control with pain medication. It was unclear if the abdominal wall mass was neoplastic, and given our initial nonoperative approach, a biopsy was performed for tissue diagnosis to properly guide further treatment. A core needle biopsy of the abdominal wall mass demonstrated a uterine leiomyoma implant, and the cytology aspirate of the peritoneal fluid showed pools of acellular mucoid material. On hospital day 7, the patient’s leukocytosis rose to 23 K, and repeat imaging demonstrated a more organized collection with intraperitoneal air in addition to multiple thick, wall-enhancing, complex cystic multiseptated lesions. Given these findings on imaging as well as her clinical presentation, the patient was taken to the operating room (OR) jointly with surgical oncology and gynecology oncology for a peritoneal washout and bilateral salpingoopherectomy. Intraoperative findings included a large amount of mucin in the abdomen and pelvis with a pocket of purulent fluid in the mid-abdomen, a very large (12 cm) cystic left ovary, dilated right fallopian tube with enlarged right ovary, a very dilated and thickened appendix, and dense, diffuse small bowel intraabdominal adhesions . Her peritoneal cancer index (PCI) score was unable to be determined due to the degree of inflammatory adhesions. She underwent bilateral salpingoopherectomy given the amount of inflammation in the cecum and base of the appendix, the decision was made not to perform an appendectomy to avoid leakage at the staple line and further infectious complication. The patient’s abdomen was hostile, and no larger operation was deemed necessary at this time, as the patient was nonobstructed and the origin of PMP was not yet verified. The primary goal of the operation was to clear the infection, with the intent to return at a later date when her intraabdominal contents could be properly mobilized for a complete PCI score and an appropriate oncologic resection could be performed.
Her hospital course was complicated by recurrent pleural effusions requiring multiple thoracocenteses, negative for cytology, and persistent need for supplemental oxygen. She also developed a secondary intraabdominal abscess requiring IR-guided drainage. After the patient clinically improved, she returned to the OR 2 months after her initial presentation for completion cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) with 40 mg of mitomycin-C at a target temperature of 42–43 °C over 90 min, as per our institutional protocol . Her PCI at the second surgery was calculated to be 13. She had minimal peritoneal adhesions, and her intraabdominal infectious process had completely resolved. The patient underwent an appendectomy, omentectomy, and tumor debulking. The appendicular base was healthy and easily stapled across. The patient was discharged home with lovenox on postoperative day 5, saturating well on room air, tolerating a diet with oral pain medication, and with return of bowel function. Six months after the CRS/HIPEC, the patient had surveillance imaging with no evidence of recurrence . The abdominal wall mass was unchanged from prior imaging and, given the biopsy of leimyoma, presumed to be an implant at the port site from the patient’s prior hysterectomy.
After the discharge from the second surgery, the patient’s postoperative recovery was complicated by new-onset shortness of breath after the completion of her 30 day course of lovenox. She was diagnosed with bilateral pulmonary emboli, with no evidence of deep vein thrombus on lower extremity duplex. Therapeutic lovenox was initiated, and her symptoms gradually improved. An interval angio CT of the chest demonstrated resolution of the clot. Anticoagulation has since been discontinued, and the patient will continue with 6-month interval surveillance imaging for PMP recurrence.
The pathology of the left ovary and tube following the first operation resulted as an ovarian cyst containing mucin pools and low-grade intestinal type mucinous glands, consistent with metastasis from appendiceal mucinous neoplasm. The right ovary and tube showed mucin, acute inflammation, and adhesions. Immunostains were positive for CK7, CK20, and CDX2 and negative for PAX8 . Following the completion cytoreduction, the appendiceal pathology demonstrated a low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN) with acellular mucin outside the appendix and associated fibroinflammatory response. The proximal margin, the appendicieal base, was negative for tumor. Additional specimens sent during the debulking included the falciform ligament, omentum, pelvic tumor nodules, and tumor deposits overlying the sigmoid, small bowel, left colon, and liver. All additional specimens consisted of acellular mucin. Pre-operative carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA-125 were elevated at 26.8 and 101 respectively. CA 19-9 was within the normal limits. Using AJCC (8th ed.) staging, the final staging was determined to be T4a NX M1a (stage IVA). Since the patient had a complete cytoreduction and the pathology was determined to be LAMN, no further adjuvant therapy was given.