A 40-year-old male presented with a 4-day history of fever, nausea/vomiting, and an enlarging non-tender left neck swelling. The patient was hypotensive, febrile, and confused. Clinical examination demonstrated a unilateral anterior cervical triangle swelling and an erythematous rash on the left side of his neck and anterior chest wall. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with left anterior fascicular block. Treatment was initially with intravenous fluid resuscitation and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Laboratory findings indicated elevated inflammatory markers [C-reactive protein (CRP) 205 mg/L], and a computed tomography (CT) neck and thorax demonstrated an acute inflammatory process of the left submandibular space, unilateral enlarged lymph nodes (largest 4 cm × 2 cm), and evidence of necrotizing lymphadenopathy.
Rapidly, the patient clinically deteriorated, requiring admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) for septic shock. Laboratory findings showed normal haemoglobin (Hb) and neutrophils (Hb 11.1 g/dL; 6.20 109/L) with elevated inflammatory markers [CRP 205 mg/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 91 mm/h], lymphopoenia (0.21 109/L), thrombocytopoenia (59 109/L), hyponatraemia (127 mmol/L), hepatitis [alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 275 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 51 U/L; bilirubin 23 umol/L], hypoalbuminaemia (27 g/L), coagulopathy [international normalized ratio (INR) 1.8], and myocarditis (troponin T 1104 ng/L; NT-proBNP 48 412 pg/mL). Viral and bacterial investigations were performed but remained negative throughout hospitalization. Additionally, a vasculitis screen returned negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated normal left ventricular function and moderate central mitral regurgitation.
Despite ongoing broad-spectrum antibiotics, the patient remained critically unwell and febrile with no definitive aetiology. An ultrasound-guided biopsy of a left anterior cervical lymph node on Day 3 demonstrated features suggestive of suppurative necrotizing lymphadenitis . On Day 4, clinical assessment noted new erythema of the oral mucosa, fissured lips, strawberry tongue, and bilateral conjunctival injection. Coupled with persistent fever, laboratory findings, and lymph node histology, a possible diagnosis of classic KD was made. Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) and high-dose aspirin (300 mg) commenced, with dramatic clinical improvement noted within 2 days. On Day 10, acute transient left upper limb weakness occurred. This was investigated by CT angiogram and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which excluded vertebral artery dissection or stroke.
Given the likely diagnosis of KD, with elevated cardiac enzymes on admission, a computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) was undertaken as an outpatient ( and ). A CTCA at 3 months demonstrated two sequential aneurysms (max 6 mm) in the right coronary artery (RCA), with one smaller subtle aneurysm in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery (4 mm). No associated thrombus, mural thickening, coronary plaque, or perivascular fatty changes were noted. Cardiac MRI showed normal left ventricular volumes with preserved function but focal regions of mid-wall fibrosis consistent with previous myocarditis. A follow-up CTCA at 12 months showed resolution of the LAD aneurysm and improvement of the two focal aneurysms in the RCA (3 mm).