A 56-year-old female patient complained of repeated coughing and wheezing for over 10 years, with allergic rhinitis, allergy to milk, seafood, and many other substances. Over 10 years ago, she developed recurrent cough, wheezing and chest tightness, which was significant in summer and winter, and was subsequently diagnosed as asthma at the local hospital. The patient was started on ICS + LABA (salmeterol fluticasone inhalation powder 50 µg/250 µg) twice daily, and her symptoms were unsatisfactorily controlled. Five years ago, a ground glass shadow, and tree-bud sign in the middle lobe of right lung and lower lobe of both lungs with bronchiectasis were first detected by chest CT. Three years ago, chest CT reexamination showed persistence of the lesions in bilateral lower lungs, along with atelectasis of middle lobe of right lung. Two years ago, the symptoms of cough, expectoration and dyspnea persisted without relief. The outpatient examination showed that FeNO was 41 ppb, and then she was admitted to the hospital, with BMI 16.7, normal serum neutrophil and eosinophil count, negative GM, serum total IgE 152 IU/mL, Aspergillus fumigatus specific IgE 0.28 IU/mL. Bronchoscopy showed more airway secretions, but no airway obstruction was found. Aspergillus fumigatus was detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and sputum pathogenic culture, and the final diagnosis was pulmonary Aspergillosis with uncertain classification . Therefore, oral/intravenous voriconazole was given for 16 weeks, and the dose of inhaled ICS + LABA was increased (salmeterol fluticasone inhalation powder 50 µg/500 µg). The middle lobe atelectasis of the right lung had improved on repeat CT, but the lesions of bilateral lower lungs had not changed. Then, combined aerosol inhalation of amphotericin B 25 mg twice a day was given for 5 weeks, after which the asthma symptoms and lung lesions of the patient remained unchanged. Considering the past allergic rhinitis with increased FeNO and serum IgE levels, allergic airway inflammation was suspected. However, the patient was concerned about adverse drug reactions and refused oral/intravenous glucocorticoids, so we finally decided to use inhaled ICS + LABA (salmeterol fluticasone inhalation powder 50 µg/500 µg) combined with omalizumab 300 mg once every 4 weeks. After 1 month of treatment, the patient’s clinical symptoms began to ease, and were gradually controlled and stabilized. After 1 year, the reexamination showed that the pulmonary imaging lesions had normalized , the nutritional status (BMI 20.1) was improved, FeNO was lower than before (30 ppb), and small airway function was improved.