A 3-year-old female child has been evaluated at our gastroenterological service for persisting constipation and encopresis. The symptoms began when the patient was 18 months old. She was the only child born from non-consanguineous healthy Italian parents. The pregnancy was regular and she was born via vaginal delivery after the 38th week of gestation. Neonatal weight was 3250 g (50°-75° percentile), length 47 cm (10–25° percentile), head circumference 33 cm (25–50° percentile). Apgar score was 9–10 -10. Clinical evaluation at birth was normal. Her perinatal period was uneventful. When the child was 26 months old, microcephaly was detected. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalogram (EEG) were performed and both exams resulted normal. Her physical and cognitive development was unremarkable. The family history was negative for genetic diseases. On physical examination, abdominal distention and microcephaly (head circumference 45 cm, < 3° percentile) were the main characteristics detected. The growth was regular, the facial appearance, as well as the sacral and anal regions, were normal. Functional constipation was initially supposed, so toilet training combined with polyethylene glycol (PEG) treatment was prescribed. During the clinical follow-up, constipation and encopresis persisted despite adequate compliance to therapy, so the patient was revaluated at our gastroenterological service. Normal anal sphincter tone and soft stools in rectum were detected at digital rectal examination. Blood tests, particularly thyroid function, celiac disease screening and electrolytes, resulted within normal ranges. On plain abdominal x-ray (AXR) fecal impaction was confirmed and partial sacral agenesis and lumbar dextro scoliosis were identified. A lumbosacral MRI was performed and the following features were recorded: “sickle – shaped” sacrum (S2-S5 and coccygeal vertebrae agenesis) with preserved S1, anterior meningocele, pre sacral teratoma, terminal cord lipoma, low-lying conus medullaris and tethered cord . To complete the diagnostic evaluation, the urinary tract was studied with abdominal ultrasound and urodynamic test. Both tests resulted normal. As the CS was suspected, MNX1 gene sequencing was performed, but no mutation was detected. Nevertheless, the CGH-array analysis identified a de novo 4.15 Mb deletion of 7q36.2q36.3 region, including MNX1 and SHH genes that are responsible for CS phenotype and microcephaly [–]. The deletion involves also the DPP6, PAXIP1, HTR5A, EN2 and LMBR1 genes. Because of the association between DPP6 mutations and cardiac arrhythmias, a complete cardiological assessment (electrocardiogram, echocardiogram) was performed, but all these exams resulted in normal range. In addition, it has been reported that the DPP6 gene appears to play a major role in the regulation of proliferation and migration of neurons . Loss-of-function mutations in DPP6 are also associated with microcephaly and intellectual disability. In the last neurological evaluation of our patient, which was performed when the child was 6 years old, mild behavioral abnormalities have been documented. In the literature the EN2 gene has been considered to be a susceptibility gene for autism. Furthermore, mutations of LMBR1 has been associated with polydactyly. However, both of these conditions were not present in our patient. To the best of our knowledge, deletions of PAXIP1 and HTR5A are not associated with any clinical abnormalities.
The patient underwent a neurosurgical operation with the indication of cord untethering. After the surgical treatment, constipation improved and encopresis regressed. Clinical follow-up is still ongoing.