A 57-year-old female patient was hospitalized for “one year of menopause, pelvic mass with irregular vaginal bleeding for 3 weeks.” The patient had a history of well-controlled hypertension, denied a relevant family, and disease history. There is no history of lung disease, exogenous hormone use, TSC, or renal angiomyolipoma. 1-0-0-1, spontaneous labor. The patient was admitted to the hospital for an ultrasound examination, which showed that the intima was 7.3 mm, and the echo of the intima was uneven. There was a mixed echo on the left side of the pelvic cavity, with a size of 99 mm × 48 mm, which was mainly hypoechoic with a pipe-like structure. Preoperative PET-CT examination revealed an irregular cystic, solid mass on the left side of the pelvis, an abnormal increase in FDG metabolism in the solid part in front of the mass, the maximum value of SUV is 6.51, 7.02 after delay, the uptake range is 38 mm × 25 mm and possible large malignant lesions from the left appendix. Preoperative chest CT showed a small amount of pleural effusion on both sides, and no apparent abnormalities were found in the rest. The results of the preoperative pulmonary function examination were normal. We performed a laparoscopic total hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, greater omentum resection, and pelvic lymphadenectomy. During the operation, the left fallopian tube was thickened and twisted, approximately 15 cm long, and brittle tumor tissue was seen at the fimbriae end. The uterus is slightly enlarged, and a small intramural myoma was seen in the posterior wall. There was no right fallopian tube abnormality and bilateral ovarian atrophy. The left pelvic wall adhered to the intestinal canal, and the greater omentum adhered to the abdominal wall. There was no evident lymphadenopathy. The postoperative pathology showed that the malignant epitheliogenic tumor of the left adnexa was consistent with high-grade serous carcinoma, and the possibility of fallopian tube origin was high. No definite vascular and nerve recidivism. No tumor metastasis was found in the bilateral parauterine and cervical margins. One of the eight lymph nodes in the left pelvic cavity showed lymphangiomyomatosis, 2 mm in diameter. Among the seven lymph nodes in the left obturator, two lymph nodes showed lymphangiomyomatosis, 5 mm in diameter. Among the five lymph nodes in the right obturator, one lymph node is seen, showing lymphangiomyomatosis, 5 mm in diameter. See in for the H&E staining results of the lymph node LAM pathological sections. Immunohistochemistry showed a-SMA positivity, Desmin positivity, HMB45 (scattered cells +), D2-40 (vessels +), β-catenin (cytoplasmic +), ER, and PR were negative (see ).
According to the pathological report after the operation, the patient was diagnosed with high-grade serous carcinoma of the left fallopian tube (p-T1aN0M0 stage IA). We gave the patient a cycle of chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. After chemotherapy, the patient had no discomfort or bone marrow suppression, so she was discharged from the hospital. The follow-up patient elected to stop treatment because of pronounced nausea and vomiting after chemotherapy. As of 7 April 2021, the patient was followed up in our hospital again. Nearly 8 months had passed since the operation and chemotherapy. A small amount of pleural effusion was still seen on chest CT, similar to before the operation. There were no apparent abnormalities in others, and there was no evident recurrence on upper abdominal enhanced CT and pelvic enhanced MRI. The patient was followed up for 12 months after the operation, and there were no related pulmonary symptoms.