A 69-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of purple discolouration of her 1st and 5th toes of the left foot for approximately 1 month. She had a past medical history of coronary artery disease, coronary artery bypass grafting in 2010, PCI of the left circumflex coronary artery in 2019, history of ischaemic stroke with no permanent disability, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, essential hypertension, insulin-dependent Type 2 diabetes mellitus, and morbid obesity (body mass index 37 kg/m2). Initial physical exam was unremarkable except peripheral vascular exam which revealed cyanosis of the left 1st and 5th toes with diminished left dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses. Laboratory testing was unrevealing with a creatinine 0.66 mg/dL (normal 0.60–1.20 mg/dL), haemoglobin 12.3 g/dL (normal 12–15 g/dL), and platelet count 190 000/µL (normal 150 000–400 000/µL). Her electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with no significant ST-T changes. Non-invasive vascular testing showed an ankle brachial index of 0.88 on the right and 0.50 on the left. Lower-extremity arterial duplex ultrasound revealed a severe left superficial femoral artery (SFA) stenosis. Patient was diagnosed with PAD (Rutherford Grade 5) and planned for peripheral angiogram and possible intervention.
The prior PCI procedure via femoral access was complicated by severe bleeding requiring transfusion. Given obesity and prior femoral access site bleeding, the decision was made to pursue left radial approach for the PVI to reduce the risk of bleeding. Midazolam and fentanyl were used for conscious sedation as needed throughout the procedure and 1% lidocaine for local infiltration over the left radial artery. A 6-Fr Terumo Guiding Sheath Slender was placed in the left radial artery followed by verapamil 2.5 mg and nitroglycerine 200 µg intravenous through the sheath. A Magic torque wire was manipulated to the descending aorta. Heparin anticoagulation was used for this procedure. A 5-Fr pigtail catheter was placed in the descending aorta and aortogram was performed. Next, a Terumo 4-Fr PV multipurpose catheter (150 cm) was advanced to the left iliac artery and left lower-extremity angiogram was performed using digital subtraction angiography. A 90% stenosis in the left mid SFA was noted . The Terumo 6-Fr R2P Destination Slender 119 cm sheath was then advanced over the Magic Torque guidewire after the previous catheter was removed. Unfortunately, the sheath became stuck with the tip of the sheath at the level of the left axillary artery (, , Video S1). The sheath was unable to be advanced nor removed. Multiple doses of intra-arterial verapamil and nitroglycerine were given without success. Following this, right femoral artery was accessed, and a 6-Fr sheath was placed. Then, a NaviCross catheter and a Magic Torque guidewire were advanced to the left brachial artery and further intra-arterial doses of verapamil as well as nitroglycerine were delivered without success. The patient was then intubated and started intravenous propofol for deep sedation with the assistance of anaesthesia. The sheath was still unable to be removed. Subcutaneous injection of verapamil, nitroglycerine, and lidocaine using ultrasound guidance along the course of the radial artery were then attempted. Unfortunately, despite all conventional measures and steady retraction we could not remove the sheath. Due to severe radial spasm, further attempts at removal resulted in structural failure of the sheath. Vascular surgery was consulted, and surgical approach in the operating room to remove the sheath was recommended. The sheath was removed by arteriotomy and was noted to be very thin, friable, and broken into multiple pieces. The stainless steel braided wire that is part of the sheath construction had unravelled and the plastic polymer had separated . Fortunately, the patient recovered well from the surgery and was discharged a week later. She recovered over the next month and has no residual deficits. The left SFA was successful treated with a second procedure using right common femoral artery access.