A 65-year-old Caucasian man (body mass index 25kg/m2) had a history of ischemic heart disease and lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign prostatic hyperplasia, which was under pharmacological treatment with alpha-blockers. He consulted us due to recurrent hematuria and back pain that had been unsuccessfully treated with antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs in the previous 2 months. His physical examination was normal. A digital rectal examination revealed a moderate increase in prostatic gland size without any finding suspicious for neoplastic disease.The results of his blood tests were normal and his total prostate-specific antigen value was 2.2ng/mL. An abdominal ultrasound showed normal kidneys and a lesion of his right bladder wall associated with a 2cm calculus. On cystoscopy, his bladder lesion was a solid, sessile, mass of 2.5cm on the right lateral wall, 3cm from his right ureteral orifice; a 2cm bladder stone was confirmed. Abdominopelvic contrast computed tomography (CT) showed mild heterogeneous enhancement of the lesion, which infiltrated his bladder wall. No other lesions or local or systemic adenopathy were observed . He then underwent endoscopic removal of the mass and a simultaneous transurethral cystolithotripsy .No intra- and postoperative complications were observed; he was discharged on the second postoperative day after catheter removal. Histopathology of the lesion showed spindled and epithelioid clear neoplastic cells with prominent blood vessels ; immunohistochemistry was positive for human melanoma black-45 and negative for S-100, vimentin, smooth muscle actin, cytokeratin, and desmin . The tissue exhibited an infiltrative growth pattern with high mitotic activity (more than 1/50 high-power field) and necrosis. These findings were suggestive of a malignant PEComa.
Based on the histopathological examination and negative CT findings with symptoms (persistent back pain), positron emission tomography (PET) was performed, which showed an increased uptake of the radiopharmaceutical drug at specific skeletal segments: somas of L1, L5, and the left iliac wing. After surgery, he had a performance status of 1 and reported a moderate pain in his lumbar region with a visual analog scale (VAS; from 1 to 10) of 5. Chemotherapy was therefore planned. Previous ischemic heart disease and the echocardiographic finding of reduced systolic function with first-degree diastolic dysfunction prevented the use of anthracyclines, which are the standard first-line treatment for soft tissue sarcomas [-]. Gemcitabine was therefore administered, starting with a 30-minute infusion of 1000mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 4-week cycle. He was clinically re-evaluated before each dose. His performance status did not change during the treatment and pain in his lumbar region disappeared after the third administration (VAS: 1). The treatment was well tolerated and analgesics were not necessary. Side effects were nausea, asthenia, moderate thrombocytopenia (90,000 platelet count/mcL) and neutropenia (4100 white blood cells/mcL).
Six months after starting chemotherapy, CT assessment showed a stable disease according to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors; no bladder recurrence was observed on PET or cystoscopic control; skeletal metastases were reduced and no other secondary lesions were observed. He is presently clinically stable.