In July 2010, a five-year-old boy was admitted to Surgery at the Pediatric Hospital of Coimbra for tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. He had a medical history of recurrent otological suppurative infections, starting 2 years before, with two or three episodes per month, and antibiotic therapy was frequent. Recurrent epistaxis was reported in the previous 3 weeks before this evaluation. The mother described a period of 4 months of prostration and dysarthric language.
The child was born in Portugal from Portuguese parents, and was attending a pre-school institution. He was born by normal vaginal delivery, without complications, after a full-term gestation. His mother received prenatal care, with pre-eclampsia; HIV serology was negative in the first and last trimesters of pregnancy. At birth, the patient weighed 3460 g and measured 51 cm with an APGAR score of 10 (5 min). The child was breastfed for 2 years. He received all vaccines included in the Portuguese national vaccination programme, including BCG, plus Prevenar (Pfizer) and Meningitec (Pfizer), with no report of complications. At the age of 3 years, he was at the fifth percentile (P50) of weight according to the growth charts. At hospital admission, aged 5 years, he was at P25 for weight and P50 for height . On physical examination, he was alert and interactive, with normal mental status, appearing well. The remaining physical clinical examination was normal, except for abdominal distension. On the pre-operative tests, the prothrombin time (15 s; control 1 s) was increased and thromboplastin was normal. A full blood count showed 4.42×103 white blood cells μl−1, with an absolute neutrophil count of 1200 and an absolute lymphocyte count of 2700. Serum electrolytes, creatinine and creatine phosphokinase values were normal, but alanine aminotransferase/aspartate aminotransferase levels were elevated to 1939/637 U l-1. Epstein–Barr virus serology was IgM positive, but all other hepatotropic virus markers were negative. A 0 % CD4+ lymphocyte value prompted the clinicians to test for HIV, revealing a positive result with an HIV viral load of 1 073 899 RNA copies ml−1 (6.03 log) . According to the CDC staging system, at this point the HIV clinical disease staging of the boy could be classified as A3. After the diagnosis of HIV infection in the child, his parents also tested positive for HIV-1. As the child’s mother seroconverted after the 32 week of pregnancy, it is impossible to determine whether the child was infected peripartum or during breastfeeding. The mother was considered asymptomatic, and still remains as such, although at the child’s diagnosis it could not be considered a LTNP, as he was infected for less than 7 years .
Upon diagnosis, he started a combined oral therapy of lamivudine 4 mg kg−1 twice a day, zidovudine 180 mg m−2 twice a day, lopinavir/ritonavir 10/2.5 mg−1 kg−1 twice a day. The response to treatment was excellent, as assessed by the increasing CD4+ percentage and the decreasing plasma viral load . The immunological recovery was achieved without any clinical manifestations suggestive of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome. One month after treatment was started, the aminotransferase value returned to normal. After 8 months, the plasma HIV RNA load was undetectable and the CD4+ level increased to 17.8 % with a CD4+/CD8+ ratio of 0.3. Eighteen months after treatment, the CD4+ level reached to 34.7 % and the CD4+/CD8+ ratio was 0.63. At this stage, the clinical examination was normal, without symptoms of disease . The mother never developed any signs of disease compatibly with AIDS, while the father rapidly progressed to AIDS (results not shown).
As part of an ongoing surveillance programme of LTNPs, we searched in the child and parents for genetic variants of the vpr gene. For this, leukocytes were extracted from the patient’s blood using a Ficoll (Lymphoprep; Axis-Shield) gradient methodology, based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Leukocyte DNA extraction was performed using a MagNA Pure Compact with a MagNA Pure Compact Nucleic Acid Isolation kit I (Roche). Amplification of the vpr gene was performed as described by , with slight modifications. Briefly, two sets of primers were designed and used in two successive amplifications: the external primers, Fwd-Vpr (5'-GGAAAACAGATGGCAGGTGATG-3') and Rev-Vpr (5'-TCTCCGCTTCTTCCTGCCAT-3') and the internal primers Vpr1f (5'-ATAGTTAGTCCTAGGTGTGA-3') and Nint2 (5'-TTCCTGGATGCTTCCAGGGCTCTA-3'). For amplification, we used a Phusion Hot Start High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (Finnzymes). The amplicon was purified and sequenced elsewhere (LGC Genomics). The sequences obtained were analysed with the mega4 program , to search for mutations. We found that the child’s HIV-1 vpr gene had point mutations, some of which resulted in codon changes (see Fig. S1, available in the online Supplementary Material). The predicted resulting amino acid sequence led to an amino acid change at position 77, from arginine to glutamine (R77Q), and at position 3 from glutamine to arginine (Q3R). The vpr gene of the parents revealed a predicted change at position 77, but the codons indicated a change from arginine to histidine (R77H) .