A 35-year-old woman was referred to the Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery of The University of Tokyo Hospital for evaluation of a gastric lesion in August 2005. During esophagogastroduodenoscopy, a 30-mm flat and depressed lesion was identified at the anterior wall of the upper gastric body and was diagnosed as Type 0-IIc gastric cancer . A pathological analysis of the biopsy specimen determined a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (tub2). The patient underwent laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy (LATG) with Roux en-Y reconstruction and lymph node dissection (D1 + No. 7) in accordance with the Japanese Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines . A pathological analysis of the specimen revealed the depth of the lesion remaining in mucosal layer, without any lymph node metastasis. The patient showed good progress after the operation and did not receive any further treatment including chemotherapy. She was only instructed to continue oral iron supplementation for postoperative chronic anemia after discharge. She became pregnant 1 year and 8 months after the operation. After her pregnancy, radiographic examinations were excluded during the follow-up period while oral iron supplements were continued. In addition, 500 μg of methylcobalamin (MeCbl), an active form of vitamin B12, was intramuscularly injected once a month for a potential vitamin B12 deficiency, although her serum vitamin B12 level was within normal range. No pregnancy-associated discomfort or illness was observed including hyperemesis gravidarum during her pregnancy while the fetus was developing normally. In May 2008, the baby was born by vaginal delivery at 41 weeks of gestation. Delivery time was 4 h and 20 min, and the baby was delivered as a healthy normal child weighing 3076 g. The mother’s weight change and the uterus height change of the fetus are shown in Fig. a–c.
After delivery, she continued to take oral iron supplements and vitamin B12 intramuscular injection and had kept exclusively breastfeeding without any problems until her first postpartum check-up. However, during the blood examination after her postoperative follow-up, 2 months after her delivery, the serum AST (aspartate transaminase) and ALT (alanine transaminase) levels of the patient were found to be elevated. We presumed that excessive oral food intake influenced gastrointestinal absorption leading to liver dysfunction. After changing exclusively breastfeeding into the combination of formula and breastfeeding, the serum AST and ALT levels were restored within the normal range . The patient has been followed-up for 10 years and has not shown recurrence of gastric cancer. Also, the child showed a good progress.