This is a 26-year-old man who experienced right lower limb weakness for 2 years and the weakness exacerbated in last half year. He visited the second affiliate hospital of the Zhejiang University School of Medicine. A physical examination indicated the result of the straight leg raising test was positive and also muscle atrophy. The muscle power of the right lower limb had decreased to grade 3. There was no sensory impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed an intraspinal extradural tumor over T10 to L3 . It appeared to be a spinal extradural arachnoid cyst (SEAC). To confirm whether the fistula existed between the subarachnoid space and arachnoid cyst, and to localize the position of the fistula, we performed a real-time technique. First, we injected contrast medium into the cyst under fluoroscopy. After 1 h the follow-up computed tomography (CT) was administered, and it revealed there was no contrast-infiltration into the subarachnoid space . We then extracted about 20 mL of fluid from the cyst. The follow-up magnetic resonance imaging on the same day indicated the cyst did not become smaller . A “one-way valve” fistula was suspected such that cerebral spinal fluid could pass into the cystic space from the subarachnoid space but could not flow in the opposite manner. Therefore we designed a procedure to localize the fistula. We penetrated two needles into the cyst and subarachnoid space separately in the L3/L4 level under digital subtraction angiography . Pending the fluid drained through those two needles, we injected 10 mL of contrast medium slowly into the subarachnoid space and a little contrast medium infiltrated into the cystic space horizontally at the T12/L1 level. We then administered high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) immediately to confirm the position in the axial plane. The HRCT revealed a funnel-shaped enhancement between the lower edges of the T12 body and the left nerve root, and this is the accurate position of the fistula .
After general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation, the patient was placed in prone position. A fluoroscopy was used to determine the correct operative level, and a longitudinal incision was made 5 cm off midline at the T12 level. Muscle was dissected layer by layer, and a spinal process and left lamina were exposed. The left lamina was partially ground by cutting burr and then removed along with ligamentum flavum by Kerrison punch. After that, the cyst was exposed. Under a microscope, the cystic wall was fenestrated and it then drained off clear cystic fluid (cerebral spinal fluid). After partial excision of the cyst and evacuation of cystic fluid, a spinal endoscope (SPINENDOS, Germany) was maneuvered into the space and the fistula was detected . The fistula was detached from the arachnoid membrane and was ligated with a 7–0 Vicryl purse string suture. Regional leakage from the repaired site was noted. An anastoclip was then used to close the fistula . Pulmonary pressure was elevated by ventilator (valsalva maneuver) to check the leakage and there was no more leakage. Hemostatic matrix and gel [Fibrin sealant kit (human), (Shanghai RAAS Blood Products Co, Ltd., Shanghai, China)] were utilized at the local region. The postoperative diagnosis was a thoracolumbar extradural arachnoid cyst. The pathological report revealed an arachnoid cyst . The symptoms improved on postoperative day 2. His lower limbs regained strength with limited dorsiflexion of the right foot.
Through the 3-month outpatient department follow-up, there was no more numbness or weakness of his right lower limb. The motion of dorsiflexion also improved. The 3-month follow-up magnetic resonance imaging revealed no recurrence of the previous lesion and no spinal cord compression .