A 36-year-old male Indonesian who denied prior systemic disease or neurologic disorder had been healthy and came to Taiwan for 8 months, working as a labor of electronic factory. No family history of cognitive impairment, movement disorder or young-onset ischemic stroke was obtained. He presented to our emergency department because of acute onset of left limb weakness when he was working on Nov 18th, 2014. At emergency room, the initial vital signs were: blood pressure 156/95 mmHg, pulse 91 beats/min, respirations 16 breaths/min, body temperature 36 °C. The general physical examination was unremarkable. No cardiac arrhythmia, heart murmur or carotid bruit was observed. The neurologic examination revealed left hemiparesis with manual muscle power grade 4, mild dysarthria and left central facial palsy. There was no cognitive impairment, extrapyramidal signs or cerebellar ataxia. The score of National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was four points. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed extensive and symmetric calcifications involving the bilateral basal ganglia, internal capsules, thalami, cerebral subcortical white matter, cerebellar dentate nuclei and deep cerebellar white matter . The blood examinations at emergency room were normal including coagulation profiles, blood cell count and biochemistry profiles. He was admitted to neurologic ward with the tentative diagnosis of young-onset ischemic stroke.
At hospitalization, the causes of abnormal intracranial calcification and young-onset stroke were investigated. The level of serum calcium (2.20 mmol/L), phosphorus (4.3 mg/dL), magnesium (2.1 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase (79 IU/L), calcitonin, thyroid hormone, parathyroid hormone and enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were all within normal limits. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed acute ischemic infarction involving the right posterior limb of internal capsule and an old lacunar infarct involving the left genu of the internal capsule. In addition, hypointense signal in T2 weighted images and slightly hyperintense signal in T1 weighted images were identified at bilateral basal ganglia, thalami, and cerebellar dentate nuclei corresponding to the calcified lesions . Magnetic resonance angiography and venography excluded intracranial large-vessel stenosis, aneurysm, vascular malformation or dural sinus thrombosis. The contrast-enhanced MRI excluded abnormal parenchymal or leptomeningeal enhancement . Cerebral perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) of the brain with 99mTc-hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (99mTc-HMPAO) demonstrated the presence of hypoperfusion in the bilateral basal ganglia and thalamic regions as well as heterogeneous radiouptake in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres and cerebellar hemispheres . The young stroke surveys including carotid artery duplex, transthoracic cardiac echo, 24-h Holter, hematologic measurements, D-dimer level (213.23 ng/mL), coagulation profiles, autoimmune profiles, inflammation indices were all unremarkable.
Aspirin with doses of 200 mg daily and adequate hydration was regularly administered. However, his left limb weakness started to deteriorate on day 2 after admission with NIHSS score rising to six points. There was no other cortical function involvement. For stroke in evolution, low-molecular-weight heparin with Dalteparin 2500 IU subcutaneously every 12 h had been given for 5 days and his left hemiplegia gradually stabilized. After sustained physical rehabilitation for 3 months, he recovered to carry out daily activities independently. The score of NIHSS at discharge was two points. The treatment resulted in favorable functional outcome that was assessed by the modified Rankin Scale score of 1 and the Barthel Index score of 100.