A 62-year-old Afro-Caribbean woman was diagnosed as having bilateral carcinoma of the breast in 2004. Her past medical history included hypertension, controlled by amlodipine and losartan, in addition to diabetes on treatment with metformin. She underwent bilateral mastectomy and axillary node clearance with immediate implant-based reconstruction. The pathology revealed multifocal disease on the right, T2N0(0/20)M0 grade 1 and 2 invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), and on the left side, T3N1(2/18)M0 grade 1 IDC. The disease was estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, weak progesterone receptor (PR)-positive, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative. Surgery was followed by adjuvant chemotherapy, consisting of the 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FEC) regimen and regional radiotherapy. Hormonal therapy initially consisted of 20 mg daily of tamoxifen. After 3 years this was switched to an aromatase inhibitor (anastrozole 1 mg daily) until 2009 when she completed 5 years of adjuvant endocrine therapy. She then subsequently relapsed with metastatic disease with lung nodules in 2008 and bone metastases were noted on a bone scan 4 years later. She was commenced on 25 mg once a day of exemestane and 4 mg intravenously administered monthly injections of zoledronic acid in early 2014. Due to disease progression, capecitabine 1250 mg/m2 (based on total body surface area) twice daily was commenced until after six cycles when it was discontinued due to capecitabine-related toxicity and she was started on 2.5 mg once a day of letrozole and 150 mg once a day of ibandronic acid. In February 2016 she presented with neck swelling with intermittent neck discomfort without airway pressure symptoms. On clinical examination she was found to have cervical lymphadenopathy. Laboratory findings revealed a white cell count of 5.2 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 115 g/L, and normal liver and renal function with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 67 ml/minute/1.73 m2. The neck swelling was investigated with an ultrasound and confirmed both lateral cervical nodal disease in levels II to IV and a goiter with left-sided dominance. The fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of her thyroid was reported as in keeping with a papillary thyroid cancer; however, the cytology of the left lateral nodal disease was described as more suggestive of a breast malignancy. She had no personal or familial risk factors for thyroid malignancy. Staging investigations including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her spine demonstrated stable deposits involving C2, C5, T4, and L1 without neural compromise and computed tomography (CT) of her thorax demonstrated no change in the lung nodules . Since the diagnosis was not clear, following a multidisciplinary team discussion the decision was made to proceed with a total thyroidectomy and a clearance of the central compartment lymph nodes coupled with an excision biopsy of the laterocervical lymph nodes. Histopathological analysis of the specimen demonstrated an ill-circumscribed white tumor at the posterior margin of the left lobe measuring 1.2 × 0.9 × 1.5 cm. On immunocytochemistry the tumor cells were positive for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), synaptophysin, GATA3, and ER (5/8), focally positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15), and negative for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), calcitonin, thyroglobulin, CK20, PR, and HER2. The overall appearances were consistent with metastatic breast cancer with no evidence of a primary thyroid malignancy. The level IV and level VI lymph nodes contained metastatic breast cancer. She was discharged on daily 125 mcg of levothyroxine. The chemotherapy was switched to 500 mg intramuscular monthly injections of fulvestrant and she continues to take the ibandronic acid. Currently, 14 months following the thyroidectomy, she remains clinically stable. She developed local recurrences in the level II to IV lymph nodes in her neck and a recent MRI of her spine showed stable spinal metastatic disease.