A 13-year-old Han male was admitted for intermittent abdominal pain and defecation for 1.5 years and aggravation with vomiting for half a month.
One and a half years ago, the patient presented tolerable upper abdominal pain without an obvious cause, with loose stool three to four times/d. In the past half month, the abdominal pain worsened, which affected eating; the patient vomited after eating. He did not have fever, hematochezia, articular pain, or other symptoms. The patient was injected with amoxicillin [50 mg/(kg.d), i.e. 1500 mg/d, three times a day for 7 d] intravenously for anti-infection, which was ineffective. The patient lost 2 kg since the onset of the condition.
At the age of 4 years, the patient was admitted to our hospital due to large liver and spleen, short stature, and repeated hypoglycemia. Finally, he was diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type Ib [SLC37A4 gene c.572C > T (p.T191L) (maternal) and c.359C > T (p.P120L) (parental) compound heterozygous mutation]. He was given raw corn starch regularly (2 g/kg, once every 4-6 h) and G-CSF (5 μg /kg each time) when he repeatedly showed low neutrophil counts (minimum 0.5 × 109/L) and respiratory infections that were not treated regularly. He suffered from recurrent oral ulcers in the past 5 years. In addition, recurrent perianal abscesses appeared in the past 4 years that underwent surgical drainage each time.
The birth history and feeding history were uneventful. There was no history of similar illness in the family.
Height: 138 cm (< P3), weight 32.3 kg (< P3), multiple ulcers in the oral mucosa, tenderness in the upper abdomen, and soft liver with dull edge at 2 cm below the ribs.
After admission, examination showed neutrophils of 0.71 × 109/L, and the patient was treated with G-CSF [5 μg/(kg.d) i.e. 160 mg/d]. The other data were as follows: Hemoglobin: 107 g/L (120-160 g/L), uric acid: 581 μmol/L (164-376 μmol/L), triglyceride: 2.3 mmol/L (0-1.69 mmol/L), normal blood sugar, erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 104 (normal: < 15) mm/h, C-reactive protein: 61 (normal: < 8) mg/L, cytokines of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha: 204 pg/mL (0-8.1 pg/mL), IL-6: 17.2 pg/mL (0-3.4 pg/mL), and normal interleukin (IL)-2R, IL-8, and IL-10. In addition, stool routine, stool parasites, and stool Clostridium difficile toxin were all negative. Also, the results of T cell spot test (T-spot) and purified protein derivative test were negative.
Chest computed tomography showed normal results, while abdominal computed tomography revealed hepatosplenomegaly and fatty liver.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy detected chronic gastritis and bile reflux, while colonoscopy showed three deep cyclic ulcers in the terminal ileum, with a maximum circumference of 1/4 (of intestinal circumference), covered with white fur. Moreover, the ileocecal valve was deformed and narrow, and deep ulcers, about 1 cm × 0.5 cm, were visible along the tissue; several large cyclic deep ulcers were visible in the ascending colon, with a maximum circumference of 1/2 (of intestinal circumference). Moreover, the ulcers were fused with each other, and several deep ulcers were scattered in the descending colon and rectum . The pathology of antral mucosa showed chronic inflammation.
The pathology of the terminal ileum, ileocecal region, ascending colon, descending colon, and rectum prompted infiltration of diffuse inflammatory cells and scattered eosinophils with visible ulcer formation. Periodic acid-Schiff staining, immunohistochemical cytomegalovirus (CMV) staining, and Epstein-Barr virus encoded ribonucleic acid in situ hybridization were negative .
Capsule endoscopy showed several cyclic small ulcers in the terminal ileum.