A 23-year-old African American male with previous high level of social and academic functioning, family history of depression, and no past medical or psychiatric history was admitted to an inpatient psychiatric unit for treatment of several months of uncharacteristic, odd behavior and disorganized thought process. On presentation, the patient could not provide a coherent narrative. His family and friends reported gradual onset of odd behavior within the year prior to admission. These behaviors included wearing his rugby helmet around his college campus, discarding clothes in the trash, and becoming increasingly disheveled in appearance. He drove across the state, in the middle of the night, to his mother’s home to then fearfully claim he was being pursued and his mother was trying to kill him.
Several weeks prior to admission, the patient was hospitalized, diagnosed with schizophrenia, and prescribed perphenazine 8 mg twice daily and doxepin 50 mg nightly. After 7 days of inpatient care he was discharged. His disorganized behavior returned 3 days after discharge, prompting his mother to bring him for inpatient psychiatric admission.
On presentation, he was responding to internal stimuli, regularly glancing around the room during the interview. His speech was latent with intermittent thought blocking. He reported somatic delusions regarding his heart and a general delusional atmosphere feeling that everything around him was connected. He reported an auditory hallucination of the devil’s voice.
Admission labs (WBC 5300, ANC 2100), urine toxicity, and head CT were all unremarkable. He was diagnosed with schizophrenia and started on aripiprazole 10 mg, which was increased to 20 mg. He was also treated with escitalopram 10 mg daily given concern for possible affective component and clonazepam 0.25 mg twice daily for anxiety. After nearly 2 weeks, the patient demonstrated little improvement on mental status exam.
Given lack of response to aripiprazole, he was transitioned to oral paliperidone 6 mg. His ANC prior to paliperidone initiation was 4120. Following 15 days of paliperidone 6 mg, he started to respond with improvement in his psychotic symptoms. However, his complete blood count at day fifteen of paliperidone revealed an ANC of 1210 with a nadir of 960 (WBC nadir of 3720) on serial monitoring. Aside from neutropenia, there were no other lab abnormalities. Peripheral smear showed mild leucopenia with neutropenia and relative lymphocytosis. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were both negative. Physical exam was unremarkable. Hematology specialists concluded that the timeline and negative work-up were most consistent with drug-induced neutropenia. Paliperidone was discontinued after 20 days of treatment and haloperidol 10 mg nightly was started. ANC was monitored three times weekly. Gradually, his counts improved and 16 days after discontinuation of paliperidone, returned to normal with an ANC of 2070 (WBC 5220). While on haloperidol, the patient showed progressive improvement of his symptoms. By discharge he demonstrated spontaneity of speech and greatly improved content and organization of thoughts.