A 72-year-old male initially presented with the right-sided hemiparesis and underwent magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. MR imaging revealed acute infarction of the left frontal lobe and bilateral internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis (Rt: NASCET 90%, peak systolic velocity 425 cm/s and Lt: NASCET 70%, peak systolic velocity 212 cm/s). After 2 months of rehabilitation, his neurological status improved to a modified Rankin scale score of 0, and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed a decrease in CBF in the right cerebral hemisphere . Endarterectomy was successfully performed 3 months after the onset of minor stroke. We performed CEA on the left side because it was symptomatic. The patient was prescribed a dose of an anti- platelet agent (aspirin, 100 mg) daily for 7 days before the operation. We used the INVOS-4100 cerebral oximeter at several stages during CEA to measure the effect of carotid clamping and shunting on oxygen saturation (rSO2). Contralateral rSO2 readings were lower than ipsilateral rSO2 readings during the preoperative period. However, the rSO2 value increased by 2% (from 50 to 51) and 38% (from 47 to 65) on the ipsilateral and contralateral sides, respectively, the day after the CEA. The blood pressure did not have a change through the perioperative period. Neurological deterioration was observed after surgery, with the appearance of right-sided hemiparesis and dysarthria. Significant changes were not evident from the emergency CT scan. The apparent diffusion coefficient of this lesion was slightly high, but the DWI signal did not show a significant increase, suggesting the formation of local vasogenic edema. SPECT showed a decrease in CBF around the infarction . MR angiography showed a patent left ICA, whereas SPECT indicated a contralateral increase in CBF . Administration of a free- radical scavenger, edaravone, an antiepileptic agent, and glycerol, gradually relieved the patient’s symptoms during the next 7 days. The CBF improved, and laterality disappeared 2 weeks after surgery [ and ]. The blood flow of both sides equaled 2 weeks later . Subsequent MR imaging with fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images revealed a local high-intensity lesion around a previous infarction in comparison with before operation [ and ]. FLAIR MR imaging 2 weeks after initial surgery confirmed the complete disappearance of the high-intensity lesion . The patient recuperated and did not exhibit any cerebrovascular events during the 2-year postoperative period.