A 26-year-old, previously healthy man with no known history of chronic disease presented to the emergency department with a complaint of 1-week generalized edema, nausea, fatigue, and generalized ache in the extremities. The patient has no family history of autoimmune diseases. On examination, he looked ill and distressful, and he had a puffy face. His vital signs showed a pulse of 88 bpm, blood pressure of 110/80, a temperature of 36.7°C, and a respiratory rate of 18. Head and neck examinations were normal. Neurological examinations including motor, sensory, and cranial nerves were unremarkable. The cardiovascular examination was also normal. The abdomen was soft with no tenderness and no evidence of organomegaly. He had bilateral grade 3 pitting lower limb edema up to the thighs. He also had sacral and face edema. Laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 14 g/dl, glucose 99 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase 43 U/l, alanine aminotransferase 35 U/l, urea of 56 mg/dl, creatinine of 0.7 mg/dl, serum sodium 134 mmol/l, and serum potassium of 3.98 mmol/l, total protein 4.7 g/dl, and albumin level of 2.1 g/dl. Regarding the lipid profile, triglyceride was 380 mg/dl, low-density lipoprotein was 290 mg/dl, and total cholesterol was measured at 400 mg/dl. Protein was positive in urinalysis, and the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio resulted 7.27 g of protein per day .
A chest radiograph showed mild pleural effusion on both sides of the lungs. Echocardiography and electrocardiogram were both demonstrated normal results. Abdominal ultrasound revealed bilateral normal kidney anatomy with normal parenchyma and mild ascites.
The patient was immediately admitted to the internal medicine unit under the diagnosis of newly onset NS and was started on ramipril 5 mg, methylprednisolone 60 mg/day, furosemide 20 mg, aspirin 100 mg, and atorvastatin 40 mg. On routine blood tests the day after hospitalization, we incidentally revealed hypothyroidism with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) measuring 37 mIU/l and T4 0.4 ng/dl. We tested the thyroid function tests by a Roche e411 Immunoassay Analyzer (Roche Diagnostics Corporation). The antithyroid peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin antibody tests were negative. The thyroid ultrasound examination was ordered and came back normal. A diagnosis of nonautoimmune overt hypothyroidism due to NS was considered, and levothyroxine treatment was started immediately. A dose of levothyroxine 50 mcg was initially started to lessen side effects and poor compliance and after 3 days it was increased to 100 mcg. After 3 weeks of hospitalization, the patient improved very well and his symptoms subsided. Lower limb edema was decreased drastically, pleural effusion resolved, proteinuria was decreased to 3.9 g/day, and his lipid profile and albumin levels were almost at normal levels. TSH level was also decreased to 9 mIU/l. He was discharged on oral prednisolone, atorvastatin, aspirin, and levothyroxine. After 1 month, the patient came to our clinic for routine follow-up. His TSH level was 3.56 mIU/l, there was no protein in the urine and his albumin and lipid profiles were returned to normal levels.