A 72 year old African American male, with past medical history of hypertension and recently diagnosed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, was admitted to the hospital for fever and chills that started a day ago. He was discharged from the hospital two days ago on intravenous vancomycin for methicillin resistant Staphylococcus Epidermidis infection. The patient was initially admitted to a general medical floor, but his condition worsened within 24 hours and he went into septic shock and had to be transferred to the medical intensive care unit. He was hypotensive, tachycardic and tachypnic and had evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation from sepsis. He was endotracheally intubated and placed on mechanical ventilatory support. Blood cultures grew Clostridium Difficile colitis. Appropriate antibiotics were started, and he was treated aggressively with intravenous fluids and also needed norepinephrine infusion for adequate blood pressure maintenance. He had a left subclavian central venous catheter inserted on the day of admission to the intensive care unit for administration of the vasopressor agent .
The patient's condition improved and he was weaned off the norepinephrine by the third day. On the following day, patient suddenly became hypotensive. While he was being supported by aggressive resuscitative therapy, he had a chest radiograph done as part of the work up to diagnose the etiology of acute deterioration in the clinical condition. The chest radiograph showed widened mediastinum. A subsequent computed tomographic (CT) scan with intravenous contrast given through the left subclavian central venous catheter showed that the catheter had eroded through the wall of superior vena cava and there was extravasated contrast within the superior mediastinum . Chest imaging from the day prior did not show these findings. There was no manipulation of the central venous catheter since its insertion. Bilateral chest tubes were inserted which drained bloody fluid. The central venous catheter was pulled out and patient recovered from the complication with supportive therapy. He later died during the same hospitalization from septic shock due to ventilator associated pneumonia from Pseudomonas Aeruginosa.