A 70-year-old woman presented with a 1-month history of bilateral lower extremity numbness with left-sided predominance. She had a history of hypertension and insomnia, and was taking candesartan and triazolam. Blood tests showed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 7.8 mg/dl, and an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a type 3 lesion on the posterior wall of the lower part of the stomach, which was biopsied and diagnosed as adenocarcinoma . At that time, numbness had appeared in both hands. All symptoms gradually worsened, resulting in staggering, falling, and difficulty in walking. Physical examination revealed diminished tendon reflexes in the lower extremities and decreased muscle strength (manual muscle test [MMT] 3/5) of the bilateral tibialis anterior muscles. The Romberg sign was fair, and a bilateral steppage gait was observed. Blood test results were: vitamin B12, 197; antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer, < 40; anti-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibody, < 2.0; anti-SS-A antibody, < 1.0; anti-SS-B antibody, < 1.0; soluble IL-2 receptor, 321; myeloperoxidase–anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (MPO–ANCA), < 1.0; and proteinase 3–anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (PR3–ANCA), < 1.0. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed glucose of 58 mg/dl, cell count (1/3, mononuclear cells 100%), protein 122 mg/dl, and Cl 125 mEq/l. PNS and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy were considered as differential diagnoses. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal any findings suggestive of brain metastasis . Spinal MRI showed kyphotic deformity of C4 and narrowing of the spinal canal around C4/5, but no obvious spinal cord compression or abnormal intramedullary signals . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed wall thickening with contrast effect on the lateral side of the greater curvature of the stomach and enlarged lymph nodes in the surrounding area, suggesting metastasis . Nerve conduction velocity testing showed decreased amplitude of complex-type action potentials (CMAP) in the ulnar and peroneal nerves and no derivation of F waves. A laparoscopic distal gastrectomy was performed. The pathological results showed a 45 × 40 mm type 3 lesion on the posterior wall of the mid-gastric body. Histologically, the lesion appeared to be a moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, with tumor cells infiltrating the subserosal layer and invading lymphatic vessels and veins . Based on the pathological examination, the final diagnosis was T3N1M0 Stage IIB, according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma (JCGC) (3rd English Edition) . The postoperative course was uneventful; intravenous high-dose immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG) was started on the third postoperative day, and oral steroids were started on the 14th postoperative day. After rehabilitation, the patient was able to walk with a walker and the numbness in the limbs disappeared, and she was discharged on the 28th day after surgery. Her advanced age and prolonged hospitalization resulted in a marked decline in her physical activity, and we determined that adjuvant chemotherapy was not indicated according to her request. Steroids were then started at 25 mg but reduced by 5 mg every 4 weeks and continued at 10 mg for some time. At 8 months postoperatively, we decreased the dose to 5 mg, and after that, we reduced the steroid volume by 1 mg every 4 weeks, and the steroids were terminated at 18 months postoperatively. With this dosage regimen, the patient was able to walk with a cane 1 month after discharge from the hospital, and another month after that, he no longer needed a cane. The decreased deep tendon reflexes and mild steppage gait remained for some time but completely disappeared at 18 months postoperatively. Two years have passed since the surgery without any recurrence or metastasis.