An 11-year-old Caucasian female was referred to neurosurgery for evaluation of scoliosis and a 1-year history of back pain. The pain was right-sided and radiated down the lateral aspect of her right lower extremity and was not relieved by over-the-counter medications, including acetaminophen, naproxen, and ibuprofen. She also described occasional tingling of her right toes and the feeling that her right knee would “give out” when walking. She denied experiencing any bowel and bladder dysfunction. She also denied left-sided pain and any inciting event or injury.
At the time of initial presentation, her non-contrasted CT lumbar spine and her thoracic spine X-rays showed dextroconvex scoliosis with a Cobb angle of 15°, with no other abnormalities noted by the radiologist. Given the mildness of her scoliosis, her back and the right leg pain was unlikely to be secondary to her scoliosis alone. Thus, a lumbar MRI was ordered to rule out a herniated disc or other causes of nerve impingement. Her MRI showed a 5.3 cm T2/STIR hyperintense, lobulated, heterogeneous enhancing lesion widening the right L4-L5 neuronal foramen with scalloping of the posterior right L4 vertebral body and extending into the paraspinal soft tissues, most suggestive of a right L4 peripheral nerve sheath tumor (shown in Fig. ). There were no obvious signs of periosteal involvement.
The MRI findings and plan for surgical resection were discussed with the patient and her mother on follow-up. Given the lateral location of the mass, a retroperitoneal approach was planned with the assistance of pediatric surgery. Intraoperatively, we found that the mass appeared to encase the right L4 nerve root, which was spared along with any other neural elements we encountered. The mass also had a very friable capsule and contained old hematoma. We dissected the mass from the L4 nerve root with great difficulty and followed it down to the vertebral body, achieving a gross total resection (confirmed on postoperative imaging, shown in Fig. ). The frozen sample sent intraoperatively was nondiagnostic, although chordoma was within the differential. The patient was admitted following surgery for observation and pain control; her postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged home on postoperative day three in stable condition.
The final pathology on the permanent sample showed that the mass was consistent with conventional-type chordoma. Histologic sections of the soft tissue mass of the right L4 vertebra show a lobular pattern with fibrous septa separating the lobules. The lobules consist of abundant basophilic myxoid stroma with short cords of eosinophilic epithelioid cells, which are admixed with vacuolated cells resembling lipoblasts and physaliphorous cells. The neoplastic cells show diffuse and strong nuclear positivity for brachyury immunostaining, immunoreactivity to pan-cytokeratin, and epithelial membrane antigen, as well as focal immunoreactivity to desmin and S-100. The tumor cells show retained nuclear staining of BRG-1 and INI-1. These features are shown in Figure .
Upon receiving the final pathology results, the patient was referred to pediatric hematology/oncology and radiation oncology. Adjuvant proton beam radiation was chosen to minimize acute and long-term toxicity, and the patient completed a full course. She received 74 Gy administered in 37 fractions over 51 days and routine postradiation monitoring for recurrence. She was last seen for follow-up at 3 months post-operation and reported that she has been doing well since surgery, with an improvement in her pain and weakness. However, scoliosis films at 3 months showed worsening of her curvature with a Cobb angle of 51°. Because she is still growing and undergoing radiation treatments, we referred her for bracing temporarily. We plan for a close follow-up for safe scoliosis surgery as soon as possible.