A girl aged 4 years and 7 months, who lived in a rural area of Guangxi Province(China), was admitted to the Neurology Department of Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center on July 14, 2015, with left lower limb paralysis lasting more than 50 days. The girl had developed weakness in her left lower limb after falling more than 50 days previously, and occasionally had pain in her left knee when walking. On July 10, an enhanced MRI from another hospital showed multiple irregular ring-like enhancement lesions in the right frontoparietal lobe and the splenium of the corpus callosum, suggesting inflammatory lesions. Her clinical manifestations were increased muscle tension in the left lower extremity, muscle strength grade IV, left Babinski sign (+), and ankle joint spasm (+). Blood examination on July 15 showed that the percentage of eosinophils in her peripheral blood was 6% (normal reference value: 0.5–5%), and the absolute count was 0.84 × 109/L (normal reference value: <0.6 × 109/L). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of cerebral parasites (Schistosomes, Sparganosis, Taenia solium, Toxoplasm, and Paragonimia) in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid showed IgG (+) and IgM (+) for sparganosis on July 16. On July 17, further enquiry by a clinician revealed that the child had eaten raw frog meat. Four brain MRI were performed at our hospital over an 8-weeks period, including three during hospitalization (July 23, August 5, and August 17, 2015). From July 21 to August 18, the patient received 10-25 mg/kg/day praziquantel as diagnostic treatment because expert consultation did not fully support a diagnosis of cerebral sparganosis. On August 19, the child’s symptoms improved and she was discharged according to the doctor’s advice (praziquantel 20 mg/kg/day for 7 days; oral prednisolone acetate 5 mg twice daily for 7 days followed by 5 mg once daily for 3 days). On September 8, a follow-up MRI (the fourth MRI) was performed in the outpatient clinic, and the doctor informed the patient’s guardians that surgical intervention may be required. In November 2015, the child underwent craniotomy at a local hospital, and a 6-cm-long sparganum in the right occipital lobe. At present, the child has weakness in both lower limbs because of brain tissue injury and is undergoing rehabilitation treatment, according to reports from her guardians. She has not yet returned to our hospital for physical examination or follow-up MRI.