A 68-year-old male patient with no ophthalmological or medical history indicative of eye disease presented with blurred vision and metamorphopsia in his left eye. At presentation, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/9 in the right eye and 6/24 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmΗg, and anterior segment slit-lamp examination was unremarkable in both eyes. Dilated fundoscopy revealed ERM in the left eye, confirmed by optical coherence tomography (OCT) . The patient was counseled on the therapeutic alternatives, following with he was referred for PPV for treatment of ERM.
The patient underwent 23-gauge PPV using the CONSTELLATION® Vision System (Alcon, Novartis Int AG, Hünenberg, Switzerland). Core vitrectomy was followed by the surgical creation of posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), while Membrane Blue (Blue 018HD; high-density 0.18% trypan blue; Al.Chi.Mi.A. S.r.l., Ponte San Nicolò, PD, Italy) was used to stain the epiretinal tissue that was removed easily with end gripping forceps. Removal of the ILM was not attempted. The peripheral retina was inspected carefully to exclude the presence of iatrogenic retinal tears. At the end of the surgery intraocular tamponade was not used in the absence of any retinal breaks.
One week postoperatively the retina was attached and ERM was successfully removed ; the BCVA was 6/9. It should be noted that OCT at this time revealed the presence of a hyperreflective area in the inner retinal layers, which most likely was a first sign of disorganization of the inner retinal layers. One month after PPV, there was a single eccentric MH, which was detected by fundoscopy and confirmed by OCT ; this MH corresponded to the hyperreflective area observed on the OCT scan at the previous visit. The BCVA was 6/7.5, and the patient reported no symptoms. The patient was informed about the presence of the eccentric MH, but no additional intervention was attempted at this time. At the 9-month follow-up, no change in the size of the eccentric MH was noted and no complications occurred.
All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1964, as revised in 2013. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for reporting this case.