A 5-year-old, previously healthy boy presented to the Pediatrics Emergency Room with a six months history of high-grade fevers, oral sores and generalized lymphadenopathy. Other symptoms included night sweats and weight loss, with no known history of bruising or bleeding. He had been previously presumptively treated for Tuberculosis without any significant improvement. There was no known history of steroid use. At initial presentation, he was ill-appearing, pale and had generalized lymphadenopathy. A complete blood count showed a white cell count of 1,750 cells/µL, neutropenia of 510 cells/µL, lymphopenia of 770 cells/µL, and monocytosis of 470 cells/µL. He had thrombocytopenia of 21,000 platelets/µL and anemia with hemoglobin concentration 7.0 g/dL. The initial differential diagnosis included aplastic anemia and leukemia. A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy were performed that showed a hypocellular marrow with reduced erythroid progenitors, relative lymphocytosis with aberrant morphology of small mature lymphocytes but no blasts. Flow cytometry revealed no abnormal clonal proliferation. Conclusively, findings were suggestive of a hypoplastic marrow of undetermined etiology.
Although we considered performing a work up for virus infections and genetic bone marrow failure syndromes, our center does not have capacity for these studies. He was managed with antibiotics in view of fever and moderate neutropenia and supportive packed erythrocyte transfusions. Over the subsequent three weeks, his symptoms resolved, his blood counts recovered to within normal ranges, and he was given a follow up appointment in one month. Noteworthy, he was not treated with steroids during this period.
The patient is reported to have been generally well following discharge until 4 months later when he had a recrudescence of high-grade fevers, pallor, and generalized lymphadenopathy. His complete blood count showed leukopenia with white blood cells 530/µL, profound neutropenia 60/µL, lymphopenia 430/µL, monocytes 40/µL, normal platelet count of 196,000/µL, and moderate anemia with hemoglobin 9.5 mg/dL. Bone marrow aspirate showed 80% lymphoblasts. Flow cytometry of bone marrow aspirate showed clonal proliferation of cells positive for CD45, CD3, CD7, CD5 and CD2. The cells were negative for B cell markers CD19, C20, and CD10 and negative for myeloid markers CD13 and CD33, consistent with T-cell ALL . Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid was negative for pleocytosis or blasts. He was risk-stratified as High Risk ALL based on T cell immunophenotype and started on a 4-drug induction of vincristine, dexamethasone, daunorubicin, L-asparaginase and intrathecal methotrexate. He achieved remission with no evidence of minimal residual disease at a flow cytometry resolution of 1 in 10,000 events. He successfully completed augmented BFM Consolidation, Capizzi methotrexate in Interim Maintenance, and Delayed Intensification, and is on Maintenance chemotherapy as per Children's Oncology Group treatment protocols. He was clinically in good general condition with no evidence of relapse at last review.