A 44-year-old female was admitted to our department because of the epigastric pain for the preceding two weeks. Her medical history was significant for arterial hypertension, Hashimoto thyroiditis and hypercholesterolemia. Her surgical history revealed a cesarean section. There were no desmoid tumours in her family.
The physical examination revealed a mass on palpation in the mid-abdomen that was easily movable. The physical examination was otherwise normal. Laboratory findings were unremarkable. The level of CEA was within normal limits. A transabdominal ultrasound (US) showed an ovoid well-delineated homogenously hypoechoic mass that was 10.1 × 6.0 × 7.2 cm in size. There was a hyperechoic area in the central part of the tumour with posterior acoustic shadowing that corresponded to intraluminal air. The tumour was circumferentially attached to the wall of the small bowel . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a 8.2 × 7.2 × 7.4 cm mass infiltrating the small bowel. The tumour attenuation was of 33 Hounsfield units and it enhanced poorly and homogenously with an intravenous contrast . The above preoperative imaging studies suggested a GIST involving the small bowel.
The patient underwent an elective laparotomy. Intraoperatively, there was an approximately 10 cm well-circumscribed mass in the mesentery that infiltrated the wall of the small bowel and narrowed its lumen . On inspection, there were also 2–3 small tubercules attached to the serosa of the adjacent bowel that were included within the resection margins. Several similar lesions were found along the distal part of the small bowel and one of them was excised for the pathological evaluation. This gross appearance suggested a gastrointestinal stromal tumour with the peritoneal dissemination. The resection of a 25 cm segment of the small bowel was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged in a good health condition. A follow-up US revealed no desmoid recurrence a year after the operation.
The primary pathological diagnosis in this particular case was a CD117-negative gastrointestinal stromal tumour. The small serosal tubercules were found to be mesothelial cysts. The principal diagnosis was changed, however, after a consultation at a referral oncological centre. The microscopic examination of the resected specimen identified a fibromatosis in the mesentery. Histologically, the desmoid tumour was composed of spindle cells with elongated coma-shaped nuclei and the immunohistochemistry was negative for both CD117 and for CD34. Beta-catenin overexpression was present on immunohistochemistry . No mitoses were found in 50 high power fields.