A 44-year-old man had been treated with peritoneal dialysis for chronic kidney disease stage-V (CKD-V) for more than 6 years. The ESRD was caused by chronic nephritis. He has a history of hypertension for 6 years without other particular disease. He stated had edema of eyelid and low limbs intermittently and weakness of whole body. A peritoneal dialysis catheter (a right side straight two cuffed Tenckhoff catheter) was placed in August 2012, and the patient received peritoneal dialysis regularly since that time. Several episodes of peritonitis caused by peritoneal dialysis lasted more than 4 weeks only with symptomatic and empirical treatment. In May 2019, Leakage of peritoneal dialysis fluid was noted at the exit-site of the PD catheter. Three days later, the patient developed chills and fever and diagnosed with peritonitis (Supplementary Table ). After a week of antibiotic therapy, (Imipenem 0.5 g Intraperitoneal for 4 h once, Meropenem 0.5 g Intravenous infusion Q12h), his body temperature returned to normal; however, the peritoneal dialysis effluent became turbid, and passage of watery stool occurred immediately after each infusion of peritoneal dialysate into the abdominal cavity. The patient had no abdominal pain or distention.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed inflammation in the abdominal cavity, extensive peritoneal calcification, and appropriate positioning of the peritoneal catheter, but intestinal perforation was not evident . Peritoneal dialysate containing methylene blue reagent was injected into the abdominal cavity. After 2 hours, anal drainage was light blue . Thus, an intestinal fistula was suspected. Colonoscopy revealed methylene blue at the area of the appendiceal orifice , which confirmed the presence of a communication between the abdominal cavity and the bowel lumen. Peritoneal dialysis was discontinued and hemodialysis was initiated. The peritoneal catheter was removed by open surgery. No abdominal pain, abdominal distension, or other symptoms occurred during the follow-up period, which lasted a minimum of 3 months.