A 62-year-old man was referred to Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, in June 2008. He presented a 4-month history of non productive cough, progressive shortness of breath, increasing abdominal girth and anorexia. He was mildly dyspnoeic at rest and complained about severe asthenia. There was no alcohol abuse in the previous ten years, while he presented an 80-pack-a year history of cigarette use, as he had smoked since the age of 18 until recently. An abnormal shadow appeared on the patient's chest X-ray, while a CT scan revealed a right hilar tumor, measuring 92 × 66 mm, as shown in Figure .
A fiberoptic bronchoscopy indicated the presence of an endobronchial lesion infiltrating the upper lobar bronchus of the right lung. Pathological analysis with CT-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the collected specimens showed that the tumor was a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. There was no evidence of extra thoracic metastasis on brain MRI, abdominal CT and FDG-PET scans. Therefore, the patient had a stage IIIA-N2 NSCLC.
Blood tests revealed a mild renal failure with an estimated creatinine clearance of 47 ml/min. Considering the impaired renal function, a platinum-based treatment was ruled out. Therefore, the patient was started on single-agent docetaxel induction chemotherapy (75 mg/sqm over 60 min on day 1, every 3 weeks). The first evaluation was made after four cycles. In September 2008, a CT scan showed a partial response of the carcinoma, which appeared to measure 65 × 41 mm. The safety profile was good, with patient reporting grade 1 anemia, grade 3 neutropenia without fever, weight loss inferior to 10% and asthenia. Therefore, the treatment was continued for four additional cycles. In January 2009, a CT scan showed an impressive shrinkage of the hilar mass, measuring 35 × 30 mm. There also was a marked clinical improvement, as the cough and the dyspnoea had disappeared and the patient reported a general feeling of wellness. Considering the patient's good compliance, it was decided to continue the same treatment until progression or unacceptable toxicity. After 14 cycles, both CT and PET scans showed further tumor response, as the right hilar mass measured only 16 × 10 mm, and the patient was finally judged to be eligible for surgery . The chest surgeon decided to perform a right lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node sampling. On pathological examination, the response to induction chemotherapy was complete.