A 51-year-old man presented to the emergency department with acute-onset chest pain and dyspnea. Upon initial examination, the patient had a blood pressure of 98/68 mmHg, tachycardia of 100 beats/min, tachypnea of 28 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 94% on ambient air. He was agitated with cold sweats. Cardiac auscultation revealed tachycardia without cardiac murmurs. Chest auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds on the right side. Neither jugular vein distension nor lower extremities edema was observed. He had a history of hypertension and had smoked 15 cigarettes daily for 35 years.
ECG revealed sinus tachycardia of 91 beats/min, a vertical P-wave axis of 97 degrees, normal QRS axis of 55 degrees, P-pulmonale, and phasic voltage variation (PVV) of QRS complexes in V4–6 . Each respiratory component (inspiration/expiration) characterized further ECG abnormalities . Note the prominent increase of QRS amplitudes in V4–6 during expiration. However, all the P-pulmonale, vertical P-wave axis, and tachycardia remained unchanged regardless of the inspiration–expiration cycle. Echocardiography revealed normal LV contraction with trivial tricuspid regurgitation, indicating less likely pulmonary hypertension. Chest radiographs and CT scans revealed a large right-sided pneumothorax . Note the straitened cardiac border in the right atrium (RA) and the trachea’s prominent leftward deviation during expiration. Laboratory testing revealed that both cardiac enzymes and brain natriuretic peptide levels were within the normal ranges.
An emergent tube thoracostomy was performed for the pneumothorax. Immediately after the procedure, the patient’s symptoms resolved. The follow-up chest radiographs and CT scans revealed the lungs’ re-expansion and resolution of the RA deformity . Strikingly, the follow-up ECG demonstrated that all the ECG abnormalities and increased heart rate on the initial presentation were resolved . Moreover, we confirmed that no ECG abnormalities were induced during inspiration or expiration following the lungs’ re-expansion . In addition, CT scans demonstrated multiple bullae in the lung apices. Note the large bullae with a maximum diameter of 46 × 49 mm in the right lung apex (Additional file ), suggesting a PSP’s potential cause. Finally, the patient underwent a thoracoscopic bullectomy on day 21. The resected specimen’s pathological examination confirmed multiple bullae with pleural fibrosis and thickening and no evidence of malignancy. The postoperative course was uneventful. On day 23, the patient was discharged with normal vital signs: blood pressure, 134/87 mmHg; heart rate, 70 beats/min; respiratory rate, 14 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 98% on ambient air. The patient remained symptom-free during the follow-up.