A 4-year- and 6-month-old boy was referred to us due to intermittent dribbling of urine and involuntary loss of a small amount of stool, both of which had been present since birth. No family history was noted. Cognitive development was considered to be appropriate for his age. Neurologically, his anal reflex was weak, but he had no motor dysfunction or sensory disturbance in the lower extremities. He had a tiny dimple at the lumbosacral region. There were no cutaneous stigmata indicative of Café-au-lait spot. His general condition was good, except for short stature which was being followed by a pediatrician.
MRI demonstrated a small tumor in the cauda equina that had isosignal intensity to the spinal cord on three-dimensional T1-weighted imaging (3D-T1WI) and 3D heavily T2WI (3D-hT2WI) and was slightly enhanced with gadolinium [-]. A spinal lipoma of filar type with the conus medullaris at L2 level was also demonstrated. Detailed imaging study using 3D-hT2WI revealed that the tumor was located in the left dorsal nerve roots of L3 and L4, presumed from the entry point of the root into the dural sac . Local bulging was observed at the root sleeves of L3 and L4, indicating the presence of normally-positioned DRG. A 3D reconstructions of computed tomography image revealed spina bifida below S2 and abnormal fusion of the lamina of L5-S2 . No intracranial tumor was observed on brain MRI. Urological examination revealed bladder dysfunction consisting of low compliance and decreased urine retention.
Although we considered the possibility of a neoplasm, as the patient’s bladder dysfunction had existed since birth and had not progressed, a follow-up MRI was performed 7 months later; this revealed that the cauda equina tumor remained unchanged in size. The diagnosis was uncertain and we proposed diagnostic surgery for the cauda equina tumor, as well as prophylactic untethering of the spinal cord for the fatty terminal filum. Because his family was concerned about postoperative neurological deterioration due to possible damage to the cauda equina, only untethering of the cord was performed at 5 years and 2 months of age.
The fatty filum was severed through L5-S1 interspace. The cauda equina observed in the operative field appeared normal. Histologically, the fatty filum consisted of fibroadipose tissue with a tiny glial fibrillary acidic protein immunopositive tissues. Postoperatively, no de novo neurological abnormalities were observed. His family subsequently provided consent for the patient to undergo surgery for the cauda equina tumor.
Partial removal of the cauda equina tumor was performed at 5 years and 6 months of age. Laminoplastic laminotomy at L3 revealed a spherical tumor with a long axis of 10 mm at the left dorsolateral portion in the dural sac [-1]. The tumor was surrounded by nerve roots; a few normal-appearing nerve roots ran over the surface of the tumor and extended caudally, while some thinner nerve roots ended at the tumor surface [-2]. Direct stimulation of the tumor surface and the adhering nerve roots showed no evoked compound muscle action potentials on intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM) of the legs and anus. The roots were not determined to be non-functional because they could be dorsal roots on the basis of their anatomical location. Because the nerve roots intimately adhered to the tumor, we considered it impossible to dissect the tumor without damaging the nerve roots, and therefore, small parts of the tumor were resected for biopsy. Postoperatively, no de novo neurological abnormalities were observed. MRI performed after the second surgery revealed that the untethering of the cord was achieved and the cauda equina tumor remained unchanged .
Histopathologically, the resected section consisted of ganglion cells and peripheral nerve fibers [-]. At the periphery of the ganglion cells, a few Ki-67 immunopositive satellite glial cells or macrophages were observed. No neoplastic component was present. These findings indicated that the tumor comprised DRG tissue.