A forty eight year old female Musoga by tribe, resident in Katwe suburb to the south of Kampala City (Figure ) presented at Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital in the outpatients’ Oral Surgery and Jaw Injuries Unit on 25th July 2011. She had had discolouration and swelling of the tongue for three weeks, difficulty in mastication and articulation and had taken antibiotics and analgesics. There was no history of trauma, dental manipulation, bleeding or swelling of other parts of the body or treatment for chronic disease. No social history had been recorded, her human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serostatus was not known and the extremities were not inspected. Physical findings had noted a female in good general condition with swelling of the lower face and bilateral non-tender submandibular lymphadenopathy. The anterior part of the tongue was swollen, discoloured red and a firm tender lump measuring 2 × 4 millimetres was palpable. The mucosa, gingiva, palates, jaw and neck movements were normal.
Abnormal haemogram findings were a leucocytosis of 14.5 × 103/μL and neutrophilia of 10.2 × 103/μL (reference ranges 4–11 and 2–7 respectively), the bleeding indices were normal. With differential diagnoses of papilloma, granuloma, Kaposi sarcoma and cyst, the lump was excised and sent for histological examination. The patient was prescribed cetrimide-lidocaine hydrochloride mouth wash and gargle and a week later, the facial swelling and submandibular lymphadenopathy had subsided. There was no record of subsequent visits. Microscopy of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded Haematoxylin and Eosin-stained tongue sections had shown a space-occupying lesion within skeletal muscle. This was surrounded by numerous neutrophils, macrophages and giant cells, some lymphocytes and occasional eosinophils. Several oval-shaped structures, some intact some cracked, aggregated in compartments that occupied most of the space. Discontinuous spiral-bound elongations at the periphery of the lesion represented the flea’s chitinous exoskeleton (Figures , and
). Based on the circular containment of numerous oval aggregations, elongated fractionated segments encapsulating the space and accumulation at the tissue-lesion interface of inflammatory cells characteristic of a foreign body reaction, tungiasis of the tongue was diagnosed.