We present a rare case of Müllerian dysgenesis of P.C., a 24-year-old primigravida who presented to the maternity emergency department with severe generalised abdominal pains at 35 weeks. She was pale on clinical examination and haemodynamically unstable.
Abdominal palpation revealed a 35 cm fundal height, longitudinal lie, and baby in cephalic presentation; her abdomen was too tender for deeper palpation; fetal heart tones could not be heard on hand held Doppler and cardiotocographic auscultation. No bleeding was noted vaginally with a closed cervical os.
She had a subumbilical midline scar which on further inquiry was due to what was a negative laparotomy for preoperative diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy at 8-week gestation during the current pregnancy. No abnormalities were noted during surgery at that point.
She was resuscitated with two litres of normal saline and six units of blood grouped and cross matched. Emergency caesarean section was done with a tentative preoperative diagnosis of concealed abruptio placentae.
Abdominal entry through a subumbilical midline incision was employed; two litres of haemoperitoneum and tortuous vessels over the gravid uterus were encountered; on further exploration bicornuate uterus was noted intraoperatively .
The traditional Kerr uterine incision was made and baby delivered (fresh stillbirth). Placental tissue was adherent to entire myometrium all the way to serosa, with areas of active haemorrhage at point of attachment. Attempted removal left a large defect that was actively bleeding .
Upon further evaluation a decision to perform unilateral caesarean hemihysterectomy was made due to active on going haemorrhage at the point of placental attachment.
Bilateral ovarian preservation was carried out successfully; the uterine vessels on the ipsilateral side were skeletonized and ligated achieving haemostasis. The ureters were identified from the level of the pelvic brim and followed along their entire length to the bladder to rule out any possible urinary tract abnormalities that occasionally coexist with Müllerian anomalies.
Lavage was done and abdomen closed in layers. She received 4 units of whole blood and recovered without complications.