In 2008, a 44-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our pulmonary out-patient clinic with progressive dyspnea and cough. She mentioned recent swelling of her fingers and eyelids. Furthermore, Raynaud’s phenomenon was present for many years and she complained of a pruritic rash on the inner side of her right thigh and widespread arthralgia.
On clinical examination we found bibasilar crackles, puffy fingers and swollen eyelids. On her right thigh we observed a discrete macular rash. Pulmonary function tests noted normal lung volumes and a reduced diffusion capacity: forced vital capacity (FVC) 85%; forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 85%; carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO) 46%. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) demonstrated ground-glass opacities in both lung bases, with limited honeycombing, compatible with NSIP . Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) analysis revealed increased cellularity (37.04×106 cells/microliter) with increased lymphocyte (25.6%) and eosinophil count (12.4%). Laboratory analysis noted mild inflammation (C-reactive protein, CRP, 12mg/L), normal liver tests and a normal creatine kinase level. ANA were negative and no anticytoplasmic staining was detected on indirect immunofluorescence (IIF). Rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated protein antibodies were negative. No specific search for the presence of antisynthetase antibodies was performed. Capillaroscopy showed only aspecific findings with two megacapillaries, insufficient for a diagnosis of systemic sclerosis.
She was diagnosed with NSIP with a high suspicion of an underlying CTD, because of the presence of Raynaud’s phenomenon, puffy fingers, a NSIP pattern on HRCT and the lymphocytic BAL formula. However, the absence of ANA and the absence of a clear signature on capillaroscopy led to the diagnosis of undifferentiated CTD (UCTD).
She was monitored with regular clinical, laboratory, radiological and lung function evaluations. All parameters remained stable for four years. Suddenly, she presented with progressive dyspnea, fever, night sweats, weight loss, myalgia and muscle weakness, arthralgia, swollen eyelids and cracked fingers . A clinical examination revealed a febrile, discrete hypotensive and tachycardic patient (39°C, blood pressure 101/57mmHg, pulse rate 101 beats per minute). We noted a heliotropic rash, polyarthritis of hand proximal interphalangeal joints as well as proximal and distal muscular weakness and tenderness. The skin on the radial side of her first to third fingers of both hands appeared hyperkeratotic and cracked, compatible with mechanic’s hands. Laboratory analysis documented severe inflammation (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 112mm/hour, CRP 192.2mg/L) and elevated creatine kinase levels (713U/L, normal <=145U/L). IIF showed a negative ANA and a positive anticytoplasmic signal (titer 1/640). Her blood and urine cultures were negative. A chest radiograph showed no evidence for an intercurrent infection. Electromyography studies were compatible with severe myopathy in both proximal and distal muscle groups. Pulmonary function tests revealed severe restriction and severely decreased diffusion capacity (FVC 44%; FEV1 40%; DLCO 31%). A transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal right and left ventricular function with an estimated ejection fraction of 60%. A small pericardial effusion was present (maximal end-diastolic diameter 5mm) without hemodynamic effect. Systolic arteria pulmonalis pressure estimate was 45mmHg. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated discrete contrast enhancement in the basal septum, compatible with previous myocarditis.
This clinical picture was compatible with an ASS and urged the search for antisynthetase antibodies. Anti-Jo-1 antibodies were negative, but more specific testing (immunodot technique, Alphadia, Belgium) revealed the presence of anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetase (anti-PL7) antibodies. She was treated with high-dose glucocorticoids (1mg/kg methylprednisolone with a tapering scheme) in combination with mycophenolate-mofetil. This resulted in normalization of her creatine kinase levels and stabilization of pulmonary function tests.