A 37-year-old male without any previous medical history was examined for a painful anal fissure in 2006, and a biopsy was consistent with small cell ANEC with a Ki-67 proliferation index of 80%. Laboratory with blood count, liver and kidney parameters were normal, including CEA 4.5 μg/L (reference: < 4.7). An abdominoperineal resection (APR) was performed, and the patient was subsequently treated with adjuvant cisplatin/etoposide (six rounds) as well as external radiation therapy (46.8 Gy), followed by further chemotherapy for 1 year. Two ensuing recurrences with subcutaneous lymph node metastases in the right inguinal area were noted shortly afterward, and the metastatic tissue was removed surgically in two subsequent operations 2 years after initial presentation . The first metastasis measured 3.7 cm and was excised with positive margins, and the second subcutaneous relapse was 4 cm with extensive perinodal extension, almost penetrating the overlying skin. Post-operatively, the patient was administered three rounds of doxorubicin and docetaxel, with additional radiation 12.6 Gy. Soon after this, an additional subcutaneous recurrence within the abdominal wall was noted, which expanded from two to 6 cm within 2 months. Extended surgery was performed, excising a 7 cm large metastasis with negative resection margins. The resection included the spermatic cord and right testicle, but these structures were seen without tumoral engagement. This procedure was completed with reconstructive surgery using a flap technique and a skin transplant. After this, adjuvant treatment with eight rounds of irinotecan/fluorouracil and folic acid (leucovorin) were administered for 2 years. Since the last relapse 2 years after initial presentation and to our last follow-up 13 years after initial presentation, there have been no recurrences during clinical investigations and imaging performed with repeated computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) . The patient is still followed clinically by our Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, and a follow-up MRI of the abdomen and pelvic area is planned in the autumn of 2020. If this future radiological examination is negative for recurrences, the patient will be discharged as an outpatient. The clinical course of our patient is schematically presented in Table .
Histopathology of the primarily surgically resected anal lesion as well as three subsequent local recurrences was reviewed by an experienced endocrine pathologist (CCJ) to verify the original diagnoses. In this process, additional immunohistochemical and molecular analyses were ordered, and are detailed below.
The primary anal lesion resected was found to be a 59 mm undifferentiated tumor growing in solid formations, with tumor nuclei displaying a dense chromatin and focal nuclear molding . Plenty of apoptotic bodies were also noted, in addition to widespread tumor necrosis and > 20 mitoses per ten high-power fields. The tumor infiltrated through the muscularis propria into the pericolic fat, but displayed negative margins. Metastases were found in 2 of 19 regional lymph nodes .
By immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells were seen positive for Chromogranin A, Synaptophysin, CD56, INSM1, OSCAR, somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSR2), P16 and focally for ISLET1 . Negative immunoreactivity was noted for P53, CK20, MCV-LT, CDX2, AFP, PSA, HCG, Uroplakin, GATA3, OCT3–4, PLAP, GLP-1, SOX10R and CD45. The diagnosis was consistent with a poorly differentiated small cell ANEC with a Ki-67 index of 80% . The TNM staging was pT3N1a R0.
Given the strong P16 stain, a real time PCR screening of high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) was ordered using FFPE material from the primary tumor, and HPV type 45 DNA was detected – thereby strongly suggesting an active HR-HPV infection in the excised lesion. Indeed, the combination of P16 positivity and the detection of HR-HPV DNA is a strong indicator of HPV early-gene expression . Interestingly, our patient had no other known HPV associated manifestations of the genital or extra-genital regions.
When analyzing tumor DNA extracted from the primary tumor, a focused next-generation sequencing approach detected a PIK3CA mutation in exon 10 (c.1624G > A p.Glu542Lys;p. E542K. This specific mutation is recurrently found in carcinomas of the breast and endometrium and is therefore believed to be pathogenic. We performed an in silico analysis using PolyPhen2 , in which the mutation scored 0.995, indicating a high probability of this missense variant of having impact on the overall PIK3CA function.
Subsequent characterization of the three separate subcutaneous metastases displayed a small cell tumor with a similar histological appearance as the primary small cell ANEC diagnosed earlier. The tumor cells were now negative for Chromogranin A but positive for synaptophysin and pan-cytokeratins, and the Ki-67 index was consistently 90% in all three metastatic lesions . The absence of Chromogranin A expression in the subsequent relapses do not argue against an ANEC diagnosis, as reduced or absent expression of this marker is not uncommonly observed in metachronously biopsied NECs from the same individual. This reduction in sensitivity is well established and possibly reflects the underlying tumor de-differentiation process .