This is a case of a 31-year-old right-hand-dominant man who was riding his motorbike when he was involved in a collision with a car, where he suffered an extremely severe left wrist and hand injury. The patient was previously healthy and did not take any drugs regularly. Clinical examination, which was limited due to severe pain, revealed swelling and deformity of the palmar aspect of the wrist, significantly limited wrist range of motion, and deformity of the left thumb. Standard radiographs and a computed tomography scan of the hand and wrist with 3D reconstruction showed an acute volar dislocation of the lunate (Mayfield IV) with the rest of the carpus intact, along with a concomitant extra-articular fracture of the base of the second phalanx of the thumb (, ).
On presentation, our patient was brought into the operation suite for emergency reduction under fluoroscopic control. The lunate dislocation was preliminarily reduced by external maneuvers: Wrist extension and traction, along with pushing the lunate back into its anatomic position by applying direct thumb pressure over it from volar to dorsal. The achieved reduction was extremely unstable and the lunate demonstrated a dorsal intercalated segment instability deformity, necessitating surgical treatment . The wrist was subsequently immobilized in a plaster splint in a 10° palmar flexion position, while the thumb fracture was reduced and immobilized in extension.
The patient was operated on 72 h after the accident under regional anesthesia, with a pneumatic tourniquet applied after administration of intravenous antibiotics. The upper limb was prepped and draped in the standard sterile fashion. Our reconstruction was approached first by a dorsal approach to the lunate. Dissection was carried down to the level of the carpal bones. The posttraumatic hematoma was removed and the surgical site was irrigated. When we explored the incision, we saw a tendon, lying curled up in the diastasis of the scapholunate (SL) complex, which we did not recognize at first . After ensuring that the extensor tendons were intact. We assessed the flexors, and based on its length and caliber, we concluded that the tendon, we encountered, was the FPL lacerated in zone I. The distal end of the FPL was retrieved by a palmar incision at the wrist . Returning to the dorsal incision, the dorsal SL ligament was identified as a big stump that had avulsed from the scaphoid and remained attached to the lunate. Initially, the lunate was reduced in its anatomical position and, then, stabilized with three Kirschner wires (K-wires) across the SL, scaphocapitate, and lunotriquetral intervals. Following debridement of the scaphoid area, where the ligament was avulsed, one DePuy Mitek MicroFix® QuickAnchor® Plus (3/0 Suture) was inserted. The anchor sutures were placed and secured into the torn end of the ligament. After stabilizing the lunate, we opened the carpal tunnel and recovered the FPL tendon from beneath the median nerve. The tendon was then passed through the intact thumb pulleys . A pullout suture was necessary on the 2nd phalanx to repair the tendon securely . The wrist was immobilized with a plaster cast in a neutral position.
Postoperatively, plain film X-rays revealed metacarpal–phalangeal joint (MCPJ) instability of the thumb . Two days after the first procedure, our patient was operated on again under general anesthesia. Stress testing was performed in 30° of flexion with a soft endpoint and >35° of MCPJ deviation, indicating a complete rupture of the UCL. The UCL was repaired using a dorsoulnar approach to the first MCPJ. A complete Stener’s lesion was identified . After copious irrigation, a DePuy Mitek MicroFix® QuickAnchor® Plus (3/0 Suture) was inserted in the anatomical footprint of the UCL, the threads of which were used to reinsert the capsuloligamentous plane on the base of the 1st phalanx. The wrist and thumb were immobilized in a neutral position by a thumb spica plaster cast in for 7 weeks. The post-operative period was uneventful and the radiological follow-up was adequate . While there are numerous publications about the association of lunate dislocation with other carpal and wrist injuries, a combination of lunate dislocation with a FPL injury and a Stener lesion is extremely uncommon.
Our patient returned to the clinic after 7 weeks to assess the healing of the SL ligament repair and UCL repair. Following the removal of the cast, the three K-wires were removed in the operating theatre. Post-operative control X-rays showed a good position of the carpal bones and the 1st MCPJ, after which the patient participated in an intense physical therapy protocol including range of motion and grip strength exercises. Six months after surgery, the patient’s wrist and thumb were found to have adequate strength and a pain-free range of motion. He denied any sense of instability and, as a result has returned to his job as a bus driver and to his sports activities.
At his final visit to the clinic, 4 years after the accident, our patient was very satisfied, as he had fully recovered and the range of motion was as follows in comparison to the contralateral side: Active wrist extension 80°/85°, flexion 65°/75°, stable valgus stress testing of the first MCPJ, and complete forearm pronation-supination range. When compared to the contralateral hand, grip strength (measured with a Jamar dynamometer) averaged 90 lbs./110 lbs., while pinch strength (measured with a Pinch dynamometer) averaged 15 lbs./25 lbs. .