The patient was a 63-year-old man who presented to the Cardiomyopathy Clinic with a 7-month history of dyspnoea on exertion and lower extremity oedema. The patient had a history of hypertension, dyslipidaemia, rotator cuff tear 5 years prior, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome for which he had not undergone surgery, and coronary artery disease s/p left anterior descending artery percutaneous coronary intervention for acute coronary syndrome performed 10 years prior to presentation. Of note, the patient was of Portuguese descent with a family history of amyloidosis, although few details were available. His half-sister reportedly had cardiac amyloidosis diagnosed by endomyocardial biopsy, his half-brother had amyloidosis of an unspecified type, and his mother died at age 68 from reported heart failure, although the underlying aetiology was unknown.
On examination, pulse was 58 beats/min and blood pressure 102/70 mmHg. Jugular venous pressure was elevated at 10–12 cm water and he had a grade 2/6 systolic murmur. Electrocardiogram did not show low voltage; however, low voltage is not sensitive for amyloidosis diagnosis.
Resting echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 60% with increased left ventricular wall thickness (left ventricular septum 1.5 cm and left ventricular posterior wall 1.5 cm). Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction was not assessed. Measurement of global longitudinal strain was not standardly performed at the time when the echocardiogram was completed, and thus, the presence of apical sparing could not be assessed.
Based on the echocardiogram, he was presumed to have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy vs. cardiac amyloidosis. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, however, demonstrated diffuse gadolinium uptake throughout the myocardium and diffusively elevated extracellular volume highly suggestive of ATTR amyloidosis.
Serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis demonstrated no monoclonal bands, and the serum kappa/lambda light chain ratio was normal, excluding AL amyloidosis. Technetium pyrophosphate scan showed diffuse uptake throughout the left ventricle; quantitative and semi-quantitative gradings were not performed as the study was done in 2017 prior to reporting standardization. Genetic testing demonstrated no TTR gene variants. Based on this evaluation, a diagnosis of wild-type ATTR amyloidosis was established. Per ESC guidelines, tafamidis is typically the agent of choice in wild-type ATTR amyloidosis.
Tafamidis is a protein stabilizer shown to significantly increase survival and lower the rate of decline in exercise capacity as measured by the 6 min walk test. Gene silencing agents can also be considered in patients with variant ATTR amyloidosis and neuropathic disease, with or without cardiomyopathy.
However, the patient was unable to afford tafamidis due to a high co-payment. Given progressive symptoms, he was evaluated for heart transplantation. A right heart catheterization was completed as part of the transplant evaluation with an endomyocardial biopsy for confirmation of the diagnosis given discrepancy between family history and lack of identified genetic variants. Congo red staining showed apple-green birefringence on polarization microscopy. Mass spectrometry detected a peptide profile consistent with AB2M. Beta 2-microglobulin (B2M) serum level was measured post transplantation and was within normal range, more consistent with familial, rather than dialysis-related, B2M amyloidosis. Genetic testing of the B2M gene showed a variant of unknown significance, a heterozygous Pro32Leu (p. P52L) missense mutation. The PolyPhen-2 (polymorphism phenotyping v2) is a tool which predicts the impact of amino acid substitutions on the structure and functioning of human proteins. This tool predicts that this mutation is ‘probably damaging’. Given the determination that the variant was of unknown significance, cascade screening of family members was not performed, in line with guidelines.
The patient had progressive heart failure symptoms warranting heart transplant evaluation. He was listed Status 6 and underwent transplantation 6 months later. The explanted heart showed AB2M amyloid deposition.