A 29-year-old Nigerian woman, who frequently travels by air, presented with a six-month history of persistent bilateral hearing impairment following a flight. She erstwhile had experienced repeated episodes of this symptom, which occurred each time she flew, but there was always complete resolution after a few days following treatment from an outside health facility. There was associated tinnitus but no otalgia, no ear discharge and no sensation of disequilibrium or vertiginous spells. She did not have any nasal blockage, nasal discharge, epistaxis or postnasal drip. There were no throat or neuro-ophthalmic symptoms. She did not complain of neck swelling. There was no history suggestive of exposure to carcinogens.
She had received treatment at peripheral hospitals for barotrauma before presenting to our hospital due to persistence of the symptoms.
Examination revealed a young woman with a nevus on the lobule of her right pinna. Both tympanic membranes were dull with a loss of light reflex. The tuning fork test showed evidence of bilateral conductive hearing loss. No evidence of spontaneous nystagmus was noted. A nasal and oropharyngeal examination revealed essentially normal findings. Indirect laryngoscopy findings appeared normal. Her cranial nerves and both eyes were grossly normal. Examination of her other systems did not reveal any abnormalities.
A pure tone audiogram confirmed the bilateral conductive hearing loss . Impedance audiometry showed type B curves bilaterally.
A diagnosis of bilateral otitic barotrauma was made. She was treated with nasal decongestants, prophylactic antibiotics and asked to perform the Vasalva maneuver frequently. However, her symptoms still persisted after two weeks. This necessitated a re-evaluation; during examination her tympanic membranes were now hyperemic and bulging. A computerized tomographic (CT) scan of her paranasal sinuses was done, which revealed isodense lesions in both fossae of Rosenmüller with complete occlusion of the openings of the Eustachian tubes bilaterally . Nasopharyngoscopy, which would have been pivotal in reaching a diagnosis, was not done before the CT scan because nasopharyngeal cancer had not been in our list of differentials. She underwent examination of the nasopharynx under general anesthesia and a biopsy of the lesion was performed. The histology revealed an undifferentiated carcinoma of the nasopharynx (World Health Organization type III). She was referred to the clinical oncologist and radiotherapist in our center for treatment. The hearing loss improved after commencement of chemoradiation; a pure tone audiogram thereafter showed socially adequate hearing thresholds in most frequencies .