A 58-year-old female patient, who complained of upper abdominal pain and discomfort for more than 3 months, was diagnosed with gastric cancer through electronic gastroscopy at another hospital. The biopsy tissue showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and she was admitted to our hospital for further treatment and diagnosis. The electronic esophagogastroduodenoscopy performed at our hospital revealed a 1.8 cm × 1.5 cm lesion at the anterior wall of the gastric antrum, with ulcers on the surface . Full abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a slight thickening of the gastric wall at the antrum and no abnormalities in the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, and lymph nodes. Laparoscopic gastrectomy was performed after completing preoperative examinations.
Pathological examination revealed the gastric wall measuring 3.0 cm × 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm, with slightly exophytic erosions on the surface. The cut surface showed a poorly-circumscribed white area measuring 1.2 cm × 1.0 cm × 0.3 cm. The tumor was mainly located in the submucosa. The tumor was highly cellular, which grew in a lobular shape and invaded the muscularis mucosa; the mucosa was multifocally involved. The tumor cells were arranged in different architectural features, partially arranged in an acinar pattern . These cells had moderate amounts of granular eosinophilic cytoplasm containing zymogen granules, which were PAS-positive.Partially in a solid nest pattern,cells dysplasia were obvious . Some tumor cells were arranged in a glandular pattern .
Furthermore, we found ectopic pancreatic tissue in the adjacent tumor. It showed clear, sharp boundaries and fully developed acini and ductal structures ; there were obvious transitions with the cancer tissue. The immunohistochemical workup was notable for CK19, CK7 , and alpha-1-antitrypsin , positivity in the tumor cells. The results of all tests performed with site-specific markers are presented . The final histological and immunohistochemical results confirmed the diagnosis of primary pancreatic-type acinar cell carcinoma of the stomach. And the patient recovered well, with no recurrence or metastasis 6 months after surgery.