A 34-year-old Caucasian man attended the emergency room complaining of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting for the past 24 hours. He reported diffuse, severe, noncolicky pain, abdominal distention, and no stools or gases in the past 24 hours. A physical examination disclosed abdominal distention and bloating, with diffuse pain. Bowel sounds were absent. A tender mass was palpated in the left iliac fossa, with abdominal guarding and rigidity.
His vital signs were normal. Laboratory tests in the emergency room revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 15,000 cells/mm3 with a shift to the left.
Our patient had undergone emergency surgery for intestinal intussusception 10 years before. A 23-cm-long jejunal segment was resected and gross examination revealed polypoid lesions, some of them up to 3 cm in size. A microscopic examination revealed pseudopolyps with no other mucosal changes. During this time, our patient had experienced episodes of abdominal pain and distention that resolved spontaneously or required fluid therapy and absolute diet, and resolved with no need for surgery. An abdominal CT scan and colonoscopy had been performed with no abnormal findings. Colonoscopy ruled out inflammatory bowel disease with colonic involvement. Intestinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed in one of the episodes, 6 months before the reported surgery, showed images consistent with intussusception.
An emergency CT scan, performed without oral or intravenous contrast, revealed an image consistent with intestinal intussusception . Due to persistence of the condition and suspected intestinal intussusception with mesenteric compromise, emergency surgery with a three-dimensional laparoscopic approach was performed. Rocuronium was used as a muscle relaxant. Neuromuscular monitoring was performed with TOF-Watch® SX (Organon Ltd., Dublin, Ireland). Extubation was done when the train-of-four (TOF) ratio was greater than 0.9, and sugammadex 2 mg/kg was administered if the TOF was lower at the end of surgery. Jejunal intussusception was found. Desintussusception was therefore performed, followed by resection of the involved segment. In order to ensure that the ends were not grossly affected by any condition, the intestinal loop was externalized, and extracorporeal resection and anastomosis were performed. The whole small intestine was visualized and was seen to have a grossly normal appearance. The portions of the large bowel visualized also had a normal appearance.
Pathological examination found a 20 cm segment of the small intestine, which showed, on gross examination, multiple polypoid lesions of soft consistency not reaching the resection margins . All polyps present in the surgical specimen were examined. Microscopically, polypoid formations consisted of a core of loose, edematous connective tissue in which the lining epithelium consisted of isolated, slightly tortuous and dilated glands with no atypia. No changes were seen in intestinal mucosa.
The postoperative course was satisfactory and free of complications. Nine months after surgery, a gastrointestinal barium meal examination and colonoscopy were performed, reaching the last centimeters of the terminal ileum, which were normal. Ileum and colon biopsies were normal, showing no signs of inflammatory bowel disease.