A 75-year-old female patient visited to local hospital with dizziness, slurred speech for 10 days, and then was found to have a space-occupying lesion in right lung by chest CT scanning. For further treatment, the patient was referred to our institution. She lost 5 kg within 10 days, did not smoke and had no family history of malignancy. Physical examination revealed a 5 cm×5 cm mass with tough texture and indistinct borders in right mammary area, while the left nipple and breast showed no abnormal findings grossly. Other systemic examinations were unremarkable. Her past medical history included ten years of cerebrovascular disease and five years of hypertension and coronary heart disease. The vital parameters exhibited values within the established normal range. Laboratory data disclosed complete blood count, liver and kidney function tests were within normal limits. The tumor marker showed raised NSE and CEA while other markers were within normal range . CT contrast-enhanced scan showed a mass 4.2 cm in diameter in the lower lobe of the right lung and a 3.8 cm space-occupying lesion in right-sided breast . The patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous biopsy in the right lung neoplasm and it took a few days to achieve results. Breast ultrasound revealed the presence of 5.41 × 4.75 × 3.06 cm hypoechoic lesion in the right breast and mammary duct ectasia, furthermore, no obvious lymph node enlargement was detected in the two axillary fossa, subclavicular regions and parasternal . The histopathological examination of the ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed the presence of tumor cells organized in sheets and nests, exhibiting scant cytoplasm. The nuclei of these cells appeared round or oval, containing granular stippled chromatin and visible nuclear divisions. Notably, no apparent nucleoli were observed, and areas of necrosis were evident. Immunohistochemistry result for breast mass testified strongly positive staining for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) in most tumor cells (3+), 2 + staining for human epithelial receptor 2 (HER-2), 3 + staining for androgen receptor (AR) and 10% positive Ki67 in tumor cells. P63, Calponin, CK5/6 and CK14 was negative in tumor cells . Based on the pathological and the immunohistochemical findings, the lesion was regarded as invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) of the right breast. It was recommended that the patient underwent fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to detect HER-2 status, however, the patient refused the procedure. MR imaging of the head showed abnormal signals in the right frontal lobe (3.6 × 2.9 cm in size), left cerebellar hemisphere, and punctate enhancement in the left temporal lobe, which should be considered for metastasis . Based on these findings, a provisional diagnosis of IDC with brain metastasis (BM) was made. To alleviate the symptoms, brain focal radiotherapy was delivered. Due to larger right frontal lobe lesion, tumor cells—especially those located in the center of this lesion—often face a severe microenvironment lacking oxygen. Thus, she underwent brain focal radiotherapy, simultaneously high-dose radiotherapy in the center of the foci and prescribed dose was 95%PGTVboost (the center of lesion in right frontal lobe) 66 Gy/3.3 Gy/20fractions; 95%PGTV1(lesion in right frontal lobe) 60 Gy/3Gy/20fractions; 95%PGTV2(lesion in left temporal lobe) 60 Gy/3Gy/20fractions; 95%PGTV3(lesion in left cerebellar hemisphere) 60 Gy/3Gy/20fractions. After 3 days of radiotherapy, pathological findings presented that lung lesions cells were distributed in flaky nest-like shape, arranged densely, with hyperchromatic nuclei, visible areas of focal necrosis, moreover, immunohistochemistry of lung lesions showed positive staining for thyroid transcription factor-1(TTF-1), cytokeratin-PAN (CK-Pan), synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (CgA), CD56, P53 (90%) and Ki67 (70%), and negative staining for NapsinA and P40 in tumor cells . The findings on pathology and immunohistochemistry suggested SCLC. After discussion, the final diagnosis was SCLC (cT2bN0M1c IVB) with BM, IDC. Whereupon we offered to treat patient with whole-brain radiation (40 Gy/20fractions) and focal radiotherapy (60 Gy/20fractions) and adjuvant concurrent chemotherapy with oral etoposide (50 mg d1-d20). Regretfully, the effect was not observed as the patient refused further therapy and follow-up. Completed dose was 95%PGTVboost 66 Gy/3.3 Gy/20fractions; 95%PGTV1 60 Gy/3Gy/20fractions; 95%PGTV2 60 Gy/3Gy/20fractions; 95%PGTV3 60 Gy/3Gy/20fractions; 95%PTV 34 Gy/2Gy/17fractions .