A 68-year-old man with hypertension and diabetes type II with a recent negative evaluation for recurrent abdominal pain presented to the emergency room for a right middle cerebral artery syndrome, last seen well 2 hours prior. He presented mild frontal and occipital excoriations and his NIHSS score was 18 for forced right gaze deviation, left hemianopia, dysarthria, left hemiplegia, and hemi-neglect. A cerebral computed tomography showed a mild posttraumatic right acute subdural parietal hematoma that contraindicated intravenous thrombolysis, whereas a cerebral angio-computed tomography scan excluded an LVO. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with angio-magnetic resonance disclosed punctate lesions in the right parietal lobe and cerebellum bilaterally . A cerebral angiogram showed small vessels with an irregular appearance in the right parieto-occipital and left parietal regions, consistent with a vasculitic involvement, while no vasospasm was detected. The patient was admitted to the Stroke Unit of Padua University Hospital with a stable neurological status (NIHSS = 16), febrile, and high arterial blood pressure (>200/100 mm Hg). The EKG disclosed signs of acute subepicardic necrosis and a chest x-ray showed bilateral interstitial pulmonary infiltrates. No signs of endocarditis were found by a bedside transthoracic echocardiography. On day 2, the patient underwent a new MRI scan that showed a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery hyperintensity in the sulcal regions of the right hemisphere, left posterior parietal regions, and a pachymeningeal enhancement after contrast agent infusion. Blood investigations identified hypoalbuminemia, acute renal failure, lowering Troponin I and brain natriuretic peptide levels, hyperglycemia, and slight anemia. cererbo-spinal fluid examination (including appearance, proteins, white cell count, red cell count, glucose, gram stain, microbiological film array, extended culture, and cytology) was normal. Due to these findings, sepsis, the acute appearance of purpura in the proximal region of the legs, we began empiric antibiotic therapy with levofloxacin. Further immunologic work-up included negative antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, anti–double-stranded DNA antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, and high levels of circulating rheumatoid factor. Additional testing found no anticitrullinated protein antibodies, reduced complement components, and circulating cryoglobulins (4% at cryocrit). In light of a concomitant CNS, renal, skin, cardiac, and pulmonary involvement , we suspected a systemic small vessel vasculitis and investigated the possible origin of cryoglobulinemia. Microbiological investigations, including a test for hepatitis C virus, were negative, whereas the lymphocytic immune-phenotype and medullar biopsy showed clones of B cells expressing markers of chronic lymphatic leukemia (like). We started intravenous high-dose steroid therapy, with rapid improvement of vital parameters and normalization of the neurological examination on day 7. Blood tests showed a recovery of renal function and a control chest x-ray confirmed a complete resolution of the described pulmonary infiltrates. At 2 weeks from onset, a brain MRI showed a near complete resolution of the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery hyperintensities . The patient was discharged and followed up at our Day Hospital where he started a Rituximab-based therapy.