A 33-year-old male with no significant medical history presented to the emergency room with progressive weakness, easy fatigability and headache. He had no evidence of lower or upper gastrointestinal bleeding and he reported no abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fever or weight loss.
The patient’s symptoms started 3 wk prior and had worsened over the last 4 d.
There was no significant medical history.
There was no significant medical history.
In the emergency room, the patient was clinically stable, with a normal temperature (36.7 °C). The patient exhibited an oxygen saturation level of 97% while he was breathing ambient air. His blood pressure was 102/61 mmHg and his heart rate was 91 beats per minute. The patient was awake, alert, and fully oriented. Physical examination revealed signs of pallor and an absence of lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, bone tenderness or jaundice. Examination of the rectum revealed a few external hemorrhoids, but there was no blood or melena in the rectal vault; there were no skin tags, fissures or palpable masses.
The initial laboratory findings showed low hemoglobin levels (7 g/dL), a white blood cell count of 11250 per mm3, a platelet count of 221000 per mm3 and a C-reactive protein of 1.31 mg/dL. Two pints of packed red blood cells were therefore transfused and the patient was admitted to the gastroenterology department. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm at 93 beats per minute and the results of the patient’s chest radiography were normal.
The patient’s next blood test, showed a mean corpuscular volume of 72.5 fl, a mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 25.6 pg, and a reticulocyte count of 1%. The patient’s iron level was 38 μg/dL, his ferritin level was 17 ng/mL, and his transferrin saturation was 9%. The hemolysis study was negative. Hence, the patient’s anemia was classified as iron deficiency anemia.
During this period, an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and a colonoscopy were performed to study the patient’s anemia. The colonoscopy revealed internal hemorrhoids without any other relevant findings while the upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no abnormalities. The patient remained stable and was discharged and the study was completed on an outpatient basis with oral iron treatment.
During his visit to the outpatient clinic 3 wk later, the patient remained anemic, with a hemoglobin level of 8.8 g/dL. The anemia study was completed with a capsule endoscopy, which revealed a lifted erosion and mild bulge in the ileum of approximately 8-9 mm in size . These findings of appearance of a subepithelial bulge in the ileum suggested an inverted Meckel diverticulum. Normal intestinal mucosa was seen on the surface of the tumor with a longer small intestine transit time suggestive of Meckel’s diverticulum. A technetium-99m pertechnetate radioisotope scintigraphy (Meckel’s scan) was performed and was negative. The patient subsequently underwent an ultrasound examination, which revealed no pathological findings. Finally, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed and showed a central area of fat attenuation surrounded by a thick collar of soft tissue attenuation suggestive of inverted Meckel’s diverticulum.