A 34-year-old man presented to the respiratory department with a cough and breathlessness in October 2018. Investigations, including computed tomography (CT) and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography, demonstrated widespread bilateral lung changes, most prominent within the lower lobe, consistent with primary lung cancer and metastatic spread. Associated hilar mediastinal and para-aortic lymphadenopathy were also noted, as were multiple bone and left adrenal metastases. Therefore, the final staging was cT4N3M1c (stage IVB), and a CT-guided biopsy revealed lung adenocarcinoma (TTF1+, CK7+, CK20-, CDX2-).
The patient developed significant back pain with associated leg weakness shortly after undergoing the above investigations and was emergently admitted to the hospital. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a solitary lumbar spine metastasis with no evidence of spinal cord compression. His pain was attributed to the bone lesion as well as to his abdominal lymphadenopathy, so he underwent palliative radiotherapy (20 Gy in 5 fractions) with an excellent clinical response. Molecular analysis showed that the tumor had an ROS1 translocation (immunohistochemistry strongly positive with a confirmatory fluorescence in situ hybridization [FISH] result). There was no evidence of an EGFR mutation or ALK translocation. PD-L1 was weakly positive (1–49%).
Following detection of the ROS1 translocation, he was started on crizotinib (500 mg a day) in November 2018. Although a complete response was achieved and sustained, a brain MRI revealed multiple asymptomatic brain metastasis in July 2020, which were treated with stereotactic radiation therapy (SRT). Two new lesions were detected on the cerebellum and cerebrum in October 2020, necessitating additional SRT. Subsequently, SRT was also added to the right parietal lobe and pons lesions in October 2020 and January 2021, respectively.
When we needed to administer a third round of SRT to his brain metastasis in January 2021, we concluded that the progression was due to acquired resistance to crizotinib and switched to cytotoxic chemotherapy of cisplatin/pemetrexed/bevacizumab. The chemotherapy stabilized his condition well with a good partial response (PR) until he started complaining of dizziness, tinnitus, light headache, and blurred vision in June 2022. MRI only showed the two known metastases on the cerebellum and cerebrum without any signs of leptomeningeal enhancement or enlargement of the ventricles . A cerebrospinal fluid examination showed a normal protein concentration (32.2 mg/dL) and normal glucose concentration (53.0 mg/dL) but slightly elevated opening pressure (25 cmH2O). The ophthalmologist he was referred to for his blurred vision confirmed that he had optic disc edema bilaterally. Although the initial CSF cytology only showed a few atypical cells, repeated testing eventually revealed positive with obvious signs of malignancy (a, b). As a result, we diagnosed him with LM. The progression only occurred on the CNS, whereas the whole body CT/positron emission tomography-scan did not show any changes from previous examinations.
While performing these tests, his neurological symptoms became exacerbated, and he became unable to walk. Eventually, lumboperitoneal shunting and whole-brain radiotherapy (30 Gy in 15 fr) with systemic steroid therapy were performed, which resulted in mild improvement in the dizziness and headache. Crizotinib was re-administered in August 2022 after liquid next-generation sequencing (NGS)-Based FoundationOne CDx failed to detect the presence of ROS1 fusion due to minimal ctDNA.
Finally, entrectinib 600 mg daily was initiated in October 2022 because crizotinib re-treatment did not bring the expected efficacy, and he remained wheelchair-bound. By the end of December 2022, his symptoms had completely disappeared, and he was once more totally ambulatory. Both lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and sialyl SSEA-1 antigen (SLX), known as tumor markers because of the concordance with his disease burden, have decreased significantly since entrectinib was introduced (, ). The head MRI showed the metastatic site on the right basis pontis had become smaller . Even though the dosage of entrectinib was reduced from 600 mg to 400 mg in January 2023 due to lower leg edema, bilateral pleural effusion, and mood swings, his symptoms of LM have not recurred. In addition, imaging studies including whole body CT and head MRI have had no significant sign of progression until now.