A 68-year-old man developed abdominal pain, bloating and fever for a month. The rectal touch found a mass (20mm in diameter) in the lower rectum that was located 5cm from the anal verge at the posterior side of the rectum wall. Colonoscopy revealed the mass is 2.4 cm × 2.0 cm in size, with a wide stratum, poor mobility, and a rough but intact surface mucosa . And the biopsy was performed. The pathological diagnosis of NET was confirmed. Considering that the maximum diameter of the tumor is 2.4 cm, further radical surgical treatment is necessary for this patient. Low anterior resection (LAR) and regional LNs dissection is the recommended surgical method. More detailed imaging examinations were therefore performed to evaluate the condition of LLNs metastases. A CT examination revealed the tumor is significantly enhanced and the fat gap around the tumor is blurred . The endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) reveals the lesion invades the submucosal layer, and some levels are suspected of invading the innate muscular layer . But, neither CT nor EUS reveals pelvic, abdominal, or retroperitoneal enlarged LNs. 99Tcm-octreotide SPECT images revealed high uptake in the rectal cavity which is consistent with neuroendocrine tumor manifestations . But there are no high-uptake foci in the regional LNs. Therefore, multiple imaging examinations cannot determine the LLNs metastases of the patient.
Two weeks later, 4K fluorescent laparoscopic radical resection of rectal cancer was performed. Before total mesorectal excision (TME), anoscopic injection of ICG 1ml(2.5mg) at 0.5cm above, below, on the left, and on the right side of the tumor, respectively. After opening the peritoneum, the internal iliac vessels were subsequently cleared from the lymphatic tissue at a safe distance from the lateral side of the pelvic plexus . In the obturator space, fluorescence staining of the left LLNs is visible . In contrast, LLNs on the right side are not visible with fluorescence staining . Therefore, the left LLND was performed . Following completion of the left LLND, only external vessels, internal iliac vessels and their branches, the obturator nerves, and the pelvic plexus remained. The procedure after lymphadenectomy is conventional AR and regional LNs dissection. The operative time was 207min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 100ml. The patient recovered well from surgery and was discharged on postoperative day 9. The adjuvant therapy was not performed.
The resected specimen indicated that the primary tumor was 20mm in diameter and invaded peri-intestinal adipose tissue . Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of the primary tumor and LLNs showed that the tumor cells spread in the organ-like features, trabecular, glandular, gyri-like . The vessel carcinoma embolus and nerve invasion were detected. A pathological diagnosis of NET G1(pT3N1) was confirmed according to a Ki-67 index of 1-2% . The macroscopic and microscopic findings of the specimen revealed that the surgical margin was negative. One of the 6 LNs in the mesorectum contained metastases from the NET, and one of the 6 LLNs on the left side contained metastases from the NET. More results of immunohistochemistry are shown in and . The patient was followed up with abdominal CT every 3 months. Three months after the operation, he showed symptoms of chronic diarrhea, but there was no fecal incontinence, and his voiding and sexual functions were also preserved. At the six-month follow-up, the symptoms of diarrhea were slightly relieved. And no local recurrence or distant metastases had been found. More details about the timeline with relevant data are shown in .