A previously healthy three-year-old girl weighing 10 kg was brought to our emergency department by her mother and admitted 15 min after being hit and run over by a wagon-type car. The initial examination showed her airway was patent without disturbance of consciousness. There were no signs of shock, such as wet or cold sweat on the skin. Her vital signs at the time of the visit were as follows; oxygen saturation in room air, 99 %; heart rate, 130 beats/min; blood pressure, 112/51 mmHg; Glasgow Coma Scale, 15; and body temperature, 37.7 °C. Her pupils were round with anisocoria and prompt light reflex.
Focused assessment with sonography for trauma at the time of admission demonstrated no intraabdominal fluid. Tire marks from her right shoulder to the abdomen were noted. Abdominal physical examination revealed muscle defense and tenderness on her abdomen. No limb paralysis was noted. Pelvic radiograph was unremarkable. Plain computed tomography (CT) taken 15 min after arrival showed right lung contusion, left pneumothorax, and irregular linear or branching low-attenuation areas in the liver, indicating liver laceration. Intraperitoneal fluid was not noted. Blood tests revealed a white blood cell count of 22,400/mm3, hemoglobin of 11.8 g/dl, hematocrit of 37.1 %, red blood cell count of 4460 × 103/mm3, and platelet count of 434 × 103/mm3. Blood chemistry test showed an elevation of leaking liver enzymes; 1151 IU/L aspartate aminotransferase and 599 IU/L alanine aminotransferase.
The patient was carefully examined with fluid injection and followed up on one hour after admission. The pneumothorax was conservatively treated. Although the patient remained hemodynamically stable, sonography detected a small amount of fluid in the Morison's pouch. A declining hemoglobin level, (9.3 g/dl) compared to that one hour prior was noticed. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed extravasation in the middle hepatic lobe associated with hemoperitoneum . There was no pneumothorax or hemothorax. Based on the clinical diagnosis of active bleeding, TAE was performed for the purpose of hemostasis of active bleeding under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. After a 4-Fr sheath was placed in the right femoral artery, the celiac artery and common hepatic artery were visualized. When the left hepatic artery was selectively imaged using a smaller-diameter catheter, the active contrast extravasation was confirmed from a branch of the middle hepatic artery. Since selective embolization was difficult anatomically, the left hepatic artery was embolized using gelatin sponge particles (Serescue®, Nipponkayaku) . Throughout TAE, her vital signs remained stable with a heart rate of 114 beats/min and blood pressure of 93/50 mmHg. Her condition stabilized overnight and the following day she was extubated. The patient was transferred to the general ward with normal liver function on the fifth day. As her clinical course was uneventful, she was discharged from the hospital on the ninth day after admission. So far (follow-up period of eight weeks after the event), the patient has been well without complications such as biloma.