A 68-year old male was diagnosed with stage IV melanoma (cM1c (0) AJCC 2017, BRAF wild type) with iliac lymph node, adrenal and splenic metastases . Anti-PD-1 monotherapy with pembrolizumab was initiated (2 mg/kg q3w) as first-line therapy. Eighteen days after the first application of pembrolizumab, the patient reported a weight gain of 10 kg within 7 days and massive peripheral edema. Laboratory tests revealed an acute renal failure with nephrotic syndrome (creatinine 2.86 [0–1.17] mg/dl, urea 78.9 [10–50] mg/dl, potassium 5.2 [3.5–5] mmol/l, calcium 1.7 [2–2.7] mmol/l, cholesterol 399 [130–220] mg/dl, total protein 4.2 [6.6–8.7] g/dl, albumin 1.6 [3.5–5.5] g/dl). Prior to pembrolizumab, renal function tests were normal and proteinuria was absent. The patient was hospitalized and a kidney biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed a tubular damage (presumably due to a preexistent hypertensive nephropathy) without signs for interstitial nephritis. Amyloidosis, the presence of immune complexes or complement-mediated glomerulonephritis were ruled out by immunohistochemistry. Ultimately, electron microscopy showed findings consistent with a minimal change disease. Based on these findings, an acute renal failure with nephrotic syndrome due to a minimal change disease related to pembrolizumab was diagnosed. Other risk factors for a minimal change disease (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) were not evident. Treatment with oral corticosteroids (100 mg prednisolone qd) and diuretics was initiated. Renal function recovered to creatinine levels around 1.5 mg/dl and proteinuria decreased to 329 mg/l . Prednisolone was tapered over approximately 6 weeks, diuretic treatment with torasemid was reduced to a maintenance dose of 25 mg qd.
During irAE treatment, S100 serum levels increased significantly and a computed tomography (CT) scan of chest and abdomen 2 months after the single dose of pembrolizumab showed diesease progression (PD, RECIST 1.1) . A grand round recommended re-exposure to a PD-1-based immunotherapy due to lacking effective therapy alternatives. The recommendation was discussed with the patient including the risk of an immunotherapy-related terminal dialysis-dependent renal insufficiency. Finally, a combined checkpoint inhibition with ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) and nivolumab (1 mg/kg) was initiated. Proteinuria and blood pressure were monitored weekly. After two applications of the combined immunotherapy, creatinine levels increased to values ~ 2 mg/dl and the patient once again showed massive proteinuria (total protein 18,200 mg/l) . Fortunately, there were no signs of peripheral edema and his body weight remained stable. To curtail proteinuria, oral treatment with the ACE inhibitor ramipril was escalated to 5 mg qd.
Ipilimumab and nivolumab were continued without a dose delay. Creatinine serum levels and proteinuria stabilized . Nevertheless, we abstained from the fourth dose after another nephrological consultation and due to sonographic and serological signs for response becoming evident. An ultrasound of the abdomen performed after two doses of ipilimumab and nivolumab had already shown a shrinkage of the iliac lymph node metastasis and S100 serum levels were dropping . A CT scan after three doses of combined checkpoint inhibition confirmed a deep partial response (PR, RECIST 1.1) with regression of all known visceral and lymph node metastases. There were no signs for new thoraco-abdominal or brain metastases (MRI). Due to the renal irAE during anti-PD-1 monotherapy and a deep PR after three doses of ipilimumab and nivolumab, we refrained from a maintenance treatment with nivolumab.