A 53-year-old previously healthy male was referred to Kuwait Cancer Control Centre (KCCC) with a 1-year history of multiple painless lumps. He tested positive for SARS-COV2 in March 2020, with a non-complicated course requiring home quarantine only. After that, he started to develop numerous painless lumps; the first one appeared in the right submandibular area, which he attributed to COVID-19 infection. Later he developed another painless swelling in the right inguinal area, after which he sought medical attention. No other symptoms of note, no weight loss, night sweats, or fever.
On examination, he was hemodynamically stable, conscious, oriented, afebrile.
Chest and cardiac examinations were unremarkable. Abdominal examination revealed a splenomegaly, with the spleen felt two centimeters below the left costal margin. Upon examining the lymph nodes, a right submandibular 2 × 2 cm's painless mass, without overlying skin changes. Another bigger swelling was felt in the right inguinal area, measuring 3 × 3 cm's, fixed, rubbery, and no overlying skin changes.
Patient lab. Investigations:Full blood count showed absolute eosinophilia as shown in Table . Biochemical parameters such as Creatinine, Alkaline phosphatase, Total bilirubin, Total protein and electrolytes were in normal range. However, Uric acid was found to be elevated at 585 μmol/L (normal range 208–428 μmol/L). Virology screen negative for Hepatitis B, C, and HIV. Excisional biopsy from the Rt inguinal LN: T-lymphoblastic Lymphoma (TLL), positive for CD3, CD2, CD7, TDT as shown in Figure . Negative for Cyclin D1, CD20, PAX5, and Bcl6. Blood Film: WBC showed absolute eosinophilias shown in Figure , with eosinophils showing dysplasia and hypogranulation. Red blood cells are normocytic normochromic cells. His platelet count was adequate. Ultrasound (US) of inguinal lump showed a suspicious hypoechoic lesion possibly nodal for fine needle aspiration cytology, which in turn showed necrotic material. PAN CT (Neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis):Multiple variable-sized enlarged cervical lymph nodes are seen bilaterally; some show globular appearance with attenuated hilum, largest is seen at right Ib group measuring about 17 × 23 × 18 mm (suspicious). Bilateral posterior basal faint ground-glass opacities (previous Covid infection). Well-defined globular shape large lymph node is seen at the right inguinal region, measuring about 2.4 × 3 × 3.6 cm at maximum diameters. It shows no cystic breakdown or abscess formation with no intra-abdominal extension. Preserved surrounded fat plane as well. Other few small inguinal lymph nodes are noted. The liver is mildly enlarged, has homogenous attenuation, no focal or enhancing lesions; no intra or extra hepatic biliary dilation. Enlarged spleen with a span measuring about 15 cm. No focal lesions. Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate:Aspirate: hypercellular marrow, with an eosinophil percentage of approximately 2%. No morphological evidence of bone marrow infiltration by lymphoma on aspiration smear. Biopsy: No infiltration by lymphoma cells. Myeloid/lymphoid neoplasm with PDGFRA rearrangement. Trephine biopsy shows scattered small CD20/CD79a-ve+ B-lymphocytes and CD3/CD5-VE+ T-Lymphocytes. No lymphoma infiltration. Marrow aspirate cytogenetics analysis: 46, XY (normal karyotype). Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) from peripheral blood: FIP1L1/CHIC2/PDGFRA: 70% interstitial deletion detected . FDG-PET done: Hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy below and above the diaphragm.Diffuse hypermetabolic bone marrow in the axial and proximal appendicular skeleton .