A 36-year-old Asian Indian male patient attended our clinical immunology outpatient clinic with a fever of two months duration and two episode of herpes zoster in the last year. He also complained of significant weight loss in the last three months. He had no history of chronic cough or diarrhea. He was not a diabetic and not alcoholic. Our patient had a history of multiple unprotected sexual exposure around eight years ago.
On clinical examination his vitals were normal. He had a mild pallor and oral candidiasis. He had no significant lymphadenopathy or any cutaneous lesions. A systemic examination revealed no significant abnormality. Routine investigations were within normal limits. An ultrasound of his abdomen revealed no abnormality. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for HIV-1 was positive and this was confirmed by western blot. Serology for Hepatitis B and C was non-reactive. Our patient's CD4 count was 67/mm3. He was put on HAART therapy consisting of nevirapine 30 mg twice a day, lamuvidine 150 mg twice a day and zidovudine 300 mg twice a day.
After 12 days our patient came back with a complaint of upper abdominal discomfort. An abdominal examination revealed mild epigastric tenderness, no organomegaly and normal peristaltic sound. An ultrasound of his abdomen was normal. He was presumed to be suffering from gastrointestinal side-effects, which is very common during initiation of HAART, and advised to take a proton pump inhibitor.
Our patient came back after another two weeks with severe abdominal pain, vomiting and abdominal distension. On examination his abdomen was found to be distended with absent peristaltic sound. An ultrasound of his abdomen was done and showed distended bowel loops with an admixture of air and fluid suggestive of acute intestinal obstruction. Routine investigations were normal and his CD4 count was 356/mm3. We put our patient on conservative management with fluids and nasogastric suction. However there was no improvement in 24 hours and our patient complained of increasing pain. A surgical consultation was taken and an exploratory laparotomy was performed with universal precautions. On exploration, small bowel loops were seen matted with a minimal amount of ascites. Purple colored patches, three in number, were seen on the serosal surface of his small bowel. Three thick walled, purple colored rounded cystic lesions adherent to surrounding bowel loops and omentum containing dirty white fluids were seen on the small bowel mesentery. The lesions had prominent veins over their surfaces . The lesions were excised; adhesiolysis was performed followed by peritoneal lavage with normal saline. The excised lesion was sent for histopathology.
Our patient's symptoms improved after surgery. He was started on an oral diet after five days. The histological examination of the excised lesion showed tortuous blood vessels lined by a single layer of pleomorphic endothelial cells with extra-vasation of red blood cells in the stroma with spindle cells suggestive of KS. His CD4 count was repeated and was 476/mm3. Our patient was started on paclitaxel (eight cycles of 100 mg/m2 intravenously over three hours every two weeks) and the HAART was continued along with supportive management. He responded well to treatment and is doing well on follow-up.