A 52-year-old man presented symptoms of recurrent upper abdominal pain, fever, jaundice, and weight loss for nine months. Four months prior, the patient was suspected of having malignant biliary obstruction and underwent percutaneous transhepatic biliary metal stenting at another hospital. However, due to recurrent episodes of cholangitis and jaundice, the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination. Physical examinations at admission were unremarkable except for jaundice and mild tenderness in the upper abdomen. Laboratory examinations revealed markedly elevated GGT (1593 IU/L) and ALP (1091 IU/L) levels, mildly elevated transaminase and TBiL levels, with normal serum amylase, blood glucose, CA19-9, and CEA. Ultrasonography (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed common bile duct stricture with significantly dilated intra-extra biliary tract and main pancreatic duct, without intraductal masses or mural nodules on both ducts. Pathogenesis could not be identified based on CT and MRCP. Hence, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed. Mucus discharge from the enlarged orifice of the major papilla with fish eye-like appearance was observed . Duodenoscopy showed a normal stomach and duodenum. Cholangiography revealed bile duct stricture and proximal bile duct dilation, and a displaced metal stent in the intrahepatic bile duct . The metal stent was retrieved using a snare. Pancreatography revealed a pancreatobiliary fistula between the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct, with a dilated pancreatic duct (8 mm in diameter) . A 0.025 inch guide wire was inserted through the fistula orifice of the pancreatic duct into the bile duct. SpyGlass cholangiopancreatoscopy (Boston Scientific Corp, Natick, Massachusetts, United States) was performed via a duodenoscope during ERCP. This was due to a suspected mucin-producing biliary tumor and indeterminate main pancreatic duct dilatation. SpyGlass imaging showed excessive mucus in the bile duct. Multiple fish egg-like protrusions and a cauliflower-like protrusion with vascular images in the common bile duct were observed after mucus removal. Afterwards, a pancreatoscope with SpyGlass over the guide wire via the pancreatic orifice was inserted into the main pancreatic duct after pancreatic sphincterotomy. Excessive mucus and multiple longilineal papillary protrusions, as well as leaf-like projections with vascular images in the main duct of the pancreatic head were observed . The extent of the lesions in the pancreaticobiliary duct was identified through SpyGlass. The protruding lesions in both the biliary and pancreatic duct were biopsied under direct vision. Afterwards, a nasobiliary drainage catheter and a pancreatic 7-Fr stent were temporarily placed to prevent SpyGlass-related complications. Both IPMN (intestinal type) with intermediate-grade dysplasia and IPNB (pancreaticobiliary type) with moderate to high-grade dysplasia were diagnosed via biopsy. Pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed three months after percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) due to poor drainage. Postoperative pathological diagnosis of IPNB with moderate to high-grade dysplasia, with focal invasion of the bile duct wall without lymph node metastasis, and IPMN with moderate-grade dysplasia was determined. The patient had a good prognosis with weight gain without any clinical symptoms or pancreaticobiliary dilation during the 52-month postoperative follow-up period.