A 28-year-old man in full health condition spontaneously developed weakness of the right side of the tongue with its deviation to the right, 4 years later dysarthria appeared. At the debut of the disease, the patient noted fascial twitching (fasciation?) of half of his tongue. The patient had no history of neck trauma, infectious, and autoimmune diseases. He was treated as an outpatient under the care of a dentist. Results of physical examination of the patient were unremarkable. Neurological examination revealed only peripheral neuropathy of the right side of the tongue with significant atrophy with no signs of deficits on the part of other cranial nerves. A brisk bilateral gag reflex was detected. Cerebellar function was normal, with no symptoms or signs of brainstem compression or increased intracranial pressure. General blood count and C-reactive protein levels excluded an infectious cause. MRI revealed a dolichoectasia of the right VA, which severely compressed the medulla oblongata and roots (XII cranial nerve?) exiting the trunk at the level of the deformity . The depth of the premedullary cistern was 9 mm according to MRI data, which was considered to be enough distance to move the artery. We believed that there was a high probability that it was the vertebral artery that was the “causal factor” for the neuropathy of the HN at the medullary segment. As the patient showed negative dynamics with the development of dysarthria, surgical intervention was suggested to prevent the progression of neurological deficit.
We performed a right-sided “enough” lateral retrosigmoid craniotomy in the position of the patient on the left side . The V3 segment of the vertebral artery, caudal cranial nerves, cerebellum and medulla oblongata are visualized. The vertebral artery was characterized by stiffness in the segment of interest, formed an elastic nondisplaced C-shaped deformity, and compressed the brain stem. At attempts to displace it from the ventral surface of the medulla oblongata, the artery returned to its previous position, while no significant compression of the HN roots by the artery was detected; therefore, it was concluded that NHN was caused by nuclear compression.
Given the rigidity of the causal vessel in the area of conflict and the predicted low efficiency of interposition, we performed transposition of the vertebral artery by forming a cuff of Teflon material and moving the artery anteriorly by fixing the cuff in the anteromedial direction to the dura mater of the posterior surface of the clivus with single sutures. During transposition, to reduce the stiffness of the main artery, temporary clipping of the vertebral artery was used for 7 min [ and , ]. After arterial transposition, control intraoperative Doppler and intraoperative fluorescence angiography using ICG were performed: no signs of blood flow abnormalities were detected. In addition, interposition was performed by placing a Teflon fiber gasket between the medulla oblongata and the right VA.
In the 1st day after the surgery, the patient underwent MRI of the brain, visualized the displaced vertebral artery without signs of brainstem compression, the right vertebral artery and other arteries of the posterior cranial fossa contrasted homogeneously, no arterial narrowing or deformities were observed . In the 1st week after the operation, the patient noted improvement in the neurological status in the form of dysarthria regression. He was discharged from the hospital on the 7th day after the operation.
At the follow-up examination after 3 months, the atrophy of the tongue muscles had not regressed, but the patient noted an improvement in the mobility of the tongue .