A 55-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with intermittent chest tightness for 3 months, and his condition has worsened in the past 10 days. Physical examination showed left enlargement of cardiac boundary, and the systolic murmur (4/6 level) could be heard in the auscultation area of the aortic valve. Cardiac color Doppler ultrasound showed aortic valve calcification with moderate to severe stenosis. Sixth days after admission, aortic valve replacement was performed in the patient successfully without ischemia and hypoxia.
On the seventh days of admission, the patient’s consciousness was clear, his limbs were moving well, and he can communicate with his family simply. On the 11th day of admission, the patient was emotionally agitated, with speech disorder, accompanied by eating cough and diplopia. Dysarthria and ptosis in both eyelids were existed. Both eyes abduct was limited. Bilateral frontal lines and nasolabial sulcus remained unchanged. The muscle strength of the extremities was grade 4+, but the tendon reflex of both lower limbs was decreased. Serum anti-GQ1b antibody test was positive, then postoperative concurrent GBS was considered. Intravenous human immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg) was given for immunomodulation, methylprednisolone ((Manufacturing Belgium NV, 1000 mg) therapy and symptomatic treatment were performed. On the thirteenth day of admission, the patient’s consciousness turned to sleepiness, and his breathing and heart rate were stable, and the Glasgow Coma Scale/Score (GCS) was 12. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) + Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) showed small DWI high signal near the posterior corner of right ventricle, acute cerebral infarction was considered . On the 16th day of admission, the patient presented with deep coma, poor cough reflex and more sputum. He was given tracheotomy with GCS score of 5 points. The diameter of bilateral pupils is 5 mm, which is slow to reflect light. and the ptosis of both eyelids was existed. Horizontal movement of the eyeball was involuntarily slow. The eyeball hovered and returned from one side to the other horizontally for 3–4 s per cycle (Periodic alternating ping-pong gaze, Additional file : Video 1). The muscle strength of the extremities was grade 0, the tendon reflex of the extremities disappeared and the muscle tension was low. On the 18th day, the video EEG (electroencephalograph) showed that the patient was in a coma, and the brain waves were in the general 6-8 Hz wave and bilateral symmetry, and the voltage was 10–25 microvolts, no abnormal electroencephalogram activity was observed in all leads with 6–8 HZ wave .
The electromyography of the extremities showed that the motor amplitude of the common peroneal nerve of the left lower extremity decreased, the conduction velocity of the right peroneal nerve slowed down, and the conduction velocity of the superficial peroneal nerve of the right lower extremity slowed down. The occurrence rate of F wave of bilateral median nerve, right ulnar nerve, bilateral common peroneal nerve and left tibial nerve was low. On the 19th days, the patients turned into a shallow coma, PPG disappeared and the GCS score was grade 7. The lumbar puncture treatment showed that the pressure was 120 mmH2O, the cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) protein was 86 mg/dl associated with pleocytosis (8 cells/ml). The patient gradually turned to get consciousness, and the GCS score was 15 on the 25th days after admission. Dysarthria, slow reflex of pharynx and ptosis of the double eyelids existed. Bilateral pupils were large and equal circles, which were sensitive to light reflection. Both eyes were limited in adduction and abduction. Both frontal lines and nasolabial sulcus became shallow. The muscle strength of the extremities was 2 levels, the muscle tension was low, and bilateral tendon reflex was weakened.
Combining with the patient’s typical clinical and laboratory tests, the final diagnosis was anti GQ1b antibody syndrome BBE combined with GBS, accompanied by periodic alternating ping-pong gaze. The patients were discharged from hospital on the thirtieth day because of economic reasons. After 6 months of follow up, the patients left behind a lack of fluency in speech and limb mobility, but the basic life can be taken care of by himself. Physical examination showed clear mental reaction and mild dysarthria. No blepharoptosis. Bilateral pupils are large and equal circles, which are sensitive to light reflection. The eyeball moves freely in all directions without nystagmus. Bilateral frontal lines and nasolabial sulcus remained unchanged. The strength of limbs was grade 4 +. Decreased tendon reflex in extremities. The bilateral finger-nose and heel-knee-tibia tests were not (mildly) accurate. Double Pasteur sign was negative.