The patient was a 49-year-old male who presented to our emergency department with the complaint of a 4-day duration of lower abdominal pain. A physical examination revealed tenderness to palpation of the lower abdomen without signs of peritoneal irritation. There was no previous history of comorbid medical or surgical illness except for a recurrent feeling of abdominal discomfort that had persisted for several years. Laboratory data showed slight leukocytosis (WBC 112 × 102/μL) with elevated C-reactive protein (CRP 30.67 mg/dl).
A computed tomography (CT) image revealed an irregular polycystic mass that was connected to the small intestine and measured 7.5 cm in diameter in the lower abdomen . The preoperative diagnosis was either a massive Meckel's diverticulum or a small intestinal tumour. We planned to perform laparoscopic-assisted surgery. During the laparoscopy, the lesion was found to have caused torsion and congested. After dividing the inflammatory adhesions, the lesion was removed through the umbilical incision . We confirmed that the lesion was located 130 cm from the ileocecal valve and 50 cm from the ligament of Treitz. Partial resection of the jejunum, which included the lesion, was performed. The specimen was a solid irregular mass that looked like an extraintestinal growth tumour with a narrow neck . Macroscopically, an irregular polycystic appearance was observed on the cut surface, and the mass was fluid-containing. One of the cysts showed fistulation with the submucosal layer of small intestine; however, communicating links with the lumen were not apparent . Microscopically, the inner surfaces of the cysts were covered with layers of epithelium. One of the cysts exhibited the epithelium of the gastric pyloric gland, while another cyst adjacent to the intestine exhibited the epithelium of the small intestine . The lesion was diagnosed as atypical MD with torsion. The postoperative course of treatment was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day without postoperative complications.