A 28-year-old male presented to the emergency room with complaints of severe headache and vomiting following a road traffic accident where he had an impact on the back of his head with a blunt object. The patient was fully conscious at the time of admission. He was resuscitated with fluids and antiemetics. His vitals were stable. Initial CT head scans after 6 h from injury showed a fracture in the occipital bone along with EDH in both supratentorial and infratentorial compartments bilaterally [ and b]. The volume of EDH was 20.6 mL. Complete obliteration of the transverse sinus with a swirl sign was seen in the scan . 4th ventricular obliteration with proximal ventriculomegaly was also seen. His routine blood investigations were normal. CT scan of the neck was also normal. The patient was planned for emergent evacuation of hematoma but the patient’s relatives did not give consent for surgery. After 24 h of admission patient’s condition deteriorated and the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score dropped to E2V2M5. A repeat CT scan of the head was done. It showed an increase in the size of the hematoma from 20.6 mL to 32.6 mL which led to severe compression on the brain stem with proximal hydrocephalus as manifested by an increase in the size of temporal horns [ and ]. After the deterioration, the patient’s relatives agreed to surgery. The preoperative GCS score was E1V1M5. In a prone position under general anesthesia, a midline incision was made and a small infratentorial craniectomy for infratentorial EDH was done along with two burr holes made above transverse sinus bilaterally for supratentorial EDH and slightly enlarged with Kerrison punch . Adequate evacuation of hematoma was done. The source of bleeding was ruptured emissary diploic veins in the infratentorial compartment and probably stripping of venous sinuses with overlying fractured bone in the supratentorial compartment. Postdecompression dural pulsation was seen. The patient was observed in the intensive care unit for 24 h. The patient made an excellent recovery in the postoperative period. The patient regained full consciousness 24 h after surgery. Postoperative scans showed evacuated EDH with a small amount of residual blood along the transverse sinus [ and ]. 4th ventricle was also visualized with a decrease in the size of the ventricles . The transverse sinus was completely visualized in scans . The patient was discharged on day 9 in a fully conscious state.