A male patient, 53 years old, was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University on 8 February 2020 for a history of 12-day dry cough, 6-day fever with a maximum body temperature of 38.0°C, and 3-day disease aggravation with shortness of breath. Three days before admission, nasopharyngeal swab specimens were obtained and tested for SARS-CoV-2; the results of nucleic acid tests were positive twice. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) scans showed thin exudate in both lungs. The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 and transferred to our hospital.
The body temperature was 36.6°C and it remained normal after admission. A CT scan indicated extensive inflammation in both lungs , and no conjunctivitis was noted in neither eye. The patient was treated with oral arbidol (200 mg, tid), recombinant interferon spray (100,000 U, qid), oral darunavir (800mg, qd) as well as oxygen and other symptomatic supportive treatments. A CT scan revealed improvement , and there were no other complaints.
On 16 February 2020, the patient complained of general discomfort and stabbing pain in the left eye. And he did not report visual loss in either eye. An eye examination revealed redness and edema of lower eyelid, bulbar conjunctival hyperemia and edema, accompanied by a large quantity of watery secretions and a small quantity of thin viscous secretions. The cornea was clear, without infiltration. The right eye was relatively normal, except that slight redness and edema of the lower eyelid were obvious . On 17 February 2020, binocular tear and conjunctival secretion specimens were obtained using swabs and tested for SARS-CoV-2. The results of nucleic acid tests were positive (for details, see Reference 8 ); specifically, the left eye was positive for the virus, whereas the right eye was negative. The patient stated that he had a tendency of not washing his hands and rubbing his eyes, and he was advised to reverse his bad habit. On 18 February 2020, the left eye was treated with levofloxacin hydrochloride (drops, tid) and 0.1% sodium hyaluronate (drops, tid). One day after treatment, specimens were obtained and tested as indicated, and the left eye was positive for the virus, whereas the right eye was negative. On 22 February 2020, the symptoms in the left eye subsided. The results of nucleic acid tests using left eye tear and conjunctival secretion specimens, as well as sputum and fecal specimes, were all negative for SARS-CoV-2. From 19 to 23 February 2020, left eye tears and conjunctival secretion specimens were repeatedly obtained for virus isolation and culture, and the results were all negative. The treatment of the left eye was halted, and the patient was discharged and quarantined at home.
On 27 February 2020, the patient phoned the clinic and stated that he had sudden discomfort in both eyes with conjunctival hyperemia and edema. However, the patient denied recently rubbing his eyes. Both eyes were treated with ganciclovir ophthalmic gel, levofloxacin hydrochloride drops, and 0.1% sodium hyaluronate drops. On 1 March 2020, the patient was re-examined. However, the symptoms of both eyes were not relieved; instead, they were aggravated, with spot staining observed at the periphery of the corneal epithelium of both eyes . Binocular tear and conjunctival secretion specimens were obtained and tested for SARS-CoV-2, adenovirus, and herpes simplex, as well as for inflammatory factors. The results of nucleic acid tests were all negative for the viruses; however, the levels of inflammatory factors, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), increased ten-fold of the upper normal reference range in the left eye . Both eyes were treated with 0.1% fluorometholone (drops, qid). Four days after treatment, binocular symptoms were relieved. On 8 March 2020, the patient was re-examined. Binocular keratoconjunctivitis was completely relieved, and the cornea was transparent . The timeline of the disease course is shown in Fig. .