A 37-year-old man (weight 61 kg, height 183 cm) was diagnosed with Becker muscular dystrophy-associated cardiomyopathy. Eventually, he received implantation of EVAHEART® (Sun Medical Technology Research Corporation, Nagano, Japan), which is an implantable centrifugal LVAD, in addition to tricuspid annuloplasty (TAP) and patent foramen ovale closure surgery. One month later and 2 months after LVAD implantation, he developed spontaneous right-sided pneumothorax. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) revealed right-sided pneumothorax . Moreover, bullae of the right pulmonary apex with moderately retained pleural effusion were observed on CT images. Subsequently, the patient was scheduled for VATS.
Prior to surgery, the patient’s body weight decreased due to loss of appetite. He was hydrated with crystalloids at the request of the cardiac surgery team to prevent occurrence of the sucking phenomenon and the formation of thrombi. Consequently, he gained 3.5 kg of body weight in 4 days, exceeding his target body weight by 1 kg. However, a preoperative chest radiograph showed a dilated cardiac shadow and pulmonary congestion. The patient was routinely administered aspirin (100 mg) each day and warfarin to maintain the prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) at approximately 2.5–3.5 for systemic anticoagulation. The patient bridged from warfarin to intravenous heparin 3 days preoperatively. On the day of the operation, heparin administration was discontinued 3 h before surgery. Routine laboratory test results were within the normal limits except for anemia and coagulation abnormalities: prothrombin time: 17 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT): 52.9 s (APTT control: 32.9 s), and PT-INR: 1.51.
The patient was transported to the operating room, and monitors were placed according to the Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists. An arterial catheter was inserted in the left radial artery before general anesthesia induction using an ultrasound-guided technique. The pump speed was set at 1700 rpm, pump power consumption was 2.8 W, and the mean arterial blood pressure (ABP) was approximately 80 mmHg.
Anesthetic induction was achieved with midazolam 2 mg, remifentanil 0.2 μg/kg/min, and a propofol target blood concentration at 2 μg/ml using the target-controlled infusion system, with maintenance doses of remifentanil at 0.2–0.5 μg/kg/min and propofol at 2–2.5 μg/ml. To facilitate endotracheal intubation using a left-sided double lumen tube Broncho-Cath™ (Mallinckrodt Medical, Athlone, Ireland), 50 mg of rocuronium bromide was administered. We did not administer additional muscle relaxants except when a 10 mg maintenance dose of rocuronium bromide was used just after the patient was placed into the left lateral decubitus position, and 20 mg rocuronium bromide was administered just before the first incision. The train-of-four was measured for neuromuscular monitoring throughout the operation. A central line was inserted in the right jugular vein. The patient’s ABP and central venous pressure (CVP) were continuously monitored using invasive means. Electrocardiography showed the sinus rhythm supported by the pacemaker, but the mode was changed from DDD to DOO at the heart rate of 80 bpm to avoid interference of electrocautery. Defibrillator pads were attached because implantable cardioverter defibrillator detection was inactivated. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) probe was placed for monitoring the performance of the LVAD and to determine intraoperative cardiac function. Initial findings included severely dilated left ventricle (LV) and right ventricle (RV), bowing of the intraventricular septum into the RV , reduced LV and RV wall motion [RV-fractional area change (FAC) 16.8%], severe mitral regurgitation, continuous closed aortic valves, no aortic regurgitation, and trivial tricuspid regurgitation (TR) after TAP. The inflow cannula, anastomosed to the apex of the LV, and the outflow cannula, attached to the ascending aorta, of the LVAD were unobstructed with low flow velocities of 90.2 cm/s and 87.3 cm/s on pulse wave and color Doppler analyses, respectively. The right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) was estimated at 21 mmHg by measuring the TR jet maximum velocity. First, arterial gas analysis showed the following results: pH 7.437, pCO2 31.1 mmHg, pO2 225 mmHg, BEecf 2.7, lactate 0.7 mmol/L, SaO2 99% and Hb 9.2 g/dL at FiO2 of 0.5.
When the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, the CVP increased from 12 mmHg to 20 mmHg despite maintaining a mean ABP of 80 mmHg ). The external portion of driveline was not kinked. As the patient was coughing slightly, 10 mg rocuronium bromide was administered, and the dose of remifentanil was increased. TEE examination revealed an almost akinetic LV, free wall RV, and a flattened intraventricular septum. The inflow and outflow cannulas of the LVAD were noted to be in the proper position with a pulsatile flow of approximately 60 cm/s and 110 cm/s, respectively. We assessed that the patient needed inotropic support, and hence, the administration of dobutamine (3.3 μg/kg/min) and milrinone (0.2 μg/kg/min) was initiated. Gradually, the CVP returned to 12 mmHg, and TEE showed improved LV and RV motions, with rightward shift of the intraventricular septum. At the beginning of OLV, the pressure-controlled ventilation mode was adjusted; peak inspiratory pressure and positive end-expiratory pressure were changed from 17 cmH2O to 28 cmH2O and from 5 cmH2O to 7 cmH2O, respectively, to maintain saturation of percutaneous oxygen (SpO2) above 90%. After insertion of the access ports, SpO2 decreased to 91% at FiO2 of 1.0, pump power consumption increased to 3.5 watts, and the CVP reached 20 mmHg, when the mean ABP was maintained at approximately 85 mmHg ). TEE showed severely reduced RV motion, and the intraventricular septum had again shifted slightly to the left side. The RVSP was calculated at 35 mmHg, whereas the RV-FAC was calculated at 17.7% and appeared to be near the pre-OLV level. For further support of right heart function, continuous intravenous infusion of milrinone was increased to 0.4 μg/kg/min. Arterial blood gas analysis at this time revealed the following results: pH 7.357, pCO2 42.9 mmHg, pO2 67.9 mmHg, BEecf − 1.4, lactate 0.6 mmol/L, SaO2 96.7% and Hb 10.2 g/dL at FiO2 1.0. After a couple of min, TEE examination showed that the LV and RV motions had slightly improved, and the intraventricular septum had shifted toward the RV. Reflecting gradually improved RV wall motion, the RV-FAC was found to be 33.8%. With the increase in urine output, oxygenation improved and CVP decreased to 10 mmHg. The TEE findings did not change, and the mean ABP was maintained at 64–85 mmHg. The pulsatile waveforms were maintained on ABP and SpO2 throughout the operation. Intraoperatively, the EVAHEART® monitor showed that the pump speed was set at 1700 rpm; the pump power consumption was 2–4 W. The VATS was completed successfully with stable hemodynamic conditions.
Intraoperatively, the total administration of fentanyl was 450 μg. For postoperative pain control, a single intercostal nerve block (ICNB) was applied by the thoracic surgeons from the inside whilst closing the chest, and an intravenous patient control system (fentanyl 20 μg/h, lock-out time 10 min, 20 μg/one demanded dose) was used. The total OLV time was 3 h 6 min, with an operation time of 3 h 5 min, necessitating a fluid input of 1320 ml crystalloids. The total urine output and blood loss measured were 2550 ml and 23 ml, respectively. Before recovery from general anesthesia, the TEE findings and LVAD parameters showed unremarkable changes in the supine position. The neuromuscular blockade was reversed with sugammadex sodium. After extubation, the patient did not experience pain and could breathe deeply. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit in stable condition. However, he needed temporary bilevel positive airway pressure support after several hours. Moreover, postoperative pneumonia was suspected on postoperative day 2, and a change in the antibiotic protocol was needed. Finally, he recovered in 1 week and was discharged from our hospital in stable condition on postoperative day 37.