An 8-year-old African boy, a primary school pupil, from rural Kenya presented to our unit with a 1-year history of cough, difficulty in breathing and dyspnea on exertion that were relieved by rest. His difficulty in breathing was worse at night and there were no reported known relieving factors. His dyspnea was progressive in spite of antibiotics, inhalers and treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) for 6 months. His cough was dry and associated with constitutional symptoms; he had no history of hemoptysis, chest pain or foreign body inhalation. Our patient had no features of cardiac failure, no dysphagia or odynophagia. He had been treated for PTB at the district hospital without improvement.
There was no history of similar illness nor was there a history of tumors in the family. Our patient was well prior to the onset of these symptoms with no history of previous hospital admission. A chest X-ray was done after completion of the anti-tubercular medication since there was no improvement. After the X-ray, the patient was referred to our facility. When we examined our patient, he was tachypneic at 40 breaths/minute, with flaring of alae nasi and no cyanosis. He had wheezing with symmetrical chest expansion and his trachea deviated to the left with reduced air entry on the right and rhonchi on auscultation. The results of his cardiovascular and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. His neck had no visible swelling nor was a mass palpable.
The chest X-ray done at the district hospital after no improvement on anti-TB medication showed a widened mediastinum without features of PTB . His hemogram and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was done upon admission to our unit. It showed a cystic mass in the superior mediastinum. It appeared to be arising from the neck at the level of the thyroid cartilage deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle and extending into the mediastinum to the level of the carina. The mass displaced the major neck vessels . The lung parenchyma and the heart were reported as normal, with no pleural effusion. The radiologist reported a differential diagnosis of branchial cleft cyst and thymoma.
Our patient was prepared for surgery after the basic preoperative laboratory tests i.e. total blood count, urea electrolytes and creatinine were done and found to be normal. Median sternotomy was performed combined with neck dissection. Intraoperative findings included a right cystic mass arising from the angle of the right jaw extending into the superior mediastinum; there was no extension into the anterior mediastinum. The right common carotid artery was displaced anterolaterally, the superior vena cava anteriorly. The cyst was dissected from the surrounding vessels and the other adjacent structures within its vicinity in the chest. Extension into the neck was noted as the cyst stalk and excised en bloc. The stalk ended abruptly at the angle of the jaw. Its end could not be traced into the pharynx due to the above finding. Postoperatively, our patient was admitted in our intensive care unit from where he was discharged to the general ward after 2 days. He was discharged from the hospital 10 days after the surgery following an uneventful postoperative course. Histopathology of the specimen reported a fibrous cyst wall lined with low columnar and cuboidal cells. These features are consistent with a branchial cyst.
Our patient was seen 2 weeks after discharge in our clinic and all his symptoms had cleared.