An 87 year old Bangladeshi lady presented with a 4 month history of recurrent episodes of syncope associated with complete loss of consciousness for several seconds, and shortness of breath. Her medical history was significant for ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and chronic kidney disease. Physical examination revealed a heart rate of 42 beats/minute, blood pressure 140/80 mmHg, bilateral crackles on lung auscultation and auscultation of the praecordium revealed no abnormality. She had no cognitive deficit.
An immediate ECG revealed intermittent complete heart block alternating with junctional rhythm and sinus bradycardia, with a heart rate of approximately 42 beats/minute . An emergent temporary pace maker (TPM) was set at a rate of 60 beats per minute. Echocardiogram revealed anterior wall hypokinesia with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50 %. Routine laboratory parameters were within normal limit, except for an elevated serum creatinine of 2.28 mg/dL and urea of 120 mg/dL. Electrolyte imbalance and hypothyroidism were excluded biochemically. Drug history did not include beta blockers. She was treated with diuretics in addition to her anti-ischaemic treatment. The patient remained TPM dependent for the following 2 days.
She was diagnosed as a case of complete heart block. As this is a Class I indication for PPM implantation according to AHA/ACC/ESC guidelines, a single chamber ventricular pacemaker (VVI mode: i.e. Ventricle paced, Ventricle sensed, Inhibitory mode) was implanted with appropriate lead parameters for sensing and pacing. The pulse generator was positioned in the left pre-pectoral area, and the right ventricular lead was placed via the left subclavian vein.
The post-implantation chest X-ray showed ideal ventricular lead positioning, with the pacemaker head pointing upwards. Post PPM ECG showed regular ventricular paced rhythm. She had no further episodes of syncope and was discharged 3 days later with stable hemodynamic parameters.
Seven weeks after pacemaker implantation, she presented again with recurrent episodes of syncope. She had eight episodes of syncope in the 3 days prior to presentation, each lasting less than fifteen seconds, following which she regained consciousness. The ECG showed complete heart block with pacemaker spikes and failure to capture . The chest X-ray showed coiling of the ventricular lead resulting in the pulse generator being rotated, with its head now pointing downwards. The distal end of the ventricular lead was seen in the right atrium .
On query the patient admitted that she had repeatedly twiddled and manipulated the PPM generator in the skin pocket on her upper left chest, especially attempting to show the device to other elderly neighbours. She denied any history of epigastric or arm twitching. She was immediately put on TPM once again, and subsequently PPM lead repositioning was performed. During this procedure, the leads were found to be grossly entangled into repeated knots. They were uncoiled manually, and the pulse generator was secured in the pocket with additional non-absorbable sutures.
A chest X-ray was done to confirm appropriate lead positioning. She was discharged on day 3 with good counselling against further twiddling of the device. She has been asymptomatic since then.