A 64-year-old Japanese man admitted to Nagoya City University Hospital because of upper abdominal pain was diagnosed with gastric cancer with liver metastases. His family history was unremarkable. Laboratory data on admission revealed liver dysfunction as follows: serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), 125 U/L (normal range, 10–33 U/L); glutamic pyruvic transferase (SGPT), 252 U/L (normal range, 6–37 U/L); γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP), 1435 U/L (normal range, 10–47 U/L); alkaliphosphatase (ALP), 988 U/L (normal range, 115–359 U/L). AFP and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were 1497.8 ng/ml and 72.7 ng/ml, respectively. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed enhanced thickness of the gastric wall and multiple liver metastases . Gastroscopy revealed a Borrmann type III tumor on the lesser curvature in the midportion of the stomach , which was diagnosed as gastric carcinoma upon histological examination of a biopsy specimen. After informed consent with enough detailed explanation about the patient's disease, he wished a surgical treatment strongly. The patient underwent surgical resection (total gastrectomy with splenectomy). The pathological stage was IV: T3, N1, H1, P0 according to the classification proposed by the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association , and the histological diagnosis was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Lymphatic invasion was moderate and venous invasion was negative. Tumor production of AFP was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining .
The patient was treated with one course of paclitaxel (80 mg on days 1 and 8) and TS-1 (100 mg/day for 2 weeks and discontinuation for 1 week) after surgery. After 3 months, the level of AFP had remarkably decreased from 4344.0 ng/ml to 418.9 ng/ml. After 4 months, CT revealed regression of liver metastases . However, after 5 months, multiple new liver metastases were apparent and serum AFP had increased to 8189.0 ng/ml. Furthermore, an ileus occurred due to peritonitis carcinomatous. We therefore tried a regimen of 5-FU (500 mg/day via continuous infusion for 7 days) plus paclitaxel (120 mg weekly) at weekly intervals. After one treatment course, 5-FU administration was stopped but paclitaxel (120 mg) monotherapy was continued for 6 weeks. Serum AFP levels decreased again (to 709.7 ng/ml) and CT revealed that the liver metastases had either regressed or disappeared . The patient currently has a very good quality of life, and is receiving weekly paclitaxel monotherapy as an outpatient. Three months have passed since 5-FU/paclitaxel treatment was started; no progression of liver metastases has been observed to date.