The 42-year-old woman sought medical attention for periodically occurring moderately severe pain in the lower abdomen. Intermittent lower abdominal pain occurred 2 years ago for the first time. She was investigated in the emergency department a few times. The pain gradually increased over the time. Physical examination revealed that the patient was well and no physical changes were identified. CT scan revealed a clearly defined, hypodensic, cystic, without clear solid components mass, about 11 cm × 10 cm × 6,5 cm, ventrally reaching the right side of abdomen wall, dorsally contacting abdominal aorta, inferior vena cava and right common iliac artery, caudally lying on the ileocolic artery and vein ( and ). The mass extended from pancreatic head and superior mesenteric vein near ileum to right iliac area along the ileocolic artery and vein. Lymphangioma of the ileum mesentery was suspected. Also, an atypical anatomy of the celiac trunk was detected.
After multidisciplinary team discussion the decision was made to proceed with the surgical treatment. Midline laparotomy was performed. A cystic lymph-filled tumor about 12 cm in diameter was detected in the abdominal cavity within the mesentery . The tumor was dissected from the surrounding structures with vessel sealing device. Right ileocolic artery and vein were freed from the tissues of lymphangioma . No extravasation of the lymph flow was observed after removal of the mass.
On pathological examination, the macroscopically observed partially opened fatty-fibrous cystic formation 9 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm was identified. Cysts of up to 2 cm filled with whitish, turbid substance were visible. 6 lymph nodes up to 0.5 cm were excised alongside with the lymphangioma. Histologically thin-walled cystic tumor structures were separated by areas of adipose tissue with lymphoid aggregates . The cavities of the mass were filled with eosinophilic fluid and lymphocytes. The fluid color is similar to milk due to the accumulation of lymphocytes . Lymphoid aggregates and lymph nodes with histiocytosis were found in the surrounding tissue. Immunohistochemical examination of the lymphatic endothelial marker podoplanin (D2-40) was positive in the endothelial wall of the cystic tumor . Histological findings support the diagnosis of lymphangioma.