A 2-month-old boy with known Down syndrome (trisomy 21) was referred to our department with presentation of rapid head enlargement. He was born as a full-term baby to a 30-year-old mother by normal delivery without perinatal complications.
On examination, the boy was lethargic and found to have variable waveforms of nystagmus (congenital nystagmus). The head circumference was 39 cm with bulging of the anterior fontanel. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed a large heterogeneously dense midline posterior fossa tumor, 5 cm in diameter, involving the cerebellum. Small speckles of calcification were also seen. Severe hydrocephalus with periventricular lucency was present. The tumor was of mixed intensity on T1- and T2-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) and consisted of various sized cysts [Figure and ]. The tumor strongly enhanced with gadolinium and was multiloculated [Figure –]. Serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) was elevated to 2.91 × 106 UI/L. Serum levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) and β-HCG were normal, 1.1 and 0.2 mlU/ml, respectively.
Midline suboccipital craniotomy exposed a highly vascularized tumor with variable consistency; cystic, solid, and elastic hard. Gross total removal was achieved in a piecemeal fashion. The tumor capsule was easily detached from the cerebellar hemisphere, but not from the cerebellar vermis. An intact pineal gland was seen in the supracerebellar cistern after tumor removal. Postoperative MRI showed the total removal of the tumor [Figure –].
Histopathologically, the tumor was composed of incompletely differentiated components resembling fetal tissues. The most immature elements were primitive embryonal mesenchymal tissue or neuroectodermal tissue with canalicular structure resembling a developing neural tube or neuroepithelial rosettes . This tumor showed a positive reaction to AFP immunostaining . Neuroepithelial rosettes reacted positively to β-tubulin 3 and MAP2 [Figure and ]. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostaining was negative . The MIB-1 index was approximately 10% .
Four cycles of chemotherapy with regimens comprised of cisplatin and etoposide followed the surgery. The AFP serum level decreased to 2.74 × 104 UI/L after chemotherapy. In addition, it had dropped to 1.25 × 104 UI/L when two recurrent lesions were detected in the cerebellar vermis and tentorium on MRI [Figure –], performed 10 months after the first surgery. The second operation was done via the same approach, and histological diagnosis of the recurrent tumor was mature teratoma. No additional treatment has been given since then. The AFP serum level has remained normal in the range 2.06 × 103 to 2.31 × 103 UI/L since the second operation. The latest MRI studied 3 years after the second surgery [Figure –] showed no recurrences. The patient is now 4-year-old and has been living in the nursing house with minimum assistance.