In October 2014, a 53 year old male Caucasian administration officer was referred to a tertiary renal outpatient clinic for assessment of nephrotic range proteinuria. On review, he described occasional ankle oedema over the past year but otherwise felt well. His past medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus which was treated in 2007 with 15 kg of weight loss (glycosylated haemoglobin < 6% since 2013). He denied symptoms of macrovascular or microvascular complications. The patient also had hypertension (diagnosed > 10 years prior to review), obesity (body mass index: 47.6 g/m2) and degenerative spine disease. His medications were irbesartan 300 mg once daily, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg once daily, tramadol 50 mg three times a day and meloxicam 7.5 mg as needed. His family history was significant for type 1 diabetes mellitus in his father and paternal uncle. On examination, his blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg and heart sounds were dual with no murmurs. There was bipedal oedema up to the bottom third of his shins, his jugular venous pressure was not elevated and his chest was clear to auscultation.
Initial laboratory investigation demonstrated haemoglobin 149 g/L, white cell count 7.20 × 109/L, platelets 235 × 109/L, blood urea nitrogen 6.0 mmol/L, serum creatinine 70 μmol/L and serum albumin 32 g/L. Serum electrolytes, liver enzymes, calcium and phosphate were within normal range. Repeated urinalysis did not demonstrate any haematuria, leukocyturia or casts. Urine protein creatinine ratio was 662 mg/mmol (normal in August, 2012, Fig. ). Serum levels of antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, immunoglobulin (Ig) A, cryoglobulins, complement factor C3 and C4 were normal. Human immunodeficiency virus screen, Hepatitis B antigen and hepatitis C antibodies were negative. Serum κ free light chains (FLC) was 18 mg/L (7–22), serum λ FLC was 60 mg/L (8–27) and κ/λ ratio was 0.30 (0.31–1.56). Repeated serum electrophoreses over three months showed persistent κ and λ IgG bands in trace amounts consistent with an inflammatory or reactive pattern. The repeated abnormal serum electrophoreses in the absence of inflammation (normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels) prompted referral to haematology for further assessment.
Bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular marrow with mild lymphocytosis but no morphological evidence of plasma cell myeloma. Flow cytometry identified a clonal B-cell population suggesting a low grade B-cell lymphoma. Staging computer tomography scans of his neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis found some borderline mesenteric lymphadenopathy (clinically stage 1).
The first renal biopsy demonstrated 4 glomeruli with minor mesangial hypercellularity but not expansion of the mesangial matrix. However, there was insufficient tissue to determine the cause of the patient’s glomerular disease. The second renal biopsy was performed a month later, yielding 11 glomeruli . There was mild mesangial expansion but no mesangial hypercellularity, endocapillary proliferation nor crescent formation. One glomerulus was globally sclerosed. Three glomeruli showed areas of segmental sclerosis and adhesion to Bowman’s capsule. The lesions of segmental sclerosis were not perihilar in location. There was mild tubular atrophy involving 5% of the cortex and there was mild arteriolar hyalinosis. Immunofluorescence examination showed mesangial reactivity for IgA (moderate intensity), IgM (trace) and both kappa and lambda light chains (weak intensity). There was no reactivity for IgG, C3 or C1q. Electron microscopy showed extensive epithelial foot process effacement with microvillous change. A few small electron-dense deposits were found in the mesangium but not in glomerular capillary walls. Together, these findings indicated IgAN with associated FSGS.
In June 2015, the patient began 6 cycles of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide (day 1: 750 mg/m2), rituximab (day 1: 375 mg/m2) and prednisolone (days 1–5: 50 mg/day). The patient did not demonstrate any side effects or complications from treatment. At the end of chemotherapy, the patient was in complete remission haematologically and urine protein creatinine ratio had decreased substantially to 241 mg/mmol creatinine. Over the next 14 months, his urine protein creatinine ratio continued to fall. His serum creatinine was 104 μmol/L, serum albumin was 38 g/L and urine protein excretion was 14 mg/mmol at his most recent follow-up, 26 months post-chemotherapy.