The first case was a 29-year-old white non-Hispanic female nurse (one of the authors) who started experiencing nausea and vomiting 3 weeks after conceiving her first pregnancy that persisted throughout her pregnancy. Her pregnancy was complicated with a 114-pound weight gain and pre-eclampsia. Her delivery was complicated with shoulder dystocia and post partum hemorrhage. After her delivery in January 1985, her symptoms got better in that she only had nausea in the mornings that cleared by 1 or 2 P.M. She also had headaches on awakening in the morning up to 3 days a week.
She was on no medications and had no allergies to medications. She denied use of alcohol, cigarettes, or any other drugs. Her past medical history was significant for intermittent hypertension. She had multiple right eye surgeries for strabismus in the early 1960s and a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy in 1965. She was 5 foot and 11 inches tall and weighed 165 lbs prior to her pregnancy, 264 lbs just after her delivery that decreased over the time to 180 lbs at time of her self-diagnosis.
She went to see her physician in July 1985 with these symptoms. Her physician treated her with oral prochlorperazine and meclizine; however, these medications did not have much effect on her.
In January 1986, she again saw her physician with the same complaints. The neurological exam was normal except for showing a few beats of nystagmus on lateral gaze. She was again treated symptomatically with metoclopramide and trimethobenzamide. Over the next several months, the nausea progressed to encompass the entire day along with some vomiting. In addition, she was experiencing vertigo with motion and lying in bed.
She saw her physician in June 1986 and was noted to have nonfatiguing nystagmus on looking to the right. She had audiologic testing that was normal but had an electronystagmograph (ENG) that showed a direction-fixed right-beating positional nystagmus of about six degrees. She was referred to an otolaryngologist who noted a positioning nystagmus consistent with the ENG that was easily reproduced and persistent. Radiographs of the internal auditory canals were normal. Because of the persistence of her symptoms, she was then referred to a neurologist. He ordered a brainstem auditory evoked response test and a magnetic resonance imaging scan of the brain, both of which were normal. His final diagnosis was a vestibular neuronitis versus a chronic labyrinthitis and he gave her diazepam to take as needed.
Over the next two months, her symptoms got worse to where she was experiencing problems with muscle coordination manifested by occasionally not being able to negotiate doorways and occasionally not being able to place a spoon squarely in her mouth.
In September 1986, she read a doctor-advice column in the local paper that mentioned aspartame was anecdotally associated with nausea and headaches. She had first begun to drink an aspartame-sweetened drink - Crystal Light® - right after the birth of her son and was drinking 16 to 32 ounces per day, sipping on it throughout the day. She made sure that she did not consume it during her pregnancy. After reading the article, she stopped drinking Crystal Light®, her only source of aspartame, and within a week, she was symptom free. About a month later, she challenged herself with 8 ounces of Crystal Light® and within 1 to 2 hours started having nausea, headaches, and vertigo that lasted for 48 hours. About 3 to 4 weeks later she drank a 12-ounce can of Diet Pepsi® and within 1 hour started to have the exact same symptoms, again lasting about 48 hours. She had a recurrence of the symptoms two times after that, each time after accidentally drinking a beverage with aspartame in it. After the last occurrence of her nausea, headaches, and vertigo, she has since not consumed aspartame in any product or form and has been symptom free for 22 years.
Primary diagnosis is a vestibular neuronitis versus chronic labyrinthitis secondary to aspartame. Secondary diagnosis is nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.