A previously healthy twenty year-old female patient was admitted to outpatient clinic after she had experienced a generalized tonic–clonic seizure while she was sleep-deprived. Her neurologic examination and vital signs were normal. Laboratory tests were within normal limits except C-reactive protein which was elevated at 45.8 (normal range: 0–6) mg/L. She reported no recent fever, signs of upper respiratory, urinary or gastrointestinal infection. She only reported hip pain. X-rays of the thorax, hip, and lumbar region were reported as normal. Electrencephalography (EEG) revealed generalized epileptiform pathology. Levetiracetam 500 mg tablets twice per day was started. On MRI, multiple ring-enhancing lesions were observed .
Considering an infectious etiology, the patient was referred to the infectious diseases department where albendazole treatment was initiated with a probable diagnosis of NCC. Although the diagnosis of NCC typically requires both CNS imaging and serological testing including enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot (EITB), and commercial enzyme-linked immunoassays, serological tests were not performed because they were not readily available. Due to the present symptoms and radiological findings compatible with NCC, urgent treatment was started.
In the fourth week of albendazole treatment, the patient was admitted to our hospital with new-onset fever while receiving antiparasitic treatment. She denied having cough, loss of appetite, weight loss or night sweats. Her neurologic examination was normal without any sign of increased intracranial pressure or meningeal irritation. Her seizures were under control with levetirasetam. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for coronavirus was negative. Thoracic scans were normal. Repeated cranial MRI showed no improvement compared with the initial imaging performed one month ago.
With a suspicion of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, QuantiFERON-TB Gold test was performed and resulted positive indicating previous TB infection. MRI of the hip revealed active severe sacroiliitis on the right side. An enlarged lymph node was newly detected in the anterior cervical region. Biopsy of the lymph node showed granulomatous lymphadenitis including necrotizing Langhans-type giant cells, which was compatible with a diagnosis of TB. Anti-HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) antibody testing was negative and serum immunoglobulin levels (IgG,A,M) were within normal limits. Antituberculosis treatment with isoniazid—plus pyridoxine, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide was started.
Two months after the onset of anti-tuberculosis therapy, follow-up cranial MRI showed near-complete resolution of the tuberculomas in the brain . We planned to continue four drugs for a total of six months; after six months, isoniazid and rifampicin for a further 12 months.