A 61-year-old woman with no underlying medical conditions presented with progressive left hand resting tremor that began at the age of 42, quickly followed by the development of rigidity and slow movement over the left side limbs. There were no signs of early cognition impairment, change in personality, behavior disturbance, psychiatric symptoms, limited eye movements, bulbar symptoms, retrocollis or antecollis, focal weakness, focal numbness, or gait disturbance. Treatment with levodopa, anticholinergics and dopamine agonists led to a significant clinical improvement. The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor score improved from at 42/108 to 15/108 after medications. However she developed peak-dose dyskinesia and wearing-off phenomenon within seven years, which clinical responses became progressively resistant to medications. She developed severe gait freezing, dysphagia and torticollis during OFF-medication status. She then received STN-DBS at the age of 55. The levodopa equivalent daily dose was 1435 mg/day before the DBS surgery. Monopolar stimulation of the two dorsal contacts (6−/2-) at 4.4 V in the right STN and 3.2 V in the left STN, with a frequency of 160 Hz and pulse duration of 90 ms in the right STN and 60 ms in the left STN led to the best clinical response. We measured the intraoperative microelectrode recording (MER) in STN during surgery. MER could identify the neuronal firing patterns of the STN and is the most commonly employed technique to assist and validate target localization. The recorded MER of our index patient was comparable with those with sporadic PD. The post-operational brain MRI was shown in Fig. . Stimulation resulted in a marked improvement in her parkinsonism features and decrease of peak-dose dyskinesia. STN-DBS still resulted in a 37% improvement in the UPDRS motor score during the OFF period five years after surgery. The observed motor benefit persisted, with UPDRS motor scores of 35/108 in the OFF-medication condition and OFF-stimulation, 22/108 in the OFF-medication and ON-stimulation condition, 15/108 in the ON-medication and OFF-stimulation condition, and 13/108 in the ON-medication and ON-stimulation condition.
The patient’s family history indicated that her deceased mother, two sisters (one deceased) and one brother were also diagnosed with PD in their mid to late forties . Unfortunately, the affected sister and brother declined genetic analysis and detailed examination. Neurological examinations of the other family members were normal, including additional siblings and the younger generation. Since the clinical picture indicated an autosomal dominant inheritance form of PD, we applied targeted NGS to perform genetic analysis of the proband, covering candidate genes known causing familial forms of PD . Variants within the genes of interest were extracted for further analysis and included SNCA, GBA, LRRK2, UCHL1, GIGYF2, VPS35, DNAJC13, PARK2, PINK1, DJ-1,ATP13A2, HtrA2,FBXO7, SYNJ1, DNAJC6, CHCHD2, and Rab39B. The analyzed genes presented an individual average coverage of >33× and we Sanger sequenced exons in specific samples with coverage below 8×. We assessed the frequency of the variants in the general population (Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), dbSNP, 1000 Genomes Project) and Taiwan biobank , which is the whole genome sequencing (WGS) database enrolling 997 Taiwanese people without known neurological disorders, in order to identify potentially pathogenic variants. If the variants were non-synonymous, predicted to change the protein sequence, or were located in either untranslated or splicing regions, we also evaluated the functional annotation of the variants and used prediction software to obtain a prediction of pathogenicity. We considered variants with minor allele frequency (MAF) < = 0.1% (rare variants) and variants predicted to change the protein sequence or to impact splicing as potentially pathogenic. Mutations were classified as definitely pathogenic if they had been reported in the literature previously as causative. The salsa multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MPLA) kit P051-c1/P52-c1 (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) was used to detect large deletions or duplications of common PD-causative genes, including SNCA, Parkin, PINK1, DJ-1, ATP13A2, PLA2G6, FBXO7, DNAJC6 and LRRK2.
We determined that this patient carried a heterozygous missense substitution in the VPS35 gene, c.1858G > A (p.D620N) . We did not identify other rare genetic variants from the targeted NGS sequencing panel. The results of MLPA did not detect any genetic deletions or duplications of SNCA and other aforementioned common PD-causative gene. This variation had been reported in previous studies to be the pathogenic for patients with autosomal dominant forms of PD, was not found in more than 500 Japanese control subjects and was not identified from the WGS database of Taiwan Biobank. In the patient’s family this genetic substitution was not observed in the non-affected family members , although the affected siblings declined genetic analysis which hampered further segregation analysis. The Institutional Ethics Committee of National Taiwan University Hospital approved this study and each subject that provided blood samples for genetic testing also provided written informed consent.