A 4-day-old Asian baby boy was delivered vaginally at term in our hospital; he was referred to our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) 48 hours after delivery when he presented with fever, tachypnea and chest retraction. His birth weight was 2.9kg and he cried immediately after delivery. His mother was 19-years old and she came from a rural area. Her antenatal history revealed that she had undergone regular checkups at our hospital; she had no bad obstetric history during the whole pregnancy period. On examination it was found that her human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) status was negative by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method. No vaginal lesions were identified during pregnancy and there was no history of birth trauma. She gave a history of premature rupture of membrane (PROM) approximately 8 to 10 hours before delivery. She noted a foul smelling discharge after rupture of membrane.
The baby boy had respiratory distress with some pneumonic changes seen on chest X-ray. A blood sample was collected with complete aseptic precaution into aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottle (BacT/ALERT® 3D; bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France). He was then empirically treated with a combination of amikacin and vancomycin. Aliquots of broth were subcultured on 5% sheep blood agar and MacConkey agar. On blood agar plate colonies were pin-point and had a smooth surface, whereas on MacConkey agar there was a lactose-fermenting colony with similar morphology. A routine biochemical test showed that the colony belonged to the family Enterobacteriaceae and further identification was performed by Vitek 2 using GN25 card (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France); it was identified as Pantoea spp. with 97% probability. Isolates were sensitive to imipenem, meropenem, amikacin, cefoperazone-sulbactam, ceftriaxone and netilmicin, and resistant to gentamicin, cefotaxime and ceftazidime-clavulanic acid. The anaerobic culture bottle showed no growth after 7 days of incubation. A high vaginal swab of the mother was also sent for culture and sensitivity and it also showed growth of Pantoea spp. Other laboratory parameters were: hemoglobin (Hb) 10gm %, red blood cell (RBC) 4.49/cmm3, total leukocyte count (TLC) 41,000, neutrophil 80%, lymphocyte 16%, monocyte 4%, C-reactive protein (CRP) 22.5mg/L, urea 73.5mg/dl, serum creatinine 0.45mg/dl, sodium (Na+) 141mmol/L and potassium (K+) 4.8mmol/L. After collection of the blood sample the baby boy was treated empirically with vancomycin and amikacin. His therapy was changed to meropenem and he was successfully treated with 1 gram twice daily for 14 days after getting the sensitivity report.