An 84-year-old Caucasian woman, in good health, without any medication, independent in activities and instrumental activities of daily living, walking without any assisting devices, presented to our General Medicine Unit with painful swelling of the hands and the feet. She described stiffness in her hands and feet that developed abruptly 10 days before. Subsequently, she noted swelling of her hands and feet associated with significant pain and functional limitation .
In addition, she reported progressively increasing fatigue over the past 2 months associated with generalized muscle weakness. Pain in the shoulders and hips, as well as neck pain, was also present. The family history for rheumatological diseases was unremarkable. On physical examination, the patient was in a moderately altered general condition. Symmetrical swelling, redness, and localized warmth were noted at the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints, as well as pitting edema on the dorsal surface of the hands and wrists . Her neurological examination was unremarkable, and the rest of the clinical examination was normal.
Laboratory data showed increased C-reactive protein (CRP) to 28 mg/l and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) to 42 mm/h without leukocytosis. The presence of mild microcytic hypochromic anemia was also noted [hemoglobin (Hb) 103 g/l, hematocrit (Htc) 34%, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 79 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCH) 24.1 pg]. Rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP, myeloperoxidase (MPO), and proteinase 3 (PR3) antibodies were negative. An X-ray of the hands showed only moderate degenerative lesions at the MCP, PIP, and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints, without lesions (erosions) that could be suggestive of inflammatory arthritis or cartilage calcifications suggestive of chondrocalcinosis. An X-ray of the thorax was normal. Owing to evocative clinical presentation of RS3PE fulfilling the diagnostic criteria, treatment with low-dose glucocorticoids was immediately introduced. Prednisone administration at a dose of 15 mg/day for 2 weeks following a 2-month tapering schedule (decrease of 2.5 mg per week) resulted in an excellent and quick response to treatment with resolution of edemas and pain in less than a week and gradually improving fatigue. The patient remains asymptomatic without treatment, 2 years after the onset of symptoms, without any evident oncologic etiology.