In 2017, a 77-year-old retired female patient was admitted to our hospital, which serves as an outpatient hospital, with only complaints of weakness and inappetence for 6 months. A contrast-enhanced CT indicated an 11 cm space-occupying lesion in the right lobe of the liver. There was no particular family history or infectious medical history. She did not receive any medical intervention before admission, and her vital signs, such as blood pressure, heart rate, respiration rate and body temperature, were normal. Physical examination showed the appearance of mild cachexia, no significant abdominal symptoms such as tenderness, rebound tenderness or muscular tension were noticed, and the abdomen was soft. Palpation revealed a normal liver and spleen, and normal borborygmus existed. The blood routine was normal, other blood chemistries showed a serum albumin of 29.3 (40–55 g/L), ALT of 21 (< 15U/L), AST of 98 (13-35U/L), T-Bil of 17.7 (5.1–20.5 µmol/L), CEA of 3.02 (< 4.7 ng/mL), CA19-9 of 7.49 (< 39U/mL) and CA12-5 of 20.35 (< 35U/mL), but a unusually high level of AFP (more than 1210 ng/mL). Serological tests for hepatitis viruses B and C were negative, as were other infectious indications. Then, the patient underwent an MRI examination that revealed a suspicion of a massive hepatoma (8.9 × 12.3 × 9.9 cm) and multiple gallstones. In fact, there was slight local nodular thickening in the gallbladder wall that was easily ignored .
TACE is the most widely used primary treatment for unresectable HCC, and was the recommended first-line therapy for patient with intermediate-stage disease . Liver resection remains the curative for various liver malignancies . Currently the extent of liver resection/future liver remnants volume has been shown to most consistently and decisively determine the liver regeneration . Truly some centers for radiation segmentectomy has also shown the encouraging results using selective internal radiation therapy(SIRT) as an alternative to curative therapies, but it is not supported by guidelines due to a lack of solid evidence. Therefore, considering the massive entity, the patient first underwent TACE to minimize the size of the mass. Approximately one and a half months later, a repeat abdominal enhanced CT was performed, showing the changes after TACE . Additionally, the gallbladder lesion became more obvious .
From the CT images it could be concluded that a future remnant liver volume of at least 30% of the original total liver volume, which met the current guidelines for extended liver resection . Moreover, the tumor located in the right lobe of liver, without metastasis in either the peritoneal cavity or the rest of the liver. So routinely right hemi-hepatectomy and cholecystectomy were planned. After preoperative preparation and general anesthesia, the patient underwent surgery in the supine position performed by the chief physician, who has approximately 25 years of specialized training. Intraoperatively, the tumor located in the right lobe involved segments V, VI, VII, and VIII and partially invaded the right diaphragm , and the size of the gallbladder was 6.5 × 3.5 × 2 cm, with the wall was partly thickened to 0.5 cm. Without adhesion and invasion, anatomy of hepatic portal area was clear, then complete resection of hepatoma with negative margin and lymphadenectomy were achieved.
Finally, postoperative histopathological examination proved synchronous primary double cancers in the liver and gallbladder that were moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma and poorly differentiated gallbladder adenocarcinoma accompanied by neuroendocrine differentiation, with immunohistochemical markers AFP(−), CD19(+), CD56(+), and partly SYN(+). There was no microvessel invasion, no lymph node involvement and no perineural invasion.
The patient was discharged after 14 days and recovered well. The patient had an uneventful recovery over at least 24 months, without metastasis or recurrence. However, the patient was lost to follow-up, so her final outcome is unknown.