A 9-year-old Chinese girl presented to our hospital in April 2017. She complained of cough and recurrent fever of 38 °C-39 °C during the previous month.
The patient's symptoms started 1 mo previous with recurrent fever.
She was diagnosed with an upper respiratory tract infection and treated with antipyretic drugs. However, she showed no improvement after 4 wk of treatment. We discovered a mass in the right upper abdomen and right chest during the last 4 d of the treatment. We recorded her detailed history, but no significant medical history or predisposing factors were noted.
The parents deny any family history of infectious diseases.
Physical examination revealed a large mass involving both the lower part of the right chest and right upper abdomen, with obvious tenderness in the liver; the respiratory sounds in the right side were weaker than those in the contralateral side.
Laboratory investigation revealed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 24.5/nL (normal range: 4-10/nL), neutrophil 82%, hemoglobin 70 g/L (normal range: 120-160 g/L), hematocrit 24.6%, C-reactive protein (CRP) 177 mg/L (normal range: < 10 mg/L). Alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase were within normal range, whereas albumin was 29.6 g/L (normal range: 40-55 g/L). The tumor marker levels were as follows: carbohydrate antigen-125 (CA-125) 45.5 U/mL (normal range: 0-35 U/mL); carcinoembryonic antigen, CA-153, CA-199, alpha-fetoprotein, and squamous cell carcinoma antigen levels were with the normal range. No amoebae were found in the stool smear. Serology for hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, hepatitis D, hepatitis E, and human immunodeficiency virus were negative.
Computed tomography (CT) of her chest revealed a patchy shadow with blurred edges, uneven density in the lower region of the right lung, and thickening of the pleura and chest wall with indistinct intercostal muscles. CT of the abdomen with intravenous contrast revealed a hypodense nonhomogeneous solid lesion (5.2 cm × 7.2 cm × 5.5 cm) in the right lobe of the liver, with obvious enhancement .
Although the patient's medical history and imaging results indicated an infection, we could not exclude the possibility of malignancy due to the tendency toward invasion and elevated level of CA-125. Therefore, we performed a bone marrow aspiration to exclude any pediatric malignancy, but the results were negative. An ultrasound-guided fine-needle biopsy of the lesion was performed to confirm the diagnosis and causative pathogen. While awaiting the pathological results, the patient was prescribed cefoperazone sodium and sulbactam sodium (intravenous drip; q12h; 50 mg/kg) for 2 wk. During the treatment, the symptoms gradually relieved, and laboratory examinations such as WBC and CRP showed declined levels, supporting the diagnosis of an infectious disease. One week later, pathological histology demonstrated a necrotic lesion in the liver tissue with an infiltration of macrophages and granulocytes, sulfur granules, and gram-positive filamentous bacteria forming radiating aggregates .