A 23-year-old white woman presented to our hospital 8 months previously with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) sepsis and was found to have IE in the context of intravenous (IV) drug abuse. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed significant tricuspid and mitral valve vegetations with severe mitral regurgitation requiring salvage repair and reconstruction of both valves. She had a prolonged hospital stay but was successfully discharged with close cardiology follow up. Four months later, she developed heart failure in the context of medication noncompliance and underwent redo surgery with mitral valve replacement using a 25 mm St Jude Epic™ bioprosthesis. She was discharged home with prolonged antibiotic therapy and a plan to continue partaking in an extensive out-patient drug rehabilitation program.
Two months after her valve replacement, she was transferred to our facility from an outside hospital for suspected meningitis. On presentation, she stated that 1 week prior to admission she had had subjective fevers, headache, and myalgia, in the setting of recurrent IV drug use. She was febrile to 40.4 °C, with an initial blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, heart rate 147 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 32 breaths per minute. A cardiac examination showed normal S1 and S2 with no audible murmur and no notable jugular venous distension. Her lung sounds were clear bilaterally. An abdominal examination was unremarkable, and a skin survey demonstrated track marks over her left antecubital fossa with Janeway lesions over her fingertips. A neurologic examination was significant for a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14 with altered sensorium, but no meningeal signs or focal deficits.
An initial workup yielded serum sodium of 127 mEq/L, potassium of 2.0 mEq/L, bicarbonate of 17 mEq/L with no anion gap, blood urea nitrogen of 28 mg/dL, and serum creatinine of 1.4 mg/dL believed to be secondary to hypovolemia from diarrhea. A complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 9.2 g/dL, platelets of 58 k/mm3, and no leukocytosis. Her anemia and thrombocytopenia were attributed to severe sepsis, with no evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Her liver function tests were normal. Urine analysis showed moderate blood but no red blood cells, suggesting myoglobinuria. A urine drug screen was positive for methamphetamine and heroin. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia and known first-degree atrioventricular block. A chest X-ray was unremarkable, and computed tomography (CT) imaging was without evidence of acute intracranial pathology. A lumbar puncture showed glucose of 67 mg/dL, elevated protein at 57 mg/dL, neutrophilic pleocytosis with 217 white blood cells per cubic mm, and no evidence of organisms on Gram stain or culture.
She was transferred to our intensive care unit; aggressive fluid resuscitation was administered intravenously for her hypotension and electrolyte abnormalities, and she continued on empiric antibiotics for suspected meningitis. Two sets of blood cultures grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA), prompting a switch in therapy to nafcillin and gentamicin for presumed MSSA IE. Her gentamicin levels were subsequently followed during her treatment course to avoid worsening acute renal failure. TTE showed a mean mitral valve gradient of 22 mmHg indicating severe mitral stenosis, but notably failed to show any obvious vegetations or regurgitation . Subsequent TEE re-demonstrated mitral stenosis, in addition to multiple independently mobile echodensities on the mitral prosthesis . There was also evidence of significant thickening of the bioprosthetic leaflets with extensive infected pannus formation . No mitral valve insufficiency was present (Additional files , 2 and 3).
Due to the extent of her endocarditis, it was very unlikely that medical therapy and supportive care alone would be sufficient treatment, and cardiothoracic surgery deemed her to be at prohibitive surgical risk given her ongoing drug abuse and poor prognosis. It was collectively decided to transition to palliative care given her persistent critical illness in the face of maximal medical therapy. She was kept comfortable until death a few days later.