A 71-year-old woman (height, 158 cm; weight, 47 kg; American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status II) with lumbar spinal stenosis was scheduled to undergo transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion under general anesthesia. Her medical history included rheumatoid arthritis and osteoporosis, for which she was treated with methotrexate and eldecalcitol. The patient had no history of syncope or other cardiac events. Blood tests showed mild anemia but no electrolyte abnormalities. Preoperative electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and an incomplete right bundle branch block .
ECG, pulse oximetry, noninvasive blood pressure, invasive radial artery blood pressure (ABP), end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration, bladder temperature, and Bispectral Index (Medtronic-Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) were monitored in the operating room. General anesthesia was induced using propofol at a target concentration of 4 μg/ml and remifentanil at 0.18 μg/kg/min. After loss of consciousness, propofol was reduced to a target-controlled infusion of 3 μg/ml, 40 mg of rocuronium was administered, and the trachea was intubated. Anesthesia was maintained with target-controlled infusion of 2–3 μg/ml propofol to maintain a Bispectral Index value of 40–60, 0.1–0.3 μg/kg/min remifentanil, and an oxygen-in-air gas mixture. After induction of anesthesia, the patient was placed in the prone position.
Subsequently, Tc-MEP measurements were performed using a NuVasive NV-M5 monitoring system (NuVasive, San Diego, CA, USA). The NV-M5 monitoring system can use single-pulse stimulation and sets of sequential-pulse stimulation, which is characterized by sequential increases from 200 to 900 mA in 50 mA increments until the amplitude at the measurement site exceeds 50 μV, and requires several tens of seconds for a single Tc-MEP measurement. Transcranial electrical stimulation by train-of-five pulses (pulse width: 50 μs, interval of each stimulus: 2 ms) was applied through corkscrew electrodes to the C3 and C4 positions (internationals 10–20 electroencephalography system). To detect the compound muscle action potentials, seal-type electrodes were placed bilaterally on the deltoid, vastus medialis, tibialis anterior, biceps femoris, and gastrocnemius muscles.
A twitch test (four train-of-five pulses of 45 mA) was performed after muscle relaxation was antagonized with 190 mg sugammadex. Thereafter, an occasional second-degree AVB appeared but did not persist. Approximately 5 min after the twitch test, a single Tc-MEP stimulation (train-of-five pulses at 900 mA) and sequential Tc-MEP stimulation at baseline were performed. The frequency of second-degree AVB increased with stimulation . As the second-degree AVB improved briefly after Tc-MEP stimulation, and the patient's ABP decreased only slightly, we decided to perform surgery after preparing for transcutaneous pacing. Typical intraoperative ECG and ABP waveforms of second-degree AVB that appeared to be associated with Tc-MEP are shown in Fig. B. Throughout the operation, Tc-MEP measurements were performed seven times. However, the first two stimulations were performed at intervals of approximately 10 s for the baseline setting, and we were unable to determine the pre- and post-stimulation effects. Thus, excluding these two stimulations, the total stimulation duration of the five stimulations was approximately 112 s, with a minimum current of 200 mA and maximum current of 650 mA. For these five stimulations, the P waves and QRS complex for 20 s before stimulation, during stimulation, and 20 s after stimulation are shown in Table . The average incidence of second-degree AVB with Tc-MEP stimulation was 0% 20 s before stimulation, 22.8% during stimulation, and 2.7% 20 s after stimulation. There was no decrease in the P waves per unit time with Tc-MEP stimulation.
During surgery, the patient’s hemodynamic status was relatively stable, with a heart rate of 44–89 bpm, and an ABP of at least 80/57 mmHg. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 9.0; GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), and the frequency of missing QRS complexes during Tc-MEP stimulation was significantly increased compared with that before stimulation (p = 0.0089, Friedman test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test). The total duration of surgery and anesthesia was 250 and 376 min, respectively. Intraoperative blood loss was 100 ml, infusion volume was 2060 ml, urine volume was 910 ml, and no blood transfusion was performed.
Anesthesia and surgery were uneventful except for a second-degree AVB, and transcutaneous pacing was not performed. There was no significant decrease in the amplitude of intraoperative Tc-MEP measurements. Emergence from anesthesia was smooth, and the patient was extubated without difficulty in the operating room. The 12-lead ECG performed after extubation did not differ significantly from the preoperative ECG findings. The patient was monitored by a cardiologist in the general ward, and the patient’s condition remained stable with no recurrence of the second-degree AVB. No additional treatment for arrhythmia was deemed necessary, and she was discharged without complications on postoperative day eight.