A 68-year-old Japanese man, who had a history of total gastrectomy for gastric cancer and transcatheter arterial embolization for left adrenal gland aneurysm rupture, had been transported to our emergency department by ambulance several times. He had a history of repeated hypoglycemia after meals, leading to a diagnosis of late dumping syndrome. Prior to the most recent admission, he had abdominal pain followed by diarrhea after breakfast at approximately 8:30 a.m. He was found unconscious sitting on the toilet seat at approximately 9:00 p.m. and was transported to our emergency department 20 minutes later.
On arriving at our hospital, he was unable to describe his symptoms. His vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, E3V4M6; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/minute; oxygen saturation, 99% under room air; blood pressure, 60/28 mmHg; heart rate, 90 beats/minute; and body temperature, 36.1 °C. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation, hyperglycemia, and hyperlactatemia . Blood biochemistry findings were within the normal limits . After rapid administration of 2000 mL of bicarbonate Ringer’s solution, his systolic blood pressure transiently increased to 100 mmHg, but this increase was not sustained. A chest radiograph and computed tomography images of his brain and whole body revealed no abnormal findings. Ultrasonography revealed normal contractility of his heart and collapse of the inferior vena cava. He was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) with further administration of bicarbonate Ringer’s solution.
In the ICU, his lactate was decreased to 7.4 mmol/L, while the hypotension persisted. A central venous catheter was inserted into the right internal jugular vein, and continuous infusion of noradrenaline was started and increased to 0.13 μg/kg per minute. Antibiotics were not administered as neither blood chemistry nor imaging revealed any findings of infection. As his hemodynamics gradually stabilized, after 3500 mL of fluid administration, continuous infusion of noradrenaline was stopped 4 hours after the initial infusion. He was able to eat supper on the same day and was discharged from the ICU on the following day. During admission, the plasma cortisol level was found to be normal; therefore, no steroids were administered.