A 78-year-old male presented to our emergency room with a chief complaint of total right monocular visual loss. Four hours and forty minutes prior, he had strained during a bowel movement and developed blurred vision in his right eye. He went to see an ophthalmologist. His visual acuity in the right eye was 20/25 (20/20, corrected) and the eye showed no abnormal conditions in his slit-lamp and funduscopic examination. The arteries of the retina were stenotic, however, the color of the retina was normal and an ischemic condition such as cherry red spot was not detected [ (left)]. Optical coherence tomography demonstrated normal thickness of the retina [ (right)]. Further, he recognized gradual improvement of his vision and returned home. Three hours later when he was taking a bath, he developed total blindness in the right eye. His wife noted his mydriasis of the right eye. His past medical history was remarkable for chronic Af, which had two episodes of cerebral infarction (5 and 3 years ago, respectively), for which he was taking warfarin. His prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.85 at the time of admission to our hospital. No obvious neurological focal deficits were noted except for findings in his right eye: His left pupil was 3 mm and reactive to light, but his right pupils was fixed at 6 mm on testing of both direct and consensual pupillary responses. He was alert and denied any other symptoms except his right total monocular visual loss. His National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 0.
Initial diffusion-weighted images (DWIs) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain did not demonstrate any high intensity lesions . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed occlusion of the right internal/external carotid artery (ICA/ECA) and the right ophthalmic artery was not visualized . Neck MRA did not show any signal intensity of the right ICA/ECA or of the right common carotid artery (CCA) . Magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) image showed loss of black signal in the right CCA with no obvious deposition of vulnerable plaque . Considering his past history of two embolic strokes attributable to chronic Af, the sudden-onset clinical course, and negative atherosclerotic arterial stenotic lesions in the MRA 10 months prior [Figure and ], we inferred that cardiogenic emboli occluded both the right ECA and ICA, which caused his total monocular visual loss due to CRAO. IV t-PA was considered not appropriate in this condition, since large cervical emboli could migrate further into the intracranial ICA or middle cerebral artery (MCA), causing devastating cerebral infarction. Emergent endovascular treatment was not available at our institution. We decided to proceed with cervical surgical embolectomy. After thorough discussion with him and his family, the operation started 2 h and 28 min after the patient's arrival at our hospital.
With the patient in a neutral supine position under general anesthesia, an S-shaped curvilinear skin incision was made along the medial side of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. In order to prevent distal migration of emboli, the proximal portion of the CCA was clamped as soon as it was exposed. Linear longitudinal incision was made in the CCA, and bluish fresh large emboli came out of the incision spontaneously by back flow . Gross inspection of the emboli found simple bluish emboli rather than debris related to atherosclerotic plaque, suggesting cardiogenic embolism . After retrieval of the emboli, robust back flow of the blood from the distal portion of the CCA was seen. Considering good intracranial left to right cross flow signal in preoperative MRA, we judged that we had restored anterograde ICA flow. The distal portion of the CCA was also clamped, and the arteriotomy was sutured with 6-0 nylon . Doppler flowmeter confirmed good anterograde blood flow of the CCA.
The recanalization time was 19 min since the start of surgery, 2 h and 47 min since the arrival of the patient, and approximately 8 h and 12 min since symptom onset .
The pathological report described the embolus resected from cervical surgical embolectomy as erythrocyte rich mixed thrombus, consistent with cardiogenic embolism.
Postoperatively, the patient had partial recovery of his vision of the right eye (he was able to recognize hand movement) from the status of total blindness. No obvious additional focal deficits were seen. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and oral intake of kallidinogenase and limaprost alfadex were started for CRAO. Anticoagulation with warfarin was continued.
Postoperative DWI did not show any intracranial ischemic lesions, and MRA showed anterograde recanalization of the right cervical to intracranial ICA, including the right ophthalmic artery . Cervical MRA showed consistent occlusion of the ECA . However, follow-up MRA on postoperative day (POD) 7 demonstrated complete recanalization of the right ECA, suggesting that the occlusion was embolic in nature .
On POD 2, the ophthalmologist reported improvement of blood flow to the right retina based on fundus fluorescein angiography . Although the retinal perfusion was recovered by the operation, the influence of retinal ischemia caused by occlusion of the carotid arteries still remained and therefore, cherry red spot was still seen . Optical coherence tomography on the same day showed thinning of the retina around the macular area . His visual acuity recovered to 20/1000 from total blindness.
He was able to recognize faces on POD 8. He returned home 16 days after surgery. Four months after the surgery, his visual acuity increased to 20/40.