A 51-year-old Japanese man underwent a subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy following the diagnosis of PC in December 2011. Histopathologic examination of the resected specimen revealed invasive ductal carcinoma; this PC case was classified as T2N1M0, stage IIB using the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging guidelines.
The patient demonstrated a relatively good postoperative course and was discharged from our hospital in remission 26 days after the surgery. Thereafter, the patient underwent adjuvant gemcitabine (GEM) chemotherapy at 1000 mg/m2/day on days 1, 8, and 15 during a 28-day cycle.
After 16 cycles of GEM or 17 months after surgery, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 1-cm nodule in the liver . Review of the abdominal CT scan that was performed 4 months previous revealed obscure hints of a nodule in the same location. Notably, even after 4 months of observation, there was only one liver metastasis, and no other distant metastases were observed.
We performed a partial hepatectomy (segment 6) in May 2013. The patient demonstrated a relatively good postoperative course. One month after the hepatectomy, he received adjuvant chemotherapy with tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S-1) for 12 months.
Approximately 1 year after the second surgery, repeat abdominal CT scan detected abdominal lymph node metastases around the celiac artery and along the superior mesenteric artery . Because the patient had already received GEM and S-1, we initially treated the lymph node metastases with radiation therapy alone.
The macroscopically visible tumors as well as the locoregional lymph nodes were irradiated with an International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements (ICRU) reference dose of up to 39.6 Gy, which was applied in 22 fractions of 1.8 Gy/day.
Because the administration of oxaliplatin and irinotecan for PC was approved for use in Japan after December 2013, we decided to add sequential chemotherapy. In particular, the combination therapy of 5-FU/leucovorin plus oxaliplatin or irinotecan was given initially in September 2014. Because the patient had severe fatty liver with a poor hepatic function reserve (the ICG-R15 was 46.0%), irinotecan was initially excluded. After receiving 10 cycles of treatment, the peripheral neuropathy of the patient worsened (grade 2). Consequently, oxaliplatin was withdrawn from the regimen, and irinotecan was administered from March 2015.
From September 2014 to the present, a total of 59 cycles of chemotherapy have been administered. Even at 67 months after the pancreaticoduodenectomy and 50 months after hepatectomy, the patient has remained healthy with no relapse of recurrent lesions , and the value of serum CA19–9 has been within the normal range .