A 60-year-old female patient presented to the clinic with complaints of bilateral knee pain, difficulty in walking, and sitting cross-legged for the past 6 months. Based on the history and complaints, the patient was primarily assessed for arthritic changes in the knee joint. However, on examination, the patient had pain which was out of proportion to the arthritic changes around the right knee joint. On thorough examination, a pin-pointed, localized tenderness was elicited on the anterior portion of the right proximal tibia. The patient was advised radiographs of the knee in routine anteroposterior and lateral views. The radiographs showed a lytic lesion in the epi-metaphyseal region of the right proximal tibial. It showed rarefaction with a well-defined boundary around it . The finding was corroborated by magnetic resonance imaging, which suggested it to be an enchondroma involving the epi-metaphyseal region without articular extension, thereby sparing the articular cartilage.
The patient was then advised to undergo a CT-guided biopsy of the lesion. On biopsy, the lesion was diagnosed as an enchondroma of the right proximal tibia. Considering that it was a solitary enchondroma and was symptomatic, the patient was taken up for surgery. Using a medial incision, pes anserine bursa was incised and lifted subperiosteally. By creating a medial window using a drill and an oscillating saw, the lesion was thoroughly scooped out and the sample was sent for histopathological biopsy . On confirming adequate clearance of the lesion by fluoroscopy, the void was filled with allograft . On adequate compaction of the cancellous allograft, a three-hole polyether ether ketone (PEEK) plate was applied for supplementary fixation .
The skin was closed in layers and the patient was mobilized with walker-assisted non-weight bearing walking in the aftermath. At 3 weeks, the patient was then mobilized full weight-bearing without aid. At 2 months follow-up, the patient was able to carry out all her activities of daily living.