A 60-year-old man was referred to our outpatient clinic because of persisting lower back pain and hyporexia. The patient was under follow-up after liver transplantation. Seven years prior to admission, he was treated at the intensive care unit for third degree burns covering approximately 30% of his body surface. During a complicated clinical course, he developed a severe secondary sclerosing cholangitis with biliary cirrhosis and was therefore listed for a liver transplantation. In November 2006, 8 months after the accident, he underwent whole living donor liver transplantation. Subsequently, the patient received a long-term immunosuppressive therapy with Tacrolimus, maintained at a blood concentration between 4.1 and 14.59 ng/ml and Mycophenolate 500 mg every 8 h. He regularly attended follow-up at our clinic and never suffered from any complications related to the immunosuppressive treatment regimen. Routine laboratory tests including blood count, liver function tests, bilirubin, and C-reactive protein were normal. He denied alcohol consumption and drug abuse.
Seven years after transplantation, a sonography performed for abdominal discomfort newly diagnosed multiple cystic lesions in the pancreatic head, body, and tail, the biggest lesion measuring 3.5 cm in maximum diameter. A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) confirmed the presence of multiple pancreatic cysts involving the entire gland . The lesions were morphologically compatible with a multifocal branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (BD-IPMN). In order to obtain a biopsy for histopathological examination, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was carried out, which revealed a communication between the cysts and the dilated main pancreatic duct. Brush cytology showed papillary epithelium suspicious for IPMN. After thorough discussion in our interdisciplinary, weekly tumor board surgical resection was recommended. In November 2013, the patient underwent a total pancreatoduodenectomy and splenectomy. The histopathological assessment revealed a multifocal BD-IPMN of the gastric subtype with low-grade intraepithelial dysplasia . No high-grade dysplasia or associated invasive cancer was detected on a multitude of sections from the entire specimen, which were independently assessed by three experienced pathologists (HZ, GK, GK). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 14th postoperative day. Seven months after surgery, he presented in a favorable condition without any relevant complaints.