A 50-year-old man was admitted to our clinic with a 20-day history of cough, small amounts of haemoptysis, fever and exhaustion. There was no past medical history of predisposition factors for embolism or episodes of venous thrombo-embolism.
During the hospitalization, the patient developed a massive haemoptysis. Laboratory blood tests showed elevated inflammatory parameters, but platelets and plasma coagulation function parameters were in the normal range: platelet: 254 × 109/L; fibrinogen: 278 mg/dl; bleeding time, Duke methods: < 4 minutes; partial thromboplasin time: 29 seconds; prothrombin time: 12.7 seconds; thrombin time: 17 seconds; protein C: 121%; protein S: 93%. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the lungs showed a few areas of pulmonary consolidation on the right side and a few enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes . The presumptive fibre optic bronchoscopy findings were bronchogenic carcinoma; however, histopathological findings did not confirm a malignancy. The patient was given symptomatic therapy which led to a complete clinical recovery, and he was discharged with follow-up recommended.
Two months later the patient developed intensive chest pain, medium amounts of haemoptysis and fever. Laboratory tests showed three-fold elevated inflammatory parameters and D-dimer value. Chest radiography was significant since it showed prominent parenchymal density in the lateral right low-lung field as well as heart enlargement. On CT scan , we identified different locations of pulmonary consolidation and pleural thickening on the right side, as well as a dilated pulmonary artery trunk. Venous duplex ultrasound of the lower extremities was negative for deep-vein thrombosis. However, echosonography showed right ventricular hypertrophy; perfusion scintigraphy uncovered a complete absence of the perfusion of the right lung, and pulmonary angiography showed a complete occlusion of the right pulmonary artery due to external compression or intra-luminal infiltration. The patient was placed on low-density heparin for a presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. There were no further episodes of haemoptysis, and the patient was discharged with a recommended anticoagulant therapy.
A further 6 months later, despite the anticoagulant therapy treatment, the patient developed massive haemoptysis. Transoesophageal echosonography showed a mass in the pulmonary trunk. On the basis of contrast-enhanced CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart and blood vessels showing a large filling defect in the pulmonary artery trunk and in the right branch, massive pulmonary embolism was diagnosed. A right dorsal posterior pleural effusion was noted and 25 ml of haemorrhage pleural fluid was drained.
The patient underwent surgery with embolectomy of a suspected thrombotic mass in the pulmonary trunk; however, histopathology revealed an angiosarcoma of the pulmonary artery. He was haemodynamically unstable, and due to respiratory insufficiency, invasive mechanical ventilation had to be carried out. Three weeks later, he died due to heart and lung failure.