A 74-year-old Malay woman presented to the emergency department for recurrent falls precipitated by intermittent vertiginous giddiness, resulting in three hospital admissions in the past six months. She reported that the falls occurred at home when she was performing routine chores such as hanging clothes to dry while doing laundry and were precipitated by sudden intermittent attacks of vertigo of varying durations, ranging from a few minutes to one hour. The sudden bouts of vertigo caused to her lose balance and land on her buttocks. During her previous admissions to hospital, her giddiness was attributed to possible chronic vestibulopathy, but her symptoms recurred despite taking regular oral betahistine hydrochloride 24 mg twice a day and cinnarizine 25 mg three times a day. In fact, she was just discharged from hospital three days prior. While she reported intermittent abdominal bloating after meals for the past six months, she denied any weight loss, melena, hematochezia, dysphagia or vomiting. She denied any loss of consciousness, limb weakness, numbness or injuries, and she had no hearing loss, tinnitus, ear discharge or trauma to her ears.
Her past medical history includes hypertension, dyslipidemia, and poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, with a glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level of 8.9%, and mild cognitive impairment. Her regular oral medications included metformin 500 mg twice a day, glipizide 5 mg twice a day, lisinopril 20 mg once a day, and simvastatin 10 mg once a day. She had no personal or family history of cancer and had no previous surgeries. She never smoked, was teetotal, and did not consume supplements or traditional medicines.
On examination, she was afebrile and hemodynamically stable but lethargic; her tongue was dry, and her skin turgor was poor. Orthostatic hypotension was observed. Her abdomen was grossly distended with mild generalized tenderness, but was soft, with no guarding, rebound tenderness, palpable masses, succession splash, or ascites. Digital rectal examination was unremarkable, with no hematochezia, melena, masses or impacted stool. A thorough neurological examination, including vestibular tests, was performed to evaluate for a neurological cause for the vertigo. The neurological exam and gait were normal: There was no limb weakness, nystagmus, dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia, rigidity, tremors or bradykinesia. Dix-Hallpike and head thrust tests were negative. Cardiac examination revealed no cardiac murmur or carotid bruits. Her vision and hearing were intact, and she had no knee osteoarthritis or injuries. Otoscopy was normal, revealing intact tympanic membranes.
Serum investigations were remarkable for normocytic, normochromic anemia (hemoglobin, 10.6 g/dL), leukocytosis (leukocyte count, 17.1 × 109/L), and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP, 53 mg/L). In addition, she had mild acute kidney injury (creatinine, 106 umol/L), moderate hyponatremia (sodium, 125 mmol/L), hypophosphatemia (phosphate, 0.78 mmol/L), and hypomagnesemia (magnesium, 0.53 mmol/L). The liver and thyroid function tests were normal. Computed tomography (CT) of the head was unremarkable, with no acute brain infarct or hemorrhage. Conversely, abdominal CT revealed incidental misty stranding of the mesentery with small-volume mesenteric nodes indicative of mesenteric panniculitis .
In view of the abdominal CT findings, the general surgeons assessed the patient and suggested empirical treatment for a possible intra-abdominal infection with oral amoxicillin/clavulanate 625 mg three times a day for one week. In addition to antibiotics, the patient was treated with intravenous esomeprazole 40 mg twice a day and ondansetron 4 mg twice a day for three days for her abdominal bloating, and electrolytes were replaced intravenously. Nonetheless, her symptoms did not fully resolve.
Twenty days after her admission, the patient acutely developed small amounts of non-bloody, non-bilious nausea and vomiting after meals, and a repeat abdominal CT revealed an intramural mass along the lesser curvature of the stomach . In view of the new symptoms, the general surgeons performed an urgent esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy, which found a 3 cm gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) along the lesser curve of the stomach . The patient was transferred to a tertiary hospital for laparoscopic wedge gastrectomy. During surgery, a 3.0 by 2.4 cm gastric GIST with no obvious metastatic deposits was observed. Histological analysis of the resected tissue revealed a low-grade, spindle-cell type GIST with resection margins free of the tumor . The pathological grade classification was pT2N0, and the histologic grade was G1 with a mitotic rate of 1/5 mm2. Immunohistochemical studies were positive for KIT (CD117) and ANO1/DOG1; focally positive for SMA; and negative for S100 . Subsequently, after resection of the tumor, the patient reported that her symptoms resolved, and she was able to consume full feeds on post-operative day 3. After a period of rehabilitation at a community hospital, she was discharged home hemodynamically stable, well and satisfied with her care.
Even though the patient reported no more falls or vertigo after her gastrectomy, she subsequently had multiple hospitalizations for nosocomial infections. Three months after her gastrectomy, the patient was re-admitted to hospital for diarrhea due to Clostridium difficile colitis. She was successfully treated with a tapering course of oral vancomycin over seven weeks and discharged home. Yet two weeks later, she was admitted again for hospital-acquired pneumonia requiring admission to the intensive care unit. She discharged home after a one-month stay in the hospital, but was physically deconditioned from her recurrent hospitalizations, and required minimal assistance for her activities of daily living and ambulation at home. The patient was reviewed by a community nurse at home nine months after her initial diagnosis of GIST by gastroscopy and reported that her vertigo never recurred after surgery. However, three days after the home visit, the patient suddenly demised at home before a repeat gastroscopy could be performed to evaluate for recurrence of the gastric tumor.