A 65-year-old woman experienced a sudden onset of severe pain in her right eye. An examination by her local ophthalmologist revealed high intraocular pressure (IOP) and a pigmented mass in her right eye. She was started on glaucoma eye drops and was referred to the ophthalmology department at Mayo Clinic for further management. On presentation, the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/80 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. The IOPs were 62 mm Hg and 20 mm Hg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Slit lamp examination showed a large pigmented ciliary body tumor superotemporally in the right eye that had caused local anterior displacement of the iris without any visible anterior chamber invasion [Figure 1]. On gonioscopy, diffuse flat pigmentation of the trabecular meshwork was visible for 12 hr; moreover, no anterior chamber or angle invasion by the tumor was observed [Figure 2]. Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed a solid ciliary body tumor with anterior displacement of the iris [Figure 3].
A diagnosis of ciliary body melanoma was rendered, and the tumor was treated with 60 Gy of proton radiation in 4 fractions. During the placement of tantalum fiducial markers, cyclocryotherapy was also performed to manage the uncontrolled high IOP. As per the patient's request, a needle biopsy of the tumor for prognostic genetic testing was not performed. The patient developed rapid progression of cataract soon after completion of proton beam radiation and underwent cataract surgery one month later. During the surgery, a portion of the anterior lens capsule was excised and submitted for histopathological evaluation that revealed no malignant melanoma cells.
Sixteen months after proton radiation the treated ciliary body melanoma showed signs of regression, but mild degrees of pigment dusting were visible in the inferior vitreous cavity on ophthalmoscopy. In addition, flat deposits of pigment were noticeable on the surface of the retina in the macular area [Figure 4]. B-scan ultrasound revealed point-like echodensities in the posterior vitreous cavity [Figure 5]. On optical coherence tomography (OCT), optically dense particles were noticeable on the surface of the retina. On follow-up, 26 months after proton beam radiation, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/400, IOP was 30 mm Hg, there was progression of the vitreous and epiretinal pigmentation [Figure 6], and the epiretinal deposits noted on OCT had coalesced into a thick and dense epiretinal membrane in the macular area [Figure 7]. After analyzing the funduscopic and OCT results, a vitreous seeding caused by ciliary body melanoma and the malignant epiretinal membrane was suspected. To confirm the diagnosis, a vitreous biopsy was recommended. However, the patient chose not to proceed with the biopsy and instead opted for enucleation of the right eye, which was performed 29 months after proton beam radiation on her request. Histopathological examination of the enucleated globe showed a necrotic ciliary body melanoma compatible with the treatment effect, and an adjacent focal area of residual tumor. Numerous pigmented macrophages were present in the anterior chamber angle. There were visible pigmented melanoma cells in the vitreous cavity, and a sheet-like growth of viable spindle melanoma cells was also present on the retinal surface [Figure 8]. There was no extraocular extension. The patient has been followed for 10 months after enucleation without any evidence of orbital tumor recurrence or distant metastasis.