An 82-year-old male was transferred to our institution from another hospital following the sudden onset of seizures, in absence of fever or other systemic symptoms.
His past medical history comprised pulmonary tuberculosis treated for 9 months with a standard four-drug regimen about 20 years before, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and surgical removal of a localized cutaneous melanoma on the right shoulder 1 year before. He had no history of travel to tropical regions with the exception of a recent stay in southern Italy in possibly endemic Entamoeba histolytica areas.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan on admission showed multiple CNS lesions in the white matter, with peripheral contrast enhancement, coherent with pyogenic or neoplastic nature . Blood tests showed signs of systemic inflammation with leukocytosis, moderate neutrophilia, negative HIV serology, and normal immunoglobulin plasma levels. Echocardiographic findings were negative for vegetations or endocarditis. Serial blood cultures were negative. A positive serology for E. histolytica was obtained, with negative serologies for Taenia solium and Echinococcus spp. Toxoplasma gondii serology was positive for IgG, negative for IgM. Body temperature and bowel movements were normal. Serum β-d-glucan and galactomannan were undetectable. With a working diagnosis of brain abscess of unknown origin, based on symptoms and MRI, while waiting for blood culture results and trans-esophageal sonographic study, he was started on empiric antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone and metronidazole and anti-epileptic treatment. Treatment benefit was obtained for the seizures, but not for cerebral mass volume, as shown by sequential CT scans.
A total-body CT scan was performed upon failing improvement of cerebral abscesses, showing bilateral bronchiectasis and a lung cavitation. A diagnostic bronchoscopic procedure was performed with broncho-alveolar lavage. The bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis by PCR and culture, no bacterial or fungal growth was detected, and molecular analysis by PCR was negative for Pneumocystis jirovecii and cytomegalovirus.
Tumor markers, autoimmunity tests, and immunological profile (IgA, IgM, IgG count and the flow cytometric lymphocyte subset analysis) were unremarkable. A lumbar puncture was performed. Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) examination demonstrated a normal cell count, normal glycorrhachia, and an increase in proteins (1103 mg/L) and lactate (2,7 mmol/L). CSF culture for common pathogens as well as PCR for common bacterial and viral pathogens, T. gondii, Cryptococcus and E. histolytica were negative.
To provide diagnostic support for treatment, the right frontal lesion was surgically excised “en bloc.” It presented macroscopically as a firm. elastic, round, well-capsulated mass with a necrotic-like core at post-excision exploration . The tissue culture did not provide growth for bacteria, mycobacteria, or fungi. Histology demonstrated the presence of histiocytic granulomatous tissue with a conspicuous plasmacellular component, subsequently defined as an IgG subtype 4 producer (ratio IgG4/IgG 45% on the histological specimen, IgG4 > 10/HPF) . Based on these data, a working diagnosis of IgG4-related disease was made, in the absence of other infectious or neoplastic lesions.
The patient was started on steroid treatment (1 mg/Kg of prednisone twice daily) and antibiotic treatment was stopped. Clinical improvement became evident after 10 days of treatment, with this otherwise bedridden patient walking successfully with minimal aid by the second week of treatment.