A 24-year-old man presented with sudden-onset mild left-sided hemiparesis that had manifested 2 days earlier. He had no history of smoking, or excessive alcohol consumption. A medical examination showed that he had dry and scaly skin . He claimed to have experienced his skin disorder for 20 years. On neurological examination, he was conscious and alert. No other focal neurologic deficits were noted except mild left-sided hemiparesis.
Initial head CT demonstrated no acute infarction. The following day, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Siemens, Germany) with diffusion-weighted sequences revealed punctate areas of restricted diffusion in the left corona radiata that represented small acute infarct . Magnetic resonance angiography revealed no significant flow-limiting stenosis. Because the MRI-detected lesions were ipsilateral to the paralyzed limb, the patient underwent diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) (Siemens Magnetom trioatim 3.0 T, Siemens Leonardo) tractography, which revealed uncrossed corticospinal tracts . The level of D-dimer was within the normal range in our patient who without history of hypertensive disease, in addition, no abnormalities were found in carotid ultrasound, cervical MRI, echocardiography, foaming test and microembolism monitoring, the probabilities of arterial dissection or patent foramen ovale were reduced.
Cerebrovascular risk factors such as serum lipid, uric acid, homocystein, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, B12 vitamin, folate, fasting blood glucose were all within the normal range and the patient has no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, smoking, and alcohol consumption. Body mass index (BMI), routine blood test, coagulation routine, renal function and liver function, erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR), HIV serology, syphilis serology, serum lactate, anti-nuclear antibody were all normal or negative. An electrocardiogram and a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed no sources of cardiac embolism. Besides, the patient’s other MRI sequences were negative, so we could exclude cerebral small vessel disease and microbleeds. Noteworthy, his skin was abnormal for about 20 years. We performed a genetic test on the patient. However, next-generation sequencing of a DNA sample identified two known heterozygous FLG nonsense mutations: (c.3905C > A, p.Ser1302Ter)(which was inherited from his father) and (c.5368C > T, p.Gln1790Ter) (which was inherited from his mother) [, ]. The two mutations have an effect on the protein functions.
Based on these genetic findings and the patient’s 20-year history of skin complaints, the patient was diagnosed with ichthyosis vulgaris and cerebral infarction. His left-side hemiparesis gradually dissipated after symptomatic treatment. Aspirin therapy played a crucial role in the secondary prevention of ischemic stroke. After discharge, the patient continued to take aspirin with daily dose of 100 mg.