A 63-year-old man with a history of hypertension and atrial fibrillation presented with progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion and aggravated lower leg edema for 1 month without a fever, coughing, or sore throat. He had no history of surgery. The symptoms of heart failure markedly improved after a 2-week treatment with diuretics in a local hospital. However, echocardiography showed a mobile mass in the left atrium; therefore, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. On admission, his vital signs were blood pressure of 145/90 mmHg, atrial fibrillation with a ventricular rate of 81 beats per min, and a body temperature of 36.3 °C. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 3.8 × 103/μL (reference range 4.0–10.0 × 103/μL) with 44.7% neutrophils, and a serum hypersensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) level of 8 mg/L (reference range 0.8–8 mg/L). His urine and feces examinations were normal. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a 2.7 cm × 2.6 cm left atrial mass that was suspected of being a myxoma . TEE also revealed a 2.7 cm left atrial mass attached by a thin stalk (0.15 cm) to the base of the atrial apex, swinging freely within the left atrial cavity . The patient was managed surgically. The mass was confirmed to originate from the atrial apex and appeared grossly myxoid and fragile. Surprisingly, however, the histopathology of the specimen showed no characteristic stellate mesenchymal cells to support the diagnosis of myxoma. Instead, it revealed a fibrinous exudate and chronic inflammation with a few mononuclear cells and a macrophage reaction . Therefore, the mass was considered to be a left atrial thrombus.
Despite the preventive use of cefuroxime sodium (1500 mg every 12 h), his temperature increased to 39.5 °C on the fourth day. The WBC count increased to 9.5 × 10 [3]/μL with 85.9% neutrophils and his hs-CRP level rose to 183.9 mg/L. Four sets of blood cultures were drawn. Urgent computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates with sputum culture positive for Acinetobacter baumannii. Consequently, cefoperazone, sulbactam, and fosfomycin were started. Nevertheless, his fever recurred for 2 weeks. The blood cultures yielded C. striatum that was resistant to ceftriaxone, penicillin, meropenem, and clindamycin and sensitive to vancomycin. Instead of vancomycin, linezolid was chosen to treat the C. striatum bacteremia after considering the elevated creatinine level of 117 μmol/L (reference range 59–104 μmol/L). However, the symptoms of heart failure worsened gradually and echocardiography revealed valve excrescence and severe aortic insufficiency. Therefore, the patient underwent surgical management and treatment with 500 mg daptomycin daily. A double valve replacement was performed. At surgery, a 1 cm × 1 cm vegetation was seen at the left coronary cusp of the aortic valve, with perforation of the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve and moderate mitral regurgitation. The fever subsided rapidly and six sets of blood cultures obtained postoperatively were negative. Histological examination of the new vegetation indicated large numbers of Corynebacterium on Gram staining and vegetation cultures confirmed that the bacterium was C. striatum. We also found the same Corynebacterium on the first surgical specimen using Gram and Wright’s staining . We speculate that the left atrial mass was an occult bacterial embolus and large amounts of bacteria entered the blood stream and induced the valve damage after the first operation. Subsequently, the patient received a 4-week course of intravenous daptomycin and was switched to oral linezolid for 3 weeks. The patient’s general condition markedly improved and he was discharged from our hospital.