A 57-year-old male with a history of human immunodeficiency virus, chronic hepatitis B, and Fournier gangrene (with extensive debridement in the past requiring a colostomy) presented with a 4 day history of sharp epigastric pain with associated nausea and vomiting. He had not had a bowel movement for 4 days prior to admission. The patient denied tobacco use and used alcohol only occasionally. Family history was not significant.
On examination, he was mildly tachycardic but was in no acute distress. He had dry mucous membranes. Abdominal exam revealed absent bowel sounds and tenderness to palpation in the epigastric region without rebound or guarding. Physical exam was otherwise unremarkable. Initial laboratory evaluation revealed acute renal injury with a creatinine of 1.72 mg/dL, hypokalemia with a potassium of 2.9 mmol/L, and an unremarkable lipase level of 86 U/L. Liver enzymes and total bilirubin were normal. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of his abdomen and pelvis without contrast revealed a high-grade obstruction of the second portion of the duodenum without any obvious mass .
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed due to duodenal obstruction and found a circumferential mass starting at the duodenal bulb causing luminal narrowing. Biopsies of this lesion were negative for malignancy; however, there was still a concern for cancer due to the location of the mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen was then obtained which revealed an ill-defined soft tissue mass in the region of the pancreatic head and descending duodenum with tethering of the duodenum causing obstruction . A positron emission tomography scan demonstrated hypermetabolic activity of the mass without lymph node involvement. Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) were both normal. The patient underwent EUS revealing a 3 cm hypoechoic mass in the region of pancreatic head with irregular borders and no vascular invasion. FNA was performed but was nondiagnostic with no lesional tissue identified. Given the mass seen on MRI and EUS as well as the presence of a high-grade duodenal obstruction, the patient went to surgery for a Whipple's procedure (pancreaticoduodenectomy).
Pathology of these specimens was negative for malignancy and consistent with para-duodenal or “groove” pancreatitis. The duodenal submucosa had Brunner's gland hyperplasia with fibrosis and inflammatory infiltrate into the pancreas [Figures and ]. The pancreatic tissue had some focal fibrosis . Staining for acid-fast bacilli and fungus were negative. There was scattered immunoglobulin G4 positivity throughout the specimen, but this was nonspecific. The patient was discharged after his pain was controlled, and he was tolerating an oral diet.