A 12-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital with a Type I Wenckebach second-degree
atrioventricular block, which was found in a regular medical check in his junior high
school. His first CMR showed supranormal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (82%),
mild left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) with mid-interventricular wall thickness of 11 mm,
and no obvious late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) . At age 19, the second CMR showed LVH
progression (apical interventricular wall thickness of 18 mm) with marked LGE despite
normal LVEF (63%) . Carvedilol was started due to a diagnosis of HCM.
At age 22, he underwent T1 mapping in the third CMR, which showed evident LGE in the left
ventricular (LV) free wall and right ventricular insertion point, in addition to reduced
LVEF (29%) and enlarged left ventricular end-diastolic volume index (LVEDVI)
(216 mL/m2) . The interventricular wall, where LGE was not evident , had a high native T1 value
of 1325 ms (reference range: 1250 ± 30ms) and a normal ECV fraction of 28.2% (reference range:
28 ± 3%) . He was
admitted to hospital for cardiac biopsy to perform a histological investigation of these
abnormal CMR findings. He was active in everyday life without obvious HF symptoms [New
York Heart Association (NYHA) Class I] in spite of elevated brain-natriuretic peptide
(BNP) [523.0 pg/mL (normal range: ≤18.4 pg/mL)] and troponin-T [0.136 ng/mL (normal range:
≤0.014 ng/mL)] levels. Physical examination showed normal blood pressure (111/75 mmHg),
regular heart rate (52 b.p.m.) without a murmur, rales, or oedema. Electron microscopic
examination of cardiac biopsy specimens from the interventricular wall showed
intracytoplasmic autophagic vacuoles in myocytes , a characteristic feature of Danon
disease. In addition, mild
fibrotic changes in the interventricular myocardial tissues were noted microscopically
.
Perindopril, spironolactone, azosemide, and warfarin were added due to appearance of
dilated feature and reduction in LVEF. Perindopril was changed to valsartan because of
increased frequency of cough.
At age 23, he was hospitalized for his first HF episode. He was diagnosed with Danon
disease based on the detection of LAMP2 c.864G>A p. Val288Val hemizygous mutation.
After 9 months, he was rehospitalized and underwent an LV assist device because he was
inotrope dependent (INTERMACS profile 3) and had no evident symptoms of psychological or
musculoskeletal disorders. He was discharged home and waited for a heart transplant at age
24.