A 66-year-old Black male with documented history of peptic ulcer disease presented to the emergency department (ED) with a generalized skin eruption for four months. Initially he was prescribed an oral steroid and antihistamine for a pruritic eruption along his arms and face. This emergency visit was prompted when the rash reappeared on his torso and insidiously progressed to his face, arms, and thighs. He denied mucosal or genital lesions, exposures, contacts with similar symptoms, prescribed or over-the-counter medications, or international or domestic travel. He did not exhibit systemic symptoms of infection.
The patient was well-appearing with a blood pressure 175/101 millimeters of mercury, pulse 77 beats per minute, and oral temperature 98.1° Fahrenheit. His skin revealed indurated and ulcerated plaque-like lesions with patchy erythema along the face and torso ( and ). Plaque-like lesions were present on the thighs, and flat, scaly lesions were present on the hands and feet. There was no mucosal involvement. The periorbital lesions were vesicular and edematous but did not affect his vision .
A computed tomography (CT) with iodinated contrast of the orbits showed preseptal and facial cellulitis. He was given clindamycin intravenously and oral hydroxyzine for itching. Pertinent labs included white blood cell count 5.8 × 109 per liter (L) (reference range: 3.9–12.7 × 109/L), hemoglobin 10.3 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (14.0−18.0 g/dL), platelets 200 × 109/L (150–450 109/L), international normalized ratio 1.0 (0.8–1.2), C-reactive protein 47.3 milligrams (mg)/dL (0.0–8.2 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 128 millimeters per hour (mm/hr) (0–23 mm/hr) and normal electrolytes, renal function, and transaminases. A polymerase chain reaction test for herpes simplex virus was positive. Superficial aerobic cultures of the right chest and right back skin lesions resulted with methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus.
The patient was admitted to hospital medicine. Antibiotic coverage was broadened with vancomycin and ceftriaxone. Ophthalmology recommended topical erythromycin for the periorbital lesions. Dermatology raised concern for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. A skin biopsy was obtained from the right back and sent to pathology for further diagnosis. Oncology recommended CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. This revealed multiple areas of lymphadenopathy and mild splenomegaly suspicious for lymphoproliferative disorder. The patient declined an excisional lymph node biopsy. He was discharged from the hospital with a 10-day antibiotic course and outpatient oncology follow-up.
An outpatient positron emission tomography showed increased diffuse lymphadenopathy and soft tissue thickening, compatible with the suspected diagnosis of cutaneous lymphoma. Skin and right inguinal excisional lymph node biopsies confirmed T-cell lymphoma.