A 79-year-old female with a history of hypertension, permanent atrial fibrillation, and progressing aortic stenosis presented with NYHA stage II dyspnoea and peripheral oedema. Echocardiography showed a tricuspid aortic valve with severe paradoxical low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis with a surface of 0.5 cm2 by planimetry, a mean gradient of 19 mmHg, a preserved ejection fraction at 60%, and a low left ventricular output of 25 ml/min/m2 due to moderate hypertrophy. A CT scan revealed a modified Agatston calcium score of 630, with a calcium volume of 197 mm3 and moderate calcifications of the valve with heterogenous peripheral distribution. The patient's surgical risk was characterised by an EuroSCORE II of 1.60% and an STS score of 3.4% of predicted mortality, and her frailty score was at class 5.
The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary Heart Team meeting, and due to the patient's persistent symptoms and recurring hospitalisations, despite the low calcium score, an invasive strategy was decided. The patient was strongly opposed to cardiac surgery, despite her relatively low surgical risk, which contributed to the decision to perform a percutaneous aortic valve implantation.
The patient underwent a transfemoral implantation of a biological aortic prosthesis type Edwards Sapien 3 of 23 mm, with a good echocardiographic result, mild paravalvular leak, and a mean valve gradient that came down to 8 mmHg.
Immediately after the procedure, a new left bundle branch block was noted that motivated a His-ventricular (HV) exploration. A His-right ventricle conduction delay of 64 ms was found, which increased to 95 ms after Ajmaline provocation. Considering these results and given that the patient was in permanent atrial fibrillation with a difficult-to-control heart rate, despite bitherapy, the decision to implant a pacemaker was made. The patient was implanted with a single-chamber pacemaker SORIN, followed by an atrioventricular node ablation.
One month after the procedure, the patient presented with acute pulmonary oedema. Physical examination revealed a new diastolic heart murmur, and the echocardiography confirmed a seemingly significant paravalvular leak with an ERO (Effective Regurgitant Orifice) by PISA method at 0.1 cm2 and a planimetry of 0.4 cm2.
Given the new findings, the patient was referred for percutaneous repair of the paravalvular leak and was successfully implanted with an Amplatzer Vascular Plug 4 of 8 mm , resulting in a significant reduction of regurgitation and resolution of the heart murmur. Post-procedural echocardiography showed a residual paravalvular leak involving 1/5 of the valve perimeter, a calculated valve surface of 1 cm2, and a trans-aortic mean gradient of 14 mmHg.
Five weeks after the valvular leak repair, the patient was readmitted for acute heart failure. At this time, echocardiography showed mixed aortic disease with aortic stenosis characterised by a surface of 1 cm2, a mean gradient of 23 mmHg, and a significant paravalvular aortic regurgitation involving 1/3 of the valve perimeter . The case was reconsidered by the Heart Team, and a surgical approach was proposed.
During the surgical procedure, it was found that the Amplatzer had moved from its initial position and was oriented towards the leaflets of the bioprosthesis as shown in . This contributed to the post-procedural aortic stenosis by impeding the opening of the right coronary leaflet and providing insufficient leak barrier. A surgical aortic valve replacement was performed using a sutureless LIVANOVA Perceval S bioprosthesis size M, which was completed without any complications. The postoperative echocardiography revealed a preserved left ventricle ejection fraction (62%) with grade 3 diastolic dysfunction, an aortic bioprosthesis with a calculated surface of 0.9 cm2, and a mean gradient of 18 mmHg with no regurgitation. The patient evolved well and was transferred to cardiac rehabilitation. The mid-term follow-up at 4 years showed a benefit of the procedures in terms of symptoms, with the patient now being in NYHA class I, and hospitalisations, with only one hospitalisation for acute heart failure since being discharged.