We report the case of a 60-year-old man with multiple metastatic melanoma, who presented to our unit with vomiting and was later diagnosed with a gastric neoplasia with no histological and immunohistochemical characteristics referable to a malignant melanoma.
He underwent a surgical excision of a cutaneous lesion, localized on the left sub-costal region. The histological findings suggested a melanocytic melanoma with fused cells, of nodular type, exceeding the reticular layer of derma (pT4a), of Breslow thickness 8.3 mm and Clark level IV. Two months later the patient underwent an axillary lymph node dissection with no histological evidence of nodal metastases. Furthermore, he was treated with six cycles of chemotherapy with dacarbazine and IL-2. Four months after concluding chemotherapy the patient underwent a total-body computed tomography (CT) scan revealing three low-density lesions on the II, III and VIII segment of the liver, which remained uninvestigated. The CT scan also revealed one nodule (<1 cm) on the apical segment of the right lung and one sub-pleural nodule (1 cm) on the basal segment of the left lung, accompanied by a thickened contiguous pleura. Due to these findings, the patient underwent a thoracotomy, but the histological examination only revealed the presence of fibrotic tissue.
During follow-up, the clinical condition of the patient remained stable for six months until the appearance of multiple masses localized on the left arm, both axillae and at the level of the primary melanoma surgical scar. The patient underwent a total-body bone scintigraphy that showed an increased concentration of the radioactive tracer (99mTc-MDP) in the left collarbone, II and VII right ribs, IV left rib, L2 and left acetabulum. A total-body CT scan showed multiple intra-peritoneal subcutaneous nodules, two metastatic lesions in the liver (IV and V segment), one in the spleen (1 cm) and one in the pancreas corpus (2 cm). A positron emission tomography (PET) scan confirmed the presence of multiple skeletal, muscular and nodal repetitive lesions. A treatment of three cycles of Interferon 5MU three times a week and Temozolomide 150 mg/m2/day 5 days a week for 4 weeks was started. However, the treatment was suspended after the second cycle due to side effects. The patient required admission to hospital due to his worsened clinical state, which included progressive asthenia, muscle and skeletal pain, nausea and vomiting. Five months after the last investigation the patient underwent a total-body CT again which confirmed the presence of multiple subcutaneous, muscular and nodal repetitive lesions; in addition, the CT scan revealed a gross lesion in the upper abdomen, probably due to confluent lymph nodes, undistinguishable from the gastric corpus and pancreas. Therefore, the patient was referred to our unit to evaluate the gastric wall involvement and its role in causing obstruction and vomiting. The patient underwent an upper endoscopy that showed a prominent mass at the passage between the fundus and the corpus of the stomach, with a hard consistency and largely covered by fibrin; the diameter of the lesion was about 3 cm . Histological findings suggested an undifferentiated neoplasia constituted prevalently by neoplastic fused cells . The immunohistochemical stains for melanoma (S100, tyrosinase, Melan A and HMB-45), carcinoma (CK), gastrointestinal stromal tumours (CD-34, vimentin and c-Kit) and lymphoma (LCA) were performed with negative results, except for a weak and focal expression of vimentin. No treatment for the gastric mass was started because of the patient's compromised clinical condition. Enteral nutrition was maintained until the patient's death, a month after the endoscopy.