A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital complaining that he presented abdominal pain and feculent effluent. He was hospitalized for uremia treated with peritoneal dialysis 5 years ago. The possible reason for uremia was chronic glomerulonephropathy, and the renal biopsy was not performed. He remained on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis without complications for 5 years till he instilled hot dialysis solution, which was heated in a microwave oven on high for 5 min by his new caretaker in a nursing home 3 weeks before. (The caretaker was a fresh man and came from a nursing home without enough education and training of peritoneal dialysis.)The patient went to the emergency room immediately because of severe abdominal pain. There was no signs of bowel perforation and peritonitis. No abnormality was found in abdominal X ray and complete blood count. The peritoneal fluid culture was sent. He was asked to fast for 5 days and administered with preventive antibacterial treatment. Meanwhile he ceased peritoneal dialysis and was converted to non-heparin hemodialysis. The abdominal pain relieved and the peritoneal drainage was clear, so he asked for being discharged from the hospital on the second day against medical advice. After 3 days, the microbiological analysis of the peritoneal fluid revealed growth of Enterococcus faecium. He was treated with intravenous (IV) fluids and antibiotics in the emergency room of another hospital. After 10 days of IV treatment, he felt pain in the abdomen again and feculent effluent was found in the peritoneal catheter. He was readmitted to our hospital.
Examination on admission indicated that he was afebrile and had a soft、tender abdomen. Blood examination showed white blood cell count 21.88 × 109/l, hemoglobin 72 g/l, neutrophil count 19.89 × 109/l. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed peri-hepatic pneumatosis and effusion. No free air or dilated loops of bowel were seen. The patient underwent emergency exploratory laparotomy. A great mount of pus mosses and fecal fluid were found in the abdominal cavity and between intestines. There were multiple perforation holes on the small bowel (the largest one 4*3 cm) and a single perforation (1*1 cm) on the anterior rectum wall. A section of the small bowel was resected . Other perforation holes were repaired and ileostomy was performed. The peritoneal catheter was removed. The peritoneal cavity was lavaged with copious amounts of saline solution. The patient developed intestinal fistula after the surgery. Parenteral nutrition, anti-infection treatment and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) were applied. The patient died of septic shock 15 days later.