A 73-year-old female was referred by a dentist for the extraction of the residual root of the second right mandibular premolar . She was followed for 13 years for an IgM kappa monoclonal gammopathy with a serum level at 13.16 g/L at the time of consultation. The patient had no autoimmune disease history. Medical imaging during the 13-year follow-up of the gammopathy did not identify any lesions or suspicious images. All computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis, abdomen, chest and head and neck were without abnormality. A total body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) was performed routinely, since the diagnosis of monoclonal gammopathy did not show suspect hypermetabolic focus. Biological analysis of the patient’s blood count was without abnormality, C-reactive protein level increased gradually over the 13 years of follow-up, and all sternal BM aspirations performed were also without abnormality.
The intraoral visual examination did not show any mucosal lesions; however, salivation was normal and the patient had no symptoms, especially pain or swelling. A thorough systematic physical examination was performed, with free bidigital palpation of the floor of the mouth and left cheek, but palpation of the right cheek revealed a submucosal infra-centimetric and irregular nodular lesion underneath the orifice of the Stenon canal . It was not fixed to the deep plane and was of firm consistency. No cervical lymphadenopathy was found. In the context of monoclonal gammopathy, surgical excision of this nodule was performed under local anaesthesia, at the same operating time as the extraction of the residual root of the second right mandibular premolar. The excised tissue consisted of a brownish yellow tissue measuring 0.8 cm × 0.7 cm × 0.5 cm. On pathological examination, the lesion was firm and the cut surface yellowish-white. Microscopically, dense lymphomatous proliferation of the pseudo-nodular architecture was present, revealing some germinal centres colonised by a lymphomatous infiltrate, which also widened the marginal zone and infiltrated the interfollicular areas . Proliferation of the tumour tended to massively infiltrate the germinal centres with invasion of the adipose tissue and insheathing of the nerve filaments . The diffuse proliferation of tumour cells in the marginal zone was formed of cells of small size, with irregular nuclei, but that were rarely nucleated. The tumour cells had rather dense chromatin nuclei with a cytoplasm that was sometimes off-centred and a plasma-cell differentiation , We found some mast cells. There were no Dütcher body-type intra-nuclear inclusions. Immunohistochemical study of the lymphomatous proliferation showed that the tumour cells expressed CD20 and CD79a , monoclonal heavy chain IgM , and kappa light chain and were negative for lambda light chain .
Many tumour cells expressed CD5- and anti-CD3-staining marked T-lymphocytes. A network of cells was immunolabelled for CD10, BCL2, BCL6, MUM1 and cyclin D1. The BCL2 and MUM1 markers were expressed by many PCs. CD21 and CD23 highlighted the dendritic cells in residual dislocated germinal centres. Histological examination did not show lymphoepithelial structure, and the anti-AE1/AE3 immunolabelling was negative. The final diagnosis was primary MALT lymphoma.
The patient was referred to the Haematology department, and no indication of specific treatment was retained in the absence of symptoms or high tumour burden. With a follow-up of 4 years, no local recurrence or dissemination was observed clinically or in annual CT scans. Biological assessment, particularly thyroid, hepatic and renal, remained normal, and electrophoresis of the plasma proteins showed a decrease in the serum level of IgM kappa to 7 g/L, probably favoured by the surgical excision of the primary isolated MALT lymphoma of the mucosa of the cheek.