A 43-year-old Caucasian man presented with a traumatic nasal fracture. He noted difficulty breathing and soreness at the right side of the nose, and a 5-year history of mild tenderness at the same site. On physical exam, his nose was deviated to the right, and nasal endoscopy revealed normal-appearing mucosa with some anterior crusting. The patient had a 7.5-pack-year smoking history, with cessation 13 years earlier. The patient did not have any significant medical history otherwise and did not have a family history of cancer.
During repair of the fracture, the right external nasal valve mucosa appeared ulcerated. Biopsy revealed invasive keratinizing SCC with perineural involvement. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET)/CT imaging showed local disease only . The patient underwent partial rhinectomy with a paramedian forehead flap reconstruction; negative histopathologic margins were established. The lesion spanned 2.4 cm and involved the right lateral nasal wall with extension to the septum and invasion through the cartilage into the subcutaneous tissues of the right ala. On 2-month follow-up, the patient reported a new, palpable submandibular lymph node on the right side. Fine needle aspiration showed regionally metastatic disease. Bilateral neck dissection revealed disease in one of 56 excised lymph nodes at level 1B; the lymph node was 3 cm in size. After surgery, the patient had a final pathologic stage of T2N1M0. He underwent adjuvant radiation therapy using volumetric-modulated arc therapy (VMAT) to the nasal cavity and bilateral neck; he received a total of 60 Gy in 30 fractions. The patient tolerated therapy well, with no interruptions or major toxicity. The 5-year overall survival for early-stage T1–T2 disease was estimated at 58–85%; however, due to limited comparison data it was difficult to determine the patient’s exact prognosis. To date, the patient has no evidence of disease recurrence.
Immunohistochemistry of the tumor was positive for cytokeratin and negative for p16 . Human papilloma virus type 16 (HPV16) and HPV18 were negative. FoundationOne® analysis showed loss of PTEN (exons 2–8), CDKN2A/B and TP53 (exons 8–9), MYC amplification, and a BLM S338* truncating mutation. Exome sequencing on the Illumina HiSEQ platform with >110× nucleotide coverage revealed 435 somatic single-nucleotide variants. Thirty-six percent of mutations matched an apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide–like (APOBEC) mutational signature (2 and 13), characterized by the presence of C>T substitutions (signature 2) and C>G substitutions (signature 13) . One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed a significant overrepresentation of the APOBEC signature (p = 0.000) and underrepresentation of the tobacco-related signature (p = 0.001) in the nasal septal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), compared to the reference SCC data set. There was no ultraviolet (UV)-associated COSMIC signature 7 (associated with large numbers of CC>TT dinucleotide mutations) or tobacco-associated Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) signature 4 (characterized by CC>AA dinucleotide substitutions); however, there was a substantial COSMIC signature 5 (characterized by transcriptional strand bias for C>T substitutions at ApTpN context) contribution (53%).
Notably, these data place mutations from our patient’s tumor matching an APOBEC mutational signature 2 and those matching a clock-like mutation COSMIC signature 5 each in the 90th percentile of a reference data set consisting of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) head-and-neck SCCs and a separate data set of cutaneous SCCs . The top 90th percentile of APOBEC signature 2-containing TCGA head-and-neck SCCs (shown in brown) are highly represented in the 90th percentile of APOBEC COSMIC signature 13-containing tumors, confirming their expected concordance . In contrast, few of the reference APOBEC COSMIC signature 2-elevated group appear in the top 90th percentile of clock-like COSMIC signature 5 mutations, as do our patient’s tumor and like those injury-derived SCCs recently reported to arise in an RDEB background . Notably, the patient’s tumor also did not harbor any tobacco-related COSMIC signature 4 mutations, placing it in about the 10th percentile in the reference data set.