A 53-year-old white woman presented to our clinic with enlarged cervical lymph nodes (timeline of relevant interventions and outcomes shown in ). Clinical staging evaluation with sono-mammography, conventional CT, and PET-CT showed pathologic lymph nodes in the cervical, supraclavicular, infraclavicular, and predominantly in the left axilla (shown in a). No primary tumor could be detected. One axillary lymph node was surgically removed. After histopathologic examination, the disease was classified as CUP with lymph node metastases from a poorly differentiated grade 3 adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry analyses revealed that tumor cells were negative for bcl2, vimentin, S100, CK5/6, p40, Gata3, estrogen receptor, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CK20, CDx2, and TTF-1. Positive staining reactions were detected for p53, C-Kit, CK7, SOX10, and partially for alpha-Actin. Ki67 proliferation marker was high at about 90%. Immunohistochemical assays for PD-L1 showed a weak and unspecific reaction in only a few tumor cells, corresponding to a tumor proportion score (TPS) < 1%, whereas a larger proportion of surrounding immune cells showed a positive reaction, corresponding to a CPS of 35. Additionally, NGS was carried out, covering a panel of 161 cancer genes. A non-targetable TP53 mutation was detected, while no genetic alterations were found in any of the other genes examined.
At the patient’s request, chemosensitivity testing on PD3D tumor models was performed at ASC Oncology. A tissue fragment of the metastatic lymph node was used to generate an individual PD3D model for drug screening. Recommended drugs for the most likely suspected primary tumor sites were used for the sensitivity assay. Test results were available 42 days after sample collection, and a report summarizing the findings was provided to the treating physicians. Of the eight therapy options tested, only doxorubicin showed considerable effects on the tumor cells by reducing cell growth by more than 50% at clinically relevant concentrations (shown in ). Because the individual IC50 value was below the maximum achievable plasma concentration (IC50 < cmax), doxorubicin had the potential to lead to tumor regression in the patient (shown in b). Gemcitabine and 5-fluoruracil (5-FU) also showed some activity, reducing cell growth by approximately 50%. However, growth reduction never fell below 50%, or growth reduction was only reached at the documented maximum plasma concentration of the drug. Both make it unlikely that there would be a significant reduction of the tumor in the patient but rather stable disease.
Initiation of therapy with doxorubicin was arranged with the patient, a rather uncommon first-line treatment for a CUP diagnosis, but the decision was patient driven. On the first day of doxorubicin monotherapy (60 mg/m2), a CT scan was performed, as the previous baseline scan had been performed 3 months previously. This CT scan showed a lesion in the left breast, which was then histologically confirmed as the primary tumor site as well as TNBC without PD-L1 expression (immune cell (IC) score = 0). In parallel with the diagnostic procedures, a total of two cycles of doxorubicin were administered. After further discussion of the case at the local tumor board, the patient could be convinced to expand treatment with cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2) for two more cycles and then switch to docetaxel (100 mg/m2) for 4 cycles, followed by extended radiotherapy with a potential chance of long-term remission. The use of immunotherapy was also discussed, but in a formally metastatic situation (positive cervical lymph nodes) with an IC 0, no indication was seen.
CT scans before and after docetaxel treatment showed a very good response (partial remission shown in c, d), so that subsequently, the consolidating radiotherapy of the mamma and the affected lymph nodes was arranged. Due to the involvement of cervical lymph nodes, curative surgery was not possible. About 7 weeks after the last dose of first-line chemotherapy, radiation therapy was given at a cumulative total dose of 56.05 Gy according to the START-B protocol of 40 Gy in 15 fractions over 3 weeks in the breast, plus an extended boost in eight fractions in the originally PET-positive lymphatic drainage extending to the cervical region. A subsequent CT scan showed a complete remission (shown in e). The patient is still alive >12 months after an initial prognosis of 3 months median survival and is planning to re-enter the workforce.