A 29-year-old woman had a chief complaint of chronic abdominal pain for one year and she experienced continuous weight loss of 5 kg over 2 mo prior to her admission.
The patient had chronic abdominal pain for 1 year and she experienced continuous weight loss of 5 kg over 2 mo prior to her admission.
The patient had undergone ovarian cystectomy, appendectomy, and subtotal hysterectomy for uncontrollable hemorrhage according to her past medical history.
No special family history was provided except that her mother was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of the vulvar epithelium and the disease was cured according to her description.
Upon physical examination, a round mass approximately 7 cm in diameter could be palpated in the right upper abdomen and the mass was smooth, pushable, hard, and indistinguishable from adjacent tissue. Other detailed basic information is displayed in Table .
Laboratory data demonstrated normal liver function and routine blood test results . The tumor marker results showed that the level of alpha-fetoprotein was 9850 ng/mL and that of carcinoma embryonic antigen was 0.55 ng/mL.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging examinations suggested a mass of unknown pathological nature located in segment VIII and it was between the first and second hila and the margin of the lower segment of the right liver lobe . The anterior wall of the gastric antrum was unevenly thickened. Positron emission tomography/CT (whole body) examination showed two main points: (1) The anterior wall of the gastric antrum was unevenly thickened, and fluorodeoxyglucose uptake was increased, which was consistent with the manifestations of gastric cancer; and (2) A mass shadow was located at the first and second hepatic hila and the lower right lobe of the liver. As increased fluorodeoxyglucose uptake is a sign of malignancy, whether the mass was liver metastasis or primary liver cancer remained to be identified. Electrocardiograph, chest digital radiography, and CT of the lower abdomen and pelvis showed no obvious abnormalities.