A 28-year-old, 24-week-pregnant woman, gravida 1 was referred to the emergency department complaining of a slowly progressive dyspnea over the last month. She had had an uncorrected ventricular septal defect (VSD) at the age of ten, and later, at the age of fifteen, her condition progressed to Eisenmenger syndrome (ES) and was treated with a daily dose (100mg) of Sildenafil. Upon physical examination, she had dyspnea on exertion along with central and peripheral cyanosis. Her oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 60% and blood pressure (BP) 120/70. A transabdominal ultrasound was performed, and the findings were normal (amniotic fluid 700 mL, biparietal diameter (BPD) 59 mm and femur length (FL) 43.5 mm). For further evaluation and monitoring, she was referred to the cardiology department and was placed on continuous oxygen therapy that elevated her SpO2 to 90%, and completely new physical, cardiovascular, and obstetric examinations were performed. Physical examination revealed an SpO2 of 60% at room air BP of 120/70, peripheral and central cyanosis, digital clubbing and no peripheral edema. Auscultation of the chest was clear, and cardiovascular examination showed loud P2 with no murmur and Respiratory rate (RR) of 18 on rest. Echocardiography showed ejection fraction (EF) of 60%, pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PSAP) of 130 mm, a large muscular ventricular septal defect (12mm in diameter) with right-to-left shunting, and dilated right ventricle. The patient elected to continue the pregnancy despite the high risk on her and her fetus. Therefore, a multidisciplinary team consisting of an obstetrician, midwife, cardiologist, anesthetist, intensive care physician and neonatologist was assigned to fully monitor the patient. Our team's original goal was to reach 32 weeks of pregnancy, but because of the patient's low financial status, we decided to admit her at the Cardio department with the following medical plan: bedrest, oxygen administered by mask at 5 L/min, Sildenafil 50mg 1 × 2, Lovenox 40mg 1 × 1, Dopegyt 250mg 1 × 3, and Lasix 40mg 1/2 × 1. Later, we noticed that the patient tolerated her pregnancy well following this regimen; furthermore, her SpO2 levels, EF and PSAP improved grandly which led to a reduction of the dyspnea and cyanosis. At week 28, we started a betamethasone course for fetal lung maturation. At week 30, the patient developed arterial hypertension of 170/90. Preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome were among the major concerns; however, lab tests showed the diagnosis of isolated, pregnancy related hypertension. Thus, Hydralazine was administrated, and the patient was admitted to the cardiac ICU for strict monitoring. When the patient became stable, multiple scenarios for timing and mode of delivery were discussed based on the mother's condition and the fetal position. Risks of vaginal delivery were known to be more endurable than those with cesarean section, but the 2018 European Society of Cardiology guidelines recommend proceeding with a cesarean section in such a case; moreover, the fetus' transverse position rendered vaginal delivery extremely difficult, so we went with a cesarean section. Taking into consideration the state of our patient, we went with epidural anesthesia which was given in the beginning of the surgery with fractionated doses of bupivacaine (65 mg), lidocaine (280 mg), and fentanyl (100 mg) achieving a T-5 anesthesia level after 35 minutes. During the surgery, the patient was asymptomatic. The surgical procedure was uneventful and a female infant of 1,850 g, Apgar score of 9 was delivered. The patient's condition remained stable after delivery, and she was restarted on 7,500 U of subcutaneous heparin which was switched to 40 U of enoxaparin daily on postoperative day 2. She was hospitalized for 1 week and was discharged postoperative day 7 on oral sildenafil 100 mg. Given the risk of further decompensation, she was advised to resume regular close follow-ups after hospital discharge and to implement safe contraception methods.