A 19-year-old male patient, who is a university student and resides in Thai Binh province, Vietnam, has an average family income.
The patient noticed a mass in the left scrotum for the past 3 months, which increased in size and did not cause any pain. Regarding his past medical history, he was a healthy-term baby with a previous history of a left inguinal hernia. He underwent open surgery at ten years old, during which this defect was not detected.
Clinical examination showed that the patient was in average physical condition with a BMI of 20. The external shape of the penis was normal, and the pubic hair was at Tanner stage 4. The left testicle can be palpated and the mass firmly attached right next to the left testicle was 4x3cm in size, firm, with clear boundaries, gradually tapering to the external inguinal ring (A).
First, during the ultrasound, we observed a mass located next to the left testicle. The mass had a volume of 20 cm3 and appeared to have a similar structure to testicular tissue. However, it was hypoechoic and mildly hypervascular. Based on these findings, my sonographer suspected a third testicle was present in the scrotum. Additionally, we conducted an abdominal ultrasound, chest X-ray, and echocardiography, which did not detect anything abnormal. An assay for testicular tumor markers was requested: AFP, b-HCG, and LDH were found to be normal. Multi-scan computed tomography detected a mass measuring 57x38mm, tissue density (47HU), strong enhancement after injection, mass with clear margins and boundaries pushing the testicles down, growing along the left inguinal canal up to left iliac fossa and continuous with the lower pole of the spleen (B). The preliminary diagnosis given was SGF.
The patient underwent exploratory laparoscopic surgery and it was observed that the malformed spleen grew from the lower pole of the spleen. It followed the colonic groove and entered the inguinal canal, ultimately sticking to the testicles. At this time, the diagnosis of SGF was confirmed. We performed a resection of the splenic tail in the abdomen (A) and surgically separated the scrotal spleen from the testicle while preserving the left testicle through the left inguinal line (B).
The histopathological examination confirmed the presence of splenic tissue.
After surgery, the patient was stable, had no short-term complications such as bleeding or infection, and was discharged after 3 days. We schedule patient follow-up visits after 1 month and 6 months to monitor complications such as testicular atrophy, and recurrence, and evaluate the patient's fertility.