An 81-year-old man was admitted to our hospital to undergo RFCA of paroxysmal AF. He had a history of hypertension, and suffered from cerebrovascular apoplexy at the age of 80 years. Then, AF was documented , and anticoagulation therapy with Apixaban® and antiarrhythmic agents including 100 mg per day of Bepridil® and 40 mg per day of Aprindine® were started. However, he experienced several attacks of paroxysmal AF with intolerable palpitations under treatment with antiarrhythmic agents. On admission, his blood pressure and heart rate were 108/62 mmHg and 62 b.p.m., respectively. Auscultation revealed normal cardiac sounds without any significant murmur and normal breath sounds over the bilateral lung fields. His laboratory analysis was almost normal. The 12-lead electrocardiogram exhibited normal sinus rhythm . The echocardiography yielded a normal left ventricular and valvular function and no evidence of structural heart disease. His left atrial (LA) dimension was 38 mm. His CHA2DS2-VASc score was 5. He had a family history of thrombophilia including his mother who suffered from deep vein thrombosis. However, this was not further investigated.
Anticoagulation therapy with Apixaban® was continued until the day before the RFCA, and was withheld on the morning of the RFCA. After a bolus injection of heparin at 50 units per kilogram (3300 units), a double transseptal puncture was performed under guidance with intracardiac echocardiography (Ultra ICE catheter; EP Technologies, Boston Scientific Corporation, San Jose, CA, USA). Then, a 100 unit per kilogram (6700 units) administration of heparin was additionally administered to maintain the ACT at 300–400 s. However, the ACT was revealed to be only 133 s at that time. Because the retesting of the ACT level revealed it was only 135 s, a 10 000 units dose of heparin was additionally administered. However, the ACT was still low at 200 s.
Although we initially doubted he had heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), a blood test was performed revealing that the platelet level was 225 × 103/μL and there was no thrombus formation in the sheaths with no evidence of HIT. Based on the ACT results, we speculated that the patient had heparin resistance, and the direct thrombin inhibitor, Argatroban Hydrate®, was used instead of heparin as an anticoagulation therapy. At first, a 10 mg dose of Argatroban Hydrate® was administered, and then 4 mg/h (1.6 mg/kg/min) was additionally and continuously infused to maintain the ACT at 300–400 s. After an administration of Argatroban Hydrate® for 10 min the ACT was 391 s. Then, the RFCA of AF was resumed. The ACT was measured every 15 min during the procedure and was maintained at 300–400 s.
Next, a circumferential PVAI was performed under electroanatomic guidance with the 3D mapping system, until the achievement of bidirectional conduction block between the LA and PVs under the administration of isoproterenol . Thereafter, programmed stimulation could no longer induce any arrhythmias including AF. Finally, the AF was successfully treated by RFCA without any complications. Anticoagulation therapy with Apixaban® was resumed immediately after the RFCA.
His laboratory analysis during the RFCA yielded a decrease in his AT-III activity and concentration of AT-III antigen down to 47% and 22.6 ng/mL, respectively. However, the analysis demonstrated that he had negative HIT antibodies. Thus, he was diagnosed with a Type I AT-III deficiency. We explained these results and the Argatroban Hydrate® use instead of heparin as an anticoagulation therapy during the procedure to the patient and his family, and obtained their informed consent. Moreover, we also reported these conditions to the institutional review committee of our hospital, because Argatroban Hydrate® use for RFCA of AF is uncommon. We recommended his family evaluate their AT-III activity and concentration of AT-III antigen. He did not want to undertake genetic testing.
His laboratory analysis before discharge yielded a further decrease in his AT-III activity and concentration of AT-III antigen down to 73% and 22.4 ng/mL, respectively. Moreover, the analysis demonstrated that normal levels of the thrombin-AT-III complex, Protein C and S, and D-dimer under anticoagulation therapy with Apixaban® . He continued on the anticoagulation therapy because of his history of cerebrovascular apoplexy associated with AF and the AT-III deficiency and has remained well without any symptoms after the RFCA.