We present a 68-year-old woman with recurrent episodes of lancinating face pain in the region of the third branch of the right TN . The pain attacks had initiated 5 years ago and during the last year had become resistant to the medical treatment.
An MRI study was performed using a GE HDxT 1.5-T MR scanner and images were obtained using a dedicated commercially available high-resolution 8-channel head coil. Conventional T1- and T2-weighted studies were performed to prove that the patient had no brain tumor or demyelinating disease. In addition, we used the sequences 3D FIESTA and 3D TOF MOTSA to specifically evaluate the neurovascular anatomy of the CPA. Imaging using 3D FIESTA technique was centered on the pons in the region of the TN. Acquisition parameters for 3D FIESTA sequence included a TR of 4.8 msec, a TE of 2.2 msec, two excitations (NEX: 2), and a flip angle of 45°. The acquisition matrix was 224 × 224 for a field of view (FOV) 18 × 18 cm. The other imaging parameters included a bandwidth of 62.5 kHz per pixel, which gave a section thickness of 1.2 mm and an interslice distance of 0.6 mm. A total of 248 slices were obtained with an acquisition time of 4 min and 39 sec. MR angiography was performed by using 3D TOF MOTSA sequence with the following parameters: TR, 23 msec; TE, 2.9 msec; NEX, 1; flip angle, 20°; slice thickness, 1 mm; interslice distance, 0.5 mm; band width, 31.4 kHz; FOV, 22 × 22 cm; and matrix, 384 × 224. Ramp pulse, magnetization transference pulse, and fat saturation were used. A total of 208 slices were obtained. An acquisition scan time of 6 min and 43 sec was required. Both the 3D FIESTA and 3D TOF MOTSA images were acquired with the slabs oriented in the transverse direction. After data acquisition was completed, coronal and sagittal reformatted images were obtained by using a multiplanar reformation algorithm.
The preoperative MRI study showed that the site of compression of the right TN at its rostral-medial aspect was caused by the SCA. This is the nerve area corresponding to the anatomical location of the nerve fibers of the third branch . Therefore, the SCA was predicted as the offending vessel and the patient was scheduled for surgery.
An MVD was performed via a right retromastoid craniotomy to explore the root entry zone of the affected nerve [Figure , ]. The intraoperative microscopic view was compared with the preoperative study, with special attention to identify the site of compression by the offending vessel. The SCA loop configuration and the point of neural compression were both identical to the neuroradiological findings observed on the FIESTA and MOTSA MRI sequences .
The pain was eradicated after surgery and previous medical treatment was gradually suspended. A postoperative MRI study including the same 3D FIESTA protocol was obtained 1 month after the surgery with the aim to evaluate the correct placement of the Teflon implant. It was situated properly between the TN and the SCA, and its signal intensity was intermediate between that of cerebrospinal fluid and neurovascular structures .