A 61-year-old male patient was transferred to the gastrointestinal surgery department of our hospital for further treatment due to severe abdominal infection after he was performed a massive resection of small intestine for vascular ileus in December 2015. The results of the coagulation function test showed that the D-dimer (2.28ug/ml; reference range, 0-0.5ug/ml) was prolonged while thrombin time (TT), prothrombin time (PT) and active partial thromboplastin time (APTT) were normal. The plasma levels of AT antigen (58 mg/dl; reference range, 80-120 mg/dl) and AT activity (54%; reference range, 80–120%) were reduced. Abdomen enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan and computed tomography venography (CTV) revealed the several peripheral thromboembolus have been filled in the portal vein , splenic vein , superior mesenteric vein . Pulmonary artery CT angiography (CTA) demonstrated the massive thrombosis of the left pulmonary artery . Color Doppler ultrasound showed thrombosis in bilateral femoral vein and the left popliteal vein, which suggested DVT in both lower extremities . His family history was unremarkable except for sudden death of his nephew and niece from possible pulmonary embolism. He received standard thrombolytic therapy. Initially, he had achieved significant improvement in recanalization of the venous thrombosis. The patient was prescribed with oral dabigatran and was discharged. However, the patient was referred to the department of neurology for status epilepticus after ceasing dabigatran by himself in March 2017. Brain CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral frontal hemorrhagic infarction . Brain enhanced MRI and MRI Venography (MRV) documented multiple thrombosis in the right transverse sinus, sigmoid sinus, and superior sagittal sinus. CTA in head was unremarkable with no vascular malformation, aneurysm or stenosis . A total of 4 mg clonazepam was immediately administered intravenously as antiepileptic therapy. He received lamotrigine titrated to 75 mg bid and levetiracetam titrated to 1000 mg bid, after which clinical signs of seizure activity ceased. Simultaneously, he received standard anticoagulation treatment with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) for the first 14 days once again, followed by the addition of oral dabigatran 110 mg Bid for 3 days, and then oral dabigatran only.
To identify the etiology of this patient showed multisystem VTE, serial blood tests were performed. Routine biochemical, renal, hepatic, blood lipid profile, homocysteine, thyroid profiles, tumor markers, electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiography were normal. The coagulation profile of the patient was determined, which included thrombin time, international normalized ratio (INR), fibrinogen degradation products, factor V, VII, VIII, IX, protein C, S, rheumatoid factor, lupus anticoagulant, antiphospholipid antibodies, anticardiolipin antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, but no abnormality was found. The D-dimer (2.35 ug/ml; reference range, 0-0.5 ug/ml) was slightly elevated. The plasma levels of AT antigen (43 mg/dl; reference range, 80–120 mg/dl) and AT activity (33%; reference range, 80–120%) were found to be decreased.
The patient was subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES) to identify potential pathogenic variants. A novel heterozygous frameshift duplication (c.233_236dup, p.Val80Alafs*26) in the SERPINC1 gene was identified . To further confirm the mutation, the sample DNA was amplified by PCR (SERPINC1 primers: 5’-TCTGCTTTACTGGGGCAACC-3’ and 5’-GTGCTCCTAACAAGGTGGCT-3’) and the PCR products were combined with the pClone007 Versatile Simple Vector (TSV-007VS, Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd) by TA cloning. Subsequently, the isolated allele vectors were subjected to Sanger sequencing . The duplication mutation in SERPINC1 caused a frame-shift mutation which resulted in a stop-codon at amino acid 105, leading to a premature termination of AT protein .
The recovery of myodynamia and daily ability were significantly achieved within one year after the treatment. His seizures were kept under control by a combination therapy with lamotrigine and levetiracetam. Due to the inherited AT deficiency, oral dabigatran was continued with semiannual follow-up, including blood tests, Doppler ultrasound in the peripheral vessels and brain MRV. Blood tests revealed that the repeated measurement of plasma AT antigen and activity were constantly lower than normal. D-dimer was 0.22 ug/ml and other coagulation tests were unremarkable. The Color Doppler ultrasound showed bilateral superficial femoral veins, popliteal veins and their tributaries were partially recanalized after chronic thrombosis. Abdomen CTV in 2019 revealed recanalization of the portal vein, splenic vein, superior mesenteric vein thrombosis At the same time, D-dimer and other coagulation tests were within the normal range, except for the reduction of plasma AT antigen and activity. The Color Doppler ultrasound in 2021 showed partial recanalization of bilateral superficial femoral vein and the popliteal vein thrombosis. Brain MRV improved even if recanalization was not completed after 2 years of the onset of the cerebral infraction . The blood test results were not much different from the previous ones. The last follow-up visit in February 2022 indicated that the patient recovered significantly.