A 16-year-old male complained of inability to flex his left elbow since 1 year prior to admission. One and a half year before, he fell down and hit his elbow during football practice. He felt pain and there was swelling on his elbow. However, he didn't seek for medical treatment. He had his elbow massaged every week for 5 months but there was no improvement. His elbow became fixed in extended position. A month later, he went to an orthopaedic surgeon and underwent x-ray examination which revealed a fracture and dislocation on his left elbow. He was then referred to our institution for further treatment.
From clinical examination, range of flexion-extension of the elbow was 300-00 with normal pronation-supination. There was no neurological deficit . From radiological examination, there was a malunion of medial epicondyle with subluxation of left proximal ulna . From 3D CT reconstruction, there was a deformity and malunion fracture in humeral capitellum with radial and ulnar postero-superior dislocation . The patient was diagnosed with extension contracture of the left elbow due to malunion of left capitellum, neglected dislocation of the radiohumeral joint, and neglected dislocation of the ulnohumeral joint. The patient was scheduled to have a contracture release, open reduction and internal fixation, and ulnar interposition.
Intraoperatively, we did a posterior approach to the elbow. The ulnar nerve was identified and preserved. The fibrotic tissues and heterotopic ossification were excised. We did a contracture release and open reduction and internal fixation using K-Wire. The flexion and extension of the elbow were evaluated and we managed to get 300 - 130° of flexion-extension ROM. Afterwards, ulnar interposition was performed to prevent ulnar impingement. The wound was closed and a single drain was placed. The elbow was immobilized with back-slab in 900 flexion position for two weeks.
After 1 week, the patient went back to our hospital for follow-up examination. In the 1st evaluation, we tried to remove the back slab and moved the elbow passively. The movement is restricted due to pain and the patient went back home with the back slab on. In the 2nd week follow-up, we permanently remove the back slab and the stitches. At that time, the pain still persisted and the patient was planned to have physical rehabilitation.
On the 4th week after surgery, the surgical wound was infected. We performed debridement, implant removal, and manipulation under general anesthesia. Two weeks later, patient came back to our hospital. We removed the stitches and started rehabilitation. Later on, he continued his rehabilitation in his previous hospital.
After 6 months, he visited our outpatient clinic for medical checkup. From physical examination, the elbow flexion-extension ROM was 1100 - 300 . The patient is able to do normal daily activities .