A 58-year-old man with no particular past medical history had fever of 38 °C 11 days before admission. Dysesthesia of both the lower limbs and acute urinary retention were observed in the same day. Although the fever improved after a few days, 7 days before admission, the patient developed urinary retention 7 days before admission, which required intervention by a urologist. As urinary drainage and oral administration of silodosin, urapidil, baclofen, and distigmine did not improve the patient’s condition, however, a spinal cord lesion was suspected and he was referred to our institution.
On systemic review during a medical examination at our institution, bilateral lower limb dysesthesia, dysuria, and constipation were present, whereas fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, and rash were absent.
He was fully conscious, and with pulse rate, temperature, blood pressure, and respiratory rate of 117 beats/min, 36.5 °C, 153/110 mmHg, and 15 breaths/min, respectively. A physical examination did not reveal any rash, or any other obvious abnormal findings while neurological examination was negative for Jolt accentuation, no nuchal rigidity, and Kerning's and Brudzinski's signs. However, the Babinski reflexes wore positive bilaterally, and he had right patellar tendon hyperreflexia and positive Romberg and Mann tests. In addition, he had urinary retention and constipation, and decreased anal sphincter reflex, a reduction in vibratory sensation in both lower limbs and dysesthesia in parts of the lower limbs as illustrated in Fig. . There were no other abnormalities neurologic examination. The Laboratory test results on presentation are shown in Table . The abnormalities included relative neutrophilia, and elevated levels of D-dimer, procalcitonin, lactic dehydrogenase, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine.
No abnormalities were noted in urinalysis. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed urinary and fecal retentions, but there was no space-occupying lesion in the pelvis nor a lumbar spinal canal stenosis. No abnormalities were observed in the spine on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), but cranial contrast-enhanced MRI showed meningeal thickening .
Because the cranial MRI indicated meningitis and MRS was suspected to be the cause of his acute urinary retention, his cerebrospinal fluid was examined for confirmation of the diagnosis. The results were as follows: cell count of 232/μL (mononuclear cells 227/μL, polymorphonuclear cells 5/μL), protein level of 331 mg/dL, sugar level of 69 mg/dL (47.6% of the simultaneous blood glucose level of 145 mg/dL), and adenosine deaminase concentration of 14.5 U/L. Furthermore, the CSF was positive for VZV DNA, but negative for cryptococcal Ag, and general bacterial, and mycobacterium cultures. The titers of various viruses in the serum are shown in Table . The elevated VZV IgM level indicated acute phase infection, while the high VZV IgG level indicated a reactivation of VZV. Elevated Epstein-Barr virus viral capsid antigen IgG and Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen IgG indicated past Epstein-Barr virus infection, while the negative Epstein-Barr virus IgM ruled-out acute Epstein-Barr virus infection.
The final diagnosis was MRS owing to aseptic meningitis due to VZV. After the diagnosis, he was given intravenous acyclovir at a dose of 625 mg every 8 h for 14 days. The subsequent course is shown in Fig. . The symptoms gradually improved, and management with oral medications (distigmine, urapidil, magnesium oxide) became feasible.
The medications for dysuria and dyschezia have been discontinued, and 2 years have passed since the onset of MRS. No sequelae have been observed, and the patient is being followed up.