A 63-year-old non-smoker male presented with non-productive cough and hypereosinophilia was finally diagnosed of stage IV NSCLC (T2aN2 M1) with visceral involvement affecting contralateral lung, liver and brain. Paraneoplastic hypereosinophilia was resolved with prednisone. Cisplatin and vinorelbine were given during one month but needed withdrawal because of transient acute renal insufficiency related to cisplatin. A second line treatment with erlotinib (150 mg daily) in addition to prednisone was initiated. Dramatic improvement of symptoms and radiographic regression were induced.
After seven weeks of treatment fever and chills appeared without demonstrable infection, coinciding with reduction of the steroid dose from 20 mg to 1 mg/day of prednisone. General conditions deteriorated in the following seven days, and dyspnea, pulmonary infiltrates and progressive respiratory failure developed . Computed Tomography showed increased interstitial parenchyma density affecting both lungs . Heart failure was also excluded: an echocardiography reported normal ventricular chambers without dilatation nor hypertrophia, no contractility impairment with left ventricular ejection fraction 74%, normal atrial chambers and no valve abnormalities. Erlotinib treatment was immediately discontinued and methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg daily) was initiated. Empirical treatment with imipenem, clarithromycin, trimethoprim - sulfamethoxazole, amphotericin B and ganciclovir were given. Patient was admitted in the Intensive Care Unit.
Despite therapy, the patient developed an acute lung injury in accordance with the Lung Injury Score definitions , and required mechanical ventilation with FiO2 0.6, tidal volume 450 ml, PEEP 10. Peak airway pressure was 25 cm H2O and PaO2/FiO2 225. Cardiovascular evaluation ruled out heart failure. Flexible fiberoptic bronchofibroscopy revealed minimal inflammatory changes. Bronchoalveolar lavage, protected catheter brush and bronchial specimen cultures excluded acid-fast resistant bacilli, bacterial or fungal infections. Eosinophilic pneumonitis and malignancy were also discarded. Polymerase chain reaction analysis (PCR) for Herpesviridae and Mycobacterium tuberculosis were performed in blood and bronchial samples, proved also negative. The Papanicolau stain in bronchoalveolar lavage samples, and the hematoxylin-eosin stain in transbronchial biospy samples discarded Pneumocystis jiroveci infection. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Urinary antigen testing for Legionella and Pneumococcus were also negative. Consequently, antibiotic treatment was discontinued at day five.
On the following days gas-exchange improved and pulmonary infiltrates progressively solved . It was possible to wean off the patient from the ventilator and was successfully extubated on the fourth day of intensive care. On the sixth day he was discharged from the ICU to a normal ward with the diagnosis of interstitial pneumonitis induced by erlotinib. Three months later a CT scan was performed showing no abnormalities .