We present the clinical case of a 61-year-old male, diagnosed with a squamous cell carcinoma in the maxilla . Virtual planning was performed using digital software for the placement of a microvascular fibula flap with three osteotomies and a preformed plate .
Under general anaesthesia, complete surgical resection of the maxilla was performed, given that the tumour was multicentric . The jaw was reconstructed using a microvascular fibula flap in three fragments. Virtual planning was used both for the resection and reconstruction cutting guides and production of the custom-made titanium plate to fix the fibula in the middle third of the face.
Seventy-two hours after the surgery, fibula graft failure occurred due to thrombosis of the vascular anastomosis and could not be recovered through revision of the anastomosis.
The flap was removed and reconstruction was performed using a titanium mesh moulded to the premaxillary anatomy to maintain the space, and the temporalis flap on the right. This patient did not need adjuvant administration of radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Nine months later, virtual planning (Materialise Mimics v22.0®) was again performed for placement of a customised prosthesis. Designed by Avinent®, it was made from sintered titanium using machined subperiosteal implants with a universal external connection (4.1mm wide). To place the prosthesis, using general anaesthesia and nasotracheal intubation, an approach was made over the existing temporalis flap in the palate and dissection of maxillary buttresses was performed. The existing mesh was removed and the customised prosthesis was positioned, which was fixed into the nasomaxillary and zygomaticomaxillary buttresses with the help of a transcutaneous guide and additional screws in the median line area. Without subsequent complications, the patient was discharged and referred to the hospital’s Dental Service for metal-ceramic implant-supported dental restoration.
Using local anaesthetic, the subperiostal implants were found to be covered in mucous, and straight and 30º angled transepithelial abutments (MultiUnit®) were placed to create an optimal emergency prosthetic and secure the connections at the juxta-gingival level. After the tissue around the implants had healed, a splinted open tray impression was taken. Passive fit of the implants was tested and 3D printed test dentures were created to achieve optimum aesthetic and occlusal parameters. A milled cobalt-chrome structure was produced and a feldspar ceramic covering was subsequently applied.