A 70-year-old male patient, presented with complaints of ulcer associated with severe pain and reddish skin discoloration over a ventral aspect of the third toe of his right foot since 2 months . Patient was said to be healthy and asymptomatic 2 months before this, he noticed small bleb over the third toe of right foot, which burst out into ulcer and went on increasing in size with severe pain and reddish skin discoloration around it. He consulted a nearby physician and got wound dressing daily but did not get relief. Following this, he approached our hospital in search of better treatment.
According to his statement, it was found that the pain was severe and of burning type and the ulcer was increasing in size every day with foul smelling and pus-like discharge through it. Patient is k/c/o diabetic since 8 years and was on medication using tablet glycinase 1 bid. There was neither H/O hypertension nor any other chronic illness. Patient was addicted to beedi (a type of cigarette filled with tobacco flakes and wrapped in Bauhinia racemosa leaf) smoking from past 30 years but had stopped it since the past 2 years.
The case was diagnosed clinically along with hematological reports as DFU of Grade-II Wagner's classification for DFU.
Vimlāpanakarma with Jātyāditailam.
The procedure was carried out in aseptic conditions wearing surgical gloves. Jātyāditailam was applied all around the ulcer, and vimlāpanakarma was carried out. The size of the ulcer was small and place of occurrence was in the toe region and hence a single thumb with the pulp of the fingers were used for vimlāpanakarma around the ulcer followed with Jātyāditailam dressing and bandaging. No internal medications are given during the treatment period .
Vimlāpanakarma was performed with Jātyāditailam around the wound for about 15–20 min daily for 10 days and the patient was followed-up over a period of 45 days.
The results were evaluated by subjective and objective parameters mainly based on clinical observation by grading method. The pain was assessed using visual analogue scale and the wound (vraṇa-ākṛti) was measured in centimeters with the help of thread and scale method, graph method and photography before, during and after the treatment. Vraṇalakṣaṇas were graded as symptomless (−), mild (+), moderate (++) and severe (+++) .
Vedana (pain) Varṇa (coloration) Srāva (discharge) Gandha (odor) Māṃsāṅkura (granulation tissue) Ākṛti (shape).
Ulcer size.