A 64-year-old man presented to the department of digestive surgery in our institute because of esophageal cancer in the middle and lower thoracic esophagus. Physical examination revealed severe emaciation and sarcopenia (loss of skeletal muscle volume due to malnutrition and esophageal cancer itself). The patient lost 10 kg during the last 6 months. The BMI before esophagectomy was 16.9 (height, 166.2 cm; weight, 46.7 kg). Esophageal angiography revealed an esophageal stricture across the Th6–9 levels. Furthermore, CT findings suggested that it was infiltrating both lower lungs and left primary bronchus . The upper endoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor located in the thoracic esophagus (distance from the incisors was 25 to 33 cm). The pathological diagnosis of the tumor was squamous cell carcinoma. Thus, the patient was diagnosed as having esophageal cancer cT4bN0M0 stage IIIB in accordance with the eighth edition UICC TNM classification. The patient underwent two courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with docetaxel, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil (DCF). NAC somewhat improved esophageal wall thickening . However, the surgeons considered NAC did not achieve downstaging (tumor invasion to lungs and bronchus did not change). The patient underwent thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy with cervical esophagogastric anastomosis via the retrosternal route using a gastric tube. Intraoperatively, a tumor was found to be invading the right main bronchus and right lung. Wedge resection of the part of the lesion invading the lung was performed; however, resection of the part invading the bronchus was considered impossible. Therefore, LigaSure Maryland was mainly used to resect as much of the tumor as possible along the wall of the right main bronchus. After esophagectomy, the surgeons cauterized the unresectable tumor as much as possible. As a result, R2 resection was performed according to intraoperative and pathological findings. After esophagectomy, total parenteral nutrition had performed at first. Activities of daily living (ADL) of the patient was movement only in bed because he was exhausted and depressed due to surgical stress. Therefore, it was considered that sarcopenia had deteriorated. Postoperative day (POD) 6 after esophagectomy, the patient developed a fever. A partial defect of the membranous portion of the right main bronchus and an air–fluid level around the right main bronchus were identified on CT scan . After being diagnosed with BPF, the patient was referred to our department. It was considered that chest tube thoracostomy would not adequately treat the fistula and thoracic infection; thus, surgery was planned. In the operating room, we used a left-sided double-lumen tube for endobronchial intubation. After intubation, the bronchial fistula was evaluated by bronchoscopy and found to extend from the right main bronchus to the intermediate bronchus. Furthermore, ischemic changes were apparent around the fistula. Surgery was then performed via posterolateral thoracotomy. A fistula affecting the membranous portion of the right main bronchus and a little serous fluid around the fistula were noted . The cause of necrosis and fistula appeared to be cauterization during esophagectomy. Because of the patient’s poor nutritional condition and the area of necrosis around the fistula, it was anticipated that simple covering of the fistula with an intercostal muscle flap would collapse. It was therefore considered necessary to devise a novel means of treating the fistula. First, a muscle flap was created by detaching the fourth and fifth intercostal muscles en bloc from the ribs near their angles , preserving blood flow from the right internal thoracic artery. Next, the muscle flap was passed between the azygos vein and right upper lobe bronchus and the bronchus and pleural side of the intercostal muscle flap anastomosed using 4-0 monofilament synthetic absorbable suture material . The postoperative course was almost uneventful. On POD 1, we evaluated the post-surgical state of BPF by bronchoscopy. Since the muscle flap had closed BPF securely, the patient was extubated. Just for the next few days, he required nasal cannula oxygenation therapy and tracheal suctioning.
We performed intravenous antibiotic therapy after operation. As a result, the elevated C-reactive protein levels and white blood cell count gradually improved. In addition to that, there was no evidence of post-surgical empyema. Bronchoscopy was performed on POD 22. The bronchial lumen was patent without the muscle flap collapse. CT scan was performed on POD 30 after BPF closure. There were no findings of BPF and empyema, but it was difficult to diagnose the recurrence of esophageal cancer because the muscle flap and esophagectomy site overlapped. Although BPF improved, ADL of the patient did not improve due to depression. Therefore, he transferred from our hospital to a rehabilitation hospital on POD 76. After 4 months from our operation, he resulted in death due to aspiration pneumonia. However, according to the transferred hospital, there was no evidence indicating BPF and empyema on physical and chest X-ray findings.