A 36-year-old male patient presented at metabolic bone disease clinic at the Aga Khan University Hospital with history of multiple fragility fractures and juvenile osteoporosis since childhood. There was no history of neurological or cardiovascular complications nor any urinary symptoms.
Upon physical examination, the patient's height was 159 cm and weight was 95 kg. He displayed a prominent forehead, hypertelorism, long eyelashes, and micrognathia. Furthermore, his hands were short and stubby with acroosteolysis and broad dark nails. There were no signs of local inflammation in either fingers or toes. He had lost all his teeth and had replaced them with dentures. The liver and spleen were not palpable and no abnormalities were noted on cardiovascular and neurological exams. Previous consultations in the United States of America, during his childhood had considered the possibility of HCS due to the presence of acroosteolysis. He had been taking bisphosphonates including Pamidronate and Zoledronic Acid since childhood. He was on Prolia when he presented this time.
shows the results of bone biochemistry and Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) findings at an interval of two years. Complete blood count, serum electrolytes, liver and renal function tests (except gamma-GT, which was marginally raised) were within the normal range on different occasions. In addition, thyroid profile, follicle stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone & free androgen index were also within the reference intervals.
Based on history & facial dysmorphism, he was referred for geneticist consult. DNA sequence analysis of the NOTCH2 coding sequence was performed on genomic DNA extracted from peripheral leucocytes at the Invitae Corporation, San Francisco CA 94103. A pathogenic variant in NOTCH2, Exon 34, c.6426_6427insTT (p.Glu2143Leufs*5) heterozygous was identified, consistent with a predisposition to, or diagnosis of NOTCH2 related conditions including HCS (MedGen UID: 182961) and Alagille syndrome 2 (ALGS2) (MedGen UID: 341844).
Further inquiry revealed that the patient's daughter has facial features resembling those of her father and a history of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), acroosteolysis. He also gave history of abortion of a female fetus with cardiac developmental defect. Genetic testing was advised for confirmation of the disease and subsequent management.
During his most recent follow-up visit, the patient was found to be doing well. He was on Prolia and was advised weight reduction, lifestyle measures, and exercise with stretch bands.