A 30-year-old female was referred to our surgical department because of a giant retroperitoneal and mediastinal mass detected in an ultrasound performed outside of our facility as well as in CT imaging. Her medical history prior to admission was unremarkable, including no long-term medications and no reported pre-existing medical conditions. The initial symptoms were transient nausea, diarrhea, and crampy, left lower quadrant abdominal pain persisting for 2 weeks with a rough palpable mass in physical examination. Family history was positive for cancer, including 5 first- and second-degree relatives .
Initial laboratory examination revealed inflammatory and tumor markers within normal limits. Further CT imaging demonstrated the involvement of the abdominal and thoracic cavities with tumor mass expansion from the retroperitoneum through the aortic hiatus to the posterior mediastinum with a concordant displacement of the major central vessels .
Presurgical CT-guided biopsy verified a benign ganglioneuroma. Thus, complete surgical resection was recommended in a symptomatic patient. Total resection (TR) of a 35 × 25 × 25 cm, 2550-g tumor via laparotomy and partial diaphragm incision were performed successfully.
Postoperative histological analysis confirmed the diagnosis . Surgically challenging aspects resulted from the bilateral tumor invasion of the retroperitoneum and the mediastinum through the aortic hiatus, as well as the tumor-related displacement of the abdominal aorta, the mesenteric vessels, and the inferior vena cava. Additionally, the tumor grew between the inferior vena cava and aorta, with the need of comprehensive separation up to the aortic hiatus, where the tumor entered the posterior mediastinum on both sides. Despite the necessity of partial resection of several lumbar aortic vessels due to perivascular tumor growth, postoperative functioning of the patient showed no signs of neurologic impairment. Regular wound drainages (two located intraabdominally and one in the thoracic space) could be removed at day 3 with an output of less than 100 ml. Unfortunately, the patient developed a chylous ascites which required continuous fluid drainage via a PleurX™ system, which was placed retroperitoneally on day 9 postoperatively. This was not completely unexpected due to the vast extent of lymph vessel resection. Supportive medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) diet improved the drain output, such that the PleurX™ drain could be removed at day 27 postoperatively, and the patient was discharged on day 32 postoperatively. Afterwards, no further medication or therapy was needed. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient reported no negative impacts and no restrictions on her activities of daily living in comparison with her preoperative status.