A 52-year-old female patient presented to our outpatient facility with complaints of bilateral knee pain and swelling for the past 4–5 years. The pain was insidious in onset and disabling enough to interfere in her activities of daily living, not associated with any constitutional symptom. She had a history of lower back surgery 5 years ago for lumbar disc prolapse and had mild lower back pain on and off post-surgery. The right knee was more symptomatic than the left one. On examination, medial and lateral joint line tenderness along with patella-femoral tenderness was noted on both knees. There was significant synovial thickening along with moderate bilateral knee joint effusion which was confirmed with patellar tap. The range of motion of the right knee was 0–80° on the right and 0–90° on the left side with significant pain on 20–30° of terminal flexion. Both knee joints had about 10° of varus deformity which was partially correctable and the patient walked with antalgic gait. The anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of knee joints depicted gross narrowing of medial tibiofemoral joint spaces with subchondral sclerosis, patellofemoral and posterior recess osteophytes and overall varus alignment of both knee joints .
A diagnosis of bilateral knee osteoarthritis (OA) was made and the patient was posted for bilateral total knee arthroplasty (TKA) after prior surgical clearance from an internist, cardiologist, and anesthesiologist as per protocol. During the first (right) knee surgery, there was difficulty in spinal anesthesia due to stiff spine as reported by the anesthetist. Under spinal anesthesia, after medial parapatellar arthrotomy, diffuse black discoloration of the tibiofemoral articular cartilage, menisci, joint capsule, synovium, and quadriceps tendon was noted with degenerative changes in the cartilage . The synovium was hypertrophic and of dark brownish-black color. Subtotal synovectomy was done and bone cuts were completed following standard measured resection technique and trial components were inserted.
The subchondral bone was normal in appearance; however it seemed to be osteopenic than those of routine cases. The strength of ligaments and tendons seemed to be normal. During components trial, we noted positive lift-off sign (booking) of tibial tray at 70–90° of flexion which was resolved with partial release of posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) at femoral attachment. The cruciate retaining (CR) femoral and tibial components were cemented in routine manner. We used ultracongruent polyethylene liner (Curved Plus, PFC sigma, and Depuy-Synthes Warsaw Indiana) due to its proven efficiency in clinical studies [, ]. No excessive bleeding was noted after synovectomy and hemostasis was achieved following tourniquet deflation before closure. Drains were not used. The left knee arthroplasty was also done in similar manner except superficial medial collateral ligament (MCL) release and using posterior stabilized (PS) components. Patellofemoral OA was managed with removal of osteophytes and circumferential denervation with electrocautery on both sides. Post-operative radiographs were satisfactory in regard to component placement and alignment .
The diagnosis of ochronosis was confirmed retrospectively in post-operative period, while the patient revealed history of black discoloration of her urine and of family members. Careful physical examination revealed subtle blackish discoloration of her palms, helices of ear pinna, finger nails, toe nails, and skin of dorsum of the feet . Her lumbosacral spine roentgenograms depicted diffuse osteopenia of vertebral bodies with endplate sclerosis, narrowing of disc spaces, and calcification of IVDs while pelvis depicted characteristic degenerative changes and sclerosis at symphysis pubis . Her high urine HA levels confirmed the diagnosis.
In post-operative period, the patient had mild-to-moderate pain, which was managed with standard multimodal analgesic protocol. She was mobilized full weight bearing with walking frame on post-operative day 1. Her post-operative wound healing was uneventful and standard rehabilitation protocol was followed. Sutures were removed after 2 weeks and the patient remained satisfied with the surgery. At the latest (24 months post-operative) follow-up, the patient was symptom free and the ranges of motion were 0–110° on the right side and 0–120° on the left side. The knee society score (KSS) was 82 and 84 on the right and left side respectively and the knee function score was recorded to be 90. The follow-up radiographs showed neutral mechanical alignment with absence of radiolucent lines, osteolysis, wear, or loosening around the components .