A 70-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with the diagnosis of acute HF (1st hospitalization). She had a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Approximately one week previously, she experienced chest pains. Thereafter, exertional dyspnoea appeared, and she was transferred to our hospital. On arrival, blood pressure was 170/80 mmHg. Auscultation revealed bilateral coarse crackle and systolic murmur at apex. Juglar vein dilation and slight pitting oedema on bilateral lower extremities were noted. Chest radiography revealed pulmonary congestion . A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation with Q wave at the lateral leads . N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide was elevated at 4528 pg/mL (normal range: <125 pg/mL). She was diagnosed with myocardial infarction and acute HF. Transthoracic echocardiography, performed after the initiation of HF therapies, revealed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 26% with predominant posterior asynergy (, see ). Moderate functional MR due to leaflet tethering was noted (, see ). After HF stabilization, coronary angiography demonstrated three vessel disease (, F). We performed percutaneous coronary intervention on these three vessels. We prescribed bisoprolol 1.25 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, and furosemide 20 mg during hospitalization. Renin–angiotensin system inhibitor was unable to be prescribed due to hypotension after HF stabilization. Thereafter, she was transferred to another hospital to continue rehabilitation.
Two weeks after hospital transfer, she suddenly experienced dyspnoea and re-transferred to our hospital (2nd hospitalization). Systolic blood pressure was elevated at 147 mmHg. Pulmonary oedema on chest radiography and elevated natriuretic peptide levels were noted. Transthoracic echocardiography, performed after HF treatment was initiated, showed reduced LVEF of 35% and moderate functional MR. After the stabilization of HF, we performed right heart catheterization with isometric handgrip stress test. At rest, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) and pulmonary artery pressure were normal . During isometric handgrip for about 2 min, blood pressure increased, but PCWP and pulmonary artery pressure were within normal range albeit mildly increased . At that time, we considered invasive procedures for MR as unnecessary. Neither angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors nor sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors had been approved for HF in Japan at that time. She was discharged with bisoprolol 1.25 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, and furosemide 20 mg.
One month later, she suffered sudden-onset dyspnoea and rushed to our hospital (3rd hospitalization). On arrival, she was drowsy and arterial blood gas revealed respiratory and metabolic acidosis with pH: 6.9. Blood pressure was unmeasurable. Her weight had increased by 1 kg compared with the stable condition during 2nd hospitalization. Chest radiography showed a butterfly shadow, resulting in the diagnosis of recurrent acute HF. Focused echocardiography at emergency department described reduced LVEF and more than moderate degree MR. She was admitted to our intensive care unit and treated with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, vasodilator and diuretics. On the following day, her condition was improving, and we performed bedside transthoracic echocardiography with isometric handgrip stress test. At rest, we observed a moderate to severe degree of functional MR and an elevated tricuspid regurgitation pressure gradient (TRPG) of 45 mmHg (, see ). After resting measurements were obtained, sustained maximum-effort handgrip grasping was maintained for about 2 min using hand dynamometer in a left lateral decubitus position. Then, MR deteriorated to a severe degree and the TRPG was further elevated to 60 mmHg (, see ). We diagnosed that functional MR was a main underlying cause of her recurrent acute HF. Two weeks later, transthoracic echocardiography with isometric handgrip was performed after the HF condition stabilized with dosing-up oral loop diuretic (furosemide 40 mg) and adding enalapril 5 mg on top of bisoprolol 1.25 mg and spironolactone 25 mg. Functional MR was moderate and the TRPG was 25 mmHg at rest (, see ). During handgrip test, the degree of MR did not significantly change and the TRPG was only mildly elevated to 30 mmHg (, see ).
Invasive treatment of functional MR was discussed comprehensively within our heart team. She experienced HF exacerbation during hospitalization (2nd admission) and even with slight increase in body weight (3rd admission, which was a lethal HF exacerbation) under optimal medical therapy. Cardiac resynchronization therapy was not indicated considering the narrow QRS duration on electrocardiogram. Thus, we decided to proceed with transcatheter edge-to-edge repair. One month after discharge from 3rd hospitalization, one clip was deployed at the mid position of the mitral leaflet, resulting in the MR becoming trivial . The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. The 1-year follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed trivial MR without significant mitral stenosis (, see Supplementary material online, ). Since transcatheter mitral repair, she experienced no additional hospitalization for acute HF.