A 14-year-old female with fever, facial erythema, facial ulcers, mouth ulcers and alopecia was admitted to our rheumatology department.
Two months before admission, the patient began to develop facial ulcers with swelling, and no improvement was observed following treatment with clindamycin and metronidazole. Fever occurred one month before admission, and routine blood examination showed that the white blood cell count and red blood cell count were decreased. C-reactive protein (CRP) was normal, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 96 mm/h, and her body temperature continued to rise after dexamethasone and cefuroxime administration. One week previously, facial erythema accompanied by gaze , fever, facial and oral ulcers, ulceration and bleeding on the ulcer surface, internal and external genital ulcers, severe hair loss, pharyngitis, and erythema on the fingertips of both hands and toes were observed.
A body temperature of 37.6 ℃, blood pressure of 108/76 mmHg, heart rate of 126 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 20 times/min were noted. Ulceration and scabbing can be seen in the oral cavity. Facial erythema, ulcers at the fingertips of both hands and toes, vulvar ulcers and scar alopecia were observed. No joint tenderness. The remaining physical examinations showed no significant abnormalities.
The results of laboratory examinations were as follows: ANA1: 1000, natural anti-SSA antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-nucleosome antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, and P-ANCA were positive. CRP was 9.78 mg/L, ESR was 68 mm/h, complement 3 (C3) was 0.11 g/L, and complement 4 (C4) was 0.01 g/L. The white blood cell count, red blood cell count, platelet count and hemoglobin were decreased, and a bone marrow biopsy showed no abnormalities. Respiratory virus, Mycoplasma infection, and procalcitonin results were negative. Given the patient’s clinical symptoms, she was diagnosed with SLE. The Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000 (SLEDAI-2000) was 13 and we evaluated the activity as medium level. Following intravenous methylprednisolone 80 mg/d administration over five days and rituximab 500 mg once, the child’s symptoms improved. C3 and C4 increased (C3 0.29 g/L, C4 0.02 g/L) and routine blood levels were normal. CRP and ESR decreased to within the normal range. The SLEDAI-2000 was 2. On the sixth day, methylprednisolone was reduced to 60 mg/d. The patient’s body weight was 60 kg. The dosage of glucocorticoid as prednisone was 1.25 mg/kg/d due to decreased disease activity. Unfortunately, new symptoms emerged after one day of glucocorticoid reduction, her limbs and head exhibited involuntary dance-like movements, such as, turning of the neck, intermittent flexion and extension of fingers, waving the hand, and stretching of the arm ( and ). Further examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) including CSF biochemistry, next-generation sequencing of CSF, and autoimmune encephalitis antibody were negative. Anti-streptolysin O was negative. Thus, infectious encephalitis and autoimmune encephalitis were excluded.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging revealed acute cerebral infarction in the left centrum semiovale.