A 41 year old Malay female with no prior medical illness, was admitted to medical ward with the complain of fever, headache and reducing platelet and increasing hematocrit for 3 days duration. Her Dengue NS-1 antigen was reactive which confirms dengue virus infection. She was diagnosed to have ‘dengue fever with warning signs’ based on WHO classification of levels of severity . On admission she complained of right eye blurring of vision for 1 day. Fundus examination was done by medical officer in Medical ward and was documented normal. Therefore she was not referred to Ophthalmology department during the hospital stay. She was treated with fluid resuscitation and was discharged after 5 days. However, right eye blurring of vision persisted and then she was referred to the ophthalmologist. She presented to our eye clinic with right eye blurring of vision for 8 days. It was sudden in onset and non-progressive.
On examination, patient was alert, comfortable and vital signs were stable. Ocular examination noted best corrected visual acuity in right eye was <20/1000 and left eye was 20/25. Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. Relative pupillary afferent defect was detected in the right eye. Right eye fundus showed typical features of CRVO—dilated, tortuous retinal veins and retinal hemorrhages in all four quadrants, optic disc swelling, cotton wool spots and macular edema. Left eye examination was normal .
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of right eye macula disclosed cystoid spaces with edema, retinal thickening and subretinal fluid .
Further assessment to identify the risk factors for CRVO were done. She was not on any hormonal contraception. Blood investigations were done namely fasting serum lipid, fasting blood sugar, renal profile, full blood count (post recovery), anti-cardiolipin antibodies (ACA), Anti-Beta-2-Glycoprotein 1 (2GP1), Protein C activity, Protein S activity, Antithrombin activity, Activated Protein C Pathway which were normal. Serum electrophoresis shows no paraprotein band and no immune paresis. Her full blood count (FBC) trend during hospital stay showed increasing hematocrit and reducing platelet which peaked on day 6 of illness and then gradually improved . Her symptoms onset was during early period of the illness when her hematocrit and platelet levels were still acceptable.
Six weeks later, fundus fluorescein angiography was done and there was delayed venous filling, less than ten disc diameter area of capillary dropout and areas of masking by retinal hemorrhages . Patient was planned for repeat FFA, however her right eye progress to develop proliferative retinopathy—new vessels elsewhere on the posterior pole which was treated with panretinal photocoagulation. There was no new vessels on the iris or angle noted. The macular edema improved drastically and was monitored with OCT imaging. Unfortunately, her vision did not improve. Her best corrected visual acuity of right eye is 20/400 and left eye 20/25.