A 68-year-old Saudi male known to have type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension for 15 years presented to the emergency department of the Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, in September 16, 2018 with confusion, vomiting, left-sided weakness, left facial palsy, and slurred speech. His symptoms had started 2 hours and 25 minutes earlier.
On examination, the patient was conscious but confused. He had left facial weakness, gaze deviation to the right side, left homonymous hemianopsia, dense left hemiplegia, and left sided hemineglect, so the stroke code was announced. Both a computed tomography (CT) scan and a CT angiogram were performed upon admission. The CT scan of the brain showed an ischemic stroke of the right temporal lobe surrounded by diffuse brain edema causing mass effect . The CT angiogram revealed nonopacification of the right internal carotid artery near its origin with extension cranially to involve the majority of the cervical portion in addition to the petrous, cavernous, and supraclinoid aspects. In addition, there was nonopacification of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) branches, which was likely due to thrombus formation. Additionally, the brain MRI findings are illustrated in Fig. .
The patient was given tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) as per the stroke protocol. Later on, he was taken for intraarterial thrombectomy, which, after five attempts, was without significant reperfusion. He was then intubated during the procedure, and later on transferred to the intensive care unit for postthrombolytic protocol. A follow-up CT scan showed a malignant MCA stroke with diffuse edema causing mass effect, midline shift, and impending herniation. Therefore, the patient was taken for craniotomy as the only salvageable option, and high intracranial pressure measures were reversed. A few days later, the edema improved, the mass effect resolved, and the patient was weaned off sedation. Afterward, the patient started to slowly recover.
Several laboratory investigations were conducted, including complete blood count, coagulation profile, and electrolyte panel. Markers of vasculitis and autoimmune disorders were unremarkable. Hemoglobin A1C was 10.2%. The lipid profile was the following: cholesterol: 4.73 mmol/L, triglycerides: 2.07 mmol/L, high-density lipoprotein (HDL): 1.05 mmol/L, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL): 3.25 mmol/L.
On November 19, 2018, the patient was transferred to the neurology ward. A few days later, it was noticed that he was displaying hyperorality, hypermetamorphosis, hyperphagia, hypersexuality, and other behavioral changes, including apathy, visual agnosia, and hallucinations. During the first few days in the ward, the patient was unable to recognize his family members. Hence, he was started on escitalopram 10 mg once daily together with levetiracetam 1 g twice daily. Two months later, the patient showed significant improvement in his neurobehavioral symptoms, hypersexuality, and altered eating behavior.