An 85-year-old man with a permanent DDDR pacemaker (implantation 25 years ago due to complete heart block) was admitted for differential diagnosis and treatment of a right atrial mass, revealed in a routine transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), which was performed on an outpatient basis, for the evaluation of dyspnoea on exertion (New York Heart Association III stage). The patient had a prior medical history of arterial hypertension and three-vessel coronary artery disease under medical treatment. Coronary angiography was performed 2 years ago. Percutaneous coronary artery angioplasty was not feasible due to the complexity of the atheromatic lesions and the patient refused any surgical treatment. Six months prior to this hospitalization, he had undergone uncomplicated generator replacement due to battery depletion. On admission, the patient was afebrile with a heart rate of 60 b.p.m. and blood pressure 120/65 mmHg. The ECG showed pacing rhythm, and he was pacemaker-dependent. Physical examination of the heart, lung, and abdomen revealed no abnormalities and there were no signs of localized infection at the pacemaker pocket site.
Biochemical examinations (red and white blood cells count, C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, urine analysis, and plasma markers of coagulation) were within normal range. The interrogation of the device revealed normal findings.
The TTE showed the left and right ventricle within normal size and contractility range. The apical four chamber view revealed clearly two mobile masses (32 mm and 19 mm long) with a common stem, of low echogenicity and elliptic shape, attached to the ventricular lead of the pacemaker, prolapsing through the tricuspid valve in systole (ventricular lead type: Medtronic 4043–58, passive fixation, bipolar). Contrast-enhanced chest and computed tomography showed a pulmonary infarct in the right upper lobe. A Doppler study of the upper and lower extremity veins did not show any thrombi.
The patient was held on low molecular heparin (LMWH). Three sets of blood cultures and urine culture were negative. The patient remained in-hospital for a close echocardiographic follow-up and for the final identification of all blood cultures. Ten days after his admission, he presented low grade fever up to 37.5°C, normal white blood cell count and C-reactive protein at 70 mg/L (normal range <3 mg/L). A positive urine culture of Escherichia coli was detected. After 2 weeks of antimicrobial treatment (ciprofloxacin 200 mg bid) and under LMWH the patient was afebrile, with normal inflammatory markers and small decrease of the size of the cardiac masses in the TTE.
The patient was discharged on acenocoumarol. A TTE after 1 month did not visualize the cardiac masses . Acenocoumarol with a goal INR of 2.0–2.5 was recommended to be continued for an additional 3 month period. After discontinuation of acenocoumarol, the patient received aspirin 100 mg daily, due to the coexisting coronary artery disease.
The patient did not receive any other anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy and did not attend any other scheduled follow-up appointments.
Over 2 years after his 1st admission, the patient, without anticoaguland therapy anymore, was readmitted to our clinic due to a 7-day history of fever up to 38.5°C. Once more, physical examination revealed no signs of localized infection.
The TTE revealed two new vegetation-like masses, possibly attached to the same site of the ventricular lead. Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed clearly the existence of the masses approximately of the same size as in the 1st hospitalization and their attachment to the pacemaker lead . Once more, most of the biochemical examinations (red blood cells count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, urine analysis, and plasma markers of coagulation) were within normal range, with only slight elevation of white blood cells count [11 000/μL (normal range 4000–9000/μL), 76% PMN (normal range 50–80%), and C-reactive protein (23 mg/L)]. Two out of five blood cultures yielded Staphylococcus epidermidis. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography showed no pulmonary infarcts. The patient was held on vancomycin 2 g daily and meropenem 1 g daily, combined with LMWH (enoxaparin 60 mg bid). Differential diagnosis between contaminated thrombus and vegetation was challenging. However, 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, which was performed 2 days after admission, demonstrated increased uptake of 18F-FDG in the outer part of the middle pulmonary lobe and in the sigmoid colon . The diagnosis of vegetation was excluded and lead thrombosis was confirmed once more (relapse). Antibiotics were discontinued. A sigmoidoscopy was performed, which revealed polyposis of the sigmoid colon. Endoscopic polypectomy was performed one month afterwards. At that time, the TOE echocardiogram revealed total resolution of the masses .
Since then, the patient remains asymptomatic on acenocoumarol therapy with a goal INR of 2.0 – 2.5, with no detectable intracardiac masses in a follow-up TTE, 6 months after his 2nd hospitalization. Repeated device interrogation did not detect any dysfunction. Of note, no atrial tachyarrhythmia was ever detected.