A 74-year-old Lebanese man living with his wife in Melbourne, Australia, who was previously independent with all activities of daily living, mobility and driving a car, sustained an unwitnessed fall resulting in mild TBI, with an initial GCS score of 15 on presentation. He was on warfarin and sotalol for chronic atrial fibrillation, with a target international normalized ratio (INR) of two to three, and a past history of transient ischaemic attack eight years earlier. He was also treated for hypertension. On the day of the injury, he was last seen in his garden pruning a tree on a ladder at a height of two meters. He had no recollection of immediate events leading up to the fall, or the fall itself. His wife noticed extensive right facial bruising when he entered the house, which led to the presentation to his usual local medical officer, who referred him on to the Emergency Department at the Royal Melbourne Hospital (Victoria, Australia), a major trauma centre. The initial CT scan of his brain was performed at five hours from the injury due to the above delays in presentation. This was non-diagnostic for intracranial hemorrhage . His INR was elevated at 4.2. He was assessed by the neurosurgical team, and was admitted for a 24-hour observation period, with a planned repeat CT brain scan prior to discharge to home to the care of his family. His GCS score remained at 14 to 15 throughout the observation period, due to mildly confused speech at times throughout the night. He complained of a mild headache, which was managed with paracetamol as required.
On the following day, the repeat CT scan of his brain at 24 hours demonstrated a large right posteromedial parietal intraparenchymal hemorrhage with vasogenic edema, subarachnoid and subdural extension, and right anterolateral subdural hematoma . He received urgent fresh frozen plasma, human prothrombin complex (Prothrombinex®-VF) (CSL Behring, Melbourne, Australia), and Vitamin K to reverse the anticoagulation, and he was admitted to the Stroke Care Unit, with a multidisciplinary team involved in his care. Further repeat scans did not demonstrate an extension of DICH, and surgical intervention was not required. During his admission, he sustained a fall due to left homonymous hemianopia, impulsivity and vertigo. He was found to have episodes of bradycardia, and his sotalol dosage was ceased. A subsequent CT scan of his brain did not demonstrate additional intracranial pathology. He was referred for inpatient rehabilitation.
On the 11th day after the injury, he was transferred to the Rehabilitation Unit at Royal Park Campus, Royal Melbourne Hospital, for multidisciplinary rehabilitation. On the 15th day, warfarin therapy was recommenced with close monitoring, with a target INR of two to three. His headache was minimal and his vertigo had resolved. He remained motivated and euthymic. A multidisciplinary assessment in the Rehabilitation Unit demonstrated the following problems: fatigue; mildly impaired arousal, attention, orientation, insight, processing speed, working memory and verbal learning; left homonymous hemianopia; decreased functioning, with minimal assistance of one person required for personal activities of daily living, including assisted showering and toileting; and decreased mobility with constant supervision required due to impulsivity and ongoing risk of falls, with minimal assistance of one person required for transfers and walking. He underwent an intensive three-week inpatient multidisciplinary rehabilitation program to address these problems.
By discharge, his fatigue and cognitive functioning had improved, and his family were educated on his supervision needs. A formal orthoptics assessment demonstrated full Bjerrum visual fields. However, in functional tasks and ambulation, he demonstrated left neglect and veered to the right side. He was independent with personal activities of daily living, and necessary home equipment was prescribed by his discharge. He was independent with transfers and ambulation indoors, without exercise tolerance limitations, but required supervision for outdoor mobility due to an ongoing visuospatial problem. He was also advised against driving on discharge for the same reason.
He attended a further two months’ outpatient multidisciplinary rehabilitation program at the Royal Park Campus, Royal Melbourne Hospital to address participation restrictions, with the goal of independent local community access. He was assessed in the outpatient clinic at three months from the injury, and by this stage, he was safely walking to the nearby shops alone, with increased independence in personal and domestic activities of daily living. However, the changed family roles as a result of the injury led to increasing caregiver stress, with ongoing driving restrictions and supervision needs. At his six-month review, he had no residual activity limitations, but his overall participation was restricted by his inability to return to driving.