A 21-year-old white woman presented to our emergency room with a 1-month history of fatigue, muscle aches, nausea, cutaneous rash, and 5 days of blurred vision in her left eye (OS).
She denied any double vision, pain with eye movements, flashing lights, floaters, or changes in color vision. She had no recent sick contacts or travel. She had no past ocular or medical history. Her family history for ocular or autoimmune disease was unremarkable. She used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as needed for her recent myalgia.
She presented with a malar rash and some violet raised papules erupting on her elbows and knees that were made worse by exposure to sunlight. Her arterial pressure was 115/70 mmHg. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in her right eye (OD) and 20/100 in her OS.
Intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal in both eyes (OU). Extraocular movements were conjugate and full and she had no subjective red desaturation. Conjunctiva was white without dilated conjunctival vessels, cornea was clear, and anterior chamber showed no evidence of cell or flare, bilaterally.
On dilated examination she had bilateral retinal vascular engorgement, scattered foci of inner retinal whitening consistent with CWS, and some superficial hemorrhages in OU.
These changes were primarily around the macula and optic nerve and spared the peripheral retina .
Optic disks were pink with sharp margins and a cup-to-disc ratio of approximately 0.4.
Triton Plus® SS-OCT (Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) showed light central macular edema in her OD and severe central macular edema in her OS with the presence of serous subretinal fluid. SS-OCT sections were obtained on the CWS highlighting the presence of hyper-reflective material affecting the nerve fiber layer and reaching even the inner nuclear layer in some sections. This is considered a sign of ischemia-induced edema. Consistent with this edema, inner nuclear and outer plexiform layers appeared wavy and were partially masked by the overlying CWS.
FA (Spectralis HRA+OCT; Heidelberg engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) showed generalized vascular walls enhancement, veins dilatation, and capillary leakage whereas, consistent with CWS, vascular occlusion was observed.
Triton Plus® SS-OCTA (Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) confirmed superficial and deep capillary occlusion in all areas affected by CWS, but these areas appeared more confluent than in FA. No alterations were visible in outer retina and choriocapillaris OCTA segmentations, but some shadowing effects due to the overlying CWS were present.
At presentation our patient had symptoms that indicated myositis including diffuse muscle pain, weakness, malar rash, and raised papules on elbows and knees. Her muscle enzymes were significantly elevated with a creatine kinase (CK) of 17,030 U/l (normal range 22–198 U/l) and an aldolase (ALDOA) of 106 (normal range 0.5–3 UI/l). Electromyography and nerve conduction study results were suggestive of moderate myositis and a subsequent right thigh muscle (vastus lateralis) biopsy was consistent with an inflammatory myopathy, showing vascular inflammation and a perifascicular atrophy. A myositis antibody panel was positive for an anti-Jo1 antibody. Given the constellation of findings our patient was finally diagnosed as having DM.
Despite the absence of a clear consensus over the most indicated retinal therapy , in agreement with a rheumatologist who was managing the systemic disease, treatment was started with 1 mg/kg per day of orally administered prednisone, but she showed no improvement over the course of a week. Therefore, therapy was modified with the administration of a high dose of intravenously administered methylprednisolone (1000 mg daily), showing a slow favorable change after 1 week with a reduction in macular edema and subretinal fluid.
At this point, a decision was taken to start a steroid-sparing immunosuppressive drug, so the corticosteroids were progressively tapered and therapy with cyclophosphamide was started.
The protocol for cyclophosphamide that was used was 500 mg/m2 (maximum 500 mg) administered intravenously every 2 weeks for the first three doses and then 750 mg/m2 (maximum 1200 mg) every 4 weeks for a total of six doses, with no further cyclophosphamide infusions. Thus, a standardized non-continuous treatment protocol was used, with the cyclophosphamide treatment course completed within 4 months of initiation [, ].
After 3 months of therapy, best corrected visual acuity was returned to 20/20 in OU with subjective temporal pericentral scotoma in her OS.
A funduscopic examination revealed a reduction in number and dimension of the CWS and some new hemorrhages in OU.
SS-OCT showed a complete resolution of the cystoid macula edema and subretinal fluid. The ganglion cell layer and, to a small extent, even the inner nuclear layer were thinned in the areas previously affected by CWS, confirming the ischemic nature of the edema. The wavy appearance of inner nuclear layer and outer plexiform layer was unchanged at this stage.
FA showed normal diameters of arteries and veins without wall enhancement. Consistent with ischemic areas previously affected by CWS, capillary and venule angioectasias were noticeable. However, no retinal neovascularization was visible in OU.
OCTA confirmed the same capillary occlusions visible in FA and it detected venule angioectasias as well.
After 6 months of therapy, CWS were almost completely resolved and no new hemorrhages were seen . Best corrected visual acuity remained stable at 20/20 in OU. However, the visual field examination performed after disease resolution confirmed the presence of multiple and confluent scotomas in OU, with central involvement in OS .