An 82-year-old woman with HCV-associated hepatitis was treated with ledipasvir and sofosbuvir 5 years previously and achieved SVR. She had a history of hypertension, which was treated with an angiotensin II receptor blocker. She had no history of alcohol consumption. During follow-up, abdominal ultrasonography revealed dilation of the left intrahepatic bile duct. Computed tomography (CT) showed dilation of the paraumbilical vein and mild splenomegaly. Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed a tumor adjacent to the umbilical portion of the portal vein measuring 30 mm in diameter at the left lateral section of the liver .
Laboratory findings revealed elevated levels of liver function markers and total bilirubin (9.6 mg/dL), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography showed disruption of the left intrahepatic bile duct due to tumor compression . The tumor did not infiltrate the hepatic hilum. Endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage was performed. The levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (serum tumor markers) were 1.9 ng/mL and 1156 U/mL, respectively. After biliary drainage, the serum total bilirubin level decreased to 1.4 mg/dL; other biochemistry results included an albumin level of 4.0 g/dL; prothrombin time, 90%; prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, 1.0; serum creatinine, 0.63 mg/dL; Child–Pugh class A; and MELD score, 3 points. Serum type IV collagen and hyaluronic acid levels were 254 and 160 ng/mL, respectively. The indocyanine green retention test at 15 min yielded a value of 18%. The serum platelet count was low (80 × 103/μL). A liver tumor biopsy revealed a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma.
Based on the diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, laparoscopic left hemihepatectomy was performed. The future liver remnant (FLR) volume was 382 cm3 (49.5% of the whole liver) according to preoperative three-dimensional volumetry . Cirrhosis was diagnosed, which was further complicated by PH with a mildly decreased liver reserve and advanced age. Because of inadequate FLR volume and risk of postoperative liver failure due to left hemihepatectomy with cirrhosis, we decided to perform PTPE. Therefore, PTPE and PSE were performed concomitantly, followed by HVWP measurements . In PTPE, the paraumbilical vein was embolized . After PTPE, the HVWP increased to 16 mmHg but decreased to 12 mmHg after PSE . Since PH improved with the embolization of only the inferior pole of the splenic artery, additional embolization was not performed. She had a low-grade fever after PTPE and PSE, and her platelet count increased to 157 × 103/μL before surgery. Laparoscopic left hemihepatectomy was performed 8 days after PTPE and PSE. During surgery, the liver showed cirrhotic changes with an irregular surface . After mobilization of the left lobe of the liver, the left Glissonean pedicle was divided, and the demarcation line was identified. Liver parenchymal transection was performed between the middle hepatic vein and the demarcation line under the Pringle maneuver. Finally, the left hepatic vein was divided, and laparoscopic left hemihepatectomy was performed . The operation time was 268 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 20 g.
Pathological examination revealed a solid tumor measuring 60 mm × 32 mm × 20 mm, which was diagnosed as a moderately differentiated intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (T2N0M0 Stage II; Fig. C). Advanced liver fibrosis was observed in the remaining liver . CT on postoperative day 7 showed no remarkable findings. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 without any complications. The patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 for 4 months and had no cancer recurrence during the adjuvant chemotherapy.