The manuscript was approved by the Ethics Committees of Guangdong Women and Children Hosptial and the participant provided written informed consent.
The patient was a 23-year old pregnant woman under healthy condition, and vaginally delivered one healthy girl with term birth as the first pregnancy. Delivery was smooth, first stage of labor was 15 h and second stage was 2 h. The birth weight was 3.6 kg. This newborn was in good health. The slight abdominal bloat was complained after delivery, but without special treatment. The abdominal pain was exacerbated On the fifth day after delivery accompanied with vomiting, shivering, and high fever. The highest body temperature was 39 °C. Oliguria and edema on the bilateral lower extremities were reported. The large amount of ascites was revealed by ultrasound examination; and the venous blood biochemical assays indicated the elevated level of serum creatinine (427 umol/L), urea nitrogen (26 mmol/L) and potassium (6.6 mmol/L). The diagnosis was considered to be postpartum acute renal failure (ARF) and peritonitis The patient was treated with intravenous antibiotics, hemodialysis, peritoneal catheter drainage (2000 mL reddish ascites drained) and indwelling bladder catheter. The abdominal pain was significantly alleviated on the second day and the ascites disappeared with the serum biochemical restored normal. The patient was transferred to our hospital on the sixth day postpartum. Physical examination:Temperature 37.8 °C, Pulse 93 beats per minute, Respiratory rate 30 times per minute, and Blood Pressure 118/78 mmHg. BP118/78 mmHg, Patient was conscious and no abnormality was revealed during heart and lung auscultations. Abdominal distension, mild tenderness and rebound tenderness are positive for the whole abdomen. no percussion pain in the liver and kidney, The bottom of the uterus is at subumbilical 1.5 cm.The intraperitoneal bladder rupture and peri-bladder inflammation were diagnosed and confirmed by MR, CT, cystoradiography and cystoscopy. Exploratory laparotomy was performed to remove the lesion on the bladder wall and repair perforation. The pelvic drainage tube was indwelled. Finally, Patient made a good recovery and was discharged on the 8th day after surgery.
The bladder was ruptured within abdominal cavity, the rupture site was located on the right top wall of bladder with the size of 10 mm × 10 mm, the edge of rupture was irregular. The local wall of bladder was thickened and formed a mass with size of 60 mm × 30 mm. The mass was located within the serosa membrane and depressed the bladder. The broken site was at the edge of the mass. The edema and adhesion around the bladder was observed . The mass was proven to be inflammatory granuloma by pathological examination .