A 69-year-old man who had never smoked was admitted to the hospital for chest pain and dyspnea in October 2019. He had no significant medical history. He was not taking any medication. Whole-body computed tomography and brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 3.5 x 5.0-cm pulmonary mass in the upper left lobe, mediastinal lymphadenopathies and multiple brain metastases, the largest of which was approximately 1 cm along its longest axis in the left temporal lobe. Stage IVB (T3N2M1c) lung adenocarcinoma was diagnosed by biopsy performed via bronchoscopy. Biopsied tumor tissue revealed the presence of EGFR exon 19 deletion, no ALK translocations, no ROS1 translocations and PD-L1 expression of 20% determined via the SP263 PDL-1 assay.
Osimertinib was administered at the standard dose of 80 mg daily from November 2019. Brain radiotherapy was not performed given osimertinib activity in the CNS. The patient exhibited grade 4 neutropenia (4 x 106 cells/L), grade 3 anemia (7.8 g/dL) and grade 2 thrombocytopenia (62 x 109 cells/L) 10 days after starting osimertinib. Reticulocytes were undetectable. Serum biochemical indices of liver and kidney function were normal. Hematological iron, folate and B12 deficiencies were excluded. Hemolytic anemia screening was negative. Bacterial and fungal infections were excluded based on negative blood cultures. Osimertinib was discontinued. Two-unit red blood cell transfusions were performed immediately in conjunction with administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (subcutaneous filgrastim 480 cg daily for 3 days). The patient was refractory to granulocyte colony-stimulating factors and grade 3 neutropenia (6 x 106 cells/L) and grade 3 thrombocytopenia (45 x 109 cells/L) were still evident 3 days after the onset of bone marrow toxicity. Bone marrow cellularity and trilineage progenitor cells were not investigated because the patient did not consent to bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. After 10 days of supportive care with blood transfusions (four units in total) and 5 days of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor daily (subcutaneous filgrastim 480 cg) however, normal blood parameters were detected (hemoglobin 13.2 g/dL, neutrophil count 40×106 cells/L, platelet count 155×109 cells/L). Tests for rheumatic factors, ANA, c-ANCA, p-ANCA, Brucella, cytomegalovirus virus, parvovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, HIV, hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus were negative. The patient’s karyotype was normal. In the absence of other causes, osimertinib-induced pancytopenia was suspected. In December 2019 computed tomography indicated a partial tumor response with reduction of brain and thoracic malignant lesions. Specifically, the diameters of the pulmonary mass in the upper left lobe had decreased from 3.5×5.0 cm to 2.1×2.0 cm, mediastinal lymphadenopathies had decreased in size and number and the largest brain metastasis had shrunk from 1.0 cm to 0.5 cm on its longest axis. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status of the patient was 0. Given the potential clinical benefit, in January 2020 osimertinib was resumed at a reduced dose of 40 mg daily in conjunction with weekly laboratory monitoring. In March 2020 computed tomography indicated stable disease. No adverse events occurred after the osimertinib dose reduction. To date, the patient remains on 40 mg osimertinib and is exhibiting stable disease.