A 77-year-old Japanese woman noticed a hard, non-tender lump in the left lower inner part of her breast and visited the outpatient clinic for breast surgery on September 24 2014. She had no family history of amyloidosis or breast cancer. She had hypertension, angina pectoris, and arteriosclerosis. She also had an operation history: abdominal total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for myoma uteri at the age of 52 years.
A hard lump was palpable on the left lower inner part of her breast. The mammogram showed no mass or pleomorphic calcifications in both breasts: however, a focal asymmetric density was observed on the inner side of the left breast in the craniocaudal view, which was assessed as BI-RADS category 3 . On breast ultrasonogoraphy, an irregular low echoic area was observed at the site of the lump . No blood flows were seen entering the low echoic area. Elastography (elasticity imaging technique) revealed that the low echoic area was soft, a finding that is different from that of breast cancer.
An ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy was done to rule out breast cancer. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed eosinophilic material in the extracellular area. The specimen was positive for Congo red staining even after permanganic acid treatment, and exhibited yellow-green birefringence under polarizing microscopy.
Further examinations were carried out to rule out plasma cell myeloma, other B cell tumors, or systemic amyloidosis according to National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. The patient had neither M-protein in serum immune electrophoresis nor Bence-Jones protein in urine immune electrophoresis examination. Bone marrow aspiration was negative for plasma cell myeloma or other B cell tumors. No lymphadenopathy was seen on computed tomography. Electrocardiogram and cardiac ultrasonography showed no evidence of cardiomyopathy or amyloidosis related changes. Stomach, rectum, bone marrow, and random skin biopsies were performed and none of biopsies showed evidence of amyloidosis. Taken together, systemic amyloidosis and multiple myeloma were ruled out, and localized breast amyloidosis was highly suspected.
To make a definite diagnosis, lumpectomy was performed on December 25, 2014. Macroscopic specimens of the mammary gland showed abnormal white masses as arrows indicate . The final pathology demonstrated homogenous eosinophilic depositions with surrounding margins of breast parenchyma . The deposits were positive to Congo red and direct fast scarlet (DFS) staining after permanganic acid treatment . Immunohistochemistry for AA amyloid was negative. No malignancy such as breast carcinoma, lymphoma, or plasma cell myeloma was seen.
For further immunohistochemical staining, specimens were sent to the Department of Neurology of Kumamoto University. Amyloid typing with immunohistochemistry was performed using antibodies directed against the following antigens: polyclonal rabbit anti-human prealbumin (TTR) (DAKO), monoclonal mouse anti-human amyloid A (clone mc1) (DAKO), polyclonal rabbit anti-human kappa light chains (DAKO), polyclonal rabbit anti-human lambda light chains (DAKO), anti-human kappa light chain monoclonal antibody, clone H16-E (Novus Biologicals), anti-IGLL5 immunoglobulin lambda-like polypeptide 5, rabbit-Poly (Novus Biologicals), rabbit monoclonal antibody [EP1368Y] to apolipoprotein A-I (Abcam), and polyclonal rabbit anti-human beta-2-microglobulin (DAKO). The resected breast tissue was positive for Congo red, IgLCk (immunoglobulin light chain kappa [polyclonal]), and Kmab (immunoglobulin light chain kappa [monoclonal]) . Under polarized light, the protein exhibited yellow-green birefringence. The specimen was negative for serum amyloid A (SAA), TTR, IgLCλ (immunoglobulin light chain lambda [polyclonal]), and IGLL5 (immunoglobulin lambda-like polypeptide 5) . The amyloidosis was shown to be the ALk type, which is more frequently encountered than the ALλ type . The patient was free from any lymphoid malignancies or immunological disorders. Therefore, the final diagnosis was primary amyloidosis of the breast.
The patient is currently being followed-up at our institution, and has shown no evidence of disease recurrence or breast cancer at 1 year after the surgery.
This report highlights imaging and histopathological assessment of amyloidosis of the breast. Amyloidosis of the breast is rare and should be distinguished from breast cancer, and histological assessment is necessary.