A 10-year-old boy (height 123.8 cm, weight 24.9 kg) developed irreversible lung failure associated with chronic graft-versus-host disease following HSCT. He primarily underwent right single living-donor lobar LT donated from the next of kin followed by long-term immunosuppressive therapy. At 14 years old, the patient developed chronic lung allograft dysfunction (CLAD, BOS) with concomitant development of de novo donor-specific alloantibody (DSA) toward DQ4 (16,880 mean fluorescence intensity; MFI), which resulted in a rapid decline in respiratory function to grade 3 or < 50% of baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 0.46 L (19.3% of predicted value). The patient was suspected of having a clinical antibody-mediated rejection. Shortly after the diagnosis of CLAD (BOS), he was registered and waitlisted for lung re-transplantation from a deceased donor in the Japan Organ Transplantation Network. Antigen-targeted therapy (plasma exchange: 4 times) was conducted but irresponsive (MFI: 11453 → 2483 → 14834). Owing to progression of respiratory failure, the patient was hospitalized and prescribed non-invasive positive pressure ventilation 7 months after registration on the list. During the early waiting period, the patient was relatively in stable conditions (pCO2, 60 Torr), maintaining moderate physical performance to implement daily rehabilitation program of ambulation and cycle ergometry.
However, his respiratory condition rapidly deteriorated 11 months after wait-listing (the age of 15), and he (height 143 cm, weight 33 kg) was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and required mechanical ventilation under sedation because of hypercapnic respiratory failure . Despite the high level of positive end-expiratory pressure, and prolonged expiratory time, the patient’s severe respiratory acidosis (pH, 6.9–7.1; pCO2, 130–200 Torr) with hypercapnia did not improve, and an alternate mode of lung support was required as rescue therapy . The patient had chronic deterioration of respiratory function; hence, he possibly would not be weaned off VV ECMO once initiated. However, the patient remained free from active bacterial, viral, or fungal infection, and the function of other vital organs including the heart, kidney, and liver was normal. Following emergency multidisciplinary team discussions, VV ECMO was introduced initially as a bridging strategy to transplantation on day 1 after ICU admission, with the aim to achieve long-term standby status for LT . A 21-Fr single catheter was cannulated for venous drainage in the common femoral vein and a 19-Fr catheter for return in the right internal jugular vein. We had planned to switch to cannulation with a single-site dual-lumen device if the patient transitioned to a state where rehabilitation was possible under a prolonged period of ECMO use. The initial ECMO settings were as follows: sweep gas flow, 2.0 L/min; flow, 3.1 L/min; 3360 revolutions per min (RPM); and heparin infusion. ECMO and ventilator settings were later adjusted to minimize lung stress and strain. Early rehabilitation of in-bed mobilization and electrical muscle stimulation was started on day 2 after ECMO initiation. Subsequently, a tracheostomy was placed on day 5. Once the blood gas data were normalized, the weaning process from VV ECMO was attempted on day 6. Following the cautious reduction of the flow and several weaning trials, the ECMO could finally be removed on day 9 and sedation was completely ceased on day 18. The patient underwent rehabilitation under ventilator support, and his physical performance improved to the extent that he could perform stepping exercise.
Six months after the ECMO treatment, a suitable organ was allocated. The patient was transferred to the referred lung transplant center , and bilateral LT was performed perioperatively using desensitization therapy (DSA DQ4 [MFI:13529]). Intraoperative cardiopulmonary support was required, but could be removed immediately after implantation. Standard triple immunosuppressive therapy (tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisolone), and antiviral and antifungal prophylaxis were administered postoperatively. No major surgical complication related to the previous history of ECMO use, including severe primary graft dysfunction, cardiac insufficiency, infection, and venous thrombosis, was noted. The patient was successfully weaned off mechanical ventilation on postoperative day 69 and oxygen inhalation on day 74. He was transferred to our rehabilitation facility on postoperative day 99 and was finally discharged on day 114. He returned to his normal daily life without any significant complications 14 months after lung re-transplantation.