A previously healthy 49-year-old black man presented to the emergency department in December 2020 with a 4-day history of worsening dyspnoea and fever. Upon clinical examination, he was apyretic, hypotensive, tachycardic, and tachypneic. Arterial blood gas revealed high lactate levels with compensatory respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.56—reference value 7.35–7.45, lactate 12.6 mmol/L—reference value <2 mmol/L, bicarbonates 15.2 mmol/L—reference value 22–26 mmol/L, partial arterial pressure carbon dioxide 17.1 mmHg—reference value 35–45 mmHg, base excess −6.9—reference value). His nasopharyngeal swab resulted tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection, but no signs of pulmonary involvement were observed.
Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with lateral ST elevation; transthoracic echocardiography documented severe left-ventricular dysfunction (left-ventricular ejection fraction 10%—reference value >55%, indexed left-ventricular end-diastolic volume 70 mL/m2—reference value 35–75 mL/m2) with diffuse hypokinetic pattern and elevated filling pressure, and no pericardial effusion.
Urgent coronary angiography showed absence of significant coronary artery disease. He rapidly evolved in overt cardiogenic shock, requiring haemodynamic support: Impella CP was implanted at the end of the procedure.
In the next 12 h, the patient deteriorated despite left-ventricular support. Severe right-ventricular dysfunction was evident, with signs of systemic congestion and multiple end-organ hypoperfusion. Fulminant myocarditis was suspected. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support was considered, but was not implemented to the lack of pulmonary involvement and gas exchanges issues. A multidisciplinary evaluation was carried out involving cardiac intensivists, intensive care cardiologists, and cardiovascular surgeons. Due to patient’s worsening clinical conditions, it was decided to proceed with a BiPella strategy, for its potential of providing unloading and enhance cardiac recovery. The Impella CP in the left ventricle was replaced with an Impella 5.0 surgically implanted via right axillary artery and an Impella RP was subsequently inserted percutaneously, via right femoral vein, in the right ventricle . In the same setting, endomyocardial biopsy was performed.
The systems were running as follows: Impella 5.0 blood flow 4.0 L/min (level P-8), Impella RP blood flow 3.3 L/min (level P-7). Haemodynamic stability was achieved and the patient was extubated on the day after BiPella implantation.
Endomyocardial biopsy documented massive lymphomonocytic inflammatory infiltrates (CD3+ cells >7/mm2) with cardiomyocytes necrosis and no replacement fibrosis . Molecular viral analysis tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 ribonucleic acid (open-reading frame-1 negative, N-gene positive). Remarkably, in situ hybridization documented viral localization within the endothelial cells, but not within cardiomyocytes.
No antiviral or immunosuppressive therapy was administered. Anticoagulation was performed with bivalirudin, titrated to reach a target-activated partial thromboplastin time of 60–65 s. Bleeding from the axillary access occurred 2 days after implant, which required temporary suspension of anticoagulation and blood products transfusion.
After 10 days of support, the patient was weaned from the right-ventricular support and on the day after from Impella 5.0 as complete recovery of cardiac function and end-organ damage was observed.
A cardiac magnetic resonance was later performed: diffuse increase of native T2 (sign of myocardial oedema) and native T1 (sign of non-ischaemic myocardial injury) were observed, meeting the 2018 Lake Louis Criteria. No significant late gadolinium enhancement areas and normal biventricular function were also observed.
The patient was transferred from the intensive care unit after 15 days and discharged home 1 month after presentation. Echocardiography before discharge documented a complete recovery of heart function. Discharge therapy included a low dose of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and beta-blockers. He did not have further episodes of heart failure at 12 months follow up.