A 64-year-old Hispanic woman with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and transient ischemic attack presented with a chief complaint of chest pain. The pain was severe enough to wake her from sleep around 6.00 a.m. Pain was 8/10 and described as pressure and as if someone had punched her on left side of her chest with an associated tingling sensation in her left arm and fingers. She related her chest discomfort to the recent familial conflict. The pain did not improve over the next hour, and she proceeded to walk a few blocks to the hospital. A review of her symptoms was negative. Her medications included aspirin 81 mg and lopressor 25 mg. Our patient denied a history of coronary artery disease, tobacco smoking and alcoholism, a family history of coronary artery disease or invasive cardiovascular procedures. On arrival at 7.02 a.m., the first set of vitals showed a pulse rate of 79, a respiratory rate of 18, blood pressure of 166/87 and oxygen saturation 100% on 2 L via nasal cannula. A physical examination revealed a body mass index (BMI) of 25.3. She was anxious and was in obvious discomfort. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. An electrocardiogram (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm at 77 per minute with normal ST and T wave. A chest X-ray revealed a normal cardiac silhouette. Her baseline troponin was within normal limits. Lopressor, aspirin, and nitroglycerin were administered in the emergency department (ED). However, her pain worsened. The repeat troponin tests at 4-hourly interval trended up from < 0.012 baseline to 0.736 . The repeat EKG did not display any ischemic ST-T wave changes to explain troponin elevation or to account for the degree of pain. A Stat transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) yielded normal left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction and normal wall motion. (The Stat TTE was performed due to the persistent pain being unresponsive to nitroglycerine and morphine.)
Our patient was managed with an ACS protocol with acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) 325 mg, plavix 600 mg, full-dose lovenox, lopressor 100 mg, lipitor 80 mg, and underwent emergent cardiac catheterization. On angiogram, no atherosclerotic or stenotic lesion was visualized; however, following the injection of contrast medium, a plexiform network of vessels in the LV wall was demonstrated, followed by a jet of contrast medium entering the left ventricular cavity originating from the distal third of the left anterior descending and diagonal arteries. The plexus was eventually identified as coronary artery microfistulae. All fistulae drained into the left ventricular cavity. The ventriculogram elicited apical ballooning of the left ventricle with preserved function of the remaining myocardium consistent with TCM.
The echocardiogram (ECHO) did not reveal the apical ballooning seen on the ventriculogram likely due to two reasons:
First, because of it was a technically difficult study; second, as the Takotsubo is a transient phenomenon, it is likely that she developed the apical ballooning while being transferred for the cardiac catheterization.
After medical treatment our patient was discharged on metoprolol and aspirin with full resolution of symptoms and remained asymptomatic at 1-month and 6-month follow-up.