A 24-year-old female patient presented to our outpatient service in June 2020 with the complaints of recurrent abdominal distension and discomfort for 3 mo.
The patient reported feeling epigastric distension after eating that could last anywhere from 30 min to 12 h, with no other significant discomfort.
Following hospital admission, the patient denied a history of allergies, asthma, and pet exposure. Both her father and mother were living and healthy.
The physical examination on admission revealed stable vital signs, no yellow staining of the skin or sclera, and no enlargement of superficial lymph nodes. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations showed no abnormalities.
Laboratory tests revealed a normal blood count, liver function, and renal function and normal carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 125, cancer antigen 19-9, and alpha-fetoprotein values. Her liver fibrosis test was normal, and she had normal levels of immunoglobulins immunoglobulin (Ig) A, IgM, and IgG, as well as serum type III procollagen, type IV collagen, laminin, and hyaluronic acid. Her serum pepsinogen (PG) I value was 133.41 μm/L, her PG II value was elevated at 25.99 μm/L, her pepsinogen I/II ratio (PGR) value was reduced at 5.13, and her gastrin-17 value was 54.01 pmol/L. The 13C urea breath test negative, the allergen assay was negative, and her extractable nuclear antigen antibodies were negative.
Eesophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) performed on June 28, 2020 revealed diffuse nodular elevation-depression changes in the mucosa of the entire gastric corpus .
Nodular reddening-like changes were seen in the anterior wall of the gastric antrum . Then, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) completed in July 2020 suggested an intact 5-layer structure of the gastric corpus wall with hypoechoic changes in the mucosal layer . Histopathology reported moderate chronic inflammation with erosion and mild activity .
In May 10, 2021, EGD confirmed that no mass or ulcer could be found in the esophagus or duodenum. The mucosa of the angulus was smooth, while the mucosa of the gastric corpus and fundus appeared uneven, with elevation-depression changes .
Magnifying endoscopy with blue laser imaging (ME-BLI) showed clear borders of the elevation, regular arrangement of the marginal crypt epithelium (MCE), and widening of the microvascular vessels. The MCE in the depression was indistinct, and the irregular microvascular pattern showed dendritic changes with a constant ductal diameter, and the microvessels here were thinner than those of the elevated area of the gastric antrum . Nodular reddening-like changes were seen in the anterior wall of the gastric antrum . The findings of ME-BLI were similar to those from the gastric corpus . EUS showed that the mucosal layer of the gastric corpus was thickened, appearing slightly hypoechoic, with no thickening of its posterior submucosal layer .
The normal structures of the mucosa, muscularis mucosa, and submucosa at the elevation of the gastric antrum had disappeared and were replaced by inhomogeneous hypoechoic changes, with the muscularis propria and serosa still intact . Colonoscopy confirmed that the mucosa of the whole colon, rectum, and terminal ileum was smooth, and no mass or ulcer was visible. Computed tomography showed a relative thickening of the gastric wall in the gastric corpus and antrum, and mild enhancement was seen in the arterial phase .
Histopathological findings of the gastric fundus, body, and antrum biopsies included moderate chronic inflammation with erosion, mild activity, a higher number of lymphocytes, a few neutrophils and eosinophils [20-30/high-powered field (HPF)] infiltrating the interstitium, multifocal lymphoid tissue hyperplasia, and negative Congo red staining . Collagenous bands deposited under the mucosal epithelium (about 40 μm) were seen . Angulus biopsy revealed moderate chronic inflammation with erosion and positive Masson’s trichome staining. The bulbous, terminal ileum, and ascending colon biopsies showed moderate mucosal chronic inflammation with erosion, mild activity, focal lymphocytosis, and positive Masson’s trichome staining. The rectal biopsy showed moderate mucosal chronic inflammation with erosion and positive Masson’s trichome staining. Furthermore, complementary Masson staining of the patient’s gastric corpus biopsy specimen from June 28, 2020 revealed the presence of collagenous band deposited under the epithelium (approximately 40 μm) .