A 27-year-old male requested transfer for a self-inflicted abdominal stab wound.
The patient had stabbed himself in his upper abdomen with a kitchen knife three times, in front of his family. He then visited the emergency room at another hospital, from which he was transferred to our emergency room. According to his family, he was uncontrollable when angry.
The patient denied a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, viral hepatitis, or tuberculosis. He had no known drug or food allergies. He also denied a history of operation, trauma, or blood transfusion.
The patient’s vital signs upon arrival were as follows: Blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, heart rate 88 beats/min, respiratory rate 12 times/min, body temperature 37 °C, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. He was awake, alert, and oriented. However, he complained of tenderness throughout the entire abdomen. We found three stab wounds in the upper-abdominal area. Two stab wounds had not penetrated the peritoneum, but the third had penetrated the peritoneum. There was a 3-cm longitudinal wound in the upper midline abdominal area, and the small bowel and transverse colon were eviscerated.
A complete blood count was obtained showing a white blood cell count of 13.3 × 106/L, hemoglobin 15.3 g/dL, and a platelet count of 229 × 109/L. Electrolyte, coagulation, and blood biochemical tests were all normal.
The three wounds in the middle of the upper abdomen were inspected. An exploratory laparotomy detected two perforations in the ileum and mid-transverse colon, which were repaired primarily . One day after the surgery, the patient became hemodynamically unstable with massive hematochezia, although there was no evidence of bleeding in the Levin tube or Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain. Eight pints of packed red blood cells were transfused, but his hemoglobin value decreased from 10 to 8 mg/dL. Systolic blood pressure was < 80 mg and the patient’s consciousness became unclear. The patient was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. An abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed extravasation of contrast medium in the third duodenal portion . An endoluminal approach for the endoscopic examination was performed in the intensive care unit to identify the bleeding lesions during preparation for the second operation. It showed a large blood clot on the third duodenum; a perforation 0.3 cm in diameter with active bleeding medially into the third duodenal portion was detected .