A 77-year old male was referred to our hospital for known coronary artery disease and a history of antero-septal myocardial infarction and syncope. Coronary angiography showed severe triple vessel disease. Computed tomography revealed severe diffuse calcification from the aortic arch to the abdominal aorta. In particular, just proximal brachiocephalic artery was shown to be circumferentially calcified and 90% stenosed . Proximal left carotid artery and left subclavian artery were also shown to be calcified. But there were no significant stenosis at the origin of right carotid artery and vertebral artery. The peak blood pressure of the right arm was 40 mmHg lower than that of the left arm. Carotid ultrasonographic examination revealed 50% stenosis of right internal carotid artery and subclavian steal phenomenon in right vertebral artery. And post stenotic high flow pattern was observed in proximal brachiocephalic artery. We planned to perform an aorto-brachial or aorto-right subclavian artery bypass using a prosthetic graft and concomitant off-pump CABG.
A median sternotomy was performed, and the bilateral internal thoracic arteries were dissected. At the same time, a saphenous vein graft was dissected. A direct ultrasonographic examination revealed severe atheromatous plaques inside the brachiocephalic artery; hence, we chose the right subclavian artery as the distal anastomosis site for the prosthetic bypass conduit. An 8-mm polytetrafluoroethylene graft was anastomosed to the right subclavian artery, and then the proximal end of this graft was anastomosed to the aorta with a side-biting clamp. Off-pump CABG was then performed using a method described previously . The left internal thoracic artery and the free right internal thoracic artery were anastomosed to the left anterior descending artery and the left circumflex artery, respectively. Two saphenous vein grafts were used for the diagonal branch and the distal branches of the right coronary artery. Proximal anastomoses between the saphenous vein grafts and the aorta were performed with proximal suturing devices. Lastly, a proximal anastomosis of the free right internal thoracic artery to the saphenous vein graft as a V-composite graft was performed .
Postoperatively, no neurological deficit was observed. The blood pressures of the bilateral upper extremities were identical. Computed tomography demonstrated the patency of the coronary bypass grafts and the aorto-right subclavian artery bypass graft . Postoperative radionuclide imaging showed no cerebral ischemia.