A 61-year-old man underwent subtotal gastrectomy with Billroth I anastomosis and received chemotherapy (XELOX) for advanced gastric cancer. Five years later, he visited a hospital with a palpable mass in the right inguinal area and underwent computed tomography (CT).
CT showed a bilobed mass with 2 components of a round portion, measuring 2.5 cm, at the caudal aspect of the right inguinal canal, and an additional 6.6-cm irregular elongated portion straddling the right inguinal canal and right pelvic cavity along the right external iliac vessels . The right scrotal sac was empty and without the normal right testis. The 2.5-cm round mass appeared to be the right undescended testis . It was presumed to be affected by the right inguinal canal mass rather than the primary testicular cancer, with extension to the nearby structures because of its relatively preserved size and contour. There was another 4-cm mass in the aortocaval space at the third lumbar spine level, which was presumed to be metastatic lymphadenopathy . Masses in the right inguinal area and aortocaval space had similar imaging characteristics. Both lesions showed peripheral rim enhancement with internal low attenuation of a necrotic portion. Scrotal ultrasonography (US) revealed the right testis at the caudal aspect of right inguinal canal, similar to the CT findings. The right testis appeared to maintain a relatively normal contour on US as well as on CT. However, it had less echogenicity than the normal left testis . The right inguinal and pelvic masses above the right testis appeared as a hypoechoic mass partially surrounding the spermatic cord, which was correlated with the right inguinal canal mass on CT . There was no increased vascularity on color Doppler ultrasonography (CDUS) . On magnetic resonance (MR) T2-weighted images (T2WI), the mass surrounding the spermatic cord and involving the right testis showed high signal intensity . Peripheral rim enhancement and diffusion restriction were shown on contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (CE-T1WI) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with high b-value, respectively . Most central contents had no enhancement and no diffusion restriction, indicating mostly necrotic portions. Serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) and beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-hCG) levels were normal.
Differential diagnoses for the right inguinal and aortocaval masses included metastatic lesion, testis cancer, lymphoma, or sarcoma originating in the inguinal canal. However, primary testicular cancer was less likely, as the right testis maintained its relatively normal shape and contour. The epicenter of the mass seemed to be the inguinal canal mass rather than the right testis, which is different from the usual primary testicular cancer. In addition, it was presumed that the right testis moved upward as the mass in the right inguinal canal affected the spermatic cord, because the patient said the right testis had recently disappeared from the right scrotum. Lymphoma usually presents as a homogeneous soft tissue mass without necrosis, unlike as a mass containing mostly necrosis, as seen in the present case. Primary sarcomas rarely develop in the inguinal canal. It usually originates from the outside of the testis such as spermatic cord, scrotal wall, or epididymis. Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors arising from the embryonic mesoderm and the most commonly reported as liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, carcinosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma in the genitourinary tract . Among those, well-differentiated liposarcoma can be excluded from the differential diagnosis of our case because it usually appears a large mass of fat attenuation with septa on CT scan and high-signal intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images with little enhancement on MRI. Imaging results for other types of sarcomas are nonspecific, and biopsy is usually required for a definitive diagnosis . Nevertheless, we still thought that the inguinal canal mass was less likely to be sarcoma because of the presence of another aortocaval mass, which suggests a metastatic lymph node. The prevalence of nodal metastasis is low in soft-tissue sarcomas . Most subtypes of sarcomas spread and recur by direct invasion rather than lymph node metastasis; thus, elective lymphadenectomy is rarely required . As the patient had a history of stomach cancer, metastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes was possible, even though the external iliac and inguinal area and the right testis are uncommon metastatic locations. The similar imaging features of these masses with abundant internal necrosis was consistent with metastasis.
Right orchiectomy was planned initially. However, as imaging findings strongly suggested metastasis, US-guided biopsy was performed. Pathology of the US-guided biopsy specimen from the right inguinal mass revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma with necrosis. The primary sites were considered to be the pancreatobiliary tract and stomach. The patient received multiple cycles of chemotherapy (FOLFOX), and all metastatic masses decreased in size at the 5-month outpatient follow-up.