In 2003 a 58-year-old Caucasian man with no previous medical history of note was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. Ten years previous to this he began to work with the preparation of a novel material (DARMATT KM1) used as insulation in the nuclear fuel and space industries. This work exposed him to aluminium sulphate ‘dust’ on a daily basis over 8 years. An ‘ordinary’ dust mask was supplied to protect against inhalation of the materials. Within a short time of starting this work he complained of headaches, tiredness and mouth ulcers. By 1999 he started to show problems in relation to memory and suffered depression. Following his death, aged 66, in 2011, at the request of the family and the local coroner, samples of his brain tissue were sent to the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University, UK, for clinical diagnosis and a section of deep frozen frontal lobe was sent to Professor C Exley (Keele University, UK) for determination of tissue aluminium. Clinical diagnosis reported an abundance of argyrophilic β amyloid plaques and a profusion of neurofibrillary tangles in all areas of his cerebral cortex; the neuropathology is consistent with features of advanced Alzheimer’s disease.
The frontal lobe tissue (approximately 20g frozen weight) was allowed to thaw and then divided up into 50 similar-sized portions each weighing approximately 300mg. These were placed in an incubator at 37°C and allowed to achieve a constant dry weight over approximately 72 hours (Table ). The dry tissues were then digested using a 1:1 mixture of 15.8M nitric acid and 30% w/v hydrogen peroxide in a microwave oven using established methods
. All samples produced clear digests and the total aluminium in each was measured by transversely heated graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry using established and fully verified methods
. The aluminium contents of three tissue samples (identification [IDs] 6, 8 and 9) were below the value of the method blank and were recorded as ‘zero’ for statistical purposes. The dry weights of three tissue samples (IDs 2, 14 and 18) were below 10mg and the aluminium contents of these samples were also excluded from statistical analyses because such very low dry weights can disproportionately influence the final aluminium content
. The mean aluminium content of the remaining tissues (n = 46) was 2.98 with a standard deviation of 2.73μg/g dry weight and a range from 0.00 to 12.97μg/g dry weight (Table ).