A 54-year-old woman was referred to Rassoul Akram hospital, Tehran, Iran for uncontrolled glaucoma. She had history of complicated cataract surgery about 20 years ago on the left eye and was aphakic at the time of presentation. Best corrected vision was 20/200, intraocular pressure (IOP) was 45 mmHg, cup-to-disc (C/D) ratio was 0.8, and the superior conjunctiva was scarred from prior surgery. The patient was started on timolol-dorzolamide, brimonidine, and latanoprost and was visited a week later. At that time, IOP was 30 mmHg which was not low enough considering the advanced glaucoma.
The patient underwent an uneventful AGV implantation in the superotemporal quadrant under general anesthesia. After preparing a fornix-based flap, the AGV was primed and secured to the sclera using 7-0 silk sutures. The tube was inserted into the anterior chamber (AC) and secured by 10-0 nylon. At the end of the procedure, a scleral patch graft was sutured over the tube using 10-0 nylon, and the conjunctiva was closed using an 8-0 Vicryl running suture. As an adjunctive measure, 1.25 mg (0.05 ml) bevacizumab was injected subconjunctivally adjacent to the AGV plate.
The day after surgery, IOP was 13, the wound was secure, and the tube was in a good position. The patient was discharged with betamethasone eye drops six times, and ciprofloxacin drops four times a day. Everything remained the same on day 4 after surgery, but on day 10, although IOP was 14 mmHg and visual acuity was stable, the patient complained of pain and copious discharge. On slit lamp examination, the tube was in a good position and the anterior chamber and vitreous were clear; however copious discharge was present around the sutures. The patient was admitted to the hospital with a suspected diagnosis of suture infection. Fortified topical vancomycin and ceftazidime were started every one hour, and betamethasone was discontinued. On day 3 after admission, anterior migration of the tube and complete wound dehiscence was observed [Figures and ]. For prevention of further complications such as tube-corneal touch, the AGV was explanted and the wound was repaired using 10/0 nylon sutures; the GDD was sent to the laboratory for smears and bacterial culture which were negative. At the time of surgery, the scleral patch graft was found to be necrotic, but no sign of infection around the tube or plate was detected. The eye was quiet with no conjunctival discharge the day after surgery.
The second case was a 33-year-old man with history of congenital glaucoma. He had undergone trabeculectomy three times before and was pseudophakic at presentation. IOP was 38 mmHg with full medications, and C/D ratio was 0.9. He underwent uneventful AGV implantation and bevacizumab injection using the same technique described above. IOP was 12 mmHg the day after surgery, and the wound was secure. The patient was discharged on betamethasone eye drops six times a day and ciprofloxacin four times a day. The patient did not return for follow-up until 5 months after surgery when was seen complaining of foreign body sensation during this period. Slit lamp examination revealed that the AGV plate was completely exposed and had migrated toward the limbus, but there was no sign of infection or inflammation. During repeat surgery, migration of the AGV and melting of the scleral patch graft were observed . The device was explanted and the conjunctiva was sutured using 10-0 nylon.