A 44-year-old Polish woman who was involved in a car crash presented to our Military Institute of Medicine with a head injury and blunt ocular trauma: she had trauma to her left eye with eye pain and decreased visual acuity. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of her left eye was 0.1 according to Snellen and the intraocular pressure (IOP) was less than 3 mmHg. A slit lamp examination showed corneal edema with Descemet membrane folds, shallow AC, iris sphincter tear from 7 o’clock to 11 o’clock position, mydriatic pupil, subluxated lens from 1 o’clock to 5 o’clock with iridophacodonesis, and vitreous body prolapse into the AC . A gonioscopy and anterior segment OCT (Visante OCT™) confirmed cyclodialysis cleft and choroidal detachment in the nasal and superior temporal quadrant .
A fundus examination also showed star folds and macular edema with mean macular thickness of 745 μm, and 396 μm in the central part of her fovea. She was treated with Tropicamidum (tropicamide) 1% and topical steroids. No improvements in her visual acuity, IOP or anatomy were observed after 2, 4 and 6 weeks.
Surgery was performed under retrobulbar anesthesia. Retrobulbar block is a useful method for intraocular and orbital surgery. First, the bulbar conjunctiva was detached from the limbus within the nasal quadrant. Then a scleral incision was performed and a partial thickness sclera flap 3-mm wide and 2-mm long was dissected. Point entries into AC were made at 3 o’clock and 11 o’clock positions. Sodium hyaluronate (1%) was applied into the AC to reform and stabilize the surgical planes and protect the endothelium. The next step was the scleral bed incision and dissection of a deep rectangular scleral flap 2×1 mm in size with ciliary body exposure. The iris was pulled back from the prepared fistula. Subsequently, two 10.0 nylon sutures were used to fix the ciliary body to the deep scleral flap. Then interrupted 10.0 nylon sutures were used on both scleral flaps and single interrupted conjunctival sutures were applied. Topical dexamethasone (0.1%), Levofloxacinum (levofloxacin), and diclofenac were applied postoperatively for a month. In this period her left eye BCVA was 0.1 to 0.5 according to Snellen, and IOP was 4 to 6 mmHg. Gonioscopy and Visante OCT™ performed 1 week after the surgery showed that the ciliary body had reattached to the scleral spur, closing the cleft but only at the sutures. However, over and under the sutures and in the superior temporal quadrant, cyclodialysis cleft and choroidal detachment were detected . A fundus examination confirmed the presence of star folds and macular edema.
Considering the above, our patient qualified for a revision surgery. In the first step retrobulbar anesthesia was applied and 2.6-mm self-sealing corneal tunnel in the temporal quadrant and point limbic opening at 11 o'clock were performed . Sodium hyaluronate (1% and 4%) was applied into the AC to reform and stabilize the surgical planes and protect the endothelium. A continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (CCC) was made and then additional limbic openings at 1, 5, and 7 o'clock were used to insert the retractors that were fixed to the anterior lens capsule to ensure its stability . Following that, an anterior vitrectomy was performed. The nucleus was removed using the phaco chop phacoemulsification technique. The limbus was also incised at 9 o'clock and 2 o'clock, and other retractors supporting the AC were introduced. Cortical masses were removed. Next, the conjunctiva and the superficial scleral flap in the superior temporal quadrant were dissected. A 13-mm Morcher MR-1 L Cionni-modified CTR was then inserted into the capsular bag. The CTR was sutured with 10.0 nylon to the sclera at 1 o'clock, 1 mm posterior to the surgical limbus, and at 1 o’clock through the ring eyelet to the site of the cyclodialysis. A +23.5 diopter, foldable IOL (MA60BM) was implanted into the capsular bag through a 2.6-mm corneal tunnel. Then 10.0 nylon suture was placed through the iris and around the pupillary sphincter with its simultaneous centering. Following dissection of the conjunctiva in the nasal quadrant, a parallel 3-mm sclerotomy was made approximately 1 mm from the limbus. Two opposite sutures were placed ab interno at the base of the iris, using a straight needle with Prolene 10-0, through a 3 o'clock incision position on the corneal limbus . Both stitch ends were tied and hidden inside the sclerotomy. Corneal incisions were inspected for leaks and interrupted sutures were placed on the scleral and conjunctival flaps. Postoperative medications included topical 0.1% dexamethasone, 0.5% Levofloxacinum (levofloxacin; Oftaquix), and diclofenac (Naclof), four times a day for a month.
For 5 months after the surgery her BCVA was 0.4 to 0.8 according to Snellen, and IOP was 10 to 22 mmHg. Six months after the procedure the values stabilized at 0.7 for BCVA and on average 14 mmHg for IOP. A physical examination revealed no deviations within the anterior segment, her pupil was normal in size and equal, and IOL was in a correct central position . Visante OCT™ showed cleft closure and complete resolution of the choroidal detachment . A stereoscopic fundus examination and OCT confirmed no signs of edema, and the average macular thickness was 304 μm and 158 μm within the central fovea .