A 69-year-old Japanese woman suffering from dysphagia visited a nearby hospital. She became aware of a right cervical mass 2 months ago and of the mass lesion becoming enlarged when dysphagia subsequently appeared. She had a history of asthma and hypertension, but no family history of thyroid disease. She never smoked and did not have an habitual alcoholic drink. Laryngoscopy revealed right vocal cord paralysis and ultrasonography revealed a well-defined mass in the right lobe of the thyroid gland and an indistinct mass in the isthmus . The CT scan showed mutiple cervical lymph node swellings and two tumors in the right lobe and isthmus of the thyroid , which were approximately 4 cm and 2 cm in diameter, respectively. The patient was transfered to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Preoperative fine needle aspiration cytology was performed on the enlarged right cervical lymph node and the cytological diagnosis was “ PTC” which is classified as Category VI in the Bethesda system . No distant metastasis was found in the preoperative workup. Under the clinical diagnosis of PTC with multiple lymph node metastases, the patient underwent a total thyroidectomy, right neck dissection and bilateral paratracheal dissection. No residual tumor was intraoperatively recognized. The resected specimens were submitted for histopathological examination.
The cut surfase of the tumor grossly exhibited yellowish-brown and whitish masses . Histologically, the whitish mass showed papillary or follicular growth of tumor cells with ground-glass nuclei and some nuclear grooves and pseudo-inclusions . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed that the tumor cells in this lesion were positive for TTF-1, thyroglobulin, CK19, HBME-1, Galectin-3 and BRAF (V600E). The Ki-67 labeling index was 5% . The tumor had extended beyond the thyroid capsule and invaded the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle and thus was considered as pT4a in the TNM classification . The surgical margin was positive at the invasion site of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle. No necrosis was observed and the mitotic index of this lesion was 2 / 10HPF, thus the tumor of this lesion did not fit the criteria of differentiated high-grade thyroid carcinomas (DHGTC) . The tumor of this lesion was pathologically diagnosed as an infiltrative follicular variant of PTC in the 2022 WHO classification of thyroid tumors . Dissected lymph nodes showed multiple metastases (20 / 32) of the PTC includng unilateral Level V lymph nodes (pN1b). Genetic analyses for NRAS codon 61 mutation and TERT promoter mutation were performed by employing the droplet digital PCR method using the DNA extracted from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tumor tissues, as previously described by one of the co-authors . The results of genetic analyses further revealed a TERT promoter C228T mutation, but no NRAS mutation was detected.
In contrast, histologically the yellowish-brown mass showed that the tumor cells had an eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to oval shaped nuclei with granular chromatin. The tumor proliferated trabecular or solid, and formed a peritumoral fibrous capsule. Typical nuclear findings suggesting a PTC were not observed. The tumor exhibited predominantly expanding growth and capsular invasion was detected . No necrosis was observed and the mitotic index of this lesion was less than 1 / 10HPF, thus the tumor of this lesion did not fit the criteria of DHGTC . In IHC, the tumor cells were positive for TTF-1 and thyroglobulin, but negative for CK19, HBME-1, Galectin-1 and BRAF (V600E). The Ki-67 labeling index was 3% . Based on nuclear findings, the presence of capsular invasion and IHC results, the tumor comprising this lesion was pathologically diagnosed as minimally invasive FTC (mi-FTC) in the 2022 WHO classification . Genetic analysis for this FTC lesion futher revealed a NRAS codon 61 mutation, but a TERT promoter mutation was not detected. The results of IHC and genetic analyses for both PTC and FTC lesions are summerized in Table .
Based on the above results, this case was finally diagnosed as a collision tumor of PTC and FTC, each stage at surgery being pT4aN1b and pT3aN0, respectively. The patient was scheduled to receive radioactive iodine therapy. However, she declined to receive the adjuvant therapy. Eight months after surgery, recurrent tumor was clinically detected as a rapidly growing cervical mass. The patient did not accept further clinical examination nor treatment and died of recurrent tumor 8 months after surgery. Suffocation due to airway stenosis by tumor growth was considered as the direct cause of death.