We present the case of a 27 years old Caucasian male that presented to our emergency department with chief complaint of right lower quadrant abdominal pain. The patient was referred with a 24 hour onset of colicky pain, of seven of ten in intensity. He denied bowel habit changes, fevers or chills, but he did complain of nausea, and postprandial fullness, but no vomiting. There was no history of weight loss over the last year and he denied any abdominal trauma or past surgeries. His family history was significant for colonic cancer in his father at age 47 and breast cancer in his mother at age 60.
Examination showed a well-developed male in no acute distress with obvious abdominal distension. Abdominal palpation demonstrated a large mass extending from the right upper quadrant and epigastrium to the right lower quadrant. The mass was non-pulsatile, moderately tender, and non-mobile. No peritoneal signs were appreciated. His lower extremities showed no edema, and his rectal examination was negative for masses or gross or microscopic blood in the stools.
A computerized tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was performed which showed a large ovoid intraabdominal heterogeneous mass measuring 22 cm in greatest length extending from the right upper quadrant to the pelvis without invasion into adjacent viscera . Chest X-ray showed no lung parenchyma or bony lesions, and the CT scan of the abdomen was negative for liver lesions. A colonoscopy was attempted, but we were unable to pass the transverse colon due to the extraluminal compression, but no polyps, lesions or blood were appreciated. Tumor markers were drawn for CA-19-9, CA-125, beta-HCG, and alpha-fetoprotein. Only CA-123 was elevated at 128.
The patient was operated for resection of the mass. Upon gaining access to the peritoneal cavity, a moderate amount of serosanguinous fluid was evident and collected for cytology. A "muscular" mass was immediately apparent and occupied most of the peritoneal cavity . The mass arose from the greater omentum, which was densely fused to it. On its inferior pole the mass was in close apposition to the sigmoid colon, but was not fused to it.
The mass was removed en block with the greater omentum and the adjacent sigmoid colon. The margins were sent for frozen section and came back as negative for malignancy. Cytology of the peritoneal fluid revealed reactive mesothelial cells.
Final pathology showed a malignant gastrointestinal stromal tumor with smooth muscle differentiation and negative margins of resection. Based on the size of the neoplasm and necrosis present, in spite of few mitoses, this tumor was best viewed as a malignant or at least an aggressive extra-gastrointestinal stromal tumor . Immunostainings for LCA, CD117, CD34, pancytokeratin, s100, smooth muscle actin, calretinin, EMA, vimentin, CEA, LEU M1, and Factor VIII were done. The positive results included CD 117 (C-Kit), smooth muscle actin and vimentin . The postoperative period was uncomplicated, and medical oncology service was consulted and the patient was placed on a STI-571 regimen.