This case involves a 63-year-old gentleman who complained of backache along with fever and loss of appetite 2 years back which lasted around 4–5 months. The patient took over-the-counter medications for the above complaints during the initial period of 4–5 months. As the symptoms were not relieved, the patient got MRI done at the consult of an Orthopaedic surgeon, and a diagnosis of tubercular spondylitis involving D-12 and L-1 vertebral bodies and intervening disc along with pre- and para-vertebral collection was made . The patient was started on anti-tubercular therapy based on the clinicoradiological diagnosis of TB spine. Even after 6 months of anti-tubercular chemotherapy, the patient developed gradual onset weakness in bilateral lower limbs and was referred to our center. Due to the failure of chemotherapy as evidenced by progressive lower limb weakness even after 6 months of medical management, the patient was planned for surgery.
Posterior decompression and pedicle screw fixation was done . Pedicle screws were put in D11, D12, and L2 vertebrae. Post-operative course was uneventful and he was discharged with the continuation of anti-tubercular therapy. The patient was put on ATT regimen which consisted of HRZE for initial 2 months followed by HRE for 7 months and then H+R for 9 months. At a 3-week follow-up visit, suture removal was done and the patient was mobilized using a walker.
Till 15-month post-surgery, the patient was able to mobilize himself with the assistance of a cane or walker. He continued taking rifampicin and isoniazid combination drug during this period as per protocol.
After 15 months of symptom-free period, the patient again presented to our OPD with complaints of fever and weakness in bilateral lower limbs and unable to walk for the past 10 days. On examination, the patient had spastic paralysis in extension in bilateral lower limbs, and UMN signs such as ankle clonus, patellar clonus, and Babinski sign were positive in both lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes in bilateral lower limbs were exaggerated. The sensory loss was seen below the D10 level. The patient was catheterized due to urinary retention.
Routine blood investigations, ESR, and CRP were found to be within normal limits. Radiological investigations were done (, , ).
Based on the clinicoradiological findings, the patient was diagnosed with D9-D10 tubercular spondylitis with cord compression and neural deficits. Revision surgery was planned and the patient was prepared accordingly.
Posterior decompression was done at D9-D10 level and pedicle screws were put in D7 and D8 level and the connecting rods interconnected to the previous rods at a lower level . Post-operative stay was uneventful and the patient was discharged on post-operative day 4.