A 21-year-old African man presented with a two-year history of facial tumors. He had no other significant medical or family history. He had initially noted a small swelling over his right maxilla, and subsequently felt another in his mandible. The two masses grew over time, even as he sought medical attention. The prohibitive cost of the surgery prevented him from accessing surgical care. At the end of two years, and now with the maxillary and mandibular tumors having grown so large that they interfered with his eating, speech, and breathing, some Good Samaritans offered to help him access medical care in different institutions. A computed tomography (CT) scan and a biopsy were requested at one such institution, and performed . The CT scan showed two large tumors, one in the right maxilla and the other involving the mandible. A chest radiograph did not reveal any metastases, and there was no evidence of any other lesions. A biopsy of the mandible was reported as suggestive of an osteosarcoma. After discussing the histology, CT scan findings and the patient’s clinical status, the doctors referred the patient for palliative care, at the nearest hospice.
On presentation to the author’s institution, palliative debulking was offered, with the hope of improving the quality of life postoperatively.
At surgery, a right radical maxillectomy and wide excision of the mandibular tumor were performed . An immediate reconstruction of the palate, nasal lining, and midface with a supraclavicular flap and reconstruction plates was performed, achieving an excellent cosmetic outcome . A feeding tracheostomy and gastrostomy were fashioned to ensure peri-operative ventilation and postoperative nutrition, respectively. The patient’s recovery was uneventful; the tracheostomy tube was removed one week postoperatively, while the gastrostomy feeding tube was removed after three weeks, when it was gaged that the patient was able to feed adequately, orally.
On histological examination, the mandibular margins were clear, while the maxillary margins were reported as close. The maxillectomy specimen measured 16 cm × 12 cm × 14 cm, while the mandibular tumor was 15 cm × 6 cm . The histology results were initially delayed, as the pathologists tried to find a diagnosis; a provisional diagnosis of a juvenile ossifying fibroma of both lesions was made, pending further consultation. A final diagnosis of a well-differentiated osteosarcoma of the maxilla and mandible was made by consensus, after a review of the slides and radiographs by a larger group of pathologists and radiologists.
At the time of discharge from hospital, the patient could feed himself, speak intelligibly, and breathe comfortably. He remains well one year after the operation.