A 52-year-old woman (height; 151 cm, weight; 52 kg) was referred to our clinic from an obstetrics and gynecology clinic with symptoms of numbness and tingling sensation in the left anterolateral thigh following a laparoscopic myomectomy 5 mo prior.
The patient had undergone surgery in the LP, during which her legs were fixed using the instrument shown in Figure , with hip flexion of 45°, knee flexion of 45°, and thighs apart by 90°. During the surgery, while handling the endoscopic surgical instrument, the patient was repeatedly repositioned so that the left hip joint extended parallel to the operating table to secure space for the surgeon . Laparoscopic adenomyomectomy and myomectomy were performed following adhesiolysis. The operation lasted 75 min. The patient complained of decreased sensation in her left outer thigh the day after the surgery, and her symptoms gradually worsened after 5 mo. In addition, the tingling sensation in that area began 2 wk before the visit.
The patient had no relevant medical history or history of issues in this region. The patient had a surgical history of left ovarian mass removal 17 years prior, appendectomy 15 years prior, and right ectopic pregnancy surgery 10 years prior; however, she had experienced no side effects after the previous surgeries.
The patient had no relevant family history or history of issues in this region.
Physical examination revealed no signs of trauma. Neurological examination showed that the strength of all lower extremity muscles was intact. Numbness and tingling sensations in the left anterolateral thigh were the only symptoms. A positive Tinel’s sign was observed on the medial side of the left ASIS.
Needle electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) were performed in the bilateral lower extremities. The sensory response of the right LFCN was within the normal limits; however, that of the left LFCN showed no response. All other motor and sensory responses were within the normal limits . Needle EMG showed normal motor unit potentials in all examined muscles.
We subsequently performed ultrasonography to confirm the condition of the bilateral LFCN. The cross-sectional area (CSA) of the left LFCN was 7 mm2, and the longitudinal diameter (LD) was 5.6 mm. The CSA of the right side was 3 mm2, and the LD was 2.8 mm . According to a previous study, the normal ranges for the CSA and LD of the LFCN are 4.5 ± 1.0 mm2 and 3.5 ± 0.3 mm, respectively. Unlike the right LFCN of the patient, which passed over the inguinal ligament (IL), the left LFCN was entrapped within the IL and became swollen around it .