A 22-year-old man presented with a history of recurrent hemoptysis of small volume for a duration of two years. He also experienced progressive dyspnea for three months. The patient had no other complaints, such as hoarseness, dysphagia, or any other symptoms. Following the development of stridor in April 2017, the patient underwent a tracheostomy in the emergency department at West China Hospital, with dyspnea relieved markedly. The physical examination didn’t reveal any special issues except for a scar on the neck. A review of the patient’s medical history revealed that 7 years prior, he had undergone left thyroid lobectomy without the neck dissection for a palpable 3-cm left thyroid mass in a local hospital. Moreover, the post-operative histopathology was unknown.
He was then hospitalized at the respiratory department after tracheostomy. Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope revealed a smooth and sessile vascularized mass, located 0.5–1.5 cm below the glottis, causing lumen narrowing by approximately 80% . Pathological analysis of a biopsy from the mass described it as lobulated capillary hemangioma. Furthermore, enhanced CT scans confirmed a bulky and vascularized tumor located primarily in the cervical trachea, which may have originated from the left tracheoesophageal groove with intraluminal exophytic and extratracheal components . Upon reviewing CT scans before the thyroidectomy 7 years prior, images showed that the tumor was also hyper-vascularized, though limited to the thyroid region with ambiguous tracheoesophageal sulcus . Lab work, which included complete blood cell count, C-reactive protein, calcitonin and thyroid function (TSH, FT3 and FT4), were within normal limits, which help exclude from acute infection, medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and thyroid dysfunction.
With the initial consideration of subglottic or cervical tracheal hemangioma based on the biopsy results, the patient was referred to the department of otolaryngology for sclerotherapy combined with CO2 laser using suspension laryngoscope under general anaesthesia. The transoral surgery was aborted due to the potential presence of an undefined solid mass and possible excessive bleeding. Then, intra-operative frozen biopsy was performed and subsequently indicated a vascularized tumor characterized by small vessels and atypical proliferative cells. Therefore, a lateral cervical approach was taken to remove the tumor. The tumor was located in the subglottis with involvement of the lower portion of the cricoid cartilage and bulged into the left perichondrium of the first three tracheal cartilages . The mass was complete en-bloc resected, including the left lateral part of the cricoid cartilage and the first six tracheal rings with negative margins on permanent pathology . Histologically, hematoxylin and eosin staining showed a characteristic “zellballen” pattern growth traversed by a delicate capillary network . Immunohistochemical studies determined the followings: The chief cells were positive for chromogranin A (abcam, ab52983, 1:250) and synaptophysin (abcam, ab8049, 1:200) , and the sustentacular cells were stained positively for S-100 (abcam, ab136629, 1:200) . In addition, the tumor was negative for calcitonin, keratin, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1). Finally, the tumor was diagnosed as paraganglioma. The defect, created by complete removal of tumors with six tracheal rings and partial cricoid cartilage resection, was challenging to reconstruct by end-to-end anastomosis. Simultaneously, a pedicled thoracoacromial artery perforator flap (PTAPF) was harvested to reconstruct the left lateral wall of the trachea and cricoid cartilage. The anterior wall of the defect was left to second-stage reconstruction .
The patient was uneventful post-operatively and discharged with tracheostomy cannula. Six months post-operatively, the second-stage tracheal reconstruction was conducted with a local flap and the patient decannulated successfully. In addition, no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis was noted during the 3-year follow-up .