A case of a 17-year-old male with a history of PKD was presented to the hospital due to syncope during exercise in a gymnasium. After emergency personnel performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on the patient at the scene, the patient was rushed to the emergency center. An electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated ventricular tachycardia, with a left bundle branch block-like pattern indicating right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) origin and a heart rate of 250 beats/min . Moreover, the patient was immediately given 200 joules of synchronized electrical resuscitation to restore sinus rhythm and then transferred to our hospital’s heart center for further evaluation and treatment. As for his family, no similar history and situation were discovered.
In terms of physical examination, the blood pressure was 110/80mmHg, the heart rate was 88 beats/min, and the cardiac examination showed no positive signs. The ECG on admission was normal . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed that the left ventricle’s (LV) end-diastolic diameter and RV were 36mm, 27mm, respectively, and the ejection fraction was 58%. Furthermore, subtle regional wall motion and echo abnormalities were found in the apex of the RV’s anterior wall . Subsequently, coronary angiography was performed, indicating that the blood flow in the coronary arteries was normal. Intracardiac electrophysiological studies of RV stimulation easily induced rapid ventricular tachycardia with a heart rate of 250–280 beats/min originating from the RV with various forms . The patient developed chest pain and amaurosis and undergone electrical cardioversion again during the operation.
MRI of the long-axis and short-axis of the heart confirmed the typical RV segmental wall motion abnormalities, that is, an akinetic zone presented inferiorly in the RV’s apex. The anterior wall was slightly thinned, and there was a signal change, suggesting myocardial fat infiltration .
According to these results and the diagnostic criteria of ARVC, (the patient met two significant criteria: regional RV akinesia or dyskinesia; LBBB-type ventricular tachycardia), a precise positive diagnosis of ARVC was finally made.
After obtaining the informed consent, we conducted whole-exome sequencing (WES) on the patient and his family to confirm our diagnosis. Gene testing revealed that the patient carried a DSG2 heterozygous missense mutation (NM_001943: exon5: c.445G>A, p. Val149Ile) as well as a frameshift mutation of PRRT2 (NM_001256442:exon2:p. Arg217Profs Ter8) ( and ). Moreover, the pedigree analysis showed that the patient’s mother and sister carried the same DSG2 mutation, while his father did not ( and ). On the contrary, the patient’s father carried the same mutation of PRRT2, while his mother and sister did not ( and ). What is more, not his mother and sister but his father were absolutely asymptomatic.
Because of the high risk of sudden cardiac death, we recommend implanting a cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) for the patient. Due to economic reasons, the patient refused, and we gave the patient metoprolol orally. No serious arrhythmias and complications occurred during the 6-month follow-up.