A 65-year-old man presented at the emergencies department of our hospital with third-degree burns due to a recent suicide attempt. On arrival, the patient reported scrotal pain; swelling lesions could be seen on the scrotum and penis . High fever (up to 39°C) was also present. Clinical examination revealed a 4 × 5 cm ulcerated lesion on the penis and scrotum. The edges of the ulcer were edematous and irregular. The surrounding tissues were rather necrotic. A brown, seropurulent, exudative, and mousy odor was characteristic. Decolorization of the skin was also found and the wound invasion was rather quickly increasing. Fournier's gangrene was diagnosed. Comorbidity included diabetes mellitus known for the last 5 years and major depression known for the last 25 years.
Microbiological testing returned: Hct: 31.7%, Hb: 11.2 g/dl, WBC: 26,3 K/μl (neut/lymph: 92.4%/4%), PLT: 326 K/μl, urea: 106 mg/dl, creatinine: 1.7 mg/dl, Na: 139 mMol/L, K: 4.1 mMol/L, Leu: 6 g/dl, Alb: 2.2 g/dl. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed that the liver and spleen were enlarged and that the prostate gland showed benign hypertrophy. Blood and urine cultures were all negative. However, cultures of the necrotizing tissues grew Escherichia coli. This was the reason why the differential diagnosis included an infected burn. However, clinical signs and symptoms were characteristic of Fournier's necrotizing fasciitis.
The patient was treated with ciprofloxacin twice daily (intravenous) according to the antibiogram. Human albumin twice daily was also added and furthermore a protein-rich diet was also initiated. Careful daily inspections of the wound were necessary to determine whether the lesions were viable or necrotic. Aggressive debridement of the wound was followed by twice daily dressings with NaCl 15% solution and betadine solution. No skin graft was used. Our patient was also treated for diabetes mellitus and depression.
On follow-up 2 months later, a significant improvement in the wound was noted. However, the patient presented with diarrhea and anemia with hematocrit down to 28%. Stool examination revealed medium blood loss (Mayer test ++). Colonoscopy followed the diagnostic aspect and revealed two polyps in the sigmoid. Polypectomy was performed with an electrocautery snare during the colonoscopy. The histological diagnosis was tubular adenoma. Six months after first diagnosis, the condition of the patient had improved, characterized by healing of burns and improvement in Fournier's gangrene as the lesions were no longer necrotic but viable. A skin graft is planned for better healing.