A 52-year-old male with past medical history of pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of left lower extremity, hepatitis C virus, intra venous drug abuse, presented to an outside hospital for worsening dyspnea, fever and chills, diffuse lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and leukocytosis with blast appearing cells on smear review. Imaging studies with CT (computerize tomography) of thorax, abdomen, pelvis and scrotum showed no pulmonary embolism but DVTs were identified for which prophylactic Enoxaparin was given. He was noted to have bilateral pulmonary consolidations being worse on left, bilateral pleural effusions, massive splenomegaly and extensive retroperitoneal lymphadenopathies. Per CBC (complete blood count), there was markedly elevated WBC (white blood cell count), with blast appearing cells on smear review. Upon transfer to our clinic, patient was awake and alert, complained of dyspnea at rest, nonproductive cough, left upper quadrant abdominal pain, bilateral chest pain radiating to back, fever and chills.
CT scan demonstrated extensive retroperitoneal, pelvic and inguinal lymphadenopathies with massive splenomegaly. There was large area of decreased enchancement of the spleen, involving approximately 25% of the spleen, most likely splenic infarction. CBC at the admission showed a WBC 68.02 × 103/ul, RBC 3.76 × 106/ul, Hgb 10.2 g/dl, Hct 31.0%, MCV 82.4 fl, MCH 27.1 pg, Platelets 96 × 103/ul. Differential count showed 25% Segs; 3% Bands; 8% Lymphocytes; 9% Monocytes; 1% Eosinophils; 0% Basophils; 2% Metamyelocytes; 1% Myelocytes; 0% Promyelocytes; 51% Blasts / blast appearing cells.
The blood smear showed leukocytosis due to the presence of blast appearing cells. These cells appeared medium to large in size with high N/C ratio, open nuclear chromatin pattern and distinctive nucleoli. Neutrophils were slightly left-shifted. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) did not show dysplastic changes. Normocytic anemia and thrombocytopenia was also noted.
Bone marrow aspirate showed about 40% abnormal blast appearing cells with similar morphology as those in the blood. Bone marrow biopsy revealed remarkable lymphoid infiltrate in interstitial pattern and large lymphoid aggregates, contributing to about 40% of entire cellularity. The infiltrate was composed of mostly immature appearing cells with high N/C ratio and open chromatin. The abnormal cells were immunoreactive to CD20, PAX-5 and Cyclin D1, with a few scattered CD3 T-cells.