A 33-year-old white man with schizophrenia and intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDDs) was admitted to a community hospital emergency department (ED) in January 2022 from an assisted living facility because of worsening aggressive behavior mainly due to IDD. The patient had been on clozapine for more than 2 years, stabilized on a regimen of 200 mg 3 times daily. He was also taking fluvoxamine 50 mg daily, levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily, oxcarbazepine 300 mg twice daily, and perphenazine 2 mg daily, which were continued upon admission. Per the REMS program, white blood cell count and ANC were monitored every 4 weeks, with ANC labs prior to hospitalization 2.888/L in January 2022 and 1.872/L in December 2021. On day 4 of admission the patient's clozapine and norclozapine levels were therapeutic at 451 ng/mL and 312 ng/mL, respectively. Eleven days into the hospital admission, the patient had a surveillance COVID-19 PCR test due to exposure, which returned as positive. He did not display any symptoms of COVID-19 at that time or throughout expected disease course. On the day of positive PCR test, the patient's ANC dropped from 2.2/L (3 days prior) to 1.4/L. On day 13 of admission, ANC dropped further to 0.8/L. This decrease was reported to REMS, and ANC monitoring was increased to daily labs. The clozapine regimen was held for 1 day (3 total doses) and then restarted at the same prior dose, once ANC had increased to 3.2/L the following day. During the weeks following COVID-19 diagnosis, ANC levels were monitored and adjustments to the schedule of lab draws were made. Despite positive COVID diagnosis, the patient remained asymptomatic and hence was not admitted medically from the ED. He was referred to inpatient psychiatric facilities but declined because the main issues were behavioral disturbances secondary to underlying IDD. He remained in the ED for his entire treatment awaiting an appropriate disposition plan in collaboration with his guardian and community team.
The patient was also taking other medications that could have contributed to the neutropenia, including fluvoxamine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, and perphenazine. When the ANC fell below 1.5/L, the inpatient hematology team was consulted, which did not have any specific recommendations. The treatment team and the patient's guardian made the decision to discontinue the patient's levetiracetam and fluvoxamine because both of these agents have the potential to affect neutrophil count. This was done after the patient's guardian confirmed he had been seizure-free for 4 years and the patient was still on another antiepileptic agent, oxcarbazepine. Following discontinuation of these agents, no significant clinical changes were noticed in the patient, and therefore a follow-up clozapine level was not drawn.
On hospital day 37, an ANC level of 1.7/L led to monitoring being extended to weekly labs . On hospital day 50, two weeks following the last lab schedule adjustment, the patient's ANC was still above 1.5/L. Throughout the patient's hospital stay ANC levels were monitored and reported to the REMS program with no further drops in ANC found. Because of complex psychosocial circumstances, patient remained in the ED for 60 days prior to being discharged to a new alternative to family living facility.