A 74-year-old woman presented to our hospital emergency room with sharp left flank pain radiating posteriorly. She had experienced three similar episodes over the last 9 months. During one of the episodes, the patient had undergone clinical examination and abdominal ultrasound, which showed a renal intraparenchymal aneurysm about 10 mm in diameter.Her medical history was remarkable for severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, and hypertension, all treated medically. After the patient was admitted, a color Doppler ultrasound (CDUS) and a multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) scan confirmed an 18-mm saccular aneurysm of the left renal anterior segmental artery. The aneurysm was characterized by a wide (12-mm) neck and the absence of intraluminal thrombus or parietal calcification .A multidisciplinary consultation that included general and vascular surgeons, urologists, and interventional radiologists was held, in which aneurysm morphology, the absence of calcifications, and the propensity of the aneurysm to enlarge were considered. In light of the patient’s performance status and comorbidities, the decision was made to treat the aneurysm with endovascular exclusion. After the patient provided informed consent, the embolization was performed under local anesthesia via transaxillary access. After selective catheterization of the left renal artery, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed using a 5-Fr Cobra 1 angiographic catheter (TEMPO®AQUA®, Cordis Corp., Bridgewater, NJ, USA) coaxially introduced into a 6-Fr flexible, long-sheath introducer (Flexor® CheckFlo® Introducer; Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) to assess the relationship between the aneurysm and the left renal vasculature on multiple projections . After introducing a coaxial neurointerventional microcatheter (Penumbra PX400™ Delivery Microcatheter; Penumbra Inc., Alameda, CA, USA) into the aneurysmal sac, superselective DSA was performed to confirm the absence of branches originating from within the sac, and a slow, swirling flow inside the sac was observed .
To protect the renal vasculature, three complex-shaped bare nitinol microcoils (Penumbra Coil 400™ 18 mm × 57-cm and 15 mm × 57 cm Complex Standard and 13 mm × 48-cm Complex Soft; Penumbra, Inc.) were then sequentially deployed in the aneurysm until it was densely packed to 10.5% of the aneurysm volume. Each coil was detached only when angiography clearly showed complete and exclusive coiling inside the sac. The first coil, which was used to prevent coil migration through the neck into the parent artery, was the stiffest available and was sized slightly larger than the aneurysmal dome, thus creating a cage through which the other, more flexible coils could be safely deployed.
The final DSA demonstrated complete embolization and regular renal parenchymal opacification without parent-vessel embolization or thrombosis . The patient was asymptomatic at the time of discharge, 48 h after the procedure. Renal function, as evaluated by estimated glomerular filtration rate, was similar before (89 mL/min/1.73 m2) and after the intervention (92 mL/min/1.73 m2). The patient was followed up monthly with clinical examinations and laboratory tests. Her blood pressure remained unchanged, and her previous therapies were maintained. CDUS performed at 3 months and MDCT performed 1 and 3 years after the intervention confirmed preservation of the superior segmental artery and normal parenchymal perfusion .