A 68-year-old woman presented with 3 d of both lower limb weakness, associated with both lower limb numbness and multiple skin lesions in the left thoracic area.
4 wk before the visit, the patient received the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccination. A week later, multiple skin lesions developed on her back and buttock. Thoracic pain developed with hyperesthesia, for which she consulted the pain clinic. T-spine epidural nerve block two times was performed to control the pain. Worsening pain spread to the back 3 days after the procedure. Afterward, weakness and numbness were felt in both lower legs, and the patient developed a gait disorder.
After a slip and fall accident at the age of 7, the patient felt lower body weakness but could still ambulate. Gait instability became very severe 5 years ago ambulation could only be performed with a walker. No other specific findings were found in the patient's history.
The patient had no family history or genetic disease.
On physical examination, the patient’s mental status was alert with stable vital signs; body temperature was 36.8 °C. Multiple rashes and crusts were observed from the back to the chest, corresponding to the T6-T9 unilateral dermatome .
Motor and sensory examination showed decreased sensation (including vibratory and thermal) below the T7 Level by 50%-60% compared to the right side. The upper limb power average is grade 5 with grade 1 power in both lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were 2+ in the ankle, and 4+ in the knee, activated. Babinski’s sign was positive bilaterally with clonus at the right ankle. Along with the lower extremity weakness, there were limb numbness and urinary retention symptoms.
Based on the above symptoms, nerve damage by physical compression was considered, such as epidural hematoma; central nervous system diseases, such as TM by zoster and demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, as differential diagnosis.
Investigations done were as follows: White blood count 9.7 × 10³/mL, hemoglobin 12.2 g/dL, platelet count 231 × 10³/mL, and ESR of 3.5 mm/h and CRP of 2.3 mg/dL. VZV DNA was detected via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification in blood. The blood sample results for herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein–Barr virus were negative.
Lumbar CSF study showed the following: Intracranial pressure (ICP) 170 mmH2O, red blood cell count 100 cells/uL, white blood cell count 402 cells/uL (99% monocytes, 1% lymphocyte), protein 133 mg/dL, and glucose 66.7 mg/dL. VZV DNA was not detected via PCR amplification in CSF. AFB stain, Gram stain, cytology for malignant cells, and cultures were all negative.
Demyelinating workup was negative for AQP4-Ab, oligoclonal band, and IgG index.
Brain computed tomography (CT) & magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) finding is nonspecific. Spine MRI showed old T5 compression fractures with some kyphotic deformity at the upper T-spine and subtle intramedullary T2 signal hyperintensity at the T6–T9 Levels, which suggested TM .
Somatosensory-evoked potential (SSEP) was performed. Median SSEP showed normal conduction, whereas tibial SSEP was delayed in the iliac crest and cerebral cortex level, right dominantly .