A 31-year-old African man presented to our emergency unit with a four-hour history of penile swelling and voiding difficulty. He had earlier tried to suppress an erection before his routine morning religious rituals by kneading on his erect penis. He heard a popping sound with associated minimal pain and sudden detumescence. He noticed no bleeding per urethra but subsequently had difficulty with voiding and urinary frequency. On physical examination, he had a grossly swollen and deformed penis with deviation to the right side . A diagnosis of penile fracture with probable associated urethral injury was made. Bedside urine analysis results were negative for blood and he was taken for penile ultrasound and sonourethrography about an hour after presentation to the emergency unit. This was performed using a high-frequency 7.5MHz transducer with our patient in a supine position and the penis supported with towels between the thighs. A generous amount of sonographic acoustic gel was applied on the dorsum of the penis and images were obtained both in longitudinal and transverse planes beginning at the glans and proceeding proximally to the root of the penis. This was performed initially without urethral distension. A 16Fr Foley catheter was then placed at the urethral meatus with its balloon inflated with 2mL of water at the fossa navicularis. Retrograde urethral distension using normal saline was achieved via the catheter and sonographic images were obtained as above. The penile ultrasound showed a tear of the TA covering the ventrolateral aspect of left CC with associated hematoma in the proximal third of the penile shaft, and the real-time sonourethrography additionally revealed an intact urethra . He also had retrograde urethrography performed, which also showed an intact urethra (Additional file 1). Three hours after presenting to the hospital he had penile surgery via a subcoronal circumferential degloving incision. A Foley urethral catheter was placed pre-operatively to identify and avoid injury to the urethra. A 1.5cm tear of the TA in the ventrolateral aspect of the proximal third of the left CC just adjacent to the urethra was seen (Additional file 2). The hematoma was evacuated and the tear repaired with 2/0 silk with burying of the knots. An artificial erection created with intra-cavernosal injection of normal saline revealed an intact repair with no leakages. The wound was closed with 3/0 vicryl (Additional file 3). He was discharged 24 hours after surgery and advised to abstain from sexual activity for six weeks. At one-week follow-up, he reported return of good nocturnal erections and normal voiding.