A 26-year-old female with no medical history presented with progressive headaches, vomiting, and visual loss over a 3-month period. The physical examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15, no motor or sensory deficits, and equal and semi-mydriatic pupils with only light perception in both eyes at the ophthalmological examination. The computed tomography (CT) scan and contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed obstructive hydrocephalus secondary to a pineal region tumor. This lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted sequences and heterogeneously hyperintense on T2 with small cystic portions noted in the mass. Solid portions were heterogeneously enhanced after contrast injection. The tumor extended into the third ventricle, elevating both internal cerebral veins, but no extension into the fourth ventricle or the thalamus was noted. The lesion measured 15 mm × 10 mm. The serum laboratory workup for germ cell tumor markers (αfetoprotein and β-HCG) was negative .
Given the location of the lesion and its accessibility by transventricular biopsy, an endoscopic right ventricular approach was chosen both to treat the obstructive hydrocephalus endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) and obtain tumor specimens for pathology. The postoperative protocol was determined based on the results of the first procedures. The transventricular biopsy was achieved through a two burr hole approaches: one in front of the coronal suture for the ETV (using the Decq Neuroendoscopy set [Karl Storz, Germany] with 30° endoscope, 2.9 mm in diameter and 30 cm in length, ventriculostomy forceps and a Fogarty balloon catheter) and the second, 5 cm in front of the coronal suture, to perform the biopsy using the same set and tumor forceps. The tumor was reddish and nonhemorrhagic, originating from the pineal region. Three tumor specimens were collected. A CSF sample was tested for pathological cells and biological markers and was negative for both.
Pathology revealed an epithelial-looking tumor with papillary features and denser cellular areas in a vascularized conjunctive tissue. In papillary areas, the vessels were covered by layers of large, pale to eosinophilic columnar cells. The nuclei were round to oval, with stippled chromatin and pleomorphic nuclei. The mitotic count ranged from 0 to 10 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. Necrotic foci were noted. Vessels were hyalinized and had a pseudoangiomatous morphology, with multiple lumina and an absence of microvascular proliferation .
The IHC profile showed reactivity to epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), synaptophysin, glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), vimentin, PS100, pancytokeratin, and Ki67 estimated at 2%, indicating a PTPR.
In the postoperative period, the patient showed significant improvement in intracranial hypertension syndrome symptoms (disappearance of headaches and vomiting), no motor or sensitive deficit, and a slight ophthalmological improvement at the examination (2/10 on both eyes).
Given the pathological findings in the tumor specimen, two treatment options were possible and explained in detail to the patient: surgical resection through one of the selected approaches or Gamma Knife-based SRS. The latter option was preferred, as the patient did not accept the risks associated with surgery and could be achieved 1 month after the biopsy.
The patient was fitted with a Leksell stereotactic frame (Model G, Elekta Instruments, AB Stockholm, Inc.) under local anesthesia. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted reconstructions were generated and the treatment planning was performed using GammaPlan software (Elekta Instruments, Inc., version 11.0.3). The patient was treated 2 weeks after the biopsy for a tumor with a volume of 1.9 cm3. We delivered a 14 Gy dose at 50% isodose with 40 shots of 4 mm using a Leksell Gamma Knife ICON machine (Elekta Instruments, AB Stockholm, Inc.). The beam time was 88 min for a dose ratio of 2.681 Gy/min. The mean dose delivered to the brainstem was 0.4 ± 0.8; as such, the 10 Gy isodose volume was difficult to measurable. In the context of tumor location, the superior and inferior colliculi were initially considered as organs at risk; however, considering the mean dose to the brainstem, local dose distributions were not measurable. The frame was removed at the end of the procedure and the patient was discharged the same day.
The patient follow-up occurred at 3, 6, and 12 months. Her neurological examination showed progressive improvement of the intracranial hypertension syndrome symptoms as well as her visual status. On MRI, we observed a significant tumor reduction at 6 and 12 months (30% and 60% volume reduction, respectively) and the previously reported aqueductal compression had disappeared at 6 months .
Because of the malignancy of the lesion and the high risk of recurrence, the patient will attend follow-up appointments every 6 months, including a physical examination and serial imaging. This will continue for the first 5 years, and yearly until the 10-year follow-up period is complete.