A 66-year-old male was admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain with vomiting for 1 day. The patient described that he had fitful abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting after a large consumption of persimmons 1 day ago. The vomit contained gastric contents. In addition, he had a failure to pass flatus and bowel movements. Physical examination found the following: temperature of 36.8°C, pulse rate of 73 bpm, respirator rate of 18 breaths/min, blood pressure (BP) of 143/88 mmHg, presence of an abdominal bulge, periumbilical pressure pain, no significant rebound pain, active bowel sounds of 6 times/min. Laboratory tests produced the following findings: white blood cell count of 10.3*10E9/L, neutrophil (%) of 81.6%, hemoglobin of 164 g/L, hypersensitive C-reactive protein of 11.8 mg/L. Imaging found a X-ray of the abdomen showing intestinal obstruction and an enhanced CT of the abdomen showing incomplete small bowel obstruction . Past history was unremarkable. The patient was healthy in the past.
After admission, fasting, rehydration, gastrointestinal decompression, and symptomatic treatment with antibiotics was conducted. After 2 days of treatment, the patient's abdominal pain was not significantly relieved, and it was decided that laparoscopic exploratory surgery was to be performed. Surgery revealed a columnar foreign body embedded in the small intestine lumen about 10 cm away from the ileocecal region . The obstructed proximal small intestine was highly dilated, and the intestinal lumen had more contents. The distal part of the ileum and cecum of the obstruction was hollow and collapsed. The primary diagnosis is phytobezoar small bowel obstruction. Therefore, a McBurney incision was made, which was about 3 cm long and dissected into the abdomen layer by layer. The small intestine with phytobezoar incarceration was dislodged outside the abdominal incision. We made a longitudinal incision of about 4 cm above the foreign body, and the small intestine was incised. The phytobezoars were visible, hard, and cylindrical, about 2.5 cm in diameter and 3 cm length . The foreign body was removed, and the incision was horizontally closed with 3-0 absorbable thread. The procedure was successful. The patient had the passage of gas by anus within 2 days after the operation and was given a liquid diet. The patient also had anal bowel movements and was given a semi-liquid diet within 3 days after the operation. The patient was given a normal diet within 5 days, and laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 3.5*10E9/L, neutrophil count (%) of 55.3%, hemoglobin of 124 g/L, and ultrasensitive C-reactive protein of 5.4 mg/L. The patient made a good postoperative recovery without complications. Since the patient requested to be discharged only after the stitches were removed from the abdominal incision, the patient was not discharged until the stitches were removed from the incision on the 7th postoperative day.