A 77-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with persistent nonvalvular AF for 6 years. Physical examination showed an irregular heartbeat with confirmation of AF on an electrocardiogram. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed left and right atrial enlargement and a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (58%). The patient had a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 4 and a HAS-BLED score of 3; he also had a history of ischaemic stroke and gastrointestinal bleeding, and therefore could not tolerate long-term oral anticoagulation treatment. Thus, LAAC was recommended after confirming that there was no thrombus in the left atrium (LA) and left atrial appendage (LAA) on transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) .
The LAAC procedure was performed under local anaesthesia. After TTE-guided trans-septal puncture was completed, 6000 international units (IU) (100 IU/kg) of heparin was administered to achieve a minimum activated clotting time of ≥ 250 s. Next, a 0.035-inch J-tipped soft guidewire was advanced via the trans-septal puncture sheath into the left superior pulmonary vein (LSPV), followed by the Swartz sheath being delivered to the LA. The 0.035-inch J-tipped soft guidewire was then exchanged for a super stiff wire, which was placed into the LSPV while the Swartz sheath was withdrawn (Video ). Subsequently, the patient suddenly developed a severe cough with haemoptysis when the operator began to advance the delivery sheath along the super stiff guidewire. Meanwhile, fluoroscopy showed signs of blood entering the left main bronchus (Video ). Fast TTE identified no pericardial effusion, but bubbles were present in the LA and left ventricle . The patient subsequently developed a headache. The procedure was terminated because of a major complication indicated by the patient’s repeated haemoptysis and headache. Protamine and etamsylate were immediately administered for haemostasis. Subsequent chest computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed 1) absence of LSPV branches and presence of the LSPV main trunk and 2) bubbles in the aorta . Therefore, there was a high index of suspicion of iatrogenic LSPV perforation by the super stiff guidewire with respiratory tract involvement during the procedure.
The patient was transferred to the critical care unit for haemostasis and antibacterial treatment. Postoperative brain magnetic resonance imaging showed no acute infarct lesion . TTE later that day showed no bubbles in the heart . The headache and haemoptysis significantly abated the following day. Chest CTA on day 7 showed no bubbles in the aorta . However, microembolisation in the left frontal lobe was suspected on brain magnetic resonance imaging . The patient recovered well and was discharged on day 11 with neither haemoptysis nor headache.