A 60-year-old Japanese man with painful and enlarged intraoral tumour on the left side visited the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Gunma University Hospital. An unusually large pedunculated tumour of approximately 65 mm × 45 mm was localised in the left lower alveolar region. The tumour surface was granulomatous, elastic-hard, partially ulcerated, and haemorrhagic. The tongue was displaced rightward by the tumour . There was no hypoesthesia in the region innervated by the lower alveolar nerve. Oral hygiene was poor. Mobile elastic soft swollen lymph nodes, the size of the tip of the thumb, were palpated in the bilateral submandibular regions. The patient had a past medical history of oesophageal hiatal hernia and reflux oesophagitis, without asthma and allergy. He had no family history of particular relevance. His height was 160 cm and body weight was 53 kg. Difficulty with eating due to the tumour was noted, and the patient's nutritional status was poor.
Panoramic radiography and computed tomography (CT) scans both showed compressive bone resorption in the left mandible, but the cortical bone was retained . It was considered that the long-term persistent growth of the lesion had caused the compressive bone resorption. T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (T1-Gd-MRI) revealed significant contrast in the entire tumour, particularly in the tumour margin. A high marginal intensity was detected using short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) scanning . A positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan showed high accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose with a maximum standardised uptake value (SUVmax) of 5.7 in the region of the tumour. The CT scan of the cervical lymph nodes showed a swollen lymph node in both the left and right submandibular regions (approximately 25 mm and 20 mm respectively), with the swollen node on the right displaying high contrast. Cervical echo confirmed both the swollen submandibular lymph nodes to be flat, with smooth margins. The lymph node hila were clear, although a localised increase in blood flow was observed in the hilar region . PET-CT scan showed accumulation in the bilateral submandibular lymph nodes, with SUVmax values of 3.9 and 3.0 on the right and left sides, respectively.
The clinical diagnosis was a suspected malignant left lower gingival tumour with submandibular lymph node metastasis. The pathology of incisional biopsy indicated the possibility of a mesenchymal tumour, but no definite diagnosis could be made, because there was a strong inflammatory reaction. Thus, excision of the oral tumour (following the procedure for oral malignant tumours), and excisional biopsy of the left submandibular lymph node, were planned. Radical neck dissection was also planned in the event of detecting a malignancy in the submandibular lymph node during intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis. Rapid pathological diagnosis of the submandibular lymph node during surgery revealed only inflammation but no sign of malignancy. The oral tumour was dissected by subperiosteal detachment with a 10 mm safety margin . The cortical bone was also scraped, and the region was covered with an absorbable polyglycolic acid sheet using a tissue adhesive.
The cut surface of the excised tumour was solid and whitish. Haematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining revealed the surface to be covered with stratified squamous epithelium and outgrowths of fibroblasts and collagen fibres, showing marked storiform fibrosis. No capsule was present, and lamellar bone formation was observed in the outgrowing fibres. Reactive hyperplasia of blood vessels and inflammatory cell infiltration, such as neutrophils and plasma cells, were also detected . Immunohistology revealed that numerous IgG(+) plasma cells and IgG4(+) plasma cells were stained with an IgG4/IgG ratio of approximately 62.3% . Forty-five IgG4(+) plasma cells were present per high-power field (HPF) at 400× magnification, with many expressing transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) . Generally, ossifying fibrous epulis exhibits reduced infiltration of inflammatory cells because of chronic inflammation. However, the present case showed marked infiltration of inflammatory cells with a high IgG/IgG4 plasma cell ratio and plasma cell numbers/HPF. Thus, the present case was diagnosed as ossifying fibrous epulis with a suspicion of IgG4-RD based on the other histopathological findings. Based on immunohistochemical findings, mesenchymal tumours, such as solitary fibrous tumour (antibody: bcl-2, CD34, STAT6) and myofibroma (antibody: SMA), were excluded.
The excised submandibular lymph node was soft, and the cut surface was solid and milky white. HE staining showed hyperplasia of the lymphoid follicles of irregular sizes accompanied by germinal centres. Blood vessels had grown between the lymphoid follicles and many plasma cells, and fewer eosinophils were mixed, showing a morphology similar to that of reactive lymphadenitis . Immunohistology detected numerous IgG4(+) plasma cells in the lymphoid follicles. The IgG4/IgG ratio was approximately 87.3%, and the IgG4(+) plasma cell count was 138/HPF . Blood tests showed a high serum IgG level of 2025 mg/dL, and a high serum IgG4 level of 312 mg/dL. A complete blood count was normal, c-reactive protein was mildly elevated to 1 0.83 mg/dL, and the albumin level was slightly low, at 3.1 g/dL. Serum IgA, IgM, and IL-6 levels were not elevated, while anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B antibodies were negative. IgG4-related lymphadenopathy cannot be easily differentiated from plasma cell-rich Castleman disease only by histopathological examination. In the present case, plasma cell-rich Castleman disease was excluded because of the absence of the conditions of hyperIL-6-emia, such as fever, persistently high CRP, microcytic anaemia, and thrombocytosis. Thus, the diagnosis of the submandibular lymph node was IgG4-related lymphadenopathy.
Based on this information, a whole-body examination was performed by the Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, but no finding suggesting the presence of IgG4-RD was observed in any other organ. Since the lesion was localised and the residual right submandibular lymph node was not enlarged, the patient was subjected to course observation. Approximately seven years after surgery, the course has been favourable, without enlargement of the submandibular lymph nodes, or appearance of a new lesion, and without recurrence of ossifying fibrous epulis.