A 73-year-old man (body weight, 72.2 kg; height, 158 cm) had been diagnosed with GPA 20 years previously based on optic narrowing, upper respiratory symptoms, multiple nodules in the lungs, and positive proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA (41 U/mL) and was treated with prednisolone and methotrexate; he did not receive heparin therapy. His PR3-ANCA level was 48.9 U/mL 2 years before admission to our hospital, 53.6 U/mL 6 months before admission, and 83.8 U/mL immediately before admission; despite this increasing trend, however, he showed no subjective symptoms. Before admission, he was being treated with prednisolone (13 mg/day), methotrexate (8 mg/day), and azathioprine (25 mg/day). His medical history otherwise included coronary angina pectoris, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, Hashimoto’s disease, benign prostatic hyperplasia, thoracolumbar compression fracture associated with osteoporosis, and glaucoma.
On day 1, the patient was admitted to the hospital for right lower extremity pain. Physical examination revealed muscle weakness and edema in the right lower leg, resulting in emergency admission . Computed tomography showed a thrombus in the right common iliac vein and a micro-thromboembolism in the right pulmonary artery within the right inferior lobe . His PR3-ANCA level was elevated before admission, but acute progression of GPA was not suspected based on his physical examination findings and computed tomography images. The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary embolism due to deep vein thrombosis and began oral treatment with rivaroxaban (30 mg/day). His creatine kinase level (26 U/L) and creatinine level (0.77 mg/dL) were not elevated. However, his soluble fibrin and D-dimer levels were elevated due to the venous thrombosis .
On day 2, the patient’s leg pain and motor deficits worsened, and his creatine kinase level (435 U/L) and creatinine level (2.03 mg/dL) became elevated. Therefore, urgent inferior vena cava filter placement and catheter-based thrombolysis were performed. Interventional radiology techniques allowed an inferior vena cava filter to establish in the inferior renal vein approaching the right internal jugular vein. As the catheter for thrombolysis was about to be placed through the right lower extremity, pulseless ventricular tachycardia suddenly occurred, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed. The patient’s heartbeat resumed, but the surgery was aborted and he was admitted to the intensive care unit on an emergency basis. Tracheal intubation was not performed at this time because his level of consciousness had improved entirely. The cause of the intraoperative ventricular tachycardia was hyperkalemia (6.3 mmol/L) with myonephropathic metabolic syndrome due to severe reflux to the right lower extremity secondary to the venous thrombosis. Continuous renal replacement therapy was started to treat the acute kidney injury and hyperkalemia, and heparin therapy was started for the thrombus. The medical team discussed whether to perform a right thigh amputation, but surgery was considered contraindicated because of the patient’s poor general condition. Additionally, the patient began treatment with continuous noradrenaline administration for hypotension, albumin preparation administration for hypoalbuminemia, and thrombomodulin alpha for disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome.
Anticoagulation with heparin prolonged the activated partial thromboplastin time to more than 200 seconds after day 3 , but the patient’s symptoms gradually worsened. On the morning of day 4, noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation was performed for hypoxemia, but the patient became progressively unconscious and unable to speak in the afternoon. His right lower extremity showed obvious blistering . His soluble fibrin level decreased once with anticoagulation therapy but subsequently increased again . He also showed an increased fibrinogen level, decreased antithrombin level, and decreased platelet count, suggesting a hypercoagulable state. On day 5, after discussion with the family, it was decided not to attempt to operate or resuscitate the patient. The patient died on day 5.
After the patient’s death, his family provided written consent for pathological autopsy and publication of the present case report. The pathological autopsy showed no thrombus in the femoral artery, but it revealed severe stenosis and occlusion from the right common iliac vein to the junction of the right and left iliac veins and a thrombus in the inferior vena cava filter . There was no GPA-associated granulomatous inflammation with necrosis, necrotizing vasculitis, or necrotizing glomerulonephritis. Additionally, there were no tumors that could cause venous thrombosis.