A 66-year-old male patient presented with the right lower extremity weakness. On magnetic resonance (MR) and 3D-CT, he has had a spinal dural AVF at the L1 level. Six months after onset of the symptoms, a left L1 feeder was clipped. However, postoperatively, the patient’s clinical condition worsened due to a cerebrospinal fluid leak that required secondary corrective surgery (e.g., 1 month after the first surgery). Notably, the routine follow-up angiogram 6 months later, demonstrated a persistent pAVF.
Five years later, the patient presented with progressive muscle atrophy/paraparesis and urinary incontinence. The ventral thoracic spinal pAVF was now visualized at the T11 level on the MR. Angiographically, it was supplied by the anterior spinal artery [-]. The patient received CyberKnife treatment in two divided sessions (e.g., a total of 41.1 Gy to the local area and 31 Gy to the marginal area) at the T11 spinal level. Because of his continuing neurological deterioration and persisting perimedullary A-V shunts, he was referred for possible endovascular versus open surgery; the latter open approach was chosen.
Based on the 3D-CT, a posterolateral left-sided T10–T12 laminectomy was performed that could allow for 30–60° of cord rotation to access the ventral AVF .
Notably, motor evoked potentials (MEPs) and somatosensory evoked potentials did not change during and after cord rotation/manipulation. There was a direct arteriovenous connection between the anterior spinal artery (ASA) and a thin-walled abnormal vein, and a duplication of the ASA for the segment harboring the fistula [ and ]. Using (indocyanine green [ICG]) videoangiography, temporary clipping showed complete occlusion of the proximal and distal to the origin of the pial arterial feeders . The postclipping ICG confirmed the now isolated shunt, and the absence of flow through the fistula; it was then excised .
The postoperative MR did not show any new or significant intramedullary cord changes. Six months later, it continued to show complete occlusion/resection of the pAVF .
The histopathological examination confirmed abnormal vascular structures corresponding to the pAVF. The Verhoeff Van Gieson stain showed smooth muscle and elastic fibers inside the blood vessels that had variable wall thickening/ caliber that correlated with a pAVF . Additional findings included; irregular intimal hyperplasia, the hyalinized/hardened wall, and small-thickened blood vessels showing dense intimal proliferation.