A 6-year-old girl with anterior uveitis and white nodules on the iris surface, who was not aware of any visual disturbance, attended the University Hospital, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, in November 2013. There was no family history of eye disease. At the initial examination, her visual acuity was 20/20, and the intraocular pressure in both eyes was 21 mm Hg. A physical examination showed that she had good general health. Of the three white nodules in the right eye, one was located on the iris, and the others were found on the posterior surface of the cornea . A fundus examination revealed that there was no vitreous inflammation, obvious retinal lesions, or other abnormal findings. B-scan ultrasonography did not reveal any nodule calcifications. Anti-toxocara immunoglobulin G antibodies were not detected. The patient was administered topical anti-inflammation treatment for the anterior uveitis and nodules. The nodules gradually decreased in size; however, by November 2014, those on the posterior surface of the cornea had spread horizontally, and AS-OCT showed a shrunken iris . These changes could have been a result of tumor migration and invasion. In December 2014, after explaining the risk of metastasis to her parents, we obtained informed consent to collect the aqueous humor to determine the diagnosis. The biopsy revealed clusters of small cells with a high nuclear-to-cytoplasm ratio with partial rosette formation . Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, and gallium scintigraphy confirmed the absence of invasion outside the eyeball. Based on these findings, we diagnosed diffuse anterior retinoblastoma without retinal involvement and performed enucleation of the right eye. Histopathology showed undifferentiated cells similar to those seen on the biopsy. Tumor cells had infiltrated the iris stroma, posterior surface of the cornea, ciliary body, and sclera, but they were not detected in the retina . Serial sections confirmed that there were no tumor cells outside the eyeball. After enucleation, she underwent 6 cycles of chemotherapy and remains alive without relapse.