A 26-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with chief complaints of a diffuse, throbbing headache with severe intensity for the past 1 month. A week before admission, he had suffered from frequent episodes of non-projectile, non-blood-stained, and non-bilious vomiting. No history of sinusitis, mastoiditis, lung infection, head injury, steroid intake, or COVID-19 infection was reported. However, 2months before the admission, he was admitted and treated for dengue fever in a local hospital.
During his admission, he developed sepsis-induced acute kidney injury and was on maintenance hemodialysis (twice a week) for 2 months thereafter.
After 2 weeks of hemodialysis, the patient developed headaches and vomiting with altered sensorium. On examination, he was conscious and had pallor and pedal edema with no other systemic abnormalities.
Glasgow coma scale score was E4V5M6 and no sensorimotor deficit was noted.
On investigations, hemoglobin was 7.2 g/dL, total leucocyte count was 10,600 cells/cu.mm with (neutrophils: 79% and Lymphocytes: 15%),
serum creatinine was 1.65 mg/dl and serum urea was 73mg/dl. The patient was then investigated, and the Computed Tomography scan (CT)of the head revealed a hypodense
lesion in the left parietal region with ill-defined perilesional hypodensity showing meningoencephalitis.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain showed multiple ring enhancement lesions of altered signal intensity and variable sizes in the
left cerebral hemispheres. The features were consistent with the infective or inflammatory micro-abscesses.
A provisional diagnosis of parietal brain abscess with meningoencephalitis (fungal or tubercular) was made and the patient was started on parenteral ceftriaxone.
A left parietal craniotomy was performed with complete excision of the abscess ,
and the specimen was sent for microbiological and histopathological investigations.
Potassium hydroxide mount(KOH)showed hyaline septate branching fungal hypha .
Histopatho-logical examination using special stains (Giemsa and Grocott’s methenamine silver) also showed the presence of numerous septate fungal hyphae
with inflammatory cells( and ).The staining did not reveal any acid-fast structures in acid-fast bacilli. Moreover, the routine culture for bacteria did not show any growth. In addition, viral markers (human immunodeficiency virus, Hepatitis B antigen, anti-hepatitis C antibodies ) were negative.
Based on the above-mentioned findings, a definite diagnosis of fungal brain abscess was made and the Aspergillus species was the first differential diagnosis.
The patient was started with oral voriconazole 400mg BD for 2 days, followed by 200 mg BD for 3months. On the third day after surgery, the patient remained stable
and was discharged. After 10 days, the fungal culture showed the growth of greenish-colored colonies on brain heart infusion biphasic medium(manufactured by HiMedia, India), which were
identified as A.fumigatus on Lactophenol cotton blue mount that was confirmed on MALDI-TOF (Bruker).
It should also be mentioned that the culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative after 8 weeks of incubation.
The patient had fully recovered from his neurological symptoms and was able to start his normal daily activities 3months after being discharged.