A 33-year-old Caucasian woman, weighing 57 kg, was admitted to our hospital for abdominal pain, haematuria and right flank tumefaction. These symptoms started two weeks earlier, three months after the end of a pregnancy. A computed tomography (CT)-scan showed a mass involving the right ureter, probably of retroperitoneal origin. Her medical history was relevant for an exploratory laparotomy three years earlier for an intra-abdominal mass; histologic examination was suggestive of an atypical localization of KD.
A relaparotomy was planned to resolve renal and ureteral compression. Anaesthesiological evaluation revealed asthma treated with beclomethasone and salmeterol inhalation, insipid diabetes with a urine output 2500 mL/day, controlled with nasal desmopressin and polyarteritis nodosa-like vasculitis. Laboratory test results showed a normal white blood cell (WBC) count with eosinophilia, and normal renal functionality parameters; urinary tests indicated no microalbuminuria and sporadic red blood cells (RBCs).
Promethazine 50 mg was given intramuscularly the night before surgery, and midazolam 2.5 mg intravenous was given as premedication, followed by morphine 10 mg intramuscularly and desmopressin endonasal spray (1 puff/side). Before anaesthesia induction, a peridural catheter was placed at the T12 level, and after aspiration test and test dose administration, ropivacaine 50 mg in 10 mL saline was given, followed by a continuous 5 mL/hour−1 infusion (25 mg*hr-1). Thiopental sodium (TPS) 4 mg/kg−1 and fentanyl 1.5 mcg/kg−1 were used to induce general anaesthesia, followed by cisatracurium 0.2 mg/kg−1 to achieve endotracheal intubation. Anaesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane 1 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), fentanyl and cisatracurium on demand and volumetric mechanical ventilation (tidal volume (TV) = 8 mL/kg, respiratory rate (RR) = 12/minute, inspiratory/expiratory (I/E) = 33%).
The surgical procedure included neoplastic mass resection, ureteral repositioning and transvesical positioning of two ureteral stents. Fluids were administered according to a surgical procedure related fluids protocol (8 mL/kg−1), renal function being preserved via fenoldopam (0.1 mcg/kg−1/min−1) continuous infusion, according to our kidney transplant nephroprotective protocol ; urine output was 2 mL/kg−1 during surgery.
Anaesthesia emergence was uneventful, and no respiratory distress was noticed. The patient was then moved to a post anaesthesia care unit (PACU) for postoperative multiparametric monitoring. Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylaxis was performed; ropivacaine peridural continuous infusion by elastomeric pump was administered for postoperative pain, and inhalation and desmopressin treatment were confirmed during PACU recovery, with good results on pain control, respiratory function and urine output. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 10. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of atypical abdominal location of KD. At a 6-year follow-up, the patient is doing well without signs of recurrence.