A 2-year-old male Toy Poodle dog weighing 4.2 kg with black hair was brought to RSH Prof. Soeparwi FKH UGM Yogyakarta with complaints of urinating only slightly or oliguria. Over the last 2 months, the dogs exhibited symptoms such as bloody urine (hematuria), whooping during urination (stranguria), and decreased appetite and water intake. Previous treatment included amoxicillin, nephrolith, and tranexamic acid, but a relapse occurred after completing the treatment. The dog is fed a homemade diet consisting of beef and vegetables, resides indoors, and is occasionally taken for walks with the owner despite minimal water intake. Similar experiences have occurred in the dog’s medical history.
During urination, the dog displays signs of pain and whooping, and abdominal palpation indicates distention in the urinary vesicles. Blood tests revealed a decrease in hematology values of hematocrit (36%), erythrocytes (5.4 × 106/l), and eosinophils (0.85 × 103/l). The number of lymphocytes (5.89 × 103/l) has increased. Blood chemistry results revealed an increase in GOT/AST (60 IU/l), total plasma protein (9.0 mg/dl), globulin (6.4 g/dl), urea (50.91 mg/dl), and BUN/creatinine (273,661), while glucose values decreased (38.57 mg/dl). Ultrasound examination identified uroliths, as acoustic shadows in the urinary vesicles, accompanied by urinary vesicle distention. According to this ultrasound, the urolith is quite large .
Cystotomy was determined, and the dog received pre-anesthesia with a subcutaneous injection of atropine sulfate at a concentration of 0.04 mg/kg body weight, along with intramuscular injections of xylazine HCl at 1.2 mg/kg body weight and ketamine HCl at 10 mg/kg body weight. Ringer lactate at a rate of 20 ml/kg/hour intravenously was administered during a surgical procedure. An incision was made 2 cm distal to the umbilical scar in the ventral midline. After grasping the bladder with Babcock forceps, a longitudinal incision was made on the ventral surface of the organ. The calculi were extracted using Kelly or grasping forceps, and the bladder was cleansed with a sterile solution to minimize the risk of infection. The incision on the bladder wall was carefully closed using a continuous suture technique with resorbable thread. A simple continuous pattern was used in the first layer, and the suture in the second layer was made with interrupted Lembert.
For postoperative care, the animal was prescribed intramuscular injection ceftriaxone sodium at a dosage of 25 mg/kg body weight (Inj. Monocef®, Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., India) twice daily for a duration of 5 days. In addition, an intravenous infusion of 5% dextroses sodium chlorin (DNS) (250 ml b.i.d) was administered, and an intramuscular injection of meloxicam at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg body weight (Inj. Melonex®, Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd., India) was given once daily for a period of 3 days. Furthermore, an injection of vitamin B-complex at a dose of 0.25 ml once a day was given intramuscularly (Inj. Vit B Complex®, PT. Medion Farma Jaya). As shown in , the silicate urolith was successfully removed as a result of this procedure.