19-year-old man was brought to the emergency service after a high speed car crash. On arrival at the emergency department, the patient was monitorized and maintained a heart rate of 120 beats/minute (sinus tachycardia), with a blood pressure of 90/40 mmHg. Fluid resuscitation was initiated with normal saline. There was no obvious exsanguination injury present. The Glascow Coma Scale score was 15. There was found no significant thoracic or cranial trauma. A Focused Abdominal Sonography for Trauma (FAST) examination revealed free intraperitoneal fluid in each quadrant of the abdomen. The patient was promptly transported to the operating room where he underwent exploratory laparotomy. Midline incision from processus xyphoideus to symphysis pubis was employed. Intra-operative observation revealed approximately 1000 cc of free blood in the peritoneal cavity. Liver, spleen and the other solid organs were normal through macroscopic examination, but small intestine and its mesentery looked extensively damaged. The vascular trunk between the inferior pancreaticoduodenal and right colic artery of the superior mesenteric artery was completely transected. Adequate vascularization of approximately 20 cm of proximal jejunal segment and 20 cm of terminal ileum were observed. Nevertheless, remainder of the mesentery of the small intestine was ruptured completely. Although the proximal mesenteric arcade was damaged, the root of the SMA was patent. There were also multiple perforations in the small intestine, and a severe hematoma located in the mesentery, 40 cm proximal to the ileocecal junction (see Figure ). Unfortunately, the distal ileal segment to the hematoma was also seemed to be ischemic. After application of a bull-dog clamp to the root of the superior mesenteric artery, the bleeding could be taken under control. The hematoma in the mesentery of the ileal segment was evacuated. A distal branch of the superior mesenteric artery found in the hematoma was dissected and prepared for end to end anastomosis with a ruptured branch of superior mesenteric artery 2 mm in size. End-to-end anastomosis between the arteries was performed using interrupted 7.0 monofilament polypropylene (7/0 prolene) sutures after irrigation with heparinised saline (1 unit heparin/1 ml IV fluid) of both arteries (see Figure ). During the operation, the patient was given 4 units of blood and 4 litres of volume-expansive and crystalloid solutions. After reperfusion, ischemic segments of the small intestine were resected and an end-to end double layer anastomosis between the jejunum and the ileum was performed by using 3/0 polydiaxonon and 3/0 silk (see Figure , ). The patient's gastrointestinal passage returned to normal on the postoperative day 2. He did well and was discharged from hospital on the postoperative day 7. Until discharge, he had semi-liquid defecation four times daily. The patient was prescribed low molecular weight heparin for 7 days, starting on the postoperative day 1. On the last control, one month after the operation, the patient had no complaints. He used to have one defecation daily and fat analysis of the stool was in normal ranges. In the control mesenteric angiography, the vascular anastomosis was normal (see Figure ).