A 72-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of an abnormal pulmonary shadow found on a routine chest X-ray. Chest X-rays revealed a mass shadow in the left middle lung field and a positive silhouette sign for the left second arch . The aortic arch aneurysm was saccular aneurysm associated with a greater risk of rupture, and connected to the pulmonary mass in the left upper lobe with a possible risk of tumor adhesion or invasion to the aneurysm . Three-dimensional CT revealed that the aortic aneurysm was located in front of the arch near the left subclavian artery, and the brachiocephalic and left common carotid arteries branched from the aorta with a common duct . These findings led to the diagnosis of aortic arch aneurysm and lung carcinoma. There were no distant metastases of the lung carcinoma (clinical stage T2bN0M0 stage IIA). We decided to perform left upper lobectomy and patch angioplasty if the arch of aorta between the left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery could be temporarily occluded. If not, we planned to perform aortic arch replacement under selective cerebral perfusion with systemic extracorporeal circulation through the groin.
A fourth intercostal thoracotomy was performed. As the lung carcinoma adhered to the aortic arch aneurysm but did not invade it, we could detach the visceral pleura of the left upper lobe from the aortic arch aneurysm. We performed left upper lobectomy. After that, we confirmed that the aneurysm was proximal to the left subclavian artery. Because of the position of the TAA, it was difficult to perform patch angioplasty. We decided to perform aortic arch replacement for the aortic arch aneurysm with a 3-branched artificial vessel under selective cerebral perfusion with systemic extracorporeal circulation. The thoracotomy was extended to the right with a transverse incision of the sternum.
A 30-mm intimal defect was observed in the aorta, and half of the aneurysm was filled with organized thrombus. It was morphologically diagnosed as pseudoaneurysm. Under deep hypothermia, circulatory arrest and separate cerebral and systemic extracorporeal circulation, aortic arch replacement was performed with a 3-branched artificial vessel. First, the brachiocephalic artery and the left common carotid artery were rebuilt by the first branch of the graft. The second branch was ligated, and the subclavian artery was rebuilt by the third branch. Forming a stump, the distal aorta was anastomosed to the entire circumference of the graft and was reinforced with Teflon felt strips. The operative time was 683 min, the extracorporeal circulation time was 213 min, and the aortic cross-clamp time was 121 min. He was diagnosed with a moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma that was graded pathologically as T2bN0M0-stageIIA.
After the surgical treatment, postoperative pneumonia developed that was treated by ventilator management. The patient was removed from the ventilator on the 23rd postoperative day. He was discharged from our hospital on the 72nd postoperative day.