In 2021, a 21-year-old elite Caucasian female volleyball player, playing for her national team as a spiker, where her role involved multiple tasks, including spiking, blocking, and defense, presented with tenderness to the left proximal part of the rectus abdominis, on 10 August. The patient reported no previous history of muscle injury, and no physical restrictions on symptom presentation. However, pain onset was experienced more acutely during sporting activity, when playing in international competitions. Due to the low intensity of the pain, with no limitations in sporting activity, the athlete was allowed to play by reducing the number of attacks on court in each session of training. Some weeks following this, due to persistence of symptoms, especially present during prolonged physical activity, on 27 August, an ultrasound evaluation was performed. A structural tear was detected at the level of the distal myotendinous junction of the proximal muscle belly of the left rectus abdominis. The player was benched, and subsequently, the player was sent to us for follow-up and for rehabilitation treatment in preparation for the start of the regular volleyball season. On clinical reevaluation she presented modest pain on palpitation of the proximal left rectus abdominis muscle, and concentric contraction and stretching caused discomfort, but not pain to the area. The patient reported no pain being experienced during daily activities, including walking and running. However, a reassessment by ultrasound on 2 September evidenced a left rectus abdominis injury with intramuscular hematoma, consistent with a partial muscle tear, type 3b according to the Munich consensus . The site of pain indicated by the patient showed an area of loss of muscle echo pattern, approximately 24 × 11 × 13 mm, filled with fluid. No hematoma was detectable external to the muscle belly or within the rectus sheath .
Following the ultrasound, the recovery program was initiated. In the first week, the recovery program included physical and manual therapies aimed at controlling pain. Simultaneously, with the aim of preventing deconditioning, the athlete continued strengthening muscles and associated movements functionally unrelated to the area of injury, including the exercise bike for aerobic training. From the second week, active exercises were intensified, including postural control exercises with indirect activation of the abdominal wall muscles. From the third week, direct abdominal muscle strengthening exercises were introduced, avoiding movements that could cause any type of pain at the injury site. In addition, specific sports exercises for the defense and reception game were started, avoiding activities placing excessive strain on the abdominal muscles such as blocking and jumping. An ultrasound examination was performed before moving on to the last stage of rehabilitation on 23 September. It evidenced the full reabsorption of the hematoma noted in the first evaluation, and the advanced repair of the muscle injury on both static and dynamic evaluation .
In the fourth week, all the role-specific movements were gradually reintroduced until complete return to play without limitations was achieved . Diet and supplementation were also monitored during the rehabilitation period, this, to optimize recovery and maintain body composition. The athlete was prescribed a well-balanced diet that included adequate amounts of protein that play a key role in this phase of rehabilitation, carbohydrates, antioxidants, and moderate fats. Daily supplements by month were prescribed for decreasing inflammation and ameliorating the anabolic signals, including omega 3, 4 g a day, creatine monohydrate, 5 g a day, and essential amino acids (EAA), 5 g twice a day. (, ).
The patient was amazed at the initial ultrasound findings being so serious, as they were unexpected, considering the minor symptoms she experienced. However, the patient demonstrated full compliance to the proposed treatment plan, respecting biological and rehabilitation times, for a safe return to play.
During peak season the patient maintained an exercise program to prevent reinjury, continuing sporting activity without interruption until the end of the season in April 2022.