A 48-year-old male, working as a shopkeeper, presented to our emergency department with complaints of pain and loss of movement in bilateral shoulder, following fall from the standing height. This incident was associated with an epileptic episode while he was doing routine work in his shop. On detailed history, we discovered that he was a diagnosed case of generalized tonic clonic seizure for 9 years with the past episode 3 years back and was off medication for 2 years. There was no history of diabetes, hypertension, alcohol, and smoking. A history of oral tobacco intake for the past 20 years was present. He had suffered 4 episodes of right shoulder dislocation, the most recent episode being 2 months ago.
On examination, diffuse tenderness and swelling were present over bilateral shoulder with bony crepitus. No distal neurovascular deficit was noted. No other injuries were noted during the examination. Immobilization and analgesics were given in an emergency. Plain radiographs followed by computed tomography scans revealed bilateral Neer IV part fracture with anterior shoulder dislocation . The patient was prepared for operative intervention and necessary investigations were done. Both the shoulders were operated in a single sitting. The same deltopectoral approach was used bilaterally and open reduction with Proximal Humerus Interlocking Osteosynthesis (PHILOS) plating was done . The right side was operated first for no particular reason, taking approximately 3 h followed by the left side in the next 2 h. Re-draping was done and a shot of an intravenous antibiotic was given before starting the left side. Intraoperatively, a bony Bankart lesion in the right shoulder was noticed which led to persistent instability even after fixation of the proximal humerus. Henceforth, a Latarjet procedure was done for the same.
Postoperatively, the right shoulder was immobilized for 2 weeks. Pendular exercises were started on the 1st post-operative day on the left side and after 2 weeks on the right side. It was followed by a range of motion and strengthening exercises subsequently.
The patient developed a superficial infection on the left side resulting in serous discharge and nonhealing of the suture line. He was diagnosed with surgical site infection and underwent irrigation and debridement for the same.
He was followed up at 2 weeks, 4 weeks, and then monthly thereafter. After 1 year of follow-up, the fracture has healed completely and had a satisfactory range of motion .
He was able to carry out his activities of daily living comfortably and his Disability of the Arm, Shoulder, and Humerus of the (DASH) score was calculated to be 19.2 after 1 year.