A 37-year-old otherwise healthy male was referred to our institution because of a one-month lasting dysphagia of both hard and liquid food. He denied any breathing difficulties. There was no evidence of systemic symptoms. Physical examination showed tumour in the left jugular area measuring 2 cm in the largest diameter and some small, unsuspicious lymph nodes on both sides of the neck. The liver and spleen were not enlarged. There were no skin lesions. Peripheral blood counts were within normal limits. Serologies for anti-HAV, HbsAg, anti- HBc, anti-Hbs, anti-HCV and HIV were all negative. Lately performed laboratory studies revealed that the patient’s serum tryptase level was 79 ng/ml (normal 2–10). Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of jugulare tumour was performed as part of the initial diagnostic procedure, but the sample obtained was not diagnostic. Computer tomography of the thorax revealed a 5.2 cm large, hypodense, soft tissue tumour between the trachea and left arteria carotis communis, and subsequent ultrasound-guided FNAB was performed. The tumour was situated at the level of the upper thoracic opening. Cytologically, the diagnosis of a “neutrophil-rich” Hodgkin’s lymphoma was established. Excisional biopsy of the tumour was performed to confirm the cytological findings. Bone marrow involvement with lymphoma was assessed by aspiration and trephine biopsy.
The Giemsa-stained smear of the mediastinal tumour was very cellular. Neutrophils predominated, obscuring a few tumour cells found mainly along the edge of the smear. Tumour cells which were not degenerated showed moderately abundant, pale cytoplasm and single or multiple lobulated nuclei . Chromatin was finely granular. Nucleoli were conspicuous only in some cells. In a dense neutrophilic background, some histiocytes, few eosinophils, fibrin fibres and proteinaceous granular material were also observed. Because of the typical cytological picture and despite the fact that additional immunophenotypic analyses could not be performed (due to lack of tumour cells in the slides prepared for immunocytochemistry), the diagnosis of a “neutrophil-rich” Hodgkin’s lymphoma was suggested.
Excisional biopsy of the mediastinal tumour revealed a lymphoid neoplasm composed of relatively rare mononuclear Hodgkin’s and binuclear Reed-Sternberg cells residing in an infiltrate consisting of neutrophils, small lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils and histiocytes . Some of the H-RS cells showed a retraction of the cytoplasmic membrane, creating the appearance of the so-called lacunar cells. Focally, HRS cells had more lobulated nuclei with smaller lobes. On the periphery of the specimen, a broad band of fibrosis was present. Large atypical cells were immunohistochemically positive for CD30, CD15, Pax5 and MUM1 . In situ hybridisation for EBV was negative. Based on the morphology of the H-RS cells, reactive infiltrate and present fibrosis, the tumour was classified as nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NScHL).
Bone marrow trephine biopsy and the MGG-stained smear of the bone marrow aspirate performed for lymphoma staging revealed a slightly hypercellular bone marrow with some smaller clusters of atypical mast cells and a large peritrabecular infiltrate composed of atypical mastocytes and lymphocytes . Mast cells were highlighted by CD117 and tryptase immunostainings . CD25 and CD2 positivity of mast cells was consistent with their neoplastic phenotype . There were no HL infiltrates present in the bone marrow.