A 23- year-old Caucasian man of Polish origin was seen in The Head and Neck Cancer Clinic of the National Institute of Oncology in Warsaw with a chief compliant of a left-sided neck lump. The patient had noticed the painless mass 6 months earlier. Other symptoms reported were neck pain, which increased in frequency and intensity over time; general weakness; and occasional breathing difficulty. His medical history was insignificant for any surgeries or medical conditions. The patient denied alcohol use disorder, smoking cigarettes, or any recreational drugs. He was employed as a driver. There was no family history of genetic, metabolic, or neoplastic disorders. On presentation, his vital signs were within normal limits with heart rate of 85, respiratory rate of 126/78 mm Hg, and temperature of 36.7°C. On physical examination, a large round lump on the left side of neck above the clavicle was noticed . It was about 10 cm in diameter, soft on palpation, but firmly attached to the underlying tissue. The skin overlying the mass was normal with no redness or edema. Further investigation revealed a similar mass in the patient's left axillary fossa . The axillary lump was similar to that one on the neck in its structure, but its dimensions were bigger. Initial laboratory workup for the cystic masses included a complete blood count, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), calcium, vitamin D level, and a comprehensive metabolic panel that did not reveal any abnormality. Infectious workup that included blood and urine cultures was negative. Moreover, immunological tests checking mainly the rheumatoid factor level were within normal ranges as well. In addition, results of hematological tests together with a bone marrow biopsy were also unremarkable. As the laboratory results usually do not reveal any abnormality in Gorham–Stout disease, other diagnostic measures should be applied. The patient was also screened for neoplasms and hereditary disorders, but genetic testing and tumor markers were negative. Our patient was subsequently scheduled for an ultrasound-guided biopsy and followed by a CT scan. Histopathological report of both masses showed thin-walled, engorged capillary-like vessels, filled with blood cells and fibrin. A computed tomography scan showed a nodular polycyclic fluid lesion with transverse dimensions on the neck of approximately 101 mm × 65 mm, which was spreading from the level of the hyoid bone to the level of the third rib on the left side. This lesion in the upper part of the neck was displaced and compressed the infrahyoid muscles and the sternocleidomastoid muscle. In the middle part of the neck, it compressed the left internal jugular vein and the left subclavian vein. Moreover, it widened the left subclavian space and filled the left armpit . In addition, multiple lytic focal lesions were seen in the vertebral bodies. These lesions had sclerotic margins and several thickened trabeculae . The axillary and neck lumps noticed during physical examination were in fact distended lymphatic vessels creating cystic masses. With reference to the CT scan findings, an open thoracic vertebrae biopsy procedure was performed. Histopathological findings showed resorption of the bone matrix and angiomatous tissue with abnormal lymphatic channels. No cellular atypia was found. There were no calcifications and the osteoblastic response was minimal. Following this, our patient was consulted by a hematologist and an orthopedist to rule out multiple myeloma, lymphangiomatosis, and other skeletal or hematologic disorders. Since the diagnosis of Gorham–Stout disease is challenging, we applied the diagnostic criteria proposed by Heffez et al. On the basis of the clinical presentation, imaging studies, and histopathological findings together with the criteria used, we made a diagnosis of Gorham–Stout disease. The presented findings are consistent with a recurrent cystic lymphangioma as a main disease manifestation as the patient did not complain of spine symptoms. Due to the large size of a mass with both cervical and thoracic vertebrae involvement, the surgical treatment aiming to remove the mass was not possible. Taking into consideration the patient's young age and the risk of secondary malignancy, he did not agree to radiotherapy. He was given vitamin D and calcium and was started on a bisphosphonate regimen. Due to the side effects of bisphosphonates such as diarrhea, flu-like symptoms, and bone pain, the patient was reluctant to proceed with this therapy. While there is no effective treatment that is recommended, the patient was finally offered an approach based on axillary and neck lump drainage to relieve his symptoms and decrease body deformity. The procedure was performed under local anesthesia with the use of 2% lidocaine solution and with ultrasound imaging. The 20 G spinal needle was used for the procedure. Before needle insertion, the site was cleaned and disinfected with an antiseptic agent. The needle location was confirmed with ultrasound imaging, and the drained fluid was sent for a cytological examination. Then, neomycin was put on the site of needle insertion and a dressing was made, which was removed on a follow-up visit 2 days later. The patient’s symptoms were successfully managed through the years from 2003 till 2023. The procedure of drainage was conducted every 6 months as that was the period of time when the fluid accumulated and caused the patient’s condition to worsen. Right after the procedure, the patient did not suffer from any complications related to the biopsy itself nor present any signs of infection. Several years later, our patient was commenced on treatment with sirolimus as it is proven to decrease the volume of lymphatic vessels in some patients, but unfortunately, no disease stabilization was achieved. The follow-up plan included repeated MRI imaging every 1–2 years, which eventually revealed a decrease in the size of patient's neck and axillary cystic masses. Laboratory tests including full blood count together with ALP, calcium, and vitamin D were ordered once per year, but no significant changes have been detected so far. Nevertheless, the patents’ symptoms were well controlled for over 20 years with no significant side effects related to the treatment provided. Moreover, the patient seemed to be confident with the presented approach as the regular visits enabled him to stay active and have the disease under control.