A 56-year-old woman with acute respiratory failure and bilateral ptosis, with a past medical history of arterial hypertension was referred by regional hospital to Intensive Care Unit at the Department of Neurology. On admission to the previous hospital she presented with nausea and vomiting. One day after the onset of the disease she experienced dysphagia and blurred vision. She was first diagnosed with a brainstem stroke but CT of her brain was normal. 24 hours later bilateral ptosis and dyspnea developed. On admission to Intensive Neurological Care Unit she had sever dysarthria, her hypoventilation and hypoxia progressed to respiratory failure. Detailed neurological examination revealed external and internal ophtalmoplegia (equal unreactive pupils), deep tendon reflexes were relatively brisk. No other abnormalities, including limbs muscles paralysis, were observed. The patient was intubated and mechanical ventilation was commenced. Both brain CT and MRI scans were normal. Serum electrolytes, glucose and blood count were normal. CSF parameters were within normal limits. Nerve conduction studies showed slightly decreased amplitude of CMAP in the median nerve, with normal conduction velocities and normal conduction parameters in other motor nerves. Sensory NCV studies were within normal limits. Electrophysiological repetitive stimulation test of ulnar and facial nerve was normal. Other electrophysiological tests, such as SFEMG and SSR, were not done because the patient tolerated examination very poorly. Although repetitive stimulation test was negative, after detailed anamnesis with her family presumptive diagnosis of botulinum toxin poisoning was made and trivalent ABE antitoxin was administered on the day of her admission to our department. Serum sample was sent for botulism mouse inoculation test. The results reported 4 days later were positive for type B Clostridium botulinum toxin. The patient gradually improved and regained strength but remained on mechanical ventilation for 7 days. Finally, a possible source of botulism was established: the patient was only person in her family who had eaten a jar of pate one day prior to her admission to hospital. The pate was not available for toxicology testing.
Four months after the onset of the disease the patient still experienced episodic palpitation and chronic fatigue. On neurological examination only slow reaction of pupils to the light and convergence was found. Detailed cardiovascular and autonomic function tests are presented in Table . All tests showed significant but not life threatening signs of autonomic system involvement.