A 37-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to the obstetric haematology clinic for preconception counselling following a history of three severe post partum haemorrhages. Two of these were complicated by placental retention, requiring manual removal. Investigations including coagulation profile were carried out, which revealed a normal platelet count (192 × 109/litre) and normal bleeding time (8 minutes). A platelet aggregation study showed aggregation defects in response to adrenaline, low concentration (2.5 μM) ADP and low concentration (0.50 mg/ml and 0.75 mg/ml) ristocetin. These laboratory findings were consistent with a diagnosis of platelet storage pool disorder (SPD). Other family members were subsequently investigated. Two of her children were affected by the disorder, suggesting an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. She was keen to have another child and was counselled fully regarding the risk of another retained placenta, significant post partum haemorrhage and the possibility of a hysterectomy. A planned delivery was advised, and the risk of her child acquiring the disorder discussed.
She booked at 15 weeks' gestation and a detailed plan for delivery was discussed and documented. Her anomaly scan revealed a singleton pregnancy with no structural abnormalities and a normally sited posterior placenta. Following an uneventful antepartum period, she was admitted at 38 weeks' gestation for induction of labour. In preparation, two units of packed red cells and four units of HLA matched platelets were cross-matched. Before induction, she was given 0.3 μg/kg of prophylactic DDAVP (synthetic desmopressin, deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin), and 1 g of tranexamic acid.
Labour was induced on the ward with prostaglandin gel and later required augmentation with syntocinon. Following a prolonged first (10 hours 45 minutes) and second stage (1 hour 27 minutes) of labour, she had a normal delivery of a live female infant weighing 3360 g. Despite a bolus of intravenous syntocinon, third stage was not completed after 15 minutes, and she was transferred to theatre without delay.
An uncomplicated manual removal of placenta was followed immediately by a massive post partum haemorrhage (PPH) secondary to uterine atony. Continuous bimanual compression of the uterus was combined with intravenous oxytocin infusion, intramuscular ergometrine, intramuscular haemabate™ and per rectal misoprostol. These were unsuccessful in achieving adequate uterine tone and a Rusch balloon was inserted into the cavity. This allowed the anaesthetic staff time to stabilise the patient before surgery. At laparotomy, several modified B-lynch sutures were inserted, although the bleeding was reduced, the uterus did not sufficiently contract to maintain haemostasis and a hysterectomy was therefore performed. Total estimated blood loss was 8 litres and the patient required 14 units of packed red cells, 7 platelets, 8 fresh frozen plasmas and 4 units of cryoprecipitate. Post operatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit where she subsequently made a good recovery. Histological analysis of the uterus suggested a wide area of implantation of placental tissue within the uterus, consistent with a diagnosis of partial placenta diffusa or membranacea .