A 57-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital for definite diagnosis and treatment of an intestinal smooth protuberance that appeared more than 3 years after rectal cancer surgery.
Initially, a smooth protuberance was found following a colonoscopy examination during a regular medical examination at a local hospital 3.5 years after rectal cancer surgery. The patient did not complain of any symptoms.
The patient presented with irregular stool and bloody stool since September 2015. He was admitted to a local hospital complaining of lower abdominal pain in February 2016. Colonoscopy revealed a large protuberant lesion located 15-18 cm from the anus, and a biopsy was taken. Endoscopic diagnosis was advanced rectal cancer, and pathological diagnosis was rectal adenocarcinoma (moderately differentiated). Laparoscopic radical resection of rectal cancer was performed in March 2016. Intra- and post-operative pathology confirmed rectal adenocarcinoma (moderately differentiated). Colonoscopy performed during postoperative follow-up at 6 mo, 1 year, 2 years, and 3 years after the operation showed good anastomotic healing .
The patient had no specific personal and family history.
The patient did not have positive signs on physical examination.
Laboratory testing including C-reactive protein level and leukocyte count, showed no abnormalities.
In November 2019 (3.5 years after operation), a smooth protuberance measuring approximately 15 mm × 15 mm was found near the anastomotic site by colonoscopy at the local hospital. The diagnosis was a protuberant lesion near the anastomotic stoma. Subsequent endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) at the local hospital revealed a hypoechoic structure of approximately 1.12 cm × 0.91 cm in the rectal wall. A submucosal tumor (SMT) originating from the muscularis propria was suspected. The patient was referred to our hospital for definitive diagnosis and further treatment. We analyzed the patient's past history and examination and suspected that the protuberance was local recurrence of rectal cancer, postoperative abscess, or SMT. Subsequently, pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed no thickening or strengthening of the anastomotic wall .
To clarify the origin of the lesion and obtain the pathology, endoscopic resection was performed. After dissecting the mucosal layer by using a dual knife, a soft cystic structure was observed. After opening the sac wall, a yellow viscous liquid can be seen flowing out . Generally speaking, pus needs bacterial culture for further diagnosis; however, the lesion was at the rectum and highly susceptible to contamination by intestinal faeces and flora. Therefore, we did not culture the pus. We subsequently repeated the suction and irrigation procedures during endoscopic procedure to clean the area of the purulent exudate. The wound was closed using five metal clips finally .