A 50-year-old woman was admitted in a general hospital with severe shooting chest pain, malaise, fatigue, and low-grade fever. He worked and lived in rural villages and consumed fresh cheese, milk and other animal raw unpasteurized products. On physical examination, stethoscope revealed a friction rub of the pericardium on anterior chest wall. The laboratory exam revealed anemia 10.5 g/DL and hepatic function tests were normal. Electrocardiography (ECG) with sinus rhythm revealed an ST-segment change in pericardial leads. Chest x-ray revealed the upper normal cardiac silhouette. Stool, urine, and pharyngeal cultures, and investigations for Epstein-Barr virus, (Epstein-Barr virus VCA antibody (IgM <20U/mL) cytomegalovirus (negative: IgM), adenovirus, (adenovirus antibody, IgG < 1:10, adenovirus antibody, IgM <1:10), Chlamydia pneumoniae (IgM <20 U/ml) and Mycoplasma pneumonia (IgG <160 U/m), were negative. Mycobacteria culture, mycobacteria via PCR, and Ziehl-Neelsen staining for ARB yielded negative results. The patient’s PPD test was also negative (7 mm) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests for anti-Brucella IgG and IgM antibodies were also strongly positive (133 U/ml and 31.7 U/ml; 30 U/ml and 20 U/ml), respectively.
Wright test titer, Coombs wright and 2 mercaptoethanol (2ME) were 1/5120, 1/1280, 1/640 respectively. In addition, Brucella melitensis were isolated from two of three consecutive blood cultures. The patient remained symptomatic with chest pain but with no signs of heart failure or arrhythmias on serial ECG during the hospital stay.
The creatine kinase was normal from the normal level on admission over the following hospital days, as were the levels of the other enzymes. Also, transesophageal echocardiogram noted normal aortic valve and absence of root abscess and showed the normal mitral valve. In echocardiography there was also a mild pericardial effusion without signs of cardiac tamponade with pericardial thickening and fibrins intraperiodical materials (, ).
Additional laboratory blood tests were carried out because of pericardial effusion, including tumor markers, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, and serum immunoglobulin but did not reveal the cause. However, C-reactive protein (CRP), ESR and fibrinogen were strongly positive.
Angiography revealed normal coronary artery and ruled out coronary artery disease as the cause of chest pain. Our patient was given oral ibuprofen 400mg three times daily and doxycycline 100mg twice daily plus oral rifampicin 900mg once daily, with intramuscular streptomycin 1 g once daily for the first three weeks. His cardiac chest pain symptoms regressed rapidly 10 days after the initiation of anti-inflammatory drug and antibiotic treatment. The treatment continued for three more weeks and no recurrence was observed during the six-month follow-up.