A 60-year-old female was referred to our center with a progressive headache started 1 month ago and nausea/ vomiting during the past week. Neurological examination was intact except for mild bilateral papilledema. She had a history of breast cancer (invasive ductal carcinoma, progesterone receptor [PR] positive, and HER-2 positive) treated by radical mastectomy 5 years ago, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. She was regularly followed up by the oncologist. There was no evidence of metastatic spread and/or local recurrence and her cancer was reported to be in remission for 2 years ago.
A brain CT was done [ and ] showing a dural-based mass with hypertrophic adjacent skull base bone. Brain MRI with postcontrast images revealed an avidly enhancing extra-axial lesion in the left temporobasal and midline subfrontal region with poorly demarcated margins from the left temporal lobe [ and ].
After obtaining the patient’s informed consent, surgery was planned with the differential diagnoses of meningioma versus skull base metastasis. She was operated through a left frontopterional craniotomy. Tumor’s consistency was firm and the gross appearance was compatible with meningioma. The piecemeal removal of the tumor and microsurgical drilling of the involved bone were done as much as possible. The involved dura was also removed and reconstructed with pericranial fascia. After the surgery, the patient was admitted to neurosurgical ICU and after 24 h of close observation with no specific postsurgical complications, was transferred to the neurosurgery ward. The patient was discharged from the hospital 8 days after surgery without any neurological deficit.
Histopathological study of the tumor revealed a WHO Grade 1 (WHO 2016 classification) meningioma containing nests of metastatic breast carcinoma in hematoxylin and eosin staining [-]. Immunohistochemistry studies showed hormonal receptors to be the same as the patient’s breast carcinoma. These findings confirmed tumor-to-tumor metastasis and determined the metastasis source from breast carcinoma [-]. The cranial mass sample as well as the previous breast mass harbored focal areas of immunoreactivity with PR on immunohistochemistry staining .
Postoperative systemic metastasis workup (including PET scan) was clear and there were no signs of other metastatic foci. The patient was referred to oncologist for adjuvant chemoradiation therapy for skull base metastatic tumor.