A 66-year-old Caucasian man presented a recurrent nodular hypoechoic lesion of the VI hepatic segment on follow-up ultrasound examination. The patient reported to have a positive past medical history for chronic ischemic heart disease and aortic valve insufficiency treated by coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) and aortic valve replacement, diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, and symptomatic cholelithiasis treated by laparoscopic cholecystectomy about 15 years ago. About seven years before the US examination, the patient was diagnosed with a HCV related liver cirrhosis and previous segment VI hepatocellular carcinoma treated with Percutaneous ethanol infusion (PEI). Physical examination showed no abnormality. The patient had an excellent performance status: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 0. Furthermore, he was classified as A5 according to the Child-Pugh score and the MELD score was 8/9. Routine laboratory investigations detected high blood glucose levels (136 mg/dL), alanine amino transferase (58 U/L), total amylase (104 U/L), pancreatic amylase (76 U/L) and normal platelet count (225 × 106/mL). Whole-body conventional computed tomography (CT) revealed 17 × 12 mm nodular lesion in the V hepatic segment with contrast enhancement compatible with hepatocellular carcinoma and right portal branch thrombosis with slight contrast enhancement as from neoplastic thrombosis. However, distant metastases were not identified . A hepatospecific magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan confirmed the presence of a 18 × 13 mm nodular lesion in the V hepatic segment with satellite micronodules associated with V-VIII sectoral portal branch thrombosis . In the hepatospecific phase, the absence of contrast washout from the V-VIII segments, suggested their neoplastic involvement. The Future Remnant Liver Volume (FRLV) (S1-S2-S3-S4), calculated with the “Hepatic VCAR” segmentation software on the Whole-body CT scan, was 50% . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGDS) was unremarkable. The multidisciplinary team, considering the MELD score, the Child class, the FLRV and the patient’s will, indicated a major liver resection. On intraoperative ultrasound, the lesion affecting the V hepatic segment was confirmed. Furthermore, neoplastic thrombosis of V-VIII sectoral portal branch was identified with extension up to 1.5 cm from the origin of the right portal branch. A right hepatectomy was then performed. The portal vein stump was closed with 4.0 prolene running suture. The final histopathological report was consistent with the moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma with trabecular and multinodular features (Edmonson–Steiner grade 2/3). Lymph vascular invasion was present while the perineural one was absent. Margins of the resected specimen were free from neoplastic invasion (T2 Nx). The molecular pattern resulted as follows: Heppar −/+, Glypican +, MOC31−, Cytokeratin 19. Satellite micronodules in V segment presented the same histological aspects. In the V-VIII sectoral portal branch and in the right portal branch localization of hepatocarcinoma with trabecular aspects. The length of the surgery was 325 min. The postoperative course was regular and uneventful, with resumption of nutrition on the second postoperative day and removal of drains on the fourth and sixth postoperative day. The discharge occurred seven days after the surgery. At eight-month follow-up, there was no clinical nor radiological evidence of neoplastic recurrence, with well-preserved liver function (Child A5).