An 83-year-old female presented with recurrent chest pain without any episode of syncope or exertional dyspnoea. Her medical history included hypertension and diabetes. Her physical examination findings were as follows: pulse rate, 78 b.p.m.; blood pressure, 122/70 mmHg; oxygen saturation, 98% in room air; systolic ejection murmur at Levine Grade III/VI; and no rales or crackles in the lung field. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severe degenerative AS. The peak velocity was 3.8 m/s, the mean pressure gradient over the aortic valve was 36.5 mmHg, the aortic valve area was 0.59 cm2/m2, with a preserved global ejection fraction of 76.0%, and the indexed stroke volume was 45 mL/m2. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed calcification and limitation of motion in each leaflet and planimetry of anatomical aortic valve area of 0.47 cm2/m2 (see , ). The patient had a low flow rate of 180 mL/s. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with normal-flow low-gradient severe AS. Cardiac computed tomography showed that the entire left coronary artery (LCA) ectopically originated from the right SOV and that the orifice shared a common ostium with the right coronary artery (RCA; ). The LCA passed between the aorta and the main pulmonary artery before its anatomically correct bifurcation into the left anterior descending artery and left circumflex artery. All branches of the single coronary artery were free of significant atherosclerosis. The aortic annulus to coronary ostium distance was 12.9 mm, and the right sinus width was 26.5 mm . Given that the patient was an octogenarian with a vulnerable status according to the Canadian Study of Health and Ageing Clinical Frailty Scale, our heart team decided on TAVI via the transfemoral approach. The team selected a 23 mm SAPIEN 3 while placing a 0.014 inch angioplasty guidewire and balloon in the LCA for coronary artery protection during TAVI.The surgery was performed successfully without any coronary obstruction or significant perivalvular leakage (, see , ). Concomitant selective coronary angiogram through SAPIEN 3 showed coronary artery patency . The post-procedural course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on day 7 and has since been asymptomatic without vasodilators or beta-blockers.