A 45-year-old man without past medical history was admitted to the emergency room with weight loss (11% of total body weight in 2 months), asthenia, and fever, followed by melaena. The initial work up revealed a severe normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin at 4.1 g/dL, normal range [NR]: 13.0–17.7) and markedly elevated lactate dehydrogenase (2,231 U/L, NR: 100–247). Upper endoscopy showed three atypical-looking ulcers in the greater curvature of the gastric body, one of which with a visible vessel successfully submitted to endoscopic hemostasis with two through-the-scope clips after diluted adrenalin injection (1:10,000) in and around the ulcer base (shown in Fig. ). Biopsies of the ulcers were performed. Abdominal computed tomography revealed an extensive heterogeneous retroperitoneal mass with a diameter of 15 cm, causing inferior vena cava stenosis, and a right pelvic mass with a diameter of 10 cm (shown in Fig. ). The laboratory evaluation was notable for neuron-specific enolase of 168.5 ng/mL (NR: < 12.5). Prostate-specific antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, cancer antigens 19-9 and 72-4, immunoglobulin levels, protein electrophoresis, immunophenotyping of peripheral blood and human immunodeficiency virus serology were negative. Gastric ulcers' biopsies revealed a highly proliferative neoplasia of unknown origin, dissociated from the gastric glandular component, with immunohistochemical positivity for cluster of differentiation (CD) 56, CD117, CD68, CD10, and CD99 and negativity for cytokeratins, CD3, CD5, CD20, CD23, B-cell lymphoma 2, B-cell lymphoma 6, cyclin D1, melan-A, myeloperoxidase, and neuroendocrine markers (shown in Fig. ). The retroperitoneal mass biopsy showed an undifferentiated neoplastic proliferation with similar histologic findings and immunohistochemical profile (shown in Fig. ). The remaining study performed over the following weeks was unremarkable, including head, neck, chest, and lumbar/dorsal spine computed tomography; prostatic ultrasound; and colonoscopy. One month after the initial presentation, upper endoscopy was repeated under deep sedation. Similar findings were observed (shown in Fig. ), and multiple biopsies of the ulcers were taken. At this point, the patient complained of an enlarged right hemiscrotum suggestive of a testicular tumor in testicular ultrasound. A radical orchiectomy was performed. Histopathologic findings were compatible with a pure testicular seminoma (shown in Fig. ), with tunica albuginea and spermatic cord invasion. Revision of both gastric and retroperitoneal biopsies was compatible with metastatic seminoma. Further laboratory study revealed an elevated β-human chorionic gonadotropin (29.4 IU/L, NR: < 0.5) and persistently normal alpha-fetoprotein. With an IIIC stage (T3N3M1bS2) , the patient underwent chemotherapy with bleomycin, etoposide, and platinum. Because of an incomplete response of the retroperitoneal mass, not resectable due to vascular adherences, the patient is undergoing radiotherapy. There was no hemorrhagic recurrence.