A 10-year-old boy was admitted to the Hacettepe University Department of Emergency following a minor head injury 1 h before arrival. He had fallen and striking the occipital region of his head on the edge of the table. He presented to the emergency department with a chief complaint of minor scalp swelling. On initial presentation, the patient’s vitals were within normal limits. He was awake and alert on admission. His neurological examination was normal excluding a minor swelling in the occipital region. His history also revealed joint hypermobility, fatigue, syncope, easy bruising, and hematoma formation resulting from minor trauma due to Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The patient was consulted to our neurosurgery department within half an hour on admission. A stat computed tomography (CT) of the brain with the angiographic study was ordered. A CT showed no intracranial hemorrhage. The neurosurgery team decided to wrap a compressive bandage around his head in an attempt to stop the bleeding by compression. After around ½ h, the neurosurgery team was contacted again, only to be informed that the compressive bandage did not stop swelling. The scalp started to swell over the bandage. A CT has performed again. There was a massive increase in blood volume in subgaleal space [ and ]. The neurosurgery team evacuated approximately 400 cc of blood with needle aspiration. The patient was still awake with a Glasgow Coma Score of 15 although, through the course of his admission, he slowly developed hemodynamic instability (MAP: 50 mmHg, HR: 140 bpm). The compressive bandage was revised and the whole scalp was compressed with a cap-like compressive bandage. The patient was hospitalized and he was kept under observation and support treatment with Vitamin K, intravenous immunoglobulin, and fresh frozen plasma. Due to extended usage of compressive bandage (day 10), a large area of scalp tissue extending from the occipital area to bilateral parietal bones became necrotic, the necrotic scalp tissue was debrided and reconstructed by plastic and reconstructive surgery. After surgery, another hematoma formed extending from the front of the ear to the ipsilateral neck causing facial palsy. A Jackson-Pratt drain was placed in combination with a pressure dressing after the evacuation of the hematoma was completed. The Jackson-Pratt drain was removed a week later. During this time, the facial palsy completely resolved. Twenty-nine days following admission, the patient was discharged. The patient was followed up for 2 years and is completely normal with no recurrence of cephalhematoma.