A 14-year-old Indian girl presented with a history of sudden onset shortness of breath and was sent to the radiology department for a chest radiograph (CXR). The image showed bilateral middle and lower zone pulmonary alveolar infiltrates with relative sparing of the upper zones . Her medical history indicated that she had been diagnosed with APML and had been started on chemotherapy as per the International Consortium for Childhood APML 02 protocol which included ATO and ATRA. Table shows her initial laboratory results at admission. She developed worsening respiratory distress soon after the initiation of chemotherapy with increasing oxygen dependence and was transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit for ongoing care. ATRA and ATO were discontinued. Table shows her laboratory test results after she became symptomatic.
Without any further testing to avoid wasting valuable time, systemic steroid (dexamethasone 10 mg/m2) therapy was initiated. Appropriate respiratory care in the form of bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) was given. A computed tomography (CT) scan of thorax showed multiple bilateral lung nodules with surrounding changes in ground-glass opacity predominantly in the lower lobes .The differential diagnosis based on her imaging findings included infective causes (bacterial, viral, fungal), leukemic infiltrates, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), leukostasis as part of hyperleukocytosis, drug toxicity, pulmonary oedema and pulmonary haemorrhage. Leukostasis was ruled out since the patient had a low TLC (2.9 × 109/L), and a requirement for leukostasis is a very high WBC count (> 100 × 109/L). Further, radiological studies revealed lung nodules with patchy changes in ground-glass opacity whereas leukostasis is characterised by more confluent opacities with interlobular septal thickening.
With the treatment described above, her clinical, in particular her respiratory status, improved rapidly. A subsequent CT scan of the abdomen after 4 days of treatment showed a reduction in the lung changes at the visualised lung bases . The changes in ground-glass opacity had almost disappeared with subsidence of the nodules. A CXR performed at around the same time also showed a reduction in the lung changes , with bilateral reduction of the infiltrates in the middle and lower zones. Based on the clinical improvement and imaging changes following withdrawal of ATRA/ATO and starting of dexamethasone, the diagnosis that met all the features was that of differentiation syndrome. This was a rther unique diagnosis since most cases of DS reported in the literature are usually associated with high TLC (> 5 × 109/L). Thus, based on the radiological features and clinical correlation a difficult yet crucial diagnosis was possible which significantly affected the patient’s further treatment.