An 82-year-old female patient with a past medical history of osteopenia as well as idiopathic mild mental retardation and dementia presented to a community hospital emergency department (ED) after turning her ankle 24 h before initial evaluation. Initial radiographs demonstrated a trimalleolar ankle fracture without dislocation with a large posterior malleolar fragment as shown in . She was evaluated and placed into a well-padded three-sided splint by the on-call orthopedic resident and instructed to follow up in the orthopedic clinic within the next 5–7 days. Before this injury, the patient was ambulatory about the house and utilized a wheelchair otherwise. At the initial ED visit, she was instructed to remain non-weight bearing and to ice and elevate the extremity to alleviate swelling and pain.
Exactly 1 week later, the patient was brought back to the ED due to increased pain to the right ankle. The same orthopedic resident re-evaluated her and noted significant damage to her splint. Radiographs at this point demonstrated that the patient had dislocated the tibiotalar joint while in the splint as shown in . Inspection of the skin overlying the right ankle showed the development of serous-filled fracture blisters over the medial and lateral malleoli. The ankle was reduced and splinted by the orthopedic resident, and she was admitted to the hospital for pain control.
Discussion with the patient and family revealed that she regularly was kicking a wall with her injured extremity and that they had significant difficulty with keeping her non-weight bearing. A discussion was had with the patient and family regarding treatment options with open reduction and internal fixation versus TTC nail. It was discussed that with TTC nail, there would be closed reduction and relative stability of the fracture with loss of range of motion of the ankle, but that the patient would be able to weight bear post-operatively with lower risk of hardware failure and loss of reduction requiring revision surgery . In comparison with open reduction and internal fixation, there would be anatomic reduction and absolute stability of the fracture with preserved ankle range of motion, but higher risk of hardware failure and loss of reduction requiring subsequent revision surgery if the patient were to weight bear post-operatively . Ultimately, the family elected to proceed with the TTC nail due to its stability and durability and so that the patient could bear weight through the right lower extremity post-operatively. Intraoperative fluoroscopy images demonstrating near anatomic alignment of the tibiotalar joint are demonstrated in .
Post-operatively, the patient was placed into a bulky soft dressing and was given a walking boot without any weight-bearing restrictions. The remaining hospital course was uneventful, and she was discharged to home. Two-week follow-up revealed the skin incisions to have nicely healed and the fracture blisters to have subsided. Radiographs shown in demonstrated maintained alignment and position of the implant without any complications. Eight-week follow-up revealed no skin complications and the patient was ambulatory without difficulty. Radiographs at this time demonstrate healed fractures in anatomic alignment as shown in .