A 9-year-old non obese male patient, with no medical history, was diagnosed with T-ALL in January 2021. He was included in the ‘Very High Risk’ (VHR) arm of the EORTC CLCG 58951 protocol with a complete remission post induction maintained until post interval therapy (Additional file ).
During his hospitalization for the first block (R1), he received Dexamethasone 20 mg/m2/day (day 1 to 5), high dose methotrexate 5 g/m2/day (day1), an intrathecal injection with methotrexate, cytarabine and hydrocortisone (day 2), vincristin 1.5 mg/m2/day (day 1 and day 6), and HiDAC 4 g/m2/day (day 5) .
Since induction, he received 7 lumbar punctures (LP) containing 30 mg of cytarabine each and a cumulative dose of 13 g of intravenous HiDAC.
The R1 course was uneventful. Hepatic and renal tests were normal and the patient remained apyretic.
On day 14 of the cure, the patient became neutropenic and was diagnosed fortuitously with an asymptomatic COVID-19 infection contracted from his father who tested positive for this virus. Close monitoring for cardiorespiratory state, fever and complete blood cells count was started. Injections of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor were prescribed for 3 days until the normalization of neutrophil count. Given the stability of hemodynamic and respiratory status and the normality of lab findings we opted for outpatient treatment.
On day 21 of the cure (day 8 of the COVID-19 infection), he presented with intense holocranial headaches, visual blurring and diplopia. Neurological examination showed no focal deficit or ataxia and physical examination was normal. Neurological relapse was suspected and the patient underwent a LP. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed proteinorrachia at 10 mg/dL (normal level < 40 mg/dL), glycorrhachia at 61 mg/dL (glycorrhachia / glycemia ratio > 0.5), 7 red cells and 1 leukocyte (lymphocyte) without blasts on cytological analysis. Microbiological culture of CSF was negative, eliminating encephalitis and meningitis.
Ophthalmological examination found bilateral stage II papilledema as well as a paralysis of the sixth right cranial nerve.
Brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no evidence of hemorrhage or cerebral mass and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) revealed no cerebral venous thrombosis. The patient was commenced on acetazolamide at a dose 125 mg per day with close neurological monitoring.
Control RT-qPCR for SARS-CoV-2, done on day 11 of the infection, remained positive and the patient was still complaining of diplopia, visual blurring and headache.
A second LP was performed on day 12 of the COVID-19 infection showing a jet CSF with an opening pressure at 350 mmH2O. A volume of 20 ml of CSF was taken inducing a partial alleviation of the headache but the visual disturbances persisted.
The diagnosis of IIH was confirmed and acetazolamide was prescribed at a dose of 500 mg per day. The headache was alleviated rapidly and diplopia disappeared within a week after treatment.
Control RT-qPCR for SARS-CoV-2 on day 20 of the infection was negative. An ophthalmological examination revealed a persistent papilledema.
Given the context of our patient, we concluded that this intracranial hypertension (ICH) was due to this virus and the patient was readmitted, 3 days after the negative control of the PCR, to receive the second block (R2) of VHR arm .
LP was done on day 2 of the course with intrathecal injection of methotrexate and cytarabine, highlighting a normotensive CSF with normal cytological result. The R2 course went without incident and the patient remained apyretic. Twenty-eight days after the R2 cure, the patient was admitted to receive the third block (R3) of VHR arm including HiDAC. The course went with no neurological complaint .