A 54-year-old Caucasian female presented with atraumatic, chronic, and painful left hip. She had an uncemented metal-on-polyethylene THA performed 19 years priorly, due to osteoarthritis secondary to developmental hip dysplasia, with no other medical history of relevance for this case. The radiological study revealed asymmetrical wearing of the polyethylene liner, without other apparent complications. She was, then, proposed for revision surgery .
Intraoperatively, a posterior approach was used to expose the hip, the same one performed in the primary surgery. The acetabular and femoral components presented no signs of loosening, so a decision was made to remove the worn polyethylene liner and apply a new cemented one on the primary acetabular component. The prosthetic head was also changed. Stability and leg-length were acceptable, so the wound was closed under vacuum drainage.
The patient was admitted in the nursery ward for post-operative recovery and rehabilitation. On the 1st day post-operative, before starting to bear weight on the operated limb, she presented with acute left hip pain and shortened, externally rotated limb. The X-ray revealed anterior dislocation of the prothesis with avulsion of the femoral head . The patient and family were informed about the situation and she was submitted to open reduction on the next day. Through the same approach, the femoral head was found positioned on the anterior rim of the acetabulum. As the surgeon tried to grasp it with fingers, it quickly migrated superior and medial into the pelvis. Many attempts to retrieve the prosthetic head were performed with fluoroscopic aid, initially with fingers and then with a hemostatic clamp but were unsuccessful and only led to pushing the component even further in. The surgeons decided to apply a new femoral head, with longer neck size, close the wound, and leave the migrated head in its place to be addressed posteriorly.
A computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis was performed after the second surgery and showed the intrapelvic position of the lost femoral head, placed between the lateral aspect of the iliopsoas muscle, on the subaponeurotic space, and the medial wall of the iliac wing (-).
The patient and family were again informed of the situation, and it was decided to remove the lost component. This procedure took place on the 4th day after the first procedure. The patient was placed supine on the operating table and an anterior approach to the iliac wing was performed through a descending oblique incision, from the middle part of the iliac crest until the anterior superior iliac spin.
The subcutaneous tissue was incised in line with the skin incision so that the fascia overlying the external oblique muscle was exposed. The fibbers of the external oblique, internal oblique, and transversalis muscles were subperiosteally elevated, so the inner wall of the iliac wing was exposed. The head was partially stabilized by the assistant who pushed through the abdomen to avoid further migration, while the surgeon flipped it and grasped it with a Kocher clamp, removing it through the iliac window . The wound was closed in layers and no drain was needed.
The patient had a favorable post-operative course and was discharged after completing the rehabilitation protocol, on the 4th day after the last surgery .
On the present follow-up – 2 years after the revision surgery, the patient presents with residual hip pain, but walking without aids and no limitations on daily activities.