Eight years prior to presentation, a 49-year-old female presented with increasing breathlessness along with frequent palpitations. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed EA with apical displacement of the TV leaflets by 10 mm/m2 alongside severe TR. She was also noted to have a small atrial septal defect (ASD). Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring revealed atrial arrhythmias. In keeping with European Society of Cardiology (ESC) recommendations for severe symptomatic TR in EA (Class IC recommendation), she underwent surgery. During the operation, the TV was felt not to be repairable to a durable level, and instead she had a combined procedure that included TV replacement with a 33 mm bioprosthetic valve, ASD closure, and a radiofrequency Maze procedure. Post-operatively, she developed complete AV block necessitating a PPM. A transvenous dual chamber PPM was implanted with the right atrial lead in the standard position. However, the ventricular lead was positioned in the coronary sinus (CS) to avoid placing a transvalvular lead. She represented post-operatively with further palpitations due to typical atrial flutter that was treated with radiofrequency ablation. Two months after, she was well with TTE confirming normally functioning TV with no TR.
She remained well until she represented 5 years later with recurrent syncope. ECG monitoring revealed capture failure on the CS pacing lead with a sudden large elevation in ventricular lead impedance and threshold. Prior to the pacing system revision, repeat TTE demonstrated moderate TR. Lead revision was challenging owing to a CS stenosis just before the bifurcation of the anterolateral branches. Proximal to the stenosis, poor stability, intermittent capture, and twitch at low outputs prevented a new CS lead. As safe ventricular pacing was imperative, a thinner SelectSecure 3830 (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) lead was placed in the lower RV septum. Subsequent TTE at 2 months reassuringly revealed unchanged moderate TR. Medical therapy included a novel oral anticoagulant (NOAC) and diuretic therapy to maximize valve longevity and reduce the TR.
At follow-up, 4 months later, she noted breathlessness, abdominal bloating, and fatigue preventing her from attending the gym. On examination, there was a small amount of pedal oedema, and the jugular venous pressure was raised to the jaw line at 45°. Subsequent TTE revealed severe TR with preserved RV size and function . The mean gradient across the TV was 8 mmHg. She was initially given increased loop diuretic therapy whilst further assessments were performed.
At a multi-disciplinary team (MDT) meeting that included cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, and cardiac anaesthetists, it was felt that the lead was likely splinting one of the TV leaflets down increasing the TR. Whilst surgical intervention and staged procedures were discussed, both the team and patient favoured a percutaneous combined procedure approach. Factors that influenced this decision included her young age as well as the fact this would be her second sternotomy. It was agreed to evaluate the severity of the TR following lead extraction before intervening on the valve in a combined percutaneous procedure using leadless pacemaker implantation, extraction of the existing pacing system, and percutaneous tricuspid VIV replacement with the use of intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE).
With ultrasound guidance, femoral venous access was obtained and upsized to a 26F GORE® Dry seal sheath (WM Gore, USA). Utilizing the delivery kit, the Micra AV™ PPM (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was first advanced across the TV and positioned in the RV apex . Prior to deployment, standard testing and stability tests were performed (see , ). The device was then deployed and parameters confirmed. The transvenous device was programmed off, and she was paced via the leadless system.
The transvenous system extraction began by making an incision over the device, removing the generator, and freeing the leads. Using in order, gentle traction, locking stylets, and Evolution cutting sheaths (Cook Medical, USA), the RV, atrial, and CS leads were fully extracted. The pocket was closed in layers. Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated no complications following extraction, but the TR remained severe despite removal of the pacing lead. As agreed, we then proceeded to TV replacement.
An Amplatz Super Stiff Guidewire (Boston Scientific, USA) was deployed in the distal right pulmonary artery, and then a 30 mm Cristal balloon (Balt extrusion, Montmorency, France) was inflated across the valve for sizing. Next, a 29 mm Edwards Sapien 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) was advanced and deployed satisfactorily (see , ) across the TV. Fluoroscopy demonstrated satisfactory valve position . This was further confirmed with TOE demonstrating a well-seated replacement with no TR. Femoral venous closure was achieved with the Perclose ProGlide™ (Abbott Vascular, Redwood City, CA, USA) and a Z-stitch.
Post-procedurally, the NOAC was switched to long-term aspirin. Initial follow-up at 3 months demonstrated a significant improvement in her symptoms and a well-seated TV on TTE with no TR and a valve gradient of 4 mmHg. We were unable to achieve AV synchrony despite reprogramming the AV Micra, and it is currently programmed VVIR with the only issue being mild breathlessness at peak exertion at the gym. At 12 months, she remains well, still going to the gym regularly and TTE confirming a well-seated valve with a trace of TR (mean gradient 5.2 mmHg) .