An 80-year-old white female presented to the hospital with left lower facial swelling progressively increasing in size over the past two months. There was no history of dysphagia, odynophagia, fever, or weight loss. There was no history of lesions in the parotid gland.
On examination, a 2.5 cm tender swelling with ill-defined borders was noted over the left parotid gland. Examination of the temporomandibular joint was normal.
Ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass in the left parotid, 2.8 cm in the greatest dimension with poorly defined borders . A magnetic resonance imaging was done which showed a well-defined cystic and/or necrotic mass involving the left parotid gland, 3.4 × 3.0 × 3.0 cm . The lesion involved the superficial lobe of the parotid gland and passed through the stylomandibular tunnel to involve the lateral aspect of the deep lobe of the gland and demonstrated heterogenous increased and decreased STIR signal, with heterogenous enhancement with areas of cystic change/necrosis.
Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration was done using 21- and 25-gauge needles and reported as atypia of undetermined significance-Milan classification 3. The smears showed scattered clusters and single cells with increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and some hyperchromasia in a background of debris with lymphocytes and neutrophils, most likely representing necrosis. While an inflammatory or cystic process is possible, the possibility of either primary or metastatic malignancy could not be excluded.
This was followed by a left total parotidectomy, left selective neck dissections levels 2 and 3, and soft tissue reconstruction using sternocleidomastoid muscle. An intraoperative consultation was done and was reported as adenocarcinoma with a poorly differentiated component . The deep lobe showed a 3.5 × 2.9 × 2.9 cm white tan, focally calcified lesion abutting the resection margin. On microscopy, the lesion was composed of distinct carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements both involving the adjacent soft tissue and adipose tissue. The carcinomatous component was composed of adenoid cystic carcinoma with predominant tubular and cribriform growth patterns, and focal solid growth patterns . Also, there was a high-grade spindle cell neoplasm with occasional giant cells and scattered mitoses, and extensive necrosis. Occasional foci of chondroid differentiation were noted .
Immunohistochemical stains performed on the tumor showed CAM 5.2, CD117, p63, SMMH , p40, CK7, pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, and GATA-3 positive in adenoid cystic carcinoma, but negative in sarcoma component. Androgen receptors, CD57, and calponin were negative. The sarcoma component was positive for vimentin and S-100 highlighted the foci of chondroid differentiation . Ki-67 proliferation index was 50–70% in the sarcomatous area. No foci of pleomorphic adenoma were identified. It was suggested that this morphology could represent a carcinosarcoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma or de novo carcinosarcoma. Lymph nodes were negative for metastatic carcinoma.
The patient is currently undergoing radiotherapy of the tumor bed and skull base due to the propensity of perineural invasion of the adenoid cystic component.