A 65-year-old Caucasian man presented with a sudden onset of severe headache and with a three-month history of balance disturbance. Apart from a pathologic finger-nose test result and positive Grasset test result on the left side, no other physical or neurologic abnormalities were found. Computed tomography (CT) showed a large 4 cm, right-sided parietal parasagittal tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large 4 cm, inhomogeneously enhancing mass that exhibited a wide falx attachment and dural tail. The meningeal mass was surrounded by extensive edema of the right parietal lobe . Cerebral blood volume (CBV) map showed high intratumoral CBV. MR spectroscopy showed high choline:N-acetylaspartate and choline:creatine ratios (9.5 and 15, respectively) as well as occurrence of lactate and lipid peak in the tumor but not in the surrounding edema. Although the morphologic findings of the supratentorial mass on conventional MRI were consistent with meningioma, the occurrence of the extensive edema and the MR spectroscopy findings were highly suggestive of metastasis, and our final radiologic diagnosis was meningeal metastasis. The patient was admitted to the neurology department, and immediate treatment with cortisone therapy was started. A search for the primary tumor with CT and FDG-PET (fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography) revealed lymph node enlargement and increased FDG uptake in the left inguinal region, iliac, aortocaval and paraaortic regions. Needle biopsy was obtained from the enlarged lymph nodes in the left inguinal region. Removal of three skin lesions in the left lower limb showed no definite primary tumor.
The large supratentorial meningeal tumor was treated with gamma knife. MRI control 13 days after treatment with gamma knife showed marked reduction of the volume of the intracranial meningeal tumor . Retroperitoneal and inguinal lymph node dissection was performed. Histopathology showed small cell carcinoma consistent with MCC (immunohistopathologic analysis was positive for the epithelial markers [AE1/AE3 and CK20] and neurofilament but negative for lymphoma and melanoma markers [CD45 and HMB45, respectively]). Cerebrospinal fluid cytology also showed MCC.
About three months after the retroperitoneal and inguinal lymph node dissection, the patient received 40 Gy of external radiation for the paraaortal and iliac retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis and 50.9 Gy for the metastasis in the left inguinal region. Thereafter, FDG-PET showed total regression of the FDG uptake in the lymph nodes, which previously had shown increased uptake. A planned MRI of the brain about six months after the onset of symptoms showed evidence of cerebellar leptomeningeal enhancement , which was immediately treated with 30 Gy of palliative radiation therapy. FDG-PET study approximately seven months after the onset of symptoms showed a new enlarged left-sided axillary lymph node with increased FDG uptake. Approximately eight months after the onset of symptoms, the patient was admitted for increasing back pain and a four-day history of rapidly progressing weakness of the lower limbs that required the patient to start using a wheelchair. On examination, lower limb weakness, hyporeflexia and a positive Babinski sign were found. Emergency MRI of the spine and the spinal canal showed that the dural sac between the first and fifth lumbar vertebra was filled with intradural tumor masses with mild contrast enhancement . There were multiple tumor masses in the epidural space with extension into several lumbar and lower thoracic neural foramens. Because the patient's general condition deteriorated rapidly, further radiation therapy against the intraspinal tumors was not possible. The patient died two weeks after the detection of the intraspinal tumors. At autopsy, lung metastases were found, but there was no evidence of residual macroscopic intracranial tumor and no metastases to the vertebral column. Unfortunately, some technical difficulties restrained the examination of the spinal canal.