A 70-year-old female patient presented with abdominal pain and weight loss. Colonoscopy revealed an obstructive right-sided tumor. Pathology results showed a dMMR adenocarcinoma (MLH1 promoter hypermethylation) and the CEA was 2.5, indicating that the patient was not a CEA secretor. A subsequent CT scan demonstrated an irresectable ascending colon carcinoma with suspected ingrowth in the duodenum and abdominal wall, without any distant metastasis. See for this CT scan. Because of the irresectability, neoadjuvant treatment with pembrolizumab (200 mg iv once every 3 weeks) and ataluren (3 times daily; 500 mg, 500 mg and 1250 mg), in the phase 2 ATAPEMBRO study, was started. In preparation for potential complications from obstruction, a loop ileostomy was created. After 5 cycles of neoadjuvant treatment, the patient developed an acute kidney injury and liver enzyme disorder, leading to the discontinuation of the treatment. A new CT scan showed an impressive response to the neoadjuvant therapy, making the patient a candidate for surgical resection. In , this CT scan is displayed. At this point, the CEA was still not elevated and had a value of 4.
The demonstrates a step-by-step surgical procedure performed on this patient: a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy including shaving and closure of the duodenum. A medial-to-lateral approach was utilized to access the submesenteric plane. The CME technique, including D2 lymphadenectomy and CVL, was performed; the SMV was fully exposed until the gastrocolic trunk of Henle and the ileocolic vessels were ligated at their origin. During surgery, the tumor was found to be adhesive to the duodenum, making it challenging to distinguish between fibrosis/inflammation and tumor. Based on a pretreatment gastroscopy, which showed no intraluminal invasion of the duodenum, and the significant response observed on the CT scan, a decision was made to resect the tumor, including only the serosal layer of the duodenum. The serosal layer of the duodenum was closed crosswise, and a side-to-side intracorporeal anastomosis between the ileum and transverse colon was performed (see for a detailed step-by-step description of the procedure).
Postoperatively, the patient experienced gastroparesis, for which a nasogastric tube was placed and total parental feeding was initiated. There were no other complications. The patient was discharged after 9 days and underwent follow-up according to the guidelines of the ATAPEMBRO trial. Pathology results showed a ypT0N1c tumor with 18 negative lymph nodes and 1 tumor deposit (dMMR). Follow-up CT scans at 3, 6 and 9 months postoperatively showed no signs of recurrence or metastasis, and the CEA remained below 5 throughout this follow-up.