A 46-year-old female presented with the left-sided hemiparesis, hemispatial neglect, and dysarthria (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale [NIHSS] score, 11). Right intracranial internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion was suspected based on magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) at 343 min from the onset of these symptoms. We did not, however, detect a cerebral aneurysm on MRA. The patient was not eligible for IV tPA therapy due to the time constraints and subsequently received endovascular therapy by MT under local anesthesia.
Conventional angiography revealed terminal occlusion of the ICA . The microcatheter passed through the occlusion site, and contrast injection showed that it was guided distal to the occlusion site; an MCA aneurysm was also revealed . The stent retriever (Trevo 4 × 30 mm; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) was deployed from the MCA M2 segment proximally to cover the thrombus , and the reperfusion catheter (Catalyst 6; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) was placed at the ICA terminal. Recanalization of the anterior cerebral artery was achieved on the first attempt, but the MCA M1 proximal occlusion remained . At the second attempt, the same two thrombectomy devices were employed in a manner similar to that in the first attempt. Angiography performed after the stent retriever deployment showed subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) , possibly caused by the rupture of the aneurysm during withdrawal of the first stent or during microguidewire manipulation, until the second stent was deployed. We immediately lowered the blood pressure and carefully carried out MT by withdrawing the stent retriever and the reperfusion catheter simultaneously. In the angiography after the second MT, we confirmed that the bleeding due to the ruptured MCA aneurysm had stopped and recanalization of thrombolysis in cerebral infarction (TICI) 2b was achieved . Flat-panel detector computed tomography (FDCT) showed SAH and extravasated contrast medium . Shortly thereafter, coil embolization of the ruptured aneurysm was performed under general anesthesia . The NIHSS score after a month from the onset showed improvement, dropping from 11 to 6, since the initial assessment.