A 65-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu University on March 18, 2020. His primary complaint was a lump on the left inner thigh, over the past 2 mo, and a 1-month-old pulmonary occupation. Two months prior to admission, the patient had developed a nodule on his left inner thigh, about the size of a broad bean, and was experiencing pain due to local compression, but with no discomfort, such as ulceration or suppuration. The patient had a cough but no chest pain, bloody sputum, headache or other discomfort.
He had consulted a local hospital where they performed local incision and drainage as well as pathological biopsy, and his condition was considered to be “suppurative infection”. Results from pathological examinations suggested infiltration of malignant tumor with necrosis , while immunohistochemical findings indicated Cytokeratin (CK) (+), Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (+), protein p63 (P63) (partial+), Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) (-), chromogranin A (CgA) (-), S 100 (-), HMB45 (-), cell differentiation factor 34 (CD 34) and CD 31 (-), Ki- 67 (+, > 50%), in support of a poorly differentiated carcinoma, and SC was considered after exclusion of metastasis. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed soft tissue shadows in the tip of the left upper lobe, about 19 mm × 23 mm × 21 mm, suggesting peripheral lung cancer. At the same time, the nodule in the patient’s inner thigh gradually grew, exhibiting local redness, swelling and bleeding.
Medical records revealed that the patient had neither a history of hypertension nor diabetes, but had an unexplained weight loss of 5 kg in the recent 2 mo. He had a 40-year history of tobacco smoking, although he had stopped in the 2 mo prior to admission. He also occasionally drank alcohol for over 40 years, although he was not addicted to it.
There was no pertinent family history.
A lump was found on the left inner thigh.
Routine blood tests were normal, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein. Both liver and kidney function were normal. CA19-9 and CA125 were significantly increased.
The patient underwent further examination to assess tumor metastasis. Analysis of plain and enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images revealed a well-defined mass approximately 32 mm × 28 mm × 29 mm in size in the left parietal lobe. An enhanced chest CT scan showed a lobulated high-density shadow 23 mm × 21 mm × 25 mm in size in the upper lobe apex of the left lung, surrounded by spicules. Furthermore, systemic positron emission tomography-CT demonstrated the presence of a malignant lesion (peripheral lung cancer) at the tip of the upper lobe of the left lung, single brain metastasis in the left parietal lobe, and lymph node metastasis in the left inguinal region and the inner upper left thigh. No other abnormalities were observed.