A set of female twin neonates was seen at the clinic as 19-day-old term babies delivered in primary health center. They had bilateral ear piercing without adherence to asepsis on the 9th day of life. No extreme pressure was applied to the ear during or after the procedure. The procedure was uneventful until 4 days after the procedure when the lobules were noticed to have swollen and darkened. There was no discharge from the wound, fever or refusal of feeds. There was no known history of atopy in the older siblings.
The mother removed the earrings on the fourth day after the ear piercing and noticed rims of demarcated dark tissues. Subsequently, the ears of the first twin developed abnormally large buttonholes instead of the earring pinhole. The second twin had some degree of distortion which necessitated presentation to a tertiary hospital.
Babies were delivered at 38 weeks of gestation without any preceding history of premature rupture of membrane or vaginal discharge in the mother. Babies were on exclusive breastfeeding. Examination revealed a 2.7 kg first twin (T1) with a temperature of 37.5 °C, pulse rate of 118 pm and respiratory rate of 56 cpm. The right ear showed a buttonhole ulcer about 0.5 cm in the widest dimension with inflamed surrounding skin. The left ear showed a smaller buttonhole ulcer measuring 0.4 cm in the widest dimension .
The second twin (T2) weighed 3.7 kg with a temperature of 37.5 °C, pulse rate of 120 pulsations per minute and respiratory rate of 60 cpm. The right ear showed a 2cmx0.2 cm ulcer along the rim of the lobule with a necrotic bed and inflamed surrounding skin. The left ear had an ulcer measuring about 3cmx2cmx1cm affecting whole thickness of the lobule. The edge was undermined and the surrounding skin inflamed .
A diagnosis of necrotizing soft tissue infection of both ears was made for each twin. They were admitted, wound swab and tissue specimen were sent for microscopy, culture and sensitivity (MCS) and histology respectively for the both twin. Erythromycin and metronidazole syrups were commenced empirically while awaiting sensitivity results. Wound care was provided by dressing wound with 5% povidone-iodine ointment.
T1 wound swab MCS showed growth of Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to erythromycin and ceftazidime but resistant to vancomycin and ampicillin, amoxicillin, and augmentin. T2 wound swab MCS yielded Saureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa which were sensitive to ceftazidime, levofloxacin, augmentin but resistant to erythromycin.
After 2 days on admission, the parents declined further inpatient treatment on financial grounds and returned home on oral drugs. However, on telephone follow-up, the wounds were noted to have healed well and the twins remained healthy.