A 69-year-old unemployed woman from Asia developed symptoms of painless bilateral breast masses. Given these persistent symptoms, the patient opted for a further treatment at our hospital.
The patient first found bilateral breast masses without pain in June 2020. Mammography was performed on September 7, 2020 in another hospital, showing calcification foci in both breasts (BI-RADS 3). In addition, there was a focal lesion with asymmetric shadow in the middle before the upper part of the right breast (BI-RADS 4B). Breast ultrasound suggested the breast masses as possible malignant breast tumors. However, the patient refused a core needle biopsy. The patient came to our hospital for surgical treatment.
The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes for 20 years. She was given long-term treatment with 22 U Humalog 25R in the morning and 20 U Humalog 25R in the evening via subcutaneous injection as well as voglibose tablets (0.2 mg) three times a day. With a poor glucose control, no diabetic complications were found till now.
The patient had a free personal and family history.
The physical examination revealed symmetrical breasts, no orange peel appearance change, no dimpling, and double nipples without retraction or discharge. At the 1 o'clock position on the right breast, a mass (size 2 cm × 2 cm) was present with no tenderness but an unclear boundary, irregular shape, poor mobility, and skin adhesion (-). At the 12 o'clock and 1 o'clock positions on the left breast, masses (approximate sizes of 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm and 1.5 cm × 2 cm, respectively) were present with no tenderness but an unclear boundary, irregular shape, poor mobility, and skin adhesion (-). Enlarged lymph nodes were not found in the supraclavicular and subclavian regions and bilateral axilla .
Glycosylated hemoglobin in serum was 8.3%, which exceeded the reference range of 3.6%-6.0%. Cholesterol in serum was 8.53 mmol/L, surpassing the upper limit reference 5.18 mmol/L. Triglyceride in serum was 2.89 mmol/L, also higher than the upper limit reference of 1.70 mmol/L. Other serum test results including routine blood tests, coagulation function tests, liver function tests, and tumor markers were normal.
Breast ultrasound showed the following features: (1) Solid occupation of the upper outer quadrant of both breasts (BI-RADS 4C); and (2) A solid mass at the 12 o'clock position in the left breast (BI-RADS 4B). Lymph nodes were found in the bilateral axilla and left supraclavicular region. No enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the right clavicle . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast showed the following features: Irregularly enhanced images in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast (BI-RADS 4C); patchy abnormal signals in the upper outer quadrants of the left breast (BI-RADS 4B); and fibrocystic changes in both breasts (BI-RADS 2) .