Local Ethics Committee approved the study. Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects.
A 22-year-old man with a past medical history of focal epilepsy secondary to polymicrogyria and recurrent epistaxis presented to the Emergency Department with sudden onset of transient dysarthria and left-sided weakness. Cerebral CT scan and CT angiography in the acute setting were normal and ECG was normal.
Brain MRI confirmed left multifocal polymicrogyria and disclosed a right frontal acute stroke and multiple infratentorial and supratentorial AVMs. Spinal AVMs were absent but spinal MRI disclosed a focal cavity of the (cervical) ependymal canal. Transcranial ultrasound Doppler (UD) disclosed a right to left shunt with shower pattern. Carotid UD, cardiac echocardiography and blood tests including thrombophilia screening were normal. The transthoracic contrast-enhanced echocardiography revealed, however, an extra cardiac shunt. Chest CT was performed with evidence of multiple pulmonary AVMs as the obvious source of paradoxical embolism .
In the left lung the biggest AVMs measured 17 mm with three feeding arteries of 7, 3 and 2 mm in diameter, while in the right lung the biggest AVM measured 12 mm with a feeding artery of 2.5 mm in diameter.
Given the risk of a recurrent event, the patient was started on a full dose of low-molecular-weight heparin and underwent successfully endovascular embolization of all pulmonary AVMs. Anticoagulation was replaced by aspirin 100 mg daily six months later.
The patient’s mother had been clinically diagnosed with HHT with recurrent epistaxis and telangiectasias of the face and lips. She displayed pulmonary but no cerebral AVMs.
The patient’s younger brother (aged 20 years) suffered from recurrent epistaxis and was found to carry cortical dysplasia type II in the absence of cerebral AVMs on cerebral MRI performed because of transient episodes of blurred vision. Pulmonary CT scan disclosed multifocal AVMs .
Coding regions and intronic boundaries of ENG, were analyzed by Sanger sequencing. A heterozygous ENG variant, c.3G > A (p.Met1lle), was detected in the patient. It was also found in the mother of the patient and in his younger brother who displayed cortical dysplasia type 2 . Complementary DNA was retrotranscribed by blood-extracted RNA and RT-PCR amplicons confirmed the expression of mutant allele in all affected family members . Quantitative probe-based RT-PCR studies did not show any difference in ENG transcript levels in mutated subjects compared to healthy controls .