We present a 28-year-old male patient with a history of Asperger's syndrome, moderate mental retardation, disruptive behavior disorder, and pharmacoresistant epilepsy. The patient’s first seizure occurred at three months old without any obvious cause. Brain MRI studies were without abnormalities. Ambulatory EEG recordings demonstrated generalized, 2–4 Hz epileptiform discharges seen throughout the various stages of wakefulness, drowsiness, and sleep; in addition, there were numerous generalized electrographic seizures of the same 3–4 Hz frequency suggesting absence type seizures. The patient was experiencing five to six generalized clonic-tonic seizures a week despite numerous medication trials; thus, VNS was implanted seven years ago. The VNS therapy was highly effective and the patient experienced only two seizures since the surgery until a year ago. Since then, the patient has had three episodes of generalized clonic-tonic seizures. Additionally, two months ago the patient began experiencing a stabbing pain at the IPG site four to five times a week, lasting up to 5 min. All this was suspicious for VNS system malfunction, but device interrogation was not concerning – it showed the Demipulse device (model 103) with normal output current set at 1.5 mA with 30 Hz frequency and 500 ms pulse width at 16% duty cycle (30 s on, 3 min off) with remaining battery 8–18% and with 2746 Ohm system impedance. A CT of the neck and chest was obtained and showed unusually tilted IPG but no obvious hardware or surrounding tissue problems . Additionally, plain radiographs were obtained and showed VNS contacts at C5 level without visible hardware discontinuities . Breakthrough seizures and stabbing pains prompted the consideration of VNS system exploration surgery. Worth noting, the patient had incomplete right bundle branch block on preoperative ECG , thus, preoperative cardiology evaluation was requested. However, our patient did not follow with this recommendation. Due to the fact that our patient already had VNS in place and it was highly effective, the decision was made to proceed with surgery. During the surgery the new IPG was implanted—AspireSR (model 106). The close inspection of the original VNS lead in the chest pocket revealed the ruptured insulation layer. Thus, the surgery was extended to the VNS lead replacement to the new PerenniaFLEX lead (model 304–30). Noteworthy, the new lead contacts were placed more distally (caudally) on the freshly dissected segment of the left vagus nerve as the old contacts were embedded in the tight epineurial scar and, thus, were left in situ. However, the intraoperative device interrogation with a standard 1 mA output resulted in immediate asystole for the duration of stimulation and it was reproducible until the output was decreased to 0.675 mA which is less than a half of the original output value (1.5 mA). In the postanesthesia recovery room, the patient was experiencing excessive coughing abolishable by prolonged magnet application over IPG. Therefore, further programming was performed with normal output current titration down to 0.25 mA, with signal frequency of 20 Hz, pulse width of 250 ms, on time of 30 s, and off time of 2 min with AutoStim output turned off. At 6 months after surgery, the normal output current was titrated to 0.5 mA without side effects. At 12-month postoperative follow up, the patient’s caregiver reported “small staring spells once every few days but no big seizures since surgery”. The plain radiograph of the neck showed the retained old VNS contacts at C5 level and the new VNS contacts more caudally . The upward titration of VNS output was arranged with live concomitant ECG, IV access, and atropine available. First, VNS was turned off and ECG was recorded to establish the baseline . Then the normal VNS output was gradually increased to 0.75 mA without any significant bradyarrhythmic changes on ECG . Further titration to 1 mA resulted in excessive coughing, thus, it was reverted to 0.75 mA. Three months later, the patient was seen again and VNS normal output was successfully increased to 1.0 mA without any significant ECG changes or clinical side effects.