The 26-year-old healthy mother had given birth in her first spontaneous, uneventful pregnancy to monozygotic twins at week 35, one of whom had a birth weight of 2.320 grams. The mother did not have a history of infection, metabolic disease, autoimmune disease, or drug usage during the pregnancy period. After the evaluation of the fetuses at 35th week of gestation, an emergency cesarean section was performed on the diagnosis of fetal distress due to bradycardia of the index fetus which was determined by a non-stress test. Following birth, both babies had normal Apgar scores. While the first twin’s physical examination proved her to be normal with a pulse rate consistent with her age, the second twin had a pulse rate of approximately 40 beats/minute; therefore, the twin with bradycardia was hospitalized. Informed consent was obtained from the parents at this time. The patient was confirmed to have CAVB by 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG) (MAC 1600, GE Healthcare, USA) and 24-hour Holter monitorization (Life card CF, Del Mar Reynolds Medical, United Kingdom) . No structural cardiac defect was observed on the echocardiogram (ECHO) (Philips IE33; USA). Serum electrolyte levels, cardiac enzymes, and pro-brain natriuretic peptide levels were normal, and there were no findings of congestive heart failure (shortening fraction: 36%). Viral serology markers for myocarditis etiology were negative. Isoproterenol (HOSPIRA, INC., Lake Forest, USA) infusion was initiated for significant bradycardia (35-40/minute). Following treatment with isoproterenol, a normal sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 120/minute was reached; therefore, treatments were discontinued. Two days later, the heart rate dropped back to 50 beats/minute and was confirmed by a 12-lead ECG. Isoproterenol treatment was restarted and then discontinued one week later as the majority of the rhythm was sinus. On the fifteenth day of the follow-up, the patient was confirmed to have a normal sinus rhythm with rare Wenckebach type II AVB . As the patient’s overall condition and vital signs were stable with normal cardiac functions, the patient was discharged. The ECG and ECHO findings of the mother and the other twin were normal.
The immunological markers, including anti-Ro/SSA, anti-LA/SSB, anti-DNA, antinuclear antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, anti-Sm, U1-RNP, Jo-1 and Scl70, of both infants and the mother were found to be negative. Anti-Ro/SSA and anti-LA/SSB immunoblotting yielded negative results in a reference laboratory with ISO 15189 accreditation.
At the first and sixth month follow-up visits, the auto-antibodies of the patient and the mother were checked for late seroconversion and were found to be negative. At the sixth month follow-up visit, both Holter monitoring and the ECG indicated a normal sinus rhythm.