A 2-year-old boy (body surface area 1.8 m2) came to our hospital with a 6-month
history of shortness of breath and recurrent respiratory infection. Initial examination
showed no obvious positive clinical signs. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) found that
the origin of the LPA was abnormal. There was a blood vessel arising from the right side of
the pulmonary annulus, which went across the main pulmonary artery (MPA) to the left
pulmonary hilum with an inner diameter of 3.5 mm , while the RPA was normal with approximately
a 8 mm diameter. The z-value of the LPA and RPA was −3.16 and 2.4,
respectively. Although biphasic blood flow in this vessel could be observed by TTE, the
proximal orificium of this vessel was narrow so that the amount of regurgitation to the
right ventricle was very limited . Other findings included left atrium and left ventricle
enlargement, right aortic arch . Multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) further
demonstrated the anomalous origin of the LPA arising from the right ventricle with stenosis,
and a large lateral branch arising from the descending aorta to supply the left lung blood
. The patient
had no other intracardiac or extracardiac malformations. Besides, there was no relevant
family history, and subsequent genetic testing did not identify a deletion in the region of
22q11.
We performed a surgical correction for this patient. First, the large lateral branch was
found and ligated through the left sixth intercostal space thoracotomy without any effect on
oxygenation. Then, a midline sternotomy was performed, and operative inspection finally
demonstrated the above diagnosis. The LPA was seen arising from the root of MPA near the AAO
and crossing the anterior wall of the MPA to the upper left, finally entering into the left
pulmonary hilum with approximately a 3.5 mm diameter . During the cardiopulmonary bypass, we found
that LPA and MPA had a common wall without connection . The LPA was actually arising from the right
ventricle without valvular tissue . The proximal orificium of the LPA was closed with
interrupted sutures by the autologous pericardium . The connection of the LPA and MPA was
completed through the incision of the common wall . Then, the anterior wall of the LPA was
enlarged to its bifurcation with an autologous pericardium patch . The patient successfully
received anatomic correction and discharged in postoperative Day 7. The whole corrected
course and morphometry of pulmonary artery were confirmed by TTE and MDCT 1 month after
operation . So
far, the patient has been followed up without any symptoms for 23 months.