A 38-year-old man who did not smoke or use illicit drugs and who had a 2-year history of HCM was admitted to the emergency room at our hospital because of chest discomfort. Two hours before admission, he felt a 5-min period of chest tightness when he squatted down to fix a faucet. One hour later, at rest, he experienced a second episode of chest tightness and pressure, which radiated to the shoulders, complicated by nausea and sweating. The discomfort was moderate to severe in intensity. This episode lasted for approximately 2 h. He denied having any palpitations or loss of consciousness during this episode.
In the past year, he had several episodes of amaurosis when he changed positions. He did not take any home medications after the diagnosis of HCM. His father died of HCM in his 50 s. His older brother was diagnosed with nonobstructive HCM by echocardiography.
The patient’s blood pressure was 92/75 mmHg (right arm, supine position), and his heart rate was 100 bpm. The initial cardiac troponin I level was 0.126 ng/ml. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a normal sinus rhythm with precordial ST elevation, as well as poor R wave progression and T wave inversions in the precordial and I/aVL leads. ST-T segment changes were noted in the acute phase compared with his prior electrocardiogram in 2018 . Emergency coronary angiography was performed. However, no occluding lesions in the coronary arteries were found. Instead, diffuse dilation and slow blood flow (TIMI grade II) of the left descending artery were observed .
To confirm the diagnosis of AMI, we measured the change in the cardiac troponin isoform I levels measured using a nonhighly sensitive assay with an upper limit of 0.02 ng/ml. The levels increased from 0.126 to 0.443 ng/ml and 0.814 ng/ml at hours 5 and 7, respectively, peaked to 3.109 ng/ml 12 h later, and then decreased. Additionally, a follow-up ECG showed significant changes compared with the first ECG —i.e., the inverted T waves became normal in the precordial leads. The immediate echocardiogram also showed reduced anterior wall motion and wall thickening. Cardiac positron emission computed tomography showed nontransmural myocardial infarction in the left ventricular anterior wall and the apex, in accordance with the left anterior descending artery (LAD)-dominant areas (performed 9 days after admission, Fig. ). Overall, these clues supported the diagnosis of AMI in the left ventricular anterior wall.
Further evaluation of the echocardiogram demonstrated hypertrophy involving the interventricular septum, left ventricular anterior wall and apex, severe LVOT obstruction and mild right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction. The measured wall thickness values were as follows: 34 mm in the anterior interventricular septum, 36 mm in the apex, 9 mm in the lateral wall, 12 mm in the posterior wall, and 11 mm in the inferior wall. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) resulted in the narrowest outflow tract width of 5 mm. The peak gradient across the LVOT was 73 mmHg, and the RVOT was 23 mmHg at rest. Tissue Doppler imaging showed a mitral septal e' of 3 cm/s and mitral lateral e' of 7 cm/s. The mean E/e' was 10, and the E/A was 0.7, indicating grade 2 diastolic dysfunction. Systolic function was preserved with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 64% (performed 6 days later; Fig. ).
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging showed a concentric morphological subtype of HCM —i.e., the left ventricle was diffusely and extremely hypertrophied, with an interventricular septum thickness of 40 mm, inferior wall thickness of 15–16 mm, anterior wall thickness of 18–19 mm, and lateral wall thickness of 12–13 mm. The trabeculae were thickened, and the anterior and posterior papillary muscles were also hypertrophied. In the end diastole, the left ventricular mass was 274.71 g, and the right ventricular mass was 59.38 g. The left ventricular (LV) cavity was relatively small (diastolic diameter 39 mm) without an enlarged left atrium (anterior–posterior diameter 26 mm). The left and right outflow tracts were narrowed with SAM and mild mitral regurgitation. The measured LVEF was 56%, and the cardiac output was 6.6 L/min. CMR showed diffusely patchy late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the septum, and middle and distal segments of the left ventricle. The percentage of left ventricular fibrosis was 51.6% (performed 4 days after admission; Fig. ).
The endomyocardial biopsy revealed cardiomyocyte hypertrophy with vacuolar degeneration, and aberrantly oriented myocytes. Interstitial fibrosis, abnormal small vessels with thickened walls, and focal fibrous scar formation were also observed. The endomyocardial biopsy excluded other diseases, such as phenocopy of HCM and amyloidosis (performed 2 weeks after admission; Fig. ).
Genetic testing revealed that the patient carried a KCNJ2 p.V93I heterozygous variant, which was classified as a variant of uncertain significance based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guideline. No sarcomere gene mutations or variants were found. The gene variant was also carried by his 10-year-old daughter and older brother. His daughter was healthy with a normal ECG and echocardiogram (the pedigree; Fig. ).
Finally, we gave the patient a diagnosis of obstructive HCM, with extreme hypertrophy, biventricular obstruction and diffuse myocardial fibrosis complicated with MINOCA, which is a rare phenotype. His treatment was also a dilemma. On the one hand, he was at high risk of sudden cardiac death because of severe hypertrophy of the left ventricle (> 30 mm) and biventricular obstruction. On the other hand, diffuse fibrosis and new AMI in the anterior wall increased the risk of septal myectomy, such as post-operative cardiac dysfunction, complete heart block and in-hospital mortality. After prudent discussion, extended septal myectomy (Morrow Procedure) was performed one month later. The patient recovered well during the follow-up three months after the surgery.