A 28-year-old, right-handed white man presented with insidious-onset, slowly progressive weakness and wasting of his left deltoid and shoulder girdle muscles for the last 5 years. Initially, he noticed difficulty with abducting his left arm and raising it above head level. The weakness progressed slowly over the first 3 years of initial symptoms, and then became static. He denied history of trauma, shoulder pain, or sensory symptoms, and he was not on any medications prior to development of symptoms.
A neurological examination demonstrated significant atrophy of his left deltoid, supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles, with no fasciculations . His muscle strength, (according to Medical Research Council) was 3 in his deltoid, supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles, 4+ in his biceps and teres major, and 5 in other muscles. Deep tendon reflexes and sensory examination were normal. There were no upper motor neuron signs.
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) of his left upper limb were normal. Electromyography (EMG) revealed fasciculations and fibrillation potentials in his biceps, deltoid and supraspinatus. Large, polyphasic motor unit action potentials with prolonged duration and reduced recruitment pattern were seen in the same muscles; the infraspinatus could not be tested due to severe degree of atrophy. EMG of other muscles in his upper and lower extremities, as well as cervical paraspinal muscles, was normal.
Blood investigations, including complete blood count, sedimentation rate, renal, liver and thyroid function tests, creatine kinase (CK), and vitamins. B12 and D3 were normal. There were negative results for vasculitis screening (rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigens, antiphospholipid antibody) and viral serology: human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his cervical spine, done in the neutral position, was normal , but a flexion-position MRI was not done.
He was diagnosed to have an upper limb proximal form of benign MA. He was prescribed a regular physiotherapy program to strengthen his shoulder muscles and improve range of movement. His muscle strength and functions have remained stable over the past 2 years. He is currently working as a clerk, with no functional limitations due to his illness. He is doing regular exercises given by his physiotherapist on a daily basis.