A 7-year old male (individual III:1, Figure A) with both CFEOM1 and congenital aniridia was recruited as were his family members, including his parents, grandfather (individual I:1), grandmother (individual I:2), uncle (individual II:3) and aunt (individual II:4). He was found to have no ability to make pursuit movements soon after birth. Ophthalmologic examinations at age 2 revealed that he had congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, aniridia, foveal hypoplasia, and nystagmus, but had normal corneas and transparent lenses.
His grandfather (individual I:1) was the first individual in this pedigree to have congenital fibrosis of extraocular muscles. The grandfather was found to have limited extraocular movement soon after birth and underwent strabismus surgery for treatment of CFEOM in 1991. His head posture and ocular movement had been improved after surgery. The boy’s mother underwent strabismus surgery for CFEOM treatment in 2003. Her head posture and eye position were improved after surgery. His uncle (individual II:3) was diagnosed with CFEOM, but has not undergone strabismus surgery. All affected individuals with CFEOM in this family have typical features of CFEOM1 including bilateral blepharoptosis, chin elevation and ophthalmoplegia with the eyes fixed in an infraducted position of roughly 20 to 30 degrees below the horizontal midline .
The proband’s father was affected with congenital aniridia, foveal hypoplasia and nystagmus. The iris was completely absent at its base in both of his eyes, similar to the iris in the boy’s eyes . He had normal corneas and transparent lenses with the best corrected visual acuity of 0.1 in both of his eyes. In addition to an ocular examination, systemic and neurological examinations were also performed for all affected individuals in this family. For differentiating isolated aniridia from WAGR syndrome, abdominal ultrasonographic assessments were performed in each of the affected individuals with aniridia. However, no abnormal signs in the kidney or urogenital system were detected by B-scan, and neither were mental retardation, cerebellar anomaly, and olfactory or hearing difficulties found in the boy and his father as well.