A 55 year old woman developed anorexia, vaginal bleeding, and a non-productive cough over one month. Her last menstrual period was 11 months earlier, and she had noted some vaginal spotting for 5 months. CT scans revealed a large uterine mass and multiple lung nodules. An endometrial curetting showed small fragments of tumor consisting of two components; aggregates of atypical plump mononuclear cells with hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei were interspersed with numerous large multinucleated osteoclast-type giant cells, some of which had more than 30 benign-appearing nuclei . Up to ten mitoses power high-power field were observed in the mononuclear cells. Immunoperoxidase stain for the histiocytic marker CD68 was positive in a subpopulation of mononuclear cells and in the osteoclast-type giant cells. These cells were negative for the epithelial marker cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) which highlighted scattered benign endometrial glands. A fine needle aspirate of the lung showed sheets of atypical mononuclear plump cells and numerous scattered benign-appearing osteoclast-type giant cells . Some mononuclear cells were positive for the endometrial stromal marker CD10; all mononuclear and multinucleated cells were positive for the mesenchymal cell marker vimentin; CD117 (c-kit) was weakly positive in multinucleated cells. All cells were negative for estrogen receptors, cytokeratins (7, 20, AE1/AE3), muscle specific actin and mucin.
On presenting to our clinic, her history was remarkable for anorexia, uterine bleeding, dyspnea on exertion, a non-productive cough, and a 10 pound weight loss during the previous month. Her past history was notable for treated hypertension and hypothyroidism, an episode of gout, and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. Her medications were lisinopril, L-thyroxine, and a multivitamin. Her physical examination was notable for scattered crackles and occasional wheezes, and mild lower abdominal tenderness and fullness. A repeat CT scan revealed prominent tumor progression during the preceeding month, with a 11.6 cm uterine mass and lung nodules, some >4 cm in diameter . Hemoglobin was 8.5 g/dl, AST, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, creatinine, and electrolytes were normal. Treatment was begun with pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin (45 mg/m2, day 1), ifosfamide (9 g/m2 total dose given by continuous infusion over 6 days, days 1–6) with mesna uroprotection , and bevacizumab 5 mg/kg every 2 weeks, with pegfilgrastim 6 mg given subcutaneously on day 7, with cycles repeated every 28 days. After the first cycle of chemotherapy, repeat CT imaging revealed a tumor response in the lung nodules , although her symptoms were unchanged. At the start of cycle 3 her cough, vaginal bleeding, and dyspnea on exertion had noticeably improved. The dose of pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin was decreased by 10% for the third and subsequent cycles due to mucositis and skin rash. A CT scan before cycle 4 showed continued tumor regression. Blood pressure remained controlled and no proteinuria was noted. After 7 cycles the tumor had stabilized by CT imaging . The lung nodules had largely disappeared, but the uterine mass remained at about 8.5 cm. She was given cycle 8 without bevacizumab in anticipation of hysterectomy. Repeat CT imaging showed stable disease, and she underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 8 weeks after cycle 8.
The uterus contained a poorly demarcated tumor that measured 4.8 × 4.0 × 3.5 cm arising in the left lateral wall . Multiple leiomyomata ranging from 0.3 to 2.2 cm were also identified. Sections from the tumor showed atypical mononucleated plump to spindle shaped tumor cells diffusely infiltrating the myometrium and within dilated blood vessels. Tumor cells accounted for approximately 30 % of the cells. Vascular invasion was observed. Occasional multinucleated giant cells of osteoclastic-type were also recognized; however, these were rare and tended to form small aggregates. Extensive areas of necrosis showed dystrophic calcification. Large numbers of histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm and hemosiderin granules were observed throughout the tumor; these cells accounted for approximately 70% of the cellular population. A subpopulation of mononuclear cells was positive for CD10; osteoclastic cells were non-reactive. Some of the mononuclear plump and spindle cells were weakly positive for actin; they were negative for desmin and smooth muscle myosin. CD117 was weakly positive in the osteoclastic cells. The cell division marker Ki67 was positive in tumor cells and negative in histiocytes and osteoclasts; Stains for common leukocyte antigen (CD45) and for the histiocytic marker CD68 were positive in histiocytes and osteoclasts, but were negative in tumor cells. Stains for lysozyme were weakly positive in histiocytes and osteoclasts but were negative in tumor cells. Stains for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), estrogen receptors, and progesterone receptors were negative. Pelvic washings were negative; the cervix, parametria, tubes, and ovaries were free of tumor.
Two months after the hysterectomy, progression of the lung nodules was noted on CT imaging and therapy with pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin and bevacizumab was begun, but progression was noted after 2 months. Gemcitabine (675 mg/m2 intravenously over 90 min given days 1 and 14 with pegfilgrastim days 2 and 15 due to neutropenia on day 8 of the first cycle, with cycles repeated every 28 days) [,] with bevacizumab was begun, but progression was noted after two months. Therapy was then begun with ifosfamide and etoposide and bevacizumab, and a partial response was observed after two months, with stabilization at 4 months. The patient received a total of 6 cycles of ifosfamide, etoposide, bevacizumab, although bevacizumab was held on day 14 of cycle 6 due to proteinuria. Two months later significant progression was noted. She received 1 cycle of dacarbazine, mitomycin c, and cisplatinum, with a very good response, but prominent toxicity including myelosuppression and fatigue. Two months later tumor progression was noted.