A 44 years old male with no significant past medical or surgical history. Presented with a history of left lower abdominal pain, vomiting, flatulence and constipation for 2 months.
On examination, his abdomen was soft with left lower abdominal tenderness.
CBC and X-ray were unremarkable. An occult blood test was done and came out to be positive. Colonoscopy was performed and showed a lesion originating at 30 cm from the anal verge reaching the rectosigmoid junction. Sigmoid biopsy was obtained and was consistent with moderately differentiated invasive colonic adenocarcinoma.
A computerized tomography (CT) scan abdomen obtained with IV, oral and rectal contrasts revealed a diffuse and annular wall thickening of the sigmoid/descending colon in the left iliac fossa, this affected area was measuring up to about 68 mm in length and up to 10 mm in wall thickness, associated with diffuse adjacent fat stranding and tiny lymph nodes, narrowing its lumen without complete obstruction with adjacent 16 mm soft tissue density. Metastatic workup was negative.
The patient was referred to surgery and low anterior resection was done.
The pathology report was consistent with moderately differentiated invasive colonic adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid. The tumor size was 3.5 cm in greatest dimension and was invading through the muscularis propria into pericolic fat. All margins were free of cancer. There were intramural and extramural lymphovascular as well as perineural invasion. 1 out of 16 lymph nodes was positive. The pathologic stage was pT3N1M0.
The patient was started on adjuvant Capecitabine plus Oxaliplatin.
Upon further investigations for follow-up, positron emission tomography (PET) and CT scans showed metastasis to the lung and abdominal wall. He was referred for chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy to the lung lesions. The patient was then completed stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) to the lung lesions. Post SRS, he was started on Avastin® (bevacizumab) every 3 weeks.
One year after the surgery, the patient presented to the emergency department (ER) unconscious. Upon thorough history, he was complaining of vomiting, diarrhea, lower left quadrant abdominal pain, and low-grade fever, 10 days before presenting to the ER. He was intubated and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) as a case of septic shock.
Head CT scan was unremarkable. CT showed diffusely thickened colon with pericolonic stranding, associated with the possibility of localized collection and abnormal air foci suggestive of localized infection adjacent to the anastomotic site with possible involvement of the small bowel.
After stabilization, the patient was taken for surgery. During laparotomy, there were extensive adhesions, a small bowel loop adhered to the site of the previous anastomosis. A moderate amount of free fluid was found. Features were in keeping with perforation with a contained leak. The small bowel loop was released from the old anastomosis, resection and anastomosis were done along with a diseased colon that was resected with adequate margin. End colostomy was created. He was then discharged in good condition.
The pathology report showed mucosal ulceration with thrombosed blood vessels and inflammatory cells infiltration.
2 weeks after the surgery, the patient presented to ER with massive bleeding per rectum, a portable ultrasound was done in the ER revealed that the rectosigmoid is distended with echogenic material that suggested blood. There were multiple pockets of free fluid in the abdomen, the largest is seen on the left measuring about 53 × 26 mm. Sigmoidoscopy was done, examining up to 16 cm from the anus, there were huge clots of blood with no visible source of bleeding. He was resuscitated with blood transfusion. An interventional radiologist was consulted. Selective crossover of left external iliac artery (EIA) small pseudoaneurysm and intimal irregularity with narrowing 2 cm segment in the proximal portion. That was covered with a stent. Post ballooning angiogram showed clear patency of the left EIA with a smooth outline of the wall, distal left lower limb angiogram showed mild spasm in the left superficial femoral artery (SFA). 4 days later he was discharged in good condition.
Unfortunately, the patient passed away after developing cerebellum brain metastasis. Which he underwent craniotomy for cerebellum mass resection that was positive for metastatic deposits of adenocarcinoma.