A 57-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with distending pain in the right flank for more than 20 days. He swallowed a toothpick by accident in the days immediately prior to symptom onset. Since there were no abdominal symptoms or signs that would interfere with normal eating, he did not try to trace a toothpick excretion. He did not complain of abdominal radiating pain; he also did not have any other complaints. For the pain in the right flank, he received treatment of anti-infection and analgesics at a different institution (details unknown) before admission to our hospital; however, his symptoms improved only slightly. Physical examination results were, as follows: Temperature 36.5 °C, Pulse rate 76/min, Respiratory rate 20/min, and Blood pressure 132/71 mmHg, i.e., his vital signs were stable. The abdomen was soft, without tenderness or rebound tenderness, muscle tension, or abnormal mass. The fluid thrill test and shifting dullness sign were negative, and bowel sound frequency was 3/min. Tenderness and percussion pain were observed in the right flank, without redness, swelling, or increased skin temperature in this area, the fluctuation test was normal. The abdominal CT scan revealed a residual foreign body traversed across the right psoas and sacrospinalis muscle, accompanied with inflammation of the surrounding soft tissues (local abscess formation could not be ruled out; Fig. ). Color Doppler ultrasound of the superficial tissue (right flank pain area) showed that a hyperechoic linear lesion, i.e., the toothpick, was located in a low echo areal between the subcutaneous fat layer and intramuscular layer of the right flank . Abdominal plan X-ray graphy showed no subdiaphragmatic free air, and the routine blood tests and serum C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were within the normal range. With the foreign body located by ultrasound performed in the prone position, the patient was then operated on under local anesthesia (local infiltration anesthesia with 0.5% lidocaine was administered in operative site instantly before operation). The skin and subcutaneous tissues were incised sharply, and a horizontal incision was made in the right lumbar region. The local soft tissue of this area presented with chronic inflammatory change. After separation of the inflammatory granulation tissue, the sharp point of the toothpick was found on the surface of the right sacrospinalis muscle. The toothpick was then removed . After the inflammatory granulation tissue was fully scraped out, the surgical area was washed with hydrogen peroxide and saline, and a drainage tube was inserted at the incision site. The subcutaneous tissue and skin were sutured layer by layer. The operation took 32 min. Piperacillin and tazobactam injection was used as an antibiotherapy after surgery. The post-procedural course was uneventful. On the third day after the operation, the patient’s blood routine was normal and there was no fluid drawn from the drainage tube, the patient was then discharged after the drainage tube was removed. No complications were noted at the 18-month follow-up.