A 51-year-old female of African ethnicity was referred to our oncology center for adjuvant therapy. She had a chief complaint of occipital headache which was associated with dizziness and projectile vomiting for over a year. She had no history of chronic illness. She had three children, and all childbirths were done by cesarean section. She had no previous history of blood transfusion. She had no history of malignancy or cancer within her family. She worked as a nurse. She was married. She denied a history of use of tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs. All vitals were within normal limits. Physical examination was essentially normal. Neurological findings showed that all cranial nerves were within normal limits, and there was no motor or sensory deficit, but she had poor coordination of movement. Basic laboratory investigations were done and included: complete blood count (WBC-4.92 × 103/uL, Hb-12.3 g/dl and platelet-165.0 × 103/uL), urea (5.5 mmol/L), serum creatinine (85.19 micromol/L), alanine aminotransferase (23.1 IU/L), Aspartate aminotransferase (30.1 IU/L), total bilirubin (0.19 mg/dl), and albumin (38.45 g/L) essentially normal with negative human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test. Brain MRI was conducted and showed a left posterior fossa mass, which had an iso-hypointense appearance on T1-weighted images, an inhomogeneously enhanced appearance on T1-weighted contrast images and iso-hyperintensity on T2-weighted images .
A ventriculoperitoneal shunt procedure was conducted before surgery to overcome hydrocephalus. Craniotomy for the posterior fossa tumor was done . The patient was placed in prone position with her head supported on the Mayfield head holder. A posterior midline suboccipital approach was used. Through the displaced left cerebellar, a grayish solid mass, with an undefined border, was identified and dissected carefully with cauterization of the feeder vessels. Subtotal tumor resection (STR) was done, and hemostasis was achieved. Dura closure was achieved with a dura patch, and the bone flap was returned. Wound closure was done in layers. A histopathology sample from the mass was obtained. The postsurgery phase was uneventful.
Histopathology revealed cells with minimal cytoplasm and dense basophilic nuclei present in diffuse sheets in keeping with MB of classic type (CMB) with WHO CNS grade 4 . Reticulin staining was not done because it was not available. Immunohistochemical analysis and molecular subgroup were also not performed because they were not available.
We did not carry out CSF analysis to investigate the leptomeningeal spread of the tumor due to concerns about transtentorial herniation. We conducted MRI of the brain and spine at 1 month after surgery , which revealed a residual posterior fossa tumor without leptomeningeal spread. We stratified the tumor as high risk, and the staging was modified to Chang stage M0. We treated the patient with adjuvant concurrent chemoradiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy.
She was simulated by using CT–Simulator in supine position. The headrest and a thermoplastic head and neck mask were used to restrain the head. Contouring was done for the target and the organs at risk. Laterally parallel opposed fields with photon energy of 6 MV were used to treat the brain , and two direct posterior adjacent fields were used to treat the spinal cord . Collimator rotation was used to match the cranial and spinal fields, and a feathering maneuver was used in the two adjusted spine fields to avoid hotspots. The radiotherapy technique was 3D conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) using a linear accelerator (LINAC). The patient underwent two phases of treatment. The first phase was craniospinal radiation therapy (CSRT) whereby 36 Gy in 20 fractions was delivered, and the second phase was the posterior cranial fossa boost, whereby a boost dose of 18 Gy in 10 fractions was delivered. A weekly dose of 2 mg vincristine was administered intravenously with radiation therapy. She tolerated the treatment very well apart from fatigue, nausea, and dizziness.
Upon completion of radiotherapy, she was put on a monthly course of adjuvant intravenous chemotherapy (etoposide 50 mg/m2 D1–D4 and cisplatin 20 mg/m2 D1–D4) for a total of six cycles from June to September 2021.
Post-treatment brain MRI showed a significant decrease in the posterior fossa tumor .
She is currently doing well, apart from mild dizziness.