A 72-year-old man (body weight, 50 kg; height, 158 cm) with a history of treatment for hypertension and HOCM visited our hospital with a chief complaint of pain in the buttock following a fall from his bed. Detailed examination revealed intracapsular fracture of the left femoral neck, for which open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) was indicated. He was diagnosed with HOCM and LVOTO 6 years prior and was under treatment with carvedilol and cibenzoline. He had heart failure for 4 years and had been hospitalized several times because of exacerbation of LVOTO. Three years ago, he was resuscitated following ventricular fibrillation and received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) at that time. ICD activation was subsequently confirmed. Although the patient had no symptoms at rest before the injury, he had severe physical limitations [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III]. Cardiac auscultation revealed a Levine III/IV systolic murmur in the third intercostal space at the left sternal border.
Preoperatively, the patient’s brain natriuretic peptide level was elevated (548 pg/mL). Further, electrocardiography revealed atrial fibrillation, and TTE revealed asymmetric septal hypertrophy (ventricular septum [VS] thickness, 28 mm; left ventricular posterior wall [PW] thickness, 14 mm; VS/PW ratio, 2.0). His pressure gradient across the LVOT was 65 mmHg, and mild MR was observed. On the basis of these findings and test results, the patient was diagnosed as having severe HOCM.
We selected femoral nerve block (FNB) and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve block (LFCNB) for the administration of anesthesia and TTE for monitoring. Carvedilol and cibenzoline were administered through the day of surgery. The patient was monitored using a five-lead electrocardiogram and pulse oximeter after admission to the operating room. Continuous arterial pressure monitoring was performed using a catheter inserted in the left radial artery prior to regional anesthesia via FNB. TTE was performed using a sector array transducer (Philips S8-3; Philips, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) and Philips iE33. The left ventricular ejection fraction, left ventricular filling pressure (e/e′), and cardiac index of the aortic valve were measured (hemodynamic parameters) using continuous Doppler ultrasound. The pressure gradient across LVOT, left ventricular end-diastolic and end-systolic diameters, and effective regurgitant orifice area were also measured (morphological parameters).
A linear ultrasonic probe (HFL50 15–6 MHz; SonoSite Inc., Bothell, WA, USA) and an 18-gauge Contiplex Tuohy needle (B-Braun Ltd., Tochigi, Japan) were used for the left FNB: 0.25% levobupivacaine (20 mL) was injected around the left femoral nerve, and 0.25% levobupivacaine (10 mL) was injected into the left lateral femoral nerve region. Surgery was initiated after achieving anesthesia. No additional anesthesia was required intraoperatively, and the surgery was completed. The surgery duration was 45 min, and the anesthesia duration was 72 min. The total blood loss was 30 mL, and the fluid balance was + 190 mL. The intraoperative TTE findings remained stable from before the induction of anesthesia to the exit from the operating room .
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and the hemodynamic parameters remained stable. Acetaminophen 1000 mg was administered intravenously 10 h after admission to the ICU for postoperative pain, after which there was no complaint of pain. His hemodynamic parameters continued to remain stable, and he was discharged from the ICU on the following day.