A 51-year-old male patient who had been in good general condition over the last 2 years was admitted to our hospital with severe headaches, a feeling of weakness in his legs, noise sensitivity and nausea. An MRI revealed signs of chronic intracranial pressure with hydrocephalus (extended ventricles and diapedesis of CSF). The ophthalmologic examination revealed bilateral papilloedema. In his ventricular CSF, HSV2 was detected by PCR (3 × 104 copies/mL, ref. < 500; in CSF: protein 1130mg/L, ref. < 150; cell count 221MPt/L, ref. < 2) and a renewed HSV2 meningoencephalitis was diagnosed like 2 years ago. With external ventricular drainage and i.v. administration of aciclovir (1950 mg/day for 21 days) the patient improved. The intraventricular drain could be removed and the hydrocephalus did not recur.
The patient’s medical history reached back to early childhood. On day 4 after birth, he received a BCG vaccination under immunoglobulin substitution. At that time, physicians assumed that this substitution could provide protection, in case the patient had inherited a primary immunodeficiency. They suspected a primary immunodeficiency, because his older sister had suffered from generalized BCGitis after vaccination. Despite IVIG substitution, the boy developed BCGitis with lymphadenitis axillaris and fever, and a generalized exanthema a few days later. M. bovis (type BCG) was detected in granulomas from a lymph node biopsy and the boy was treated with INH and streptomycine. At the age of 4 months, the patient developed alleged hepatitis tuberculosa (multiple granulomas with caseating necrosis in a liver biopsy, no microbiological evidence of mycobacteria) and was therefore started on another anti-tuberculous medication. A few weeks later, after an episode of enteral salmonellosis, he developed high fever and right leg pain and was diagnosed with osteomyelitis of the right tibia caused by Salmonella typhimurium. At the age of 5 years, the patient developed VZV pneumonia during his first chickenpox infection. This episode is well documented because he was an inpatient for two weeks. At age 6, he was operated for presumed appendicitis. Retrospectively, pronounced lymphadenitis mesenterialis due to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis had mimicked appendicitis. At age 31, the patient suffered from severe chickenpox with a generalized pronounced vesicular rash and had another episode of VZV pneumonia requiring hospital admission at the same time as his son fell ill with chickenpox. During the following 15 years, the patient had repeated episodes of thoracic shingles (typical painful segmental vesicular rash, diagnosed by general practitioner, treated with oral and local aciclovir administration), which resolved without sequelae, but he was otherwise healthy. At age 49, he was admitted to our hospital with personality change and somnolence and was finally diagnosed with meningoencephalitis. HSV2 was detected in CSF by PCR (9 × 106 copies/mL, protein 3460 mg/L, cell count 1617 MPt/L in CSF). The MRI showed mild signs of inflammation. The meningoencephalitis was treated successfully with i.v.-aciclovir (2250 mg/day for 14 days). In the following 2 years, the patient reported repeated and sometimes severe headaches some of which he treated with aciclovir on his own without consulting a physician. This patient had been reported by Jouanguy et al. and Dorman et al. before the onset of the remarkable viral infections.
The family history of the patient revealed that his mother had suffered from alleged tuberculosis of the urinary bladder early in life, which was cured by anti-tuberculous therapy. She died at age 30 from chronic progressive hepatitis that could not be further specified.
The patient’s sister developed generalized BCGitis after vaccination and was treated with anti-tuberculous therapy. A relapse could be controlled with tuberculostatic treatment, and no other infectious complications occurred during childhood. However, the sister died at age 27 from an intestinal mycobacterial infection, which had been misinterpreted as Crohn’s disease and therefore treated with steroids.
The patient described in this report has two sons with the same IFNγR1-deficiency. The older son remained clinically healthy. The younger son suffered from various infections such as VZV-pneumonia, VZV-meningoencephalitis, shingles, suspected HHV-6 hepatitis, lymphadenitis mesenterialis, and mycobacterial osteomyelitis . The patient’s daughter and a nephew are not affected. Genetic testing of the patient and his sons revealed the common c.818–821del4 mutation in one allele of the IFNGR1-gene causing dominant partial IFNγR1 deficiency. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of the patient, his wife and the clinically affected son did not reveal any potential causative variation other than IFNɣR1 deficiency. Jouanguy et al. recently published inborn errors of human antiviral immunity to herpes viruses . All genes listed by Jouanguy et al. were unaffected as determined by WES.