A 41-year-old right-handed woman with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (AML) presented with fever and mental change 2 weeks after BMT. She was alert, but had no awareness. She had no any other focal neurologic deficit. The treatment regimen following BMT consisted of 2 mg/kg cyclosporine, which was used to suppress immunity. The patient's past medical history was not significant, except for the presence of AML. She had no hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiac disease, chronic renal disease, or liver disease. She had no family history of a central nerve system (CNS) disease, hereditary disorder or developmental disorder. She was febrile, with a temperature of up to 39.3℃. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure was 115/70 mm Hg, heart rate was elevated up to 134 beats per minute, and respiratory rate was usually 30 breaths per minute. A complete blood count revealed anemia and thrombocytopenia due to AML, and mild leukocytosis. A blood chemistry study revealed the presence of mild hypocalcemia and elevated liver enzymes. C-reactive protein levels were slightly elevated. A chest X-ray study suggested the presence of interstitial pulmonary edema and subsegmental atelectasis and no evidence of pneumonia. Analysis of cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) indicated 0 red blood cells (RBCs)/mm3, 0 white blood cells (WBCs)/mm3, a protein level of 59.5 mg/dL, and a glucose level of 181 mg/dL. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of the CSF was positive for HHV-6 deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), but was negative for other viral DNA, such as those of herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1, HSV-2, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and varicella-zoster virus. There was no bacterial or fungal growth in the CSF and the CSF india ink test and the cryptococcal test were negative. Tests for CMV antigenemia and aspergillus antigen were negative in the serum. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 5 days after symptom onset revealed atrophic changes in the bilateral medial temporal lobes. There was no abnormal high signal intensity or leptomeningeal enhancement, which suggested the presence of meningoencephalitis . After 2 weeks of therapy with ganciclovir, a second CSF examination indicated 0 RBCs/mm3, 2 WBCs/mm3 (50% monocytes, 20% lymphocytes, and 1% neutrophils), a protein level of 92.6 mg/dL, and a glucose level of 118 mg/dL. The CSF was negative for HHV-6 DNA. After 4 weeks of anti-viral therapy, the neurological symptoms were partially improved. However, the patient was disoriented and complained of severe retrograde and anterograde amnesia. Eight weeks after BMT, her Mini-Mental State Examination score was 16; she was incorrect on the time and place orientation, serial 7, recall, interlocking pentagon, and language tests. She was even incorrect when asked if she had graduated from a graduate school. She could not remember the names of her parents, her current address, the name of the high school she graduated from, or recent events a few days old. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) performed 8 weeks after BMT indicated global hypometabolism in the bilateral medial temporal lobes and the fronto-parietal cortices .