A 63-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with the diagnosis of rectal cancer. The cancer was located 2 cm from the anal verge; the clinical depth of the cancer was T4, and no lymph node or distant metastasis was evident on computed tomography (CT). Preoperative chemoradiotherapy was performed with a total dose of 50.4 Gy of radiation and concomitant oral administration of tegafur-uracil, followed by APR with curative intent. The pathological finding of the resected specimen was ypT2N0M0 stage I. The postoperative course was uneventful without any SSI. No adjuvant chemotherapy was administered, and no recurrence or abscess formation was seen on the CT imaging 6 months after the APR .
One year after the APR, the patient complained of pain and redness of the skin in the lower abdomen. The CT imaging showed a 5.9-cm diameter low-density mass lesion in the lower abdominal wall . The mass lesion, adjacent to the bladder and to the pubic bone, was marginally enhanced, and thickness of the bladder wall and partial destruction of the pubic bone were observed. The positron-emission tomography (PET) revealed high uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose by the tumor, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 11.1 . The laboratory data was indicative of acute inflammation (white blood cell count, 11800/μL; C-reactive protein, 18.1 mg/dL), without elevation of tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, 2.4 ng/mL; CA19-9, 10 U/mL). From these findings, we suspected of either a delayed abscess formation or the recurrence of rectal cancer in the abdominal wall with central necrosis; hence, percutaneous drainage was performed for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes. A purulent exudate was removed from the tumor, and the bacteriological culture revealed the growth of group G Streptococcus. The cytological examination of the exudate was negative for neoplastic cells. After the drainage of the abscess, followed by antibiotic administration, the tumor quickly regressed, without recurrence of cancer or the abscess even 2 years after the treatment.