A 23-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 1, at 32 weeks, came to her physician for a routine pregnancy check-up. On vaginal examination, protruded vaginal mass at the anterior vaginal wall measured 2×3 cm was present. It was punctured, revealing an unknown fluid content .
Six months after her delivery, she came to the clinic to complete investigations. For several months, the patient had had dysuria and intermittent urinary incontinence during cough and stress but no urinary urgency or other complaints. Past medical history was notable for recurrent urinary infections during infancy and occasional urinary incontinence without previous surgical interventions. The patient took no medication and did not use tobacco. Family history was negative for similar symptoms or diseases.
Physical examination showed no abnormalities, and the vaginal examination revealed a mobile soft mass at the anterior vaginal wall that leaked fluid during coughing. Laboratory results of complete blood count, glucose level, creatinine, and urea were within normal limits. Urinalysis was positive for numerous white blood cells and bacteria, and urine culture grew Escherichia coli with antimicrobial susceptibility to nitrofurantoin. Abdominal ultrasound showed left kidney hydronephrosis. Retrograde cystourethrography was normal, without vesicoureteral reflux.
An abdominal and pelvic computerized tomography appeared a duplex collecting system on the left side with good upper moiety parenchyma . Renal scintigraphy was not available.
The intravenous pyelogram revealed that the ureter of the left lower renal moiety opens nearly to the right ureter orifice. On the other hand, The retrograde ureteroceleogram detected the ureter that drains the upper pole moiety and inserts in the anterior wall of the vagina with an obstructed ureterocele .
The modified Lich–Gregoir procedure was performed to reimplant the ureter of the upper renal moiety. Postoperative following-up investigations affirmed improvement without complications.
The limitation of our approach is the duration of the follow-up, which was only 3 months.