A 50-year-old Japanese male with a medical history of thoracic haemangioma who was taking no medications and was regularly followed by computed tomography suddenly collapsed on his way to work at 8 AM. He had no history of angina and no risk factors for arteriosclerosis, such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or smoking. He had no prior history of syncope or a family history of syncope or juvenile SCD. Chest compression was immediately performed by bystanders. After several minutes’ resuscitation effort, he was connected to an automated external defibrillator (AED). The AED detected ventricular fibrillation (VF) and delivered the appropriate electrical shock, but VF continued. On the fourth electrical shock delivery, VF was terminated transiently, but recurred immediately . Two additional shocks finally terminated the VF, and the ECG recorded by the AED showed ST-segment elevation . After return of spontaneous circulation, the patient was brought to the emergency room. At presentation to the emergency room, he was unconscious with Glasgow coma scale score of 5/15 (e1, v1, and m3). His heart rate was 136 b.p.m., blood pressure was 157/110 mmHg, and there was no cardiac murmur or extra sound. He arrived ventilated by a laryngeal tube which we removed so he could be intubated, and placed on mechanical ventilation. His ECG showed ST-segment elevation in the lateral leads and ST-segment depression in the inferior leads . Laboratory analysis revealed normal values for complete blood cell count, electrolytes, and cardiac enzymes. As for electrolytes, he had a potassium level of 3.9 mEq/L (normal: 3.6–5.0 mEq/L), sodium of 139 mEq/L (136–147 mEq/L), calcium of 10.0 mg/dL (8.7–10.1 mg/dL), and magnesium of 2.0 mg/dL (1.8–2.6 mg/dL). As for cardiac enzymes, CK was 177 U/L (57–197 U/L), CK-MB was 77 U/L (0–25U/L), and troponin I was 0.0070 ng/mL (<0.040 ng/mL). We immediately performed emergency cardiac catheterization, which showed normal left ventricular contraction and no significant stenosis or thrombosis of the coronary arteries. After the acute phase passed, his ECG was completely normal, it displayed; normal QT interval, and lacked T-wave alternans, notched T-wave, and early repolarization including a J-wave . Therefore, this patient did not satisfy any of the diagnostic criteria for long QT syndrome. Based on these ECG and catheterization results, we gave a tentative diagnosis of coronary artery spasm. He was admitted to the intensive care unit and treated with targeted temperature management (target temperature of 34°C for 24 h) for the neurological defects under sedation with fentanyl, propofol, and dexmedetomidine. Intravenous injection of nicorandil (2 mg/h) was used for the prevention of coronary artery spasm.
His ECG monitor during hospitalization showed no ventricular premature beats. Transthoracic echo cardiogram and contrast enhancement magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not detect any structural heart disease. Two days after admission, sedative drugs were interrupted, and he was able to be weaned from mechanical ventilation. At that point, although his consciousness was completely clear with Glasgow coma scale score of 15/15 (e4, v5, and m6), he had a slight disturbance of short-term memory. A brain MRI conducted 5 days after admission, revealed no abnormalities. Thirteen days after admission, we performed acetylcholine provocation test after >24 h discontinuation of calcium channel blocker (CCB) and nicorandil. Intracoronary injection of 20 μg of acetylcholine into the left coronary artery induced coronary artery spasm of the distal portion of the left anterior descending coronary artery . Fifteen days after his event, we performed cardiac electrophysiological study, while he was on nifedipine (20 mg/day) and nicorandil (15 mg/day). Programmed stimulation with triple extra-stimuli at the right ventricular apex and outflow did not induce any lethal ventricular arrhythmia. A drug challenge with intravenous pilsicainide did not show any ECG indications of Brugada syndrome. The patient’s neurological status gradually improved and by discharge, he had no residual neurological deficits.
Taking all of the findings together, we attributed the patient's ASCD to coronary artery spasm and implanted a subcutaneous ICD under general anaesthesia for secondary prevention of SCD . The patient was discharged on nifedipine and nicorandil. During the 1 year of follow-up, the patient has been free of angina. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator interrogation revealed no ventricular arrhythmias and appropriate ICD therapy.