A 45-year-old female gardener presented to the emergency department after a direct injury to right elbow in a road-traffic accident. On examination, general condition of the patient was stable. She had a 30cm*15cm area of de-gloving wound on posterior aspect of upper extremity, extending from mid-arm level to mid-forearm, which was severely contaminated with dust and gravel. Comminuted bony pieces were directly visible in the wound, along with extensive stripping of periosteum and some loss of common flexor muscle mass. The ulnar nerve was exposed in the wound and showed few contusions. The wound was cleaned with plenty of plain saline lavage and patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. Neurological examination revealed sensorimotor deficit along the ulnar nerve distribution.
Radiographs revealed a comminuted fracture of olecranon with some bone loss on medial side (Schatzker type D fracture, AO/OTA 21-B1.3) . The coronoid process was also fractured and displaced towards volar aspect.
Under general anaesthesia, initially the wound was cleaned meticulously and all visible contaminants were removed. Debridement of nonviable tissues was undertaken and extensive lavage with normal saline was perfomed. The fracture anatomy was reassessed. Bone loss on medial aspect of olecranon was noted. The coronoid process fragment was found to have a long distal beak, which was reduced to the shaft and fixed with encerclage wiring. The proximal fragment was fixed with the reconstructed distal fragment using Ilizarov fixator . One cut-end olive wire was passed from the proximal olecranon across the fracture site in an intramedullary fashion exiting out at mid-ulnar level through healthy skin dorsally. We faced technical difficulty in controlling the exit of this wire at desired level due to its long intramedullary course. Hence we initially made a track in retrograde fashion using another long K-wire and later on passed the olive wire with slightly bent tip through the same track, in antegrade fashion. An ilizarov half ring was then secured to the ulna using two tensioned wires passed perpendicular to the shaft. The longitudinal olive wire was then attached to the half-ring and tensioned, achieving reduction. Another olive wire was passed in antegrade fashion at an angle to the longitudinal wire to increase the stability of construct.. This entire construct was away from the fracture and no hardware was present directly in the wound.
The ulnar nerve showed some contusions but was morphologically intact. The soft tissue was approximated as much as possible, covering the nerve and encerclage wire. The skin was tagged using non-absorbable sutures over a drain.
Post-operatively range of motion exercises were encouraged within the tolerance limit of patient. Third day onwards, majority of skin had showed progressive discoloration. However, there were no signs of infection. On seventh day, the dead skin flap was debrided and daily dressing continued. The wound started granulating and split thickness skin grafting was done on third week. The graft was accepted in most part of the wound except a small area 2 cm2 distal to the fracture site, which was left for healing by secondary intention. The second olive wire was then removed and active range was encouraged. Wound healed completely over 6 weeks, at which point patient had 900 of flexion. Ulnar nerve had fully recovered by this time, however patient started developing mild symptoms of CRPS, which was managed by physiotherapy and resolved with time. The fixator was removed at 5 months and physiotherapy was continued.
At one-year follow-up, the CRPS was subsided and the patient had elbow ROM of 100 to 1300, with 750 pronation and 850 supination.. PREE score was 7 (0 is best score, 100 is worst) and DASH score was 9.48 (0 is no disability, 100 is severe disability). The patient returned to pre-injury occupational activities. The dynamic x-ray did not show any inter-fragmentary distraction. .
CT scan showed union of coronoid fragment with the shaft However there was a firm fibrous non-union of olecranon with well-maintained congruency at one-year follow up. . Considering the condition of soft tissue and bone; along with good functional status, a decision for conservative management for the non-union was made after discussion with the patient. At three-year follow-up, the x-ray and CT Scan showed union with well maintained congruency. The patient is able to do all her occupational activities (including heavy activities such as lifting water-bucket of 20 Kg. without pain).