A 41-year-old male patient was admitted to Tungwah Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University on April 5, 2019 due to prolonged fever and upper abdominal pain. Five days before admission, he had prolonged fever for no apparent reason. The maximum body temperature was 40 °C, accompanied by chills. The body temperature reduced to normal after taking antipyretics. He began to experience upper abdominal pain 10 h before admission. Throughout the disease, he had no cough, sputum, hemoptysis, nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, diarrhea, chest tightness, and shortness of breath. He claimed that he had not been exposed to tuberculosis before. Outpatient chest computerized tomography (CT) showed no obvious infection lesions in the lungs , while chemical tests showed that amylase was 448 U/L and lipase was 1225 U/L. The patient was initially suspected of having acute pancreatitis. After admission to the hospital, CT examination of the abdomen showed that the gastric antrum-duodenum was unevenly thickened with the surrounding oozing and multiple enlarged lymph nodes . CT enhanced examination and electronic gastroscopy are recommended for further examination. The patient was treated for acute pancreatitis at the beginning of admission. After 6 days of treatment, his upper abdominal pain relieved, but he still had repeated fever.
After abdominal CT results came out, we performed a gastroscopy for the patient. Gastroscopy revealed that the patient had multiple gastric and duodenal ulcers . After biopsy, histopathology showed that the gastric antrum mucosa was chronically active inflammation and infected helicobacter pylori, and epithelioid granulomas were seen in the lamina propria, which was in line with the ulcer marginal tissue . Histopathology suggested tuberculosis should be considered. To find more evidence to support the diagnosis of tuberculosis, we arranged the tuberculosis antibody test, interferon-gamma release assay (T-SPOT.TB) and purified protein derivative test (PPD skin test) for the patient. The anti TB antibody test was positive, the T-SPOT.TB result was uncertain, and the PPD skin test was negative. After excluding other pathogen infections and autoimmune diseases, we arranged an empirical anti-tuberculosis program for the patient. The patient received systematic IREZ anti-tuberculosis treatment (ATT) for 1 week (isoniazid 0.3 g, orally once a day; rifapentine 0.45 g, orally twice a week; ethambutol 0.75 g, orally once a day; pyrazinamide, orally 3 times a day), while taking glutathione tablets to protect liver. After the third day of the anti-tuberculosis treatment process, the body temperature reduced to normal without recurring fever. One week later, the patient did not develop fever or abdominal pain again and was discharged from the hospital. After the patient was discharged from the hospital, treatment continued in the outpatient clinic. During the 12-month follow-up, the patient claimed that he did not have abdominal pain, fever, or night sweats again.