A 73-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency department with the chief complaints of fever, general malaise, and hemoptysis that had lasted for 4 days. He had a history of coronary and valvular heart disease, and underwent coronary artery bypass grafting and mitral valve replacement 7 years ago in our hospital. He had recovered well after the heart surgery and had been taking aspirin enteric-coated tablets and atorvastatin calcium regularly since the surgery. Four days prior to his current visit, the patient developed fever without obvious inducement, accompanied by a small amount of hemoptysis, general fatigue, and chest tightness. The fever reached a peak of 38.3°C. The patient was diagnosed on arrival with severe pneumonia and received empirical antibiotic treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam. The patient’s condition worsened the same day to impaired consciousness and shock. Arterial blood gas analysis showed an oxygenation index of 80.98, which is significantly lower than the normal range. Therefore, emergency tracheal intubation and invasive ventilator were used to assist oxygenation. The patient was admitted to the ICU ward on the same day after stabilization.
Physical examination in the ICU showed a temperature of 36.3°C (after the use of antipyretic drugs), pulse rate 74 times/min, respiration rate 16 times/min, and blood pressure 165/115 mmHg (with norepinephrine maintained at 0.27 μg/kg. min). The patient was in a sedated state with tracheal intubation and ventilator assisted respiration, bilateral pupil diameter was 2.0 mm with no light response, bilateral lung exam showed thick breathing with audible moist rales, heart was in atrial fibrillation, abdomen was flat and soft, and both lower limbs had slight edema, with negative Babinski’s sign on both sides.
Laboratory tests showed a significant increase in neutrophils, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin levels. Arterial blood gas analysis suggested type I respiratory failure with a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 80.89. Blood work resulted in a white blood cell count, hemoglobin, and platelet count of 14.03 * 10^9/L, 100 g/L, and 48 * 10^9/L, respectively. Blood biochemistry indicated creatinine was 285 μmol/L, liver enzymes and direct bilirubin were slightly elevated, and pro-brain natriuretic peptide (Pro-BNP) was significantly higher than normal, suggesting heart failure .
Chest computed tomography (CT) on admission to our hospital showed diffuse exudative lesions in both lungs , and CT pulmonary angiography revealed multiple pulmonary artery branch embolisms in both lungs . Color Doppler ultrasound of the heart showed decreased left ventricular systolic function, enlarged right heart, and a cardiac ejection fraction of 45%. Lower limb vascular Doppler ultrasound did not indicate deep vein thrombosis. Bedside electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular rate of 114 times/min.
To detect the etiology of the pneumonia, we performed a series of microbiologic diagnostics including staining and culture and serologic testing for viruses, bacteria, and fungi, all of which were negative .
After the patient was transferred to the ICU, due to the consideration of severe community-acquired pneumonia, the condition progressed rapidly, and the initial anti infection treatment failed. Moreover, the pathogen of the infection was not clear, so he was given imipenem and cilastatin sodium (1.0 g, I.V. infusion, q12h), vancomycin (0.5 g, I.V. infusion, qd), and voriconazole (0.2 g, I.V. infusion, qd). The dosage of antibiotics was based on the creatinine clearance rate. The patient was also given methylprednisone (40 mg, I.V., q12h) as an anti-inflammatory, lyophilized recombinant human brain natriuretic peptide (0.0075 μg/kg. min, I.V. infusion) to treat heart failure, and nadroparin calcium (4,100 IU, I.H., q12h) for anticoagulation after platelet count recovery.
After 3 days, the blood inflammation indices decreased, but the patient still had current fever. Chest CT reexamination showed the progression of bilateral lung lesions, as illustrated in , and so bedside bronchoscopy was given. Bronchoscopy displayed diffuse blood infiltration and mucosal swelling in the left and right bronchial lumens. The bronchial alveolar lavage fluid was sent for mNGS examination. Three days later, mNGS showed seven sequence numbers of Leptospira interrogans and 1,289,906 sequences of Aspergillus flavus. A culture of the bronchial alveolar lavage fluid revealed Aspergillus flavus: 1+. Therefore, in consideration of pulmonary hemorrhagic leptospirosis complicated with pulmonary aspergillosis, administration of vancomycin, imipenem cilastatin, and voriconazole injection was stopped, and the patient was given penicillin G (400,000 U I.V. infusion, q4h) combined with voriconazole tablets (0.2 g, p.o., q12h). After using penicillin G for a week, the patient’s condition improved and he was returned to the general ward. The chest CT reexamination on day 17 showed that the exudative lesions in bilateral lungs were obviously absorbed, and some nodules were enlarged, as shown in . Inflammation indices in the blood were normal, so penicillin sodium was stopped. The enlarged pulmonary nodules were considered to be associated with Aspergillus flavus infection, so the blood concentration of voriconazole was detected. The detection result was 1.0 mg/L (the reference value range was 0.5–5 mg/L), which was at the normal lower limit level. Therefore, voriconazole was increased to 250 mg once every 12 h for antifungal treatment. Methylprednisolone was gradually reduced to stop, and the patient was discharged with voriconazole tablets. illustrates the timeline of hospitalization and clinical treatments, and shows the changes in relevant laboratory indicators during the course of the disease. Chest CT reexamination 3 weeks after discharge showed that the bilateral lung lesions were obviously absorbed, and there were new cavities, as shown in . The images showed an air crescent sign typical of aspergillosis. Therefore, the patient continued to receive oral antifungal treatment with voriconazole tablets for 3 to 6 months.