In 2006, a 73-year-old Caucasian man presented with nodular lesions on the left chest wall while receiving mitoxantrone and prednisolone for metastatic hormone refractory prostate cancer with skeletal metastases. At the time, mitoxantrone was the standard systemic chemotherapy for this condition, this gentleman was first diagnosed with prostate cancer 9 years previously. Past treatments included androgen deprivation, strontium, carboplatin–etoposide, radiotherapy to the chest wall for pain in the manubrium and sternum; and also with cisplatinum–phenoxidiol (as part of a phase 1 clinical trial). He initially responded well to mitoxantrone with a fall in the serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) and resolution of bone pain.
After the eighth cycle of mitoxantrone, the patient reported having skin lesions on his chest. The lesions were non-tender, pink, raised and occurred in irregular clusters just lateral to the nipple towards the mid axillary line, there were no epidermal changes. A clinical suspicion of cutaneous metastases was considered along with the differential diagnoses of a drug eruption and other dermatoses.
A punch biopsy was performed on a sample lesion. The pathology showed metastatic adenocarcinoma in the dermis that stained for cytokeratin, PSA and prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) consistent with prostate cancer . He was also found to have a lower leg deep vein thrombus and was commenced on enoxaparin then warfarin.
Chemotherapy was ceased due to progressive disease, thereafter, serum PSA levels continued to rise. The PSA increase coincided with increasing extent, size and pain in the nodules on the chest wall. The lesions close to a previous sternal ulcer became friable and bled easily . Two months from when the lesions were first noticed, palliative radiotherapy of 18 Gy in 3 fractions using electrons was delivered to the left chest wall to good clinical effect .
The PSA continued to rise, however, and further symptoms developed including fatigue, leg swelling and dyspnoea. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral pleural effusions, the larger effusion on the left was drained. The cytology of the fluid revealed adenocarcinoma cells staining with anti-cytokeratin antibody CAM 5.2, PSA and PAP consistent with metastatic disease.
The treated cutaneous lesions did not cause further problems but new lesions were found out of the field of radiotherapy treatment . He continued to decline and required a second pleurocentesis. At this time there were also changes on CT consistent with pulmonary lymphangitis, he subsequently died in hospital 2 weeks later.