A 30-year-old Indian man was brought to our Emergency Room after a road traffic accident, in which he was riding a motorcycle and was hit by a truck at a speed of approximately 50 miles per hour. Our patient complained of pain in his right arm and the inability to move it. An examination of his extremities revealed contusions over his right upper arm without any evidence of penetrating injury. There was marked swelling and tenderness in the middle part of his right arm associated with a closed injury. His cranial nerves were intact and no neurological deficits were present. No injures were found in his other limbs. In view of the above clinical findings, a radiograph of his right upper limb and a computed tomography (CT) scan of his head were suggested. While the CT scan did not reveal any abnormality, the radiograph of his right arm showed a unilateral displaced comminuted fracture of the mid shaft of his humerus . Our patient was then given first aid in the form of a U-slab and immediately transferred to our orthopedic ward for further evaluation. His laboratory results were normal. Liver and kidney function test values were within their normal range. An electrocardiogram did not show any abnormal features.
Our patient complained of tingling and numbness in his right little and ring fingers the following morning. On examination, there was hyperextension at the metacarpophalangeal joints and flexion at the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints with an inability to move his little and ring finger . With the suspicion of an ulnar nerve injury due to the accident, a series of nerve conduction studies of his right upper arm nerves were suggested. The electrodiagnostic evaluation demonstrated a severe ulnar nerve conduction block along his arm with normal amplitudes of conduction along the median and the radial nerves.
Correlating the clinical findings with the above radiological and nerve conduction findings, a diagnosis of ulnar nerve injury after the fracture of the shaft of the humerus was made. Our patient was taken to the Operating Room for surgery, during which a fragment of bone was found abutting the ulnar nerve after penetrating the triceps muscle . This fragment of bone was replaced and the fracture was reduced by open reduction and internal fixation using a dynamic compression plate and screws.
Postoperatively, the tingling and numbness of the little and ring finger gradually subsided and our patient received regular physiotherapy and was discharged two weeks after surgery. Our patient was advised to come regularly for follow-up every three months for a period of one year. Our patient first came for a follow-up appointment four months after discharge and told the attending surgeon about the recovery of the normal functioning of his right hand 14 weeks after surgery; confirming it to have been ulnar neuropraxia.