We present a case of a 42-year-old-male with a history of papillary thyroid cancer 3 years prior to the presentation that was treated by left hemithyroidectomy, presented complaining of shortness of breath, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, left-sided neck discomfort, and generalized weakness. he denied dysphagia, odynophagia, or dysphonia, He also denied symptoms of cold intolerance, weight gain, or decreased appetite, nor history of heat intolerance, sweating, or irritability. He was noticed to have abnormal repetitive movement of his throat and a clicking sound that he admitted that he first noticed a few days after his thyroidectomy surgery that had a smooth post-operative course without complications. Clicking sounds occurred all the time with no provoking factors like moving his neck, swallowing, or speaking, he has no history of neck pain or previous similar episodes during childhood or before his malignancy.
A neck examination showed a well-healed thyroidectomy scar with no visible masses. There was an abnormal movement of thyroid cartilage associated with a clicking noise heard continuously not related to neck movement, swallowing, or talking and not associated with stridor or abnormal breathing sounds. Palpation of the neck did not cause any tenderness, neither the thyroid gland nor cervical lymph nodes were palpable. Carotid arteries were palpable bilaterally with regular pulse and auscultated. Oral examination revealed clicking movement of the tongue and throat structures. no enlarged tonsils or visible abnormalities were appreciated. Cranial nerves were intact with no focal neurological deficits.
Laboratory investigations showed normal complete blood count and thyroid function test levels, Neck ultrasound showed a right lobe of normal size and shape with no nodules, lesions, or lymph nodes visualized. A 9 × 6 mm left thyroid remnant is noted. He also underwent flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy that showed no abnormal findings so a neck CT scan with 0.6-mm thick sections and 3D reconstruction showed normal hyoid bone size and normal distance between the superior cornu of the thyroid cartilage and the lower surface of the greater cornu of the hyoid bone. (On the right side: sagittal plane 16.7 mm. On the left side: sagittal plane 17.6 mm) remnant of thyroid tissue in the left thyroid lobe, a normal right thyroid lobe, with no evidence of neck masses, obvious tumor recurrence or structural cause explaining his clicking larynx .
Moderate ossification of triticeal cartilage bilaterally was noted .
The patient was discussed regarding his condition and albeit opting for the conservative option, he was nevertheless relieved upon knowing his symptoms are not caused by malignancy recurrence or significant medical disease so he was scheduled for his regular oncology follow-up. The patient was phone called 7 months after diagnosis, he stated having the same complaint with no resolution of his condition that started 3 years before diagnosis. The patient is also cancer free and on regular oncology follow-ups.