A 54-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Surgery at our hospital following abnormal abdominal CT findings. He had no complaints, such as upper abdominal pain or abdominal distension. He presented with comorbidities of neurogenic bladder due to spinal cord injury and sleep apnea syndrome. His past history included previous surgeries for appendicitis and renal stones in the left kidney. The laboratory data showed normal findings. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a tumor in the hepatoduodenal ligament, measuring 40 mm, with enhancement at its margin in the arterial phase; the enhancement was prolonged in the delayed phase . The boundary between the tumor and the caudate lobe of the liver was unclear. The abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the tumor was hypointense on T1-weighted images and both hypo- and hyperintense on T2-weighted fat-suppression images . Moreover, the contrast MRI showed that the margin of the tumor was enhanced in the arterial phase . The boundary between the tumor and the liver was clear; hence, the tumor was considered an extrahepatic lesion. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed localized accumulation of fludeoxyglucose (FDG) (5.9 F) in the hepatoduodenal ligament tumor . The biopsy was difficult to perform due to the location of the lesion. Although no preoperative diagnosis was made, surgical intervention was planned for an accurate diagnosis. The patient underwent 5-port laparoscopic surgery for tumor resection. Perioperatively, the tumor was found to be located on the left side of the portal vein and on the ventral side of the inferior vena cava . The tumor was surrounded by a fibrous capsule and did not infiltrate the other organs. In the operative technique used, the proper hepatic artery and common hepatic artery were taped at three sites . Each tape was used for traction in order to proceed with smooth and safe tumor resection. The total operative time was 273 min, and the total intraoperative blood loss was minimal. Macroscopic examination of the specimen showed an elastic, hard tumor measuring 40 × 30 mm with a smooth surface and fibrous capsule . The cross-section of the tumor was milky white in color. Histopathologically, the peripheral nerve was near the tumor. The tumor was mainly composed of spindle cells and hypercellular (Antoni type A) and hypocellular (Antoni type B) areas . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor was strongly positive for S-100 protein , but had an extremely low Ki-67 positive rate. The patient was diagnosed with low-grade schwannoma. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5.