A 43-year-old Uyghur woman presented herself to our emergency obstetric department with menstruation-like vaginal bleeding in her 5th pregnancy with 24 6/7 weeks of gestation. The patient had conceived spontaneously. In the obstetrical history, the patient had had one vaginal birth and three cesarean deliveries in the last 13 years. Two of the deliveries were late preterm and one was a twin pregnancy. All children were healthy. During the last two pregnancies she suffered from gestational diabetes. Obesity with a BMI of 42 kg/m2 and status after laparoscopic cholecystectomy were the only relevant comorbidities. The last cervix PAP smear from the first trimester showed a result without any abnormalities.
A detailed second trimester ultrasound had been performed in an external prenatal care diagnostic clinic 3 weeks prior to the first in house presentation. A tetralogy of Fallot was suspected in the fetal echocardiography. To rule out a genetic syndrome, an amniocentesis was performed externally and showed an unremarkable male karyotyping. In the further molecular workup through whole exome sequencing, a heterozygous pathogen mutation in the MSH2 gene (c.560T > C p.(Leu187Pro)) was detected, which was not considered to be related to the cardiac anomaly.
When the patient presented herself to our clinic with 24 6/7 weeks of gestation, the cervix was 27 mm long, the fetus showed growth according to gestational age and normal Doppler values. On transvaginal ultrasound, a 4.8 cm mass close to the cervix was interpreted as a fibroid, shown in Fig. . Due to the preterm bleeding, we started respiratory distress prophylaxis with 12 mg betamethasone i.m., tocolysis with the oxytocin-receptor antagonist atosiban and antibiotics with ampicillin and sulbactam i.v. Bacterial testing revealed ureaplasma parvum and antibiotic treatment was expanded to azithromycin orally. The bleeding regressed.
One week after admission (25 6/7 weeks of gestation), the patient stated increased contractions. An examination showed a three centimeter dilated cervix with a prolapse of the membranes. Laboratory and clinical testing did not show any sign for acute infection. A McDonald rescue cerclage was performed without any complications after thorough informed consent due to imminent preterm birth with the suspected cardiac defect. Perioperative tocolysis with indomethacin was applied. With 26 4/7 weeks of gestation, we observed a recurrence of the bleeding and a new prolapse of the membranes. We indicated an emergency caesarean section.
Intraoperative evaluation of the suspected fibroid, showed necrotizing—extremely vulnerable—tissue in the lower uterine segment. This was removed as completely as possible and sent to histology.
The preterm male, 980 g (APGAR 5/7/9) was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit after intubation due to respiratory distress. The tetralogy of Fallot was confirmed by echocardiography. Unfortunately, on day 27 the newborn died from a fulminant sepsis due to necrotizing enterocolitis.
Histology from the uterine biopsy resulted in the diagnosis of a clear cell adenocarcinoma of the endometrium (shown in Fig. ). P53 was overexpressed with a deficiency in MSH2-repair-protein in immunohistochemistry (shown in Fig. ) with a preserved expression of MSH6.
A CT scan of thorax and abdomen and a pelvic MRI showed no distant metastasis or locoregional disease. Colonoscopy and gastroscopy showed no pathologic findings.
Four weeks postpartum we performed a laparotomy with hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, infragastric omentectomy, pelvic and paraaortal lymphadenectomy. The final pathology revealed a pT2, pN0 (0/45 lymph nodes), L1, V0, Pn0 poorly differentiated clear cell adenocarcinoma of the endometrium progressing to the cervix (UICC-stadium II).
After a prolonged postoperative course, restitution and final wound closure, chemotherapy with carboplatin (AUC5) and paclitaxel (175 mg/m2 body surface area) was started two months after the oncological surgery and five cycles were applied every three weeks. A planned sixth dose was not given due to neutropenia, diarrhea and a urinary tract infection. External beam radiotherapy (45 Gy) of the pelvis followed with a simultaneous integrated boost on the former tumor region (50 Gy).
Six months after completion of adjuvant systemic and radiation therapy, the patient presented with signs of an ileus. Multiple adhesions were found in re-laparotomy where an ileum segment was excised and a metastasis measuring 3.6 cm infiltrating the subserous tissue was confirmed. Imaging did not show any further metastatic lesions. After a new prolonged postoperative course with vacuum surgery therapy, the patient is currently undergoing immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy with pembrolizumab.