The patient is a 39-year-old gentleman originally from Central America who currently lives in Southeast Georgia. His past medical history is significant for HIV/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), alcohol abuse, tobacco dependency and bone marrow biopsy-proven leishmaniasis who was transferred from an outside hospital. He denied any recent travel. At first presentation, the patient had diffuse moderate abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, chills and dysphagia. On physical exam, the patient was tachycardic to a rate of 140 beats per minute and the patient was found to have mild abdominal tenderness, but the physical exam was otherwise non-contributory. The patient was leukopenic as well as thrombocytopenic. For treatment, the patient was placed on amphotericin B for his leishmaniasis as well as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) for his HIV/AIDS infection. The patient was then discharged home on a 3 month course of amphotericin B in addition to continued HAART therapy with outpatient follow-up.
Over the course of the next 6 months, the patient initially recovered from his acute illness, but later developed acute abdominal pain and tenderness along with nausea, which prompted presentation to the emergency department. On exam, the patient was found to have a fine nodular skin rash across his chest, abdomen and parts of his back consistent with cutaneous leishmaniasis. Additionally, he was found to have continued thrombocytopenia. A bone marrow biopsy was done to differentiate whether the new onset symptoms were secondary to his HIV or related to a relapse of the his leishmaniasis. The bone marrow results are shown in , which demonstrates various stains showing the presence of macrophages filled with Leishmaniasis amastigotes. The patient was again initiated on intravenous amphotericin B for 6 weeks inpatient and discharged with the plan to get an amphotericin B infusion every 3 weeks on an outpatient basis. The patient was steadily improving on his inpatient treatment and was cleared for discharge home, the patient, however, was lost to follow-up.
Several years later the patient returned to the emergency department with the most recent flare of his Leishmaniasis disease. The patient presented with rectal bleeding accompanied by continued abdominal pain and discomfort. This hospital course, the gastroenterology team was consulted. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed, and a biopsy was taken of his gastric mucosa. The biopsy showed scattered macrophages filled with amastigotes throughout the patient’s gastric mucosa (see
). These findings confirmed the suspected case of gastric leishmaniasis. The patient was subsequently treated with amphotericin B to treat his disseminated gastric leishmaniasis and encouraged to stay consistent with his HAART for his HIV. The patient responded well, his gastrointestinal bleed resolved, and the patient clinically had no complaints or concerns. The patient was encouraged to follow-up in the outpatient setting with his gastroenterologist for his gastric leishmaniasis and primary care physician for his HIV/AIDS disease.