We intend to report a case of a 27-year-old male patient with no underlying systemic conditions and no prior history of herpes simplex virus (HSV) and COVID-19 infection who received his first dose of Oxford–AstraZeneca (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19) COVID-19 vaccine (codenamed AZD1222) 8 days prior to being referred to us. The first couple of days after the administration of the vaccine were uneventful. Three days after the administration of the vaccine, the patient woke up and immediately started vomiting. Following the patient’s emesis period, symptoms of severe headache and altered mental status began to appear, including slowed psychomotor activity and loss of alertness; however, no signs of disorientation to time and location and people around him were evident at that time. The patient then presented to a local clinic for outpatient treatment and was prescribed baclofen and diclofenac. After returning home, the patient then developed symptoms of severe headache, agitation, delirium, and disorientation to time, location, and people around him. The same night patient experienced severe emetic episodes again. The next morning, following four days after administering the first dose of vaccine, he presented to the emergency department of a local hospital. After obtaining blood tests, chest computed tomography (CT) scan, and brain CT scan, he was transferred to Imam Reza hospital for further evaluations with the preliminary diagnosis of encephalitis. Chest and brain CT scans yielded normal findings with no evidence of involvement. Our primary neurological evaluations revealed altered mental status to Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 12 [eye opening only to verbal commands (3), normal motor response (6), and inappropriate words on verbal commands (3)]. Neurological examination revealed altered mental status and decreased level of consciousness, and disorientation. Furthermore, there were no evidences of ataxia, hemiparesis, and aphasia. There were no focal neurological deficits observed in the primary evaluations.
Following these observations, the decision was made to intubate the patient in order to preserve the airway, due to reduced levels of consciousness and admit him to the intensive care unit. Results obtained from complimentary evaluations revealed elevated temperature of 38.9 °C (102.02 °F) and leukocytosis (12,900/mm3). The remaining laboratory test values were all in normal ranges. The patient was then immediately put on Acyclovir 10 mg/kg TDS due to suspicion of herpetic encephalitis based on his clinical presentations and medical history. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis demonstrated decreased protein levels (3.05 mg/dl), a WBC count of 600 per mm3 with the predominance of lymphocyte, and normal glucose levels, all of which are suggestive of a viral encephalitis.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test showed positive for HSV in cerebrospinal fluid, and therefore, the diagnosis of herpes simplex encephalitis was established. Furthermore, it is established that the identification of the viral DNA in the cerebrospinal fluid via PCR is the most sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of HSV encephalitis . Moreover, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed using axial T1, T2, and sagittal T2/W images, which revealed no space-occupying lesions in supra- and infratemporal structures. White and gray matter signals, cerebral ventricles, major intracranial vascular structures, basal ganglia, and brainstem were all normal. Furthermore, electroencephalography (EEG) also depicted normal results.
The patient was planned for 21 days of Acyclovir treatment. His altered mental status gradually ameliorated over the course of the first eight days of admission and was extubated after the 8th day. Although some degrees of amnesia and unusual behaviors were still present following the extubation, these symptoms improved over the next few days, and the patient was finally discharged on the 21st day.