A 58-year-old male with a history of RA presents with left knee osteoarthritis and an associated large bone cyst in the lateral femoral condyle.
The patient initially presented at age 57 with symptomatic primary osteoarthritis of the left knee for the past 10 + years. He reported pain limiting activity and sleep, lack of full knee extension, and impaired ambulation. Symptoms were refractory to conservative treatments, including weight loss, over-the-counter NSAIDs, corticosteroid injections, a full course of physical therapy, and a prior synovectomy. On examination, body mass index was 31. Left knee alignment was neutral. Range of motion was 5°–120° with no extension lag. The knee was stable to varus/valgus and anterior/posterior stress. Left hip examination was unremarkable. Left knee radiographs showed severe tricompartmental degeneration with tricompartmental osteophytes, joint space narrowing, and multiple intraarticular loose bodies . CT showed a large lytic lesion involving most of the lateral femoral condyle, with no aggressive features, most consistent with a benign bone cyst . After extensive discussion of non-surgical and surgical options, the patient elected to undergo left robotic-assisted TKA, including bone cyst debridement and grafting. The decision to use a cementless knee prosthesis in this case was driven by the patient’s relatively young age, the need to preserve bone stock, and the potential benefits of osteointegration. The possibility of requiring revision TKA implants was discussed.
Extensive pre-operative planning was undertaken to address the technical challenges faced by this case. Planning objectives were to aim for a CR construct to minimize bone resection . Alternative plans were made for stemmed posterior stabilized (PS), and total stabilized (TS) constructs with the use of femoral stem as needed. Pre-operative CT scanning was performed using the standard RA-TKA protocol (Stryker Mako, Mahwah, NJ). CT characterized a cystic lesion measuring 5 cm in its axial dimension. The resulting anatomical models demonstrated severe medial and lateral compartment osteoarthritis with genu valgus alignment.
After standard preparation for knee arthroplasty, the left knee was exposed using a limited anterior-midline incision. A median para-patellar arthrotomy was performed and standard procedure was followed to expose and register the knee for robotic arthroplasty. Assessment of the knee joint revealed severe end-stage articular damage with no remaining medial weight-bearing cartilage. The lateral compartment was severely eburnated with bone loss on the posterior tibia and posterior femoral condyles, resulting in the valgus deformity. Soft-tissue balance was performed, the pre-operative robotic plan was updated accordingly, and the robotic arm was utilized to execute the planned cuts. The patella was assessed and showed minimal degenerative changes, midline tracking, and no instability, so the decision was made not to resurface it. The bone defect in the lateral femoral condyle was then assessed and debrided from the membrane. The bone cyst was found to compromise 30–40% of the distal femoral cut. A decision had to be made between bone grafting and aiming for a CR construct or choosing a PS or TS construct with a stem. To avoid removing a substantial amount of host bone from a healthy medial and central aspects of the femur to prepare for the femoral box, we decided to proceed with bone grafting the cyst and placing a primary CR cementless femoral component . The graft used consisted of autologous bone obtained from the cuts and 22 cc of a CSH/brushite/β-TCP graft containing 75% calcium sulfate (CaS) and 25% calcium phosphate (Pro-Dense™, Wright Medical Technology Inc., Memphis, TN) and it was placed in a doughy state .
Final implants were placed showing excellent press-fit, tracking, and stability with a 9-mm CS polyethylene. The extensor mechanism and capsule were anatomically repaired and range of motion was 0–135 without excessive stress. Standard skin closure was followed and the patient recovered adequately in PACU.
Post-operatively, weight bearing was protected to 25% body weight with a walker for the first 4 weeks and increased gradually until full weight bearing on week 12. He otherwise followed the standard post-operative TKA physical therapy protocol, starting as an inpatient on post-operative day 1 and continuing at home.
At 1-year follow-up, he reported no pain and no activity limitations. He has no effusion, tenderness, or instability. He has achieved 0°–120° knee range of motion without pain. Radiographs show well-fixed TKA with radiographic evidence of osteointegration and no osteolysis ( and ).