We report successful desensitization in a 43-year-old female with locally advanced HER2-positive breast cancer following a severe anaphylactic reaction to trastuzumab infusion for which epinephrine was not administered.
At initial assessment, the patient had biopsy-confirmed HER2-positive, ER/PR-negative, and right breast invasive mammary carcinoma measuring 1.8 cm in diameter. Imaging demonstrated multiple axillary lymph nodes (largest 3.0 × 2.1 cm) and a right supraclavicular node (1 cm). No metastases were identified. Her oncologist assessed this as stage III and recommended neoadjuvant Docetaxel, Carboplatin, and trastuzumab every 3 weeks for a total of 6 cycles, followed by mastectomy. Chemotherapy was administered at a local clinic in a northern region of the province of Manitoba. The patient was otherwise healthy, took no other medications, with no history of allergies or allergic disease.
Cycle 1 of neoadjuvant therapy was administered without issue. However, during Cycle 2, the patient experienced an adverse reaction approximately 2 min after trastuzumab infusion was initiated. She became flushed and reported evolving symptoms that quickly culminated in hypotension (BP 80/49), tachycardia (HR 147), dyspnea (O2 sat 91%), and nausea. She had not yet received Docetaxel or Cyclophosphamide. The trastuzumab infusion was discontinued, and her IV was flushed with normal saline (NS). O2 was applied at 6 L/min via a face mask. The patient received 50 mg Diphenhydramine IV. SpO2 continued to decrease, at which point O2 was increased to 10 L/min. Hydrocortisone, 100 mg IV, was then administered. The patient became unresponsive and began vomiting (total 500 mL emesis). Vital signs were persistently unstable, and multiple NS boluses were administered via pressure bag to a total of 5 L. She did not receive epinephrine. SpO2 stabilized on 10 L/min face mask and remained stable on a decrease to 5 L/min. The patient was observed for 2 additional hours. Each decrease in NS IV rate resulted in hypotension with BP of 80/52 and tachycardia of 120–150 bpm. The patient was unconscious for 1.5 h and was weaned off O2, at which point she was awake and walked to the bathroom with assistance from the nursing staff. On return to bed, her vital signs quickly deteriorated again. The local emergency department (ED) was contacted, and the patient was transferred for further management.
After a presentation to the ED, the patient was given norepinephrine IV. This decision was made based on the large volume of IV fluid she had received prior to arrival. She was weaned off the norepinephrine and was stable and discharged home later that evening. A tryptase level was not drawn due to patient refusal.
Manitoba has recently established a multidisciplinary Medical Oncology and Allergy Clinic aimed at allowing oncology patients to receive treatments despite adverse reactions. Re-administration with desensitization was pursued, as the anti-HER2 component to her therapy was felt to carry significant potential benefit.
Cycle 2 was administered two weeks later with a desensitization protocol. Desensitization involves administering the drug at increasing concentrations and infusion rates with set time intervals to allow those with an anaphylactic allergy to receive the medication safely . The patient tolerated the desensitization protocol for Cycle 2 and has since completed up to 5 cycles using desensitization without issue.