A 74-year-old man with a history of CAD, cerebral infarction, and dyslipidaemia was referred to our hospital with a chief complaint of chest pain and was admitted. The patient had smoked 20 cigarettes per day for 53 years but had stopped smoking 1 year earlier. Physical examination had no significant findings and showed a blood pressure of 154/90 mmHg, a heart rate of 110 b.p.m., and a body temperature of 36.5°C. Electrocardiography showed ST-segment elevation in precordial leads and a depression in inferior leads . Laboratory examinations showed elevated troponin levels, with a troponin T level of 0.458 ng/mL. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed impaired left ventricular wall motion in the anteroseptal area, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40–45%. A myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation was diagnosed, and an urgent coronary angiogram revealed thrombotic occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) (, Files). There was no significant CAD in the left circumflex artery and right coronary artery (RCA). The antiplatelet regime the patient was commenced on at the time of coronary intervention included oral aspirin, 200 mg, and prasugrel, 20 mg.
The patient underwent percutaneous coronary intervention with the implantation of a drug-eluting stent in the LAD (, Files). Importantly, during the present admission of this patient for chest pain, the blood glucose level was high, with a fasting blood glucose level of 362 mg/dL (normal value: 73–109 mg/dL) and haemoglobin A1c level of 10.8% (normal value: 4.9–6.0%). Because, we were told by the patient’s previous physician that 6 months earlier the fasting blood glucose level had been 85 mg/dL and the haemoglobin A1c level had been 7.1%, abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to examine the pancreas. This examination showed diffuse enlargement and a surrounding capsule-like structure. On the basis of these findings, the differential diagnosis included autoimmune pancreatitis. In addition, because autoimmune pancreatitis is a typical finding of IgG4-RD,, the serum IgG4 level was examined and found to be extremely high (453 mg/dL; normal value: 4.8–105 mg/dL). Therefore, IgG4-RD was diagnosed, despite tissue biopsy not being performed.
Intravascular ultrasonography of the coronary arteries demonstrated mild stenosis of the vascular lumen with an attenuated plaque and the thickening of adventitia in the proximal LAD branch .
To examine the radiological characteristics of the coronary arteries, coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was performed. A heterogeneous slight thickening was found of coronary artery walls and surrounding soft tissue from the left main trunk through the proximal LAD branch and the proximal RCA. A localized nodular lesion was also observed in the middle of the RCA . Coronary angiography also showed mild stenosis of the proximal LAD branch and the proximal RCA and localized mild stenosis in the middle of the RCA (, Files).
To investigate the involvement of other organs in IgG4-RD, gallium scintigraphy was performed. However, gallium accumulation was shown in only part of the pancreas. Contrast-enhanced CT showed only slight thickening of the walls of the thoracic and abdominal aorta, which could not be differentiated from atherosclerotic changes.
With insulin therapy, the blood glucose level was significantly improved. The patient was discharged after 18 days without any complications of CAD. Upon discharge, the patient has closely been followed-up until the present time. The coronary angiogram 9 months after percutaneous coronary intervention did not reveal any restenosis or new lesion. In addition, CCTA performed at the time of coronary angiogram revealed slight wall thickening from the left main trunk through the proximal LAD branch and the proximal RCA. Significant thickening of soft tissue and a coronary aneurysm were not present. There were no remarkable changes compared with the findings of CCTA at the initial presentation.
The medications prescribed on discharge included aspirin, 100 mg once daily; prasugrel, 3.75 mg once daily; rosuvastatin, 5 mg once daily; enalapril, 2.5 mg once daily; bisoprolol, 0.625 mg once daily; insulin glargine, once daily; and insulin lispro, three times a day.