The patient, a 52-year-old female, was admitted to the department of gastrointestinal surgery of Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute in September, 2016, due to space-occupying lesions in the colon found by colonoscopy during medical examination 2 weeks before. Histopathological examination of endoscopic biopsy specimens indicated moderately differentiated colonic adenocarcinoma. Contrast-enhanced computer tomography (CT) of her abdomen demonstrated that the intestinal wall was thickened about 14 mm in the transverse colon, and several small lymph nodes (7 mm) scattered around the intestine were detected . Laboratory examination revealed that the levels of CEA and CA72.4 increased to 15.17 ng/ml and 20.88 U/ml respectively. Laparoscopic examination confirmed the tumor (6 cm × 5 cm) was located in the hepatic flexure of the colon .
The patient (III7) had no other major medical history, except a family history of colon cancer in 3 out of 5 first-degree relatives (mother II2; sister, III5; brother, III6). In particular, the patient’s mother (II2) was diagnosed two separate primary colon cancer at the age 54 and 61 at different sites. Her sister (III5) was diagnosed with endometrial cancer and colon cancer at the age of 54 and 61 respectively . The patient was referred to our cancer genetic counseling clinic for LS genetic testing. Based on Amsterdam II criteria, the proband was diagnosed with LS.
To confirm the diagnosis, all affected individuals (III5, 6 and 7) underwent genetic testing of a 101-gene panel by next generation sequencing. Peripheral blood was collected to extract genomic DNA (gDNA). The gDNA was then used to generate libraries according to the protocols suggested by Illumina. A custom targeted capture kit, covering all exons of the 101 genes, was designed (Agilent Technologies, Additional file : Table S1) . Qualified libraries were subsequently sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform with 2 × 150 bp configuration. Reads were aligned to the reference human genome GRCh37 with BWA and PCR duplications were marked using Picard tools (version 1.57). To further increase the specificity for mutation calling, realignment and base recalibration were conducted using Genome Analysis tool kit (GATK). All samples were tested at least in an average depth of 200-fold coverage. Bases with a minimum of 30-fold coverage was required at every targeted position (Additional file : Table S2). The missense, nonsense, indel and splice site mutations that located at the upstream or downstream 1-2 bp of exon, whose frequency are below 5% in at least one pubic population database were retained (Additional file : Table S3). According to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants, all the gene variants were classified into 5 grades. Therefore, 14 mutations at least carried by two first-degree relatives were listed. A pathogenic variant (class 5) in MLH1 (c.1852_1854delAAG, p.K618del) was identified in all patient’s blood samples .
Laparoscopy-assisted colectomy was performed on the proband to resect right colonic mass and its surrounding tissue followed by ileocolonic anastomosis. In addition, the clinicopathologic stage was pT3N0M0 and no complications occurred in the perioperative period. Conventional hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemistry were performed on resected specimens to confirm the malignancy . Additionally, abdominal CT of III5 showed a obstructing mass in the same location of colon as the proband (III7) . Moreover, according to the medical record for the proband’s brother (III6) in another hospital, a tumor was found in his hepatic flexure of colon. Immunohistochemistry results showed MMR deficiency in all tumor tissues of the 3 cancer patients . Subsequently, MSI testing was performed using MSI Analysis System Version 1.2 (Promega). Tumor DNA was extract from formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections. Genomic DNA extracted from white blood cell was used as normal control. Seven markers were amplified using fluorescent PCR. The PCR products were separated by capillary electrophoresis using Applied Biosystem 3130 Genetic Analyzer. GeneMapper Analysis Software was used to analyze the output data. The MSI results indicated that the 3 siblings with cancer (III5, 6 and 7) were all microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) . Based on the results of MSI and the proband’s clinical stage, no adjuvant chemotherapy was given after surgery.
To screen and evaluate the cancer developing risk in the offspring, children of affected individuals were also enrolled for genetic testing. And 1 (IV8) out of 3 carries the same MLH1 mutation to the proband. However, this carrier has no symptoms or confirmed diagnosis of cancer. Endoscopy was performed on IV8 for further examination and the ileocecal mucosa showed signs of dysplasia, including chronic inflammation with erosion, lymphoid hyperplasia and mild atypical hyperplasia of glandular epithelium . The asymptomatic individual was given oral administration of aspirin as a preventative treatment, and 6-months follow-up showed improved appearance with colonoscopy examination . A healthcare plan was proposed to this offspring including colonoscopy and urine test once a year, and gastroscopy every 3~ 5 years after 35 years old. All individuals carrying the MLH1 mutation in this family will be monitored on a long term basis.
The CARE guidelines were followed in reporting this case.