A 35-year-old man was hospitalized after a 10-year history of occipitocervical pain and limited mobility . Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the back of the upper cervical vertebrae and limited mobility of the neck. The muscle strength of the limbs was grade 4, and there was slight loss of limb and trunk sensation. Excretory function was normal. Pathological reflexes were positive, and bilateral patellar tendon reflexes were hyperactive. Cervical anteroposterior and lateral plain radiography, cervical computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an occipitocervical junction deformity accompanied by spinal cord compression. Occipitocervical deformity was diagnosed. On the fifth day after admission, the patient underwent a corrective operation involving posterior reduction and occipitocervical fixation and fusion. The bone graft comprised both ilium and artificial bone.
The standard occipitocervical posterior midline approach was adopted to expose the posterior structures of the C0–C3 vertebrae. Care was taken to protect the vertebral artery and posterior vascular plexus. Intraoperative fluoroscopy revealed that the occipitocervical joint sequence was good, and the reduction was successful. Screw insertion was a three-step process. First, occipital screws were inserted in the mediolateral tubercle and the occipital protrusion of the occipital bone (total of three occipital screws) . Second, pedicle screws were inserted bilaterally in C2 using the Harms and Melcher technique , and lateral mass screws were inserted bilaterally in C3 using the Roy–Camille et al. technique . Third, an additional spinous process screw (3.5 mm diameter, 20 mm long) was inserted vertically into C2 . The depth and angle of its implantation was determined using the Goel and Kulkarni technique , and the screw itself was chosen according to its length and diameter based on the patient’s appearance on preoperative CT scans. Following screw insertion, three rods were then connected from C0 to C3. An occipital screw was placed in the occipital protrusion and connected to the C2 spinous process screw. A high-speed drill was used to prepare the bone graft bed on the posterior structure of the occipitocervical joint. The graft comprised bone from the posterosuperior ilium and artificial bone.
The patient could walk with a neck brace on postoperative day 3 and continued wearing the neck brace for the next 3 months. No neurovascular complications or incision infection were observed during the 24-month follow-up. Postoperative radiography showed that the internal fixation remained stable. Successful fusion was confirmed 4 months after the operation. Postoperative MRI showed that the occipitocervical decompression was sufficient, and there was no obvious spinal cord compression. The muscle strength of the limbs was grade 5, and at the 24-month follow-up visit the patient’s sensation function had improved from its preoperative state .