A 2-day-old Caucasian full-term male neonate was admitted in neonate intensive care with shock. There were no familial antecedents, no consanguinity and no infection or inflammation during pregnancy. However the tumor was suspected in fetal echocardiography.
At observation, he presented poor general status with marked hypotonia, immeasurable blood pressure, tachypnoea and retractions. Percutaneous oxygen saturation was 85% on room air. He had a mottled blue and white skin with prolonged capillary refill time (above 3 s). Cardiac auscultation showed rhythmic heart sounds without murmurs. On pulmonary auscultation, he had a symmetric entrance of air and without rales.
He was intubated and ventilated with conventional mechanical ventilation. We started intravenous fluid resuscitation, inotropic drugs (dobutamine), with the subsequent reestablishment of normal blood pressure. He was transferred to the echocardiography laboratory.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed two echogenic masses. The first one, was large, poly-lobed, and mobile mass in the right ventricle, which measured 37 mm × 29 mm. The mass was embedded in the interventricular septum (IVS) and right ventricle (RV) wall . This mass was extended to the pulmonary trunk . Pulmonary artery flow measurements showed the presence of pulmonary and tricuspid obstruction. The peak pressure gradient between the right ventricle and the pulmonary trunk was 60 mmHg.
The second one, was a large mass measuring 28 mm × 22 mm in the right atrium. Color Doppler flow imaging did not detect any flow signal inside the mass.
To further characterize the mass, cardiovascular Magnetic resonance imaging was indicated, however it was not performed because of unavailability of this exam in emergency. Surgery was rapidly considered since the baby was hemodynamically unstable. He was transferred operating room for emergency surgery the next day.
Through median sternotomy and systemic heparinization, the baby was cannulated for cardiopulmonary bypass employing direct bi-caval venous cannulation. After cardioplegic arrest a longitudinal right atriotomy was performed. During surgery, a mass was found to be embedded in the IVS, and to occupy the RV cavity and the right atrium . The tumor involved also the chordae of the tricuspid. That is why, it was impossible to remove completely the tumor. Partial resection was done. Tricuspid valve repair was performed by construction of new chordae from the autologous pericardium. The baby died immediately after surgery before doing the echocardiography. This evolution is probably due of the right ventricle dysfunction. In fact the tumor was infiltrated the right ventricle and the tricuspid valve. The partial tumor resection of the tumors was insufficient to improve the right ventricle and the restoration of the hemodynamic state. The specimen was sent for histopathological analysis.
Histological examination of the surgical specimen revealed clear multivacuolated cells filled with lipid droplets and granular intense eosinophilic cytoplasm which confirms the diagnosis of Hibernoma . The genetic analysis was not done.