A 40-year-old male with a height of 173 cm and a weight of 68 kg, who presented severe orthostatic headache, was consulted to our pain clinic from neurology department. The headache started three weeks prior to the admission with a characteristic orthostatic nature. The patient had no history of headache prior to this ongoing orthostatic headache. He initially felt a pain over the whole occipital area which then spread over the frontal and parietal areas. He described his headache as dull nature pain accompanied by pressure sensation, and it was associated with nausea and vomiting. He graded his headache as 9/10 on a numerical rating scale (NRS) before admission to the neurology department. After strict bed rest and intravenous hydration therapy, his NRS decreased to 7/10. The headache persisted for whole day during his admission. Physical examination did not reveal any specific neurologic abnormality or symptoms. He did not have any special history of trauma or accidental dural puncture prior to the onset of this headache. He showed slightly decreased kidney function due to IgA nephropathy which was diagnosed three years ago. He could not maintain his daily activity due to headache. Contrast enhanced MRI revealed bilateral symmetric curvilinear dural enhancement along both cerebral high convexities. Both internal carotid artery angiography and vertebral artery angiography were performed, but they did not demonstrate any suspicious lesion of cerebral venous thrombosis. To identify the leakage level of CSF, cisternography was planned. However, cisternography was only possible at least three weeks later due to an overloaded schedule.
Before the planned cisternography, this patient was consulted to our pain clinic for an EBP. Since we thought that targeted EBP after confirmation of leakage level of CSF is more appropriate for headache improvement, an EBP was delayed until the cisternography was performed. Instead of an EBP, we suggested a bilateral GON blockade using ultrasound guidance for symptom improvement.
The GON blockade was performed by a pain physician who had more than five years of experience in ultrasound guided procedures. The patient was asked to lie with his face down and his head was flexed slightly. Afterward, the spinous process of C2 was palpated and marked. Sterile draping was done using a povidone swab. A linear probe with a frequency of 4–15 MHz was used (Logiq S8, GE Healthcare, USA). After identifying the spinous process of C2, we placed the probe in a parallel direction to the laminae of C2 and then rotated it along the long axis of the obliquus capitis inferior (OCI) . Since the GON always passes by the OCI, the OCI muscle was first identified . After this identification, our final target site was the intermuscular fatty layer between the OCI and semispinalis capitis (SSC) muscle . Local infiltration using 1% lidocaine was done before needle insertion. A 23 G needle was inserted slowly toward the intermuscular fatty layer between the OCI and SSC using an in-plane method. When the needle tip was confirmed to have reached the final target site, 0.1% ropivacaine 3 ml was injected. We could check the accumulation of the local anesthetics at the intermuscular fatty layer . Both sides of the GON blockade were performed using the same local anesthetics and technique.
After completing the bilateral GON blockade, the patient was lay down in bed for 20 min and was monitored for the appearance of any possible side effect. He was asked to sit up for a while in order to confirm the improvement of the orthostatic headache. He reported that the previous headache which existed around the occipital and parietal areas had disappeared completely, but that mild headache persisted at the frontal area. On the next day after the GON blockade, the significant improvement of headache was still maintained and NRS of the headache was approximately 1–2/10. Two days after GON blockade, he was discharged with mild headache at the frontal area. He was fully educated about the importance of absolute bed rest at home to prevent the aggravation of the intracranial hypotension and headache.
Three weeks after his discharge, he was readmitted for the cisternography. The test demonstrated multiple CSF leakages at the upper thoracic spine, and lumbar puncture opening pressure was as low as 5 cmH2O. Although the headache was mild with NRS of 1–2/10, an EBP was performed to prevent any unwanted complication due to low intracranial pressure. The EBP was performed using the C-arm guided technique. For epidural entry at the specific spinal level, the midline approach via loss-of-air resistance was used. Autologous blood of 10 ml was injected using a 22-G Tuohy epidural needle. The blood was injected very slowly to minimize any discomfort during the injection. Before the blood injection, 3 ml of contrast medium was injected to confirm the epidural space.
One month after the GON blockade and EBP were performed, the orthostatic headache had almost completely disappeared but mild tinnitus remained.