A 77-year-old man with a history of smoking 35 pack-years was found to have a pure GGN in the right lower lobe of the lung on CT during follow-up for pneumoconiosis . He had been a potter when he was in his twenties. The GGN gradually enlarged from 0.7 to 2.4 cm over 1.5 years and a solid component developed within it . In a semi-automated three-dimensional volumetric measurement of ground glass opacity component on the last CT images using a work station, Synapse Vincent© (Fujifilm Medical, Inc., Tokyo Japan), the ground-glass opacity component accounted for 64% of the lesion . Laboratory investigations showed normal CEA (3.2 ng/mL; normal value, < 5 ng/mL) and slightly increased SCC antigen (6 ng/mL; normal < 1.5 ng/mL). Lung function studies showed obstructive changes with a vital capacity of 106% and a forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced vital capacity of 62%. An adenocarcinoma of the lung with a lepidic growth pattern presenting as a GGN with a clinical stage of T1aN0M0 stage IA (UICC-TNM classification, version 7) was suspected. Because of the patient’s limited pulmonary function and relatively non-invasive appearance of the suspected ground-glass-dominant adenocarcinoma lesion , a thoracoscopic right S8 + S9b segmentectomy was successfully performed. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed a moderately differentiated SCC of the lung located in S8. Tumor cells with condensed chromatin staining and nuclear enlargement had spread along the alveolar lumen , whereas stromal tumor cell invasion and stromal collagen fiber were observed . Keratinization was not apparent. No lymph node metastases or lymphovascular invasion were identified. Fibrosis, silicotic nodules and macules with focal emphysema characteristic of pneumoconiosis were seen in the background lung. The histology was further confirmed by the immunohistochemistry for p40 (the inset of Fig. ), a marker for squamous cell carcinoma. The pathological diagnosis was T1aN0M0 stage IA SCC. At 19 months follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence.