A 73-year-old male was hospitalized in the rheumatology department for an insidious inflammatory swelling of the right wrist. Symptoms began six weeks before with a localized swelling of the right index finger. He received NSAID followed by a week of pristinamycin without improvement. He reported no local trauma, respiratory symptoms or fever but occasional mild night sweats.
He had a medical history of chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL), treated by chemotherapy five years before (bendamustine in association with rituximab). He was a former postman and had gardening and woodworking as hobbies.
On admission, the patient showed right wrist synovitis since two months without extra rheumatologic complaints. Blood tests showed leukocytosis (40.8 G/L) with lymphocyte predominance (32 G/L). Neutrophil count was also increased (7.6 G/L), as well as C-reactive protein (44 mg/L). Liver enzymes were within ranges. Immunological assays were negative, including rheumatoid factor and anti-CCP antibodies (except anti-nuclear antibodies at 1/160, without specificity). There was no hypogammaglobulinemia.
Ultrasound of the wrist showed a carpal and radiocarpal fluid effusion with positive Doppler signal . There was a palmar and dorsal subcutaneous infiltration as well, without collection. Fluid aspiration was hemorrhagic, with a white blood count of 36900/mm3. Neutrophil count was 43% and mono-histiocytes count was 49%. Routine bacterial cultures remained sterile but 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) identified Legionella anisa at day 4. The manufacturer of the equipment was Diagenode. Blood cultures were sterile.
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice a day for a period of six weeks improved arthritis with full recovery at the end of the treatment. Interestingly, C-reactive protein showed spontaneous normalization before any treatment.
The source of infection was presumably gardening. The patient had a well in his garden. Chest X-ray was normal. No environmental exploration was performed according to the national reference center guidelines.