A 51-year-old Japanese man visited our department with a chief complaint of asymptomatic gross hematuria in November 2019 with a history of hypertension. Family history was unremarkable.
At the first visit, height and weight of the patient were 179 cm and 93 kg, respectively. Blood pressure was 128/78 mmHg, pulse was regular with 62 beats/minute. and body temperature was 36.4 °C. The patient had no history of smoking or drinking.
There were no specific abnormalities or neurological findings at the initial physical examination. Blood biochemistry revealed no abnormal findings, and urinalysis revealed microscopic hematuria with red blood cells (RBC) 20–29/high-power field (hpf) and white blood cells (WBC) 1–4/hpf.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed hydronephrosis and contracted right kidney, in addition to fatty liver. Enhanced CT showed a tumor in the upper part of the right ureter, with a density similar to the ureteral wall, which appeared to be the cause of hydronephrosis and no retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy . Distal metastasis was not observed. A well-defined 20-mm (diameter) defect was identified at the upper right ureter on retrograde pyelogram (RP) , with no bladder cancer on cystoscopy; therefore, the findings of urinary cytology and right divided renal urine cytology were classified as class I.
Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with contracted kidney with right ureteral cancer (cT2, N0, M0) and right hydronephrosis, and the condition was close to that of a nonfunctional kidney; laparoscopic nephroureterectomy was performed.
The extracted specimen was a nonpapillary, broad-based, solid tumor measuring 20 × 13 mm with a yellowish-white cut surface .
Histopathological findings showed an increase in spindle cells with an interlacing fascicular pattern, mild nuclear atypia, and no mitotic figures . Because immunostaining showed α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) (+) , h-caldesmon (+) , S-100 (−), C-KIT (−), cytokeratin (−), Melan-A (−), and human melanin black (HMB) 45 (−) , it was diagnosed as a primary leiomyoma from the ureteral muscularis.
Neither recurrence nor occurrence of leiomyoma was found in the contralateral urinary tract and other genitourinary organs 16 months after surgery.