A 62-year-old man with a 45-day history of generalized pruritus since February 2017 presented to the medical department. He had been diagnosed in another hospital with senile pruritus and had been treated by antihistamines and emollient cream for 20 days. The itch was not completely relieved, and he came to seek further treatment. He did not smoke cigarettes or drink alcoholic beverages. He had no notable medical history except for hypertension. On physical examination, there were no notable findings except for slight scratch marks. Blood tests showed normal erythrocyte, leukocyte and platelet counts, and urinalysis and chest radiography showed nothing of note. There was no evidence of renal or thyroid dysfunction. Laboratory studies revealed normal liver chemistry. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 35 mm/h. A color duplex sonography of the abdomen revealed a large hypervascular, low-level echo, heterogeneous right renal mass. An intravenous pyelogram revealed irregularity of the margin of the right renal calices. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and the pelvis showed a heterogeneous mass originating from the upper pole of the right kidney and infiltrating to renal calices . Helical CT angiography (CTA) demonstrated a right renal tumor with a tumor thrombus in the right renal vein that did not extend into the inferior vena cava (IVC) . Further evaluation, including a bone scan, did not demonstrate any evidence of metastases.
A right radical nephrectomy with a complete regional intraperitoneal lymphadenectomy with an anterior subcostal incision was performed in April 2017. No intraoperative or postoperative complications developed.
Gross examination showed a 9 × 8 × 8 cm daffodil yellow and madder red tumor with foci of necrosis. No positive surgical margins were discovered. There was a 2 cm yellowish-red soft tumor thrombus in the right renal vein without infiltration into the vessel wall. The tumor thrombus did not extend into the IVC but did infiltrate into the renal calices. No lymph node metastases were found. We obtained 12 random specimens from the tumor for histopathologic examination except for the tumor thrombus. Microscopy revealed that the mass consisted of nests and cords of cells separated by fine, arborizing fibrovascular septa. The collagenous material intermingled among tumor cells, which were cuboidal or polygonal in shape. The nuclei were optically clear with fine chromatin and round to oval in shape, lacked prominent nucleoli, and exhibited infrequent mitosis . There was necrosis in the tumor . Figure b shows microtumor thrombi in small vessels of the tumor. The histopathologic characteristics of the tumor thrombus in the renal vein were the same as those of the tumor in the kidney . Silver staining clearly demonstrated reticular fibers often outlining individual tumor cells , suggesting that the tumor was a sarcoma but not a carcinoma. Immunostaining was performed to make an exact histopathologic diagnosis. With immunostaining, tumor cells were positive for expressed vimentin, neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM, CD56), and Ki-67 and focally positive for p53, Bcl-2 and CD10 . Immunostaining for alpha B-crystallin, alpha-smooth muscle actin, CAM5.2, CD34, chromogranin (Chr), Cytokeratin7, M2A oncofetal antigen (D2–40), Desmin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), hemopoietic cell kinase (HCK), neuron specific enolase (NSE), P63, renal cell carcinoma marker (RCC-Ma), S100, Wilms’ tumor 1 (WT1), CD57 and CD15 were negative. We carefully checked an internal positive control for the negative staining. We found a prominent vascular network with positive reactivity for CD34 in the tumor . RCC-Ma was positive in the luminal surface of Bowman’s capsule adjoining the tumor . EMA and CAM5.2 were expressed in renal tubules adjoining the tumor . These data showed that the histopathologic diagnosis of the mass was CCSK. The pathological diagnosis was made by consultation of three pathologists in our hospital. The finalized pathologic stage was T3aN0M0 based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) definition and accepted as stage II according to the updated National Wilms Tumor Study 5 (NWTS-5) definition.
Two weeks after the operation, the generalized pruritus ended. One month after the operation, the patient started treatment with a regimen combining doxorubicin (DOX), vincristine (VCR), cyclophosphamide, and etoposide. Twenty months after the operation, CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed no evidence of local recurrence in the right kidney. Other examinations revealed no evidence of distant metastases. The patient is still alive and without clinical evidence of progression. The patient can complete daily life activities, occasionally feeling tired and experiencing numbness at the incision site.