A 59-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with sudden onset of chest pain for 4 h. The patient had a longstanding history of controlled hypertension.
Three years ago, the patient presented himself to a local hospital with sudden onset of chest and abdominal pain. Multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) revealed aortic arch dissection combined with distal dissection of descending aorta , of the case who had undergone the primary TEVAR assisted by Chimney technique with two non-overlapping stent-grafts surgery at that time. The proximal breaks were covered with a stent-graft (Medtronic VA 3030C200TE) assisted by Chimney technique (Fluency 10 mm*40 mm). The second stent-graft (Medtronic ENE2828C80EE) was implanted above the abdominal trunk artery to cover the distal breaks. In order to cover the breaks as much as possible and reduce the risk of paraplegia due to the continuous coverage, the two stent-grafts were non-overlapped, and the distance was about 30 mm. At 4 months after the primary TEVAR, MDCT did not show any significant change in the repaired aorta . However, 3 years later, MDCT showed a SINE between two non-overlapping stent-grafts had develop into a huge aneurysm originating from the distal end of the first stent-graft to the proximal end of the second stent-graft . Considering the possibility of a fatal aneurysm rupture at any time, emergent re-TEVAR was performed, and the third stent-graft (XianjianXJZDF36180) was implanted to prevention of aneurysm rupture, instead of open surgery. The third stent-graft was carefully implanted according to the overlapping area by re-TEVAR, and overlapped the distal end of the first stent-graft more than 70 mm, and the proximal end of the second stent more than 60 mm. MDCT re-examination showed the SINE between the primary no-overlapping stent-grafts disappeared and the reconstruction of blood vessels was smooth within 2 years of clinical follow-up checkup . The patient experienced a good recovery after surgery without stent migration, collapse, stroke, and spinal cord ischaemia.