A 65-year-old female presented to the emergency department having been woken from
sleep with severe chest pain. She reported that she had recently been experiencing
frontal headaches and had subsequently been diagnosed with hypertension confirmed by
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. First-line antihypertensive therapy with
candesartan had been commenced. She had no other traditional cardiovascular risk
factors, and there were no other physical or psychological stressors identified in
the history. However, there was a family history of early cardiac death from
myocardial infarction affecting her mother at 55 years of age. Her other past
medical history included right nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma.
Initial physical assessment was unremarkable; she was normotensive with no clinical
signs of cardiac failure. Her electrocardiogram demonstrated high-lateral T-wave
changes with normal corrected QT interval . High-sensitivity cardiac troponin
I was elevated (peak 6807 ng/L; normal range <10 ng/L), and a diagnosis of
non-ST elevation myocardial infarction was made. Anticoagulation with unfractionated
heparin and dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel were initiated.
Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated severe LV dysfunction with hyperkinetic
basal segments and circumferential akinesis of the mid to apical segments
(,
Video 1). Akinesis
of the mid to apical right ventricular segments were also noted suggestive of
biventricular stress cardiomyopathy (Video
1). The patient proceeded to selective coronary angiography that identified severe stenosis of the distal first diagonal branch, with an
appearance typical for intramural haematoma and type 2A SCAD. The remaining coronary
arteries were angiographically normal. Left ventriculography demonstrated extensive
apical and mid-wall regional wall motion abnormalities extending beyond the vascular
territory of the affected coronary artery (, Video 2). Serial electrocardiography
demonstrated progressive wide-spread deep T-wave inversion, suggestive of a stress
cardiomyopathy .
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated severe LV dysfunction (ejection
fraction [EF] 29%) with circumferential akinesis of the mid to apical
segments. Right ventricular EF was normal at 49%, with akinesis of the apical
segments. Tissue characterization with native T1 mapping and T2-weighted imaging
demonstrated circumferential myocardial oedema of the mid-wall and apical segments
consistent with myocardial oedema . Near transmural late Gadolinium enhancement
(LGE) in a subendocardial pattern was noted on post-contrast imaging in the apical
lateral and apical inferior segments consistent with myocardial infarction
.
The degree of myocardial oedema was disproportionate to the territory of infarction,
supporting a concomitant diagnosis of stress cardiomyopathy. A non-enhancing filling
defect in the LV apex was noted consistent with intracardiac thrombus.
A computed tomography (CT) renal angiogram was arranged to screen for systemic
arteriopathy and demonstrated FMD involving both external iliac arteries and the
left renal artery . Subsequent CT angiography of the head and neck vessels
confirmed FMD of the internal carotid arteries with otherwise unaffected
intracranial vessels and excluded intracerebral aneurysms.
On patient preference, rivaroxaban 15 mg was initiated in combination with
clopidogrel 75 mg daily. Candesartan and metoprolol succinate were progressively
up-titrated to maximally tolerated doses. Following discharge, the patient
represented with headache and hypertension, but no significant abnormalities such as
intracranial bleeding or vascular abnormalities (i.e. intracranial aneurysms) were
detected on CT brain imaging.
Repeat 2D (Video 3) and
contrast enhanced transthoracic echocardiography was performed at 6 weeks,
demonstrating recovery of the stress cardiomyopathy (LV EF 56% with normal
right ventricular size and function). No residual LV thrombus was identified. There
were no adverse bleeding events on therapy, no thrombo-embolic events, and no
clinical features to suggest reinfarction related to propagation of intramural
haematoma.