A 23-year-old man presented to the neurosurgery department on August 21, 2020, after suffering intermittent seizures and numbness and weakness of the right limb for 17 years. Before that, the family members reported that the patient had a limb convulsion at the age of 6, the right limb was numb and weak, and the symptoms were not considered. On June 14, 2016, due to another epileptic seizure, serum and cerebrospinal fluid were collected and tested at the Jiangxi Provincial Institute of Parasitic Disease Control and IgG antibody testing. The test results showed that both serum and cerebrospinal fluid were positive for Spirometra mansoni antibodies ; cerebrospinal fluid acid-fast staining and ink staining were normal; the Paneth test result was positive; the total number of white blood cells was 0.01*109/L; and the cerebrospinal fluid protein, sugar, and chloride were normal. The patient had no history of trauma, surgery, genetic or other chronic medical conditions, and did not complain of pain, itching, or other symptoms associated with the lesion. After further careful questioning, it was revealed that the patient was born in a rural area. When he was young, he often played in paddy fields, had contact with frogs, ingested undercooked frog meat, and had a habit of drinking mountain spring water. The patient refused surgery. Praziquantel was administered at a dose of 20 mg/kg three times a day for 15 consecutive days. The patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly. On August 18, 2020, the serum Spirometra mansoni IgG antibody test was performed again, and the results were not negative for Spirometra mansoni antibodies .
The patient had hypoesthesia in the right limb, and the remaining nerve function was normal. Laboratory tests including complete blood count, biochemical markers, urinalysis and routine stool tests were within normal limits, and no eosinophilia was observed at 0.12*109/L (reference value range was 0.02–0.52*109/L). The patient’s results evaluating peripheral blood paragonimiasis, schistosomiasis, hydatid disease, Angiostrongylus cantonensis, cysticercosis antibody negative and Toxoplasma gondii IgG and IgM were negative . On August 25, 2020, enhanced MRI of the brain showed that the left temporoparietal occipital lobe brain parenchyma and adjacent meninges showed obvious patchy, nodular and line-like enhancement; a low diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) signal, and a slightly high apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). We initially considered the possibility of neoplastic lesions. . Based on further clarification of the diagnosis, a craniotomy was performed on August 25, 2020, to remove the lesion .