A 20-year-old man without previous medical conditions suffered blunt abdominal trauma from the handlebar of a motorcycle. Arriving at the local hospital he was in hemorrhagic shock, with computed tomography displaying a liver laceration, capsular tear and free blood in the intraperitoneal cavity (a). The patient was transferred to another hospital where he received massive transfusions and underwent DCS with abdominal packing by 20 pieces of surgical drapes. Postoperatively, he was sedated using ketamine/midazolam and mechanically ventilated.
On day 2 he was transferred to Uppsala University Hospital, still dependent on transfusion and vasopressor support. At that time, he had received 4000 ml of Ringers Acetate, 1900 ml of Red cells, 1100 ml fresh frozen plasma, as well as Platelets, Fibrinogen and Tranexamic Acid. Abdominal angiography (a) demonstrated ongoing extravasation from branches of the right hepatic artery, which were selectively micro-catheterized and subsequently embolized (b).
After the angiography he remained circulatory unstable. Computed tomography (b) displayed compression of inferior vena cava as well as congestion including the whole intestine.
When a re-laparotomy was performed, no ongoing bleeding was found and the liver was repacked with two surgical drapes. The patient was now circulatory stable, vasopressor therapy tapered. In the evening, he presented a hypertensive episode with blood pressure rising up to 190/120 mmHg which was thought to be caused by inadequate pain relief.
During the night, antihypertensive treatment was initiated with labetalol, metoprolol and furosemide, and he was extubated in the morning. He negated pain, and at noon a dose of amlodipine was given and Tertiary Trauma Survey (TTS) was performed without any new findings. The blood pressure during the antihypertensive therapy remained around 180/100 mmHg. At this time his cumulative positive fluid balance was estimated to 10 L, but diuretic treatment with furosemide had only a temporary effects on the blood pressure.
On day 4, six episodes of extreme hypertension periods were observed. The highest blood pressure registered by the Patient Data Management System was 337/141 mmHg, simultaneous with a heart rate of 93 beats/min and an oxygen saturation of 93 %. The clinical presentation of that event was witnessed at bedside by one of the authors and described as follows:“The patient was asleep, with a blood pressure of 160/80 during continuous antihypertensive therapy. Suddenly, a rapid rise in blood pressure was registered and in less than one minute BP rose to 350/200 mmHg. The patient woke up, was pale, and described chest pain, shortness of breath, and showed severe anxiety. Non-invasive blood pressure measurement confirmed the hypertensive crisis. During the episode, saturation dropped to 91 %, while the heart rate did not change. Then blood pressure slowly decreased in 5 min down to 160/80 mmHg without additional treatment.”
The clinical presentation was consistent with a hypertensive crisis, and it was now clear that the patient was in an exceptional, and regarding the recent bleeding trauma, critical condition. Differential diagnoses considered at this time were as follows:Cushing Reflex, however, very unlikely due to GCS 15 and no history of neuro trauma Insufficient sedation or analgesia Renal artery obstruction/dissection Pheochromocytoma Neuroendocrine pathology including vasopressin, renin or aldosterone Transfusion Associated Circulatory Overload (TACO)
The patient was lucid and, except for continuous infusion of clonidine, devoid of sedation. He did not complain of any pain. CT Angiography of the thoracic and abdominal aorta to exclude aortic or arterial dissection were performed without pathological findings, as was Doppler ultrasound of the renal vessels. On CT abdomen, no intra- or extracapsular kidney hematomas could be seen, but a gauze directly compressing the right kidney (c/d) was later found. In order to exclude pheochromocytoma CT images were re-examined by an endocrine surgeon without any positive findings. In addition, plasma samples were drawn for analysis of methoxy-catecholamines, which (later) were found to be normal. Additional treatment with doxazosin and nitroglycerine was started with modest effect on the blood pressure. In addition, all drugs, syringes, and infusion tubes were replaced to rule out accidental drug administration errors.
The suspicion of direct renal compression equivalent to Page Kidney was raised, why plasma renin was analyzed, and found to be 85 mIE/L, thus clearly elevated compared to the reference interval of 2.8–40 mIE/L. At noon, the patient was subjected to re-laparotomy to remove the two remaining surgical drapes. Postoperatively, the hypertension decreased so that during the night following day 5 the patient became normotensive and all antihypertensive therapy could be cancelled. P-Renin decreased to 59 mIE/L during the evening after surgery, and was normalized to 30 mIE/L in the morning of day 6. Creatinine and diuresis were normal during the entire period.