A 15-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan boy from an urban crowded area, presented with high grade intermittent fever for 5 days with epigastric discomfort and backache without severe myalgia. He had neither clinically detectable focus of infection nor bleeding manifestations. He had not traveled to endemic areas of malaria or typhus. He had not consumed drugs, alcohol or indigenous medications.
On admission he was anicteric, pink, well hydrated and temperature was 38.8°C. There was tachycardia around 150 beats/min and an initial blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg which dropped down to 80/60 mmHg after 8 hrs. Tachypnoea was the only abnormality detected on the examination of respiratory system while the precordial examination was normal. There was mild epigastric discomfort on palpation but guarding, rigidity and organomegaly were not detected.
The electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia with ST segment depressions and troponin I was positive. The transthoracic echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 60%, normal diastolic function and chamber sizes. Myocarditis was considered and normal blood pressure was achieved within 1 hour with inotropic support [,].
On admission biochemistry revealed serum amylase of 4200 IU/L (70–340) and normal renal functions. Ionized calcium was low [0.9 mmol/l (1.1-1.4)]. Non-contrast CT abdomen demonstrated prominent, edematous pancreas suggesting pancreatitis, along with hepatomegaly.
The patient developed gradually worsening dyspnea with severe hemoptysis and hypoxia necessitating endotracheal intubation and ventilator support on the third hospitalized day. Frank blood was aspirated from the endotracheal tube. Repeat chest x ray demonstrated newly developed bilateral diffuse alveolar shadows suggesting diffuse pulmonary hemorrhages . He was hemodynamically stable and maintaining normal blood pressure without inotropic support while repeat echocardiography was normal. Central venous pressure(CVP) was 10 cm H2O.
Simultaneously his renal functions deteriorated with an elevation of serum creatinine upto 521 μmol/l (60–120). The patient was not oliguric during the first 2 days despite the initial episode of transient hypotension which developed 8 hrs after the admission. After recovering from the initial hypotensive episode within 1 hr, he was normotensive, normovolemic with normal CVP throughout the hospital stay. During the 3rd day he gradually became oliguric with rising serum creatinine level. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria of 300 mg/dl and hematuria of 100 per high power field without dysmorphic red cells or casts. Towards the latter part of the 3rd day he underwent hemodialysis. Hemodialysis was offered twice to the patient until the stabilization of renal function and then urine output and the serum creatinine was gradually normalized.
Icterus was detected along with the deterioration of renal function. Total and direct bilirubin was elevated [184 μmol/l (5–21) and 76 μmol/l (<3.4) respectively] and increased aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase and alkaline phosphatase [96 units/l (10–35), 141 units/l(10–40) and 685 units/l(100–360) respectively] was detected. Creatine phospho kinase was high [590 units/l (25–174)].
The hemoglobin level dropped from 13 g/dl to 8 g/dl with the pulmonary hemorrhage and the platelet count dropped from 125000 to 20000/mm3. Total leucocyte count was normal (7000/mm3) with 70% neutrophils with toxic changes. There were no polychromasia or fragmented erythrocytes in blood picture. International normalized ratio was 1.6 while activated partial thromboplastin time was normal.
With the progression of the clinical course, multisystem involvement with initial pancreatitis and possible myocarditis followed by pulmonary hemorrhage was unusual and led to a diagnostic dilemma in view of the aetiology. Later, along with the renal and hepatic involvement, the detection of positive leptospira IgM, negative IgG and a titer of 3200 in microscopic agglutination test (MAT) for leptospirosis enlightened the clinical picture. Negative hepatitis serology, dengue NS1 antigen and antibodies, serology for mycoplasma pneumonia excluded the other possible infective pathologies. Anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (MPO and PR3) were negative and complement levels were normal.
Intravenous meropenem 500 mg 8 hourly and benzyl penicillin 2,000,000 units 6 hourly was started empirically and continued for 2 weeks along with supportive care. Ventilator support was offered for 4 days and hemodialysis was performed twice. Patient improved dramatically, and became asymptomatic. Normal levels of serum amylase, renal function, cardio-respiratory functions, transaminases and hematological parameters were achieved by the end of 2nd week.