An 8 year old black Kenyan female child was diagnosed with JS in her first year of life. She was delivered at term via spontaneous vaginal delivery with a birth weight of 3.2 kg. There was no perinatal resuscitation and antenatal history was unremarkable. On her second day of life, she had multiple generalised tonic–clonic convulsions. The patient had 16 year old brother who is presently alive and well. Two siblings died as infants; the first died at 3 weeks of age and had an encephalocoele. The other sibling died at 9 months of age and had an encephalocoele and hydrocephalus for which a ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted.
On examination she was noted to have generalised hypotonia with a flat nasal bridge, abnormal eye movements and both anterior and posterior fontanelles were enlarged. MRI brain done at 56 days of age showed a small dysplastic vermis, large rounded superior cerebellar peduncles and absence of decussation of white matter pathways forming the ‘molar tooth’ malformation, characteristic of JS . The fourth ventricle was enlarged; there was ventricular asymmetry and dilatation with absence of septum pellucidum and a midline lipoma in the occipital region. Oral phenobarbital and phenytoin were commenced after which no further convulsions were noted. She was followed up by a paediatric neurologist until 2 years of age at which point she was lost to follow up.
She presented several years later, age 7 years, for a general outpatient review. She was not on any medication and had reportedly been seizure free for several years. She had characteristic clinical features of JS, namely; gross developmental delay and cognitive impairment, hypotonia with abnormal limb movements and generalised muscle wasting, a wide nasal bridge, low set ears, a protruding tongue and abnormal eye movements. Her weight at this point was 17 kg and length 119 cm. A macrocytic anaemia was noted on full blood count (haemoglobin 6.2 g/dL, reference range 11.5–15.5 g/dL; mean corpuscular volume 99 fL, reference range 78–94 fL). Further investigation revealed hypothyroidism (thyroid stimulating hormone 2.53 U/mL, reference range 0.6–5.1 U/mL; free triiodothyronine 2.22 pg/mL, reference range 2.6–5.4 pg/mL; free thyroxine 0.69 ng/dL, reference range 0.8–2.05 ng/dL). Peripheral blood film showed macrocytic normochromic red blood cells of normal morphology and haematinics were within normal limits. She was transfused with packed red blood cells and started on levothyroxine 25 μg once daily.
One month later she presented to our institution following two generalised tonic–clonic convulsions. No acute changes were noted on CT brain. She was started on oral phenobarbital 30 mg once daily and carbamazepine 100 mg once daily. Her haemoglobin was 6.4 g/dL and marked renal impairment was noted with urea 16.7 mmol/L (reference range 1.7–8.3 mmol/L), creatinine 460 µmol/L (reference range 27–62 µmol/L) and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 10 mL/min/1.73 m2. Serum potassium was 6 mmol/L (reference range 3.5–5 mmol/L), other electrolytes were within normal limits. Renal ultrasound showed hyperechoic kidneys of size 9 × 3.5 cm with loss of normal corticomedullary differentiation, multiple cortical cysts of variable sizes in both kidneys consistent with renal parenchymal disease and bilateral polycystic kidney disease . There were no peripheral stigmata of chronic renal disease noted on examination. She was transfused with packed red blood cells and started on subcutaneous erythropoietin 2000 units once weekly.
Her parents were counselled regarding the short and long term implications of her diagnosis and guarded prognosis. Following a multi-disciplinary ethical committee meeting, it was decided that dialysis should be started. Palliative care was deemed inappropriate at this stage as the patient was still at her baseline level of functioning. Her parents request for maximal intervention was also considered during the decision making process. Peritoneal dialysis was initiated in hospital and continued at home. She was deemed an unsuitable candidate for haemodialysis as she would have required sedation for each session due to frequent and erratic limb movements.
She underwent home PD for a 7 month period which was manually administered by renal nurses. Her mother declined to be trained in PD administration and chose not to engage with the counselling services offered to her. During this period she had 2 week-long hospital admissions with peritonitis (culture negative) which was treated with intra-peritoneal vancomycin and intravenous ceftazidime. Her nutritional needs were met by nasogastric feeding. After 7 months of home PD, she was admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit with Stevens–Johnson syndrome. She subsequently developed severe sepsis with multiple organ failure, secondary to hospital acquired multi-drug resistant klebsiella pneumoniae. Her PD catheter was changed as it was obstructed. She died 22 days following admission in June 2016, aged 8 years and 14 days.
The timeline of the case is shown in Fig. .