Patient is a 58 years-old female with history of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), obesity (BMI: 38.7), asthma, diabetes mellitus and hypertension. She had been experiencing dysphagia and chest discomfort for more than 10 years; worsening of her chest pain prompted her to visit the emergency room. Following a negative cardiac work-up, she was referred to a gastroenterologist for an endoscopic evaluation. The esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) report described a few medium-sized blebs in the lower third of the esophagus. The patient was then referred to our tertiary care center for further evaluation and management. To further characterize the lesions, an EGD with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed, which re-demonstrated several cystic lesions in the distal and middle esophagus, and showed several well defined anechoic submucosal lesions . High resolution manometry (HRM) was then performed which showed a hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter (LES) with an elevated resting pressure of 86.7 mmHg and elevated integrated relaxation pressure (IRP) of 31.6 mmHg consistent with the diagnosis of EGJOO . In addition, the mean distal contractile integral (DCI) was elevated at 14665.9 mmHg·cm·s and all contractions had a DCI > 8000 mmHg·cm·s, consistent with the diagnosis of jackhammer esophagus. The decision was made to perform endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) of these cysts in a staged manner . Pathologic evaluation of the lesions showed benign squamous mucosa with cystic dilation of the submucosal duct consistent with esophageal retention cyst . Of note, pathologic examination of tissue obtained from non-cystic parts of the esophagus also showed microscopic submucosal retention cysts.
Following EMR, the patient reported significant symptomatic improvement, and post-operative esophagram showed no further cystic lesion in the esophagus. However, the ingested 13 mm barium tablet was retained above EGJ for more than 3 min, concerning for persistent outflow resistance at the EGJ . HRM was repeated following resection and showed an LES resting pressure of 65.6 mmHg with IRP of 36.7 mmHg and mean DCI of 11,480.7 with all contractions with DCI > 8000 mmHg·cm·s. The patient was enrolled in a weight management program and was being counseled for bariatric surgery prior to presenting to us. Since her esophageal dysmotility persisted even after eliminating mechanical obstruction from the cysts and given the unknown natural history or malignant potential of esophageal retention cysts, she was advised to not proceed with a bariatric surgical intervention. The altered foregut anatomy following a bariatric procedure could pose a challenge if she requires an esophagectomy in the future. The patient is currently considering a surgical or endoscopic myotomy to address her EGJOO and jackhammer esophagus.