The patient was a 5 years old Italian girl in usual good health, regularly vaccinated. Family history was unremarkable. She was admitted at the emergency room of the Ferrara’s Hospital because of pain in her feet started 3 days before after a minor trauma, and of an abnormal gait with lower limbs extended.
The physical examination revealed the presence of ecchymosis at the ankles, and reduced mobility of the left tibiotarsic joint. No additional clinically relevant findings were observed on physical examination. The child was in good health, exception made for a feverish gastroenteritis 3–4 weeks before admission to the emergency room. She was discharged with anti-inflammatory therapy (Ibuprofen) every 8 h for 5 days, and recommending rest. However, once at home, she complained of night-time articular pain localized to the feet, and later extended to dorsal spine, hands and wrists. Wrists also showed ecchymosis. Fever was also present (maximum temperature of 38.9 °C).
Due to rapid deterioration of her conditions, the child was again referred to our emergency room. At the time of admission, she had an axillary temperature of 38.9 °C, aching and walking with lower limbs extended. Physical examination was suggestive of a polyarticular arthritis: joint pain elicited only by touching with bilateral functional limitation of tibiotarsic joints, knees, wrists, elbows and left metacarpophalangeal joints and in flexion the left hand-interphalangeal joints.
Pain was also triggered by cervical and dorsal spine movement. Cardio-respiratory objectivity, as well as pharynx and mucous membranes appeared normal, and no adenomegaly or hepatosplenomegaly was observed. The skin was normal, without nodules or rash.
Blood tests revealed high grade leucocytosis (leukocyte count 19,070/μL, 82.4% neutrophils), predominantly neutrophilia, with elevated inflammation indexes (ESR 56 mm, CRP 130.5 mg/l). The fast pharyngeal swab for haemolytic beta-streptococcus of Group A was negative. It was decided to admit the patient at the Pediatrics Department, where, while waiting for culture tests, we started intravenous antibiotic treatment with Amoxicillin and anti-inflammatory therapy with Ibuprofen every 8 h. This therapy produced a partial clinical recovery.
Further laboratory tests revealed Antinuclear Antibodies positivity (1:160, dotted score), Rheumatic Factor negativity, and confirmed the increased level of markers of inflammation: leucocytosis with neutrophilia (leukocyte count 20,030/μL, 82% neutrophils), thrombocytosis (772 platelets × 103/μl), and increased ESR, CRP, alpha2globulin and ferritin (ESR 65 mm, CRP 164 mg/l, alpha2globulin 17.8%, ferritin 267 ng/ml). Pharyngeal swab for haemolytic beta-streptococcus was negative, and the anti-streptolytic title slightly increased (437 U/ml).
The electrocardiogram was normal, while the echocardiogram was suggestive of serositis: pericardial effusion in the absence of signs of hemodynamic repercussion. Abdominal ultrasound scan was normal and slit lamp examination showed no signs of eye inflammation. Thus, a tentative diagnosis of systemic inflammatory disease was made.
Therefore Kawasaki disease, rheumatic disease, streptococcal infection as differential diagnoses were excluded. Lymphoproliferative diseases were excluded by light microscope examination of peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate smears.
Fever was intermittent with evening spikes. Intermittent fever, polyarthritis with poor response to anti-inflammatory drugs and serositis were suggestive of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SJIA).
First-line treatment with oral prednisone at the dose of 2 mg/kg/day induced a stable defervescence after 24 h (10th day of fever), and regression of arthritis.
Due to the marked thrombocytosis (1,515 platelets × 103/μl), although ascribable to the inflammatory process, in addition to the corticosteroid treatment, we started antiplatelet therapy with aspirin at the dose of 5 mg/kg. During the hospitalization no clinical or laboratory evidence of macrophage activation syndrome was observed.
After about 2 weeks, the child was sent home in good general conditions with no articular and district signs of disease, except a residual minimal pericardial discharge. At that time, the platelet count was increased (2,597 × 103/μl) in the absence of other abnormal laboratory indexes.
However, at follow-up visit 1 week after Hospital discharge, severe thrombocytosis (up to 3,193 platelets × 103/μl) was found. Subcutaneous therapy with interleukin 1β (IL-1β) receptor antagonist (Anakinra 2.5 mg / Kg/ day) was started for a total of 22 administrations. IL-1β, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and thrombopoietin (Tpo) were measured before, throughout and after Anakinra treatment.
Platelet number decreased rapidly, with normalization achieved after the tenth dose (404 platelets × 103/μl), with subsequent resolution of the pericardial effusion without coronary and valve involvement.
Residual blood samples after routine blood counts were used for plasma separation. Plasma aliquots were stored at − 80 °C avoiding freezing and thawing cycles. Plasma IL-6, IL-1β and Tpo levels were measured by using the Human IL-6 Quantikine, human IL-1β/IL-1F2 Quantikine, and the Human Thrombopoietin Quantikine ELISA kits, respectively (all from R&D System, Minneapolis, MN, USA), following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed in duplicate. Optical density was measured with a Multiskan FC spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Plasma samples were obtained at the following time points: the day before starting Anakinra treatment (T0), at day 14 (T1) after beginning treatment, at day 22 (the last day of treatment, T2), and after 10 months (T3). Plasma IL-6 levels (3.34 pg/ml at T0 and 3.92 pg/ml at T2, Table ) were unaltered compared to normal values (12–13 pg/ml) , suggesting that IL-6 was not implicated in the disease process. On the contrary, plasma IL-1β levels at T0 were significantly increased (66.51 pg/ml). IL-1β levels were further increased at T1 (104.22 pg/ml), but drastically declined at T2 (17.75 pg/ml). At time T3, IL-1β concentration was 13.16 pg/ml, i.e. in the same range of concentrations reported for healthy children in other studies (8.1–19 pg/ml) .
Finally, plasma Tpo levels were also examined at all time-points. Values were consistent with those reported for healthy adults (62.3 to 124 pg/ml ) and children (7 to 99 pg/ml ), and no significant changes were observed throughout the test period . Due to limited availability of blood, it was not possible to measure all cytokines at all time points.
A correlation between IL-1β and Tpo plasma levels was tentatively verified , but although the two parameters seemed to be correlated, statistical significance was not achieved (R = 0.887, p = 0.057).
Therapy with Anakinra was well tolerated, the only side effect observed being a skin rash at the injection sites that resolved rapidly and spontaneously. At four and 10 months follow-up, the child has normal platelet count (439 platelets × 103/μl) and echocardiography test.