A 47-year-old woman presented to the gynaecology clinic with a history of menometrorrhagia and dysmenorrhea for 8 months. She denied experiencing symptomatic anaemia, postcoital bleeding, gastrointestinal and urinary symptoms and constitutional symptoms. Her past gynaecologic, obstetric and surgical history was otherwise unremarkable. She had a normal Pap smear 2 years prior. The patient had a history of gastritis which was self-treated with over-the-counter medications. She was a non-smoker and had no personal or familial history of cancer.
At the time of referral, her general physical examination was normal. Pelvic examination revealed a mobile uterus of 10 weeks size with no masses or adnexal tenderness. On speculum examination, the cervix appeared healthy and unremarkable. Pelvic ultrasonography demonstrated a solitary 6.7 cm × 4.5 cm subserosal uterine leiomyoma. There was mild left hydronephrosis with hydroureter and moderate pelvic free fluid. Blood investigations revealed a haemoglobin concentration of 10.5 g/dL and normal renal and liver function tests.
A tentative diagnosis of uterine leiomyoma was made, and treatment options were discussed with the patient. She opted for cystoscopy with left ureteric stenting, a total laparoscopic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Intraoperatively, the uterus, cervix and bilateral adnexa appeared unremarkable. The patient underwent an uneventful procedure and was discharged in satisfactory condition approximately 24 h later. Histopathology confirmed a benign uterine leiomyoma, with no evidence of malignancy. The cervix was widely sampled and there was no evidence of in situ or invasive neoplasia. However, several cervical sections revealed aggregates of atypical cells within the lymphovascular spaces of the cervix . These cells displayed moderate, syncytial cytoplasms and round to ovoid nuclei with indistinct nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry was subsequently performed, and further study of these atypical cervical cells revealed positive stains for CK7 and CDX2 . Negative stains included CK20, CK5/6, CD45, desmin, GATA3 and PAX8. These features were highly suspicious for metastatic adenocarcinoma.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was requested. Positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan was not available at our institution at that time. Abdominal CT demonstrated mild thickening of the gastric fundus with no associated lymphadenopathy or other features suggestive of malignancy. The intra-abdominal viscera appeared unremarkable, and the pelvic scan denoted status post hysterectomy changes. An upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy was arranged, and an atypical gastric fundus with irregular thickened folds was discovered, giving the impression of a diffuse gastric lesion. The gastric cardia, antrum and pylorus appeared unremarkable. Several endoscopic biopsies were taken of the gastric fundus.
Histopathology of the gastric fundal biopsies demonstrated multiple fragments of gastric mucosa infiltrated by dissociated single cells which had high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios and prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry of gastric samples also stained positive for CK7 and CDX2. Considering the pattern of infiltration and prior cervical histopathology, it was best regarded as stage T2 N0 M1 poorly differentiated diffuse-type gastric adenocarcinoma that metastasized to the uterine cervix. The patient’s case was subsequently discussed at the multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting, and a decision was made for the patient to undergo chemotherapy due to the presence of metastatic disease in the cervix. Surgery for the primary gastric cancer was not considered. The patient was referred to the Medical Oncology team for further management. However, she eventually decided to stop treatment due to the side effects of chemotherapy and the progression of the disease. The patient succumbed to her disease a few months later.