A 42-year-old man of Greek origin presented with an episode of left intermittent lumbar pain. Abdominal examination did not reveal any tenderness and laboratory data were not remarkable.
Ultrasound sonography revealed a 5 cm, solid, well-defined mass with mixed echogenicity in the left paraspinal region, with no further pathology. A 5 cm, well-defined mass in the left paraspinal region at the L5 level was also showed in CT and MRI demonstrating homogeneous low signal intensity on the T1-weighted and a high signal on the T2-weighted abdominal MRI images. There was contrast enhancement, contrary to left psoas muscle that didn't have any scintigraphic uptake. The lesion was in association with the L4-L5 interspinal space and seemed to derive from the spinal root. Lumbar spine MRI showed an encapsulated ovoidal retroperitoneal lesion in the L4-L5 level along the posterior side of left psoas muscle with great scintigraphic uptake. The tumor demonstrated a cystic degeneration with surrounding collagenous fibrous tissue and was in close relation to L5 spinal root. A CT guided FNA was performed in order to establish a preoperative diagnosis of the tumor. The cytologic examination revealed typical features of benign schwannoma .
The patient was operated with extra peritoneal approach, through a left paramedian incision. The mass seemed to originate from the nerve root of the L4-L5 lumbar spinal space and the excision was complete. On the third postoperative day, the patient complained for strong postural headache that worsened when sitting up and improved after lying down. This was attributed to a leak of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the spinal membrane, probably caused by minor laceration of the CS canal. The patient's condition was improved with bed rest, paracetamol and hydration. He was discharged on the fifth postoperative day, with no headache, but with a sensory deficit at the site of the left lateral femoral region. The deficit was attributed to left L5 spinal nerve's branch excision, probably occurred during the removal of the mass.
Histology showed a well circumscribed spindle-cell tumor with hemorrhage and necrosis, cellular atypia but no mitotic figures, myxoid degeneration, and vessels with hyalinized walls, while S100 immunohistochemistry was strongly positive . Proliferative index Ki-67 was positive, but low. Final diagnosis was ancient schwannoma.