A 56-year-old man sustained a traumatic amputation at the mid-calf combined with dislocation of the proximal tibiofibular joint and rupture of the posterior cruciate ligament. His tibiofibular joint was stabilized which provided enough knee stability for rehabilitation and eventual full activity as a motorcycle mechanic using a vacuum assisted suspension system (VASS) socket with a hydraulic foot and ankle. Over the next 2 years, heavy labor saw a progression of underlying knee osteoarthritis which significantly affected his ability to work and mobilize. Plain films revealed predominantly patellofemoral joint (PFJ) osteoarthritis with some degenerative changes also seen in both medial and lateral compartments . Prosthetic adjustment was not effective in offloading the PFJ and given his increasing pain, recurrent hemarthroses and inability to perform heavy work it was decided to proceed to a TKA. Patient consent and local ethics committee approval were obtained (NSLHD HREC RESP/17/110).
Skin preparation and draping in the absence of the distal leg presents difficulties otherwise not encountered. This was achieved using a sling under the posterior thigh and tourniquet cuff flexing the hip and allowing sterile skin preparation . Two soft wedges of rolled towels were placed under the knee to provide support and allow varying ranges of flexion of the hip and knee.
Navigationpins were placed in the distal femur and proximal tibial stump to mount trackers . While registration and navigation of the femoral side were unchanged, an extramedullary tibial jig was pinned to the proximal tibia and carefully aligned with the entire stump to create a virtual ankle position where the two malleoli reference points can be estimated .
Exposure of the femur was performed with both knee wedge supports. The tibial exposure was made more challenging by the lack of a fixed foot position which resulted in internal and external rotation of the hip when retractors were placed in the medial and lateral aspects of the knee, and by the absence of counter-leverage for an adequate anterior draw with the popliteal fossa retractor. For this stage, transferring to a single knee wedge allowed the hip to push up into full flexion and a second assistant was useful to support the stump.
With no ankle reference points to guide alignment of the tibial prosthesis, pre-operative templating was also performed on long leg films of the contralateral leg which suggested that neutral tibial alignment would be achieved if 4mm more bone was removed from the lateral plateau than the medial. Navigation allowed estimation of the bony resection depth on each side of the knee and this combined with registration using the extension of the extramedullary jig was utilized to plan the tibial cut .The resected bone measurements were 7.5mm from the medial plateau and 9.5mm from the lateral side, suggesting slight varus. A cemented posterior stabilized TKA with patella resurfacing was performed.
Stump swelling was expected and it was predicted that the patient’s prosthesis could not be used in the early recovery period. Regular high elevation with application of circumferential ice packs was used along with daily stump compression dressings. Frequent sessions with physiotherapy helped to maintain knee range of motion both actively and passively. This was achieved by binding bungee ropes to the stump which can be pulled either anteriorly to gain extension or posteriorly for flexion. A good fitting prosthetic socket is crucial for efficient and comfortable use of a prosthesis . A new prosthesis fitting occurred when the stump swelling had fully resolved. The new prosthesis was designed to accommodate any changes in limb alignment and length.