A 67-year-old female Caucasian patient was admitted to our hospital with a one-day history of rapid onset of severe left lower abdominal pain and tenderness, which was associated with nausea and vomiting with frequent passage of bloody, loose stools. Ten days earlier, because of gingivitis, amoxicillin-clavulanate had been prescribed for one week that was associated with episodic abdominal discomfort that lasted a few minutes. Episodic abdominal pain was already present during the preceding 3 months but was not associated with other symptoms such as bloating, diarrhoea, constipation, nausea, vomiting, early satiety, weakness, fever/chills or anorexia; the discomfort could not be ignored but did not influence daily activities (Mesenteric Panniculitis Subjective Assessment Score MPSAS of 16) suggestive of moderately symptomatic disease.
Her past medical history included hypertension and dyslipidemia for 10 years and impaired glucose tolerance diagnosed only recently. Urinary incontinence due to childbirth-related pelvic floor defect and uterine descent was surgically corrected 3 years ago. Her medication history included daily clonidine 0.3 mg divided in two doses, lercadipine 20 mg, olmesartan 20 mg, hydrochlorothiazide 20 mg, rosuvastatin 10 mg, and acetylsalicylic acid 75 mg. She had no known allergies, no significant family history, and a review of her systems was unremarkable.
On examination, the patient was in sinus rhythm, was moderately dehydrated, had lower abdominal tenderness, and had no organomegaly or palpable masses. Body mass index was 33.9 kg/m2. Digital rectal examination results were positive for blood. Laboratory tests showed moderate leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 15, 700/μL; with an elevated neutrophil count of 13, 500/μL), an elevated C-reactive protein level (67 mg/L, normal range < 5 mg/L), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 39 mm/h. Arterial blood gas showed no lactic acidosis. The patient was admitted for investigation.
Chest and abdominal plain X-rays, as well as abdominal ultrasonography were normal. Stool cultures for Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter and Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Clostridium difficile toxin A and B were negative. Complete ileo-colonoscopy performed within 48 hours of presentation showed petechial hemorrhages interspersed with areas of pale, edematous mucosa in the distal sigma and at the splenic flexure with rectal sparing. No strictures, diverticula, polyps, neoplastic tissue or ulcera were detected. Multiple biopsy specimens were taken and histology was consistent with minimal changes related to a ischemic colitis demonstrating diffuse hyperaemic dilated blood vessels free of thombi associated with minimal eosinophilic edema and a light chronic and acute mucosal inflammation. Antinuclear, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic, antiphospholipid and anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies were negative. Antithrombin and protein C plasma levels were normal; factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene mutations were negative. Therapeutic administration of acetylsalicylic acid was interrupted and enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneously administered instead; metronidazole 500 mg every eight hours was given orally for suspected infectious colitis. Rectal bleeding stopped and acute abdominal pain significantly improved with no need of additional analgesic therapy.
On day 5 after admission, contrast-enhanced CT was performed which showed unremarkable results for small intestine, colon, liver, spleen, pancreas adrenal glands and pelvic organs. It revealed an area of mesenteric panniculitis at the root of the small bowel mesentery . Vascular contrast CT findings of mesenteric arteries were normal, thus excluding luminal thrombosis, vasculitis, abdominal aortic aneurysm and dissection or strangulation of the mesentery as typical causes for both, occlusive and non-occlusive types of ischemic colitis. Slightly increased vascular markings in projection to the proximal transversal mesocolon, compatible with venous stasis, were observed. A repeat CT scan performed 2 months later showed no appreciable change in the size of MP. In PET/CT imaging, no FDG uptake was seen within typical features of MP .
Laparoscopy was performed 1 month later demonstrating a slight whitish discoloration of the yellow upper mesenteric fat in proximity to the ligament of Treitz . Biopsies from the mesenteric surface of this area were taken; histology, however, was basically unremarkable with evidence of some submesothelial inflammation only.
After initial presentation, preexisting symptoms persisted for another two months and then gradually disappeared (MPSAS of 10). She had no abdominal pain any more, no change in bowel habits or hematochezia and no weight loss.
An exophytic renal mass of the left kidney of 15 × 17 × 18 mm size had already been noted in the first CT scan, which was confirmed in PET-CT imaging as not taking up FDG. A repeat CT scan after 14 months showed that the area of MP was slightly reduced. A small increment in size of this renal mass (17 × 17 × 20 mm) was noted and therefore the tumor was laparoscopically enucleated. Pathologic examination of the specimen revealed an oncocitoma with no coexistence of renal carcinoma and negative surgical margins.