A 4-year-old girl with T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma was admitted for chemotherapy at Shahid Baghaei Hospital, Ahvaz, Iran.
On the first day of admission (day 0), the patient had no symptoms but as soon as a needle entered IVAP to inject normal saline, her body temperature rose to 39°C (102°F).
Due to the presence of fever, antibiotic therapy started with cefepime (50 mg per kg) every 8 hours to diminish the febrile status.
During this period, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of the patient was equal to 47, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was three plus (+3) with WBC count of 2500/µl.
After 48 hours of antibiotic therapy, the fever did not improve. On the third day of hospitalization, a blood culture from the port was sent to
the medical mycology laboratory for fungal detection. White to cream, smooth, and glossy yeast colonies grew on Sabouraud dextrose agar medium (Merck Co., Darmstadt, Germany)
at 37℃ but no hyphae or pseudohyphae was
observed in wet mount examination .
Genomic DNA of isolate was extracted using SinaPureTMDNA kit (SinaClonBioScience, Tehran, Iran) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) and ITS2 regions and the 5.8S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) region of the fungi were amplified and sequenced by using universal primers ITS1/ITS4.
Using BLAST analysis, the ITS sequences of isolate exhibited 100% homology with W. myanmarensis. Sequence with 778bp length was deposited in
GenBank with the accession no. OQ455736. The patient was treated with intravenous voriconazole at a dosage of 9 mg on the first day and then 6 mg on the second day.
After taking voriconazole for 48 hours, the fever was resolved in the patient. However, the treatment continued with intravenous voriconazole for seven days, namely the
time the antifungal susceptibility profile became available. In vitro antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) was performed using the broth microdilution CLSI M27-A3 method . Antifungals (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) used in this study had MICs for amphotericin B, 0.25 μg/ml; anidulafungin, ≤0.015 μg/ml; micafungin,
0.06 μg/ml; caspofungin, 0.125 μg/ml; fluconazole, 2 μg/ml; voriconazole, ≤0.03 μg/ml; posaconazole, 0.25 μg/ml; isavuconazole,0.06 μg/ml; ibrexafungerp,
0.25 μg/ml; Itraconazole,0.125 μg/ml .
There are no interpretative breakpoints available for W. myanmarensis. On the 7th day of hospitalization and during maintenance of therapy,
two blood cultures from the vein and port were sent to the medical mycology laboratory for monitoring of the treatment regimen, and the results of both were negative.
Fortunately, after seven days of treatment, there was a significant improvement in laboratory indices such as ESR (8) and CRP (negative) with 9.7/ µL WBC count without fever.
Eventually, after normal results of echocardiography, brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), abdominal and pelvic ultrasound scanner, the patient was discharged with
voriconazole maintenance therapy. On the first day, treatment started with intravenous voriconazole at a dosage of 9 mg/kgevery 12 h, then 6 mg/kg every 12 h for one week,
followed by oral voriconazole at a dosage of 6 mg/kg every 12 h for two weeks.