The patient was a 50-year-old female who underwent surgery in 2004 for mucinous breast carcinoma of the right breast [T2N1M0 (IIb)], and received postoperative CMF (cyclophosphamide+methotrexate+fluorouracil) chemotherapy, radiotherapy with 50Gy and endocrinotherapy with tamoxifen for 5 years. Unfortunately, she did not receive any follow-up examination after completion of the treatment. In 2015, she found that the right local surface of the scalp had become irregular and was increasing in size without pain or numbness. More than 1 year later, the patient experienced a slight headache which was relieved with antipyretic analgesics. Then edema of the frontal scalp and bilateral upper eyelid followed, particularly on the right side. She denied any past trauma history. The physical examination revealed the following: edema of the bilateral frontal scalp and upper eyelid, the right frontal, temporal, and dorsal scalp were slightly lumpy with normal scalp color, and the lumps were immobile and solid but without tenderness. The right thoracic wall was modified due to the prior radical mastectomy for the treatment of breast cancer and the right upper limb was free of edema. Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities other than the slight headache. No abnormalies were found in the remaining examinations. Laboratory examination: The results of routine blood and urine examinations were normal, as were those of the biochemistry examination.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed that the bilateral frontal bone, right temporal bone and right parietal bone were diffusely and osteolytically destroyed with soft tissue lesions. . No metastatic lesions were observed on the CT images of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results revealed that the bilateral frontal bone, right temporal bone, and right parietal bone were thickened with nodules. The lesions were tent-like on coronal and sagittal planes . The lesions exhibited a slight hypointensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) , and isointensity on T1-weighted imaging (T2WI) and T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, and were significantly enhanced after enhancement. The meninges of the right frontal, temporal, and parietal areas were also diffusely thickened with nodules. The nodules compressed the right temporal lobe slightly and led to edema of the parenchyma , which was not enhanced . There was slight compression of the adjacent brain parenc hyma and ventricle. The brain midline structure shifted to the left by approximately 0.5 cm, and the size of the meningeal nodular lesions was approximately 2.8 × 1.3 × 2.8 cm. The tumor marker levels were: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 11.52 ng/ml, cancer antigen 15–3(CA15–3) 77.39 U/m l. The results combined with the medical history, led us to suspect the presence of a metastatic tumor with invasion of the right temporal and occipital meninges. Systemic bone imaging revealed abnormal bone metabolism in the skull . To evaluate the nature of the lesion, open biopsy was performed. The pathological diagnosis of the biopsy was hemangioma of the skull . The corrected diagnosis was cranial cavernous hemangioma.
Based on the CT and MRI findings, the headache and upper eyelid edema of the patient were considered to be caused by the local invasion of the skull lesions. The patient received a normal three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy with a dose of 60Gy/30F (the lesions nearby bilateral upper orbital bone was 50Gy/30F). The target volume was described as: according to CT and MRI images to delineate the target, gross tumor volume (GTV) comprised the skull, meningeal and Right temporal lobe lesions, GTV was enlarged 3 mm circumferentialy to form the planning target volume (PTV). Irradiation was performed using 6 MV X-rays. At the end of the radiotherapy, the size of the lump at biopsy site (the primary right frontal, temporal, and top scalp) was slightly reduced on physical examination, but the head CT showed no significantly change compared to pre-radiotherapy CT images . The symptoms of discomfort in the head and eye swelling were relieved. We concluded that the blood vessels of lesions in skull may be blocked. The patient reported no symptoms during the 1-year telephonic follow-up. Unfortunately, the CT scan during 1-year follow-up was performed at an outside institution and was not available for inclusion in this report.