A 14-year-old girl of Asian ethnicity presented in the outpatient department of our hospital with loss of vision in her right eye for the previous 1.5 months, and a painless, discharging sinus over the front of her head on the right side for the preceding 14 months. The patient gave a history of low grade fever with intermittent discharge of cheesy material from the sinus. There was no history of chronic cough, dyspnea, loss of appetite or weight loss. The patient was malnourished (PEM grade-II). On examination, the sinus was found to be attached to the underlying frontal bone. The base of the sinus was non-tender. On pressing around the base, a few drops of cheesy material were extruded. Two posterior auricular lymph nodes were found enlarged on the right side and these were non-tender, and freely mobile. No other lymphadenopathy was detected. The chest and other systemic examinations were non-contributory.
The investigations revealed haemoglobin 10.5 gm%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 24 mm in the first hour (Wintrobe's Method), total lymphocyte count (TLC) 6200 cells/mm3 with polymorphs 76% and lymphocytes 24%. The Mantoux test was positive with induration of 16 mm × 18 mm. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive for tuberculosis, and direct smear was positive for acid fast bacillus (AFB). Chest X-ray was normal. X-ray of her skull , showed a well defined area of radiodense shadow overlying the right frontal bone with sella appearing normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her head was done and showed a diffuse, homogeneously ill defined hyperdense lesion of size 2.9 × 5.3 cm (anteroposterior × thickness) involving the right orbit in its superior aspect with inferior and downward displacement of the right globe with extension into the anterior cranial fossa involving the right frontal region and the basal cistern region mainly on the right side; it also showed a mass effect with a midline shift toward the left. Lytic bone lesions involving the greater wing of the sphenoid, the roof of the medial wall of the orbit and the temporal bone on the right side with bony spikes were seen scattered in the right frontal region. Histopathology of tissue bone aggregates showed multiple granulomas composed of epithelioid cells, Langerhans giant cells and lymphocytes with casseous necrosis consistent with tuberculosis. Perimetry was also done and showed complete loss of vision on the right side with mean sensitivity (MS) 26.8, mean deviation (MD) -18.6 and pattern standard deviation (PSD) 2.2 .
A diagnosis was made of tuberculosis of the frontal bone with orbital extension. Surgery was performed 8 cm parallel to the hair line and behind it and the tumor infiltrating into the sphenoid, frontal and lateral wall of the orbit was removed. Antituberculosis treatment of directly observed therapy (DOTS) with rifampicin (10 mg/kg), pyrazinamide (25 mg/kg), ethambutol (15 mg/kg) and isoniazid (5 mg/kg) according to body weight was started. The four drugs were given for a period of 3 months followed by rifampicin (10 mg/kg) and isoniazid (5 mg/kg) for the next 9 months. The sinus healed in 3 weeks and radiological recovery was noted 4 months after the start of the antituberculosis treatment because of good compliance on the part of the patient. The patient's vision also improved as monitored by perimetry and refraction, and at the time of reporting, her vision was 6/60. Radiological recovery was in the form of sclerosis around a former lytic area.