A 27-year-old male visited an ophthalmology clinic with a complaint of blurred vision OU. He showed bilateral uveitis that had been controlled with eye drops; however, it later exacerbated, and he was referred to our hospital.
He had suffered from psoriasis vulgaris since he was 14 years old and had been treated with topical corticosteroids and phototherapy by dermatologists; however, he had ceased all treatments on his own accord 2 years earlier. Since then, his skin condition had become worse due to the lack of medication.
At the first visit, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.5 OD and counting fingers OS. Intraocular pressure was 13 mm Hg OD and 5 mm Hg OS. A slit-lamp examination showed ciliary injections and 3+ flare and 3+ cells, fibrin formation in the anterior chamber with total posterior iris synechia OU, and fundi were invisible OU .
Besides psoriasis, other extraocular lesions such as oral aphthous ulcers or genital ulcers, or symptoms for Behçet's disease were not found. The patient's psoriasis was very severe; the skin over the whole body including the face and eyelids formed erythroderma and thick desquamation. Screening blood and urine tests did not show any positive results indicating sarcoidosis or other uveitis.
He underwent dexamethasone conjunctival injections, and topical treatments with 0.1% betamethasone eye drops and mydriatic eye drops were applied every hour. For psoriasis, corticosteroid ointment and ultraviolet irradiation were promptly started. With these medications, the anterior segment intraocular inflammation was reduced, and BCVA improved to 1.2 OD and 0.8 OS 3 months later; however, the posterior synechia was not removed and fundi were still invisible OU. Ten months later, the patient underwent cataract surgery, and the posterior synechia was removed OS. After surgery, the vitreous opacity was mild, and the BCVA improved to 0.9 OS. However, the anterior chamber inflammation suddenly exacerbated with a vitreous hemorrhage OS 1 month postoperatively. The fundus was too blurred to be seen in detail; however, fluorescein angiography revealed marked leakage suggestive of retinal neovascularization . Since the patient developed further vitreous hemorrhages with a recurrence of anterior uveitis with his psoriasis not controlled well, IFX was administered 19 months following the first visit.
IFX (5 mg/kg) was infused 2 and 6 weeks following the first infusion and every 8 weeks thereafter. After the IFX administration, a new vitreous hemorrhage occurred only once; however, it quickly disappeared and has not recurred. During the 3 years of IFX therapy, no severe recurrences were seen, and cataract surgery could be performed safely without postoperative inflammations OD. The final BCVA was 1.2 OD and 0.8 OS. The patient's psoriasis was also gradually improved.