A 45-year-old man referred to our Rheumatology clinic for further evaluation of proptosis, which started about 8 years ago. He had a gradual bilateral decrease of vision that worsened during the last 18 months. Physical examination revealed a proptosis of 33 mm and 26 mm in the right and left eyes, respectively .
There was a mild conjunctivitis in both eyes and the visual acuity (best corrected visual acuity) of the right eye was recorded as hand motion recognition at 50 cm and that of the left eye was normal (9/10). He had a mild cataract in both eyes. On further eye examination, the anterior segments of both eyes and the posterior segment of left eye were normal, but the posterior segment of right eye had grade 2+ disc paleness. Marcus gun examination was positive. Fundoscopy of the right eye showed blurred disc margin and mild engorgement of veins around the disc. The rest of physical examinations were unremarkable. There were no skin or mucosal involvement, sinusitis, otitis, neurological or respiratory manifestations. Laboratory investigations yielded the following results: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 11 mm/h, white blood cells (WBC): 13000 /ul, hemoglobin: 13.7 gr/dl, platelet count: 404000 /ul, urea: 31 mg/dl, serum creatinine (Cr): 1 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 10 U/L, alanine transaminase (ALT):12 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 187 U/L, INR:1 and total bilirubin: 0.2mg/dl. Urinalysis was normal without any cellular cast, dysmorphic RBCs or proteinuria. Echocardiography indicated normal left ventricle size with ejection fraction (EF) of 55%, normal left ventricular systolic function, moderate aortic regurgitation, and a bicuspid aortic valve. In computed tomography of paranasal sinuses and orbits, there was an evidence of bilateral retro-orbital enhancing masses notably in the right orbit with intraconal and extraconal extension encasement of optic nerve, and extension into the orbital apex and superior and inferior orbital fissures . There was an extension into frontal and ethmoidal air cells and also inferior extension into nasal cavity and both maxillary sinuses with widening of ostiomeatal complex (OMC) bilaterally. There were significant proptosis and extension toward cavernous sinus at the right side.
The patient underwent four different ocular biopsies. In June 2014, the patient had microscopic anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) positive inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and underwent 17 sessions of radiotherapy, but the clinical symptoms did not resolve. The last pathology study revealed chronic inflammatory pseudotumor with marked fibrosis and IgG4 positive plasma cells about 50/ high power field. The results of immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) study was as follows: IgG4 positive lymphoid cells 50/ high power field, CD138 positive plasma cells, CD3 positive T cells (80%), CD20 positive B cells (20%), smooth muscle antibody (SMA) positive spindle cells, negative ALK and his serum IgG4 level was 693 mg/dl.
As this disease can affect any organ and due to a complaint of mild abdominal pain by the patient, an abdominal CT scan was performed. The computed tomography scan results revealed multiple bilateral hepatic mass lesions with the largest size being (41*32 mm) at segment 7, and 28*2 (3)7 mm at segment 3 . The masses were non-specific and there was a high recommendation for pathologic evaluation to rule out metastatic lesions, lymphoma or other possible lesions. The patient accepted liver biopsy, and hemangioma was reported by pathology assessment.
When the patient referred to us, the diagnosis of IgG4-related disease was established based on the clinical and histopathological findings including the result of IHC revealed the presence of IgG4 positive plasma cells, the ratio of IgG4>40% and serum IgG4 level>130 mg/dL (693 mg/dL). Aggressive treatment (pulse of cyclophosphamide and pulse of corticosteroid) started with methylprednisolone 1gram/ day for 3 consecutive days. We observed a significant reduction of symptoms as the proptosis decreased to 26mm and 17.5 mm in the right and the left eyes, respectively .
The visual acuity of right eye improved from hand motion to finger count at 1 meter. After 4 pulses of 1-gram cyclophosphamide/ month, his visual acuity improved to 3/10. The patient required a prolonged treatment with glucocorticoid, however, even though it was expensive, azathioprine was prescribed as a glucocorticoid-sparing therapy. The author previously reported a similar case of IgG4-RD with ocular manifestation of proptosis and decrease in visual acuity that showed a dramatic response to early aggressive treatment with corticosteroid and cyclophosphamide .