A 55 year old male presented to our hospital with critical left lower limb ischemia with associated great toe ulceration. Computed tomography (CT) angiogram revealed a Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society Consensus (TASC) A lesion in the left superficial femoral artery (SFA) with patent run-off vessels. The patient underwent left retrograde SFA angioplasty via an ultrasound guided right common femoral artery puncture. Drug eluting balloon angioplasty was performed for the SFA lesion and a confirmatory angiogram revealed satisfactory results with patent run-off vessels. Access site control was attempted utilizing the Celt ACD® device. Unfortunately, continuous bleeding from the access point was noticed. Therefore, manual compression was applied for 10 min. Post procedure, the patient had palpable pedal pulses and satisfactory access site appearance. His discharge medications included dual anti-platelet therapy and statins.
One week following discharge, the patient developed sudden pain and numbness in his right foot with short distance calf claudication. On clinical evaluation, the patient denied any symptoms of critical limb ischemia. Physical examination confirmed an unremarkable access site, palpable femoral and popliteal pulses, but absent pedal pulses. Consequently, a lower limb CT angiogram was conducted and revealed a metallic artifact in the distal popliteal artery consistent with VCD embolisation .
Endovascular retrieval of the closure device was attempted through the right antegrade common femoral artery using a snare (Indy OTW™ Vascular Retriever, 8Fr, .35 mm, 100 cm; Fig. ). Unfortunately, the attempt was unsuccessful and the patient developed severe spasm of the popliteal artery.
The following day, the patient’s symptoms worsened and he developed rest pain. Therefore, we opted for surgical exploration of the distal popliteal artery and tibioperoneal trunk (TPT), which revealed a thrombus in the explored arteries with the closure device occluding the TPT bifurcation. Selective embolectomy of the anterior tibial artery and TPT with device retrieval was successfully accomplished . Dacron patch was used for arteriotomy closure. On table doppler ultrasound was done and demonstrated good signals in the patch and crural vessels.
The patient’s post-operative course was unremarkable; his pedal pulses were restored and he was discharged 3 days following the procedure on dual anti-platelet therapy. At 3 months follow up, the patient was doing well with completely healed wounds and palpable pedal pulses in both lower limbs.