A 33-year-old Caucasian woman with end-stage renal failure secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus started PD in December 2008. She had previously been treated with PD without complication 17 years before, in the context of acute kidney injury, from which she recovered. Exact details of PD were unavailable, but it was recalled to be of short duration and probably of small fill volume. The patient denied any history of traumatic injury to the chest or diaphragmatic surgery.
A Tenckhoff catheter was inserted 28 days before commencement of PD without complication. Her first exchange revealed asymptomatic slightly cloudy dialysate with 210 white cells [82% polymorphonuclear cells] and negative growth and was treated as culture-negative PD peritonitis.
One week later, she presented with sudden onset of dyspnea associated with right pleuritic chest pain. Chest X-ray showed right pleural effusion.
Thoracentesis was performed for symptomatic relief. Pleural fluid biochemistry results were consistent with transudate, according to Light's criteria . Culture of pleural aspirate showed no evidence of infection. Clinically, no evidence of lupus flare or nephrotic syndrome was noted.
Pleural fluid biochemistry results were consistent with PD-related hydrothorax. An effusion reaccumulated with further PD treatment. It was unclear whether poor dialysis (uremia) or ultrafiltration was contributing to the effusion. Tc-99 m DTPA scintigraphy was performed to confirm pleuroperitoneal leakage, showing prompt (within 15 minutes) appearance of tracer in the pleural space on the right side with no evidence of tracer entering the left hemithorax . Thus, the etiology of hydrothorax likely was due to congenital diaphragmatic defects, exacerbated by persistently elevated intraabdominal pressure from PD.
The patient was temporarily transferred to hemodialysis via a tunneled line and underwent right video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery and talc pleurodesis. An intraoperative methylene blue test failed to identify the pleuroperitoneal defect. Two months after the procedure, she successfully recommenced PD without reoccurrence of hydrothorax.