A 58-year-old man presented to our hospital because of chest discomfort and a difference in blood pressure between the right and left arms. He had no family history and did not meet the revised Ghent criteria for Marfan syndrome. The patient had undergone TEVAR with a GORE TAG conformable thoracic aortic graft (CTAG) (diameter 40 mm, length 20 cm and diameter 31 mm, length 20 cm) for Stanford type B dissection at 52 years of age. Noninvasive blood pressure measurement showed that the blood pressure in his right arm was 30 mmHg lower than that in his left arm. We suspected Stanford type A dissection. Enhanced computed tomography showed proximal SINE and therefore type A dissection . An emergent operation was performed. The patient was placed in the supine position following induction of general anesthesia. After the right femoral artery and vein were exposed, cardiopulmonary bypass was established via cannulation of these vessels. Median sternotomy was then performed. In our hospital, the routine repair technique for aortic dissection is to perform a median sternotomy after starting femoral bypass. The brachiocephalic and left carotid arteries were exposed during systemic cooling. Hypothermic circulatory arrest was performed at a rectal temperature of 28 °C. Cardioplegic arrest was achieved with intermittent administration of retrograde and antegrade cold blood cardioplegia. After insertion of catheters into the innominate and left common carotid arteries, selective antegrade cerebral perfusion was initiated. The entry tear was found at the lesser aortic arch curve, at which the proximal stent was positioned . The entry was excluded, and the transverse arch was transected proximal to the left common carotid artery. After reinforcement of the distal end of the aorta with a felt strip, a four-branched, 28-mm Hemashield prosthesis (Getinge, Gothenburg, Sweden) was anastomosed to the distal end using running 4-0 polypropylene sutures. Systemic perfusion was restarted through the side branch of the graft. The total circulatory arrest time was 66 min. Proximal anastomosis was then performed using continuous 4-0 polypropylene sutures with double-felt-strip reinforcement. With the heart beating, reconstruction of the innominate artery was performed using continuous 5-0 polypropylene sutures. The cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic cross-clamp times were 250 and 139 min, respectively. Postoperative computed tomography showed exclusion of the entry . Partial rupture of the tunica media elastic fibers and deposition of mucin were identified, indicating connective tissue disease. Although the patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, weight management and drug adjustment for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation took time; thus, he was discharged on postoperative day 27.