A 75-year-old Caucasian woman with past medical history of atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and remotely treated breast cancer presented with dyspnea, non-productive cough, subjective fevers, polyarthralgias, myalgias, and consequent sleep disturbance of 10 days’ duration. Her medications were hydrochlorothiazide, losartan and simvastatin. Eighteen days earlier she had been seen for a routine health-care visit and received PCV13. Soon thereafter she developed a large, erythematous, warm local reaction to the vaccine, which was still present. Her vital signs included a pulse rate of 126 beats/minute, blood pressure of 99/63 mmHg, a maximum temperature of 36.6 degrees Celsius, and oxygen saturation of 83% on room air requiring bilevel positive airway pressure therapy. She had reduced breath sounds in the left lung field. Her white blood cell (WBC) count was 19.1 (normal 4–11 K/uL), creatinine level was 1.5 (normal 0.52–1.04 mg/dL), and B-type natriuretic peptide level was 1670 (normal 0–900 pg/mL). All blood bacterial cultures, urine streptococcus pneumonia and legionella antigens, mycoplasma titers, and Lyme antibody test results were negative. A chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large left pleural effusion and a large pericardial effusion. An echocardiogram confirmed the pericardial effusion. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 59 (normal 0–20 mm/hour), C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 62.7 (normal 0–0.9 mg/dL), and her rheumatoid factor was 15 (normal 0–11 IU/mL). Her antinuclear antibody test result was negative. Test results for anti-Sm, -double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA), -histone, -cardiolipin, -ribonucleoprotein, -centromere, -topoisomerase I, -Ro, -La, -thyroid, -neutrophil cytoplasmic (-myeloperoxidase and -proteinase 3) antibodies were all negative. Her complement levels were normal.
Thoracentesis and pericardial window were required. Pleural fluid appeared bloody and was exudative by Light’s criteria (serum lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] 765 U/L, serum total protein 7.7 g/dL; pleural LDH 749 U/L, red blood cells 320,000/uL, nucleated cells 3368/uL [PMN 62%, lymphocytes 22%, macrophages/histiocytes 14%, mesothelial cells 2%], glucose 97 mg/dL) . Cytology test results of the pleural fluid were negative. The pericardial fluid was exudative and hemorrhagic and cultures and cytology test results were negative. A pericardial biopsy showed organizing effusion containing hemorrhage and acute inflammation with reactive changes and mesothelial hyperplasia. Cultures of the pericardial biopsy were negative.
The pleural fluid re-accumulated so a chest tube was placed. Repeat fluid analysis was similar and cultures were negative. Given the severity of her illness, her serositis was treated with corticosteroids rather than nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications . She received 40 mg of prednisone daily for 2 weeks with a good initial response and tapered off steroids over the next 3 months. Her vital signs recovered to normal range throughout the admission. The chest tube and pericardial drain were removed prior to discharge. A follow-up chest X-ray one year after discharge revealed no recurring pleural effusions. She has remained asymptomatic now for one and a half years since discharge.