Our patient was a 21-year-old Han Chinese man who had found a painless testicular mass in his right scrotum 1 year before presentation to our hospital, for which he had gone to another hospital for treatment. He received no definite diagnosis there but was given a 1-week Chinese herb decoction. Owing to the loss of the previous case record, the suspected diagnosis and the names of the herbs were unknown. He observed no obvious improvement. The mass remained small and unchanged during the first 9 months of the disease course and therefore did not arouse the patient’s attention enough to seek further treatment. However, over the next 3 months, the mass enlarged rapidly and led to obvious right scrotal tenderness. Ultrasonography showed a solid space-occupying lesion measuring 9.7 × 7.7 cm in the right scrotum. The patient reported no obvious fever, osphyalgia, abdominal pain, frequent micturition, urgency, dysuria, or gross hematuria.
The patient was admitted to our andrology department in October 2017. On admission, we took a full medical history, including his personal and family history as well as previous treatment of his testicular mass. He had no history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, traumas, or surgeries, among others. He did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol, and he had no family history of testicular tumor.
The patient’s physical examination revealed unremarkable vital signs (body temperature 37.1 °C, heart rate 70 beats/minute, blood pressure 120/65 mmHg, respiration 17 breaths/minute), normal heart and lung sounds, and a soft abdomen with no tenderness or organomegaly. Urogenital palpation disclosed an enlarged right scrotum with a hard, tender mass (~ 10 × 8 cm) adhering to the right testis and epididymis, but no palpable masses in the right spermatic cord or bilateral inguinal regions. The patient’s neurological examination showed no abnormalities.
Color Doppler ultrasonography displayed a solid intrascrotal mass (11.5 × 8.2 × 7.6 cm) with heterogeneous inner echoes and short linear blood vessel flow signals at the mass periphery. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) (SonoVue contrast agent; Bracco Diagnostics, Monroe Township, NJ, USA) showed a partial enhancement that appeared mainly in the periphery of the intrascrotal lesion during arterial phase; the lesion also showed an extensive interior filling defect. The enhanced part was irregular in form and contained coarse, twisted blood vessels . The CEUS results suggested a testicular germ cell tumor. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed some soft tissue density shadows anterior to the right psoas (and at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra), which were suspected to be metastases in the retroperitoneal lymph nodes (RPLNs) . Both the physical examination and the imaging results showed no abnormalities of the left testis, epididymis, or spermatic cord. No significant abnormal signs were found on chest x-ray film.
The results of the patient’s complete blood count, blood biochemistry, and urinalysis were all normal, except for a high lactate dehydrogenase concentration (295 U/L). His α-fetoprotein (AFP; < 1.3 ng/ml) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG; < 0.1 mIU/ml) concentrations were within normal ranges.
All these findings, taken together, indicated that the right intrascrotal mass was a malignant tumor. The patient rejected retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND), but he underwent a right radical orchiectomy by inguinal approach. Intraoperative pathology suggested a small cell carcinoma of the right testis.
Postoperative pathology showed a giant (10 × 7 × 6 cm) intrascrotal tumor that involved the right testis, epididymis, and paratesticular tissues . Microscopy showed diffuse distribution of small round cells with obvious atypia . Tumor emboli were found in the surrounding vessels. No nerve was infiltrated by the tumor tissue. The incisal edge of the right spermatic cord was negative. Immunohistochemistry showed the tumor tissue to be negative for cytokeratin, calretinin, inhibin-α, placental alkaline phosphatase, lymphocyte common antigen, S100, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, α-smooth muscle actin, CD34, and SOX10. Positive immunohistochemistry results were found for vimentin (+), CD56 (+++), myogenin (+++), myoblast determination protein 1 (MyoD1) (++), desmin (+++), and Ki-67 (70%+) . The histopathologic diagnosis was embryonal RMS.
According to all the clinical, imaging, and pathologic evidence, the tumor was finally diagnosed as an intrascrotal embryonal RMS. Its exact origin was hard to confirm, owing to its extensive invasion of testis, epididymis, and paratesticular tissues. Because the patient rejected RPLND, we could not verify whether the tumor had metastasized to the RPLNs. The patient is now undergoing vincristine, actinomycin D, and cyclophosphamide (VAC) chemotherapy regimen, combined with abdominopelvic radiotherapy, at another hospital, which was initiated 20 days after discharge from our department. We will continue to follow-up of our patient.