A 10-year-old girl presented six hours after falling off a bicycle. She had fallen on the handlebar while riding her bicycle without wearing a protective helmet, and the brake handle had penetrated her right upper eyelid. At the time of examination, she was conscious, cooperative, and oriented. The right globe was luxated out of the orbit and suspended on the eyelids ( and ). There was no light perception in the eye, the pupil was dilated and unresponsive to light stimulation, and diffuse corneal edema and punctate epitheliopathy were present.
Computed tomography showed a fragmented fracture in the greater wing of the sphenoid bone, a linear fracture in the nasal bone, intracerebral and subarachnoid hemorrhage in the temporal lobe, and air in the orbit and cranium. The apical area seemed to be enlarged because of the sphenoidal fracture . Total rupture of the medial rectus muscle and partial ruptures of the superior and lateral rectus muscles were also reported. Surgery was performed on the same day, and a 15-mm laceration was observed in the upper eyelid. The conjunctiva and anterior Tenon capsule were ruptured circumferentially 4–5 mm behind the limbus. The medial rectus muscle was ruptured 8 mm behind its insertion into the globe. The globe could not be repositioned back to the orbit with digital pressure while pulling the upper eyelid anteriorly. Lateral canthotomy, cantholysis, and superior and inferior septotomies were performed to prolapse the orbital fat and reduce the intraorbital pressure. The proximal and distal parts of the medial rectus muscle were located and attached to each other with two 5.0 polyglactin sutures. The globe was then pushed back and replaced into the orbit . The conjunctiva, eyelid laceration, and lateral canthus were closed with sutures and a temporary blepharorrhaphy was performed. Postoperatively, the patient received systemic prednisolone and antibiotics for one week. During 22 months of follow-up, the globe remained intact, without light perception, and total optic atrophy developed. Blepharoptosis and eye motility restriction showed slight improvement. The patient was recommended to wear eyeglasses with a ptosis crutch ( and ).