A 54-year-old Caucasian male presented with a 1.5 mm Breslow malignant melanoma on his left shin in February 2002 and was managed with wide local excision. At 16 months follow-up, recurrence in the left inguinal lymph nodes was detected. The patient underwent groin dissection, and all 8 lymph nodes showed either partial or complete replacement by metastatic melanoma on histology with extracapsular extension. No necrosis was seen in either the skin or the lymph node specimens at this stage. Surgery was followed by adjuvant high-dose interferon-α2a therapy, consisting of 1 month of intravenous interferon 5 days a week followed by 11 months of subcutaneous lower-dose interferon 3 days a week. Progression was documented at 6 months by computed tomography (CT), which confirmed a large metastasis in the spleen, left iliac lymphadenopathy, and 2metastases in the liver .
The patient enrolled into a randomized phase II clinical trial in which he was treated with the toll-like receptor 9 agonist PF-3512676 (formerly known as CPG 7909), a synthetic cytosine-phosphorothioate-guanine rich oligodeoxynucleotide. PF-3512676 induces activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells and enhances cell surface expression of costimulatory molecules (eg, B7) and is hypothesized to promote an antitumor immune response by enhancing antigen presentation to T cells and promoting proliferation of antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. CT scanning was performed during the study initially 6 weekly for 6 months, then at 8 weekly intervals. The patient achieved stable disease over a 20-month period. Thereafter, disease progression, according to RECIST radiological parameters , was documented at all disease sites. It is worth noting that during the therapy period, the patient experienced grade 1cutaneous reaction (minor erythema) at the site of the excised primary lesion, the left shin. Figure shows the 100.3 mm splenic metastasis , the 41.3 mm pelvic metastases along the left iliac vein lymph node chain , and the 2 metastatic liver lesions shortly after completion of the PF-3512676 treatment period. In view of the indolent disease biology and the absence of new metastatic lesions during treatment, tumor metastasectomy was undertaken. Initial left iliac lymphadenectomy and splenectomy was followed by adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy. During a second procedure, the patient underwent staging laparoscopy followed by liver resection of segments V and VI with cholecystectomy. Surgical clearance was confirmed by whole body PET scanning at 1 month and 6 months after liver resection, indicating no disease activity. Following up imaging is currently being performed with 3 monthly alternating CT and PET scanning.
Macroscopic examination of the liver lesions revealed a dark brown nodule (25 × 20 × 15 mm) comprised of 2 adjoining lesions reaching the liver capsule but remaining clear of the resection margin. Sections throughout the specimen revealed an almost entirely necrotic nodule with a well-demarcated fibrous capsule . Many of the cells within the inner margin of the capsule contained a granular brown pigment showing no reaction in Perl's preparation. However, because of loss of color when placed in a melanin bleach preparation, the pigment was identified as melanin. The majority of these pigmented cells tested positive for CD68, indicating that they were macrophages. In contrast, a very few number of cells tested positive for S100, indicating that these cells were melanoma. Hence, the vast majority of these pigmented cells were macrophages, with only a small number identified as melanoma cells.
The spleen specimen also showed a similar histologic pattern, with almost the entire parenchyma replaced by friable necrotic tissue. Moreover, sections contained large areas of necrosis with admixed melanoma cells. In addition, the left iliac specimen was largely hemorrhagic with blood clots, fibroadipose tissue, and deposits of viable malignant melanoma.