A 49-year-old Japanese woman (gravida 4, para 3) was diagnosed with AIP at the age of 27. Our patient had repeatedly visited the hospital for stomachaches beforehand; however, approximately 2 years of consultations passed before she was accurately diagnosed. Afterwards, she avoided elements known to precipitate acute attacks, and had not experienced an acute porphyria attack since she was 33 years of age. In addition, she began hypertension treatment with amlodipine besylate at the age of 40 years, and her last pregnancy had spontaneously aborted 4 years prior to the present event. In July 2011, this patient visited a local private clinic for atypical vaginal bleeding and was referred to a general hospital because of suspected spontaneous abortion. She was subsequently diagnosed with a acute intermittent porphyria hydatidiform mole via dilatation and curettage (D&C).
One month after D&C, our patient presented with an elevated serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level . As fertility preservation was deemed impossible, she underwent an abdominal total hysterectomy. Pathological study of the resected specimen revealed an invasive mole, but no metastasis was observed. However, our patient’s serum hCG level was again elevated 1 month after hysterectomy, and she was referred to Saitama Medical Center for chemotherapy to address expected AIP-associated complications. An X-ray computed tomography scan of her chest, performed at our institution, revealed a lung metastasis. The FIGO 2000 staging and risk factor scoring system indicated a stage III:41 gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) , and our patient was accordingly diagnosed with a low-risk GTN. Her treatment strategy included intramuscular MTX administration at a dose of 20 mg/day for 5 days every 2 weeks.
MTX chemotherapy was initiated after our patient provided informed consent, which included an understanding that MTX had not been implicated as either porphyrinogenic or nonporphyrinogenic. Our patient experienced small eruptions on the hands and epigastric region on day 3 of chemotherapy. However, a dermatologist did not interpret these eruptions as drug-related, and thus treatment was continued. On day 5, the eruptions expanded over her whole body and worsened, with ulcers developing on the oral mucosa . Our patient was unable to eat or drink owing to the severe pain caused by mucosal erosion; moreover, she complained of painful micturition because of a sore on her vulva. A skin biopsy revealed drug eruption instead of a porphyric skin lesion. In particular, microabscesses had formed under the stratum corneum, with neutrophilic and eosinophilic invasion, and neutrophilic exocytosis was observed in the epidermis. Liquefaction was also observed between the epidermis and dermis, and eosinophilic, neutrophilic, and lymphocytic invasion from the layer between the epidermis and dermis to the superficial layer of the dermis was noted . No changes in our patient’s urinary coproporphyrin or uroporphyrin levels were observed despite the appearance of skin lesions . She received intravenous prednisolone at 60 mg/day beginning on day 5 to treat the drug eruption.
On day 11, our patient experienced febrile neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count [ANC] on day 8 was 1,380/μL but decreased to 12/μL on day 11) and was treated subcutaneously with 75 μg/day of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) for 3 days beginning on day 11. However, as she was unable to recover from neutropenia (ANC remained at 12/μL on day 13), additional subcutaneous G-CSF at 150 μg/day was administered for 2 days beginning on day 13, and her neutropenia finally resolved on day 15 (ANC, 1598/μL). During that time, her skin lesions and stomatitis also began to improve, and the prednisolone dose was reduced to 40 mg/day. As she was able to eat on day 17, oral prednisolone administration at 20 mg/day was started on day 20 and tapered on day 24. She was discharged on day 25.
Although our patient’s serum hCG level decreased with MTX treatment, it became elevated during treatment interruption. Chemotherapy with ACT-D was therefore considered. After providing informed consent to ACT-D treatment and acknowledging that ACT-D was not implicated as either porphyrinogenic or nonporphyrinogenic, our patient received intravenous ACT-D at a dose of 1.5 mg/day on days 1–5 of every 2-week period, starting on day 70 of her clinical course. As shown in Fig. , her serum hCG level effectively decreased, and the lung metastasis disappeared without any porphyric attacks. After five cycles of ACT-D, her serum hCG level stabilized at 3.2 mIU/mL. Although other chemotherapeutic drugs were considered, a negative serum hCG level was achieved and maintained for the following 3 years.