A 16-year-old girl presented at our center with a six months history of multiple swellings on lateral aspect of neck on both sides. Swellings were insidious in onset and there was a gradually progressed in size. There was no history of thyroid cancer nor any history of irradiation. On examination, the thyroid gland was palpable and firm with right sided cervical lymphadenopathy. Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies and thyroglobulin levels were within normal limits. CT neck showed an enhancing mass lesion in right thyroid lobe with abnormally dilated channels (, ). A digital subtraction angiogram was done due to these suspicious abnormally dilated channels. Selective angiogram of right external carotid artery revealed high flow fistulous type of lesion fed by superior thyroidal artery, draining into internal jugular vein .
This led to a high suspicion of thyroid paraganglioma. Right thyroid lobectomy and isthmectomy was done. Grossly the resected thyroid specimen measured 30 mm × 20 mm × 10 mm and weight was 8 g. The tumor was firm in consistency, tan white and infiltrating type. Extra thyroidal extension was not seen. Histological diagnosis was papillary carcinoma of thyroid. Post operatively thyroid scan was repeated to ensure no residual tumor. Thyroid scan showed no radiotracer uptake in the region of right lobe and isthmus, however, uptake was seen in the region of left lobe. The functioning tissue represents left lobe of thyroid. Follow up CT neck showed no mass or nodule in left lobe of thyroid. Two discrete enlarged enhancing lymph nodes were present at cervical level IV on right side measuring 24 × 14 mm and another in midline measuring 14 × 10 mm at level VI. Level IV node was compressing the internal jugular vein with a tuft of tortuous venous collaterals draining into internal jugular vein. Again suspicion of paraganglioma was raised. A second surgery was planned and left thyroid lobectomy and modified neck dissection was done on right side. Grossly the resected specimen measured 40 mm × 25 mm × 20 mm. The tumor involved whole thyroid lobe, firm in consistency and tan white in color. Microscopically showed thyroid parenchyma exhibiting a tumor arranged in papillary configuration. The papillae were lined by cells that showed crowded nuclei with overlapping of adjacent nuclei, pale to clear chromatin, irregular nuclear contours and nuclear grooves. Rare intra nuclear cytoplasmic inclusions were also found. Histological diagnosis was residual foci of papillary carcinoma arising in the background of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. 2 out of 8 lymph nodes were positive for metastatic carcinoma, the largest deposit measured 10 mm. There was no lymphatic invasion. Extra nodal extension was not seen. Pathological stage classification was (pT1a) – as per the AJCC 8th Edition. Suspicion of thyroid paraganglioma along with papillary carcinoma was still there so further immunohistochemistry was done.
IHC analysis was negative for chromogranin, synaptophysin and S-100 and positive for calcitonin which further confirmed papillary carcinoma and absence of thyroid paraganglioma.