A 3 year old adult female Yucatan pig acquired from an approved research vendor arrived healthy to the research facility. The pig was never enrolled into the study for which it was ordered, and at the time, there were no concurrent studies to allow transfer to another experimental protocol. Therefore, the experimentally naive animal was then transferred to the institutional holding protocol. For the purposes of interim group housing and future re-homing or adoption, a bilateral ovariectomy was performed via a midline laparotomy (~ 20 cm incision length). The animal was anesthetized with Telazol (4 mg/kg IM) and Xylazine (2 mg/kg IM) and maintained intubated with isoflurane anesthesia (2–3%). The surgical site was prepared with removal of all hair and a triple surgical scrub using chlorohexidine and alcohol. Peri-operative cefazolin (20 mg/kg, IV, once) was administered, and aseptic surgical technique was maintained throughout the procedure. 0-Vicryl® (polyglactin 910) miller knots were used for ligation of each ovarian pedicle. For added security, each pedicle was double ligated in this manner. Three-layer closure of the incision was accomplished using PDS II® (polydioxanone)6 in a simple continuous pattern (size 2 for linea alba, size 0 for subcutaneous tissue, and size 2 − 0 for intradermal). Pre-operative analgesia was provided with Buprenorphine SR (0.2 mg/kg SQ once), meloxicam (0.4 mg/kg, SQ, once), and a local incisional block (5 mL 2% Lidocaine). Post-operatively carprofen (4 mg/kg, PO, q24) was provided for 3 days. The surgery and post-operative period were uneventful.
Approximately 4 months later (122 days post-surgery), a small nodule (~ 1 cm in diameter) developed on the left paralumbar fossa with the surrounding 3–4 cm of skin warm and mildly hyperemic. Fine need aspirate of the nodule revealed clear serous fluid. Cytology did not reveal any cellular infiltrates and protein assessment was not performed at that time. All other physical exam findings were unremarkable. A presumptive diagnosis of a cyst or seroma was made based on these findings.
By one month after this (146 days post-surgery), both paralumbar fossa had developed 2–5 nodules present on each side. Fine need aspirate yielded caseous material indicating abscessation. In-house cytology demonstrated numerous degenerate neutrophils admixed with cellular debris. No bacteria, fungi, or parasites were identified on cytology. Due to worsening presentation, treatment including amoxicillin (15 mg/kg, PO, q12) and carprofen10 (4 mg/kg, PO, q24) were instituted. Despite two weeks of treatment, there was no improvement and the affected area on each side measured 8 cm x 8 cm with multifocal abscesses present. The surrounding area was still warm and mildly hyperemic, and the immediate area was becoming hyperpigmented .
Due to this progression, anesthetized debridement, bloodwork, culture, and cytology were elected (166 days post-surgery). The animal was anesthetized as previously described. An intravenous catheter was placed in the right auricular vein and cefazolin5 (20 m/kg, IV, q12) and enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg, IV, q24) started. These antibiotics were continued for four days after debridement. Oral carprofen therapy was continued throughout this period. All abscesses were sterilely lanced and flushed with dilute betadine and sterile saline and allowed to heal open. Aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal cultures were submitted to an external laboratory9, but all yielded no growth. Cytology taken at time of debridement was unchanged and characterized by neutrophilic inflammation. A complete blood count and serum chemistry was performed on in-house analyzers.10 Complete blood count results indicated a chronic inflammatory process with a mild non-regenerative anemia and a shift in the leukocyte percentages with neutrophils comprising 73% of the total white blood cells and lymphocytes only 22% . The elevated creatinine kinase is attributable to a traumatic blood collection. The low sodium was determined to be spurious secondary to a needed machine maintenance for that particular analyte . All other complete blood count total numbers and serum chemistry values were within normal ranges.
Approximately 2 weeks after the surgical debridement during cleaning of the area (177 days post-surgery), a small biopsy was collected from one of the draining tracts which included fibrous material . Histologically, foreign material was identified in the core of the tissue . Reviewing the animal’s record, it was concluded at the observed lesions were likely a result of a reaction to the pedicle ligatures made with 0-Vicryl® during the ovariectomy. No other foreign materials had been introduced to the animal during its ovariectomy or any time thereafter.
As a suture-related pseudoinfection causing a sterile inflammatory process, all antibiotics were discontinued, and the animal was maintained on intermittent carprofen10 (4 mg/kg, PO, PRN) and buprenorphine HCl (0.03 mg/kg, SQ, PRN) to control pain and discomfort. Further, more invasive surgical debridement was not elected. Despite supportive care, the animal developed intermittent mild hindlimb lameness which alternated limbs depending on which paralumbar fossa was more severely affected with abscesses and draining tracts at the time. Eventually, the animal became generally more agitated and aggressive to care takers. Because of this change in behavior and lack of response to treatment, euthanasia was elected approximately 5 months after initial presentation and 9 months after ovariectomy. For euthanasia, similar sedation was used as for debridement, and the animal euthanized (Beuthanasia-D®, 4.5 mg/kg, IV). At necropsy (241 days post-surgery), numerous abscesses ranging from 3 to 7 mm diameter were present bilaterally in the skin and subcutaneous fat . These lesions occasionally extended in a linear fashion deep into the subcutis and through the body wall (i.e. draining sinus) . Ovarian pedicles were bilaterally fibrotic and mineralized with linear tracks of fibrotic tissue connecting the ovariectomy site with skin lesions. Minor abdominal adhesions were multifocally present (i.e. post-surgical adhesions). While scarring was present from the linea alba closure, there was no indication grossly of a similar foreign body reaction or remaining suture from the surgery in that area. Tissue sections were fixed with 10% formalin, paraffin embedded, and sectioned for hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Histologically, there were typical signs associated with a foreign body reaction including multifocal small pyogranulomas . These were observed throughout the skin which consisted of a necrotic core containing degenerate neutrophils, epithelioid macrophages and numerous foreign body type giant cells surrounded by fibroplasia and chronic inflammatory cells. In a few sections, distinct multi-nucleated giant cells surrounded a refractile material . In some of these pyogranulomas, the center contained Splendore-Hoeppli bodies composed of antigen antibody complexes .