An 81-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital by ambulance with massive hemoptysis. She reported a gradually increasing frequency of blood sputum for one month prior to this episode. The patient had a history of aortic valve replacement combined with graft replacement of the ascending aorta and aortic arch and graft replacement of the thoraco-abdominal aorta for dissecting aortic aneurysms 5 and 4 years prior, respectively. She also underwent thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for impending rupture of a descending aortic aneurysm 2 years prior. The patient was taking aspirin (100 mg/day). On admission, she was conscious and alert and her vital signs were stable. Her blood oxygen saturation level was 93% on room air. A complete blood count analysis revealed a hemoglobin level of 10.0 g/dL, white blood cell count of 8,500/µL, and platelet count of 144,000/µL. Serum biochemical tests showed no obvious abnormalities except for a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (0.8 mg/dL). No abnormalities were detected on a clotting test. Computed tomography (CT) showed a large atelectasis of the left lower lung lobe adjacent to the descending aorta treated with TEVAR. Unenhanced CT showed a heterogeneous high attenuation area within the atelectasis suggestive of a concomitant hematoma. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm, and abnormal proliferative vessels with continuity with hypertrophied left pulmonary ligament artery (PLA) were detected within the atelectasis . Furthermore, the PLA continued to the right subscapular artery via a complex collateral pathway including the right intercostal artery (ICA) . Since disruption of the pseudoaneurysm and abnormal vessels of the left PLA were considered the cause of massive hemoptysis, we decided to perform transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) with the patient’s consent. First, the right femoral artery was punctured and an aortography was performed; however, it did not show any type 1, 2, 3, or 4 endoleaks. Next, an access was obtained via the right brachial artery using a 4-Fr sheath. Diagnostic digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the right subclavian and subscapular arteries revealed a hypertrophied left PLA adjacent to the stent graft of the descending aorta that originated from the right subscapular artery via a complex collateral blood pathway including the right ICA and thoracodorsal artery . We subsequently attempted to select the left PLA with the triple coaxial (triaxial) system, which consists of a 155-cm-long 1.9-Fr microcatheter (Carnelian MARVEL, Tokai Medical Products, Kasugai, Japan), a 110-cm-long 2.7-Fr high-flow microcatheter (Sniper 2 High-Flow; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), and a 65-cm-long 4-Fr angiographic catheter (Impress; Merit Medical Japan, Tokyo, Japan) and finally reached the proximal side of the left PLA. During the procedure, we confirmed no involvement of the anterior spinal artery by DSA of the intercostal artery. Selective DSA of the left PLA showed proliferation of small tortuous vessels and a pseudoaneurysm at the peripheral side . In addition, small systemic-pulmonary artery shunts were observed at the peripheral side of this lesion . Based on the angiographic findings, we decided to use an N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) (B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany)-Lipiodol (Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid; Guerbet, Roissy, France) mixture for embolization, which should reach the embolic material on the peripheral side of the PLA while avoiding large amounts of embolic material migration to the pulmonary artery branches via the systemic-pulmonary artery shunt. We carefully injected 0.8 mL of an NBCA:Lipiodol (1:6) mixture in a stepwise fashion under fluoroscopic guidance until it reached the pseudoaneurysm and abnormal proliferative vessels . DSA of the right subscapular artery after TAE showed disappearance of the pseudoaneurysm and abnormal vessels of the left PLA . We subsequently performed DSA of the bilateral subclavian arteries and celiac artery and confirmed that none supplied the target lesions. Pulmonary angiography of the left pulmonary trunk performed via the right femoral vein showed no pseudoaneurysm or contrast filling defect due to the systemic-pulmonary artery shunt. After TAE, the hemoptysis was controlled without complications, and the patient was discharged 5 days after TAE. Chest radiography performed 2 weeks after the TAE revealed improved consolidation in the left lower field. Six months after TAE, no recurrence of the hemoptysis was noted.