A 6-year-old girl with unremarkable medical history was bitten on her right leg on May 24, 2020, at 3:30 p.m. This happened near Bielmonte (Piedmont, Italy), a mountain village located at an elevation of approximately 1500 m. The girl was hiking on a trail lined with small bushes when she felt strong pain on her right ankle. Her parents noticed punctate marks in the proximity of the lateral malleolus and took a photograph . Neither the girl nor the parents noticed the presence of snakes or any other venomous animal. However, inspection of the photograph leaves little doubt that the girl was bitten by a viper, as revealed by the presence of two pairs of fang marks with evident edema and bruising, as well as two less evident fang punctures . Notably, the distance between the fang tip marks was considerably greater for one bite (12 mm) than for the other (8 mm; Fig. A). Two species of viper inhabit the locality where the incident occurred: the common viper (Vipera aspis) and the recently described Vipera walser , an adder whose taxonomic status is still uncertain [, ]. Although the species responsible for the envenomation remains undetermined, the habitat in the area (alpine prairie with Rhododendron scrubs) is compatible with the presence of Vipera walser (personal observations).
The victim was carried by her father to the car and then transported to the emergency doctor service in Trivero, where the physician assumed the occurrence of a snakebite and recommended swift hospitalization. The girl and her parents reached the closest hospital in Biella at 5:02 p.m., which was an hour and a half after the accident. The drive to the hospital was uneventful, except for a tendency toward drowsiness of the victim.
Upon admission to the emergency department, the girl was alert, with no fever and no signs of nausea or vomiting. The pulse rate was 100 bpm, and the blood pressure was 99/60 mm Hg. The right foot and ankle were slightly edematous and aching , and the right thigh and groin were painful to palpation. No neurological defects were observed. The patient was admitted to the short-stay observation unit and treated with paracetamol (250 mg), rehydration therapy and a topical application of gentamicin and betamethasone. At 5:24 p.m., there was a consultation with the Pavia Poison Center, which advised blood tests with D-dimer levels to monitor coagulation. Blood parameters became available at 7:16 p.m., revealing neutrophilic leukocytosis and elevated D-dimer .
As a result, the Pavia Poison Center recommended treatment with antivenom, which, however, was not administered. One hour later, the clinical condition worsened. The patient became drowsy and had bilateral palpebral edema and an extension of the edema in the foot and leg, with impaired foot dorsiflexion and the absence of appreciable arterial pulses. Chlorpheniramine was given intravenously (7.5 mg in 100 ml). An eco-color Doppler test was performed, with no indication for urgent vascular surgery or fasciotomy. Following anesthesia consultation, the girl was endotracheally intubated and subjected to mechanical ventilation. Arrangements were made for transfer to the Regina Margherita Children Hospital in Torino, and the patient was discharged at 10.34 p.m. after testing negative for SARS-CoV-2.
The girl was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit at 00:05 a.m. on May 25. A venous blood test revealed leukocytosis (total white blood cells: 20.17 109/l, range: 5.00-13.50), hyperglycemia (149 mg/100 ml, range: 70–100), and strongly elevated p-D-dimer (25503 ng/ml FEU, range: <500). Renal and liver functions were largely normal, with slightly elevated urea (48 mg/100 ml, range: 10–43) and creatinine (0.48 mg/100 ml, range: 0.29–0.46). The right foot and leg showed prominent edema and ecchymosis . After consultation with the Pavia Poison Center, one ampoule of viper antivenom (Viekvin, Institute of Virology, Vaccines and Sera “Torlak”, Belgrade, Serbia) was administered. This antivenom is made of equine immunoglobulin fragment F(ab’)2 raised against the venom of Vipera ammodytes and Vipera berus. The patient was also treated with antibiotics (piperacillin and tazobactam 2.5 g × 4; vancomycin 300 mg × 4), antimycotics (fluconazole 200 mg/day), dexamethasone (3 mg × 2), furosemide (15 mg), paracetamol (250 mg × 3), and enoxaparin (200 UI × 2). Moreover, compartment syndrome was diagnosed based on both clinical and instrumental criteria. Specifically, a differential pressure (ΔP = diastolic blood pressure– absolute compartment pressure; McQueen and Court-Brown of < 25 mmHg was recorded in the lateral leg compartment. The patient was taken to the operating room at 1:10 a.m., and fasciotomy was performed with an incision on the dorsal surface of the foot medial to the second metatarsal and lateral to the fourth metatarsal, as well as on the lateral aspect of the leg . A prominent edematous imbibition was found in the subcutaneous tissue, with ischemic suffering of muscles . The postoperative outcome was good, and the girl was extubated the next day and subsequently transferred to the emergency pediatrics department on May 27. During the subsequent course, there was a progressive reduction in edema and pain in the suffering limb. Dressings were changed regularly until definitive closure on June 12 . On May 30, an eco-Doppler ultrasound exam was performed due to the presence of a painful fibrotic cord on the medial aspect of the right thigh, with no evidence of thrombotic phenomena. Starting on June 13, the girl developed an intensely itchy, erythematous papular rash covering the entire body, compatible with drug-induced toxidermia . After dermatological consultation, this condition was successfully treated with antihistamines and betamethasone. On June 10, the patient began to perform protected weight-bearing exercises with crutches, and she started walking without the support of crutches on June 18. She was discharged the next day. The patient and her parents reported no significant sequelae when interviewed three years after the incident.