A 30-year-old male patient presented to our outpatient department with complaints of pain over right knee associated with recurrent swelling, instability, clicking sounds, and occasional locking episodes since 6 months following injury and all the symptoms started following significant twisting injury over knee while playing kabaddi with no prior history of any symptoms. Following trauma, the patient had only bandages application with massage at local bonesetter. At presentation to us, examination revealed medial joint line tenderness. There was minimal effusion with no varus or valgus laxity. Anterior drawers test, Lachman’s test, and Pivot-Shift tests were positive. McMurray test for medial meniscus was positive. There was significant quadriceps wasting. Range of movements was terminally painful and restricted. Lysholm Knee Scoring showed a score of 31. However, there were no other symptoms in any parts of the body/joints. The patient was worked up with plain radiography which showed minimal arthritic changes with marginal osteophyte with fairly maintained joint space (Kellgren-Lawrence grade II) and magnetic resonance imaging showed complete ACL tear with bucket handle tear of posterior and body of medial meniscus with double posterior cruciate ligament sign with hyperintense signal in posterior medial femoral condyle suggesting possible cartilage damage . The diagnosis of traumatic complete ACL tear with medial meniscus bucket handle tear of body and posterior horn with early osteoarthritic changes was made. We planned for arthroscopic surgery. Intraoperatively, we found complete tear of ACL with bucket handle tear of medial meniscus with cartilage defect of 3 cm × 3 cm at medial femoral condyle . Cartilage defect was addressed with debridement and microfracture. Furthermore, we noticed extensive usual amount of synovitis in the knee which was debrided and was sent for histopathology and culture sensitivity . ACL reconstruction was done with quadrupled hamstring graft and fixation with titanium screws with partial medial meniscectomy. Considering the unusual and extensive amount of synovitis noticed in the knee, we decided to work up for inflammatory arthritis postoperatively. Histopathological study revealed non-specific synovial proliferation with infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells including plasma cells, lymphocytes and occasional neutrophils and culture sensitivity was negative. However, there were no lymphoid follicles or pannus. Furthermore, we found that both rheumatoid factor and anticitrullinated protein antibody (anti-CCP) to be positive postoperatively and accordingly, the patient was put on DMRD’s with combination of tablet sulfasalazine 500 mg, tablet hydroxychloroquine 200 mg on daily basis, and tablet methotrexate 7.5 mg for 1 year alongwith folic acid supplementations. Furthermore, the patient was informed regarding further cartilage managing surgical procedures after surgery; however, the patient denied due to financial constraints. He was put on long knee brace for 6 weeks. Isometric knee exercises were started on day 1 postoperatively, knee range of movements after 2 weeks, and non-weight bearing for 6 weeks. The patient was followed up regularly at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year. At 1-year follow-up, the patient was back to normal activities with no instability symptoms or pain or clicking sensations over knee with full range of movements . Lysholm Knee Scoring had improved significantly to 89. However, radiological features showed osteoarthritic changes with Kellgren-Lawrence grade III .