A 73-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital on November 6, 2019 with a one-month history of cough and chest tightness. The patient had no history of smoking, drinking or family history of tumors. Following the admission, the evaluation and examination were conducted. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomograph(18F-FDG PET/CT)showed a soft tissue mass shadow near the hilum of the right upper lobe tip, having a size of 62mm*49mm, and enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum . Moreover, the neuron specific enolase (NSE) biomarker level was elevated at 32.34 ng/ml (normal levels, <16.3 ng/ml). It was diagnosed as NSCLC. Then, she received the right upper lobe resection and lymph node dissection were performed under thoracoscopy in November 12, 2019, postoperative pathology revealed a right upper lung spindle cell malignant tumor, conformed to sarcoma carcinoma , with low differentiation and a maximum diameter of about 8.5 cm. The tumor penetrated the dirty layer, parietal pleura, and accumulated in the hilar soft tissue with large tumor necrosis, vascular thrombus, nerve invasion, and hilar lymph node cancer metastasis, and negative surgical margin. A total of 43 mediastinal lymph nodes were dissected, of which 8 showed metastasis. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed Vim(+++, ), CK(+, ), CD34(+), CD68(+), Ki-67(60%+), P40 (–), P63(-), CK7(+), NapsinA(-), ALK(D5F3)(+), TTF-1(-), S-100(-), BRG1(+). The postoperative diagnosis was PSC IIIB stage (pT4N2M0, 8th edition AJCC). Seven weeks after surgery, PET-CT revealed tumor recurrence and metastasis , involving a huge mass shadow in the right-side area of the mediastinum (70 mm * 44 mm), abnormal increase in FDG metabolism, SUVmax 28 , and right upper and lower clavicle socket, right axilla, mediastinum, and right cardio-diaphragmatic angle showed metastatic lymph nodes. Considering the tumor’s rapid progression, the patient could not withstand high-intensity chemoradiotherapy. Additionally, she received the next generation sequencing (NGS) of tumor tissue samples to detect four types of 1021 genes related to tumor occurrence and development: including point mutation, small fragment insertion and deletion, copy number variation and currently known fusion gene variation. NGS was conducted on the Gene+Seq-200/2000 platform of the College of American Pathologists (CAP) accredited clinical laboratory (Gen+, BeiJing, China). NGS and IHC results are presented in . The patient had high TMB (TMB-H, 11.52Muts/Mb), microsatellite stabilization (MSS), and PD-L1 was strongly expressed, Tumor Proportion Score [TPS]: 80% and Combined Positive Score [CPS]: 95 . The profile of genetic alterations included TP53 mutation, with an abundance of 25.3% . Consequently, with the patient’s consent, pembrolizumab combined with anlotinib began treatment in January 2020. She was administered 200 mg pembrolizumab intravenously over 30 min every 3 weeks and received anlotinib orally at 10 mg day 1-14 every 3 weeks.
After 7 cycles of treatment (June 5, 2020), PET-CT showed that the recurrent malignant tumor in the right lung significantly reduced to 54mm * 43mm. The metabolic activity of the tumor has significantly decreased compared to before, with SUVmax decreasing to 7.4 . Tumor biomarker NSE decreases to normal levels . Moreover, the quality of life improved significantly. During this period, the patient experienced adverse drug reactions, including one-degree thyroid-stimulating hormone elevation and two-degree hand-foot syndrome, which was attributed to anlotinib. Therefore, sodium levothyroxine was supplemented 50μg every day and the anlotinib dose was reduced to 8 mg once daily. After 15 cycles therapy (December 8, 2020), PET-CT depicted reduced right anterior metastasis (46 mm * 33 mm) and minimal metabolic activity with SUVmax 2.4 . The Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1 evaluation was PR. Even though the tumor had not completely disappeared, there is essentially no tumor activity. Afterwards, pembrolizumab combined with anlotinib continued treatment until December 2021, with further reduction of lung malignancies . A total of 34 cycles were used and no adverse reactions of 3-4 degrees were observed. This finding suggests that anlotinib is well tolerated. Currently, the patient is still alive without tumor progression and has overall survival exceeding 45 months until the submission date. The patient is in long-term survival with tumors .