A 61-year-old man with a history of long-term cigarette smoking (45 pack-years) presented to the ED with acute dyspnea and one week of chest pain. Initial vital signs were as follows: temperature 36°C, heart rate 97 beats per minute, blood pressure 176/100 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate 30 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) 89%. He required four liters per minute supplemental oxygen to maintain SpO2 greater than 94%. An electrocardiogram revealed Q waves and ST-segment elevations in leads II, III, and aVF with reciprocal depressions in leads I, aVL, and V2–V5 (, Panel A), consistent with subacute inferior STEMI. His exam was notable for a harsh holosystolic murmur heard throughout the precordium. The patient’s preliminary laboratory results revealed a lactic acidosis with arterial lactate of 9.2 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (normal range 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), and a leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 19.8 × 109/L (normal range 4.2–9.1 × 109/L). His high sensitivity troponin T was 5853 nanograms (ng)/L (normal range 0–21 ng/L).
On POCUS in the ED, parasternal long- (, Panel B) and short-axis (, Panel C) views revealed a large VSR, and a modified apical four-chamber view with color flow Doppler confirmed left-to-right flow across the defect (, Panel D and ). Emergent coronary angiography demonstrated a chronically occluded proximal right coronary artery and an 80% proximal- to mid-left circumflex stenotic lesion; no stents were placed. The cardiac index was 1.0 L/minute (min)/squared meter (m2) (normal range 2.5–4.2 L/min/m2) and the pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio (Qp:Qs) was 7.8 (normal ratio of 1), consistent with an extremely large left-to-right intraventricular shunt. Oxygen saturation measurements collected during right heart catheterization (RHC) are shown in the table.
The coronary artery stenotic lesions were not amenable to stenting. Hemodynamic stabilization was achieved with placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). On hospital day 10, single vessel coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and VSR repair were completed successfully. The IABP was removed the following day. Post-op transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated moderately reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (30–39%; calculated at 35%; normal range 55–70%) and trivial left-to-right shunting. His post-op course was uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged home on hospital day 15.
At two-week post-discharge follow-up with his new cardiologist, the patient endorsed improving exertional fatigue and was otherwise asymptomatic. His recovery had been uneventful. He remained abstinent from cigarette smoking.
One month after discharge, repeat TTE and RHC were completed to rule out significant left-to-right shunting. TTE demonstrated an improvement in left ventricular ejection fraction, now only mildly reduced (40–49%; calculated at 44%), and a borderline increase in left-to-right shunting. RHC showed a mild step-up in oxygen saturation from the mixed venous to the right ventricle (53 to 65%, respectively), with a calculated Qp:Qs of 1.4, and cardiac index of 2.3 L/min/m2 .