We report the case of a 50-year-old Japanese woman who visited a local hospital owing to a palpable mass on the left thigh. The mass gradually increased in size and was associated with left thigh pain. The patient was referred to our hospital after 8 months. The patient had a history of hepatitis C virus (HCV) carrier, but no other major preexisting medical conditions were noted. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed the presence of sarcoma on the posterior left thigh , and differential diagnoses such as undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, pleomorphic liposarcoma, dedifferentiated liposarcoma, and other higher-ranking sarcomas were considered. Then, needle biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of PLPS. During the performance of computed tomography (CT) examination to assess for metastases, a huge liver mass (140 mm × 80 mm × 120 mm) was found . A chest CT scan showed absence of lesions in the lungs or pleura . Needle biopsy of the liver mass revealed metastatic sarcoma of the PLPS in the left thigh. Liver function tests revealed normal bilirubin levels and mildly elevated transaminase levels. Meanwhile, the serum albumin level was low. Because the sarcoma on the thigh was large (113 × 91 × 94 mm) and nearly ulcerated on the skin, wide excision was performed prior to chemotherapy (CTx) . The tumor was resected from the biceps femoris muscle, and the excised tumor was submitted for pathological examination . A well-defined 15 × 12 × 10 cm mass was detected in the subcutaneous fatty tissue. A dense proliferation of round to short spindle-shaped cells of variable sizes, often with fatty droplets, was observed on histological examination. Some cells showed an adipoblast-like morphology. Large nuclei and multinucleated cells were also noted with prominent fission patterns and coagulative necrotic nests. Immunohistochemical staining showed that only a few of the tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein, while the majority were negative for cyclin-dependent kinase 4, murine double minute type 2, desmin, smooth muscle actin, cluster of differentiation 34, epithelial membrane antigen, and cytokeratin AE1/AE3; hence, a diagnosis of PLPS was made. Resection margins were negative (Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre Le Cancer grade 3 (tumor differentiation: 3, tumor necrosis: 1, and mitotic score: 3).
At 4 weeks postoperatively, the metastatic liver tumor had increased to 211 × 106 × 180 mm in size , and symptoms of gastrointestinal obstruction developed. Chest CT scan showed absence of lesions in the lungs or pleura. Right trisectionectomy was necessary to achieve hepatic clearance. However, liver function tests revealed normal bilirubin levels, mildly elevated transaminase levels, and an indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min of 6%, but low serum albumin levels, huge tumor volume (669 ml), and insufficient future liver remnant (FLR; 23.7%). Therefore, we decided to administer anthracycline-based chemotherapy to shrink the tumor. The first course consisted of adriamycin and ifomide, but ifomide-induced encephalopathy occurred after the first dose; therefore, the second and subsequent courses were switched to adriamycin alone. After seven courses of adriamycin-based CTx, the liver tumor size was reduced to 105 mm × 66 mm × 90 mm, and the lesion was eventually confined to the right liver lobe . According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours version 1.1, the target lesion showed partial response (PR) [211 mm → 105 mm (50% reduction)], and nontarget lesions and new lesions were not found; therefore, the overall outcome was judged to be PR. Preoperative percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization was performed to secure the FLR after the seventh course of CTx. Finally, a right hemihepatectomy was performed .
The excised liver weighed 782 g. Multiple masses measuring 20–45 mm in diameter protruded from the serous surface of the liver near the gallbladder. The masses were multinodular, fused, and measuring 110 × 100 × 55 mm, most of which appeared yellowish-white and necrotic. Histologically, most yellowish-white areas were composed of necrotic and calcified tissues and foam cell aggregates, with hemosiderin deposition and monocytic infiltration. The margins of some necrotic materials had small numbers of viable tumor cells. The tumor cells showed nuclear polymorphism and dark staining and contained cytoplasmic fatty droplets. The histological characteristics were similar to those of the tumor in the posterior aspect of the left thigh and consistent with those of a metastatic tumor. The margins were negative. The remaining proliferative tumor cells accounted for 10% of the original metastasis .
No major postoperative complications occurred, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the ninth postoperative day. Metastasis or local recurrence did not occur.