A 57-year-old Japanese woman underwent computed tomography (CT) at a familial orthopedic hospital for RA to examine a complaint of right-sided chest pain. Incidentally, CT revealed a nodule measuring 44 mm in diameter in the left lung and a 14 mm nodule in the right lung. In addition, multiple nodules (up to 55 mm with pale ring enhancement) were observed in the liver . Because she had undergone left nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) 5 years prior in seeking treatment for her injured rib, multiple visceral metastases were suspected. She received annual postoperative follow-up a year prior to her visit, and no apparent evidence of recurrence was observed by thoracoabdominal CT. This prompted a referral to our department.
Details of the patient’s pathological diagnosis of the primary tumor revealed unclassified-type RCC (pT1a) without vascular and lymphatic permeation, and a Fuhrman nuclear grade of 2. When she visited our department, she had been undergoing treatment with methotrexate (8 mg/day) and prednisolone (2 mg/day) for 8 years.
Blood tests showed mildly elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 42 IU/L and 39 IU/L, respectively, and the tumor markers for lung cancer (CEA and SCC) were within normal limits . No apparent new mass lesion was observed by thoracoabdominal CT and the sizes of lung and liver masses were unchanged. A CT-guided needle biopsy of the lung nodule was performed to confirm the diagnosis. Pathological findings revealed diffuse proliferation of lymphoid cells . Necrosis and perivascular growth were also observed. Immunohistochemically, the majority of lymphoid cells were positive for CD20 and CD79a but negative for AE1/AE3. A small amount of CD3 positive was observed . In addition, almost all lymphoid cells were positive for EBER by in situ hybridization . On the basis of these results, a diagnosis of OIIA-LPD, polymorphic LPD (poly-LPD) type was made.
The methotrexate treatment was discontinued. The pulmonary mass (44 mm in size) markedly reduced to 33 mm at 4 weeks after discontinuation and disappeared at 3 months . After 3 months, ultrasonography revealed that the hepatic mass (55 mm in size) had reduced to 30 mm . And all other masses had also decreased in size. She is still under observation without additional treatment and has remained symptom-free for 17 months without expansion of either the lung or the hepatic LPDs.