A 34-year-old female Chinese patient was admitted to our intensive care unit due to hypertriglyceridemia and severe acute pancreatitis. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) on admission showed an enlarged necrotic pancreas and peripancreatic inflammation and fluid . As she suffered from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and required mechanical ventilation, a NJT was placed on the fifth day after admission at bedside by transnasal endoscopic technique. The tube position was not determined by an abdominal radiography. We initiated a D5W solution feeding after intubation. No initial discomfort was noted as the peptisorb liquid (of up to 50 ml per hour) was administered. The patient tolerated this for 15 days, and was weaned from mechanical ventilation on the 10th day. However, on the 21st day after hospitalization, she again had a high fever and abdominal distension. So we checked her using an ultrasound (US) at bedside and performed a US-guided percutaneous catheter drainage of the doubtful retroperitoneal abscesses. The left abscess was demonstrated by the aspirate, but the aspirate from the right retroperitoneal abscess was similar to the peptisorb liquid. We injected 20 ml of methylthioninium chloride through the NJT and found it effusing immediately via the right drainage catheter. At first we thought that the right drainage catheter had penetrated the duodenum or superior segment jejunum. An abdominal radiography was performed and showed that the NJT was kinking on the third portion of the duodenum. The duodenum was not visualized when meglumine diatrizoate was injected via the right drainage catheter . Meglumine diatrizoate was injected via the NJT and showed that the tip of the NJT was inserted into the right retroperitoneal abscess on the second portion of the duodenum . This demonstrated that the duodenal perforation was caused by the NJT. The position of the NJT was adjusted using fluoroscopic guidance and the tip was exactly beyond the ligament of Treitz. After this, the peptisorb liquid from the right drainage catheter disappeared. But her symptoms did not release after two days of conservative treatment. A CT scan of the abdomen showed retroperitoneal emphysema and an abscess. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed. The duodenum perforation was not found but peptisorb liquid accumulation was identified. The retroperitoneal abscess was drained. The recovery course was smooth and EN via the NJT was started five days after the surgical procedure.