A 65 year old female patient with a history of rare migraine attacks developed hyperacute severe global headache with accompanying symptoms of confusion and reduced short term memory. The headache was different from her previously known migraine, which had been asymptomatic for the last six years. The symptoms dissolved completely within 90 minutes. 2.5 weeks later she consulted a doctor, and was admitted to the hospital.
On neurological examination there were no focal neurological deficits. There were no paresis or numbness in the limbs, and cranial nerve examination and reflexes were normal. Physical examination was also completely normal.
On admission an unenhanced Computer tomography (CT) of the head was performed. There were no signs of haemorrhage or other pathology. CT angiography of the intracranial arteries revealed a 2-3 mm aneurysm in the right posterior communicating artery. There was an anatomical variant with fetal origin of the right posterior communicating artery and a hypoplastic P1-segment of the right posterior cerebral artery. This aneurysm was assumed to have caused “warning leak,” indicating an unstable aneurysm in need of treatment.
The aneurysm was successfully treated with carotid artery stenting and aneurysm coiling. Postinterventionally, the patient was clinically asymptomatic without any neurological deficits. The patient was treated with Acetylsalicylic acid and Ticagrelor, as Clopidogrel did not show adequate effect by platelet function tests. The patient was discharged to her home with a planned follow-up for Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain three and twelve months postinterventionally.
One month after EVT, the patient was rehospitalized due to two weeks of right sided headache and a transient episode with flickering in the left visual field. A CT of the head and a CT angiography were performed and revealed small areas of subacute infarction in the right insula, interpreted to be due to a procedure-related thromboembolic event. There was no bleeding, and cerebral arteries were open. Neurological examination was normal. Except for soreness in the neck muscles, the medical examination was normal. The patient's symptoms were thought to be caused by tension headache, and the patient was discharged the day after.
One week after hospital dismissal, the patient was again rehospitalized due to persisting headache and a transient episode of anomic aphasia. Additional to a new CT of the head and CT angiography, a CT perfusion of the head and a brain MRI were performed. The examinations revealed no new findings. The patient had a slight persistent aphasia at admission which completely resolved within an hour. Blood samples were normal. The headache was still thought to be caused by tension headache, and the patient was dismissed after four days.
Five months after EVT, a follow-up brain MRI was performed. On T2-weighted images, new hyperintense white matter signal changes consistent with vasogenic edema in the vascular territory of the right internal carotid artery were seen . There were approximately 10 lesions located mainly subcortical in the vascular territory of the right internal carotid artery. The lesions had slight mass effect. There was no restricted diffusion. Contrast enhanced MRI was not performed.
One year after EVT, a new follow-up MRI was performed, showing only small remaining areas of signal changes . The patient's neurological examination was still normal, and the headaches decayed about six months after EVT without specific treatment. The clinical and radiological presentation were interpreted to be suggestive of a foreign body reaction after neurointerventional treatment.