The deceased was a 37-year-old Sri Lankan male, a gem businessman by profession and a resident of Beruwala, a coastal town located 55 km South of Sri Lanka’s capital Colombo along the south-western coastline. He left Sri Lanka on the 22nd of February 2023 on a business trip. He visited Thailand for 30 days, United Arab Emirates (UAE) for 5 days and finally Tanzania where he spent the last 15 days of his trip and returned to Sri Lanka on the 10th of April 2023.
On the day of his arrival in Sri Lanka on the 10th April he was febrile and the same evening he visited a General Practitioner in his home town, Beruwela. He was reportedly prescribed antibiotics, to which he did not respond and experienced a worsening of symptoms the next day with vomiting and joint pains. Due to the severity of the illness and development of abdominal pain, he visited another General Practitioner in the Beruwela area on the 12th of April where he was once again prescribed antibiotics. The patient had not volunteered the history of his travel at the consultations. Malaria was not tested for by either general practitioners.
By the 13th of April, due to a deterioration of his condition, he contacted a third medical practitioner and the next morning, 14th April, he was jaundiced, complained of epigastric and right hypochondrial pain and was short of breath. All his consultations have been with registered allopathic medical practitioners. On that day, an ultrasound scan was done on him at a medical centre in Beruwela, which revealed splenomegaly and gall bladder oedema. On the advice of the Radiologist he was admitted to a private hospital in Colombo by 5.30 pm the same day (14th April) but due to high fever, dyspnea, an oxygen saturation of 86% the attending physician transferred him to a larger private hospital in Colombo at 7.00 pm, where he was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) there. On examination he was in acute renal failure and acute respiratory distress confirmed by chest X-ray. A request was made by the physician for examination of blood for malaria parasites on admission. The blood report issued by the hospital based on microscopy early the next morning (15thApril) was positive for P. falciparum malaria with a high parasitaemia (> 10%) , and a severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count 30,000/mm3) with evidence of haemoconcentration. A rapid diagnostic test (RDT) was not performed, although RDTs were available in the ICU. The patient died on the same day within a hour of the malaria microscopy report being available and before any anti-malarial medication was administered. The cause of death was recorded as Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome with high falciparum parasitaemia (> 10%).
The diagnosis of P. falciparum malaria was later confirmed by the central laboratory of the AMC on a blood smear which was taken at the time of admission. Parasite ring stages were present at a high density (839,638 parasites/μL). Rapid Diagnostic Tests based on both HRP-2 antigen and pLDH performed on this blood sample retrospectively also tested positive for P. falciparum.
Based on discussions with the patient’s relatives and friends following his death, it was revealed that this individual was a frequent business traveller to Africa, with a history of having visited Tanzania 3–4 times every year from 2013 onwards, excluding the periods of travel restrictions due to Covid-19. Reportedly he has not had any previous malaria infections. He has not used chemoprophylaxis for malaria on this or previous travels to Africa, but he used mosquito bite preventive measures, such as the application of repellents and sleeping under mosquito nets. The relatives of the deceased also mentioned that he was aware of malaria chemoprophylactic treatment being given free-of-charge by the AMC, but that he did not take them because he was concerned about the adverse effects of these medications. The community of gem traders in Beruwala to which the deceased belonged has been the source of several imported malaria cases in the past. The first two cases of imported malaria from this community since malaria was eliminated, was reported in 2015, one of them being a case of severe malaria which was successfully treated. Thereafter five imported malaria cases were reported from this community in Beruwala in each of the years 2016 and 2017. Following this, eight malaria cases were reported from the community between 2018 and 2022.