A 65-year-old Japanese man was hospitalized at another general hospital to undergo a bypass surgery for left middle cerebral artery stenosis. A few weeks before hospitalization, he had an ulcer on the oral mucosa, which sometimes oozed with blood; however, hemostasis was achieved spontaneously. After hospitalization, large hematomas with continuous hemorrhage developed in his oral cavity; therefore, he was transferred to our hospital for hematomas management. According to the physicians at the previous hospital, the patient had a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus with chronic kidney disease (not requiring dialysis), and his activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) had been increasing over the past 3 months.
On examination, his consciousness was clear, and his vital signs were within the normal limits. No purpura was observed on the entire skin surface. His face had no swellings, and no other significant findings were observed; however, he could not close his mouth because of the presence of two large intraoral hematomas that occupied the oral cavity. The hematomas were approximately 60 (right buccal mucosa) and 30 mm in diameter (left buccal mucosa) . Laboratory tests revealed that his anemia had become more advanced since his admission to the previous hospital. He had a significantly prolonged aPTT of 84.8 seconds, a red blood cell count of 230 × 104/µl, hemoglobin level of 7.4 g/dl, and hematocrit level of 21.7%. A computed tomography (CT) angiogram revealed no blood vessels flowing in or out of the hematomas, and there were no findings of arteriovenous malformations . No obstructions or deviations were observed in the upper airway. After physical examination, coagulopathy was suspected, and an emergency surgical hemostasis was planned because of the risk of hematomas rupture and severe hemorrhage.
We resected the intraoral hematomas and achieved surgical hemostasis under general anesthesia and nasal intubation with fiberoptic bronchoscopy. When the hematomas on both sides of the buccal mucosa were removed by careful blunt dissection, oozing of blood was observed and hemostasis was completed by cauterization. The wound in the right buccal mucosa was replaced by an artificial dermis, and that on the left was closed by reefing. The excised hematomas were sent for histological examination. The pathological findings showed no evidence of tumor in the hematomas .
Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit with intubation, because of the possibility of epistaxis on removal of the endotracheal tube. Further, postoperatively, a few new hematomas < 10 mm in diameter arose on both sides of the velum at a different site from the surgical site . These hematomas were far from the patient’s teeth and tongue; therefore, they were left in place. Although epistaxis was observed, after consulting with the hematologist and otolaryngologist, the nasotracheal tube was removed after administration of recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) because AHA was suspected. Thereafter, fiberoptic examination was performed through the airway to confirm the absence of hemorrhage in the upper airway. Cross-mixing test showed a pattern of deficiency rather than a typical pattern of a coagulation factor inhibitor; therefore, initiation of immunosuppressive treatment was withheld. A few days after the surgery, purpura in the right upper and lower extremities that was not observed preoperatively became visible . Blood transfusion and administration of rFVIIa were performed when purpura was observed or when the hemoglobin levels were < 6.0 g/dl. Abdominal CT and laboratory tests showed no evidence of malignancy or autoimmune disease. The dose of the factor VIII inhibitor was 165 Bethesda units at 7 days after surgery, following which a definitive diagnosis of AHA was made. The immunosuppressive treatment for eradication of the inhibitor was initiated with 55 mg/day of orally administered prednisolone. Gradually, anemia improved and the inhibitor level decreased . The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 46. Oral administration of prednisolone 45 mg/day and follow-up examination were suggested.