A 39-year-old black African male presented to a secondary facility emergency department complaining of a two-week history of progressive abdominal distension with one day of associated severe abdominal pain and post-prandial vomiting. No history of loss of weight, no past surgical history, and no medical history or chronic medication use. There was no family history of note, and the patient had no history of smoking or alcohol intake.
General examination: underweight patient, no palpable lymph nodes Heart Rate (HR) = 114 beats per minute; Blood Pressure (BP) = 103/59 mmHg, Temperature = 36.4° Celsius, Respiratory Rate (RR) = 27 breaths per minute.
Abdominal examination: massively distended, tense, tympanic abdomen, peritonitic. Succussion splash present. Per rectum examination: soft brown stool with a normal prostate. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were normal.
Two large bore intravenous (IV) lines were inserted and 1 L crystalloid fluid bolus given with subsequent crystalloid infusion rate of 125ml/hr IVI. Urine catheter inserted drained 600ml clear urine, nasogastric tube (NGT) inserted and 3.5 L of gastric material drained with some relief of abdominal distension and pain .
Chest X-ray: bilaterally elevated diaphragms with small but clear but reduced lung fields and no free air under the diaphragm, Abdominal X-Ray : large right upper quadrant cystic lesion, large, distended gastric bubble with possible colon distension, no air in the rectum. COVID swab: negative. Patient was booked for emergency laparotomy for peritonitic bowel obstruction with possible bowel perforation.
Theatre:Pneumoperitoneum noticed on entering the peritoneum Massively dilated pelvic stomach with Organo-axial gastric volvulus – viable. Narrow pylorus (<0.5cm) Multiple extensive cystic mesenteric-para -jejunal-ileal-colonic duplication cysts starting 110cm from Duodenal-Jejunal (DJ) Flexure to proximal ascending colon . Massive supra-hepatic cystic mass of 15cmx12cm
Detorsion of gastric volvulus – viable distal oesophagus and stomach – gastropexy performed along the anterior fundus. All cystic-duplication intestinal cysts left intact: true intestinal lumen viable and peristalsis present throughout. Supra-hepatic cystic lesion left in situ with pencil drain placed inferiorly
Patient was extubated on table and transferred to the ward with NGT on free drainage and support. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocol was followed and feeds were progressed from clear fluids to soft diet withing 48 hours post operatively. Patient noted to have post-prandial vomiting within 1–2 hours after eating on day six post-surgery, subsequently oral feeds were stopped and patient kept nil per os on support. Booked for a Gastroscopy and Barium Meal and follow-through. Gastroscopy: large amounts of gastric content – unable to view stomach. Gastric lavage was carried out and repeat Gastroscopy after 48 hours showed: Gastric Outlet Obstruction, pin-hole pylorus visualized and 6× biopsies taken. Barium meal and follow-through on day ten post-surgery demonstrated a large pelvic stomach with delayed transit of contrast into small bowel and subsequent large bowel. At this point the patient tolerating clear sips per os and supported with Parenteral Nutrition (TPN). Abdomen otherwise soft and not tender, minimal distention. Histology Report of Biopsies: No Helicobacter Pylori organisms noted; gastric mucosa shows widespread chronic gastritis, no active inflammation, no evidence of lymphoid follicle formation, no evidence of dysplasia or invasive malignancy. Day 19 post-surgery pyloric stenting was attempted but failed. Elective surgery planned involving a distal gastrectomy with Bill Roth 2 (Gastrojejunostomy) procedure, Jejunal and ileum cyst-lesion resection with small bowel-small primary anastomosis, resection of supra-hepatic cystic lesion – this was performed Day 23 post initial laparotomy. Thereafter, the patient progressed with feeds well to a full diet. Histology of the specimens showed: All gastric tissue margins do not demonstrate invasive malignancy, widespread chronic gastritis noted in mucosa, no active inflammation, no H. pylori noted. Jejunum-ileum tissue: morphological features of pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis, no neoplastic infiltrate. Liver cyst resection: morphological features of pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis, nil neoplasia. The patient was discharged thirty-one days after his presentation to the emergency department.