A.H. is a 71-year-old male patient known to have hypertension, dyslipidemia, coronary artery disease, and congestive heart failure who initially presented to our center on October 2011 for workup of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. CT angiography of the abdomen revealed a suspicious nodule within the right lower lobe of the lung. Further imaging and pathology revealed BRAF wild-type metastatic melanoma.
Prior to initiation of treatment, PET-CT examination revealed right lung lower lobe neoplastic nodule 17 mm in diameter (SUV = 5.8) with secondary active lymph nodes affecting the pre-trachea, right para-trachea, pre-carina, and right axilla. The patient was initially started on temozolamide for 3 cycles without notable side effects, until ipilimumab became available at our center. Starting in February 2012, the patient received his first two cycles of ipilimumab with no reported side effects.
After his third cycle in April 2012, the patient reported watery nonbloody diarrhea reaching up to 20 episodes/day associated with severe intermittent cramping abdominal pain. He was diagnosed with grade 3 enteritis requiring oral prednisone 1 mg/kg twice daily. Ipilimumab was permanently discontinued at this point. His diarrhea and abdominal pain significantly improved on steroids over the next few weeks, allowing a successful steroid taper and discontinuation.
In June 2012, follow-up PET-CT scan showed a decrease in size of the right lower lung lobe nodule (dmax = 7 mm, SUV = 0.9) as well as a decrease in size and metabolic activity of previously noted active lymph nodes. By December 2012, the patient had clinically improved and PET-CT scan revealed no evidence of active disease with complete resolution of the right lung nodule.
The patient continued to have regular follow-up with no treatment provided and was clinically asymptomatic and in remission. However, in May 2015, the patient began complaining of intermittent watery nonbloody diarrhea nonresponsive to antibiotics and standard medical management. For further assessment, he underwent colonoscopy in November 2015 , which revealed hypertrophied anal papilla and multiple long shallow ulcers with an erythematous edematous mucosa extending up to the sigmoid. Patchy inflammatory changes were noted throughout the entire colon (loss of vascular pattern, edema, ulcers). The terminal ileum was normal in appearance. This pattern was consistent with an inflammatory bowel-like syndrome.
Biopsy results further corroborated this finding. Several fragments of benign colorectal mucosa, with mild to moderate architectural distortion associated with moderate increase in lamina propria mononuclear cells were found on microscopic histopathologic examination. Furthermore, patchy cryptitis, crypt abscesses, and ulceration were noted . Moreover, there was no dysplasia, cytomegalovirus inclusions, or granulomas. The overall impression was that of active chronic colitis with ulceration consistent with IBD.
He was started on Asacol (mesalamine). The patient is still on mesalamine and his diarrhea is under control and partially resolved.