Our patient was a 68-year-old Australian Caucasian man who had a right above-the-knee amputation following a motorcycle accident in 1959, when he was 19 years of age. He initially perceived a painless phantom that dissipated soon after amputation. He did not have painful neuromata, but experienced paroxysmal shock-like stump pain two to three times yearly that would settle within 24 hours. We first assessed our patient's phantom pain in a questionnaire study in 2005 , three years after the onset of his phantom pain, and more recently via an interview and clinical examination in 2009 conducted to investigate his late-onset phantom pain. The patient provided written, informed consent for the publication of this case report, and both studies were approved by local and hospital ethics committees.
In 2002, our patient was diagnosed with moderate to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma which had infiltrated through the full thickness of the bowel wall and into one regional lymph node. He promptly underwent right hemicolectomy. Fifteen days later he was diagnosed with pulmonary emboli and secondary pneumonia. Thrombotic occlusion had developed in the right superficial femoral vein approximately 5 cm distal to the long saphenous junction and extending proximally to the level of the distal common femoral artery. The patient was advised against prosthesis use until the blood clot cleared approximately four months after the initial surgery.
Our patient completed a six-month course of chemotherapy with leucovorin 38 mg and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 800 mg, which were administered with domperidone 10 mg and dexamethasone 4 mg to 8 mg. There was no prophylactic administration of vitamin E before chemotherapy. Little note was made of the effect that these agents had on our patient's stump and phantom pain, except that he was advised to bandage his swollen stump during the third cycle and he reported nerve pain in the stump by the sixth cycle. The possible cause of stump swelling was not recorded.
Our patient noted the presence of a painful phantom foot, telescoped near the stump, and a definite increase in stump pain and hyperalgesia, which was particularly pronounced after prosthesis use, which began during the course of chemotherapy treatment. He presently takes carbamazepine (200 mg daily) and tramadol (200 mg daily) to manage his pain. Our patient is unable to differentiate between his stump and phantom pain, as they both occur within the same region, often simultaneously, and are characterized by the same sensations. Deep manipulation of the stump (with fingers) now triggers shock-type pains; however, providing even pressure with the prosthesis helps to alleviate pain, indicating the absence of any continuing irritation of the stump. The phantom sometimes feels cold, but never hot or burning.
Our patient's pain is exacerbated by sitting, increased levels of activity, heavy lifting, hot weather, sweating, and stress. He has never noticed any increase or change in pain in relation to toileting, having a full bladder or bowel, or genital stimulation. He finds that walking and keeping occupied reduces his pain. On the basis of the McGill Pain Questionnaire , he described his pain as jumping, tingling, aching, intense, numb, cold, and nagging (see Table for pain intensity and unpleasantness ratings).
On the Leeds assessment of neuropathic symptoms and signs pain scale , our patient scored 7 out of 16, responding positively to "having pain that feels like strange sensations in the skin characterised as pricking, tingling, or pins and needles" and "having pain that comes on suddenly in bursts for no apparent reason when he is still."
The patient did not exhibit allodynia on the stump when lightly stroked with cotton wool, but exhibited hyperalgesia and a reduced pinprick threshold in the stump region (pinprick was rated at 45 out of 100 on the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), where a score of 0 is not painful and a score of 100 is the worst possible pain), compared to the arm (8 out of 100) and the lower shin of the intact leg (10 out of 100). The patient's perception threshold to Von Frey filaments was the same between his arm, stump, equivalent region on the intact leg, and lower shin on the intact leg at a pressure of 2.05 g, indicating diminished protective sensation in all regions. In the stump, 15.00 g was perceived as just painful (VAS score 15 out of 100). When tested for temporal summation (10 applications of the 15 g filament at a frequency of 1 second), the patient experienced marked wind-up, with an increase in pain intensity to 56 out of 100. Given the reduced protective sensations noted above, such a pattern may be considered suggestive of hyperpathia.