An 11-year-old girl presented with a 3-week history of left otalgia, headache, and an episode of syncope. Examination revealed normal neurologic findings and no focal deficits . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a hemorrhagic cystic lesion in the left cerebellopontine angle (CPA) with a differential diagnosis of schwannoma vs. trigeminal CM. She initially underwent a period of surveillance during which time the lesion involuted at 1 year . At 2 years, repeat images showed new hemorrhage and the decision was made for surgical intervention. She underwent a left retrosigmoid craniotomy and was found to have a CM embedded within the cisternal segment of the trigeminal nerve that extended into Meckel's cave. A satisfactory resection was thought to have been achieved at surgery with preservation of the nerve fascicles and on postoperative imaging. She had an unremarkable postoperative course.
Imaging done up to 12 months after surgery demonstrated no recurrence of the lesion. By 18 months she began to experience significant left-sided facial hypesthesia and sensory symptoms worse in the distribution of the 3rd division of the trigeminal nerve. MRI revealed considerable recurrence of the lesion along the anatomical extent of the trigeminal nerve which distorted the ventrolateral brainstem, middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP) and extended into the Meckel's cave and caudally below the trigeminal nerve toward the internal acoustic canal .
The second operation utilized an extended middle fossa (Kawase-Dolenc) approach. Intraoperative neuromonitoring was employed to aid resection. Key operative steps included a frontotemporal craniotomy with an anterior interdural approach to the mandibular nerve then posterior dural elevation to undertake anterior petrosectomy . The large solid exophytic CM appeared intimately related to the anatomical trajectory of the trigeminal nerve with a significant component embedded within the brainstem. The brainstem component was gently removed in piecemeal fashion while respecting the hemosiderin-stained parenchyma. The trigeminal nerve was sacrificed to achieve gross total resection with the tentorial division and mobilization to further permit the removal of the component within Meckel's cave. Postoperatively, she had a transient left facial paresis and right hemiparesis resolving within 48 h. A small pseudomeningocele resolved within four months. She had facial hypesthesia that persisted after the operative intervention.
Postoperative images showed gross total resection with no evidence of radiological recurrence at 12 months . Genetic testing for familial CM was negative for mutations.