A 48-year-old woman visited our hospital complaining chiefly of fever, general malaise, and left cervical pain. The patient had previously undergone unilateral mastectomy, axillary sentinel node biopsy, and axillary dissection. After surgery, she was taking loxoprofen, acetaminophen, mirogabalin, and mexiletine, in addition to using Chinese herbal medicine. She had started on TC (docetaxel 75 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2) as adjuvant chemotherapy. On day 4 of treatment, PEG had been administered for prevention of FN. On day 5, the patient had developed fever and arthralgia, and on day 7, a skin rash and pruritus had appeared on her neck and back. Although the symptom of itching had been relieved by treatment with an anti-allergic drug, she continued to have a fever of ≥ 38 °C and was admitted to hospital on day 14 for examination, investigations, and treatment.
On admission, the patient’s body height was recorded as 162 cm; body weight, 48.3 kg; body temperature, 37.6 °C; blood pressure, 91/47 mmHg; heart rate, 71 beats/min; and SpO2, 99% (in room air). She had clear consciousness, general malaise, and spontaneous pain and tenderness on the left side of the neck. There was no redness or swelling in the neck, and the cervical lymph nodes were not enlarged. Table summarizes the laboratory values on admission; an elevated neutrophil-predominant white blood cell count of 14.11 × 103/μL and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 12.65 mg/dL were observed, but procalcitonin level was normal and the results of blood and urine culture were negative. Plain computed tomography (CT) images of the chest and abdomen showed no obvious evidence of infection.
Figure shows the course of the patient’s condition after admission. Because of the possibility of infection, intravenous drip infusion of tazobactam–piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC 4.5 g, four times a day), a broad-spectrum antibacterial medication, was started on the day after admission. However, the patient continued to have fever ≥ 38 °C and left cervical pain, and right cervical pain newly appeared. Despite the administration of TAZ/PIPC, blood test results showed no reduction in inflammatory response, and therefore infection was considered unlikely to be the cause of the patient’s symptoms.
On the 8th day after admission (day 22 of treatment), contrast-enhanced CT and carotid artery ultrasonography were performed to investigate the possibility of vasculitis, based on the persistent high fever and neck pain. The CT images showed thickened vessel walls in the left subclavian artery, the origin of the common carotid artery, and the thoracoabdominal aorta , suggesting vasculitis. The carotid artery ultrasonography revealed hypoechoic or isoechoic wall thickening around the vessels from the bilateral common carotid bifurcation to the bilateral internal carotid arteries , thus providing further evidence of vasculitis. Levels of myeloperoxidase–anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO–ANCA), serine proteinase 3–anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3–ANCA), and complements C3 and C4 were all normal, and the test result for anti-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibodies was negative, excluding the possibility of autoimmune disease.
Because the patient’s symptoms appeared immediately after PEG administration, we diagnosed PEG-induced vasculitis and started treatment with prednisolone (PSL) 40 mg/day on the same day. After administration of PSL, her fever rapidly resolved, CRP level decreased, and the cervical pain gradually eased until resolving completely by the 20th day of hospitalization (day 34). Images of the neck obtained by CT and ultrasonography on the 22nd day of hospitalization (day 36) showed clear improvement in the thickening of the vessel walls.
On the fourth day of hospitalization (day 18), the patient developed headache, but this fluctuated from day to day. On the 24th day of hospitalization (day 38), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head was carried out to investigate possible causes of the headache; this revealed high signal along the bilateral occipital sulci, as shown in the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image . Additionally, images obtained by magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed irregularity in the wall of the basilar artery . Cerebral angiography performed on the 26th day of hospitalization (day 40) did not show any cerebral aneurysm , but wall irregularities were observed in the vertebrobasilar artery and bilateral posterior cerebral arteries. Based on these imaging results, we considered SAH associated with vasculitis to be the most probable cause of the patient’s headache.
After the patient had received follow-up treatment with supplemental fluid, images from MRI of the head carried out on the 31th and 38th day of hospitalization (days 45 and 52, respectively) showed no enlargement of the hemorrhage area, and MRA images confirmed that the vascular irregularities were improving. The patient was discharged on the 44th day after admission to hospital (day 58).
While the patient was followed up as an outpatient, the dose of PSL was gradually tapered until the treatment was discontinued, and the MRA image obtained at 5 months after discharge shows that the vascular irregularity has improved , with no sign of SAH recurrence. Since her discharge from the hospital, she has been receiving tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy, but TC therapy has not been resumed.