A 50-year-old woman experienced intermittent irregular vaginal bleeding for 7 months and developed lower abdominal pain in the past 2 months. The patient had no history of pregnancy or childbirth, family genetic history, or adverse environmental exposure, and no bad habits such as smoking and drinking. Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV) DNA testing and p16 immunostaining were both negative. The ThinPrep cytology test (TCT) showed atypical hyperplasia of the glandular epithelium. Pathological examination of cervical and cervical canal scraping tissues suggested chronic cervicitis with squamous epithelial hyperplasia. Pelvic ultrasound indicated an incomplete mediastinal uterus and heterogeneous echo from the cervical canal to the posterior wall of the cervix, with a size of approximately 7.0×5.6×5.2 cm. The cervical serosal layer protrudes outward with irregular morphology and clear boundaries. Blood flow signals were observed inside and around the cervix . Pelvic contrast-enhanced CT showed that the mediastinum was seen in the uterus up to the top of the cervical os, and double uterine cavity changes were observed. A mixed-density mass was seen on the left side of the cervix with cystic low-density shadows and visible septa inside. The maximum cross-sectional size was approximately 7.7×7.8 cm, and cord-like high-density shadows were around it. The left kidney was absent. A solid cystic mass was visible on the left side of the retroperitoneum at the same level as the lower pole of the right kidney, extending downward to the left side of the cervix. The maximum cross-sectional size was approximately 3.4×2.4 cm, and the length was approximately 15 cm. The boundary with the cervix was not clear . A lump of approximately 7.0×6.0×5.0 cm, tender and inactivity, was palpated on the left side of the cervix during the gynecological examination. Tumor marker tests showed human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) at 133.6 pmol/L, with alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate protein 199 (CA199), carbohydrate protein 125 (CA125), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), carbohydrate antigen 153 (CA153), carbohydrate antigen 724 (CA724), risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm (Roman) index (premenopausal and postmenopausal), and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen all within the normal range. Preoperative diagnosis: (1) cervical fibroids; (2) left retroperitoneal mass; (3) incomplete mediastinal uterus; and (4) left kidney deficiency. Due to the increase in protein marker HE4, preoperative preparation was performed for malignant tumor surgery with adequate intestinal tract preparation. After full communication with the patient and family, we planned to perform a total hysterectomy and explore the retroperitoneal mass location.
During the operation, it was observed that the cervix was significantly enlarged to the low left, and a mass of approximately 7.0×6.0×5.0 cm protruded from the left wall of the cervix with a relatively clear boundary with surrounding tissues. It had a spherical shape, was isolated, and did not invade the rectum or bladder. The uterus, right ovary, and the complete large mass on the cervix were removed. The depth of the mass exceeded the external cervical os by 2 cm. The ex vivo specimen was cut open, and the tumor appeared to resemble smooth muscle tissue, with tough texture and multiple necrotic lesions. There was no tumor infiltration in the cervical canal. The results of rapid frozen pathology indicated a malignant cervical tumor. Intraoperative exploration revealed the other mass in the left retroperitoneum, approximately 15.0×3.0×2.0 cm in size, irregularly cylindrical in shape, with unclear boundaries with the surrounding area, especially closely adherent to the left cervical lesion, with gelatinous tissue on the surface. Intraoperative ultrasound examination showed that the mass lacked a complete renal pelvis structure, presented as a tubular cystic structure, and was interlinked but not connected to the bladder. The bladder was not involved, so a low-lying kidney was excluded. Based on preoperative imaging examination, intraoperative findings, and consultation with experienced urologists, this mass was considered an underdeveloped kidney and ureter, namely the ureteric bud. After explaining the situation to the patient’s family, an informed consent form was signed to perform an expanded hysterectomy, right adnexectomy, and retroperitoneal mass resection. The retroperitoneal mass specimen was cut open and showed a nodular shape with irregular wall thickness, a closed cavity filled with pus, necrotic tissue, and gel-like liquid.
The postoperative pathological diagnosis suggested cervical adenocarcinoma with intestinal-type differentiation in the total hysterectomy specimen. The tumor volume was 7.0 × 6.5 × 5.0 cm. The cancer cells were poorly differentiated, and solid cell clusters were often seen. The maximum diameter of the cancer cluster was 0.25 cm, with necrosis in the center, lymphocyte infiltration, and abscess formation around the cancer nest. Cervical serosa showed the diffuse infiltration of cancer cells. No tumor was found in the vasculature or nerves. The pathological results of the retroperitoneal mass showed a muscular tubular structure, with adenocarcinoma presented both inside and outside the tube wall (,). The immunohistochemical (IHC) results showed that the cervical mass exhibited PAX8 (−), CK7(−), ER(−), PR(−), and P16(−) (–). Retroperitoneal mass presented PAX8 focal(+), GATA3 focal(+), CDX2(+), CK20(+), CK7(−), and P63(−) (–).