A 69-year-old female patient with no significant prior medical history presented at a local clinic complaining of a persistent olfactory disturbance, characterized as a smell resembling burnt dust, which had persisted for 1 month before her visit. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed the presence of an aneurysm at the bifurcation of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) and posterior communicating artery. Subsequently, the patient was referred to our clinic for further management. The MRI scan revealed a substantial aneurysm at the bifurcation of the right posterior communicating artery, and the aneurysm was situated within the amygdala, showing high intensity on the fluid attenuated inversion recovery image in the cerebral parenchyma surrounding the aneurysm . An electroencephalogram revealed no evidence of spikes or abnormal waveforms. A cerebral angiogram confirmed the presence of a 14-millimeter aneurysm in the right posterior communicating artery . A frontotemporal craniotomy with aneurysmal neck clipping was performed to prevent rupture of the aneurysm and alleviate the patient’s olfactory hallucinations.
Under general anesthesia, the ICA was exposed at the level of the neck. A frontotemporal craniotomy was then performed, and the aneurysm was visualized utilizing a trans-sylvian approach. Because the aneurysm was large, neck clipping of the aneurysm was carried out without viewing the entire aneurysm following temporary occlusion of the cervical segment of the ICA . In the postoperative period, the patient experienced no new symptoms, and the smelly symptoms were resolved by the 2nd postoperative day. Her postoperative course was uneventful, the smelly symptoms were resolved by the 2nd postoperative day, and she was discharged home 2 weeks following the procedure. No antiepileptic drugs were administered postoperatively as no seizures other than olfactory hallucinations had been observed in preoperatively. One year after surgery, an MRI revealed resolution of aneurysm-induced pressure drainage at the medial temporal lobe, and the high intensity surrounding the aneurysm had also disappeared . Two years postoperatively, there was no recurrence of smelly symptoms, and no seizures were reported.