The patient was a 54-year-old Italian Caucasian female. She was a non-smoker. She was evaluated in our hospital for recent onset of pain and tenderness in the left breast. She referred swelling of the breast, but denied nipple discharge. Her past medical history was not significant. Her family history was not significant for breast cancer; she denied oral contraceptives use in the past and she give birth to one child. Her most recent Pap smear had been negative for any squamous lesion. Physical examination revealed erythema, hyperaemia and tenderness to touch of the left breast. A palpable well circumscribed and firm mass measuring about 40 mm was present in the left inferior lateral quadrant. The right breast examination was normal. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy on physical examination, including the axillary and supraclavicular regions.
She underwent an ultrasound examination of the left breast, which revealed a defined 29 mm mass with a thick rind and reduced central echogenicity, consistent with a cystic space. Mammography showed a round, high-density mass with almost regular but partially irregular margins, measuring approximately 30 mm.
Fine needle aspiration cytology revealed an infiltrative poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
Total body CT scan, bone scan, laboratory data (blood count, serum electrolytes, liver function tests, creatinine, prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time), tumors markers, including the levels of serum carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate 15-3 and squamous cell carcinoma antigen were within normal range.
The patient underwent a wide local excision of the left breast with ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes dissection. Gross examination revealed a 4.7 cm tumor with central cystic space located in the center to lower outer quadrant of the left breast. There were no component of obvious invasive ductal carcinoma or other features of metaplastic carcinoma for example spindle cells, or osseous or cartilaginous metaplasia. It revealed large squamous cells with keratinizing eosinophilic glassy . The lesion tends to be differentiated sufficiently to form keratohyaline granules. The central cystic space contain keratin and necrotic debris . Vascular or neural invasion was not identified. There was no involvement of the skin or skin adenexae of the breast or the nipple. The uninvolved mammary parenchyma contained fibrocystic changes. Seventeen axillary lymph nodes were dissected and they were negative for metastatic disease. Immunohistochemical evaluation was negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR) and Her2/neu overexpression and positive for EGFR. Ki-67 proliferation index was unfavourably high at 60%.
The patient received an adjuvant therapy based on 5-Fluouracil 600 mg/mq day 1 and Cisplatin (CDDP) 25 mg/mq days 1, 2, 3 every 3 weeks for six cycles. Afterwards patient refuse radiation therapy to the residual left breast.
Twenty-eight months after surgery the patient was asymptomatic and disease free.