A 61-year-old man was referred to our neurosurgical department due to radiologic findings of two intracranial lesions. He presented with a 3-month history of gait imbalance, dysmetria, and frequent falls. During this time, he reported three isolated episodes of vomiting, but no headaches. Personal history included diagnosis of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and Type 2 diabetes mellitus. He had also been a heavy smoker for 40 years. Physical examination demonstrated a bidirectional persistent horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus, ataxic gait, dysmetria, and positive Hoffmann and Babinski signs.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the two lesions previously seen. In the first mass, a radiologic diagnosis of suprasellar meningioma was made. The second was an extra-axial rim-enhancing cystic lesion of 35 × 38 × 45 mm. It was located on the inferior region of the right cerebellopontine angle, extending to the cerebellomedullary cistern, and causing marked compression on adjacent structures and a mild secondary hydrocephalus. The differential diagnosis at this time included cystic meningioma as first option or atypical schwannoma .
The patient underwent surgical resection of the cisternal cystic lesion, with concomitant intraoperative neuromonitoring (IONM). With the patient in sitting position, an extended far lateral retrosigmoid craniotomy and cervical one vertebral right hemilaminectomy were performed. After opening the duramater, a heterogeneous highly vascularized cystic lesion was visualized, strongly fused to the brainstem, as well as to the VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, and XII right cranial nerves. The tumor was seen to arise from the right accessory nerve, confirmed with IONM. A near-total resection was performed to preserve these structures .
On histological analysis, the pathological sample was described as a fusocellular proliferation, with abundant blood vessels, some dilated, and others with hyalinized walls, which were mixed with spindle cell fascicles with nuclei that presented size variability, some hyperchromatic. Proliferative index was 5% and there was no mitosis. Some areas of intravascular thrombosis and hemosiderin were exhibited. On immunohistochemistry, cells were intensely and diffusely positive for S100. Final anatomopathological diagnosis was ancient schwannoma .
This revealed that the mass did not correspond to a meningioma, as initially thought, but to an accessory nerve ancient schwannoma.
Postoperatively, the patient presented respiratory distress shortly after extubation, caused by abundant respiratory secretions and subsequent aspiration pneumonia. This together with later cardiac arrhythmias prolonged his stay at the intensive care unit. Swallowing difficulty was also notable, with the need of a nasogastric tube for feeding during a short time. At discharge 3 months after surgery, the patient had achieved autonomous oral feeding and deambulation.
The management of the remaining small capsular fragment consisted initially on follow-up. Subsequent MRIs showed regrowth of the residual lesion 13 months after surgery , especially of its cystic component. Due to the big cystic part, the decision was to reoperate with a debulking aim before radiotherapy. In the postoperative care unit, the patient suffered cardiac arrest of respiratory origin, which resulted in death after cardiopulmonary resuscitation failure.