A 43 year-old Caucasian woman with a history of hypertension and nicotine abuse was hospitalized with acute onset of chest pain, nausea, and dizziness. Shortly before, she had a vigorous argument with her partner about child education. In the course of the altercation, she was accused to be “a bad mother”. The patient was overwhelmed by the allegations that instantly lead to perceptions of tension, fear and derealisation. At the hospital she appeared anxious with a blood pressure of 168/78 mmHg, a pulse of 78 bpm, shallow breathing and oxygen saturation of 96%. The physical exam and a chest x-ray showed normal findings. Tentative diagnosis was non-STEMI myocardial infarction as ECG was normal and Troponin T levels rose to 0.22 ng/ml. A coronary angiogram revealed no obstructive coronary artery disease or plaque rupture. A left ventriculography demonstrated hypokinetic apical, diaphragmal, and posterobasal segments (Figure ). The diagnosis of Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy (TTC) was established and medication with beta blocker, ACE inhibitor, and aspirin was initiated. An echocardiography five days later showed normal wall movement and an ejection fraction of 72% on echocardiography. The patient was discharged after declining psycho-somatic support.
Six months later, weekly recurrent chest pain increased dramatically while reading a newspaper. Following hospitalization, all results of an examination were very similar to the first event and the diagnosis of recurrent TTC was established.
Nine months after the first cardiac event the patient was admitted to the emergency ward again after dyspnoea, chest pain, nausea, and vertigo had increased for several days. This time, the physical exam revealed rales in the right lung field. ECG showed T-wave inversions in leads V2-V3 (Figure ), and Troponin T levels were at 0.14 ng/ml. Echocardiography demonstrated normal left ventricle function (LVEF > 55%), akinesia of apical segments (septal, lateral, anterior, inferior), and a thrombus of 19 × 11 mm in the left ventricle. Despite administering an anticoagulant, thrombembolism to the right lower leg occurred and had to be surgically removed. After normalized echocardiographic and angiographic results, the patient was discharged a few days later. The last event of TTC emerged another four weeks later. The patient suffered from dyspnoea and pain of the chest and both arms. Physical examination was normal, ECG showed ST depression in leads V2-V4, Troponin T level was 0.06 ng/ml. Cardio-MRI revealed normal left ventricular function (LVEF = 70%) and hypokinetic wall movement of apical and lateral segments. Nonischemic patchy late enhancement was present in the apical, apical inferior septal and lateral regions. A month later late enhancement demonstrated inhomogeneous, inferior-apical transmural scar tissue (Figure ) which did not change significantly at another follow-up after 9 months. During the fourth event and due to a depressive syndrome, psychosomatic support was once again recommended. This time the patient agreed and for the first time, an antidepressant was administered. Because of latest reports of TTC associated with the use of serotonine and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, we selected Mirtazapine in order to avoid increased plasma catecholamine concentrations
[–]. The psychosomatic history revealed several chronic stress factors. At the age of 27, the patient was pregnant (gestational age 14 weeks) and was advised to undergo surgery of the uterus due to a fast growing myoma. 4 months later fetal death was diagnosed and the pregnancy had to be interrupted shortly before calculated date of birth. This was experienced as a traumatic event by the patient. Since then, she suffered from recurrent solitary symptoms indicative of post traumatic stress disorder (occasional flashbacks, hyperarousal) which did not qualify for a diagnosis of PTSD according to diagnostic manuals. Additionally she described a prolonged grief reaction with rumination about the loss of her child, peaking annually in the month of the fetal death. Three years later, the patient gave birth to a healthy premature child. The patient experienced the incident as a distressing life-event as well and felt chronically concerned about her daughter. Therefore, final diagnoses were recurrent TTC, a chronic posttraumatic stress syndrome with solitary symptoms of PTSD, and a prolonged grief disorder with depressive anniversary reactions.