A 34-year-old African American female presented with a 6-month history of dull left-sided flank pain (probably not attributable to the subsequently discovered renal mass per the urology team). The patient’s medical history was significant for obesity, hypertension, and tobacco use. There were no other known environmental risk factors. Family history was significant for pancreatic cancer (mother), leukemia (father), and breast cancer (two maternal aunts who died in their thirties). The patient had no personal or family history of tuberous sclerosis.
Clinical examination was notable for an ill-appearing, obese patient with mild left costovertebral angle tenderness. Computed tomography (CT) scans demonstrated an endophytic 5.4 cm mass within the anterior middle and lower poles of the left kidney. Avid contrast enhancement and areas of internal low-attenuation were identified within the mass and a radiologic impression of RCC was offered. The patient subsequently underwent open partial left nephrectomy.
On gross examination the specimen had an intact renal capsule and an encapsulated, bulging, yellow-tan, cortical tumor measuring 4.8 × 4.6 × 4.0 cm. The tumor showed patchy areas of dark-brown to dark-red pigmentation and focal necrosis. There was no evidence of extracapsular extension. Surgical margins were grossly free of tumor.
Routine H&E sections of tumor demonstrated a nested arrangement of epithelioid cells with clear-to-eosinophilic granular cytoplasm . Patchy, granular, brown pigment was identified that stained by Fontana-Masson technique . Nuclei were slightly irregular with vesicular chromatin and evident nucleoli . Noncaseating, sarcoid-like epithelioid granulomas with an accompanying lymphocytic infiltrate and numerous giant cells were frequent . Giant cells were often associated with psammomatous calcifications and occasional calcifications with the appearance of Schaumann (conchoidal) bodies . Rare foci with a palisading histiocytic infiltrate and a central core of necrobiotic material were also seen . Giant cells also focally contained refractile, nonpolarizable foreign material.
The immunohistochemical features of the tumor are demonstrated in Figure and listed in Table . The tumor cells showed patchy immunoreactivity for HMB-45 in a cytoplasmic and membranous pattern , patchy moderate immunoreactivity for progesterone receptor , diffuse nuclear staining for TFE3 and patchy but strong, membranous positivity with C-kit/CD117 . Cathepsin K and focal E-cadherin staining were also seen. Tumor cells were negative for all epithelial and renal tubule markers including pan-cytokeratin (CK), epithelial membrane antigen, BerEP-4, CD10, CK34βE12, CK8/18, CK7, and carbonic anhydrase IX. Tumor cells were also negative for markers of muscle differentiation including smooth muscle actin, muscle specific actin, and desmin and negative for vimentin and PAX-8 . Periodic acid-Schiff stain demonstrated abundant, diastase-susceptible glycogen within tumor cells. Prussian blue demonstrated stainable iron predominantly within giant cells in foci of granulomatous inflammation and calcification.
Break-apart FISH analysis showed evidence of TFE3 rearrangement with 60% of cells displaying a split signal (study performed by Dr. Pedram Argani and Johns Hopkins Reference Laboratories).