A 29-year-old male was admitted to the hospital due to “the amputation of the fingertips of the right index, middle, and ring fingers caused by a heavy object compression 3 h ago”. The admission examination revealed that the right index, middle, and ring fingers were completely severed at the 1/2 plane of the nail bed, with irregular sections, severe contusion, and pollution. The X-ray examination showed comminuted fractures of the distal phalanges of the right index, middle, and ring fingers. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with multiple severed fingertips in the right hand (Tamai Zone 1) .
Treatment process: The patient underwent debridement, vascular exploration, and replantation of the right index, middle, and ring fingertips under emergency general anesthesia. During surgery, it was found that the right-hand index, middle, and ring fingers were completely severed at a distance of 1/2 of the nail bed plane. The wound surface was irregular, with severe contusion and contamination. Extensive bruises were observed on the severed finger body. After debridement and observation under the microscope, avulsion injuries were identified. The digital artery was severed at the distal end of the arcuate artery and avulsed 5 mm toward the proximal cardiac segment. Under the microscope, debridement was performed, and the phalanx was shortened by about 3 mm. The fracture was fixed with a Kirschner wire. After the proximal digital artery was detected and the severed end was trimmed by 2 mm, it was found that the blood spurt was good. Through the exploration of the blood vessels in the severed finger body, an arcuate artery was detected at the central position of the finger body on the palmer side. The arcuate artery was found to be avulsed by 0.5 cm from the proximal segment. However, after the severed end was trimmed by 2 mm, the lumen was still acceptable. In the exploration under a 30x microscope, the diameter of the artery was measured to be about 0.5 mm. The end-to-end anastomosis of the arcuate artery was performed using super microsurgery, and 6–8 stitches were applied to the anastomosis under a 30 × microscope. The replantation was performed in the order of the index, middle, and ring fingers, with each finger anastomosed with one artery and no vein. The surgery continued for 5 h . After surgery, the nail bed was bled to eliminate the reflux.
Post-operative treatment: The patient received anti-inflammatory, spasmolytic, and anticoagulant treatment. Antibiotic drugs (1.0 g of cefalexin) were administered twice daily for a total of 3 days; anticoagulant drugs (0.4 ml of low molecular weight heparin) were administered subcutaneously once a day for a total of 5 days. After surgery, there was blood leakage at the nail bed, and regular dressing changes were performed without blood transfusion treatment.
Treatment effect: All three fingers of the patient survived after surgery. The appearance of these fingers was favorable 3 months after surgery, and the flexion and extension of these fingers were normal. Eventually, the patient achieved excellent Chen's hand function scores .