A 58-year-old female has sustained bilateral PHF in February 2018 due to electrocution. She was treated with ORIF with locking plate of both proximal humeri in a single stage.
At 4-month follow-up, the left side fracture has united but on the right side, there was non-union with collapse of head and penetration of screw . The patient is symptomatic with pain and inability to lift her right shoulder. The patient was advised computed tomography(CT) scan with 3D reconstruction of the right shoulder and nerve conduction studies to assess the deltoid function. After pre-operative evaluation, the patient was planned for reverse shoulder arthroplasty.
Under interscalene block, implant removal was done. There was posterior glenoid erosion due to screw penetration and glenoid was smaller than normal with a size of 2.7cm (superoinferior) × 1.72cm (anteroposterior). During drilling for the central peg, there was an iatrogenic glenoid fracture which was undisplaced. Due to the fracture, the procedure was abandoned, and we decided to treat the glenoid fracture conservatively with immobilization . Reverse shoulder replacement was deferred till glenoid fracture union.
After 4 months, a CT scan with 3D reconstruction of the right shoulder was done and glenoid fracture union was confirmed. Definitive RTSA is planned. However, the anticipated problems were (1) small size glenoid and difficulty to find enough space for the central screw and at least two peripheral screws. (2) As the glenoid vault was narrow, precise placement of the central screw to have good bone purchase was a challenge.
The patients glenoid is 3D printed for accurate assessment. Patient-specific jig is 3D printed based on required position and depth of central peg. Mock surgery was done with the 3D printed jig on the 3D printed glenoid to assess the accuracy of position, direction, and depth of the central peg. Preoperatively, we templated base plate on the patient 3D glenoid bone model and decided to use BIOMET comprehensive reverse shoulder system with mini base plate.
The custom-made jigs were ETO (Ethylene Oxide) sterilized and used intraoperatively for making the central hole in the glenoid to find a good position and direction of central peg to accommodate a good length of the 6.5mm central screw . Glenoid reaming was done and a 25mm mini base plate with peg of outer diameter 11mm and length of 8mm was used. A 6.5mm central screw with 35mm length was used. Two peripheral screws of 4.75mm size with length of 25mm and 20mm, respectively, were used to fix the base plate. The remaining part of surgery went uneventful . The stability and range of motion were assessed to be satisfactory intraoperatively. CT scan with 3D reconstruction was done in immediate post-operative period and at 3-month follow-up. It is found that 2.27 cm length of the central screw , and 1.57 cm and 1.59 cm length of the two peripheral screws(, ) were inside the glenoid vault and are in the exact position as desired. On regular follow-up, the patient has a stable shoulder with active forward elevation of 110°, lateral elevation of 90°, and an external rotation of 10° at 1-year follow-up .