A 21-year-old female (G1P0) with a monochorionic monoamniotic singleton pregnancy and a BMI of 21.5 kg/m2 had regular obstetric examinations since becoming pregnant, and all foetal indicators were in the normal range. The patient had no previous history of any underlying disease or other medical conditions. At the 12th week after natural conception, the patient began to experience mild, right-sided, low back pain without radiating pain or fever and had stable vital signs; conservative treatment was recommended after consultation at the local hospital. At the 20th week, the patient had recurrent right-sided lumbago, chills, and high fever, so she visited the local hospital again and was diagnosed with right ureteral calculi with hydronephrosis and urinary tract infection after urological ultrasound . An obstetric ultrasound showed the following: a mid-uterine pregnancy, a single live foetus, a foetal biparietal diameter of 50 mm, a head circumference of 173 mm, an amniotic fluid depth of 40 mm, and a heart rate of 148 bpm. The above symptoms were treated with intravenous magnesium sulphate (MgSO4), imipenem cystatin anti-infection therapy, symptomatic hypothermia, etc. The above symptoms did not improve, so ureteroscopic drainage with an F5 double “J” tube was performed immediately under local anaesthesia. After the operation, the patient’s back pain was relieved, but she developed irritability, persistent hyperthermia, an accelerated heart rate, and decreased blood pressure. Uroseptic shock was considered, and respiratory distress worsened after 18 h of resuscitation. She was urgently transferred to the hospital after tracheal intubation. Physical examination showed the following: a temperature of 35.5℃, a pulse of 127 bpm, a breathing rate of 18 bpm (ventilator-assisted breathing), an oxygen saturation rate of 100%, and deep coma, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 1/1/T; blood pressure was not measured. Both pupils had diminished light reflexes, petechiae were scattered on the skin, the abdomen was bulging; the patient had clear uterine contours, no tension or pressure pain, no contractions, a uterine height of 28 cm, bilateral lower extremity oedema, and no catheter. The foetus was in an ROA position, and the foetal heart rate was 0 bpm. Laboratory tests showed the following: a WBC count of 19.58*109/L, an N count of 0.85%, a CRP level of 31.10 mg/L, an ALT level of 1240 U/L, an AST level of 5863 U/L, an Scr level of 110 µmol/L, a PT of 35.20 s, an APTT of 135.50 s, a Tn level of 712.90 ng/L, and a urinary WBC count of 761 cells/µL. Echocardiography showed reduced motion in all phases of the left ventricular wall and a left ventricular EF of 18–24%. Obstetric ultrasound showed a midterm, singleton pregnancy and foetal death. Ultrasound of the thoracic and abdominal cavities showed large bilateral effusions in the thoracic and abdominal cavities; urological ultrasound showed no significant abnormalities in the sonogram of either kidney. The preliminary diagnosis was uroseptic shock, DIC, and MODS.