A 54-year-old right hand dominant Caucasian male cabinet maker was referred for evaluation and treatment of a left distal biceps tendon rupture that occurred 22 months before initial orthopedic evaluation. The patient reported that a heavy door to be installed at his job site fell toward him. He reached out with his left arm and tried to catch the door. As he did so, he felt an immediate sharp pain and tearing sensation in his left elbow. Over the next week, he noted the development of significant swelling and ecchymosis in the left forearm and elbow. He reported that injury to his employer, but was not referred for medical attention. He continued working despite the swelling and pain, relying mostly on his dominant arm to perform his job duties. Over the next several months, the patient noted increasing weakness of elbow flexion and supination and increasing deformity of his left biceps relative to the right side. On presentation, he reported he was unable to lift objects weighing more than 1—pounds and he was not able to flex or supinate his forearm without pain and weakness. He also reported muscle spasm in the left bicep muscle and significant atrophy of the left biceps muscle compared to the right. His main complaint was a profound weakness, specifically with supination, and to a lesser degree with elbow flexion, to the point where he was forced to rely on his right arm for both work-related activities and activities of daily living. He denied any prior history of elbow pain or weakness before his injury. Physical examination of the left upper extremity revealed an obvious deformity of the biceps with significant proximal retraction and atrophy of the muscle belly relative to the opposite side . Maximum biceps circumference was 32.5 cm in the right arm compared to 29.5 cm in the left arm in the resting position. Palpation revealed tenderness over the biceps muscle belly, as well as over the antecubital fossa. There was also tenderness to palpation over the proximal radius and the radial tuberosity. The biceps tendon was not palpable at the musculotendinous junction or in the antecubital fossa. Range of motion (ROM) of the elbow was symmetric from 0 to 135° of flexion bilaterally. The patient reported pain with active but not passive ROM of the left elbow. He did not report pain with active pronation or supination of the forearm. Pronation and supination were90°, respectively, and were symmetric bilaterally. Strength testing revealed 3/5 strength with left elbow flexion and 3/5 strength with left elbow supination. Spasm of the biceps brachii was noted with attempted elbow flexion and supination against resistance. Sensory testing to light touch and pinprick revealed decreased sensation in the medial aspect of the forearm extending from the elbow to the distal 1/3 of the medial aspect of the forearm. Sensation on the lateral side of the forearm was intact. Anteroposterior, oblique, and lateral radiographs of the left elbow were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the left arm showed a chronic left distal biceps tendon rupture with 17 cm of retraction of the biceps tendon proximally. The retracted stump of the tendon was visualized at the junction of the middle and distal one-third of the humerus, surrounded by edema. There was also some evidence of lateral epicondylitis as well as an interstitial tear of the common extensor origin of the forearm involving 50% of the tendon thickness. An MRI of the elbow had not been obtained. Pre-operative assessment of elbow function utilizing Mayo Elbow Performance Index(MEPI) and disability of arm, shoulder, and hand questionnaire (DASH) [, ] was measured and compared with post-operative values used to evaluate clinical outcome. In the context of the patient’s symptoms, and in conjunction with the clinical and radiographic findings, surgical reconstruction utilizing Achilles tendon allograft augmentation through a two-incision anterior approach was recommended.