We report the case of a 71-year-old Caucasian diabetic man with severe diabetic neuropathy who was diagnosed with stage IIIA IgG λ MM in 2004. He was initially treated with three cycles of vincristine, doxorubicin and dexamethasone, followed by high-dose melphalan and autologous stem-cell transplantation, which resulted in a partial response. His monoclonal IgG had dropped from 65 g/L before treatment to 11 g/L after transplantation. In 2007, a second-line chemotherapy treatment (melphalan and prednisone, six cycles) for a relapse characterized by diffuse spinal involvement and an increase in monoclonal IgG (22 g/L) stabilized the disease. His neuropathy had precluded treatment with thalidomide or bortezomib. Eight months after the second-line chemotherapy, an irradiation to the T10-L1 vertebrae (30 Gy) was undertaken for symptomatic, localized bone involvement. Ten months later, an increase in his level of IgG (34 g/L), combined with widespread bone pain and a worsening of his general condition, led to the introduction of high-dose steroids.
After a week of steroid treatment, he was admitted to our hospital for the first time with chest pain and dyspnea. He was febrile (38.4°C) and his inflammatory parameters were increased (C-reactive protein 91 mg/L). A urinary test for the Legionella pneumophila antigen was positive and a computed tomography (CT) scan showed trilobar consolidation and a bilateral pleural effusion. A heterogeneous solid mass extending from the retroperitoneal to the peritoneal spaces provided evidence for the progression of the MM. At the time, priority was given to the treatment of the pulmonary infection and he recovered after three weeks of oral levofloxacin.
Shortly after the antibiotic therapy was discontinued, he presented with sudden hematemesis and melena, requiring fifteen 500 ml units of packed red cells, in total, over a period of twenty days. His platelet count and coagulation parameters were normal. A bleeding, ulcerated jejunal mass was revealed by an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and biopsies showed an infiltration of the intestinal mucosa by neoplastic plasma cells producing monoclonal λ light chains . Despite the active bleeding, a third-line therapy with lenalidomide (25 mg daily) and dexamethasone (40 mg once-weekly) was initiated; the lenalidomide was given in three-week cycles followed by a one-week break [,]. An excellent response was achieved after the first cycle: his paraprotein levels dropped to 10 g/L and there was no recurrence of the hematemesis or melena. His general condition improved rapidly and he was discharged after the second cycle had commenced. A repeat CT four months later showed a dramatic shrinkage of the retroperitoneal mass . This response lasted for a total of 10 months and resulted in an excellent quality of life for the patient during the whole period. He declined further treatment at retroperitoneal progression and died a few weeks later.