A 72-year-old Caucasian (white) man with a history of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), immunoglobin M (IgM) monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), and chronic back pain secondary to osteoarthritis presented with dyspnea and a left pleural effusion. His social history was notable for a 60 pack-year cigarette smoking, and he had cut down to five cigarettes a day after diagnosis of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL). He denied any significant past alcohol abuse, illicit drug abuse, or prescription drug abuse and reported consuming a beer or two on rare social occasions. Our patient was adopted so he is unaware of any past family history in regard to his parents. His brother has high blood pressure; otherwise he reported no other known malignancy or cardiopulmonary disease in the family. He worked as a mechanic and retired 20 years ago. He denied any known environmental exposures or allergies. Home medications included a daily probiotic, florastor 250 mg 2 tablets once daily, and acetaminophen/oxycodone – 325 mg/5 tablets once a day as needed for severe back pain. Our patient explained that he took opiate pain medication two to three times a week. Seven years prior, a bone marrow (BM) biopsy had revealed DLBCL, stage IVB, and he achieved complete remission (CR) with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone (R-CHOP). Two years prior, he was diagnosed with monoclonal IgM kappa MGUS and BM biopsy revealed B-cell lymphoma with plasmacytic differentiation (10% of the marrow cellularity). The differential diagnosis at this time included LPL and marginal zone lymphoma. Given that he was asymptomatic at this time, he was monitored without treatment.
In the Emergency Department (ED), his vital signs were a pulse of 88 beats per minute, his blood pressure was 145/62, and temperature was 98.7 degrees Fahrenheit. His oxygen saturation was 95% on room air and he was mildly tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute. At physical examination, he appeared well, he was well nourished, awake, and in no apparent distress. An ear, nose, mouth and throat examination showed clear nasal mucosa and normal mouth mucosa. His head was atraumatic/normocephalic. His heart rate was normal, with a regular rhythm, heart sounds were S1, S2, and there were no murmurs, rubs or gallops. There were rales in his left lung base without wheeze or rhonchi. His abdomen was soft, non-distended, and non-tender. His lumbar spine showed a mild reduction in range of motion. He showed superficial bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy. He was alert and oriented × 4, with no focal deficits, and no motor or sensory deficits. His CN II-XII were intact, extremities showed no cyanosis or edema, and his skin was dry, intact, with no rash. Our patient was given one ipratropium bromide/albuterol nebulizer treatment and two doses of morphine 1 mg for back pain. During the admission, our patient received tramadol 50 mg once for back pain and required no other medication. His complete blood count showed a white blood cell count of 6.2 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 13.8 g/dL, platelet count of 156 × 109/L with normal differential. The complete metabolic panel showed sodium of 141 mEq/L, potassium of 3.8 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen of 18 mg/dL and creatinine of 1.0 mg/dL, glucose of 95 mg/dL, calcium of 9.2, albumin 3.8 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 23 IU/L, and alanine aminotransferase of 32 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase of 46, and total bilirubin of 0.6. The urinalysis was within normal limits with no evidence of hematuria, pyuria, nitrates were not detected, and there were no bacteria. A computed tomography scan of his chest , abdomen, and pelvis showed layering left pleural effusion and para-aortic retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy extending to the iliacs and superficial inguinal nodes. Pleural fluid (PF) cytology was positive for malignant cells consistent with B-cell lymphoma and positive for MYD88 L265P mutation.
PF flow cytometry showed monoclonal kappa B-cell population with moderate CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD38 expression .
Inguinal lymph node biopsy showed lymphoplasmacytic, monoclonal B-cell population, CD20-positive, CD5-negative, CD10-negative B-cells, consistent with LPL/WM .
In comparison to his BM biopsy 2 years prior, the current study shows an increase in marrow involvement by B-cell lymphoma with plasmacytic differentiation. The findings in conjunction with IgM monoclonal paraprotein favor LPL, and the positive MYD88 L265P mutation analysis supports this impression. Congo red stain was negative for amyloid .
The pleural effusion recurred post-thoracentesis and 420 mg ibrutinib was initiated, but due to intolerance with nausea and vomiting, required a dose reduction to 240 mg. He achieved a lasting CR as defined by National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines . Seven months after initial presentation to the ED, he remains in CR and is tolerating a reduced dose of imantinib without any side effects.