A 71-year-old woman was referred to us due to elevated serum CA125 (184 U/mL). She had undergone hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 8 years previously due to SEIC and multiple leiomyomas . The SEIC lesion had been confined to the endometrium ; however, peritoneal cytology was borderline (Class IIIb, atypical glandular cells). She had undergone periodic surveillance without postoperative chemotherapy. An elevated serum CA125 level was detected for the first time 8 years after hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Computed tomography revealed a 5 × 4 cm cystic lesion in the abdominal cavity. A thorough medical workup denied any possible primary lesions in the body except for that in the peritoneum. The patient was suspected to either have primary peritoneal carcinoma or recurrent SEIC. Tumor debulking surgery was performed, and the cystic lesion and one disseminated nodule were resected. Inside of the cyst, papillary tumor proliferation was observed . The patient received 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy, and complete remission has been achieved for 12 months.
Microscopically, peritoneal tumor cells had a morphologic appearance of high-grade serous carcinoma. The tumor cells proliferated in either gland-like or exophytic papillary patterns. Slit-like spaces were observed. Tumor cells had pleomorphic nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm, and the cyst wall was composed of a hyalinized membrane lined by one or a few epithelial cells. Although papillary tumors in the cyst arose continuously from the inner lining cells, it was difficult to determine by histology whether the peritoneal lesion was primary serous carcinoma or recurrent SEIC. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the peritoneal carcinoma was diffusely positive for cytokeratin 7, p53, and PAX 8, and was partially positive for WT-1, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PgR).
We then reviewed the uterus and adnexa resected 8 years previously. Although the fallopian tubes and ovaries were not meticulously cut at 2-mm intervals, no malignant signs were present in the adnexa. The tubal mucosa and ovarian surface were normal in size and morphology, with atrophic features. Neither intraepithelial carcinoma/dysplasia nor disseminated carcinoma was detectable in the adnexa. The inner surface of the uterine endometrium was distorted due to submucosal leiomyoma. Neither gross endometrial lesions nor polyps were identified. Atrophic normal endometrium was detected adjacent to the SEIC, and the SEIC was distributed in a noninvasive manner. No lymphovascular space invasion was observed in the resected organs. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that these glands were diffusely positive for p53 and PAX8, and negative for WT-1, ER, and PgR. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 70 %. The presence of a p53 signature with an elevated Ki-67 proliferation index was consistent with the histologic diagnosis of SEIC.
The patient did not have any medical history associated with familial cancer, such as hereditary breast ovarian carcinoma syndrome. Although 8 years had passed with a disease-free condition, possible metastatic carcinoma from the SEIC could not be completely denied. To investigate whether the two lesions were independent or represented metastasis from one site to another, SEIC and peritoneal carcinoma cells were microdissected, respectively. Written informed consent for molecular analysis of the surgical specimens was obtained from the patient. DNA of each lesion was extracted. Exons 5–8 of p53 and exons 8–9 of FBXW7 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction. The SEIC was revealed to have a p53 mutation at p.M169T, whereas the peritoneal carcinoma had a mutation at p.R273H . These mutations were mutually exclusive. No mutations in exons 8–9 of FBXW7 were detected in either tumors.