A 67-year-old man with history of mechanic Bentall procedure 19 years earlier presented to the emergency department with acute respiratory distress. The examination revealed a severe increase in blood pressure (180/100 mmHg), along with severe respiratory failure and a heart rate of 130 b.p.m. Bilateral lung crackles were detected, without significant bipedal oedema. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and bilateral pulmonary congestion. Laboratory tests showed normal electrolytes, mildly impaired renal function (creatinine 1.3 mg/dL), and a complete blood count (white cells 11 × 109/L, red cells 4.7 ×1012/L, platelet 250 × 109/L). Blood cultures were negative. After the initial conservative management with diuretic and non-invasive ventilation failed, the patient was sedated and intubated due to the persistent severe respiratory failure .
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed moderate biventricular dysfunction, a well-functioning mechanical aortic valve (mean gradient 5.5 mmHg, maximum velocity 1.7 m/s, Doppler velocity index 0.7), and a ruptured saccular aneurysm with a large, continuous, and holosystolic flow in the main pulmonary artery, originating in the aorta, and highly suspicious of an APF.
Further assessment with transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) confirmed the presence of a voluminous pseudoaneurysm of the aortic root communicating with the left coronary sinus and with the pulmonary artery causing an APF. Doppler assessment confirmed continuous forward flow from the ascending aorta to the pulmonary trunk .
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) demonstrated normal coronary arteries and a corrected excursion of the mechanic leaflet of the aortic valve. The presence of a broad supravalvular aortic pseudoaneurysm (maximum dimension 5 × 3 × 4.6 cm) communicating with the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) was confirmed, along with the evidence of an APF located just anterior to the origin of the left main coronary artery and extending just before the junction of the main pulmonary artery with the right pulmonary artery (diameter 10 mm). The fistula was associated with a left-to-right holosystolic shunt resulting in dilated pulmonary arteries and pulmonary hyper flow .
The patient underwent surgical correction of the aortic pseudoaneurysm with a tubular prosthesis, a composite Dacron graft, direct reimplantation of left main coronary artery into the interposition graft (Cabrol graft–left main anastomosis), and closure of the APF with a heterologous pericardial patch.
He experienced improvement in respiratory exchanges with no residual APF and left-to-right shunt and normalized pulmonary flow, leading to extubation from the orotracheal tube. Additionally, there was improvement in haemodynamic status and recovery of cardiac function, resulting in the discontinuation of inotropic support .