A 33 year old woman of Asian origin was admitted to our Colorectal Unit with a one day history of absolute constipation and haematochesia. This was associated with a one week history of emesis that had gradually increased in severity. The patient was complaining of a one month history of generalised colicky abdominal pain. On the day of admission, the pain was described as severe and was scored as 10 out of 10. The constipation had commenced a month prior following her menses and had insidiously increased in severity. The patient's past medical history included three uncomplicated Caesarean sections and was otherwise unremarkable. At the time of admission, she was taking the oral contraceptive pill. She was a non-smoker and drank alcohol very occasionally. There was no family history of bowel cancer or inflammatory bowel disease. On examination the patient was comfortable at rest, haemodynamically stable and afebrile. Inspection revealed a distended abdomen with an obvious Pfannenstiel scar. On palpation, there was generalised tenderness with no rigidity or rebound tenderness. No herniae were found. Auscultation revealed tinkling bowel sounds. Per rectal examination demonstrated soft stool. Laboratory tests revealed a raised white cell count of 12700/mm3, a normal haemoglobin of 13.6 g/dL and an elevated C-reactive protein of 186 mg/dL. The arterial blood gas demonstrated a mild metabolic alkalosis with a pH of 7.461 and a base excess of 1.4. A urine dipstick and pregnancy test were both unremarkable. A supine abdominal radiograph showed dilated loops of small bowel. A CT abdomen/pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast was performed. This was reported as showing small bowel obstruction with a transition point at the terminal ileum which was thickened and stenosed. The CT appearances were suggestive of either Crohn's disease or Tuberculosis. The patient was treated conservatively with nasogastric suction and intravenous fluids. The patient initially responded well eventually regaining bowel function. However, the patient then suddenly redeveloped signs and symptoms of obstruction. Due to a rapid deterioration in the patient's condition a histological diagnosis could not be achieved prior to surgery. After obtaining informed consent from the patient, an emergency lower midline laparotomy was performed. Intra-operatively a dilated proximal small bowel was found with one constricting lesion affecting the ileocaecal junction which seemed to arise from the base of the appendix. The macroscopic appearances were suggestive of a malignancy. No other lesions were found. A right hemicolectomy was performed with a side to side stapled ileocolic anastomosis. Histological examination of the specimen was found to show a macroscopic the ileocaecal valve was compressed by outside mass and the mucosa showed an 8 mm fibrotic nodule occupying the appendiceal base which was on microscopy diagnostic of extensive endometriosis (see figures &). The patient made an uneventful post-operative recovery and was discharged. At outpatient follow up, the patient had not experienced any further symptoms and was well.