A 78 year-old male presented to the emergency department with a ten day history of mild abdominal pain, nausea, and distention, worsening over the last day. He did not recall having a bowel movement for at least three days. His past medical history was significant for hypertension, gout, osteoarthritis, and an eighty-pack year smoking history. He had no prior surgeries and took only a blood pressure medication. He guarded during physical exam, and his abdomen was noted to be quiet, distended, and tender to palpation, but without rigidity or peritoneal signs. His laboratory evaluation was unremarkable. The emergency department obtained a CT scan of his abdomen and pelvis, which demonstrated a large amount of free air and fluid, and a mass could be visualized within the lumen of the cecum. A surgical consultation was emergently obtained .
After fluid resuscitation, he was brought to the operating room for exploration, where we encountered a minimal amount of fecal contamination and perforation of the cecum. A six centimeter non-obstructive mass and a hard mesenteric nodule were found in the cecum just distal to the site of perforation. The remainder of the colon was palpated and noted to be full of hard stool but otherwise without obvious abnormalities. We proceeded with copious irrigation of the peritoneal cavity and performed a right hemicolectomy with primary anastamosis without difficulty.
Post-operatively, the patient was extubated but progressed slowly. Final radiologic interpretation of the CT obtained on arrival additionally noted a mass in the tail of the pancreas, a finding the surgical team did not detect on the CT prior to surgery or grossly at exploration. Pathologic evaluation found that the cecal mass contained only tubulovillous adenomatous components and the perforated area demonstrated localized mucosal ischemia but had relatively sharp margins. Well-differentiated metastatic adenocarcinoma was found within the mesenteric nodule, without lymphatic components . The primary tumor responsible for this metastatic nodule was not contained within the surgical specimen. The patient had a slow return of bowel function consistent with ileus, but his abdominal distention increased dramatically overnight on post-operative day five. A repeat CT demonstrated colonic distention proximal to a now apparent mass at the splenic flexure, with distal colon decompression, concerning for a large bowel obstruction . The patient returned to the operating room for reexploration and resection of the obstructive distal colon mass missed at initial operation.
At the second exploration, the entire colon was mobilized, and this time, a mass could clearly be palpated at the splenic flexure of the colon. Continued mobilization revealed that this mass involved the splenic hilum and tail of the pancreas. An en bloc resection of the pancreatic tail, spleen, and left colon was completed without difficulty, and primary anastomosis was completed . The patient was extubated postoperatively and progressed more quickly this time. Final pathologic evaluation of the second specimen was surprising, consistent with mucinous pancreatic adenocarcinoma, extending into the splenic flexure of the colon (T3, N0, M1). At three-month follow up, the patient is doing well living in an extended care facility.