A 48-year-old woman presented to our local emergency department whilst on holiday. She had been experiencing a month of increasing exertional dyspnoea associated with left-sided chest pain radiating to her shoulder, neck, and arm culminating in symptoms at rest. She had also experienced 48 h of vomiting and rigors.
Following the recent sudden death of a first-degree relative, the patient was diagnosed with Brugada syndrome. She subsequently received a single lead ICD indicated for the primary prevention of ventricular arrhythmias (see Timeline section). Admission medications were mirtazapine 30 mg once a day, lactulose, paracetamol, ibuprofen, and codeine when required for post-operative pain. She has never smoked and alcohol intake was negligible.
On examination, the patient was pale and deep inspiration was reduced due to pleuritic pain. She was apyrexial with a regular pulse of 69 b.p.m., blood pressure of 103/70 mmHg, and normal oxygen saturation on room air. Auscultation revealed bi-basal reduced air entry. Her heart sounds were normal with no additional murmur and jugular venous pressure did not appear elevated. A pericardial rub was not documented. There was no peripheral oedema and no signs of deep vein thrombosis. Abdominal examination was unremarkable. It was noted that power in the left arm was reduced due to pain.
Chest X-ray showed increased cardiothoracic ratio with bi-basal pleural effusions and patchy bilateral bronchopneumonic changes suspicious of congestive cardiac failure. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator lead position appeared low . The 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm at a rate of 96 b.p.m., there was T-wave inversion noted in leads III and aVF, with isolated 3 mm ST-elevation in lead V2, consistent with a Brugada pattern . Serial electrocardiograms did not demonstrate dynamic changes.
Initial laboratory results were significantly abnormal. There was evidence of a microcytic anaemia with a haemoglobin of 76 g/L (110–150 g/L), mean corpuscular volume of 77.2 fL (83–100 fL), elevated C-reactive protein of 63 mg/L (0–10 mg/L). Liver function tests were deranged with albumin 33 g/L (35–50 g/L), bilirubin 30 µmol/L (0–21 µmol/L), gamma-glutamyl transferase 61 IU/L (12–43 IU/L), and alanine aminotransferase 122 IU/L (<35 IU/L). Iron and transferrin saturations were low [2 µmol/L (7–30 mol/L), 2.8% (20–50%), respectively]. N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide was 234 pg/mL (<400 pg/mL). Prothrombin time was prolonged at 15.7 s (<13 s).
Diagnostic thoracocentesis demonstrated blood-stained fluid. A CT scan of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis then confirmed bilateral pleural effusions accompanied by predominantly left-sided subsegmental atelectasis of both lower lung lobes. A moderate pericardial effusion was seen. The ICD lead position was not commented on in the initial CT report .
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator interrogation revealed no shocks and that the lead was failing to sense appropriately. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated penetration of the right ventricular lead through the right ventricular apex into the pericardium . A large global pericardial effusion was present measuring ∼3.5 cm in diameter without evidence of cardiac tamponade. Left ventricular function was normal ( and ).
Early interventions included the administration of intravenous fluids, amoxicillin, analgaesia, and the transfusion of red blood cells. Once the diagnosis was confirmed, aeromedical transfer to the linked tertiary cardiac centre was performed without complication. There, the patient underwent immediate pericardiocentesis and right ventricular lead explant under general anaesthesia guided by transoesophageal echocardiography and with cardiothoracic surgical stand-by. The patient opted against the implantation of a new lead at the time of the procedure. A total volume of 1000 mL of blood-stained fluid was drained from the pericardium. Post-procedure echocardiography confirmed resolution of the pericardial effusion. Local cardiology follow-up was planned at the time of discharge. At the time of writing, the patient-reported resolution of symptoms and is planning on discussing the implantation of a new system with her cardiologist.