A 58-year-old Caucasian female presented to our clinic with a right thyroid nodule associated to compressive symptoms for 18 months duration, including pressure on her right neck when lying flat and voice changes. She also complained of dry cough while eating and difficulty swallowing solid foods. Unexplained weight loss, fever, diaphoresis, fatigue, anorexia, dyspnea and neck pain were denied.
Pertinent personal medical history included obstructive sleep apnea with nocturnal continuous positive airway pressure use, asthma, and gastroesophageal reflux for the past 3 years. She had no prior history of neck surgery or external radiation. Family history included various types of cancer - pancreatic cancer in her father, lung cancer in her uncle, breast cancer in her mother and sister, and papillary thyroid cancer in her maternal aunt.
A firm mass moving with deglutition was palpated over the right anterior neck on physical exam. There was no tracheal deviation. Voice was clear with full projection, and vocal cords were mobile with normal appearance on flexible laryngoscopy. An elevated TSH (7.36 mIU/L), detectable thyroid peroxidase antibodies (41 IU/mL), and normal free T3 (2.4 pmol/L) and free T4 (1.04 ng/dL) levels were consistent with chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis.
Thyroid ultrasound demonstrated a 5.8 × 2.8 × 3.6 cm right lobe containing two solid hypoechoic, not taller-than-wide thyroid nodules with smooth margins and no echogenic foci, measuring 4.2 cm and 1.8 cm, respectively. Both nodules increased in size during 18-month interval, 1 cm in two dimensions. The left lobe measured 4.3 × 1.4 × 1.3 cm and had no nodules. FNAC was performed at an outside facility (2017), according to the recommendations of the American College of Radiologists for a TIRADS 3 nodule with a growth > 2 mm in two dimensions and over 20% increase in volume. Lymphocytic thyroiditis and absence of malignant cells was reported. A second FNAC prompted by nodule growth revealed similar results 18 months later. Cytology slides review at our institution was concordant.
Cervical and thoracic CT scans were not ordered as the goiter had no substernal extension and there was low suspicion for malignancy on FNAC. Recent esophago-gastroscopy documented no masses or mucosal changes concerning for malignancy.
The patient elected to proceed with a right thyroid lobectomy to relieve her compressive symptoms, after discussing options, including a repeat biopsy. The extent of surgery was planned considering the normal appearance of the left thyroid lobe and absence of nodules on ultrasound, and to minimize her risk for potential surgical complications, including recurrent laryngeal nerve injury and hypoparathyroidism. Surgery was uneventful, she recovered well. Her voice was at baseline and she had no wound complications. Surgical pathology unexpectedly revealed a mixed TL. Overall features were consistent with germinal center subtype DLBCL, rising from a low-grade FL with overexpression of BCL2 and C-MYC. The non-neoplastic areas of thyroid parenchyma were compatible with chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis.
Gross examination revealed a 53 g thyroid lobe measuring 6.3 × 5.2 × 4.0 cm, containing a 5.8 cm tumor extending to the inked capsule. Microscopic evaluation showed diffuse infiltrates of large pleomorphic cells, and areas with nodular infiltrate of small sized cells with irregular nuclei. The DLBCL infiltrate was estimated at 70% of the tumor while the small cell infiltrate arranged in follicles, composed approximately 30%. The lymphoma did not show extension beyond the boundaries of the thyroid lobe. Immunohistochemistry (IHC, ), revealed CD20 + B cells which co-expressed CD10, BCL6 and BCL2, but not cyclin 1. Ki-67 index was 20% in the FL and 90% in the DLBCL component. C-MYC immunostaining was approximately 40% in the DLBCL area. C-MYC gene rearrangement was not identified by interphase fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH).
The patient was referred to Oncology for staging and treatment. Bone marrow biopsy showed no tumor involvement. Initial fluodeoxyglucose-18 positron emission tomography (FDG-18 PET) showed an isolated hypermetabolic area in the ipsilateral lower chest and no avid lesions in the abdomen or pelvis, concordant with her cross-sectional imaging. Systemic chemotherapy with rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R−CHOP) was initiated which she tolerated well, followed by involved-field radiotherapy.