A self sufficient 67-year-old postmenopausal, Moroccan woman, with no past medical history of carcinoma, presented to our emergency department with severe mechanical right-sided pain affecting her shoulder with functional limitation. Our patient had a history of primary hyperparathyroidism for the last 15 years, diagnosed on the clinical, laboratory and radiological findings. She also had osteoporosis (T-score at the hip; -3, 3 and T-score at the wrist: -3, 2), but she was not receiving any antiosteoporotic treatment. The patient's shoulder pain began two weeks previously, without any trauma, repetitive stress or trigger factors, and worsened with time. On physical examination her clavicle was tender on palpation, without any swelling or inflammatory signs. She had no systemic symptoms and the rest of the physical examination was normal. A shoulder X-ray showed a medial diaphyseal heterogenous and slightly osteodense bone defect of her right clavicle, with a fracture at the level of the lesion . This was considered malignant and urgently investigated further. An X-ray of her entire skeleton did not find any fracture or abnormalities. A complete blood count was normal, with no evidence of an inflammatory syndrome: erythrocyte sedimentation rate and level of C-reactive protein were normal, there was no abnormal peak on serum proteins electrophoresis, and her liver and kidney function tests were normal. Tests for tumoral markers were negative, a urine analysis for Bence-Jones proteins was negative, and a bone marrow aspiration to exclude lymphoma or myeloma was also normal. However, the levels of bone metabolic markers were disturbed. Her calcium level was high at 108mg/L (normal range: 95mg/L to 105mg/L), the phosphate level was 30mg/L (normal range 25mg/L to 45mg/L), there was an increase in total alkaline phosphatase at 300IU/L (normal range 30IU/L to 100IU/L), urine calcium was 40mg/24 hours (100 to 300mg/24 hours), her serum parathyroid hormone level was 438pg/mL (normal <70pg/mL), and her plasmatic 25- hydroxyvitamin D2D3 was below 6ng/mL (normal range 30 to 50ng/mL). Further diagnostic studies, including a computed tomography scan of her thorax, abdomen and pelvis, were performed to exclude an underlying malignant process but revealed no cancer. An X-ray of her pelvis demonstrated generalized demineralization and a compatible aspect of osteomalacia. A cervical ultrasound found parathyroid hyperplasia. A microbiopsy of the lesion in her clavicle was done. The anatomopathologic examination did not reveal any cancer-related disease.
Osteoporosis and hyperparathyroidism associated with osteomalacia were considered as the potential culprits of the spontaneous clavicle’s fracture in our patient. The fracture was dressed with a figure-of-eight dressing. The patient was treated with vitamin D for the osteomalacia and zoledronic acid for the osteoporosis. Surgical treatment for parathyroid hyperplasia was indicated but our patient refused it. The patient died some time after her diagnosis of unrelated issues.