A 17-year-old girl presented to our hospital on 31 January 2023, with 2 days of intermittent fever, dyspnea, and a maximum temperature of 38.5°C after a surgical operation for a perianal abscess. She had a history of tuberculous pleurisy, which was diagnosed the previous year, and complained of regular anti-tuberculosis treatment for the whole year. At the time of presentation, she was still on the anti-tuberculosis regimen of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol, moxifloxacin, and linezolid. Meanwhile, the girl was infected with COVID-19, which was diagnosed by real-time PCR in December 2022. She denied a history of immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and hepatitis B and C. On 29 January 2023, she received an operation of incision and drainage of a perianal abscess at another hospital, and then the young patient experienced fever with chills, distress, and dyspnea. She came to our hospital for further emergency treatment.
On admission, she complained of obvious dyspnea with a temperature of 37.8°C, a heart rate of 167 per minute, a respiratory rate of 59 per minute, a blood pressure of 132/92 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation in room air of 74%. She was admitted to our respiratory intensive care unit due to critical hypoxia. Physical examination revealed moist rales in both lungs, slight neck rigidity, a positive Kerning’s sign, a positive Brudzinski’s sign, a regional subcutaneous mass with fluctuation in the left lower back, and a perianal wound after the operation. No other abnormal signs were found. Her laboratory results showed elevated white blood cells (15.91 g/L, normal value 4.1–11 g/L) with a mainly increasing count of neutrophils (14.34 g/L, normal value 1.8–8.3 g/L), anemia with decreased hemoglobin (86 g/L, normal value 114–145g/L), elevated C-reactive protein (89.98 mg/L, normal value < 5 mg/L), elevated serum adenosine deaminase (24.1 U/L, normal value < 20 U/L), and decreased CD4-T-lymphocytes (234/uL, normal value 554–1109/uL). The results of HIV infection and hepatitis B and C tests were negative. Considering intermittent fever, sputum smears and sputum and blood cultures of bacteria and fungus were also negative. Her bedside chest radiograph showed diffuse infectious foci in both lungs with a slight bilateral pleural effusion .
Unexpectedly, this patient soon developed grand mal epilepsy with loss of consciousness, a fixed gaze, and rigidity. We immediately operated on the lumbar puncture to obtain a specimen of her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to identify the cause of the epilepsy after the seizure was controlled. Her CSF results showed elevated interleukin-6 (421.70 pg/mL) with normal levels of CSF routine, biochemistry, and adenosine deaminase. Meanwhile, the CSF culture of bacteria was negative. Considering the possibility of tuberculous meningitis, an acid-fast bacilli smear, GeneXpert MTB/RIF, and next-generation sequencing (NGS) of her CSF were detected. Her CSF acid-fast bacilli smear and GeneXpert MTB/RIF were all negative. Simultaneously, her cranial computed tomography (CT) scan showed no abnormalities. Remarkably, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was detected according to the results of NGS, with evidence of high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis (, ). Tuberculous meningitis was confirmed, which led to the young patient’s epilepsy seizure. Combined with her tuberculous pleurisy history and the diffuse foci in both of her lungs, this girl was diagnosed with disseminated tuberculosis involving at least the lungs, pleura, and central system. Considering the girl had moderate anemia, we stopped the linezolid with its main adverse effect of myelosuppression and continued the anti-tuberculosis regimen of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, accompanied by the antibiotic piperacillin/tazobactam, to control pneumonia diagnosed on the bedside radiography. Meanwhile, thymalfasin (thymosin-alpha 1) was also used as an immune system enhancer for the treatment of the immunosuppressed patient with a grossly depressed CD4 T-cell count. The child’s dyspnea subsided, her temperature sustained a normal level, and epilepsy never occurred again. The treatment seemed to be effective and the girl was transferred to the general ward of the respiratory department on 8 February 2023.
Nevertheless, the patient developed acute gastrointestinal bleeding with black tarry stool and severe anemia of 50g/L hemoglobin on the second day in the general ward, and the child complained of obvious left hypogastralgia. A physical examination showed unstable vital signs with a heart rate of 144 per minute, a respiratory rate of 25 per minute, a blood pressure of 98/52 mmHg, and a severe anemic appearance. Immediately, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit again for monitoring and stabilization. Though persistent internal hemostatic treatment was carried out, there was still active gastrointestinal bleeding. Therefore, a gastroscopy and colonoscopy were performed. There was no active bleeding on the gastroscopy, while the colonoscopy revealed multiple hemorrhagic ulcers in the terminal ileum , as well as ulcers in the rectum and anal fistula . Argon plasma coagulation and hemoclip therapy were performed so that the gastrointestinal bleeding was resolved with a significant improvement. Since there was active bleeding in the terminal ileum, we did not get a biopsy of the lesions, which made it difficult to make a differential diagnosis between intestinal tuberculosis and Crohn’s disease. We adjusted the treatment plan by adding the glucocorticoid (dexamethasone sodium phosphate, 5mg/day) for this girl with tuberculous meningitis, which was strongly recommended according to the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines . In the meantime, the anti-tuberculosis regimen was regulated into isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, amikacin (0.2g, I.V., q12 h), and meropenem (0.5g, I.V., q8 h), considering most bacteria and Mycobacterium tuberculosis were sensitive to the beta-lactam antibiotic, which was also recommended by the WHO guidelines for the treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis .
The symptoms apparently subsided after our therapy and nursing care, and her vital signs were maintained at a normal level. Consequently, the patient was transferred to the general ward, where she could undergo chest and abdominal CT scans after the life-threatening stage. Her chest and abdominal CT showed multiple infectious foci and miliary nodules, considering tuberculosis and bacterial pneumonia, bilateral pleural effusion , a low-density lesion in the left lobe of the liver, suspecting hepatic abscess, and slightly high-density and gas-accumulated lesions in bilateral adnexal and subcutaneous encapsulated effusion in the left lower back, considering tuberculosis cold abscess. We considered that the multiple lesions at the different sites originated from disseminated tuberculosis. The girl then underwent percutaneous puncture drainage of the subcutaneous encapsulated abscess, and her pus specimen acid-fast bacilli smear was positive, which established the diagnosis of disseminated tuberculosis. Thus, the girl continued the anti-tuberculosis regimen of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, amikacin, and meropenem, along with dexamethasone. The patient responded well to the treatment, with marked improvement in fever and lymphopenia . She also suffered from a drug-induced liver injury, which interrupted the anti-tuberculosis therapy. After receiving liver function-protecting treatment containing bicyclol and ademetionine, her transaminase recovered to a normal level . She underwent chest and abdominal CT on 6 March 2023, and, encouragingly, the multiple infection foci in both lungs and subcutaneous effusion in the left lower back were reduced . The patient was discharged on 23 March 2023, continuing with an oral anti-tuberculosis regimen of isoniazid (0.3 g/day), rifampicin (0.45 g/day), pyrazinamide (1.0 g/day), and faropenem (0.2 g, T.i.d.). Constructive follow-up is still ongoing, with an obvious absorption of lesions on bilateral lungs in the second month , and we will adjust the anti-tuberculosis regimen based on the therapeutic efficacy and adverse effects of the patient.