Thirty-six-month-old girl; not known to have any medical or congenital illness; presented to our center complaining of persistent solid food dysphagia and regurgitation since the age of 10 months. However, her symptoms worsened over the last three months. The parents deny any history of recurrent choking or aspiration. She had no atopy, and her mother could not link her symptoms to any specific foods. Her drug, family and psychosocial history were irrelevant. Her examination revealed a normal looking child except for growth parameters which were on 5th percentile.
Her basic laboratory investigations were normal. Chest X-Ray was normal. She underwent diagnostic upper endoscopy by consultant pediatrics gastroenterologist (EA) and revealed a stricture at the upper esophagus with dilated pre-stenotic pouch filled with food. A flexible infant scope (Olympus ® 4.9 mm) could not pass through the stricture. Barium swallow was performed and delineated the anatomy of the stricture at the upper esophagus. .
Trial of antegrade esophageal dilatation (using flexible and rigid scopes) under general anesthesia failed at the first time, repeated four weeks later after gastrostomy and retrograde approach also failed by pediatrics surgeon (ZB) and (EA). Due to the fixed stricture and posterior outpouching, chest computed tomography (CT) scan with IV contrast was carried out. and revealed a circumferential soft tissue thickening involving the upper thoracic esophagus more pronounced at its right posterior lateral wall containing multiple rim-enhancing collections; the largest of which measures about 1.1 × 0.6 cm with linear hyperdense material measuring about 1.5 cm causing complete obstruction of the esophagus at this level and compression effect on the trachea which was displaced to the left side. .
The patient underwent thoracotomy by the pediatrics surgeon (ZB)_. An aluminum can tab with reactionary inflammatory mass around it were obstructing the esophagus and found to erode the esophageal wall with intramural elements. Removal of the foreign body along with the mass, partial esophagectomy with primary anastomosis were performed due to relatively wide esophageal perforation with in the inflammatory mass. No postoperative complications were detected. Video 1.
Supplementary video related to this article can be found at .
The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
Retrospectively, the mother recalled a history of chocking episode and vomiting at the age of 10 months, which was not investigated at that time. After recovery, she was able to tolerate oral intake.
She presented two weeks later with dysphagia and regurgitation. Her upper endoscopy revealed re-stricture formation at the esophagectomy site. She underwent multiple sessions of esophageal dilatation using buggies up to 11mm by (EA). Due to the re-stricture the decision was to apply Mitomycin to reduce the need to re-dilatation. Mitomycin C was prepared immediately before application at a concentration of 0.4 mg/ml and applied at the site of dilatation. The last dilatation session was four months ago (6 months postoperatively). The parents were taught about the risk of FBs ingestion and about the importance of notice any episodes of chocking and they were adherent. The patient is doing well; she gained weight and is able to tolerate solid food. Her family were satisfied about the treatment and outcome.