A 75-year-old female Eastern Mediterranean patient with a history of COVID-19 presented to our hospital after experiencing four episodes of hemoptysis with no other associated symptoms. There was no evidence of fever, dyspnea, chest pain, palpitations, or syncopal episodes. The patient had a medical history of smoking, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and coronary artery bypass grafting surgery. The diagnosis of COVID-19 was confirmed in late November 2021 through a SARS-CoV-RNA transcription-mediated amplification test and chest computed tomography (CT) scan . The CT scan showed diffuse pulmonary infiltrates consistent with COVID-19, and no aneurysm was detected at that time. The patient was treated with supplemental oxygen, anticoagulation, and steroids. Four months after the COVID-19 illness, she developed generalized fatigue, a productive cough, and four episodes of hemoptysis with ~50 ml of blood per episode. The patient was referred to our department for symptom management. During the physical examination of the chest, an inspection was made that the chest was symmetrical and there were no external deformities. Further examination revealed normal breath sounds upon auscultation and no masses were detected during palpation. A complete blood count showed a hemoglobin level of 8 g/dl, but liver and renal functions were normal. A computed tomographic pulmonary angiography was performed, which revealed a lesion in the hilum of the left lung measuring 37×52 mm extending to the lower lobe. The lesion showed clear and regular margins in direct contact with the segmental branch of the left PA in the lower left lobe, suggesting the presence of a PAA. The computed tomographic pulmonary angiography also showed multiple areas of consolidations in both lungs . Sputum was negative for acid-fast bacilli, so a bronchoscopy was performed to complete the tuberculosis (TB) study and determine the origin of hemoptysis. Blood was present in the left lower lobe bronchus, and bronchoalveolar lavage was studied with a negative result for TB. Furthermore, an echocardiogram showed normal heart function with an ejection fraction of 55%. Subsequently, surgical intervention was decided upon.
The surgery was performed at a moderately developed public hospital by a thoracic surgeon with 7 years of experience. It was performed after correcting the low hemoglobin level by blood transfusion and reaching a level of hemoglobin 9.5 g/dl. The surgery was carried out through a left lateral thoracotomy in the fifth intercostal space under general anesthesia. The left inferior lobe, including the aneurysm, was resected , after ligating the inferior pulmonary vein and the branches of the left PA. The bronchus of the inferior lobe was also resected, sutured, and a chest tube was inserted. The surgical procedure was executed without any complications or unfavorable outcomes during and post-operation.
Pathological examination revealed foci of a large aneurysm in the inferior lobe of the left lung measuring 5 cm, which was compatible with post-COVID-19 infection. Foci of granuloma with necrosis near the pleura were evident, suggesting the presence of TB, and no atypical cells were seen. The patient received antituberculous drugs (Isoniazid 300 mg, Rifampin 600 mg, pyrazinamide 2 g, and ethambutol 1.2 g daily) for 6 months.
Upon postoperative evaluation, the patient’s hemoptysis was noted to have ceased. Post-operative recovery was well-managed, with special attention given to pain management, mobilization, respiratory care, and nutritional support. The patient was closely monitored during the recovery period to ensure proper healing and minimize any potential complications. Overall, the patient responded well to the postoperative care, and the recovery was uneventful. Following removal of the chest tube, the patient was discharged in a stable condition. A week later, a follow-up chest radiography revealed the presence of a pleural air-fluid level on the left side . The patient was subjected to close monitoring, and a week later, the pleural air-fluid level was observed to have spontaneously resolved, with normal findings noted on a subsequent chest radiography . The patient was followed up for a period of 2 months, during which there was no recurrence of hemoptysis or any indications of postoperative complications. The patient was found to be in good overall health, and no significant pain or discomfort was reported.