A 13-year-old male with no known comorbidities was well until 20 days before admission to the hospital. While cycling back from school he had developed sudden onset of altered sensorium with loss of consciousness. The patient was given cardiopulmonary resuscitation and revived and subsequently intubated. An echocardiogram showed regional wall motion abnormalities in the anterior wall of the left anterior descending artery, suggesting anterior wall myocardial infarction, and an ejection fraction of 40%. He received aspirin and enoxaparin. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed bilateral cortical swelling, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2 hyperintensities in bilateral thalami, posterior putamen with restriction on diffusion-weighted images suggesting hypoxic-ischemic damage . On the 10th day after the first symptom, the patient developed abnormal posturing of all four limbs with hyperextension of the back (Video ). On the 16th day, opisthotonic posturing and abnormal posturing of the limbs worsened with no triggering factors. The patient had one episode of tonic-clonic seizure. He had no prior history of chest pain, palpitation, exertional breathlessness, or syncope. There was no family history of dystonia or any other movement disorders. The patient was examined on the 20th day after the first symptom. On examination, the patient was drowsy and did not respond to painful stimuli. His pupils were equally bilaterally reactive. The oculocephalic reflex was present. There was no autonomic dysfunction.
Investigations revealed a creatine phosphokinase (CPK) value of 1,499 IU/L, which progressively increased to 2,411 IU/L in the next 10 days, and his urine was persistently positive for myoglobin. Serum homocysteine was elevated (24.96 μmol/L). Electroencephalography (EEG) suggested diffuse cerebral dysfunction. A repeat echocardiogram showed left-ventricle segmental hypokinesia and the ejection fraction was 47%.
The patient was first started on intravenous promethazine 25 mg twice daily and haloperidol 2.5 mg four times a day. Owing to a lack of improvement, he was subsequently started on tetrabenazine and then trihexylphenidyl. The patient was then intubated and started on diazepam 5 mg per day, increasing to 15 mg per day. There was a significant improvement with tetrabenazine and trihexyphenidyl; the doses were increased to tetrabenazine 75 mg per day and trihexyphenidyl 18 mg per day in divided doses. He was also started on oral baclofen 20 mg per day and levodopa/carbidopa 110 mg three times a day. The patient was started on adequate rehydration and antipyretics for fever and intravenous levetiracetam for seizure. For cardiac dysfunction, dysfunction, he was treated with dual antiplatelet therapy and digoxin 0.25 mg, half a tablet once daily for five days a week. The QT interval was monitored while the patient was on tetrabenazine and there was no prolongation of the QT interval.
The patient had a significant reduction in generalized dystonia by the ninth day of admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), and showed no opisthotonic or dystonic spasms by the 11th day of ICU care. At discharge, the patient was bed bound, his eyes opened spontaneously, all four limbs moved spontaneously, dystonia was less severe, and there was no speech output. The patient was lost to follow-up 6 months after discharge.