The study was approved by the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee and informed, written consent was obtained from all participants.
The patient under discussion is a 30 year old male, weight lifter with hyper-acute onset chest and back pain. Upon initial evaluation, the patient did not have any manifestation of any phenotypic findings (i.e. iris flocculi, livedo reticularis, aortic valve abnormalities) hinting towards connective tissue disorders or aortic pathology. Based on echocardiography and chest CT findings the patient was diagnosed with a Type A Aortic Dissection with severe aortic valve regurgitation. The patient was then emergently intubated and was transferred to the American Medical Center (AMC) in Nicosia, Cyprus where he had emergency aortic surgery and Bentall procedure. No angiography was performed due to the fact that the patient had aortic dissection and was an emergency. Intraoperative findings showed a 70 mm diameter aortic root aneurysm with dissection extending from the sinotubular junction to the aortic root. The aortic annulus was extensively dilated and the aortic dissection extended down the origin of the left main coronary artery involving also the aortic valve commissures that resulted in severe aortic valve regurgitation. There was no evidence of involvement of the distal ascending aorta and the aortic arch.
Further evaluation of the patient’s family showed that several family members had ascending aortic aneurysms. The patient’s father, a 60-year-old male had an asymptomatic aortic root and ascending aortic aneurysm of 52 mm that also required aortic valve, aortic root and ascending aortic replacement (Bentall procedure). Pre-operatively thefather had CT chest coronary angiography that confirmed the presence and dimensions of the aneurysm and coronary angiography did not show any coronary artery disease. The patient’s mother, a 56-year-old female was also screened with echocardiography that showed ascending aortic dilatation, 42 mm in diameter. Subsequent screening of the siblings, two sisters at the ages of 22 and 34 respectively did not show any abnormalities. Following the genetic screening of the index patient, his parents and his siblings, a follow-up was recommended for both his sisters. Six years after the initial screening of the sisters, the 34-year-old was found to have a mild dilation of the ascending aorta (39 mm) by echocardiography with a 4–5 mm increase in diameter in comparison with the previous echocardiography results. The pedigree of the family is demonstrated in Fig. . The index patient’s and the family’s medical diagnosis and interventions are shown in Table .
To understand any genetic implication in the cause of TAA of this family, targeted sequencing was performed on DNA samples from the father and the son. Whole blood samples were used to extract DNA using the QIAamp Blood Midi Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The TruSight Cardio Sequencing panel (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) which includes 16 genes, the most predominant, with known association to familial aortic aneurysm was initially used and paired-end sequencing was performed on an Illumina Miseq platform at our Institute. Our results showed that the two samples (son and father) had an average depth of coverage of 117x and 108x respectively for the MYH11 region and an average depth of coverage of 135x and 125x for the ACTA2. Raw variants were filtered to include only those variants with a coverage depth greater than 20× and a Quality score greater than 30. The Illumina run generated 94.8% of base calls having >Q30. We followed the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) best practices for variant calling. Sequencing reads were aligned to the human reference genome build GRCh37/hg19 using Burrows Wheeler Aligner (BWA) software. Different GATK programs were used for local realignment and base recalibration and the SAMtools (Sequence Alignment/Map) pipeline was used to retrieve per-base read depth information. Calling was performed using Haplotype Caller from the GATK. The called Small Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) and Insertions and Deletions (InDels) were annotated using the Annotate Variation (ANNOVAR) software. The variants were then filtered using the GATK best practices , focusing on rare (minor allele frequency < 0.05) and known pathogenic variants. MPS results identified a frameshift deletion c.363_367del GAGTC, p.Met121Ilefs*5 in the ACTA2 gene (Genbank transcript ID: NM 001613) and a non-synonymous variant c.3234C > G, p.Ile1078Met in the MYH11 gene (Genbank transcript ID: NM 001040114). In order to predict the pathogenicity of the novel variants, the in silico software of the computational algorithms SIFT (Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant) , PolyPhen2 (Polymorphism Phenotyping) , Mutation Taster , PROVEAN (Protein Variation Effect Analyzer) and VEP (Variant Effect Predictor) were used. All five different prediction tools (SIFT: Deleterious PolyPhen2: Probably Damaging, Mutation Taster: Disease causing, PROVEAN: Deleterious, VEP: High) presented a consistent result describing the p.Met121Ilefs*5 (c.363_367delGAGTC) variant as having a detrimental/deleterious effect. These predictions, suggest that this variant has a significant effect on the function of ACTA2 and the development of TAA. Regarding the p.IIe1078Met (c.3234C > G) variant in the MYH11 gene, PolyPhen2 and PROVEAN prediction tools presented it as being a benign and neutral variant respectively while, VEP, SIFT and Mutation Taster suggested it as being a moderate, deleterious and disease causing variant respectively In addition, Iterative Threading ASSEmbly Refinement (I-TASSER) modeling [–], a protein structure prediction tool, was used to predict the secondary structure of the ACTA2 and MYH11 proteins. The results showed the presence of the amino acids Met121 and Ile1078 respectively, on a helix structure motif . It is difficult to describe the protein function of the regions where these variants occur as the protein structure of ACTA2 and MYH11 is not completely known as yet after performing a search in UniProtKB and Protein Data Bank (PDB).
It is noteworthy that no known pathological sequence variants were identified in the affected individuals we studied. The TruSight Cardio sequencing panel led to the identification of a 5 bp frameshift deletion in the ACTA2 gene (c.363_367del, p.Met121Ilefs*5) which results in a premature stop codon as well as a non-synonymous variant in the MYH11 gene (c.3234C > G:p.I1078M) predicted as deleterious and disease causing by the in silico software of the computational algorithms used. Both variants were absent from public variant databases, such as the dbSNP , 1000 genome dataset , Genome Aggregation Database , and Human Genetic Variation Browser databases. With respect to the MYH11 (c.3234C > G:p.I1078M) it is noteworthy that (c.3234C > T:p.I1078I) has been detected four times in the Genome Aggregation Database (GnomAD) and it is however synonymous (GnomAD, n = 282,728). Both the affected father and son displayed the novel heterozygous p.Ile1078Met variant in the MYH11 gene while the son was also identified with the novel heterozygous p.Met121Ilefs*5 (c.363_367delGAGTC) variant in the ACTA2 gene.
The identified variants were verified in the proband and other consenting family members (father, mother and two sisters) were screened by Sanger sequencing. PCR amplification was performed using 5 Units AmpliTaq DNA polymerase (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CS). The ACTA2 gene was initially amplified by PCR at 55 °C annealing temperature using the ACTA2-Forward: 5’ CTTTCAAGCTGTTCCTGTC 3′ and the ACTA2-Reverse: 5’ TGTGTTTCTCCTCTGTCC 3′ primers. The MYH11 gene was amplified by PCR at 55 °C annealing temperature using the MYH11-Forward: 5’ AGTGAACAGGGTCGAGAAG 3′ and the MYH11-Reverse: 5’ TTTGCAGTGCGGCTAAAG 3′ primers. Amplified products were cleaned using QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and subjected to cycle sequencing according to the manufacturer’s instructions [BigDye Terminator v1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems]. The reactions were run on a 3130xL Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) with the results analyzed via the Sequencing Analysis 5.2 Software (Applied Biosystems).
Sanger sequencing analysis of the patients’ ACTA2 and MYH11 genes revealed that the p.IIe1078Met variant was inherited from the father and the p.Met121Ilefs*5 variant from the mother . Results showed that the mother, the son and the 34-yo daughter had the p.Met121Ilefs*5 variant whereas the father, the son and the same daughter had the p.Ille1078Met variant. Overall, results showed that the affected son and the one daughter are carriers of both variants inherited one from each parent. The second daughter did not show any variants in either of the two genes.
In order to evaluate evidence for a sequence variant we followed the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) . The two variants (chr10:90703556_90703560delGAGTC and chr16:15831386 G > C) of ACTA2 and MYH11 genes are a deletion which results in a truncated transcript in exon 4 (c.363_367del GAGTC, p.Met121Ilefs*5) and a single base substitution in exon 26 (c.3234C > G, p.Ile1078Met), respectively. Combining the PVS1 criterion (predicted as a null variant) with 1 Moderate (PM2: Absence in population databases) classifies the ACTA2 variant as “likely pathogenic”. The MYH11 variant was interpreted as “variant of uncertain significance (VUS)” based on the following criteria: Absent in population databases (PM2), and computational evidence by different in silico tools applied supported a deleterious effect on the gene (PP3). For the p.Ile1078Met of MYH11, the small number of affected individuals (meiosis) was not enough to use the PP1 criteria. Although this variant is not found in GnomAD controls and is located on coiled-coil myosin heavy chain tail region, the evidence at this point is not enough to indicate that p.Ile1078Met is pathogenic according to ACMG standards. Therefore, we concluded that the variant in ACTA2 is more likely to contribute to the TAA phenotype.