A 43-year-old man fell into river water following an automobile accident. He was immediately rescued and intubated orally by a physician at Yokohama Work Station Doctor Car , and transported to our hospital with airway and ventilator management. He was previously in good health, with no medical history prior to the day of the accident.
On admission, he was comatose, hypothermic, and in respiratory failure. His consciousness was assessed as E1VtM1 based on the Glasgow Coma Scale. His pulse rate was 91 b.p.m., with a blood pressure of 147/83 mmHg and a body temperature of 35°C. Physical examination revealed no evidence of trauma. Coarse crackles were noted throughout the lung field. His plain chest radiographs showed decreased permeability in all the lung fields . Chest computed tomography showed consolidation in both lower lobes . Arterial blood gas findings on a 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) under volume control ventilation (positive end-expiratory pressure, 0.49 kPa; tidal volume, 480 ml; respiratory rate, 15/min) were as follows: pH, 6.678; partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), 253.1 mmHg; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 139.3 mmHg; calculated bicarbonate concentration, 16.0 mmol/L; base excess/deficit, −24.4 mmol/L; and lactate dehydrogenase, 13.71 mmol/L. The PaO2 / FiO2 ratio was 253. The patient’s laboratory findings are shown in Table . The Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score was 18 points. Using diagnostic criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation established by the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine, he had a score of 4 points.
The patient was initially treated with ampicillin/sulbactam (ABPC/SBT), volume expansion, vasopressors (noradrenaline and dobutamine), and glucocorticoids. However, he immediately developed septic shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and acute kidney injury. He became anuric and was diagnosed with stage 3 acute kidney injury, according to the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes criteria. Continuous renal replacement therapy was then initiated.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) was diagnosed based on the Berlin criteria (PaO2 / FiO2, <100) on day 2 of hospitalization. Prone position therapy was initiated (>12 h), and the patient was ventilated using the airway pressure release ventilation method. On day 7, Aeromonas caviae was detected in his blood and sputum cultures. The antimicrobial regimen was switched from ABPC/SBT to tazobactam/piperacillin (TAZ/PIPC), as susceptibility tests indicated resistance to the former and susceptibility to the latter (minimum inhibitory concentration [MIC] ≤ 8 µg/ml). On day 9, levofloxacin (LVFX; MIC ≤ 1 µg/ml) was given based on previous recommendations. However, on day 13, A. caviae was again detected in his blood culture. On day 20, the antimicrobial regimen was switched from TAZ/PIPC to meropenem (MEPM; MIC ≤ 1 µg/ml), and his condition improved. On day 26, however, MEPM was discontinued due to the appearance of a drug rash. By day 36, LVFX alone had failed to control the infection, with A. caviae growing in blood cultures. On day 39, cefepime (CFPM; MIC ≤ 1 µg/ml) with LVFX improved the inflammatory response. On day 43, his blood culture tested negative, and his fever was alleviated. By day 45, the patient’s C-reactive protein level had decreased to below the normal level. Cefepime was discontinued on day 51, with no observable worsening of symptoms . On day 34, a tracheostomy was carried out for long-term ventilator management, from which he was weaned on day 43 and transferred to a rehabilitation hospital on day 60.