An 83-year-old Thai woman presented with gradual swelling around her right wrist for 3 months. She had no history of trauma around the wrist or fingers. She did not have diabetes mellitus, human immunodeficiency virus or exposure to tuberculosis. At the Orthopedic clinic a physical examination found mild pain and limited motion of her right wrist and the little finger, with some mild swelling at the wrist and the base of the little finger . A DASH test gave a score of 59.2. Laboratory investigations including complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein were all in normal levels. A chest radiograph was normal. Plain radiographs of the wrist showed generalized osteopenia with some sclerotic change, with no osteolytic lesions . Ultrasonography indicated chronic tenosynovitis of the flexor digitorum tendons with more localized fluid at the distal forearm and little finger. Two oval-shaped homogenous hypoechoic cysts on the volar aspect of the hypoechoic flexor tendon of the right 5th finger suggested chronic tenosynovitis of the 5th flexor tendon compatible with tuberculosis (, , ). We did an open biopsy of the wrist and little finger, and found thick yellowish synovial encasing the flexor tendon with no pus or purulence . At the base of the little finger, where some pus was present; after manipulation to loosen the tendon at the base of the finger, the pus was removed and cultured was obtained. The culture showed caseous granulomatous chronic inflammation compatible with tuberculosis and acid-fast gram stain positive and PCR for TB was positive for M.tuberculosis complex in both the fluid from the base of the right little finger and tissue from the right wrist. An infectious disease clinician was consulted for further evaluation of the patient. Sputum morning acid-fast gram stain was done and was negative for 3 consecutive days. She was treated with a standard four-drug regimen (isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide) for 2 months and the isoniazid and rifampicin for an additional 6 months, during which time her clinical condition slowly improved, with decreased swelling and improved wrist and fingers motion within normal ranges with no side effects from the anti-tuberculosis drugs. The last follow up at 1 year, at which time she was satisfied with her condition with a final DASH score of 10.8.