A 63-year-old Sinhalese man with diabetes mellitus of 8 years’ duration presented with fever, loose stools, and loss of appetite of 1 week’s duration. He was on diet control for diabetes with poor glycemic control and was not on a proper follow up. On admission he was ill and febrile. An abdominal examination revealed hepatomegaly, 2 cm from right costal margin, which was non-tender. Other systemic examination was unremarkable. An ophthalmoscope examination revealed non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy. A full blood count revealed white cell count of 18 × 109/L with neutrophil predominance. His hemoglobin was 12.2 g/dL and platelet count was 256 × 109/L initially and dropped up to 9.8 g/dl and 63 × 109/L, respectively. Blood film showed severe bacterial infection with sepsis and features suggestive of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). A coagulation profile showed international normalized ratio of 1.7 and activated partial thromboplastin time of 37 seconds. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 75 mm/first hour. His C-reactive protein level was 197 mg/dL and his procalcitonin level was 59.9 ng/L. Consecutive blood cultures were positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae after 9 and 13 hours. The strain was sensitive to imipenem, meropenem, ceftriaxone, amikacin, and ciprofloxacin. A chest radiograph was normal. Retroviral screening was negative. His fasting blood sugar level was 212 mg/dl. A urine full report showed proteinuria (++) with 3–5 pus cells per high power field and the urine culture was negative. Stool examination was negative for amoebae, ova, or cysts. His initial serum creatinine level was 134 microgram/L and increased up to 647 microgram/L reflecting acute kidney injury. His urine output was satisfactory throughout the course. Serum potassium went up to 6.1 mmol/L and was managed medically. An ultrasound scan of his abdomen revealed a large ill-defined hypoechoic lesion suggestive of a liver abscess in the right lobe of his liver, at segments VII and VIII, measuring 8 × 6 × 5.5 cm in size . Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal. The abscess was aspirated once by the interventional radiology team under ultrasound guidance yielding 100 ml of thick pus. He was treated with intravenously administered ceftriaxone for 2 weeks and a marked clinical and biochemical improvement was seen. His serum creatinine returned to upper normal limit following resolution of sepsis. A repeat ultrasonography performed at completion of intravenous antibiotic therapy revealed resolving abscess in segment VIII of his liver measuring 5 × 4 × 3.2 cm. As there was considerable clinical and biochemical improvement, he was discharged with a further course of orally administered cefixime and did not require further aspirations.