A 55-year-old female (125 kg, body mass index 46 kg/m2) presented to the emergency department (ED) after ingestion of 165 tablets of metformin 500 mg (82.5 g, or 660 mg/kg), 20 tablets of acetaminophen 500 mg (10 g, or 80 mg/kg), 38 tablets of simvastatin 40 mg (1520 mg, or 12 mg/kg) and 30 tablets of semaglutide 14 mg (420 mg or 3.4 mg/kg) as a suicide attempt. Immediately after ingestion, she alerted the emergency services herself and presented within 1 h of ingestion. In the ED she was alert and cooperative. Her medical history comprised of earlier suicide attempts with chronic depression and type II diabetes. Her initial vital signs were normal: she had a normal respiratory rate and an oxygen saturation of 95 % without supplemental oxygen, blood pressure was 122/51 mmHg with a normal sinus rhythm of 89/min, and she was alert with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. Glucose was mildly elevated (18.4 mmol/L). Her body temperature was 35.7 °C. Initial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.19, a pCO2 of 5.6 kPa, bicarbonate of 16 mmol/L, base excess of − 11.8 and lactate levels of 9.5 mmol/L. Liver panel, coagulation and creatine kinase (CK) levels were normal. Serum creatinine was 90 μmol/L. Results are shown in . Due to the expected severity of the intoxication and the early presentation, she was treated with activated charcoal and immediately admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for continuous hemodialysis as the severe lactic acidosis indicated a severe metformin overdose .
After admission to the ICU, she deteriorated rapidly. She became tachypneic and was intubated for exhaustion. She developed rapid onset shock, which required continuous fluid resuscitation, noradrenalin (rapidly increasing up to 1.2 μg/kg/min) and vasopressin (0.03 IE/min). Hydrocortisone was added because of the refractory nature of the shock. Continuous hemodialysis was initiated within 3 h after presentation. Arterial blood gas and lactate levels were monitored every two hours as a marker for resolution of the metformin overdose. She became hypoglycemic, most likely due to co-ingestion of metformin and semaglutide, for which a continuous 50 % glucose infusion was started. Four hours post-ingestion, approximately three hours after presentation but prior to the initiation of hemodialysis, both acetaminophen and metformin levels were drawn. Acetaminophen levels 4 h after ingestion were 29 mg/L, so treatment with N-acetylcysteine was withheld. Metformin levels were drawn with the intent of retrospective analysis, as the results took one week to complete. Results revealed a level of 622.9 mg/L. However, as these findings were not available during the initial treatment, they had no bearing on medical decision making.
Using bedside ultrasonography in conjunction with invasive hemodynamic monitoring using a pulse index continuous cardiac output device (PiCCO), cardiogenic, obstructive, and hypovolemic shock were excluded. Causes of distributive shock other than vasoplegia, such as septic shock and anaphylaxis, were considered unlikely due to the clinical presentation and otherwise normal appearance. As there was no cardiogenic component to the shock, venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (va-ECMO) was not considered to be of added value. Therefore, the current condition was considered severe vasoplegic shock due to metformin. As the already high doses of noradrenalin and vasopressin were considered insufficient, we decided to treat the patient with methylene blue. Subsequently, 250 mg of methylene blue (2 mg/kg) was administered intravenously over 5 min. The noradrenalin dose could be reduced from 1.2 μg/kg/min to 0.5 μg/kg/min within 15 min, indicating rapid shock reversal, which was maintained at 0.5 μg/kg/min for 6 h without additional intervention. A second bolus of methylene blue 2 mg/kg was then administered in an attempt to further reduce noradrenalin levels. This allowed the noradrenalin dose to be lowered to 0.25 μg/kg/min .
The patient remained stable for the next 24 h. Lactate levels decreased from a maximum of 29 mmol/L to 4.4 mmol/L, indicating metformin clearance and improvement of shock. However, the next day, lactate levels began to increase again while still on hemodialysis. She developed severe liver test abnormalities, with alanine aminotransferase (ASAT) of 10518 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase (ALAT) of 4171 U/L, and developed progressive shock again. A computed tomography (CT) scan of both the thorax and abdomen showed extensive necrosis of the liver. As there were no curative options, treatment was switched to palliative care and she passed away. Permission for post-mortem examination was not obtained. However, her next of kin signed informed consent for publication.