A 67-year-old female was admitted to the hospital due to chest pain for three hours. She had a history of arterial hypertension for 30 years and diabetes mellitus (DM) for 3 years. ECG showed acute inferior and right ventricular myocardial infarction. After administration of 300 mg aspirin, 180 mg ticagrelor and 5000 U heparin, CAG was carried out emergently via the right TRA. The results showed that there was 60–70% stenosis in the middle of the right coronary artery, and the distal segment was completely occluded. Then, a 2.5 × 28 mm drug-eluting stent was implanted into the distal segment of the right coronary artery. The 6Fr sheath (Terumo Radifocus) was removed from the radial artery after 25.5 h, and the puncture site was bandaged with gauze for ten hours. On the third day post operation, we found that the pulsation of the artery near the puncture site could not be appreciated during palpation, whereas a weak pulse existed in the distal radial artery in the AS region. We suspected that the radial artery might be occluded. Vascular ultrasonography showed that there was no blood flow near the puncture site. Because the patient had recently undergone right RAO, we decided to recanalize the occlusion via the right dTRA. Therefore, after successful puncture of the distal radial artery in the AS, the radial artery was confirmed to be completely occluded by cannula angiography . Then, a 6Fr sheath (Terumo Radifocus) was inserted into the distal radial artery, and the tip of the sheath was near the distal segment of the occlusion. After failing to absorb the thrombosis, a Runthrough guidewire was sent through the occluded segment, then we injected 2000 U heparin and 200 ug nitroglycerin through the sheath, and a BRAUN 2.0 × 20 mm balloon was used to dilate the occluded segment with 8–10 atm × 1 min of pressure for several rounds. Repeated angiography showed that the blood flow of the radial artery was resumed . The distal radial artery puncture site of in the AS was compressed with gauze for four hours. There were no local complications in the AS region after the operation, such as bleeding, swelling and numbness. The pulsation of the right distal radial artery and the radial artery was normal, and vascular ultrasonography showed that the antegrade flow was normal . The results of vascular ultrasonography follow-up one month after the operation were the same as those immediately after operation.