A 45-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with recurrent low back pain and fever for 2 wk.
The patient reported recurrent fever with low back pain for 2 wk. The highest temperature was approximately 39 C, and he experienced no other discomfort. One week prior to his admission, the patient attended a local hospital for examination, and an elevated serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) (17.64 ng/mL) level was found. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar vertebrae showed an abnormal signal at the rear of the L4–5 vertebral body . Further, whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed a slightly low-density nodule on the left side of the prostate, with an uneven increase in fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism, which indicated prostate cancer and the need for a prostate puncture biopsy. Moreover, the left lateral lobe of the liver had a slightly low-density nodule, and L3/4/5 vertebral bone destruction was detected with high fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism . The local hospital considered the possibility of a prostate tumor, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient’s previous medical history was uneventful.
The patient and his family members had no previous episodes of similar diseases.
The patient had recurrent signs of fever with a peak body temperature of 39 °C, and most occurrences of fever occurred in the first half of the night . Pulse rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rhythm were normal. There was no percussion pain in the lower back, no scleroma observed on rectal examination of the prostate and no positive nervous system signs on physical examination.
On re-examination after admission, the serum PSA level was 8.36 ng/mL, and the proportion of free PSA was 0.046. Routine blood examination showed that the neutrophil ratio increased to 88.8% (normal range, 40.0%–75.0%), and the lymphocyte ratio decreased to 9.3% (normal range, 20.0%–50.0%) with the absolute value decreasing to 0.5 × 109/L. Leukocyte, thrombocyte, and hemoglobin values were normal, and serum C-reactive protein levels had increased to 47.84 mg/L (normal value, < 4 mg/L). No abnormalities were found in routine urine, liver, and kidney function tests, bacterial and fungal culture in urine tests, and HIV-related tests. The test result for COVID-19 nucleic acids and antibodies was also negative.
Chest and abdominal computed tomography showed no obvious abnormalities.
After a prostate puncture, histological examination showed that there were more inflammatory cells in the prostate tissue . However, tumor cells were not detected.