A 52-year-old man visited our hospital with right lower quadrant pain as his chief complaint. The patient had no past relevant history. He had experienced epigastric pain as a subjective symptom from the night before. The pain then moved to the right lower quadrant and gradually exacerbated. At the consultation, his vital signs were stable, and a low-grade fever was found. A physical exam found severe tenderness in the right lower quadrant. Blood tests showed an increase in white blood cells (WBC: 14.7 × 103/μL) and a slight increase in C-reactive protein (CRP: 1.07 mg/dL), with other values within normal limits. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed swelling of the appendix and a stercolith at the root of the appendix . He was diagnosed as having phlegmonous appendicitis, and thus, emergency laparoscopic surgery was performed.
The intraoperative findings showed a swollen appendix and slightly contaminated ascites fluid in the in the periphery of the appendix . No abscess formation was found, and the findings were consistent with phlegmonous appendicitis. Adhesiotomy was performed to release the mesoappendix that was adherent to the pelvic wall. During this process, the mesoappendix began to hemorrhage. Therefore, white coagulation with a monopolar soft coagulation system (VIO, ERBE, Germany) and Z-suture technique were performed to obtain hemostasis. The division of the mesoappendix was performed proximal to the bleeding point with ultrasonic dissecting shears. Thereafter, a standard appendectomy was conducted to bury the appendicular root, and the operation was completed.
Postoperatively, the patient’s abdominal pain improved, and he could start taking meals from postoperative day (POD) 3 after admission. The postoperative course was free of adverse events, and he was discharged from hospital on POD 5. On POD 20, he visited our hospital outpatient clinic. Blood testing was negative for inflammatory reaction, the abdominal findings were normal, and the outpatient examination was completed. The pathological diagnosis was phlegmonous appendicitis.
On POD 30, he experienced sudden right lower quadrant pain in the afternoon and revisited the outpatient clinic. He had no fever, but his vital signs indicated shock (blood pressure: 91/65 mmHg; heart rate: 122/min). A physical exam found him in a cold sweat with localized severe tenderness in the right lower quadrant. Blood tests showed an increase in WBC (9.4 × 103/μL) and a slight increase in CRP (0.91 mg/dL). However, no anemia was observed at this point. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed fluid accumulation in a high-density area from the ileocecum to the hepatic surface. A pseudoaneurysm was found near the ileocecum with extravasation . He was diagnosed as having post-appendicectomy ruptured ileocolic artery pseudoaneurysm, and emergency interventional radiology (IVR) was performed.
When the iliac artery was catheterized from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and angiography was performed, a pseudoaneurysm was visualized in the periphery of the appendicular branch . A microcatheter was guided into the pseudoaneurysm, and a micro coil was inserted. Coiling was placed from the pseudoaneurysm to the root of the appendicular branch of the ileocolic artery to achieve hemostasis. A postoperative contrast-enhanced CT scan confirmed elimination of the pseudoaneurysm .
The patient’s post-IVR vital signs remained stable. On day 1 of admission, a decrease in his Hb to 7.5 g/dL was found, and 4 units of red blood cells were administered to improve the anemia. On POD 3, the patient began meals, and even after the patient started eating again, no findings suggestive of mesenteric ischemia were noted. The patient’s outcome was good, and he was discharged on POD 6. About 3 years have passed since discharge, and his course has been complication free.