A 62-year-old male patient with no adverse medical history was admitted to our hospital with a high fever. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a liver tumor in the left lobe of the liver . Due to the presence of high fever, elevated inflammatory markers, and detection of a low-density area in the liver tumor on CT, our initial diagnosis was liver abscess. However, the detection of elevated tumor marker levels and a clear imaging of a solid tumor on abdominal ultrasonography, confirmed our diagnosis of intrahepatic malignant tumor . Laboratory findings on admission are listed in Table . Further, a percutaneous ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of the liver tumor revealed it as SCC. The patient had no liver disease underlying the liver tumor. Endoscopic examinations showed that the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts were free of primary malignancies. In addition, no head or neck malignancies were detected on CT. Fluorodeoxyglucose/positron emission tomography (FDG/PET) CT showed accumulation of FDG in the liver tumor, perihilar lymph nodes, and lymph nodes around the heart , These results confirmed our diagnosis of a primary tumor with multiple distant lymph node metastases. We suspected a diaphragmatic and pericardial invasion from the primary tumor as the tumor border was found to be obscured on CT. Therefore, we opted for systemic and TAI chemotherapies instead of surgery based on patient’s consent. The patient was administered with a TAI of 50 mg/body cisplatin (CDDP) (once every 6 weeks), for treating the primary tumor, and 120 mg/day tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S-1) systemically for both the primary tumor and distant metastases (repeating twice of 2-week administration and 1-week withdrawal). One course of chemotherapy was set at 6 weeks. A CT scan performed after five courses of chemotherapy, showed a reduction in the size of the primary tumor and lymph nodes. In addition, the tumor markers decreased after five courses of chemotherapy, which indicated partial remission (PR). Because no adverse events were reported from systemic and TAI chemotherapies after five courses, the treatment was continued for nine courses. A summary of treatments and changes in the tumor marker levels is shown in Fig. . After 9 courses of treatment, further reduction in the size of the primary tumor and lymph nodes was seen on CT scan. Additionally, FDG/PET CT showed no accumulation of FDG in the distant lymph nodes with a reduction in their size . Due to the reduction in the size of the tumor, the patient underwent conversion surgery, in which a laparotomic left lateral segmentectomy, and resection of the diaphragm and pericardium were performed, as the tumor invasion was observed . The patient also underwent sampling of perihilar lymph nodes, which showed no cancer cells. Finally, postoperative pathology tests performed on the resected tumor revealed that the patient was affected by primary hepatic ASC. Although the patient became cancer-free by conversion surgery, he was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy with intravenous CDDP (40 mg every 6 weeks) and S-1 (120 mg/day, repeating twice of 2-week administration and 1-week withdrawal) as adjuvant chemotherapy. No tumor recurrence was observed for 6 months postoperatively.