A 40-year-old woman from southern Nepal presented to the plastic surgery clinic with enlargement of the left breast for 5 years. The mass was gradually increasing in size over the years and was painless. She did not have nipple discharge or skin changes. She denied having a fever, loss of appetite, or weight. She did not give a history of any trauma to the region and denied taking hormonal medication or other drugs for concurrent medical conditions. No family members had a history of breast cancer or any other form of cancer within the first-degree relatives. She experienced menarche at the age of 14 and had regular menstrual cycles.
A physical examination of the left breast revealed a well-defined, soft mass measuring 34 ×26×6 cm with dilated veins on the surface . The overlying skin of the breast looked normal with a normal nipple and areola complex. No enlarged axillary lymph nodes were palpated. The right breast examination was unremarkable.
Ultrasonography (USG) of the breast showed a homogenously hyperechoic mass in the left chest wall deep to the left breast and pectoralis major muscle, without cystic area, calcifications, or internal vascularity. No axillary lymph node enlargement was detected. Mammography showed a heterogeneous lucent mass in the left retromammary region involving the pectoralis muscle with benign calcifications in the bilateral breast.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the chest demonstrated ~15×13×10.2 cm sized relatively well-defined homogenous T1/T2 high signal intensity mass showing signal suppression in fat-suppressed images in the left anterolateral chest wall . Furthermore, the MRI revealed the mass to be encapsulated with multiple thin septa without thoracic extension or bony erosions. The pathological examination with core biopsy was not done, as history and physical examination suggested benign lesion which was supported by imaging. The patient elected to undergo surgery promptly to eliminate the disease at the earliest opportunity as she was concerned about cosmesis and the site of the disease.
The surgery was performed under general anaesthesia by the plastic surgery team. The mass was approached through a lateral curvilinear incision to preserve the inferior pedicle for possible need of a mastopexy procedure in the future . Dermis and subcutaneous tissue were incised with cautery. Muscle was retracted after incision and eventually dissected. Vessels feeding the mass were ligated. The tumour was enucleated from underneath the pectoralis major muscle which was atrophic probably due to the compression effect of the mass . However, pressure effect over the ribs was not noted. The entire mass weighed 5 kgs and measured 20×18 cm . The incision was closed in layers over a closed suction tube drain and with cosmetic subcuticular sutures in the skin . Pressure dressing was applied. The drain was removed on the 2nd postoperative day, and the postoperative period was uneventful.
Histopathology of the surgical specimen revealed a well-encapsulated mass composed of lobules of mature adipocytes separated by fibrovascular septa without any atypical cells, mitotic figures, and necrosis features suggestive of lipoma . After 2 months of follow-up in the outpatient clinic, the patient was satisfied with the outcome of the surgery . She was advised for follow-up 6 monthly for the first year and yearly follow-up thereafter.