A 67-year-old, ASA 2 male with diabetes mellitus, hypertension, ischaemic heart
disease and dyslipidaemia was investigated for obstructive jaundice, subsequently
complicated by a spontaneous cholangitis. In addition to deranged LFTs his
haemoglobin was 6.6 g/dL. Abdominal CT showed dilated intra and extrahepatic bile
ducts (CBD 1.8 cm) with a normal liver and no pancreatic lesions. The pancreatic
duct was not dilated .
Endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreaticography (ERCP) revealed a bulging ampulla
with a tight ampullary stricture and an 8 Fr × 10 cm plastic biliary stent was
inserted. An ampullary biopsy obtained during the procedure showed histologically
unremarkable duodenal mucosa.
Following optimisation of comorbidities and prehabilitation he underwent a classical
pancreaticoduodenectomy. Histological assessment of the specimen and hepatic lymph
nodes was done.
On macroscopic examination, the common bile duct (CBD) wall was thickened along its
course from the transection margin to the ampulla of Vater. An ampullary mucosal
bulge was observed protruding into the duodenal lumen. Cut sections through the
pancreatic head revealed a 16 × 12 × 10 mm irregular, firm, white tumour just
beneath the duodenal mucosa arising from the common bile duct close to the junction
with the main pancreatic duct .
Microscopy revealed an adenosquamous carcinoma arising from the intrapancreatic CBD.
The tumour exhibited a predominance of moderately differentiated irregular glands
(75%) diversely merging with sheets and islands of atypical squamoid cells (25%).
The tumour showed co-expression of CK7 and CK 5/6 . It extended through the ampullary
duct to involve the duodenal mucosa at the major papilla. The CBD resection margin
showed high-grade biliary intra-epithelial neoplasia. The tumour also exhibited
pancreatic parenchymal invasion, lympho-vascular and perineural invasion, and
regional lymph node metastases of squamous elements. The tumour stage was assigned
as pT2 pN1 (stage group IIB).
Post-operatively the patient developed a grade B pancreatic fistula that resolved
with percutaneous drainage and octreotide therapy. This was further complicated by
an acute coronary event leading to left ventricular failure, bilateral
bronchopneumonia and acute kidney injury all of which resolved with medical therapy.
Unfortunately, he succumbed to a brainstem haemorrhage the 46th day after
surgery.