A 52-year-old Korean woman presented to our hospital because of edema and dry mouth. Additional complaints included fatigue, weight loss, and nail dystrophy. She had not had any of these symptoms in her medical history before. She started to complain of dry mouth and nail dystrophy 4 months before admission. During that period she lost 4 kg and felt severe fatigue. Two months before admission, she underwent a health screening in another hospital and received a diagnosis of renal dysfunction and hypothyroidism. There was no fever, rash, Raynaud phenomenon, or articular complaints. She had no medical history, and denied tobacco or alcohol abuse. There was no history of renal disease in her family.
Her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, pulse rate was 62/minute, and her body temperature was 36.8 °C. Her conjunctiva was pale and her oral cavity was dry. Her nails were flattened and revealed onycholysis . A KOH test showed no fungi in her nails. Her thyroid gland was not enlarged and superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. No abnormality was present in the urological findings and neurologic examinations.
Laboratory findings disclosed the following: hemoglobin 69 g/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 53 mm/hour, serum protein 88 g/L, albumin 26 g/L, serum creatinine 298.8 umol/L, and creatinine clearance 15 ml/minute according to Cockcroft and Gault formula. Urine sediment contained 0–2 white blood cells (WBC) and 0–2 red blood cells (RBC) per field. Her 24-hour urinary protein excretion was 0.696 g/day. Antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to SSA and SSB, rheumatoid factor, complement fractions, and cryoglobulins were all negative or within the normal range. In a urine protein electrophoresis, the proportion of urine protein was the following: albumin 87.6%, α1-globulin 4.0%, α2-globulin 1.1%, ß-globulin 0%, and γ-globulin 7.3%. Serum and urine protein immunofixation electrophoresis showed no abnormal finding. Serum free light chain of kappa and lambda was increased (0.307 g/L and 0.192 g/L, respectively). Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) was raised at 38.55 g/L (normal 7.0–17.0), however, IgA and IgM levels were normal (3.04 g/L and 2.45 g/L, respectively).
A slit lamp examination revealed superficial keratoconjunctival erosion in both eyes. A 99mTc pertechnetate scan of her salivary gland showed normal function. A lip biopsy demonstrated amyloid deposition around her salivary ducts, and atrophy of her salivary duct . There was no mononuclear infiltration. A renal ultrasound scan showed increased echogenicity and the size of her right kidney and left kidney was 10.32 cm and 9.42 cm, respectively. A renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy revealed a glomerular and peripheral capillary wall deposition of eosinophilic amorphous hyaline material . The Congo red stain by birefringence under polarized light showed apple-green staining reaction . Under electron microscopy, we observed non-branching, randomly distributed 10 nm-wide fibrils .
A bone marrow aspiration biopsy reveals hypercellular marrow with 5% plasma cells. She was diagnosed as having AL amyloidosis then started on chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and steroids. A follow-up at 8 months showed that her renal function remained stable (creatinine 267.85 umol/L) with reduction in free kappa and the lambda light chain (0.119 g/L, 0.154 g/L). The nail dystrophy also improved without other treatment .