A 71-year-old man was referred from another hospital with a complaint of difficulty in swallowing food. He was diagnosed as having stage III (T3, N1, M0) esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in the middle thoracic esophagus, according to the TNM classification, 8th edition . A lower gastrointestinal endoscopy performed for screening purposes indicated synchronous stage IIA (T3, N0, M0) cecal cancer . This patient had undergone a total gastrectomy for gastric cancer at another hospital 27 years earlier. Details of the surgical procedure, including the method of reconstruction and the stage of the disease, were unknown . Because esophageal cancer was at a higher stage than cecal cancer and the standard treatment for advanced esophageal cancer is preoperative chemotherapy , we first chose neoadjuvant chemotherapy (DCF: docetaxel 35 mg/m2, cisplatin 40 mg/m2, fluorouracil 400 mg/m2) as preoperative treatment [, ]. At that time, we decided to perform lower gastrointestinal endoscopy after each course to confirm that the cecal cancer was not worsening. After two courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the treatment efficacy was determined to be a partial response for both the esophageal cancer (76% reduction) and the cecal cancer (87% reduction), based on Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors Criteria version 1.1 . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography and upper gastrointestinal angiography during the preoperative treatment revealed that the method of reconstruction after total gastrectomy was a relatively long-distance jejunal interposition using the dominant areas of the second and third jejunal vessels . The oral side of the interpositioned jejunum had an end-to-side anastomosis with the esophagus and the aboral side with the second part of the duodenum, respectively.
We planned esophagectomy as the first stage of the operation and ileocecal resection and gastrointestinal reconstruction as the second stage of the operation. In the first operation, the patient underwent thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy, two-field lymphadenectomy, cervical esophagostomy, and jejunostomy with a small laparotomy . The esophageal cancer had invaded the thoracic duct and required combined resection. The adhesions to the crus were removed and the esophageal jejunal anastomosis was identified in the thoracic cavity, so the esophagus was dissected at the same site. With a small laparotomy, the jejunostomy was inserted through the reconstructed jejunum, and the tip was placed beyond Treitz’s ligament. The operative time was 7 h 15 min and blood loss was 30 mL. The postoperative course was generally uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on the 21st postoperative day. Six weeks after the first-stage operation, the second stage was performed. An ileocecal resection with D3 lymphadenectomy was performed first, followed by jejunal reconstruction. Considering the blood flow in the afferent loop including the past anastomosis, the left branch of the fourth jejunal artery was used as a feeder to the afferent loop, the right branch was included on the side of the elevated jejunum, and the mesentery was incised as long as possible to extend the elevation distance . A subcutaneous tunnel was created, the jejunum was elevated approximately 150 cm by the presternal route, and the fifth jejunal vein and the right internal thoracic vein were first anastomosed, and then the fifth jejunal artery and the right internal thoracic artery were anastomosed . Eight weeks had passed since the end of preoperative chemotherapy, but there was no progression of cecal cancer . After additional resection of the cervical esophagus, an end-to-side anastomosis was performed between the esophagus and the elevated jejunum, and a functional end-to-end anastomosis between the ascending colon and the elevated jejunum . The operative time was 9 h 55 min and blood loss was 410 mL. Because of many anastomoses and blind ends were created after a total of three operations , the patient developed mild leakage at the esophageal jejunal anastomosis postoperatively, which quickly resolved with conservative treatment. The esophageal cancer was in final stage I (T1a, N0 [0/17], M0, Grade 2) and the cecum cancer was also in final stage I (T2, N0 [0/15], M0, Grade 2), both of which could be curatively resected. At 15 months after surgery, the patient remains recurrence free from both cancers. Postoperatively, nutritional support using the jejunostomy was continued for 3 months, and the jejunostomy fistula was removed because the patient was able to take adequate oral intake.