The patient was a 78-year-old man who had consulted the physician for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (pAf), chronic heart failure, and chronic renal failure. Anti-coagulant therapy was administered to the patient for pAf. At a follow-up examination, the patient complained of tarry stool. The patient had no family history of cancer.
A colonoscopy was performed and revealed a type 2 tumor in the transverse colon measuring 30 × 30 mm . Marking was performed by injecting a black dye into the submucosal layer, near the tumor, for future surgical resection . Biopsy specimens from the tumor suggested a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Moreover, laboratory examinations revealed no remarkable abnormality: the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) levels were 3.1 ng/ml (< 5.0) and 3.4 U/ml (< 37), respectively. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed wall thickening, which was the basis for diagnosing the lesion, as the tumor invaded the muscularis propria (T2); moreover, there was no evidence of lung, liver, or lymph node metastases. The clinical diagnosis was T2N0M0, stage I according to the TNM classification (UICC 8th edition).
Laparoscopy-assisted colectomy was carried out 2 months after the initial colonoscopy. The patient did not receive any alternative medications, such as supplements, vitamins, and immunotherapy. We resected the colon, including the marking made during colonoscopy. The resected specimen revealed a 10-mm ulcer with a polypoid lesion of 8.5 mm in the center , but there was no type 2 tumor. The formalin-fixed specimen was cut into 3–5 mm slices. Histological examination demonstrated a marked nonspecific granulation of tissue, indicating fibrillization under the mucous membrane and sloughing off of the epithelium . Moreover, no cancer cells were found in the scar tissue . The dissected lymph nodes also did not show the presence of cancer cells. We used immunohistological staining to further evaluate the biopsy specimen. The findings showed that the tumor cells were strongly positive for AE1/AE3 and positive for p53 , indicating that it was an adenocarcinoma. These findings suggested SR of colon cancer. Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in the tumor stroma. Based on these pathological features including poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and TILs and the tumor location in the proximal colon, we suspected MSI-H CRC . Immunohistochemical examination of MMRs showed a lack of MLH1 and PMS2 expression in tumor nuclei, in contrast to the positive staining for MSH2 and MSH6 . The loss of PMS2 expression is known to be followed by the loss of MLH1 expression due to heterodimerization, suggesting that this case was attributed to functional abnormality of MLH1, which is required to generate high level of MSI . Lynch syndrome was not suspected because of its absence in the family and past histories; therefore, we reached a diagnosis of sporadic MSI-H CRC.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy or other anticancer treatment. Six months after surgery, a periodic colonoscopy was performed, and no abnormal findings were seen. Subsequently, there was no evidence of cancer recurrence noted after 1 year.