The patient, a 79-year-old woman, was hospitalized number 522702 due to bilateral shoulder pain, limited activity for half a year, aggravated for 4 months to the hospital. The patient began to have bilateral shoulder joint pain and limited activity without obvious inducement half a year ago, without limb weakness, numbness, or neck pain. During this period, the symptoms did not improve after treatment with acupuncture and Chinese medicine in the outpatient department of the hospital. The patient was previously diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis for more than 3 years and intermittent irregular use of methylprednisolone (2 mg/d,taken irregularly)and methotrexate(12.5 mg/d, taken irregularly) for 2 years. She had a history of osteoporosis, denied diabetes and syphilis, and had no history of trauma or surgery. Physical examination: symmetrical malformed swelling of the finger joints of both hands; there was no swelling or ecchymosis in the bilateral shoulders. Bilateral supraspinatus and deltoid muscle atrophy, tenderness at the acromion, and attachment of the long head tendon of the biceps brachii were observed. The active range of motion of both shoulders: flexion 30 degrees(Reduce by 60 degrees), extension 15 degrees(Reduce by 30 degrees), abduction 30 degrees(Reduce by 60 degrees); the passive range of motion of the left shoulder joint: flexion 90 degrees, abduction 90 degrees, extension 15 degrees(Reduce by 30 degrees); the passive range of motion of the right shoulder joint: 60 degrees of flexion(Reduce by 30 degrees), 60 degrees of abduction(Reduce by 30 degrees), and 15 degrees of extension(Reduce by 30 degrees). The left Dugas test and the right Dugas test were positive, the muscle strength of both hands was graded as 4, indicating weakened muscle tension. Additionally, VAS (Visual Analogue Scale) is 3 score in shoulders. Value of DASH (Disabilites of the Shoulder and Hand) is 54.2.Blood test: anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (A-CCP) 33.10U/ml (normal range: 0-5RU/ml); antinuclear antibody quantification (ANA) 47.40AU/ml(normal range: Negative or < 32); anti-double stranded DNA IgG antibody quantification (dsDNA) 31.00 IU/ml (normal range: 0-100 IU/ml); treponema pallidum antibody was negative; D-Dimer 6.43 µg/ml (normal range: 0-500ug/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 27 mm/h (normal range: < 20 mm/h). C-reactive protein (CRP) 39.06 mg/L(0.068-8 mg/L). There are no abnormalities found in thyroid function, blood calcium and phosphorus levels, routine urine tests, and the parathyroid ultrasound did not reveal any abnormalities in the parathyroid glands. Anteroposterior X-ray of shoulder joint: hyperplasia and hardening of bone at the edge of shoulder joint, narrowing of shoulder joint space. Figures , and MRI 3.0 T enhancement of bilateral shoulder joints showed: the correspondence between the shoulder joints on both sides was unstable, the joint space was different in thickness and narrowness, the bone collapse and defect of the medial humerus head on both sides, the glenoid lip was unclear, and the surrounding bone edema presented long T1 and T2 abnormal signal shadows. There was thickening and swelling of the bursae of the shoulder joint capsule on both sides. There was a lot of fluid accumulation in the joint cavity, and the surrounding synovium thickened obviously, especially on the right side. The enhanced scan showed patchy enhancement of the synovium of the shoulder joint on both sides, and patchy enhancement of the adjacent bone structure with blurred edges. Bilateral acromioclavicular joint hyperplasia. Diagnosis:1. Large bone destruction, cartilage injury, multiple effusion, synovitis, obvious on the right side, combined with medical history, in line with the changes in the Charcot joint. 2. Degenerative changes in the bilateral acromioclavicular joints. Figure Cervical spine and thoracic spine MRI 3.0 T showed the following: 1. Cervical degenerative changes, cervical 4 instability; 2. Intervertebral disc degeneration, cervical 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, 6/7 disc herniation, with cervical 3/4 obvious, posterior central herniation; 3. Slight stenosis of the cervical 4/5 plane spinal canal. Diagnosis: 1. CN 2. RA.Treatment: Due to the patient's refusal of surgery and request for conservative management, they were prescribed methylprednisolone tablets (4 mg, qd), Tripterygium wilfordii glycosides tablets (10 mg, tid), calcitriol soft capsules (0.25 µg, qd), and electroacupuncture therapy.