A 69-year-old man complained of difficulty swallowing his morning medication and of variation in the time required to reach an “on” state. He was previously diagnosed with internuclear ophthalmoplegia at the age of 64 years, which had resolved in 1 day. The family and lifestyle histories were unremarkable.
At 60 years of age, the patient's left leg began dragging when he walked, and at 62 years dysarthria developed. Oral administration of L-DOPA 100 mg/carbidopa 10 mg (LDCD) was initiated based on a diagnosis of PD, and walking and dysarthria improved. At 64 years, the patient regularly began to choke during breakfast, and by 65 years, wearing-off phenomena had begun. At 66 years, it became difficult for the patient to receive oral medication, and he began consuming his medication with jelly. Between 65 and 66 years, his weight decreased from 73 kg to 65 kg. By 68 years, completing breakfast required 3–4 h. In the “on” state, the patient was independent in activities of daily living. At 69 years, LDCD 600 mg and entacapone 600 mg were each received in six portions, selegiline hydrochloride 10 mg in two portions, and zonisamide 25 mg and trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride 2 mg in one portion. To assist swallowing, tablets were wrapped in a water-soluble film, but it remained easier for the patient to swallow the wrapped tablets with jelly. However, he sometimes later expelled the tablets through coughing. Doses were frequently accompanied by “delayed-on” or “no-on” phenomena.
The patient's height was 162 cm and his weight was 55 kg. There were no auscultatory abnormalities of the chest or abdomen. Mild right flexion was observed in the standing position. The Mini-Mental State Examination score was 29/30. No abnormalities in cranial nerves, muscle strength, or deep tendon reflexes were found. No pathological reflexes were present. Muscle rigidity was observed in the neck and all four limbs, and the patient was without tremor. He could walk independently in the “on” state, but experienced retropulsion in the “off” state. The Hoehn and Yahr classification was stage III in the “on” state and stage IV in the “off” state. The “off” state was characterized by strong akinesia and bradykinesia, sialorrhea, reduced vocal intensity, and poor speech intelligibility; all symptoms improved in the “on” state.
There were no abnormalities in the general blood tests or on head magnetic resonance imaging . A videofluorographic examination of swallowing (VFG) was performed in which the patient consumed 10 mL of barium-containing thickened water (Ba) and four tablets wrapped in a water-soluble film. VFG showed that the tongue barely moved, and the time required for the Ba to pass the lower border of the mandible and transfer to the pharynx was 27 s (typically 2 s in normal individuals). A swallowing reflex was induced after the Ba reached the pyriform sinuses. The backward movement of the tongue root was very limited, and the tablets remained in the epiglottic vallecula . Respiratory status was unchanged, and no aspiration was observed. After consumption of the medication, 2 h were needed for the patient to reach the “on” state, at which point, tongue movement improved and nothing remained in the pharynx.
The patient was further examined with a L-DOPA test . One tablet of LDCD was grounded and administered to the patient with jelly in a fasting state after he awakened in the morning. Blood levels of L-DOPA were measured from before the medicine was administered until 240 min afterward (seven time points), and symptoms of parkinsonism were assessed. The patient choked when swallowing the medicine and required suctioning during the L-DOPA test. There was no improvement in parkinsonian symptoms even 4 h after administration, and the blood L-DOPA level only rose to 0.78 nmol/mL .
The patient was shown a video of his swallowing process and was informed that in the “off” state his lingual movement was insufficient to transfer food from his mouth to his pharynx. Tongue resistance training was then initiated. First, the patient held the plastic probe of the tongue pressure-measuring instrument (25 × 1.8 mm) in his mouth. Then, he was asked to press the probe hard with his tongue tip. The probe was pressed between the tongue tip and the upper incisors for 5 s with maximum power, and the tongue pressure was measured. The patient performed this training five times before each meal. In addition, he was instructed to press his tongue tip to the palatal side of the upper incisors without the probe before swallowing.
The L-DOPA test was repeated 8 days after the training began. The patient swallowed the tablets quickly with jelly and reached the “on” state after 30 min, with improvements in akinesia, bradykinesia, hypokinetic dysarthria, and swallowing. The highest blood level of the drug was 9.99 nmol/mL 30 min after administration . The highest tongue pressure measured in the “on” state improved to 28.8 kPa from 23.7 kPa over 10 days. The frequency of reaching the “on” state 30 min after receiving the medicine increased from 2 times/week before training to 5 times/week after training. Additionally, transdermal rotigotine (RTG) was initiated at a maintenance dose of 9.0 mg. The patient reported improvement in swallowing, and the frequency of “no-on” phenomena decreased. The patient gained 3 kg 3 months after RTG treatment without edema.