A 27-year-old Chinese female complained of amenorrhea of 3 months duration. Her medical history and that of her family was unremarkable. Her body mass index (BMI) and blood pressure (BP) were within the normal range (BMI: 19, height 165 cm, body weight: 62 kg, BP: 120/85 mmHg). Virilization and other clinical hormonal abnormalities were not noted, except for a borderline elevation of testosterone. Multislice spiral computed tomography (CT) urography revealed a well-circumscribed, round, soft-tissue mass with a maximum diameter of 2.7 cm in the left renal hilum, near the renal pelvis and atrophic bilateral adrenals. The CT value for the unenhanced mass was 35 HU; following contrast agent administration, it increased to 161 HU. Multislice spiral CT urography showed no abnormalities in kidney blood flow or renal perfusion. Renal function was normal, except for a slight delay in renal excretion . The tumor was clinically diagnosed as an angiomyolipoma and was excised in urinary surgery. During the operation, the mass in the left renal hilum was fully resected, sparing the kidney and was sent for pathology examination. Rapid intraoperative pathological diagnosis suggested oncocytoma, but paraganglioma and renal cell carcinoma could not be excluded. Based on the postoperative pathology results, the diagnosis was ectopic adrenocortical adenoma. The patient is alive with no tumor recurrence or metastasis after 3 months of follow-up.
The tumor tissues were fixed in 10 % formalin and embedded in paraffin. Four-micrometer sections were cut from each paraffin block. One section was stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E); the others were stained for immunohistochemistry using the streptavidin-peroxidase system (Ultrasensitive; Mai Xin Inc., Fuzhou, China) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Commercially available, prediluted monoclonal antibodies against the following antigens were used to evaluate the specimen: pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), vimentin, synaptophysin, CD56, neuron specific enolase (NSE), alpha-inhibin, Melan-A, CD34, S100, PAX8, chromogranin A, Ki-67 and anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA; Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). For the negative controls, the primary antibody was replaced with PBS.
Grossly, the mass was solid, round and well circumscribed; its cut surface was yellow and brown. The mass measured 2.5 cm at its largest diameter and weighed 8 g. Neither necrosis nor hemorrhage was identified.
Histologically, the tumor was well circumscribed and composed of cells mainly arranged in nests forming an alveolar- or acinar-like configuration and surrounded by an open vascular network. Foci of edematous stroma within the tumor and oncocytes with a diffuse growth pattern along its periphery were observed. Focal infiltrations of mature lymphocytes were especially prominent in areas undergoing lipomatous or myelolipomatous metaplasia . The tumor was mainly composed of cells with an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Focal areas of pale-staining clear cells with a lipid-filled cytoplasm were identified but were rare. Bizarre nuclear forms were occasionally seen in areas with diffuse tumor cells . Eosinophilic nuclear pseudoinclusion bodies and lipofuscin pigmentation were also detected . However, mitoses were exceptionally rare or absent. The peripheral adipose tissue contained foci of ectopic adrenal rests .
The tumor cells were markedly and diffusely positive for vimentin, alpha-inhibin , Melan-A , synaptophysin , NSE and CD56, and focally positive for pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), but negative for PAX8, S100 and chromogranin A. The sustentacular pattern of S100 staining, typical in paraganglioma, was not observed in this case. Rather, the immunohistochemical profile was consistent with an adrenocortical origin of this tumor. In addition, a fine granular AMA immunoreactivity was detected in diffusely arranged eosinophilic cells located in peripheral regions of the tumor . The Ki-67 labeling index was < 1 %.