A 7-year old, castrated male Abyssinian cat presented with decreased appetite, lethargy, nausea, eyelid swelling, nasal discharge, and sneezing for 3 weeks (Day 0). On physical examination, the cat showed swelling of the right orbit and nose, bilateral purulent nasal discharge, right-sided exophthalmos and purulent ocular discharge . The patient underwent a blood analysis (complete blood count, serum-chemistry, electrolyte, feline serum amyloid A, symmetric dimethylarginine, prothrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin time), diagnostic imaging (thorax radiograph, skull radiograph, and computed tomography [CT]), histopathology and immunohistochemistry (CD3, PAX5, and cytokeratin) of nasal cavity mass, and PCR for antigen receptor rearrangement (PARR). The specimen of mass was collected by endoscopy-guided biopsy. Blood work abnormalities included mild leukocytosis (white blood cell count 22,120/uL; reference range, 6,300 − 19,600/uL) and mild hyperglycemia (blood glucose 163 mg/dL, reference range 60–130 mg/dL). Chest x-rays revealed no abnormalities and skull x-rays revealed a round soft tissue opacity protruding into the right eye region. CT showed a nasal mass protruding from the rigth nasal cavity with lytic changes of the medial wall of the right orbit . Results of histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and PARR led to a diagnosis of T cell high-grade nasal lymphoma .
The cat showed anorexia on Day 14, at which point chemotherapy was started with the L-COP protocol . Chemotherapy was started with subcutaneous (s.c.) L-asparaginase at 400 U/kg. Diphenhydramine (2 mg/kg s.c.) and dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg s.c.) were given as a pretreatment 15 min before L-asparaginase injection. The cat was treated in hospital with fluid therapy, intravenous [i.v.] tramadol (2 mg/kg twice a day), marbofloxacin (4 mg/kg s.c. once a day), prednisone (2 mg/kg twice a day), famotidine (1 mg/kg twice a day), gabapentin (10 mg/kg twice a day), and mirtazapine (1.88 mg every other day) were prescribed. Anorexia was resolved on the morning of Day 15. On Day 15, Vincristine (0.5 mg/m2 i.v.) and maropitant (1 mg/kg i.v., once a day) were administered, and 0.25 mg oral prucalopride per day was prescribed . On Day 16, the patient became bright and alert, and clinical symptoms of eye protrusion and nasal congestion dramatically improved and was discharged from the hospital.
On day 23, the patient was still bright and alert, except for the return of right orbital edema following chemotherapy . Respiration was normal on physical examination, and palpation of the swollen region revealed marked crepitus and fluctuation. There were no injuries or traumatic events. Palpable subcutaneous emphysema extended over the right side of the forehead, the scapular region, and along the abdomen. The thoracic radiographs and CT were performed which revealed massive subcutaneous emphysema from the skull to thorax region and pneumomediastinum . Before the chemotherapy, the mass was filling the space around the orbital fracture site; after the chemotherapy, the size of the mass decreased dramatically, allowing the inspirated airflow to move from the nasal cavities through the orbital fracture site to the subcutaneous region and the mediastinum. Therefore, the patient developed massive subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum, with shrinkage of the nasal mass via chemotherapy allowing airflow through the previously documented orbital blowout pathological fracture.
Conservative therapy, such as whole-body bandage treatment and subcutaneous drainage using a negative-pressure syringe, was implemented to reduce air movement. The patient’s general body condition and respiratory status were normal on Day 25, and the physical examination showed an increase in the subcutaneous emphysema after bandaging. In order to continue the treatment for lymphoma, 200 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide i.v. and 2 mg/kg furosemide i.v. were administered, and the patient was discharged at the request of the owner. Afterwards, due to the refusal of the owner, no further treatment was given, and the owner repeated the removal of the subcutaneous air with a syringe at home. The cat was found dead at home on Day 40.