An 81-year-old man who presented with shortness of breath immediately after admission.
The patient was scheduled for admission to the Department of Endocrinology for glycemic control, as indicated by a hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c) level of 9.5%, and management of diabetic gangrene in both feet. The patient had been taking metformin for one year to control his blood sugar levels. However, his serum glucose levels have not been well controlled for the past month, as measured at home, and he subsequently developed diabetic foot, requiring hospitalization. The patient had no respiratory symptoms at the time of admission. However, shortly after admission, the patient suddenly complained of dyspnea, and his initial peripheral transcutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) level was 67% while breathing room air.
The patient had been diagnosed with COVID-19 at another institution six weeks before admission. He was hospitalized for approximately two weeks due to COVID-19 pneumonia and received treatment with remdesivir and steroids. After discharge, the patient did not require additional medication or home oxygen, and he did not complain of any other symptoms, such as respiratory distress, despite being almost inactive due to diabetic gangrene. Six weeks later, the patient was admitted to our institute for further management of uncontrolled diabetes and diabetic foot disease.
The medical history included medications, such as digoxin, diltiazem, and edoxaban for atrial fibrillation and metformin for diabetes mellitus. His baseline HbA1c level was 7.2% during a hospital visit six months prior. No other respiratory illness was observed. The patient had a smoking history of 2.5 pack years.
Upon admission, the patient's vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 114/77 mmHg; heart rate, 138/min; respiratory rate, 28/min; body temperature, 37.0 °C; SpO2, 67% on room air. The patient presented with coarse breath sounds and rhonchi in both lung fields.
Arterial blood gas analysis (ABGA) revealed hypoxemia [arterial oxygen partial pressure (PaO2): 63.2 mmHg], hypocapnia (arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure: 28.6 mmHg), and respiratory alkalosis (pH7.5) with oxygen supply at 5 L/min via nasal prong. However, his bicarbonate (HCO3, 21.7 mmol/L) and lactic acid (2.0 mmol/L) levels were within normal range. Mild leukocytosis with a white blood cell counts of 12.1 × 109/L, elevated C-reactive protein (17.53 mg/dL), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (120 mm/h) were found. In addition, the patient's initial blood glucose level was markedly elevated (387 mg/dL). However, procalcitonin level was within the normal range (0.25 ng/mL). No obvious abnormalities were observed in any biochemical indices.
On initial chest radiography, diffuse bilateral consolidation with ground-glass opacities (GGO) were observed in both lungs, and a small amount of bilateral pleural effusion was noted . Chest computed tomography (CT) performed 6 weeks after the patient was hospitalized for COVID-19 pneumonia revealed peribronchovascular and peripherally distributed consolidations, with greater severity in the left lung . On admission, enhanced chest CT revealed diffuse and multifocal patchy consolidation and GGOs in both lungs, along with a small to moderate amount of bilateral effusion .
To evaluate breathing difficulty, transthoracic echocardiography was performed to assess cardiac function. The results revealed mild diastolic dysfunction, mild pulmonary hypertension with a mean pressure gradient of 38 mmHg, and left ventricular hypertrophy. No abnormalities were observed.