A 68-year-old female patient with a history of inferior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) treated by primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) 8 years earlier visited our outpatient clinic. At that time, a residual intermediate stenosis in the mid left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) was treated conservatively after discussion in the heart team.
Cardiovascular risk factors were diabetes and current smoking. She complained of atypical chest discomfort. Physical examination was unremarkable besides obesity (body mass index 33). The electrocardiogram (ECG) is shown in . Adenosine stress MPI-SPECT was arranged, as it was suspected she would not achieve sufficient exercise levels.
Prior to adenosine administration, the patient denied anginal symptoms. A routine resting ECG was performed , that demonstrated mild ST depression in the inferior leads and negative T waves anterior without any pathological Q waves. Subsequently, pharmacological stress using adenosine started, at a standard rate of 0.14 mg/kg/min over 6 minutes. Blood pressure and heart rate were 145/65 mmHg and 63 b.p.m. at rest and at 107/63 mmHg and 66 b.p.m. during maximum hyperaemia, respectively. Profound ST elevation in the anterior leads developed halfway the infusion, , but the patient still denied chest pain. The cardiologist was consulted because of the discrepancy between ECG and clinical presentation. Meanwhile, MPI-SPECT images (using Tc99m-Tetrofosmin) were collected.
The patient was immediately transferred to the coronary care unit (CCU) after consultation with the cardiologist. She was pre-treated with heparin, ticagrelor plus aspirin and subsequently sent for urgent coronary angiography.
Distinct ST resolution was already seen just before coronary angiography (CAG), . CAG showed a diffusely diseased right coronary artery. The left coronary artery contained a subtotal stenosis in the proximal LAD with reduced coronary flow (TIMI 2), . No collaterals or angiographic signs of thrombus were visible. The LAD stenosis was treated with two drug-eluting stents with good angiographic result and good coronary flow; TIMI 3 flow.
After PCI, she was admitted to the CCU for further observation. Biochemical markers of myocardial damage were moderately elevated; from CK 154 U/L (ref < 145 U/L) and high sensitive Troponin T of 294 ng/L (ref <14 ng/L) at admission to the CCU (prior to PCI) and a maximum value of CK 240 U/L (ref < 145 U/L) and high sensitive Troponin T of max 1530 ng/L (ref <14 ng/L) 6 h later. A pre-discharge echocardiogram demonstrated a mildly depressed left ventricular function with wall motion abnormalities anteroseptal and inferior. The MPI-SPECT stress images demonstrated a severe anterior wall perfusion defect (no rest images were acquired), . The summed stress score was 47 and the extent of involved myocardium was 65%.
Two days after admission, she was discharged in a good clinical condition. Four months later, she successfully completed her cardiac rehabilitation program, is free of angina, has stopped smoking and has a normalized ECG, .