A 20-year-old man without personal or family medical history presented to his primary care physician with a left-sided thyroid nodule. Ultrasound showed a 3.2 × 1.9 × 2.7 cm heterogeneous nodule in the left thyroid lobe without calcifications or increased vascularity (A). Fine needle aspiration (FNA) yielded a mixture of spindle cells and epithelioid histiocytes classified as benign and suggestive of granulomatous inflammation. A 6-month follow-up ultrasound revealed growth of the nodule to 3.9 cm in its largest dimension, prompting surgical referral. Physical examination at that time revealed a 4-cm firm mass in the left thyroid lobe with mild left-sided neck induration. The patient had no palpable lymphadenopathy or right-sided thyroid nodules. He was clinically and biochemically euthyroid. The firmness of the mass and the neck induration raised concern for aggressive thyroid cancer. Repeat FNA yielded a hypocellular specimen with mildly atypical spindle and epithelioid cells classified as “atypical – a spindle cell neoplasm cannot be excluded.” The patient was recommended a diagnostic left hemithyroidectomy. Because of the worrisome physical examination, preoperative neck MRI was performed, confirming left-sided thyroid nodule but no obliterated tissue planes or invasion into adjacent structures (B). The right thyroid lobe appeared normal. During surgery, a firm 4–5 cm mass replacing most of the left thyroid lobe was encountered with surrounding inflammatory changes. There was no central compartment lymphadenopathy and no residual gross disease was present at the end of the hemithyroidectomy. Pathology demonstrated a 4.2 cm tumor with desmoid-type fibromatosis and PTC comprising <10% of the tumor (described in detail below). The stromal component extended outside the thyroid into adjacent skeletal muscle. Surgical margin was positive for the fibromatosis-like component.
The patient subsequently underwent completion thyroidectomy. Histopathology of the right thyroid lobe revealed no malignancy or fibromatosis. The patient had an uneventful recovery after completion thyroidectomy and was doing well 3 and 6 months postoperatively with well-healed neck incision. However, the ventral neck was firmer than typically seen after a thyroidectomy. Because of this, a neck CT was performed 3 months after completion thyroidectomy, revealing a 2 cm fluid accumulation in the left surgical bed as well as obscuration of adjacent fat planes, consistent with postoperative changes (C). There was no evidence of recurrent tumor.
Because of risk for local recurrence of the desmoid-type fibromatosis, the patient was scheduled for neck MRI but was lost for follow up. He returned 16 months after the initial operation with a palpable mass in his left neck and an MRI revealing a 10.5 cm tumor in the left thyroid bed (D). Core biopsy and open excisional biopsy revealed desmoid-type fibromatosis without recurrent PTC. After multidisciplinary evaluation, the patient is undergoing treatment with doxorubicin for his recurrent desmoid-type fibromatosis in line with recent recommendations in the literature [, , , ]. After two cycles of doxorubicin treatment, a neck MRI showed that no further significant growth of the tumor had occurred. The trachea remained deviated to the right but there was no tracheal compression. The patient had no airway symptoms and a spirometry was within normal limits.