A 26-year-old man was admitted to Shandong Provincial Hospital for sudden squeezing chest and abdominal pain for 1 day. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 147/87 mmHg and heart rate was regular at 95 beats pre minute. He was diagnosed with aortic dissection (Stanford type A) and then underwent an operation . Meanwhile, he suffered AKI due to renal artery involvement in aortic dissection and his serum creatinine increased from 180.1 µmol/L to 579.7 µmol/L (62–115 µmol/L) a week later. The operation was successful and his serum creatinine level was maintained at 200–300 µmol/L. Then he was discharged from the hospital. Three months after the operation, he gradually demonstrated anorexia and lost interest in the outside things. Increasingly, he was emotionally unstable and behaved abnormally. He sometimes abused his parents or kept speaking. Then, he went to a doctor in Shandong Provincial Mental Health Center and was diagnosed with a substupor state. His symptoms were partially improved with treatment of olanzapine, sulpiride, and sertraline. Approximately 1.5 months later, his symptoms worsened. He didn’t communicate with others and he had some hallucinations. Then, he was transferred to the neurology department of Qilu hospital. His expression was dim, and his bilateral legs had positiveBabinski and Chadcock signs. Liver and kidney function tests showed serum homocysteine 481.7 µmol/L (< 15 µmol/L) and serum creatinine 326 µmol/L. Antinuclear antibody spectrum, thyroid function, serum ceruloplasmin, blood ammonia and TORCH screen results were normal. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography showed multiple intracranial ischemia areas; multiple cerebral arteriosclerosis and stenosis. To determine the reason for hyperhomocysteinemia, we further examined urinary organic acids by gas-chromatography mass spectrometry and metabolite detection related to carnitine in blood by tandem mass spectrometry. Urinary organic acid analysis showed methylmalonic acid 171.55 mmol/molCr (0.3–3.6 mmol/molCr), 3-hydroxypropionic acid 5.5 mmol/molCr (0.2–1.1 mmol/molCr) and malonic acid 1.31 mmol/molCr (0-0.1 mmol/molCr). The ratio of propionylcarnitine (C3)/free carnitine (C0) in blood was 0.57 (0.02–0.25). The level of vitamin B12 was 1232 pg/ml (243–894 pg/ml). We examined targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) panel in the patient.
.Two compound heterogeneous pathogenic mutations were further identified in the MMACHC gene namely c.482G > A (p. R161Q) and c.658_660del (p. K220del) . The results of NGS panel indicated no suspicious pathogenic genes inducing aortic dissection. These results suggested that the diagnosis was combined MMA and homocystinemia, cblC type. He was treated with hydroxycobalamin, betaine, folinate, L-carnitine and symptomatic treatment for kidney dysfunction. After 4 months, the male had an outpatient visit and his neuropsychiatric symptoms significantly improved. Liver and kidney function tests showed homocysteine 48.7 µmol/L and serum creatinine 141 µmol/L. The urine routine examination showed urinary protein and occult blood is negative.