An otherwise healthy 24-year-old boy presented with a palpable mass in the region of his left proximal fibula and B/L knee pain for 6 months. He reported pain with activity, but there were no peroneal nerve symptoms. Radiographs of his left knee revealed an expansile lytic lesion at the proximal fibular epimetaphyseal level while the right knee X-ray showed a similar smaller lesion which prompted further evaluation (, ). MRI was done to delineate the accurate extent of the tumor and to rule out involvement of the adjacent soft tissues .
Histological diagnosis was made using a core needle biopsy sample obtained using fluoroscopic guidance under local anesthesia from both the sides. Histology showed sheets of uniform oval to polygonal mononuclear stromal cells admixed with numerous large osteoclast-like giant cells. Radiographs of other probable sites of GCT such as bilateral shoulder, wrists, and hands were normal. After the metabolic workup to rule out other disorders, the patient was planned for excision of the lesion. The aim of the surgery was en bloc excision of the lesion, while still preserving the peroneal nerve and peroneal vessels.
On the left side, the patient underwent partial fibulectomy (en bloc resection) and chemical cauterization of the edges with 5% phenol . After fibulectomy, proximal stump was around 2 cm with attachments intact and knee was found to be mediolaterally stable. To ensure negative margins, biopsy from the edge of the remnants on both sides was taken. The other side GCT was smaller and the patient was largely asymptomatic, hence was planned for conservative management with regular follow-up. Pathology specimens revealed sheets of uniform oval to polygonal mononuclear stromal cells admixed with numerous large osteoclast-like multinucleate giant cells, a histological picture consistent with GCT of bone. No malignant features were noted. Post-operative expected high-risk complication of peroneal nerve palsy was not seen. Post-operative period showed uneventful course of events. At 1-year follow-up, he remains fully active with no ligamentous laxity and free of distant metastasis. The other side also remains asymptomatic. No secondary surgical procedures were required.