A 70-year-old man with abdominal pain was admitted to our hospital. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a poorly contrasted area in the spleen and stenosis at the root of the celiac artery (CA) . Sagittal image and 3-D reconstruction image of enhanced CT indicated the almost occluded celiac arterial root, and post-stenotic dilatation . Arterial dilatation was observed around the pancreaticoduodenal arcade. However, no obvious aneurysm formation or arterial dissection was observed. Abdominal-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) depicted the disappearance of the flow void at the root of the CA. The patient had no history of atrial fibrillation but was diagnosed with splenic infarction due to MALS.
We performed laparoscopic MAL section as an elective surgery. Under general anesthesia, the first port for the videoscope was inserted at the umbilicus using the open technique. The other four operating ports were inserted after establishing pneumoperitoneum. After dividing the lesser omentum, the stomach was retracted using a Penrose drain. Furthermore, the lateral segment of the liver was ventrally retracted using Nathanson Hook Liver Retractors with Silicone Disk. The left gastric artery was looped with vessel tape and extracorporeally retracted. These retractions freed the hands of the surgeon and increased safety in probable emergency situations. Laparoscopic intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS) indicated retrograde blood flow in the common hepatic artery (CHA) and the CA . After exposing the diaphragmatic crura and left gastric artery, muscular fibers covered the abdominal aorta and the area around the celiac axis . Further cranial dissection revealed that the MAL compressed the CA. These compressing ligaments were divided until a three-quarters circumferential aortoceliac artery bifurcation was observed . Improvement in the arterial flow was confirmed during surgery using laparoscopic IOUS . After releasing the compression, antegrade blood flow from the CA to the CHA and the splenic artery (SPA) was depicted using IOUS. The operative time was 226 min and the intraoperative blood loss was 15 mL. The patient was discharged nine days after surgery without complications. Enhanced CT performed one month after surgery revealed no residual stenosis of the CA, no dilation of the pancreaticoduodenal arcade, and a marked reduction in the poorly perfused region of the spleen .