A 29-year-old G3P2 was transported to the regional academic medical center at 26 weeks 3 days of gestation due to vaginal bleeding in the setting of known vasa previa with possible PAS. She had a history of one previous cesarean delivery. Prenatal ultrasound at 27 weeks' gestation reported anterior placenta with marginal cord insertion and a vasa previa without sonographic evidence of PAS. On hospital day 9, she underwent a classical cesarean delivery with bilateral tubal ligation due to active preterm labor and vaginal bleeding. The patient had requested that a bilateral tubal ligation be undertaken at the time of the cesarean delivery and signed the appropriate consent forms. After delivery of the fetus, the placenta was manually expressed without difficulty, and the uterus was exteriorized for hysterotomy closure. There were no intraoperative complications documented and no evidence of PAS at the time of cesarean delivery. Estimated blood loss from the procedure was 870cc. Her immediate postpartum course was uncomplicated, and she was discharged home on postpartum day two. The placenta pathology report confirmed an unremarkable three-vessel cord, fetal membranes with bland decidual necrosis, villous maturation accelerated for gestational age with patchy edema, and decidual vasculopathy.
On postoperative day 20, the patient presented to a local hospital with heavy vaginal bleeding. A transvaginal ultrasound showed vascularity in the lower uterine segment along with a mass which was concerning for RPOC. CT and MRI at the local hospital supported this diagnosis. The patient was transported to the regional tertiary medical center where she had previously delivered for further management. The images were reviewed by the radiologists at the tertiary medical center, and they reported the presence of a hypervascular soft tissue mass with hemorrhagic components located in the anterior lower uterine segment and invading through the myometrium, which was suggestive of a retained placenta accreta versus a uterine dehiscence with extrusion of the products of conception. The patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy with no evidence of hemoperitoneum or obvious uterine dehiscence. Adhesions near the bladder limited visualization of the lower uterine segment. Suction dilation and curettage was performed under ultrasound guidance without successful evacuation of the suspected products of conception. Concern for PAS was again raised due to brisk vaginal bleeding totaling 2 liters following dilation and curettage. An immediate exploratory laparotomy was undertaken. After the vesicouterine adhesions were lysed and a bladder flap was created, a 4×3 cm area of hypervascularity was noted in the lower uterine segment consistent with PAS, and a total abdominal hysterectomy was accomplished. Total estimated blood loss from the case was 3.4 liters; the patient received 3 units of packed red blood cells and 2 units of albumin intraoperatively ( and). The pathology report detailed retained tissue, measuring 4×3 cm, grossly adherent to the anterior endometrial surface invading into the anterior uterine wall, without penetrating the serosal surface. The depth of invasion was 2.5 cm, 0.1 cm from the serosal surface, confirming a placenta increta. The patient’s postoperative course was uncomplicated, and she was discharged home on postoperative day two.