The patient was a 27-year-old man with no medical history. One day, his parents found him in his room; his head was covered with a bag connected by a tube to a helium gas tank commercially available for inflating balloons. When the emergency team arrived, they noticed his impaired consciousness (Japan Coma Scale I-3) and hypoxemia (SpO2 90% on room air), but he was still breathing spontaneously with stable hemodynamics. His SpO2 quickly increased to 97% with oxygen administration, and this mild hypoxemia seemed to be derived from aspiration. The exposure time to helium is unclear, and the interval between helium inhalation attempt and hospital arrival could not be estimated. On arrival at our hospital, he had stable blood pressure (131/73 mmHg) but tachycardia (heart rate 148 b.p.m.). He had good oxygenation (SpO2 96% on room air) but with tachypnea (respiratory rate 30 breaths/min). Body temperature was 37.2°C. He was sedated and intubated because of persistently impaired consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale E4V2M4) and restlessness. A physical examination revealed normal light reflex, no limb paralysis, and no subcutaneous emphysema or other findings to suggest a crush injury of the airway. Blood tests showed elevated white blood cell counts (19,910/mm3) by aspiration and lactate (3.4 mmol/L) by hypoxemia and creatine kinase levels (2,883 U/L) by lying down of unconsciousness; oxygenation was within normal range, and the other results did not show remarkable changes. His head computed tomography (CT) scan showed no obvious intracranial hemorrhage, cerebral infarction, or air migration to the brain . Based on these findings and the absence of obvious neurological abnormalities, CAGE was ruled out. We diagnosed this condition as HE because there was no other disease that accounted for his unconsciousness in spite of many inspections.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, and mechanical ventilation was continued. Rhabdomyolysis was treated by fluid replacement, and the creatine kinase level began to decrease. The hemodynamics stabilized, and the lactate levels decreased. The patient was extubated on hospital day 2 because his consciousness level had improved, and he was discharged on hospital day 3 without any neurological complications.
After discharge, a physical examination showed no neurological abnormalities, the Mini-Mental State Examination score (29/30) indicated no obvious higher-order cognitive dysfunction, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no signs of HE . At follow-up 1 week later, he had no impairment in activities of daily living and no neurological complications (Mini-Mental State Examination 30/30).