A 14-year-old boy presented with an intermittent and progressive non-exertional chest pain for 2 weeks. There were no associated shortness of breath, dizziness, palpitations, or a history of syncope or presyncope. Transthoracic echocardiography in the primary care clinic showed a mass in the right ventricle, and the patient was then referred to our cardiology department. His breathing rate and blood pressure were normal. On physical examination, the apical impulse was not palpable without obvious heaves or thrills, and the first and second heart sounds were normal without additional heart sounds, murmurs, or frictional sounds. Lungs were clear on auscultation with no adventitious sounds. The laboratory results were unremarkable. He had no cardiovascular risk factors, such as drug or alcohol use or a family history of heart disease. He also denied recent infectious symptoms or a history of chest trauma. The electrocardiogram on admission indicated sinus rhythm with an average heart rate of 84 b.p.m., unremarkable PR and QRS intervals, normal axis, and no evidence of chamber enlargement or myocardial ischaemia. Repeated transthoracic echocardiography showed a solitary, well-demarcated, hyperechoic mass attached to the right ventricular apex . Computed tomography pulmonary angiography performed to rule out pulmonary thromboembolism revealed a round-shaped tumour (10 mm × 8 mm) in the right ventricular apex that was isodense and attached to the interventricular septum . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mural ventricular mass with well-defined borders and mixed iso- and low signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging .
Surgical excision was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass conditions . Cardioplegia was performed with del Nido solution after cross-clamping the ascending aorta. The surgeon made a 5 cm incision on the right atrium, and then the right ventricle was completely observed via the tricuspid valve. A round 10 mm × 12 mm tumour mass was found in the right ventricular apex adjacent to the interventricular septum. Finally, the entire tumour and its base tissue were successfully resected , and cardiac haemangioma was confirmed via histopathology, in which it was characterized by a disorganized collection of blood vessels . The surgery was successful, and postoperative electrocardiogram and laboratory results were unremarkable. The postoperative echocardiogram showed normal right ventricular size and function. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day and had an uneventful postoperative recovery at the 8-month follow-up.