The parents brought a 28-day-old male child to the Dermatology outpatient department of Manipal Teaching Hospital, Pokhara, Nepal with the complaints of yellowish discoloration of the nail with slight swelling of the upper part of the middle finger of the left hand for one week. Mother reported that the baby had been suckling this finger since birth. The baby was well two weeks back when he developed slight yellowish discoloration of the middle finger of the left hand. The stain spread proximally with increasing thickness of the nail. There was no family history of fungal infections, psoriasis, lichen planus, Darrier’s disease, or yellow nail syndrome. There were no other risk factors suggestive of HIV infection in the parents. The baby was delivered at 39 weeks of gestational age via normal vaginal delivery and weighed 3250 g. There was no history of perinatal hypoxia. His developmental milestones were appropriate for his age.
On examination, the physical activities of baby were as per his age. There was noticeable yellowish discoloration of the nail of the middle finger of the left hand distally with yellowish subungal hyperkeratotic debris. Pitting or whitish deposits on the nail were not evident. Examination of the skin revealed no lesions suggestive of fungal infections, psoriasis, lichen planus or Darrier’s disease. Scalp hairs were healthy. Oral and genital surfaces were normal without any lesions suggestive of mucosal candidiasis. Systemic examination was within normal limits. It was provisionally diagnosed as onychomycosis. The nail was trimmed, and parents were counselled to come for follow-up every month, keeping in view that the condition may be self-limiting. However, at two months follow up, increased discoloration and thickness of the nail without the involvement of glabrous skin was observed. Nail specimens (nail clippings) and oral swabs were sent for laboratory diagnosis.
Before collecting the sample, the nail and distal meta-phalangeal areas were thoroughly cleaned with alcohol to remove skin contaminants. The discolored portion of the nail was clipped; the nail bed and underside of the nail plate were scraped with the help of a sterile serrated curette after discarding the outermost debris. Avoiding injury to the nail plate and bleeding, as much of nail material as possible from the advancing infected edge closest to the cuticle, and the site close to the lateral nail edges was collected.
The material thus obtained was divided into four aliquots; one for direct microscopy using a 30% potassium hydroxide wet mount, second for fluorescent microscopy using calcofluor white, the third part was subjected to histopathological examination and, the fourth portion was cultured onto a set of two Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA) with chloramphenicol. Swabs were also obtained from the oral cavity of the baby and were subjected to direct microscopy and culture.
The direct smear examinations and the histopathological examination revealed yeast cells with pseudohyphae . C. albicans was isolated from the nail specimen and the oral swab. The isolates were identified by conventional methods and confirmed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry). Antifungal sensitivity testing of the isolates from the nail and oral cavity was performed by microbroth dilution method (Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines). Both isolates had similar minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values (μg/mL): fluconazole (2), voriconazole (0.1), caspofungin(0.06), amphotericin B (1), and anidulafungin (0.03).
The lesion was graded to be of severity index 22 on the onychomycosis severity index scale . It is considered as severe infection [area of involvement: 3, the proximity of disease to the matrix: 4, the presence of dermatophytoma (patch/streaks) or subungual hyperkeratosis (> 2 mm): 10]. Blood investigations such as complete blood count, liver function test, renal function test, random blood sugar and routine urinalysis were within normal limits. The child was treated with fluconazole syrup 6 mg/kg/week and 5% amorolfine nail lacquer once/week. After three months of therapy, the patient completely recovered with the development of a healthy nail plate.