A 58-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history presented to the emergency department with occipital headaches associated with photophobia, phonophobia, nausea, fatigue, and poor balance for 5 days. The patient reported a tick bite 6 weeks before without erythema migrans. A flu-like syndrome followed ten days after and rapidly resolved without treatment. At this time, he had undergone serological testing by his general practitioner which was negative for Borreliosis and TBEV. At presentation, he was febrile with neck stiffness and signs of ataxia and was admitted for further investigation.
Three days later, he presented unilateral visual loss in his right eye (RE). Visual acuity was 20/100 in the RE and 20/20 in the left eye (LE). Intraocular pressure was normal. Slit lamp examination of the RE revealed non granulomatous anterior uveitis with 2+ cells. Fundus examination showed 2+ of vitreous haze and cells, flame-shaped and dot retinal haemorrhages at the posterior pole (CLARUS™ 500, Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Germany). The LE was unremarkable. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), indocyanine green angiography (ICG) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) excluded the presence of macular oedema or papillitis . When the vitritis started to improve and a better analysis of the retina was possible, discrete hypoautofluorescent lesions were observed and appeared as outer retinal lesions on OCT . We concluded a diagnosis of unilateral panuveitis. Topical treatment by prednisolone acetate 1% six times per day was introduced for the treatment of the anterior uveitis. To cover for a possible herpes meningoencephalitis with retinal involvement, an antiviral therapy with intravenous acyclovir 10 mg/kg/TID was initiated.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed elevated leukocyte counts (81 cells/mm3) with mononuclear cell dominance and an elevated protein level (1030 μmol/l). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) returned negative for all Herpes family viruses and acyclovir was therefore discontinued. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and syphilis were equally negative, without any other clinical evidence of such infection being identified and no malignant cells were demonstrated. Serum antibodies for Borrelia were still not detected whereas a seroconversion of the TBEV- immunoglobulin (Ig) titres measured by Enzyme Immunoassay was noted 2 weeks after admission (Index of IgM at 2.0 and IgG at 4.9 for a norm of 0.8–1.2 and 07.1.3 respectively). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was unremarkable. Meanwhile the patient’s neurological condition gradually deteriorated with the onset of psychomotor retardation, aphasia and hallucinations. The patient remained hospitalised and supportive care was pursued.
The neurological symptoms fully resolved within 3 weeks. A complete resolution of the intraocular inflammation without sequelae was observed at 5 weeks with a visual acuity back to normal (20/16).