We report on a 29 year-old female patient who presented with a slow onset of gait disturbance, spasticity, ataxia, dysarthria and cognitive decline developing over a peroid of just 4 months. The patient formerly had been healthy and the family history was unremarkable with the exception of her grandfather who had died from Alzheimer’s disease. In the clinical examination she showed anisocoria (L > R), a discrete left facial nerve palsy, a spasticity with dyskinetic movements of the left upper and lower limb, brisk tendon reflexes at both knees and ankles with a positive Babinski sign on both sides and an ataxic gait with small steps. Furthermore she displayed a staccato speech with dystonic movements of the mandibular muscles without any signs of aphasia. She was apraxic throughout the examination when being asked to follow basic instructions. Otherwise the general physical and neurological examination as well as the medical and developmental history were unremarkable with no severe neonatal or infantile illnesses. There was no history of medication or substance abuse.
The following investigations were all normal: Routine blood analysis, search for infectious diseases (HIV, Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum, Hepatitis B/C, HSV, VZV), thyroid function tests (TSH, fT3/4, TSH receptor antibodies, thyroperoxidase antibodies, thyroglobulin antibodies), metabolic investigations (α-galactosidase A, very long chain fatty acids, arylsulfatase A, beta- galactocerebrosidase, hexosaminidase A/B, folate, vitamine B12, methylmalonic acid, homocystein, coeruloplasmin), vasculitis screen (ANA, ANCA, RF, Cardiolipin) as well as the cerebral angiography and cerebrospinal fluid analyses (glucose, proteins, cells). The electroneuromyography and the electroencephalogram did not reveal any specific pathological findings. Also the whole-body PET-CT scan was normal.
MRI showed well-circumscribed, spotted and confluent hyperintensities on T2- and FLAIR-weighted images symmetrically in the periventricular white matter and in the corpus callosum . Those changes included and extended along the corticospinal tracts and the subcortical white matter sparing the U-fibers. On T1-weighted images, lesions were slightly hypo- to hyperintense, and after intravenous gadolinium application, no contrast enhancement was seen . Lesions showed strikingly restricted diffusion with decreased ADC-values . DSC perfusion did not reveal any changes of CBF or CBV (not shown). Compared with normal appearing white matter, 1H-MR-spectroscopy (TE 35 ms) of the affected areas revealed an unspecific pattern with an increased choline-peak (131 %), a decreased peak of N-acetylaspartate (31 %), and a decreased creatine-peak (73 %), while no lactate- or lipid-peaks were found . On CT, those areas showed hypodensity, and small calcifications were found within the lesions symmetrically in the frontal white matter adjacent to the callosal truncus and in the callosal splenium . Conventional angiography of the extra- and intracranial vessel was unremarkable and excluded signs of vasculitis (not shown).
As all examinations at that point were not clearly indicative for a specific disease we referred the patient for a stereotactic brain biopsy.
Biopsy specimens from the stereotactic biopsy showed CNS tissue with signs of reactive gliosis and extensive infiltration with CD68-positive macrophages. Furthermore, many axonal spheroids were seen which stained positive for neurofilament (NF) and amyloid precursor protein (APP). The Ki67 proliferation rate was not increased. The myelin was mainly preserved . In summary, we did not observe hints for an inflammatory or a primary demyelinating disease. JC-virus in situ hybridization to exclude the possibility of a progressive multifocal encephalopathy was negative. The brain biopsy specimens were also negative for CMV, EBV, HSV1/2, as well as VZV. CSF1R immunohistochemistry was negative while control samples revealed positive staining results . Electron microscopy revealed regularly myelinated axons however several axonal globular inclusions .
The initial descriptive neuropathological diagnosis was leukoencephalopathy with extensive axonal spheroids. Following the algorithm approach to adult-onset leukodystrophies of Alturkustani and colleagues, we finally favored an adult-onset leukoencephalopathy/leukodystrophy with axonal spheroids (ALAS) related to CSF1R mutation . As other adult leukoencephalopathies/leukodystrophies do usually not go along with the formation of axonal spheroids, our main differential diagnosis was Nasu-Hakola’s disease related to TREM2/DAP12 mutations, however since bone cysts and lipodystrophy were not reported in our patient, this diagnosis was rather unlikely.
The genetic testing revealed a heterozygous mutation in exon 18 (c.2381 T > C) of the CSF1R-gene leading to a change in the amino acid sequence (p.I794T). This mutation has been previously described in a family with clinically diagnosed atypical CADASIL syndrome . As our patient’s parents were not available for testing and her family history was not fully known, it is not possible to confirm that this mutation is de novo. Nonetheless, there was no family history of significance reported.