A 73-year-old woman was admitted to Ayatollah Rouhani Hospital in Babol, Iran, on May 15, 2021, with such clinical symptoms as high fever, sore throat,
body aches, anorexia, decreased sense of smell and taste, and respiratory problems, as well as the pulse rate of 65 rpm, blood pressure of 110.70 mmHg,
and 95% oxygen saturation at admission. The patient had a 10-year history of DM, and her blood sugar level and HbA1c were 305 mg/dL and 10.8%, respectively.
One day after admission, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed evidence of lung involvement and a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed the COVID-19 infection (cycle threshold value=27). An infectious disease specialist monitored the
necessary clinical functions, from admission to June 20, 2011, to assess the patient’s condition and treatment progress .
Standard treatment protocols were implemented for COVID-19 treatment management. Initially, the patient stopped taking glibenclamide,
and later it was replaced with Zipmet at a dose of 50/1000. Remdesivir injection was started with a daily dose of 200-100 mg along with interferon
beta-1a every day in the first week. Dexamethasone 4 mg twice daily for two weeks with heparin, ceftriaxone, and Lasix were prescribed as well.
Moreover, prednisolone 25-175 mg daily was also administered during hospitalization.
On the sixth day of hospitalization, blood sugar reached 338 mg/dL and 8 units of insulin were administered daily for one week. On the ninth day of hospitalization, carotid Doppler ultrasonography of the artery of the neck and eyes showed no evidence of thrombosis and dissection. However, evidence of mild atherosclerosis was observed in the form of calcified plaques in the left carotid bulb. Treatment with Amphotericin B was started at a single dose of 150 mg/kg/day and continued until the last day of hospitalization at a dose of 250 mg/kg/day.
On the 20th day of hospitalization, the patient complained of swelling and pain in the left eye and nasal involvement . The clinical examination of the eye revealed proptosis, chemosis, and cellulitis around the eye, as well as internal vision limitation. The complications in oculus sinister (OS) were observed in the left eye. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the eye and paranasal sinus showed drooping of the upper eyelid of the left eye, indicating the involvement of the upper branch of the III nerve, as well as hypertropia or exotropia in the patient’s eye . The forehead and mouth fold shifted to the right due to the seventh cranial nerve (CN VII) involvement. The most important ocular problem was the presence of a cherry-red spot indicating the involvement of the central retinal artery . Moreover, turbidity and thickening of the mucosa of the right frontal sinuses, maxilla, sphenoid, ethmoid, and effusion of the left sphenoid sinus were detected in the paranasal sinuses .
On the 30th day of hospitalization, the patient underwent endoscopic sinus surgery and removal of blackish necrotic tissue. The biopsy specimens were referred to the department of histopathology and mycology. During the second surgery, on the 37th day of hospitalization, the patient’s sinuses were drained during surgery to facilitate treatment. In the first and second samples, a part of the biopsy specimen was inoculated on Sabouraud dextrose agar supplemented with chloramphenicol (SC, Merck, Germany) and incubated at 37 °C. After two days of incubation, a small colony of fungal growth was observed in the culture . The colony was examined under a microscope after staining with lactophenol cotton blue . On biopsy and histopathology examination, aseptate, broad, and ribbon-shaped hyphae were observed in the tissue sections stained with methylene blue and H&E .
The DNA extraction and molecular identification at the species level were performed by sequencing the ITS rDNA (ITS1 5'-TCCGTTGGTGAACCAGCGG-`3 and ITS4 5'-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-`3), as previously described . The DNA sequence of the ITS rDNA region (accession number OL636400) showed 100% similarity with S. racemosum (KX815982).
Intravenous liposomal Amphotericin B (1 mg/kg/ day) was initiated on day five and the patient underwent surgery on day 37 with excision of necrotic tissue.
The patient’s condition was stable during the follow-up seven days after the complete evacuation of the sinuses. Amphotericin B was stopped and posaconazole oral suspension (80 mg/day) resumed for 30 days.
In vitro antifungal susceptibility testing of the S. racemosum was done according to the recommendations stated in the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M38-A3 guidelines . The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were 0.032 μg/ml for amphotericin B, 0.25 μg/ml for luliconazole, 0.5 μg/ml for posaconazole, 0.5 μg/ml for itraconazole, 4 μg/ml for tavaborole, 1 μg/ml for econazole, 1 μg/ml for isavuconazole, 2 μg/ml for caspofungin, 4 μg/ml for ketoconazole, 4 μg/ml for natamycin, ≥4 μg/ml for terbinafine, ≥4 μg/ml for butenafine, ≥16 μg/ml for voriconazole, ≥16 μg/ml for miconazole, ≥16 μg/ml for efinaconazole, ≥64 μg/ml for fluconazole, ≥16 μg/ml for sertaconazole, ≥16 μg/ml for tioconazole, ≥16 μg/ml for ravuconazole. Minimum effective concentration (MEC) values were 1 μg/ml for anidulafungin, and 4 μg/ml for micafungin.