A 68-year-old postmenopausal female was admitted to our department for a mediastinal mass that was found via chest computed tomography (CT). She was diagnosed with low differentiated adenocarcinoma of the fallopian tube without regional lymphatic metastasis, including the retroperitoneal perivascular and pelvic mesenteric areas and the right iliac blood vessel, after radical resection, including uterine, bilateral attachment and pelvic lymph node dissection, was performed in another hospital 5 years before. Five cycles of chemotherapy with a paclitaxel and cisplatin (TP) regimen were subsequently administered to this patient. None of the significant symptoms presented in the previous 5 years of routine follow-up until a mediastinal mass was found on CT scan, which was performed because of a cough with expectoration that presented in the patient 10 days earlier. There was no pertinent family history of cancer. Her physical examination had no obvious abnormalities. The enhanced chest CT showed a mixed cystic-solid mass with irregular lobes and fat density in the right upper mediastinum, approximately 27 mm × 28 mm in size . No evidence of metastasis was found in the upper abdomen, brain or bone via enhanced CT, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Serum testing of tumor markers showed that the cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) level was 99.00 U/ml (normal, < 35 U/ml), and the cytokeratin-19 fragment (CYFRA21-1) level was 4.09 ng/ml (normal, < 3.3 ng/ml). Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA153, neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) levels were normal in this patient. Resection of the right upper mediastinal mass, mediastinal lymph node dissection and anterior mediastinal fat dissection were performed via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), as the diagnosis of primary malignant mediastinal tumor was considered priority. Because of the tumor in the right upper mediastinum, we chose the lateral intercostal approach. The patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. The incision was made in the fourth right intercostal space at the anterior axillary line. The tumor was to the front of the ascending aorta. To ensure en bloc dissection of the tumor, we excised the tumor with an ultrasonic scalpel, not with an electric hook. The dissection started at the anterior border of the phrenic nerve. The tumor was then mobilized to expose the ascending aorta and innominate vein. Then, the mediastinal fat was fully dissected from the phrenic nerve, the aortopulmonary window, and the aorta. The mass was radically resected . microscopically, hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining showed that the mediastinal tumor was composed of serous adenocarcinoma cells , and mediastinal metastasis of the PFTC was confirmed by strong positive expression of PAX-8, CK7, EMA and WT-1, partial positive expression of estrogen receptor and negative expression of P53, CEA, Napsin A, PR, calretinin and TTF-1, as verified by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining . The Ki-67 labeling index was 70% , and one of four lymph nodes in the adipose tissue surrounding the tumor was also demonstrated to contain metastasis in this patient. Six cycles of the TP regimen were performed after resection. The patient was followed up regularly by head MRI and enhanced chest and whole abdominal CT scans. There are no signs of recurrence or metastasis to date.