A 73-year-old female presented with a four year history of a painful swelling in the left knee that was slowly growing, with a gradual increase in pain at the same time.. She had unnoticeable medical history. Pain was aggravated by weight bearing, sitting straight, but she enjoyed full range of motion, and her general health was not affected. Osteoarthritis of left knee joint was suspected in another clinic, and she was treated conservatively with analgesic drugs. The pain persisted despite administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for long time; she visited our outpatient clinic for consultation. Clinical examination revealed local tenderness over medial aspect of proximal tibia, small well defined swelling over the medial proximal tibia was palpable. It was firm in consistency and was not red or hot to touch. Roentgenography revealed a small well-defined osteolytic lesion with thinning out of the cortex over medial part of proximal tibia, surrounded by a thin sclerotic margin (,). Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed radiolucent lesion eroding the cortex, with central calcification (,). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a hypoechoic mass in both T1and T2 weighed mages, not suppressed on T2 fat suppression view T2FS, no fluid-fluid level, it was enhanced with Gadolinium, the lesion had extra osseous extension (-). Technetium99 (Tc99) bone scan revealed an increased uptake. Laboratory studies were within normal range. CT-guided biopsy was performed, and the pathology showed a picture of leiomyoma, consisting of moderate cellular proliferation of smooth-muscle cells with little cellular pleomorphism, with no mitoses or necrosis. Immunohistochemical stains showed positive stain for smooth- muscle actin (SMA). The diagnosis of a benign intraosseous leiomyoma was made. Since the definite diagnosis was established, surgical excision with wide margin was decided to avoid local recurrence. The specimen consisted of gray-white soft tissue mass without apparent central necrosis or fluid content by macroscopic examination. (, ). Microscopically, the tumor composed of fascicles of spindle- shaped cells with elongated nuclei and fusiformor blunt ends. No atypical mitosis was seen (, ). Immunohistochemical stains to SMA were diffusely positive. The surgical margin was free of tumor. Otherwise, the histological exams were compatible with the results of biopsy and confirmed the diagnosis of intraosseous leiomyoma. The patient symptoms had improved after surgery, pain gradually improved postoperatively until it disappeared by two months after surgery, weight bearing was allowed from next postoperative day, convalescence passed uneventfully. At the latest follow-up after 18 months following surgery, the range of motion of left knee achieved full extension and flexion to 130 degrees without discomfort without any instability or residual pain of the knee. No local recurrence, malignant change, or distal metastasis had occurred.