A 32-year-old male, serving soldier, with no known comorbidities was referred to our tertiary center with complain of abdominal pain and vomiting for last 3 days on the day of presentation. The pain was sudden in onset, spasmodic in nature, intermittent in type, localized to right lumber and periumbilical region, nonradiating, associated with nausea and abdominal fullness, aggravated by eating food, and no known relieving factors. He also gave history of two episodes of nonbilious and nonblood stained vomiting. There was no history of any trauma, fever, hematemesis, tenesmus, hemoptysis, significant weight loss, hematochezia, abdominal tenderness, night sweat, diarrhea, cough, icterus, and chest pain.
He had no history of similar illness in the past. His past history, family history and allergic history were unremarkable. He was nonsmoker, did not consume alcohol and had normal bowel and bladder habit.
On examination his vitals parameters were stable and the patient looked fair without abdominal tenderness or distention and no palpable abdominal mass. The laboratory analyses were sent and it showed decrease in platelets count of 134 000 cells/cumm with normal level of hemoglobin of 12.6 g/dl and total leukocyte count of 10 800 cells/cumm with normal range of other laboratory parameters, serology was nonreactive for HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C.
Ultrasonography of abdomen was performed which showed bowel in bowel sign in the right lower quadrant measuring 4×4 cm extending over 8 cm giving target sign likely suggestive of ileoileal intussusceptions. Also, contrast-enhanced CT of abdomen and pelvis revealed features suggestive of ileoileal intussusception with preserved vascularity and with no features of bowel obstruction. Along with this colonoscopy was done and showed ileal ulcers and biopsy was taken in the same setting.
With adequate evidence and confirmation from clinical presentation of patients and investigatory findings suggesting ileoileal intussusception, the decision for need of surgery was made. The patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy along with laparotomy for segmental resection and anastomosis of ileum for ileoileal intussusception. Intraoperatively, ileoileal intussusception in the distal ileum which was 15 cm from I-C junction was found as shown in Figure . The resected segment of ileum on macroscopic examination showed dark brown soft tissue mass . Along with the discovery of intussusceptions, a polypoidal growth in the ileum was noticed which was considered to be the lead point . Mesenteric lymph nodes were not enlarged; thus, lymph node excision was not done.
Histopathological examination of the specimen turned out to be GIST, which was positive for CD117 and DOG-1 in immunohistochemistry . Patient recovered well during postoperative period and was discharged on 10th postoperative day. Patient was then referred to oncology clinic for chemotherapy and was started on imatinib 400 mg as an adjuvant therapy. Patient was asymptomatic and stable during his scheduled outpatient follow-up 1 month after the discharge.