On November 29, 2021, a 57-year-old-man with FUO for three years was referred to our department, with the maximum body temperature of 38.9 °C. The fever did not subside with antipyretic drugs. He had no cough, but had a weight loss of 8 kg over the previous three years. He went to the local hospital many times, but the cause of fever was not established. He had a history of diabetes mellitus for 20 years, and his fasting plasma glucose levels were not well controlled. He also had a history of smoking for 20 years, and smoked about 20 cigarettes daily. He denied excessive alcohol consumption. He had lived in Hainan province, China for 12 years, and worked in orchard planting management. Before moving to Hainan province, he had lived in Zhejiang province for 45 years. He underwent a 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination on November 8, 2021, at a local hospital, and the results demonstrated multiple hypermetabolic lesions (the maximum standard uptake value, SUVmax was 7.7) in the spleen. The lymph nodes in splenic hilum showed slight hypermetabolism, suggestive of primary lymphoma of the spleen and involved lymph nodes. There was no evidence of abnormal FDG uptake elsewhere in the body.
On admission, his temperature was 36.5 °C. A blood test revealed a white blood cell count of 6.05 × 109/L, with 59.1% neutrophils, 31.1% lymphocytes, and 8.8% monocytes, hemoglobin of 110 g/L, and platelets of 99 × 109/L. Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were elevated at 20 mg/L and 80 mm/h, respectively. His fasting plasma glucose level was 9.15 mmol/L. The results of renal and liver function tests were normal. T-SPOT TB test was negative. The serum 1.3-β-D-glucan tests and Aspergillus galactomannan tests for fungi were also negative. Several blood cultures were negative for bacteria. The results of several virus serology tests, such as human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus, were negative.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple pulmonary micronodules (3–4 mm in diameter) in bilateral lungs. Ultrasound of the bilateral cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, and inguinal regions revealed no enlarged lymph nodes. Abdominal ultrasound revealed hypoechoic area within the enlarged spleen, and no ascites. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enhancement scan showed splenomegaly and multiple small hypodense lesions within the spleen . Spleen biopsy guided by CT was performed, and the examination of the puncture fluid showed a few scattered lymphocytes, without evidence of malignancy. Culture of spleen biopsy specimen grew no microorganisms, while mNGS of splenic puncture fluid showed B. pseudomallei, which confirmed splenic melioidosis.
Thus, treatment with intravenous meropenem 1 g every eight hours was given for three weeks, and then the patient was discharged with a stable condition. After discharge, the treatment was changed to oral faropenem for two months. Meanwhile, insulin was used to treat the diabetes mellitus, and his fasting plasma glucose level was normal. During the follow-up, the patient was in good condition except having a low-grade fever occasionally, and a blood test revealed hemoglobin 104 g/L, and platelets of 86 × 109/L, with a normal white blood cell count. Although the clinical condition of the patient was generally stable, he refused to continue with oral medication to treat splenic melioidosis.
The patient was re-admitted to our hospital and strongly requested a splenectomy. Hence, a splenectomy was performed, and the enlarged spleen (around 15 cm in length) was observed. The liver, colon and small intestine showed no obvious abnormalities. The histopathological findings of the spleen indicated chronic inflammation with significant necrosis, and no evidence of malignancy . Culture of pus from the spleen indicated Gram-negative bacilli, and was identified as B. pseudomallei by gene amplification and Sanger sequencing of 16S rRNA with primers 27F/1492R., Also, mNGS of the pus showed B. pseudomallei, with 1783 unique reads. After the splenectomy, antibiotics were not used. During the 13-month follow-up, the patient had no fever, and the hemoglobin and platelets reverted to normal levels.