A semi-urgent Caesarean section was carried out on an obese (body mass index 45, weight 130 kg, height 170 cm) 35-year-old Caucasian woman due to cephalopelvic disproportion. She had no previous neurological problems. Subarachnoid anaesthesia was performed by a medial approach at L3 and L4 vertebrae with the patient in the sitting position. A long 25 gauge Quincke (Whitacre®) needle was used to inject 1.8 ml hyperbaric bupivacaine (5 mg/ml) and satisfactory sensory anaesthesia was achieved up to a level equivalent to T5. The attending anaesthetist did not document any difficulties, but the patient later reported that several attempts were needed to obtain correct positioning of the needle and that she had experienced one minor episode of paraesthesia in her right leg. The Caesarean section was uneventful but the patient complained postoperatively that the spinal anaesthesia had not yet worn off. However, no immediate action was considered necessary.
Two days later, the patient could still not support her right leg. A neurological examination verified unilateral neuropathy affecting the patient's right lumbar roots of L4 to S1: knee extension (L3 to L4), ankle dorsiflexion (L4) and foot eversion (L5 to S1) were severely weak; hip flexion (L1 to L2) was slightly weak, and there was sensory loss for pinprick and cold sensation on the lateral aspect of the right lower leg (L5), the lateral side of the foot (L5 to S1) and the perineum (S2 to S3). The following were unaffected: plantar flexion (S1 to S2), foot inversion (L4 to L5), knee flexion (S1), gluteal function (L4 to L5, S1 to S2) and sphincter tone (S2 to S4). All the patient's deep tendon reflexes were normal.
An MRI scan revealed a congenital small bony spinal canal combined with a degree of lipomatosis equivalent to LEL 2 according to Borré's grade. The sagittal diameters of the patient's spinal canal and dural sac were 16 mm and 10 mm, respectively, while her epidural fat and/or spinal canal index was 10/16 = 62.5%. Her dural sac was considered small (6 mm), leaving practically no free space for the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) . The cords of the patient's cauda equina were compressed into a tight bundle. After neurosurgical liaison, the examining neurologist recommended watchful waiting including electromyography (EMG) and electroneurography (ENG) after six weeks. These investigations did not detect any lumbosacral nerve root pathology and the patient has slowly improved. Eight months later, however, she was still experiencing lower back pain and weakness in her right leg.