A 77-year-old German woman presented to our emergency department with dyspnea and peripheral edema, which was first noted a few days ago. Previous ultrasound had ruled out deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and diuretic therapy had already been initiated leading to a slight alleviation of her symptoms. The medical history included tonsillectomy, appendectomy, and hysterectomy. No other previous diseases were known at that time. On physical examination, we noted a marked jugular vein pulse and discrete edema of the lower extremities. Pulmonary and cardiac auscultation revealed no abnormal findings. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 95 beats per minute without further abnormalities. On transthoracic echocardiography we noticed a dilated right heart with severe tricuspid regurgitation . No other cardiac defects were seen; the left ventricular systolic function was normal. Using continuous wave (CW) Doppler analysis for estimating the systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (sPAP), a value of 28 mmHg was calculated.
CT angiography subsequently ruled out pulmonary artery embolism. This examination also revealed multiple liver lesions, which we further investigated. Coronary angiography and right heart catheterization were performed first. There was no relevant coronary artery disease, no shunt defect, and slightly increased pulmonary artery pressure. Further internal and oncological diagnostics initially failed to detect a primary tumor as cause of the liver lesions. Therefore, a biopsy was performed with histological evidence of a well-differentiated G1 NET with high expression of synaptophysin and low co-expression of CD-56. The proliferation rate was 1%, validated with a MIB-1 marker.
In a 24-hour urine collection, the concentrations of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid and serotonin were both significantly elevated (72 mg/24 hours at an upper limit of 8 mg/24 hours and 277 µg/24 hours at an upper limit of 240 µg/24 hours, respectively). Serotonin levels in serum analysis were normal; however, preceding intake of pantoprazole may result in lowered serum serotonin levels. We assessed the findings as indicative of carcinoid syndrome and investigated cardiac involvement on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which showed severely dilated right heart cavities . The right ventricular myocardial structure showed a hypertrabecularization. The tricuspid valve was rigid and fixed with incomplete closure. The other valves, especially the pulmonary valve, had no pathology. Cine Magnetic Resonance Imaging documented a severe systolic jet from the right ventricle into the right atrium caused by incomplete closure of the tricuspid valve.
The case was discussed interdisciplinarily with cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, and oncologists. The tumor entity was judged to be associated with a good prognosis owing to its slow proliferation rate. Drug treatment was initiated with intramuscular injection of somatostatin. The right heart pathology was deemed to be most relevant regarding symptoms and prognosis. After joint discussion, there was agreement on a protocol involving two octreotide cycles followed by mechanical tricuspid valve replacement. The liver metastases with diameters up to 5 cm were treated conservatively.
The decision for a mechanical heart valve was made due to the lower risk of fibrosis compared with biological valve replacement. The patient was compliant and agreed to long-term strict [international normalized ratio (INR) 3.0–3.5] oral anticoagulation with phenprocoumon. The operation was performed 5 months after the first hospitalization in June 2015. A 31 mm Carbomedics heart valve was implanted. The MRI and echo findings were confirmed in situ. The tricuspid valve was found to be rigid and retracted with no possibility of valve reconstruction. In the postoperative course, a hemopericardium occurred with the need for surgical treatment as well as the first onset of typical atrial flutter, which was successfully treated with amiodarone. The patient was discharged 16 days after the tricuspid valve replacement.
In October 2017, the patient presented with recurrent typical atrial flutter and dyspnea. Regarding carcinoid heart disease with an otherwise good postoperative course, we recommended ablation therapy owing to its good long-term efficacy . Twelve-lead-ECG suggested a counterclockwise, cavotricuspid isthmus-dependent atrial flutter with 2:1 conduction and a ventricular rate of 130 beats per minute.
However, the presence of incisional or other types of scar-related atrial flutter was also considered. Invasively, the suspected tachycardia mechanism was confirmed by both entrainment and activation mapping . After registration and superimposition of the fluoroscopy data, the position of the mechanical valve prosthesis was carefully marked by annotating the locations of the metal artifact recordings of the ablation catheter. Ablation was performed with an inferior cavotricuspid isthmus line leading to termination of the typical atrial flutter. The bidirectional block of the cavotricuspid isthmus was finally confirmed by differential pacing.
The patient completed a follow-up of 3 years after ablation and remains in good clinical condition. All available ECG recordings show sinus rhythm. No new arrhythmias have been noted. Concerning heart failure, she is asymptomatic [New York Heart Association (NYHA) I] under appropriate guideline-directed medication. As such, there is currently no evidence for a progression of the carcinoid heart disease.