Prior to this admission, a 27-year-old woman sought medical attention at a local hospital because of facial redness and edema caused by eating a mango. She was treated with dexamethasone (5 mg intravenously daily) for five days. The patient gradually developed a round face, acne, hirsutism, hypokalemia, and 5 kg of weight loss over the course of one month since receiving dexamethasone. Upon hospitalization, the patient presented with a one-month history of facial edema, weight loss, and acne. She had no family history of Cushing’s syndrome, pheochromocytoma, or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. A 5.5-cm mass located in the right posterior lobe of the liver was detected by ultrasound in a routine physical examination 16 months ago at a local hospital; however, the patient had no symptom and did not seek further medical attention at that time.
The patient’s blood pressure was 120/75 mmHg in both arms in the supine position, with a regular pulse of 76 bpm. Her height was 164 cm and her weight was 48 kg (body mass index:17.8 kg/m2). The patient had “moon face” and severe facial edema, beard, central deposition of fat with slim extremities and atrophic muscles, and no pretibial edema. The skin was diffused with acne and both armpits had hyperpigmentaion.
Laboratory tests revealed marked hypokalemia (2.1 mmol/L; normal range, 3.5–5.5 mmol/L), which could not be normalized with oral and intravenous potassium supplementation until spironolactone was added. A 75-g oral glucose tolerance test confirmed diabetes mellitus with a fasting blood glucose level of 9.19 mmol/l and a 2-h glucose level of 21.66 mmol/L, with a HbA1c level of 6.3%. She was started on insulin aspart30 (48 U daily).
Endocrinological investigation identified severe hypercortisolism with loss of circadian rhythm. Plasma ACTH level was elevated to 1157 pg/mL, confirming ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome. Except for testosterone, the catecholamine metabolites, growth hormone, calcitonin, and prolactin levels were all within the normal range .
MRI and contrasted MRI revealed no pituitary adenoma and EAS was considered. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT scanning revealed that the mass lesion was located in the right adrenal gland and not in the right hepatic posterior lobe. The mass was a heterogeneous solid tumor which was mildly enhanced with some patchy nonenhancing areas . PET/CT showed moderate fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the mass . Both contrasted CT and PET-CT revealed bilateral adrenal hyperplasia, but the neck, thorax, and pelvis were normal.
We prepared to do inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) for ACTH assays, adrenal vein sampling for ACTH assays to make out the origin of ACTH. But the patient’s general condition rapidly deteriorated after admission, Adrenal tumorectomy was performed. During surgery, when the right adrenal mass was mobilized, no hypertensive crisis occurred. A 6.5-cm black mass was found arising from the medial branch of the right adrenal gland . Hematoxylin-eosin staining of the tumor revealed that most of the cells were chromaffin-like cells. In addition, there were multifocal oval eosinophilic cells under the tumor capsule . Immunohistochemical staining showed positive staining for chromogranin A (CgA) and CD56 , with a Ki67 labeling index of approximately 16% for chromaffin-like cells. No positive ACTH immunostaining was noticed . Positive immunostaining for CRH and Melan-A and negative immunostaining for CgA and CD56 were found in the eosinophilic cells, indicating that CRH production is indeed derived from the tumor’s peripheral cells.
One day after surgery, ACTH levels had decreased from 715 to 14.3 pg/ml and serum cortisol level had decreased from more than 50 to 10.4 μg/dl. One week postoperatively, blood potassium and glucose levels normalized without the need for medication. The signs and symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome gradually disappeared within two months, and the hydrocortisone supplementation (initial dosage was 60 mg daily and tapered gradually) was discontinued seven weeks postoperatively. CT revealed that the left adrenal gland was almost reduced to the normal size three months later. The patient is currently under regular follow-up and remains well nine months after surgery.