A healthy 78-year-old woman had been suffering from 10-cm rectal prolapse from the anus for several years. The patient had undergone laparoscopic posterior rectopexy via the Wells technique four years ago. At the operation, synthetic mesh composed of polypropylene at the sacral attachment side and expanded polytetrafluoro-ethylene at the organ attachment side had been used to fix the rectum. After the rectum was mobilized from the promontory of the sacrum down to the pelvic floor, the mesh was trimmed to three-quarters of the circumference of the rectal wall and then placed at the dorsal side of the rectum, where it was fixed with tackers at the sacrum. The mesh was then sutured and fixed to the rectal wall with absorbable string, and the whole mesh was completely covered with peritoneum . The patient was followed up in the outpatient clinic without any symptoms, including recurrence of rectal prolapse.
Four years after the surgery, the patient complained of a small amount of bloody stool. A colonoscopy examination revealed that part of the mesh had migrated into the rectal lumen at 8 cm from the anal verge . Computed tomography showed a diverticulum-like structure with panniculitis in the fat tissue behind the middle rectum, and a high-density structure was identified inside the diverticulum-like structure . Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of mesh migration into the rectum was made.
Complete removal of the mesh and tacker with rectal resection was performed by experienced colorectal surgeon. Before rectopexy, the patient had severe fecal incontinence and her anal sphincter function was decreased, therefore, Hartmann's operation was indicated instead of anastomosis. Intraoperative findings showed that the posterior wall of the rectum, the anterior surface of the sacrum and the mesh were tightly adherent, with firm scars. The mesh and tacker were completely removed from the presacral scar tissue by sharp dissection with electric scissors. The rectum was resected with the mesh and tacker, and sigmoid colostomy was constructed. In the resected specimen, the mesh was folded like a mesh plug for inguinal hernia repair and placed in the mesenteric fat of the posterior wall of the rectum, with the corner of the edge of the mesh protruding into the inside lumen (a, b).
The patient had a good postoperative course without any complications except for postoperative dysuria. She is still followed up in the outpatient clinic without any additional interventions.