A 1-month-old Japanese boy, weighing 3.5kg, was admitted to our hospital with intractable arrhythmia, specifically, multifocal atrial tachycardia with heart rate greater than 180 beats per minute. The presence of an atrial septal defect (ASD) and tachyarrhythmia were causing heart failure. Because his neck was short and it was difficult to look at his epiglottis, bronchoscope-assisted transnasal intubation was performed.On day 6, perforation peritonitis was detected, and ileocecal resection and colostomy were performed. On day 20 the ASD was closed with pericardial membrane to correct the heart failure. After surgery, cardiorespiratory conditions stabilized, but evidence of stenosis was apparent from auscultation. On day 27, tracheal extubation was not possible, and re-intubation might be impossible, owing to epiglottal oedema, and the risk of upper airway obstruction after extubation. Elective tracheostomy was performed on day 48. Stenosis was still apparent during auscultation and expiratory flow limitation did not improve. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan image showed narrowing of his right main bronchus and a white mass was detected by bronchoscopy. On day 79, bronchoscopy revealed an extensive granuloma in his right main bronchus just below the carina and the presence of a granuloma in the second left carina . His right main bronchus was occluded and even after tissue removal with forceps, granulomas proliferated again, and occlusion of the right main bronchus persisted. Consequently, from day 80 to 109 dexamethasone was administered intravenously (0.3mg/kg/day). Although the granuloma in his left bronchus disappeared, occlusion remained in his right main bronchus. Dexamethasone was gradually decreased on day 95 and replaced with prednisone 0.5mg orally on day 109. Subsequently, the granuloma increased and both bronchi were obstructed. On day 113, the granuloma was reduced with yttrium aluminium garnet (YAG) laser ablation but, a week later, bronchoscopy revealed an enlarged granuloma. Tranilast (0.05g/kg/day) was started, and on day 126, budesonide inhalation (0.5mg) was administered. On day 129, YAG laser ablation was repeated and vestiges were removed with forceps. Budesonide inhalation and tranilast were continued, and the granuloma did not reproliferate. He was weaned from mechanical ventilation, and spontaneously breathing via a tracheostomy tube; he was discharged from the intensive care unit with the tube on day 149.