A left double J-stent was applied to an obese 38-year-old patient (BMI 45 kg/m2, G3/P1) for infected hydronephrosis at 15 + 3 weeks of gestation in another hospital. Because of severe discomfort, the double J-stent was removed at 23 + 1 weeks of gestation. The patient's symptoms improved after the removal but recurred soon afterwards, with newly emerging pain and weakness in the left leg, especially when raising the leg. Suspicion of an intervertebral disc affection led to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This revealed a 20 × 10 cm lesion adjacent to the left kidney, leading to the diagnosis of a psoas abscess. The patient was transferred to our clinic at 24 + 0 weeks of gestation. White blood cells (WBC) and c-reactive protein (CRP) were both elevated (17 × 109/l and 278 mg/l). A calculated antibiotic treatment (piperacillin/tazobactam 1.5 g three times daily) was started, and ultrasound-guided percutaneous abscess drainage was performed. Fresh urinoma was ruled out by serum-identical creatinine in the punctate. MRI and ultrasound ruled out hydronephrosis at this time. Thus, further double J-stenting or percutaneous nephrostomy was not indicated. After accidental dislocation of the drain by the patent, a second abscess drainage had to be inserted into the residual abscess at 24 + 5 weeks of gestation. The drainage was flushed twice daily, and antibiotics were continued for 14 days. Microbiological examination revealed Prevotella bivia, sensitive to the antibiotic treatment already started.
Furthermore, the infection parameters were regressive in the following days. On Re-MRI at 25 + 4 weeks of gestation, the size of the psoas abscess had regressed compared to the external MRI, with a size of 7 × 6 cm . There was no evidence of urolithiasis on the MRI. At 26 + 2 weeks of gestation, the abscess appeared sonographically to be approximately 5 × 5 cm in size . The drainage was removed at 26 + 6 weeks of gestation with almost normalised infection parameters (WBC 10 × 109/l, CRP 5 mg/l). The patient was free of fever at all times, with normal renal retention parameters, and could be discharged home.
The sonographic controls of the foetus at 32 + 0 and 36 + 0 weeks of gestation showed normal growth with good foetal development, normal amniotic fluid volume and Doppler indices. The patient was asymptomatic in the further course of the pregnancy.
Elective repeat caesarean section was performed at 38 + 0 weeks of gestation, with partial bilateral salpingectomy for tubal sterilisation after completed family planning. A female neonate, weighing 2850 g, was born with physiological pH of the umbilical cord artery and Apgar score. The postnatal course in our ward was uneventful.
During puerperium, computed tomography (CT) was performed due to colic-like flank pain. It showed evidence of bilateral urolithiasis, including a left ureteral calculus, leading to the re-insertion of a left double J-stent and subsequent ureterorenoscopic laser lithotripsy in another hospital. Examination of the stones revealed calcium oxalate stone composition.