The patient was a 29-year-old woman (body weight 45 kg, body mass index 18.03 kg/m) who delivered transvaginally two weeks before presenting with bulging of the abdominal wall. Her medical history included no specific disease, and her pregnancy history was gravida 3 and para 2. Computed tomographic and ultrasonographic examinations revealed an attenuated linea alba and separation of the rectus . The distance between the two rectus abdominis muscles was 7 cm at the umbilicus, and the separation continued to 4 cm above and 4 cm below the umbilicus. Three months of conservative therapy comprising exercises to strengthen the transversus abdominis was ineffective, and the patient newly developed lower abdominal cramping and back pain at rest and had difficulty performing activities of daily living. Physical assessment, blood testing, and imaging examination ruled out other etiologies. Therefore, we decided to perform surgical treatment and selected the eTEP, Rives-Stoppa, and TAR procedure to reduce the risks of infection and hernia recurrence.
After the induction of general anesthesia and intubation, the patient was placed in the supine position. Port #1 (Kii Fios, 12 mm; Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA) was inserted in the right upper quadrant for the eTEP access with the optical method, and an inflation pressure of 8 cm H2O to 10 cm H2O was used to dissect the retrorectus space . Port #2 (EZ trocar, 5 mm; Hakko, Nagano, Japan) was inserted into the retrorectus space. A 30-degree scope was placed through port #1. Using port #2, the right posterior rectus sheath (PRS) was released in the caudal-to-cephalad direction with an ultrasonic coagulation and cutting instrument, and inferior crossover was done from the right to left PRS. Port #3 (EZ trocar, 5 mm) was inserted and the left PRS was dissected. Port #4 (5 mm) was inserted on the left side above the umbilicus. Ports #5 and #6 (5 mm) were inserted to release the PRS caudally . The bilateral TAR procedure was performed to confirm the mesh placement and tension-free rectus plication. The neurovascular bundle was identified, and the lamina of the internal oblique muscle was transected just medial to the neurovascular bundle . The underlying transversus abdominis muscle was transected to release the plane posterior to the transversus abdominis muscle, achieving bilateral TAR. The extent of dissection of the retrorectus space was 3 cm from the diastasis in all directions. Following this, both sides of the rectus were plicated with barbed self-locking 2-0 V-lok suture . Polypropylene mesh (30 × 21 cm Ventralight ST; Beckman and Dickinson Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ) was placed in the retrorectus/preperitoneal space and fixed by 3-0 Vicryl at the cranial, caudal, and both lateral sides. A 19-Fr silicone suction drain was placed in the retrorectus space. We used intraperitoneal mesh as the retrorectus mesh because this is the only large-sized mesh available in our hospital.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The drain was removed on postoperative day 4, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. At one month after the surgery, the patient reported only slight discomfort when lifting her child; the lower abdominal cramping and back pain had disappeared, and suturing and mesh fixation pain was not induced by contraction or relaxation of the rectus abdominis. There was no recurrence seen on routine follow-up abdominal computed tomography performed 3 months after the surgery . One year after the surgery, the patient had not experienced DRA recurrence, and the discomfort had disappeared. Hernia recurrence mainly occurs in one year, and after one year routine follow-up the patient is counseled to return to a clinic if any clinical changes occur.