A male in his 70s with worsening dysphonia came to out Ear, Nose & Throat Unit. He had history of smoking for 50 years of about 30–40 cigarettes per day. Negative history for alcohol abuse and comorbidities.
Flexible laryngoscopy showed an exophytic lesion that affected the left hemilarynx, absence of arytenoid motility with subglottic, anterior commissure and right vocal cord extension. Neck computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed thickening of the left vocal cord with inhomogeneous enhancement, spreading in left paraglottic space with no extension in subglottis; increased in size and multinodular thyroid gland; no evidence of thyroid cartilage invasion and neck lymphadenopathy. The endoscopic biopsy of the laryngeal lesion revealed a squamous cell carcinoma. So, after discussing the case with a multidisciplinary team, a total laryngectomy within bilateral neck dissection (levels IIA–IIB–III–IV–V–VI) and tracheo-esophageal puncture (TEP) with voice prosthesis placement were performed. No complications occurred. During hospitalization, in 10th post operative day, naso-gastric tube was removed, and voice rehabilitation has been started. Twenty days after surgery patient was discharged at home. Histological examination revealed a pT3 poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, free resection margins, no thyroid cartilage involvement and absence of metastasis on bilateral lymph nodes. Also, thyroid pyramidal lobe was free of cancer. However, in a 7 mm Delphian node a sub-massive metastasis was found. So, in agreement with oncologist, patient underwent close follow-up including neck CTs every three months.
However, eight months after surgery, during follow-up control, neck examination revealed a suspected nodule in the right thyroid lobe. Neck CT with contrast showed a round extra-parenchymal lesion with peripheral contrast in the superior pole of the right thyroid lobe .
So, a right thyroid lobectomy was performed under general anesthesia. Histological assessment revealed a nodule, 22 mm in diameter, in the superior pole of the thyroid lobe, that was a metastasis from squamous carcinoma. The remaining thyroid tissue was affected by multinodular macrofollicular goitre.
The patient underwent adjuvant therapy and, one year after the second surgery, the patient showed no clinical or radiological signs of recurrence.