A 30-year-old Chinese female with no obvious cause appeared with numbness and inductance of lower extremities 2 months previously. It initially manifested as double plantar numbness, which gradually progressed to both legs, and was accompanied by double leg weakness, walking instability and a foot cotton feeling. There was no muscle soreness or beating, no dizziness and headache, no nausea and vomiting, no blurred vision, no difficulty in swallowing and drinking water, and no incontinence. The symptoms of numbness and weakness gradually progressed to the hands, the hands could not bear weight, and the symptoms gradually progressed. For nearly 2 days, the lower extremity weakness symptoms were significantly worse than before, and she was unable to stand firmly alone or squat. She was then admitted to our hospital. Her diet, sleep quality, urination and defecation were normal. Weight loss was 4 kg in the past 2 months. There were no bladder or bowel complaints, and no involuntary movements were noticed. There was no history of dog bite or vaccination. There was no past history of any illness, and she had not had any previous episodes of weakness. The patient did not have any addictions and gave no history of high-risk sexual behavior. Her menstrual history was noncontributory. She was married and had 2 children. There was no history of abortions or stillbirths.
Physical examination at admission revealed that she had a temperature of 36.5°C, heart rate of 105 bpm, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, blood pressure of 135/90 mm Hg and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air. She had no malar rash, oral ulcer, alopecia, arthritis or muscle inflammation. Neurologic examination indicated that the muscle strength in the legs was of grade 4/5 proximally and distally bilaterally, and there was an absence of deep tendon reflex in both knees and ankles. Paresthesia was observed in the distal limbs, with glove and stocking distributions. Her sense of acupuncture analgesia and vibration at the distal extremities was decreased. The deep tendon reflexes were absent. The bilateral Babinski test was unremarkable. The Romberg sign and heel-knee-tibia test were unstable.
Laboratory data revealed leukopenia 3.16×109/L and anemia with hemoglobin at 112 g/L, respectively. Platelets were within the normal limits. The liver function panel results were also within normal limits, except for albumin at 26.4 g/L and hyperlipidemia. Prealbumin was low at 30 g/L and BUN was at 5.32 mmol/. Creatinine was at 43 μmol/L. Urinalysis revealed protein of 3+, and blood tests revealed red blood cells (RBCs) of 13.1/HPF. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C reactive protein (CRP) level were in the normal range. There was a positive ANA +1:1000, anti-dsDNA, antinucleosome, anti-SSA antibody and low levels of serum complement components (C3, C4). Anticardiolipin antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative. Serologic tests for HIV, hepatitis B/C, and syphilis were all negative. Cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed albumino-cytological dissociation (total protein: 1370 mg/L and white blood cell: 10×106/L). Head computed tomography (CT) revealed no abnormalities. Chest CT showed reduced cardiac cavity density and anemia. Abdominal CT showed that the liver and spleen were larger. A cardiac ultrasound showed mitral valve, mild tricuspid regurgitation. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed no obvious abnormalities. Electroneuromyography (ENMG) was highly suggestive of demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy. The details are described below. Bilateral sural nerve sensory conduction was normal, and bilateral median nerve, ulnar nerve sensory conduction did not lead to a certain waveform, that is, a feeling of separation. Bilateral median nerve, ulnar nerve, and peroneal nerve terminal latency were significantly prolonged, with a slight slowdown in motor conduction velocity. Further, the bilateral ulnar nerve, peroneal nerve slower transmission through the head of the fibulain and the elbow, and the right peroneal nerve conduction block were suggestive of comprehensive demyelination damage. In patients with low motor transmission, a compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude in the normal range compared with their peers and a low volatility do not rule out the possibility of secondary axonal damage. The latency of the detected F wave was significantly prolonged, and the incidence of the F wave in the lower extremities was significantly reduced, suggesting demyelination of the proximal nerve or nerve root. Needle electromechanical tips in some of the distal muscles showed a nerve predominant potential, which suggested that there was movement of fiber axon damage . A percutaneous renal biopsy was performed on the patient after hospitalization. The kidney biopsy specimen showed glomerular basement membrane mild diffuse thickening (WHO classification lupus nephritis, class V. Activity index: 1 point, chronic index: 0 points). Immunofluorescence examination showed a glomerular distribution along the mesangial area: IgA ++, IgG+ along the capillary, C3 + along the capillary wall, F +, IgM +, C1q +, Kappa +, Lamda +. HE and special staining showed a total of 14 glomeruli, glomerular capillary wall mild diffuse thickening, mesangial area without proliferation, mesangial cells 1–3/mesangial area, mesangial matrix without expansion, and endothelial cells without proliferation. Masson staining showed a small amount of hyperhidrosis protein deposition in the capillary wall. Tubular atrophy, part of the renal tubular epithelial cell swelling, granular degeneration, and no clear tube were observed. The renal interstitial area was without edema, fibrosis and lymphocyte and mononuclear cell infiltration. The interstitial small tube wall showed no thickening. Congo red stain was negative (−) . A final diagnosis of SLE with GBS was made. The patient was initially treated with intravenous pulses of methyl prednisolone 0.5 g daily for 5 days. Maintenance therapy with 48 mg methyl prednisolone once a day, combined with cyclophosphamide treatment 1 g which was provided once a month.