A 73-year-old Vietnam War Veteran with active tobacco dependence (1.5 − 2 packs per day > 50 years), prostate cancer in remission (status post definitive radiation in 2008), and alcoholic fatty liver disease was diagnosed in November 2013 with metastatic poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinoma of the left upper lobe (LUL) with biopsy-proven pleural and pericardial metastases after he presented with pneumonia and lung nodules. Molecular studies were negative for EGFR mutation and ALK rearrangement, and nondiagnostic for ROS-1.
He was started on chemotherapy in January 2014 and received five cycles of carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab, followed by three cycles of maintenance pemetrexed and bevacizumab (see for therapy sequence). Due to progression of disease (PD) with new liver lesions, he was switched to second-line docetaxel and he completed six cycles. Although interim positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed stable disease, the patient developed a paraneoplastic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) during the sixth cycle, concerning for PD. Therapy was subsequently switched to erlotinib as third-line therapy. In the interim, the patient reported left shoulder pain that was attributed to a left apical lung tumor involving the pleura and was treated palliatively with RT (3000 cGy). Notably, hyponatremia resolved within one week of initiating RT, suggesting an abscopal effect given the high burden of disease outside of the radiation field. After three months of receiving erlotinib, PET/CT showed PD but the patient continued to have a good performance status. He was started on fourth-line therapy with vinorelbine and received a total of four cycles until he had recrudescence of SIADH. Imaging showed enlarging hepatic metastasis and left apical and hilar lung lesions, but no evidence of intracranial lesions. Thus, the decision was made to switch therapy to nivolumab (240 mg IV every two weeks) as fifth line. The patient received 10 cycles from August 2015 to January 2016 and his SIADH resolved after 2 months. Following four months of therapy, nivolumab was held due to grade II transaminitis, for which he was started on prednisone 100 mg daily and had a prolonged steroid taper (for six months). PET/CT following discontinuation of therapy showed no evidence of disease (NED). Nivolumab was not restarted as he was in complete remission, and it was deemed that the risks of nivolumab rechallenge outweighed its benefits. Repeat PET/CT scans continued to show sustained complete remission, which lasted 14 months after discontinuation of nivolumab, until March 2017 when his tumor recurred in a 1.1 cm subcarinal node (biopsy proven, PDL-1 positive 80%; 22C3 pharmDX kit). Molecular studies showed RET rearrangement (10q11) in 84% of the cells (Leica BioSystems) and were negative for MET amplification and BRAF and HER2 mutations. Given local recurrence with very low disease burden, decision was made to treat the subcarinal node with RT (3000 cGy, 10 daily fractions of 300 cGy), with a resultant complete response. Nine months later, PET/CT showed a new hypermetabolic focus (SUV 8.7) in the right paratracheal lymph node (LN, 1.2 cm from 0.6 cm previously) and a new hypermetabolic focus (SUV 3.7) in the right middle paratracheal LN (0.7 cm). Given limited disease, RT was administered to the paratracheal LNs (3000 cGy), and complete response was again achieved until 12 months later, when his disease recurred in the lungs with new and growing bilateral subcentimeter nodules. He was rechallenged with nivolumab and has achieved a partial response after two months of therapy. He has no evidence of immune-mediated adverse events after 10 cycles. Of note, his SIADH has not recurred since the initial nivolumab therapy, and he continues to be asymptomatic with excellent performance status.