A 29-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on February 19th, 2014, for investigation of a retroperitoneal pararenal tumor. The tumor had been coincidentally diagnosed at a local hospital when he was admitted because of MG with a clinical manifestation of increasing upper and lower limb fatigue over 2 months. He was treated with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (pyridostigmine at a dose of 3 × 30 mg) at the local hospital and clinical remission was achieved. A mediastinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of local hospital did not show any evidence for thymoma. On admission, physical examination did not reveal any aberrations. Ultrasonography (US) demonstrated a low echogenic mass measuring about of 5.4 × 5.2 cm in size . Unenhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of abdomen presented a well-encapsulated mass of homogeneous isodensity localized in the retroperitoneum . CT arteriograms showed that the mass received its blood supply from abdominal aortic . T1WI of MRI showed a homogeneous low signal, while T2WI and DWI demonstrated a slightly higher signal and the center of the mass displayed patchy low signal . Electromyography exhibited that routine ulnar and median motor and sensory nerve conduction studies were normal, with no evidence for peripheral neuropathy; repetitive stimulation was positive, which supported a diagnosis of MG.
Preoperative biopsy for a definitive diagnosis was excluded in concern of the deep position and the possibility of hemorrhea. Preoperative embolization cannot achieve an efficient therapeutic result since the mass was not a hemangioma nor were there any vascular malformations. Although a definitive preoperative diagnosis was not possible, surgical excision was performed on February 25th, 2014. A mid-abdominal laparotomy revealed an oval mass with diffuse and rich vascularity located close to the lateral side of the abdominal aortic, near the anterior inferior part of the left renal. The surgical specimen was a well-circumscribed, encapsulated mass that measured 5 × 4 cm with a cut reddish-brown surface which changed to gray in the center . An R0 resection was performed with a total blood loss of 200 mL without blood transfusion, and the operation time was 118 min. After 2 hours, the patient was sent back to the ward. However, 30 min later, he suddenly developed dyspnea with chest discomfort. Cyanosis appeared with clammy extremities after 2 min. The oxygen saturation dropped to 50 mmHg and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was implemented. Oxygen saturation then raised to 100 mmHg immediately, which proved that the dyspnea was caused by weakness of the respiratory muscles. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after endotracheal intubation. A CT of the lung was performed on February 27th showing no sign of pulmonary embolism except for pleural effusion. He was back to the ward on March 3rd and discharged after 2 days. Histological examination of the abdominal tumor revealed angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia of the hyaline-vascular type . The patient came back to our clinic after one month and took a US which showed no recurrence of the disease. He received another US which also showed no abnormality 4 months after discharge. Further follow-up was made after 7 months and he lived free of disease.