A 28-year-old nulliparous woman, presented at Iringa Region Hospital with a one day history of abdominal pain and bright red blood per vagina. In the presence of her grandmother she denied any history of coitus or vaginal instrumentation prior to the onset of symptoms. However, when interviewed alone she reported engaging in penile-vaginal intercourse, without foreign-body instrumentation, several hours prior to onset of symptoms.
The patient described a sudden onset of generalized, lower abdominal pain. Initially the abdominal pain was sharp in quality but gradually became dull with radiation to the back and to the tip of the shoulder. This was accompanied shortly thereafter with frank vaginal bleeding and protrusion of mass per vagina notably during defecation and micturition. Initially the mass was reducible but later it become irreducible. This was associated with significant nausea, bilious emesis, pre-syncope and palpitations. She denied any prodrome of fever, diarrhea or rectal bleeding. Her past medical history was unremarkable.
On presentation to hospital she was in obvious distress. She was clinically hypovolemic with sunken eyes and dry mucosal membranes with a mildly elevated heart rate at 80 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 100/60 mm/Hg. Her body temperature was 36.9°C. The abdomen was rigid with generalized involuntary guarding, rebound tenderness and hyperactive bowel sounds.
On examination of the perineum, non-reducible intra-abdominal contents were clearly visualized protruding from the vaginal os . A digital rectal exam was performed, which was unremarkable, with normal sphincter tone and no obvious injury. A speculum examination was not technically feasible due to the edematous, incarcerated bowel.
Laboratory investigations revealed haemoglobin level of 11.6 g/dl. White blood cell count, platelets, prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time were within the normal range. The patient was consented for emergency laparotomy and taken to the operating room. Intraoperatively, we found a 4 cm full thickness perforation of the posterior vaginal fornix . The cervix was closed and there were no additional injuries identified. The herniated intra-abdominal contents were reduced and inspected. The bowel was edematous but viable and no injuries requiring intervention were identified. The edges of the vaginal perforation were debrided and the defect was closed in a continuous, full-thickness layer with 2–0 chromic catgut. Warm saline solution was then used to irrigate the peritoneal cavity. Post-operatively the patient was started on parenteral antibiotics. The patient had a prompt return of bowel habits, was quickly advanced to a full diet and was discharged on post-operative three. On post-operative day 10 the patient was seen in the out patient clinic. The patient was in good health and the midline incision was clean and dry. She was advised to refrain from sexual intercourse for eight weeks in order to allow the operative site to heal completely.