A 45-year-old Asian Indian woman was admitted to our hospital with a history of recurrent vomiting, pain in her abdomen, polydipsia, anorexia and constipation for 1.5 months. There was no history of fever, altered sensorium, headache, cough, shortness of breath, or urinary symptoms. She had been hypertensive for the past year; 2 months ago she underwent arthroscopic repair of her right knee cruciate ligament.
On physical examination, she was conscious and oriented. Pallor was present; icterus and edema were absent. Her vitals were: blood pressure 140/100mmHg, pulse 84/minute, respiratory rate 20/minute, and temperature 37.6°C. An abdominal examination revealed no abnormalities. The results of her chest and cardiovascular examinations were also normal. An examination of her central nervous system showed generalized muscle weakness without any focal neurological deficit. Her deep tendon reflexes were normal.
On laboratory investigation the following results were obtained: hemoglobin 9.2g/dL, white blood cell count 12.2×103/mm3, platelet count 242×103/mL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 57mg/dL, creatinine 4.1mg/dL, sodium 139mEq/L, potassium 3.7mEq/L, serum calcium 11.54mEq/L, phosphorous 2.8mEq/L, serum bilirubin 0.60mg/dL, protein 6.3g/dL, albumin 3.6g/dL, globulin 2.7g/dL, alanine transaminase 22IU/L, aspartate transaminase 20IU/L, alkaline phosphatase 22IU/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 76mm. The result of her Mantoux test was negative, her angiotensin-converting enzyme was 18.20mg/dL and her parathyroid hormone was 11.60pg/mL. The reference ranges of our lab for analytes are given in Table . Her urine analysis and microscopy were normal. Her urine for Bence Jones protein was negative. Protein electrophoresis did not reveal any monoclonal bands. Her chest X-ray was normal and her electrocardiogram showed low-voltage complexes. An ultrasound of her abdomen was normal. An ultrasound of her neck did not reveal any parathyroid mass. High-resolution computed tomography of her chest and magnetic resonance imaging of her brain were also essentially normal.
Hence the biochemical evaluation revealed only raised BUN and serum creatinine suggesting acute renal failure with hypercalcemia, in the absence of evidence of chronic kidney disease, multiple myeloma or hyperparathyroidism. A detailed history of previous treatment revealed that she had received an injection of Arachitol (vitamin D3) 600,000IU intramuscularly, every alternate day for 10 doses just after her knee surgery 2 months back. We found her serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) level to be 150ng/mL which was in the toxic range (normal 20 to 30ng/mL). So a diagnosis of vitamin D toxicity-induced acute kidney injury and hypercalcemia was established. To rule out chronic kidney disease a nephrology consultation was sought and ultrasound for her kidneys and routine urine microscopy were ordered, which were normal.
For hypercalcemia, she was treated with intravenous fluid, diuretics and calcitonin and had clinical improvement. Her serum calcium and creatinine levels were monitored regularly; they gradually declined to normal levels in the next 15 days. She was discharged with a prescription of an antihypertensive and calcium-restricted diet along with good hydration; she is doing well.