A 67-year-old woman with no past medical history of heart disease collapsed after expressing chest discomfort while she was taking a walk with a group of friends. Lay resuscitation was immediately started.
After 15 and 20 min respectively the paramedics and emergency physician arrived at the scene and proceeded with advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) according to the current guidelines with a compression-ventilation ratio of 30:2. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) rhythm was ventricular fibrillation (VF), thus 1 defibrillation at 120 Joule (J) biphasic followed by 5 shocks at 200 J were delivered. Following the fifth shock, the team decided to reposition defibrillator pads from sternal-apical to anterior–posterior. Nevertheless, the rhythm deteriorated into pulseless electrical activity (PEA). An endotracheal tube (ID 7.00 mm) was inserted 25 min after the CPR start using video laryngoscopy. From there, we continued thorax compressions and manual ventilation aiming a tidal volume of 400–500 ml and 10 breaths/minute. No (naso-)gastric tube was used during bag mask ventilation or after endotracheal intubation. A total of 6 mg epinephrine and 450 mg amiodarone were administered according to guidelines.
Capnography was used after endotracheal intubation showing petCO2 between 20 and 25 mmHg (= 2.6–3.3 kPa). CPR was continued manually because of the manpower on site, despite the availability of an automated CPR device (AutoPulse®). The pulse checks during rhythm analyses were conducted manually. After 60 min of CPR and deterioration of the shockable rhythm into PEA with broad QRS-complexes the patient showed fixed and dilated pupils, the petCO2 remained stationary. Regarding the prolonged CPR and deterioration of a shockable into a non-shockable rhythm the emergency team reached the joint decision to TRA.
The patient remained on the ECG monitor for the next 5 min, the ventilation bag was disconnected from the endotracheal tube, whereas the tube itself remained in situ. Agonal breathing resumed. Since the patient already was in the ambulance at the time the cardiopulmonary resuscitation was abandoned, it was decided that the body should be taken to the hospital for further legal medical inspection. All monitoring devices were removed.
About an hour after TRA, the patient surprisingly showed signs of life, spontaneously moved her head, but did not respond to voice or pain. A subtle radial pulse was palpable, she had a systolic blood pressure of 60 mmHg, peripheral oxygen saturation of 70% and a normal heart rate. The patient immediately received catecholamines to stabilize circulation, ventilation was restarted with FiO2 1.0 and sedation and muscle relaxation were administered. About 5 min after clinical recognition of autoresuscitation and stabilization of vital signs the patient arrived at the emergency department. Due to the suggestive history a coronary angiography was performed, showing a marked three-vessel coronary heart disease with a subtotal stenosis of the principal trunk as well as a high-grade stenosis of the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). She was planned to receive aortocoronary bypass (ACB). Before scheduling for ACB, sedation was reduced to investigate the extent of neurological damage. When she showed horizontal gaze and spontaneously moved her limbs, this was interpreted as a sign of potentially good outcome.
After the surgical intervention she developed acute right heart failure, which was treated by intra-aortic balloon pump and open chest. A week later she was successfully extubated. After all sedatives were stopped, adequate neurologic contact could be established while pronounced weakness due to critical illness polyneuropathy was present.
An initially existing unsteady gait as well as cognitive impairment in the sense of intermittent confusion and mental slowdown showed itself decreasing under constant physical and ergo-therapy. At day 19 after autoresuscitation, she was finally discharged to a neurological rehabilitation unit. After another month the patient left the medical facility as a self-employed pedestrian showing age-appropriate cognitive performance.