A 48-year-old Persian man from Urmia, Iran, presented to Imam Hospital with knee pain, lower back pain, fatigue, and dizziness for the last 2 months. The patient had a history of mitral valve replacement 30 years earlier, several bilateral nephrolithotripsies, and diabetes mellitus under control with oral medication. His vital signs were typical. There was a palpable large and soft nodule in the left lobe of his thyroid, which moved with swallowing. A scar of previous cardiac surgery was visible on the chest. The rest of the examination was normal.
Color Doppler ultrasonography of the thyroid and parathyroid indicated a single isoechoic nodule in the right lobe (12 × 9.5 mm) and two cystic nodules in the left lobe (40 × 23 mm and 30 × 16 mm) of his thyroid. A cystic mass in the region of the left lobe of the thyroid was visible on computed tomography (CT), in contrast to the patient’s biochemistry, indicative of parathyroid carcinoma . The mentioned findings were approved using 99mTc-MIBI scintigraphy. His complete blood count (CBC) was normal, and the results of the biochemical tests are presented in Table . Calcium and PTH serum levels were 14.6 mg/dL and 2702 pg/mL, respectively. Moreover, urine analysis revealed trace proteinuria, with two to three red blood cells (RBCs) per high-power field (HPF).
Based on the patient’s lab and imaging findings, the probability of a parathyroid carcinoma was high enough to send the patient to surgery for tumor resection.
The operation was performed under general anesthesia. After creating a large collar incision (12 cm length) two-finger width above the suprasternal notch, subplatysmal flaps were created as a routine thyroidectomy procedure. The raphe between strap muscles was opened, and the muscles were incised on the left near the upper pole of the thyroid.
On initial evaluation after the thyroid was exposed, it appeared as a thyroid mass displacing the carotid sheath laterally and extending into the mediastinum as a retrosternal goiter. However, further evaluation showed a central posterior neck mass with extension to mediastinum that displaced carotid sheath laterally and the left lobe of the thyroid superior and medially. The inferior thyroidal artery crossed the mass toward the carotid sheath. These findings favored a parathyroid origin, most likely from the superior parathyroid glands. The inferior thyroid artery was ligated as laterally as possible, and then the lateral side of the tumor was dissected out with sharp and blunt dissection, and the tumor was pulled out of the mediastinum to the neck . The recurrent laryngeal nerve was explored between the trachea and medial side of the tumor, that is, the mass was located dorsal to the recurrent laryngeal nerve (further evidence of superior parathyroid origin of the tumor).
Owing to the PTH value, size of the tumor, and adhesion to adjacent tissues, the patient was diagnosed with parathyroid carcinoma, and the tumor, right lobe of the thyroid, and adjacent lymph nodes were resected. After inserting a Hemovac drain, the neck wound was closed. The resected mass had a size of 9 × 6 × 4 cm and weighed 122 g. Since the mass was descended to the retro-esophageal space and was located posterior to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, we believe it originated from the superior parathyroid gland.
The postoperative period was eventless. In the first 24 hours, an intravenous infusion (drip) of calcium gluconate was given to prevent bone hunger syndrome. Liquid diet was started in the second 24 hours, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative day with oral CaCO3 and calcitriol pearls gradually tapered until discontinued after 2 weeks.
Histopathological assessment of the resected mass revealed a parathyroid adenoma and multinodular goiter of the resected thyroid lobe . No lymph node or local invasion, vascular invasion, or perineural invasion was reported on histopathological assessment, and there was no significant invasion of adjacent structures or organs. Finally, the patient was followed up for 12 months without any problems.