A 20-year-old male was admitted to a local hospital for the high energy injury due to single-motorcycle rollover crash under drunkenness. On admission, his consciousness and vital signs were normal (Glasgow Coma Scale: E4V5M6), and physical examination revealed both complete paralysis and sensory deficit in the right upper limb. The Horner syndrome as autonomic nervous system disorder was not clear. Initial brain computed tomography (CT) revealed no abnormalities, and chest CT revealed a right pneumothorax with a fracture of the first rib. The right lung collapsed by less than 25%, and there was neither mediastinum nor subcutaneous emphysema. Therefore, the patient was treated conservatively. During the course of initial treatment, the patient was not on bed rest and allowed to walk around. And there were neither episodes of increased intrathoracic pressure nor symptoms of infectious meningitis. 2 days after the accident, follow-up CT revealed pneumocephalus with a slight progression of pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and subcutaneous emphysema. Air was also detected in the right C7/Th1 intervertebral foramen and subdural space of the spinal canal An 8 Fr. chest tube was inserted and placed under the water sealing management, and the prophylactic antibiotics was not administered to the patient to prevent meningitis. The pneumothorax improved immediately. The day after initiating chest drainage, brain CT revealed a rapid reduction in intracranial air . Although the patient had no symptoms of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, such as headache or loss of consciousness, spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hyperintense lesions around the right C7/Th1 intervertebral foramen on T2-weighted images, suggesting CSF leakage and nerve root avulsion . On the fourth day, the chest tube was removed after a 24-hour clamp test which showed no air leak during the test. The patient was discharged without any recurrence of air migration on Day 16 after admission, although there was not any improvement in the right-arm paralysis. 2 months after the accident, CT myelography was performed as a preoperative examination of the nerve transfer for brachial plexus avulsion, and pseudomeningoceles were revealed in the right C5/C6, C6/C7, and C7/Th1 intervertebral foramen. Thus, above mentioned findings obtained by clinical imaging and neurological examination along clinical transit have implicated the existence of brachial plexus avulsion.