A 90-year-old gentleman presented to his local hospital with new-onset intermittent dizziness. He had a past medical history of coronary artery bypass surgery (over two decades prior), hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and hyperthyroidism. He had a previous left-sided dual-chamber pacemaker inserted 8 years prior for complete heart block. However, due to a failure of insulation and increased noise detection from both the ventricular and the atrial leads with the inhibition of pacing (causing symptoms of dizziness), he had a further right-sided dual-chamber pacemaker inserted via the subclavian vein 3 years prior. This was accompanied by explantation of the left-sided box and burial of the leads. Therefore, at the time of his presentation, he had four pacing leads in situ. Otherwise, he was a non-smoker, did not drink alcohol, lived alone, and was independent with activities of daily living. His physical examination was unremarkable except for a soft ejection systolic murmur consistent with a known diagnosis of mild aortic stenosis.
The patient’s electrocardiogram rhythm strip demonstrated the presence of a complete heart block . An urgent pacing check revealed right ventricular lead failure with intermittent and subsequently complete loss of right ventricular capture when the patient moved his arms. An urgent temporary pacing wire was inserted through the right femoral vein ensuring stabilization before transfer to his local cardiac centre. An urgent temporary externalized VVIR pacemaker implant was performed, and the femoral temporary wire was removed .
Blood tests were unremarkable with normal electrolytes [sodium 137 mmol/L (reference range: 133–146 mmol/L); potassium 4.5 mmol/L (reference range: 3.5–5.3 mmol/L); corrected calcium 2.51 mmol/L (reference range: 2.20–2.60 mmol/L); phosphate 1.02 mmol/L (reference range: 0.80–1.50 mmol/L); magnesium 0.91 mmol/L (reference range: 0.7–1.0 mmol/L)]. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a normal-sized left ventricle with a basal septal bulge and borderline-reduced global systolic function (ejection fraction 55%). There was mild aortic stenosis and tricuspid regurgitation and no other significant valvular pathology.
Given the failure of three of four previous implanted leads in this patient, several potential strategies for a permanent system were discussed. This included the implantation of another right-sided dual-chamber pacemaker (a venogram confirmed patency of the right-sided axillary and subclavian veins) with potential laser lead extraction. Considering the patient’s previous history of lead failures and the difficulty of further lead insertion and risks of lead extraction, a leadless pacemaker was considered the best option in this patient.
The patient underwent implantation of a Micra atrioventricular leadless pacemaker under local anaesthetic and sedation (1 mg midazolam, 1 mg morphine, and 10 mg metoclopramide). Through right femoral venous access (7F sheath inserted and upsized to 16F), the delivery system was advanced, and the Micra atrioventricular leadless device was positioned in the septal position with good initial measurements . The device was programmed to VDI at 50 b.p.m. The total duration of the procedure was 48 min with 15 mL of Visipaque contrast used and a radiation dosage of 502.9 mGy/cm2. Post-procedural pacing checks showed sinus rhythm with no intrinsic ventricular rhythm over VVI at 30 b.p.m. The existing functional atrial lead from the right-sided device had a satisfactory threshold (0.75 V at 0.4 ms), impedance (418 Ω), and p-wave amplitude (3.3 mV). The Micra atrioventricular device sensing was satisfactory, tracking the atrial rhythm at 60 b.p.m. (AAIR pacing from the permanent right-sided system; ). Frequencies of AM-VP (atrial mechanical event-ventricular pacing reflecting atrioventricular synchrony during ventricular pacing) and VP (ventricular pacing) were 93.3% and 6.5%, respectively. There were no immediate complications, and the patient was discharged home the following day.
At 6 weeks of follow-up, the pacing check revealed a presenting rhythm of AP (from the transvenous pacemaker) and VP (from the Micra device) with appropriate atrioventricular tracking . The frequencies of AM-VP and VP were 86.9% and 12.8%, respectively . The patient’s underlying rhythm was a complete heart block.