A 73-year-old multiparous woman with no remarkable past medical history visited her local physician with symptoms of low abdominal pain. A left ovarian tumor measuring approximately 15 cm was identified, and she was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a complex left ovarian tumor comprised of solid and fat components and calcifications with para-aortic and pelvic adenopathy. The blood squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC-Ag) level of 11.6 ng/ml was high. Based on these findings, she was suspected of having MCT-SCC. One week after the initial visit, she presented with increasing abdominal pain. Blood tests revealed elevated levels of inflammatory markers (white blood cell [WBC]): 13,100/μl, C-reactive protein (CRP) (16.83 mg/1), and CT imaging revealed that the tumor had shrunk to 10 cm in size with ascites extending into the upper abdomen . The decision was made to proceed an emergency exploratory laparotomy which included total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and partial omentectomy. The left ovarian tumor measured 10 cm and had ruptured, and the ensuing ascitic fluid cytology was positive. Intraoperatively, there were multiple unresectable 5 mm peritoneal implants, significant adhesions, and extensive adenopathy resulting in suboptimal debulking. The patient was in poor general condition due to tumor rupture, and maximal effort, including bowel resection, was impossible due to emergency surgery. Postoperatively, pathology revealed poorly differentiated nonkeratinizing SCC consistent with MCT-SCC having p53 overexpression with omental metastasis, conferring stage IIIB ovarian cancer (pT3bNXM0) . Interestingly, there was a synchronous stage IA grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma of the uterus. After surgery, the myChoice CDx (Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, United States) test and microsatellite instability (MSI) test (SRL, Tokyo, Japan) were performed using specimens from the nonkeratinizing SCC section of the primary tumor. The GI score of 87 was remarkably high, and there was no BRCA1/2 pathogenic mutation. The MSI test was negative. Three weeks after surgery, the patient began intravenous (IV, AUC6) carboplatin and paclitaxel (IV, 175 mg/m2). CT imaging after six courses showed that residual tumors had shrunk by 73 % (target lesions: 85 mm to 23 mm; A) and blood SCC-Ag levels decreased from 12.8 ng/ml postoperatively to 1.6 ng/ml after one course of chemotherapy, and remained in the normal range thereafter. Since complete resection of the residual tumor was considered feasible, and maximal effort was not possible at the initial surgery, we decided to perform interval debulking surgery (IDS). We performed IDS six months after the first visit. R0 resection was achieved with pelvic and paraortic lymphadenectomy and partial ureteral resection. We did not perform hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The pathology was consistent with metastatic SCC (B–E). Since six weeks after IDS, the patient received two additional courses of paclitaxel, carboplatin, and bevacizumab (IV, 15 mg/m2) and was given bevacizumab and olaparib (600 mg/day). Twelve months after IDS, no recurrence has been observed.