A 51-year-old woman was admitted to hospital due to dyspnea, occurring over a 1-mo period.
Physical examination revealed blood pressure of 101/55 mmHg, heart rate of 65 beats/min.
Plasma N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was elevated to 3780 pg/mL (normal range 0-125 pg/mL).
Electrocardiography (ECG) demonstrated a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 65 bpm, a left anterior fascicular block, poor R-wave progression in leads V1-V3, and a non-specific T wave and ST-segment . A 2-dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram revealed right ventricular enlargement, with a chamber diameter of 27 mm, a left ventricular cavity of normal diameter, an end diastolic chamber size of 42 mm and preserved systolic function, as well as an ejection fraction of 64%. The left atrium (42 mm) and right atrium (48 mm × 48 mm) were both enlarged. Transmitral Doppler flow was consistent with restrictive physiology. The left ventricle was revealed to have impaired diastolic dysfunction (mitral E wave velocity = 0.99 m/s, A wave (1.28 m/s, medial E/e’ > 15). Transthoracic echocardiography indicated severe pulmonary hypertension on the basis of the estimated right ventricular systolic pressures (the pulmonary arterial pressure was 51 mmHg). Pulmonary arterial hypertension is defined as pulmonary capillary wedge pressure < 15 mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance > 3 Wood Units as assessed by right heart catheterization. The criterion for clinically significant pulmonary hypertension when detected by Doppler echocardiography is not precisely defined. Commonly used definitions of pulmonary hypertension are a pulmonary artery systolic pressure > 35 mmHg or mean > 25 mmHg at rest or mean > 30 mmHg when exercising. Color Doppler showed mild regurgitation at the mitral and pulmonary valves. Furthermore, moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation was observed (the tricuspid regurgitation area was 7.8 cm2).
When pulmonary hypertension was identified, the patient was further evaluated for an underlying etiology. A high resolution computed tomography angiogram of the chest did not show evidence of pulmonary embolism or signs of interstitial or other lung disease. The patient had negative findings upon spirometry, and denied a family history of pulmonary hypertension, sleep apnea, and premature death. No laboratory markers or clinical symptoms that suggested collagen vascular disease were detected in the patient. Furthermore, a Doppler ultrasound of the portal vein and liver scan did not show signs of portal hypertension. The patient also showed serologic test results that were negative for human immunodeficiency virus, and the patient refused right heart catheterization.