A 23-year-old right-hand dominant male presented with 5-year history of the right shoulder pain and restriction of movements, which was insidious in onset and gradually progressive, the restriction worsened over period of time. He was a volleyball player and since the past 2 years, he could not play, and his activities of daily living were restricted. There was no history of trauma or any comorbidities. Physical examination revealed stiffness and crepitus over the right shoulder joint with severe restriction of abduction, forward flexion, and internal rotation .
Plain radiographs and computed tomography (including three dimensional reconstruction images) revealed multiple well-defined calcified foci with central lucency engulfing glenohumeral joint (intra- and extra-articular) anteriorly, posteriorly, superiorly, and inferiorly including biceps tendon consistent with synovial chondromatosis. Magnetic resonance imaging done suggested moderate synovial effusion with synovial thickening and early degenerative changes with loose bodies which were consistent with the findings on computed tomography .
Standard arthroscopy was performed under interscalene block and general anesthesia in lateral position with posterior portals along with anteroinferior and anterosuperior portals. Active, intrasynovial proliferation was noted with intra-articular and extra-articular loose bodies . With motorized shaver, partial synovectomy was performed using anterosuperior and anteroinferior portals and by inter-changing the portals frequently, the osteochondral loose bodies were removed with larger arthroscopic grasper . Approximately 20 fragments, ranging in size from 0.3 to 3.5 cm, were removed over a duration of 1 h.
The histopathological examination of the loose bodies and synovial tissue confirmed the presence of cartilaginous synovial metaplasia consistent with synovial chondromatosis . The loose bodies were composed of cartilage in various stages of calcification and endochondral ossification. Post-operative plain radiograph was done . The patient immediately began pendular exercise followed by passive and active-assisted shoulder range of movement exercises. There was a dramatic improvement in the range of movement in the immediate post-operative period . By 4 weeks post-operatively, the patient could return to work .