In the studied family, the proband, a 22-year-old man, and his 20-year-old brother were born of non-consanguineous parents. Both patients exhibit normal intelligence, devoid of any other neurological symptoms, and no sign of further deterioration to date.
The proband was admitted to Wuhan Union Hospital because of dyspnea, abdominal distention, and polyserositis, with progressive muscle weakness since the age of 13 years. Biochemical examination showed elevated CK at 11,933 U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) of 164 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 202 U/L, and N-Terminal Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide (NT-pro BNP) of 9,835 pg/ml. Admission electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 95 beats/min, deep and narrow Q waves in leads I, aVL, and V5 to V6 (,). The two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examination revealed prominent trabeculations and deep intertrabecular recesses of the left ventricular (LV) walls and apical areas . The non-compacted myocardium of the inferior wall apical segment measured 1.8 cm while the compacted myocardium was as thin as 0.4 cm and the systolic non-compacted to compacted ratio was more than 2.0. Echocardiography also demonstrated that the proband had increased LV end-systolic volume (ESV, at 119 ml), LV end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD, of 7.3 cm), and left atrium end-systolic diameter (LAESD, of 4.9 cm) with reduced LV ejection fraction (LVEF, 23%). Notably, color flow imaging showed blood flow in intertrabecular recesses . Furthermore, the diagnosis of LVNC was verified by cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR). The heart was significantly enlarged on CMR imaging, and distinct trabeculations were localized on the lateral wall, inferior wall, and part of the anterior wall, as well as at the apex (,). Furthermore, the diastolic non-compacted to compacted ratio was more than 2.3, which was consistent with the diagnosis of LVNC confirmed by TTE.
Significantly, the proband showed typical clinical features with progressive proximal limb muscle atrophy and calf muscles pseudohypertrophy (,). The electromyogram (EMG) of the proband revealed a myogenic lesion. In order to comprehensively evaluate muscle pathology, light microscopy (LM) and electron microscopy (EM) examination were performed. Pathological specimens were obtained from the right quadriceps muscle biopsies of the proband. LM study with hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining demonstrated variation in muscle fiber size accompanied by atrophy of muscle fibers, hypertrophy of muscle fibers, partial degeneration of muscle fibers with interstitial fibrosis, and adipose tissue infiltration (,). EM examination showed swollen mitochondria, expanded sarcoplasmic reticulum, focally dissolved myofilaments, and a few atrophied muscle fibers, without abnormal deposits (,).
Unexpectedly, as the primary caregiver during hospitalization, his younger brother showed proximal limb muscle atrophy and calf muscles pseudohypertrophy similar to the proband . Based on these findings, further investigations on the younger brother were carried out. Biochemical examination showed elevated CK (3,826 U/L) and TTE indicated LVNC with a dilated left ventricle (6.6 cm) as well as reduced LVEF (25%), although the younger brother did not complain of any cardiac symptoms.
Consequently, we suspected that both siblings suffered from hereditary muscular dystrophy and familial dilated cardiomyopathy. To confirm the diagnosis, we performed high throughput targeted NGS analysis on genomic DNA samples obtained from the proband with a customized panel encompassing 29 genes involved in the pathogenesis of hereditary muscular dystrophy. The DNA library was prepared using the KAPA Hyper Prep Kit (KAPA Biosystems), followed by target enrichment based on a probe library (Roche NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice). Finally, the products were analyzed by NGS using the Illumina platform, MiSeq. Results indicated a deletion of exons 10–12 (EX10_12 del) in the DMD gene (reference sequence NM_004006.2) , affecting the normal expression of dystrophin. Moreover, we confirmed the deletion of the same exons in the DMD gene in his younger brother by qPCR .
After discharge from the hospital, the proband was on long-term treatment with a β-blocker, a diuretic, coenzyme Q10, and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI). However, he required repeated hospitalization for heart failure, with gradually worsening muscle weakness, over the following 4 years. Finally, at the age of 26, he underwent orthotopic heart transplantation and has remained in good condition since transplantation.