An otherwise healthy 43-year-old African Sudanese-Darfurian woman presented with a large genital mass causing difficulty in urination and sexual discomfort. The patient first noticed this “sometimes itchy mass” when it was very “tiny” while she was a teenager, and then it started growing over the last 10 years. The patient, who was married at the age of 16, had three full-term spontaneous vaginal deliveries at home without any complications. In her past medical history, there were no other chronic diseases or surgeries, except for FGM. She is living in a village with a large extended family and not working professionally. She does not consume alcohol and or smoke. The patient decided to seek medical attention at her husband’s request because she has not been able to tolerate coitus over the last 5 years because of the pain caused by the mass, which has been negatively affecting their family life because they wish to conceive again. The patient has a history of type III FGM when she was 8 years old. The FGM was performed by a nonmedical traditional practitioner in her village, without any additional history of trauma or surgery. After genital mutilation, she did not have any problem, and for this mass she had received no other treatment for years.
When she was admitted to our hospital, her blood pressure was 110/72 mmHg, and her body temperature was 36.8 °C. Her cardiac rhythm was regular, and all pulses were palpated normal. Her physical examination revealed no pathological findings other than the genital mass. The result of her neurological examination was normal. Perineal examination revealed a 6 × 10-cm, well-circumscribed, mobile, nontender, rounded, cystic swelling in the right periclitoral area that was obstructing the urinary meatus and vaginal introitus. The multilobulated mass was along the line of the previously performed type III FGM scar . The rest of the examination was normal. Ultrasound imaging suggested benign lobulations and septations in a cystic swelling. After informed consent was obtained, an elective surgery was performed with the patient under general anesthesia for total excision of the clitoral mass. Intraoperative findings included the presence of a well-demarcated, encapsulated subcutaneous cystic mass with a volume of 6 × 7 × 10 cm, filled with dark yellow “cheesy” keratinous material . In the microscopic examination, the cyst had a squamous epithelial wall with evidence of keratinous material in the lumen, and therefore it was diagnosed as an epidermoid inclusion cyst . The postoperative period was without any complications, and by the third-month visit, the patient had no anatomic or functional problems in the perineal region. The patient stated that the complete resolution of her complaints improved her quality of life as well as her relationship with her husband. In her follow-up, by the sixth and ninth visits, the operative side was clear, and there was not any hypertrophic scar tissue. The patient told us that she had not had any pain during intercourse after her surgery.