An asymptomatic 66-year-old female (gravida 0) presented with an incidental finding of a 2.7-cm-diameter ovarian tumor during an obstetric examination 3 years prior to admission. The patient was referred to the hospital for further evaluation. Although she had intellectual disability, she was in good physical health. Of note, she had been postmenopausal for 16 years. Her past medical history included left partial mastectomy and radiation for stage I breast cancer (invasive ductal carcinoma) 2 years prior to admission. Examination using transvaginal ultrasound showed the presence of a small solid and cystic mass with a diameter of 3.5 cm in the right ovary. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a well-defined mass with slight enhancement in the internal and peripheral areas of the right adnexa. There was no lymphadenopathy or peritoneal dissemination. Sedation was deemed challenging for this patient; thus, magnetic resonance imaging was not performed. The serum levels of CA125, CEA, CA19-9, and SCC were within the normal range. However, the presence of malignancy could not be ruled out.
The patient underwent laparotomy with total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and partial omentectomy. Intraoperatively, the right ovary was converted into a 2.5-cm multiloculated mass with a solid component , which was not adherent to other organs. The presence of 7 mL of clear yellowish ascitic fluid was observed. Findings in the uterus and left adnexa were unremarkable. There were no enlarged lymph nodes, metastasis, or disseminated lesions in the intraperitoneal organs.
Histological sections demonstrated a 2.5-cm-diameter struma ovarii characterized (> 60%) by the classic features of a well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma (tumor size: 1 cm) . The lesion was characterized by the formation of crowded, branching papillae lined by abnormal thyroid follicular cells . These cells exhibited enlarged, irregular nuclei with pale (optically clear) chromatin, nuclear grooves, and intranuclear cytoplasmic invaginations . Mitotic figures were < 1 per 10 high-power fields. The presence of necrosis and marked cell atypia was not evident. Moreover, there was no histological evidence of other germ cell elements or vascular, lymphatic invasion. The thyroid adenomatous lesion was evident in the right fallopian tube, but the carcinomatous lesion was not observed. The papillary thyroid carcinoma was confined to the right ovary. The left adnexa, omentum, uterus, and ascitic fluid were negative for malignancy. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor was positive for thyroglobulin , thyroid transcription factor-1 , and BRAF V600E .
The serum levels of thyroglobulin were > 500 ng/mL 3 h after surgical resection of the ovarian mass. Thyroid function tests (thyroid-stimulating hormone: 0.58 μIU/mL, free T3: 2.53 pg/mL, free T4: 1.16 ng/mL) and the levels of thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase antibodies were within the normal range. Thyroid ultrasonography did not reveal the presence of a nodule. Following the operation, the patient underwent whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography to investigate the possibility of lymph node or distant metastasis. The results of this analysis did not show the presence of metastasis.
According to the criteria established in 2014 by the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics, the patient was diagnosed with stage IA ovarian carcinoma (pT1aNxM0) also termed malignant struma ovarii. One month after the operation, the levels of thyroglobulin returned to normal. At the 3-month follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence. We therefore decided to carefully perform thyroglobulin monitoring.