A 64-year-old female presented with a history of acute severe headache with vomiting. On examination, she was alert with no focal neurological deficits. Non-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed modified Fisher Grade 3 subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in the prepontine cistern . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed aneurysm of the VBJ measuring 5.6 × 5.7 mm. There was a small teat projecting downward from the dome of the aneurysm . On right vertebral angiogram, there was retrograde filling of the left vertebral artery till its origin from the left subclavian artery . Descending thoracic aortogram showed near-complete occlusion of the left subclavian artery origin . After multi-disciplinary team discussion, it was decided to proceed with balloon-assisted coiling of the aneurysm. Patient’s relatives were counseled for the procedure, the risks associated with it and informed written consent was obtained for the same.
The procedure was done under general anesthesia. The right femoral artery was punctured with an 18G needle. Arterial access was secured with a 7F long sheath (Rabe Flexor, Cook) placed at the origin of right vertebral artery. 6F guiding catheter (Neuron, Penumbra Inc) was parked in the distal V2 segment of right vertebral artery. A balloon (Eclipse, Balt, France) was parked across the neck of the aneurysm and coiling attempted after cannulating the aneurysm sac with a microcatheter (Headway duo, Microvention, Tustin, CA, USA). However, the coil mass could not be retained inside the sac despite inflation of the balloon due to high flow across the VBJ. It was decided to take access from the left vertebral artery. The stenotic segment of the left subclavian artery was crossed with a 0.035” wire. A 5F vertebral catheter was negotiated across the stenosis over the wire and the 7F long sheath was subsequently tracked over it and placed at the origin of the left vertebral artery. The guiding catheter was parked in the V3 segment. Balloon assisted coiling was then successfully performed. Two coils were deployed into the aneurysm sac. Postcoiling angiogram showed Modified Raymond-Roy Class II occlusion of the aneurysm with normal filling of all vessels . The microcatheter and guiding catheter were withdrawn. Descending thoracic aortogram showed partial opening of the stenotic origin of the left subclavian artery The 7F long sheath was removed and hemostasis achieved by manual compression. Immediate postprocedure CT showed no new abnormality, no bleed/infarction was noted. Antiplatelets in the form of 150 mg of aspirin were continued for 6 weeks. She had an uneventful hospital stay and was discharged in stable condition.