A 65-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) via emergency medical services (EMS) for evaluation secondary to a possible gastrointestinal bleed. Per EMS, approximately 300 mL of frank blood were noted in a bucket located in the patient’s home. Soon after arriving to the ED the patient was found to be experiencing massive hemoptysis. The patient’s vital signs on arrival included a blood pressure of 135/80 millimeters of mercury, a heart rate of 104 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 35 breaths per minute. Additionally, his oxygen saturation was 92% on room air. Pertinent past medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, left upper lobe pulmonary mass concerning for malignancy or infection, heart failure, and tobacco use. Additionally, the patient had been discharged from the hospital four days prior with a new prescription for rivaroxaban 15 milligrams (mg) by mouth twice daily for 21 days, followed by 20 mg once daily after being diagnosed with a subsegmental pulmonary embolism (PE). Enoxaparin had been transitioned to rivaroxaban while inpatient, and outpatient adherence to rivaroxaban was confirmed.
The patient continued to expectorate a large volume of blood, and there was concern for impending airway compromise. Prior to consideration of 4F-PCC, the decision was made to trial nebulized TXA. An intravenous solution of TXA 500 mg was initially nebulized directly with a Hudson RCI Micro Mist nebulizer (Teleflex Incorporated, Wayne, PA) at an oxygen flow rate of 8 L per minute. When using undiluted TXA, the solution began to crystallize, preventing further nebulization, which has not previously been reported. Subsequently, respiratory therapy added 3 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, resulting in a final concentration of 62.5 mg/mL). Nebulization was completed successfully in approximately 10 minutes. Shortly after administration, the volume and frequency of hemoptysis significantly decreased with only occasional blood-tinged sputum. No systemic reversal of anticoagulation was required. Notable labs on admission included an elevated international normalized ratio of 2.9 (reference range 0.9–1.1) likely secondary to malnutrition and possibly rivaroxaban use, as well as an anti-factor Xa level > 2.0 international units/mL.
The patient was subsequently admitted to the pulmonary intensive care unit and continued TXA 500 mg nebulized every eight hours for a total of three doses. A diagnostic bronchoscopy was never performed per patient request. Anticoagulation was held throughout the admission, and bleeding ultimately subsided. The patient was discharged two days after admission and anticoagulation was not resumed.