A 70-year-old French/Algerian man presented to our hospital following a work-related fall. He had full functional capacity in all acts of daily living including driving, lived independently and was working until the day of his presentation. An initial physical examination revealed the presence of fasciculations in all muscles of the lower limbs, warranting further investigation and admission. The patient had stable non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
An initial neurological assessment revealed normal cognition, speech and swallowing. An examination of his central and peripheral nervous systems revealed no diagnostic abnormalities, other than the fasciculations in the lower limbs with mild asymmetrical leg weakness . His mini mental state examination result of 25 and clock drawing test measurement of four out of five were considered within normal limits for a French/Algerian man of age 70 where English was not his first language. Furthermore, his Addenbrooke’s cognitive assessment and total functional capacity were normal. There were no upper motor neuron signs and the patient could walk without assistance. An initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan did not show diagnostic abnormalities in the brain or cervical spine. Nerve conduction studies were normal and an electromyography (EMG) test on day 9 showed widespread active and chronic partial denervation in all skeletal muscle sampled: fibrillation and fasciculation potentials were present in all examined muscles and in all four limbs.
A week following presentation, our patient experienced increased difficulty walking with worsening leg weakness . The fasciculations had ascended and were now clinically evident in the lumbar and thoracic paraspinal muscles and upper limbs.
Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed nonspecific slow wave changes without epileptiform activity. Our patient’s symptomatic progression continued and by day 10 he developed worsening lower and upper limb weakness with some decrease in his cognitive status . On day 16 he reported short-term memory loss and had a supranuclear palsy of upgaze with deteriorating limb weakness. The fasciculations had now ascended to his neck and facial muscles. His tongue, however, remained normal without fasciculations. There was new evidence of a marked cognitive deterioration. Our patient’s limb strength continued to deteriorate and he became progressively bed-bound and confused by day 30.
A second EEG on day 16 revealed increases in slow wave activity suggestive of encephalopathy. Six days later, the EEG demonstrated isolated epileptogenic activity in the left temporal and parietal regions with diffuse periodic discharges. Our patient developed catalepsy as he continued to deteriorate. The 14-3-3 protein was detected in his cerebrospinal fluid, which was otherwise normal and without malignant cells (day 20). A repeat MRI scan on day 22 revealed multiple areas of diffusion-weighted imaging positivity in the basal ganglia, right cingulate gyrus and the anterior border of the right caudate head suggestive of prion disease. He did not have mutations in the prion gene (PRPN) on gene testing and was Met/Met at codon 129. Our patient continued to deteriorate and died 36 days after symptom onset.
A postmortem examination revealed patchy neuronal loss, mild reactive astrogliosis and numerous diffuse neuritic plaques within the brain, with several leptomeningeal and cortical blood vessels positive for beta-amyloid: all compatible with our patient’s age, and without neurofibrillary tangles. Spongiform change was widespread in the neocortex. Immunohistological staining for the 12F10 prion antibody revealed patchy synaptic-like positivity in the cerebral cortex, thalamus, cerebellar cortex and brainstem motor neurons. The brain and spinal cord were macroscopically normal. Our mortuary does not permit spinal cord sampling for prion disease and our neuropathology laboratory does not perform prion protein isotyping. Such observations strongly suggested an unusual form of prion disease with prominent early involvement of anterior horn cells and ascending spinal propagation.