A 65-year-old Japanese female presented to our department with abdominal discomfort. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 30 × 23 × 15 cm tumor in the right retroperitoneum, compressing the inferior vena cava . The patient had no relevant personal or family history. Laboratory blood testing showed no major signs of organ dysfunction, except for increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALP), and γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (γ-GTP). Preoperative radiotherapy was not administered because a large treatment volume could otherwise lead to late radiation-related damage of critical organs, such as the kidneys, liver and small bowel and because the patient required a therapeutic strategy that would produce more rapid relief of symptoms. Surgical resection for the purpose of tumor debulking was then performed. A small tumor beside the anterior aspect of the inferior vena cava and on the uncinate process of the pancreas that was approximately 2 cm in length on the major axis remained. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed high-grade malignant cells strongly positive for h-caldesmon and positive for α-smooth muscle actin, desmin, and calponin, resulting in a diagnosis of PLS. A high proliferation rate of the tumor cells was also seen on immunohistochemical analysis .
During the period of her recovery from the surgery and preparation for adjuvant radiotherapy, abdominal fullness recurred, and a CT scan revealed that the tumor had regrown to 22 × 14 × 23 cm within only 38 days after the surgery. The regrown tumor was approximately 1000-fold higher in volume when compared with the residual tumor . On day 47 after the operation, combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin (DXR) and ifosfamide (IFM) was initiated. The dose administration schedule was designed as follows: infusional DXR (30 mg/m2) on days 1–2 and IFM (2,000 mg/m2) on days 1–5 every 21 days. The chemotherapy was administered for six cycles, and her symptoms decreased while Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (PS) improved by the time of the initiation of the second cycle. The best objective response rate was a partial response (PR, 64%; 22 × 14 × 23 cm before chemotherapy and 8 × 8 × 13 cm after 5 cycles of chemotherapy) according to the new response evaluation criteria in solid tumours (RECIST) ver. 1.1 . Common terminology criteria of adverse events (CTC-AE) ver. 4 grade 4 neutropenia and grade 3 febrile neutropenia occurred during the first cycle. In subsequent cycles of chemotherapy, the prophylactic administration of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (filgrastim, 75 μg/day) was employed to maintain the dose intensity of the chemotherapy. The chemotherapy was generally well tolerated. After the fifth cycle, the tumor remained beside the inferior vena cava, and the patient received a conventional radiotherapy dose of 50 Gy administered once daily (2 Gy per fraction) . No serious adverse events, such as perforation of the digestive tract, radiation-induced enterocolitis, or hematuria, were observed. Following the administration of the radiotherapy, the patient underwent one cycle of DXR and IFM chemotherapy followed by single-agent chemotherapy consisting of one cycle of DXR (60 mg/m2 on day 1) and one cycle of IFM (2,000 mg/m2 on days 1–5) and then was observed. More than 17 months of progression-free survival and sustained symptom relief was achieved.