A 75-year-old man was brought to our emergency department complaining of abdominal pain, predominantly in the upper abdomen and around the umbilicus. The pain started at 3 h and got progressively worse. Physical examination revealed with a blood pressure of 116/ 70 mmHg, heart rate of 60 beats/minute, oxygen saturation of 100% (on room air), and respiratory rate of 17/ minute. The signs of abdominal physical examination were negative except epigastric pressure pain. His past medical history included Parkinson's disease (PD), cerebral ischemia. He had no history of pancreatitis, abdominal trauma and other abdominal surgery except hemorrhoid surgery. He was taking aspirin, cytarabine sodium and medroxyprogesterone. His laboratory findings included erythrocytes count of 4.62*1012/L, hemoglobin level of 133 g/L, hematocrit level of 42.1%, prothrombin time of 11.4 s, activated prothrombin time of 22.2 s, fibrinogen level of 2.17 g/L and normal values of platelets and D-dimer, but a bleeding time was not performed. Blood chemistry laboratory tests were within normal limits. He underwent a whole abdominal CT scan (2022–10-27) in the emergency department, which showed extensive thickening of the gastric wall in the gastric body and sinus region with enlarged surrounding lymph nodes, localized thickening of the intestinal wall in the transverse colon, localized indistinct demarcation between the stomach and transverse colon, and a small amount of fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity. Afterwards, he was admitted to our department with a diagnosis of gastric neoplasm.
Post-admission physical examination and gastroduodenoscop suggested no significant abnormality. But contrast-enhanced abdominal CT (2022–10-29) suggested hematoma formation on the lateral side of the gastric lesser curvature with perihepatic and abdominopelvic blood/fluid accumulation considered, and multiple peri-gastric lymph nodes enlarged. Interstitial hematoma of the superior mesenteric artery is considered. Computed tomography angiography of the abdominal aorta (2022–10-30) showed a filling defect in the superior mesenteric artery with luminal stenosis, suggesting a possible thrombosis of a vessel coming off the superior mesenteric artery. Concomitantly, hematoma formation on the lateral side of the gastric lesser curvature with perihepatic and abdominopelvic blood/fluid accumulation was considered, and multiple peri-gastric lymph nodes were enlarged. We did not conduct invasive treatment, such as endovascular management or surgery considering that no obvious bleeding site or any mass was found on enhanced abdominal CT and computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the abdominal aorta. Then we took conservative anticoagulation treatment for low-molecular heparin by subcutaneous injection. The patient recovered gradually after conservative anticoagulation treatment without signs of continuous bleeding or increased abdominal pain, and he was discharged after 5 days. Physical examination at the time of discharge suggested blood pressure of 121/63 mmHg, heart rate of 87 beats/minute. His laboratory tests at discharge included erythrocytes count of 3.53*1012/L, hemoglobin level of 104 g/L, hematocrit level of 33.3%. He was given oral anticoagulation therapy with rivaroxaban 20 mg quaque die after discharge.
We performed follow-ups for the patient regularly at the hospital outpatient department. At the follow-up about 1 month after discharge, the patient had no other discomfort such as abdominal pain. The results of the about 1-month follow-up after discharge showed blood pressure of 135/79 mmHg, heart rate of 75 beats/minute. His laboratory tests at discharge included erythrocytes count of 4.71*1012/L, hemoglobin level of 142 g/L, hematocrit level of 42.9%. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT (2022–11-18) suggested the hematoma on the lateral side of the lesser curvature of the stomach is less absorbed than the imaging findings on 2022–10-29, the perihepatic blood/fluid accumulation is less than before, and the pelvic blood/fluid accumulation is essentially similar than before. Intermural hematoma of the superior mesenteric artery with localized entrapment changes. The contrast-enhanced abdominal CT (2023–03-10) of the about 4-month follow-up after discharge showed a small hematoma on the side of the gastric lesser curvature was mostly decreased and the intermural hematoma of the superior mesenteric artery was largely decreased and abdominopelvic blood/fluid accumulation disappeared compared to the imaging findings on 2022–11-18. The timeline from emergency to follow-ups is presented in Fig. .