A 30-year-old Oromo primigravida woman who did not remember her last normal menstrual period, but claimed amenorrhea of 9 months, presented to Jimma Medical Center with an urge to bear down of 12 hours duration and passage of liquor of 8 hours duration. She received antenatal care at a local health center two times and was referred from there with a diagnosis of prolonged labor. She also complained of decreased fetal movement of 2 days duration and prolapsed mass per vagina while she was in an ambulance on the way to the Jimma Medical Center. She had a history of small prolapsed mass per vagina before pregnancy when she was walking, which reduced when she lay down, but this did not worry her and it disappeared during pregnancy. Her personal, familial, and medical histories were unremarkable. The pregnancy was unplanned but wanted and supported.
Upon arrival, she was in labor pain, and her vital signs were blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, pulse rate 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, and body temperature 36.5 °C. Pertinent findings were on the abdomen: 26-week-sized gravid uterus, fundus occupied by soft bulky mass that was breech. The lie was longitudinal, and the presentation was cephalic. Fetal heart sounds were absent on auscultation with Pinard fetoscope and confirmed by ultrasound. She had three contractions in 10 minutes lasting for 40–60 seconds. Ultrasound revealed a singleton intrauterine pregnancy; the fetus was 38 weeks, the placenta was fundal anterior, and no gross congenital anomaly was seen. Pelvic examination showed a prolapsed vaginal wall with its rugae visible on the anterior vaginal wall. Edematous, irreducible cervicouterine prolapse and fetal head protruding through prolapsed cervix were visible outside the vagina. Cervix was 5–6 cm dilated, edematous, and lacerated at 2 and 10 o’clock position, but it was not bleeding . There was grade 3 meconium-stained amniotic fluid.
Owing to the combination of third-trimester pregnancy, intrauterine fetal death, active first stage of labor, and uterovaginal prolapse, she was tested for blood group and Rh (A+) and hematocrit (44%), and then she was followed for the progress of labor. She entered the second stage 3 hours after admission to the labor ward, was encouraged to push, and delivered a freshly dead male neonate weighing 3000 g after 1 hour in the second stage of labor. There was a cervical tear at 10, 2 o’clock, but there was no significant bleeding and it was stopped by compression with a pack. Upon examination, no gross fetal anomaly was seen, placental weight was 600 g, and cord length was 50 cm with two arteries and one vein. After delivery of the placenta, the patient was put in the Trendelenburg position, prolapse was elevated, and ice packs were applied to decrease edema. The size of the prolapse gradually reduced, the edema subsided, and manual reduction of the prolapse was performed on the first postpartum day. The uterus was involuted; cervix was at the level of introitus. She was discharged on the third postpartum day and scheduled for follow-up at 6 weeks. The patient was contacted on phone at 6 weeks and 3 months postpartum, but she could not come back to hospital for personal reasons; she claimed she has no prolapsed mass through the vagina.