A 25-year old woman was admitted to a psychiatric hospital due to psychotic mania. During the preceding month she had experienced elevated mood, decreased sleep, increased thought pressure, excessive spending, distractibility and expansive ideas. One week prior to admission she had been exposed to a traumatic event by proxy, which triggered intense anxiety, loss of energy and motor agitation. She subsequently started experiencing referential thoughts, which were felt as increasingly convincing, and she developed grandiose delusions raising concern in her family. She was escorted for medical and psychiatric evaluation, and was admitted into a psychiatric hospital for treatment. By the time of admission she had also experienced frequent referential delusions to surrounding events, a Fregoli-delusion, visual illusions and auditory speech hallucinations. Her behaviour and speech were disorganized, and affects changed from elation to agitated anxiety.
According to a structured clinical interview for DSM-IV Axis I disorders, the patient was initially diagnosed as suffering from a manic episode with mood congruent psychotic symptoms. Peroral treatment with aripiprazole 15 mg/day and lorazepam 3 mg/day was started. Rorschach comprehensive system revealed sensory distractibility and distorted reality testing . Neuropsychological testing indicated above average performance in psychomotor speed, word fluency, social cognition and working memory and average performance in executive functioning and visual learning performance . Routine clinical and laboratory assessments at admission were normal. There was no evident pathology in brain MRI taken at 29 days from admission. Due to intermittent bouts of low blood pressure, and tachy- or bradycardia, aripirazole was changed to quetiapine 300 mg/day, which was rapidly switched to olanzapine 20 mg/day. Olanzapine was then combined with lithium 300 mg/day due to increasingly volatile affects, novel paranoid delusions and an apparent lack of therapeutic effect.
Elbow rigidity, gait abnormalities and tremors had been absent at admission. After 1 month of antipsychotic treatments olanzapine was discontinued due to difficulties in focusing vision, joint rigidity and shuffling gait. Extrapyramidal and motor symptoms continued to worsen nevertheless. Joint rigidity increased gradually, and at the same time the patients speech became slower, verbal content poor, and affects blunted. The poor clinical response to antipsychotics prompted a neurology consultation. An EEG examination was normal but oligoclonal bands of IgG were found in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) when blood and CSF samples for autoimmune encephalitis were drawn 8 weeks after admission to psychiatric hospital. Mood stabilizing medications were discontinued as neurologic symptoms worsened with opisthotonus posturing, retrocollis, swallowing difficulties, increased salivation, nocturnal incontinence, autonomic instability and periodic unresponsiveness. Malignant neuroleptic syndrome was previously ruled out in an emergency consultation. In the context of fluctuating psychotic, manic and disorganized behavior, a clinical picture of catatonia started to emerge including mutism, mannerisms and incoherence. The patient received a series of three sessions of electroconvulsive therapy without clinical response.
At this time, 82 days after admission to psychiatric hospital, the serum and CSF sample results for NMDA receptor antibodies were reported as positive. IgG antibodies were detected using indirect immunofluorescence of 1:10 diluted serum or undiluted CSF incubated on cerebellar tissue (Clinical Immunological Laboratory, Prof. Dr. med. Winfried Stöcker, Lübeck, Germany). The patient was transferred to a neurology ward and intravenous (i.v.) methylprednisolone 1 g/day and i.v. immunoglobulins 20 g/day were started and commenced for 5 days. Peroral lorazepam was continued at 4 mg/day, and prednisone was started perorally after i.v. treatments at 50 mg/day. Ovarian teratomas and tumors were excluded with a pelvic MRI and whole body computer tomography. Positive titers of serum NMDA receptor antibodies were still measured at 166 days and 242 days after admission to psychiatric hospital. One infusion of rituximab 500 mg i.v. was given at 220 days due to persistently elevated antibody titers.
The premorbid level of functioning of our patient had been excellent, with a highest global assessment of functioning (GAF) level of 91 during the past year. At the time of admission to psychiatric hospital GAF was 43, and at the start of neurologic rehabilitation GAF was 21. Prior to illness, the patient had been working to complete a university degree after a lifetime history of academic success at international schooling. Prejuvenile and juvenile social adjustments were good, and there were no history of neurological illness, chronic medical illness, perinatal complications, head trauma, nor history of psychiatric disorders or substance use disorders in the family.
After 50 days of treatment in the neurological ward the patient was discharged. She received 15 sessions of neuropsychological rehabilitation, speech therapy and psychological counseling during outpatient treatment and further functional recovery was gained. Disregarding subjective concentration difficulties, objectives for neuropsychological recovery were attained. Medical status was assessed again at 290 days after admission to psychiatric hospital. All medications had been discontinued 3 months prior to this assessment. The patients weight and abdominal circumference changed marginally between assessments at 14 and 290 days from 55 kg to 54 kg, and 78 cm to 76 cm respectively. At this time GAF was rated at 70, which was the highest level of functioning during the past year. She had only mild subjective experiences of difficulties in verbal expression, distractibility, concentration difficulties, slowed-down thinking and lack of thought energy. Auditory working memory performance was solely reduced in repeated neuropsychological testing compared to baseline, but remained within normal limits. Positive symptoms, catatonia, joint rigidity or gait disturbances were no longer present. There was no detectable pathology or longitudinal change in conventional brain MRI. Serum NMDAR antibody titers were still positive at 408 days from admission The patient has subsequently completed her university studies, and has been since employed in full time work. All subjective neuropsychological symptoms have disappeared and no symptomatic relapses have occurred during a 946 day follow-up.
We further wanted to explore for subclinical morphological changes between the first and latest brain T1 weighted MRI using Freesurfer image analysis suite for cortical reconstruction and volumetric segmentation in a longitudinal design . The patient, and eight healthy female controls of similar age, underwent the same structural MRI scan with the Philips 3 T Ingenuity PET/MR hybrid scanner at baseline, and after 9 months with same imaging sequences. We compared regional volume changes between time points with changes measured from the reference sample. Values deviating from the lower or upper quartile for more than 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQR) was chosen as a cutoff for outlier status from reference population. See Additional file : Supplementary methods for details.
In the baseline MRI scan of this case conventional neuroradiological assessment revealed no major pathology. A more detailed volumetric analysis revealed lower volumes in multiple brain regions, but these did not clearly deviate from the control subjects when corrected for intracranial volume. However, the patient had more volume reduction between baseline and the follow-up time point than any subject in the reference group in primarily frontal cortical regions . Movement artefact was minimal, but slightly more prominent in the patient baseline MRI scan compared to the follow-up scan. Movement during a functional MRI series from the same scan session was higher in baseline for the patient, but there was no association of change in movement to change in volume in the complete study sample.