A 65-year-old male Caucasian with a history of multiple comorbid conditions presented to the emergency room with complaints of moderate constant pain at the right upper quadrant (RUQ) abdomen for the last several hours. Differential diagnoses of symptomatic cholelithiasis, cholangitis, and liver abscess were entertained. On physical examination, he was found to have normal vital signs, with icteric sclera and pain on deep palpation at the RUQ region. Upper abdominal ultrasonography (U/S) revealed a 6 cm heterogeneous mass in the left hepatic lobe and dilated gall bladder with mild sludge or stones. His laboratory results were significant for elevated liver enzymes, bilirubin and creatinine, hyperglycemia, and leukocytosis . Subsequently, he had a hepatobiliary (HPB) iminodiacetic acid scan, which showed no excretion of hepatobiliary radionuclide related to either severe liver dysfunction or high-grade biliary obstruction. In addition, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the upper abdomen and pelvis was performed, which confirmed the U/S findings of the lesion in the left lobe of the liver and demonstrated areas of internal enhancement, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed mild gall bladder wall edema and a 9 mm common bile duct (CBD) dilatation of without evidence of choledocholithiasis, and it was consistent with an undetermined 5 cm mass in the left lobe of the liver. To confirm the pathology of the lesion, the referring physician performed a CT-guided biopsy, which revealed an intrahepatic papillary mucinous neoplasm. This case was discussed at the HPB multidisciplinary conference, and the patient was recommended to undergo left liver mass resection, cholecystectomy, and repair of incisional hernia. His comorbid conditions include cardiac disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and cerebrovascular accident. Cardiology evaluated the patient and declared him as a moderate surgical risk. He uneventfully underwent robotic left partial liver resection, cholecystectomy, lymphadenectomy, and repair of ventral hernia, and his hospital course was unremarkable. Gross pathology and histology revealed negative margins, and the 4.5 cm × 3.5 cm × 3.0 cm cystic structure from hepatic tissue represents the intrahepatic biliary IPMN (yellow arrow) with low-grade dysplasia. The central aspect of the mass is comprised of pink-tan papillary tissue. There is no gross evidence of invasion . The remainder of the liver parenchyma is red-brown and firm. The patient came for regular postoperative follow-up and is still alive. The lesion had low-grade dysplasia and no malignant focus; however, the patient still underwent abdominal ultrasound after 3 months and a CT scan after 1 year. Also, he was followed up by his primary care doctor. His last visit to a hospital was on 20 March 2023 for non-IPMN or non–liver-related issues. He had a history of cerebro vascular accident (CVA) with dense right hemiparesis. His postoperative course was uneventful, other than a mild urinary tract infection for which he was prescribed antibiotics. He progressed well with physical therapy and was discharged to an inpatient rehab after 8 days of hospital stay. The patient had an extended stay at the hospital due to a lack of rehab beds. He was readmitted to the hospital from rehab due to a pulseless electrical activity (PEA) cardiac arrest for a short period, from which he successfully recovered and was discharged home with an outpatient rehab plan.