A 58-year-old female was admitted to the Department of Neurology in February 2019 due to increasing gait and visual disturbances, dizziness and nausea, which she had been suffering from for approximately nine months. Neurological examination revealed downbeat nystagmus with oscillopsia, severe standing and gait ataxia, slight extremity ataxia and slight dysarthria. The patient was only able to walk with assistance. Cranial MRI showed no evidence of cerebellar atrophy. There were no abnormalities in routine laboratory tests. CSF analysis showed pleocytosis of 11 cells/µl and an intrathecal IgG synthesis of 26% (i.e. IgG index = 0.89). Serological tests were negative for autoantibodies against the neuronal antigens GQ1b, aquaporin-4, MOG, GAD, Hu, Yo, Ri, CV2, Ma1, Ma2, NMDA, GABA(A), GABA(B), CASPR2, LGI-1 and mGluR1 receptors. So were serological test for autoantibodies against ITPR1, ARHGAP26 and CARP VIII and Tr/DNER (data not shown). In addition, the following tumour markers were on normal levels: CA 72–4, Cyfra 21–1, NSE, beta-HCG, beta-2-Microglobulin, alpha-Fetoprotein, CA 15–3, CA 19–9, CA 125 and CEA. Indirect immunofluorescence test (IIFT) on HEK293 cells ectopically expressing selected antigens (EUROIMMUN Medizinische Labordiagnostika AG, Lübeck, Germany) revealed the presence of anti-Homer-3 antibodies (IgG) with a titer of 1:32,000 in serum and 1:100 in CSF. IIFT results are shown in Fig. , where monkey cerebellum incubated with the serum or CSF of the patient shows a dense, net-like fluorescence of the molecular layer with involvement of the Purkinje cells and accentuation of their neurites. This is also the case for a sample from another Homer-3 positive patient, that was included as control. The sample from an anti-Homer-3 antibody negative patient does not show fluorescence at the 1:10 cut-off on the monkey cerebellum substrate. As already mentioned above, antibodies in the serum and CSF of the patient described in this case report bind the antigen Homer-3 overexpressed in HEK293 cells. This is also true for the additional anti-Homer-3 positive patient sample. Importantly, the HEK293 controls do not show fluorescence, and Homer-3 transfected HEK293 cells do not show fluorescence when incubated with the anti-Homer-3 negative serum.
The thorax and abdomen CT scan revealed a lymph node mass in the right axillary. Histological analysis revealed lymph node metastasis of a papillary adenocarcinoma. Because of unremarkable findings in mammography, a breast-MRI was performed, which showed multiple lesions on both sides as a diffuse tumour manifestation of adenocarcinoma of the breasts. The whole-body tumour PET showed signal increases in both breasts without further tumour manifestations. The patient received four times 1000 mg methylprednisolone followed by five plasmaphereses. To treat the downbeat nystagmus, 4-aminopyridine was dosed with 10 mg b.d. , which resulted in a moderate decrease of the nystagmus. After three weeks, the patient’s ambulation improved and she was able to move independently with a wheeled walker. She was subsequently treated with chemotherapy (epirubicin, cyclophosphamide) and two series of immunoglobulins (5 × 30 g each). Until September 2019, there was a moderate improvement of the cerebellar symptoms with a decrease of ataxia, disappearance of the downbeat nystagmus and a decrease in serum anti-Homer-3 antibody titer down to 1:100 in serum.