The patient was a 62-year-old man who underwent gastric partial resection for GIST 2 years previously. Six months after the surgery, a single tumor emerged in the hepatic left lobe. Because it was thought that tumor was metastasis of the gastric GIST, he had started on imatinib based on the pathological and genetic evidence of the original lesion. Two months after beginning imatinib, the tumor had enlarged and the imatinib regimen was changed to sunitinib. Eleven months later, the tumor had grown further and he was referred to our hospital for surgery because the tumor was considered to be tolerant to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. His blood tests showed the following: aspartate aminotransferase, 32 U/L (normal range, 5 to 30 U/L); alanine phosphatase, 37 U/L (normal range, 10 to 30 U/L); total bilirubin 1.2 mg/dL, (normal range, 0.2 to 1.2 mg/dL); carcinoembryonic antigen, 3.5 ng/ml (normal range, < 5.0 ng/ml); and carbohydrate antigen 19–9, 8.0 U/ml (normal range, < 15 U/ml). An indocyanine green retention rate of 15 min was 15.1% with Child–Pugh grade A. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a 51-mm-wide tumor in hepatic segment 4 with heterogeneous echo and it didn't present bloodstreem increase. Sonazoid-enhanced ultrasonography with hypervolemic contrasting pattern revealed that the tumor was enhanced in the early phase and washed out in the late phase . Enhanced computed tomography showed a 40-mm-diameter tumor in hepatic segments 3 and 4 (S3 + 4) with an enhanced solid nodule along the wall . On the right side of the tumor, there was an additional 50-mm tumor, which suggested a hemorrhagic cyst . Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging also showed an enhanced S3 + 4 tumor, a hemorrhagic cyst, and small nodules, which represented enhancement defects in the hepatocyte phase in hepatic segments 6 (S6), 7 (S7), and 8 (S8) . 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography showed a high FDG uptake lesion in only the S3 + 4 tumor verge. No evidence of metastasis from other organs was observed . Although the imaging findings which suggested that the tumors were possibly other hepatic malignant tumors such as hepatocellular carcinoma had been considered, we diagnosed the tumors as hepatic metastases of gastric GIST because of the existence of multiple tumors and treatment progress. We performed hepatic left lobectomy and partial resections for three lesions. Intraoperative ultrasonography showed the tumor in hepatic medial segment and hematoma between the tumor and middle hepatic vein. The tumor measuring 73 mm × 65 mm × 36 mm in the resected left lobe showed a 40-mm white solid component, an adjoining 22-mm black nodule, and a cystic lesion with bleeding close to the margin . The histopathological findings showed that the spindle-shaped cells with nuclear atypia and eosinophilic cytoplasm proliferated diffusely in the solid component . Characteristically, the tumor cells were full of pleomorphism. The partially resected specimens did not contain tumor tissues. The S6 nodule was a cyst, while the S7 and S8 specimens represented dilated ducts. Accordingly, those lesions were not considered GIST metastases. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that desmin was positive, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was slightly positive, and heavy caldesmon and muscle actin (HHF35) were positive in 30% of the tumor tissue . S-100 protein and myogenic differentiation 1 (MyoD1) did not present significant staining , and c-kit and CD34 were negative.
In contrast with these findings, the gastric GIST specimen resected 2 years previously showed that although c-kit was positive and CD34 was weakly positive, the desmin, αSMA, and S-100 protein were negative. Additionally, c-kit gene mutations were not detected in the hepatic tumor tissue, whereas these mutations were positive in gastric GIST .
According to these findings, we diagnosed the patient with primary hepatic PLMS. The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged 9 days after the operation. Because a chemotherapeutic strategy for PLMS has not been established, imatinib was administered as an adjuvant chemotherapy for GIST. Tumor recurrence was detected in the vicinity of the pancreatic head 10 months after the operation, and doxorubicin is now being administered.