A 17-year-old Japanese woman, who had decreased vision in her right eye and severe ocular pain and headaches, was referred for management of vitreous hemorrhage. On a day prior to her visit the woman's younger brother had been playing with an umbrella, which subsequently caused the handle to detach and the metal tip of the umbrella to strike the woman in her upper right eyelid. She reported that she only felt being hit with something hard on her right upper eyelid and the left eye. Following the incident, the umbrella was found on the floor. She visited a local clinic, and the eyelid injury was sutured on the same day because it was considered to be a surface injury. On the next day she had severe ocular pain, headaches, and blurred vision in the right eye and she visited our clinic.
At presentation the lid wound in her right eye was sutured and the lids were severely swollen. Her vision had diminished to light perception only in her right eye and was 20/200 in the left eye, but she could barely open her right eye because of the severe ocular pain. The eyelids were gently separated and slit-lamp examination revealed an intact globe with moderate mydriasis. There were 2+ inflammatory cells and fibrin in the anterior chamber of the right eye and corneal erosion in the left eye. Ophthalmoscopy revealed commotio retinae, and intraretinal hemorrhage at the superior quadrant with mild vitreous hemorrhage in the right eye, but no sign of a rupture of the globe.
Although her lid wound was small the woman had severe headache, and CT was performed on the orbit and brain to determine the extent of the injury. Unexpectedly, the images revealed irregular signals between the right orbit and the third ventricle. The signals were interpreted as brain edema, and the high-density area, which was isodense with bone and located anteriorly to the third ventricle, represented orbital bone fragments; no other foreign body was detected on cross-sectional CT scanning . On three-dimensional CT scanning a window defect became apparent in the superior orbital wall . MRI on the same day demonstrated edema of the head of the caudate nucleus and putamen, and the edema extended to the hypothalamus, where the bone fragments had penetrated into the brain cavity through the inferior part of the frontal lobe . We assumed that her headaches were caused by the leakage of cerebrospinal fluid, and she was transferred to the Neurosurgery Department.
The patient was given intravenous hyperosmotic solutions to reduce the brain edema and antibiotics to prevent bacterial meningitis. Her systemic condition improved, and the ocular pain and headaches disappeared within a week. However, several neurological tests showed that her memory was altered, indicating minor brain damage.
After the vitreous hemorrhage had cleared, a retinal break was found superiorly where the intraretinal hemorrhage had been located, and the break was treated by laser photocoagulation. The retina remained attached in the right eye three months later, with full ocular movement and a minor scar of width approximately 2 cm at the superior eyelid . Her vision improved to 20/50 in her right eye and 20/20 in her left. Decreased vision in her right eye was caused by subretinal fibrosis due to the choroidal rupture and subretinal hemorrhage caused by the blunt trauma.