A 12-year-old boy, previously well, presented to the spine clinic with a 6-month history of recurrent back pain following a trivial trauma. Pain was acute in onset and was associated with band-like sensation across the chest. It was particularly worse in the night and woke him up from the sleep several times. Family did not report any history of fever or history suggestive of neurological deficit.
He was a keen cricket player which he had to stop due to pain in his ankles and heels. He was later diagnosed with the possible Sever’s disease and was managed conservatively for the same. The parents also noticed the presence of pustules on palms in the past, which have now healed. There was a travel history to the United States of America for 16 days, however, no known history of tick bite or contact with a tuberculosis patient. Birth and development history were unremarkable. There were no pets in the house and no one in the family had a similar clinical presentation in the past.
On examination, he was 138.3 cm tall and weighed 43.25 kg (body mass index [BMI] 22.7 kg/m2, at risk for overweight according to CDC growth charts ). He was afebrile to touch and there was no tenderness on palpating the back. He had a mild kyphotic deformity in the mid-back region though his overall spinal alignment was good in both coronal and sagittal planes. He had a relatively preserved spinal range of motion. Abdominal reflexes were bilaterally symmetrical and equal. There was no sensory or motor deficit present in the lower limbs.
The radiographs of the thoracic spine revealed compression fracture of the 6th, 7th, and 8th thoracic vertebrae with the collapse of T7 and T8 vertebrae . His blood counts were unremarkable and are tabulated in . Blood tests were also performed to rule out inflammatory arthropathies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were suggestive of high signal intensity in STIR sequence with significant loss of vertebral height in T7 and T8 vertebrae .
The MRI scan of whole body did not show lesion in any other bone. As no diagnoses was reached on non-invasive investigations, decision to undergo a biopsy was taken in a multi-departmental team MEETING. Subsequently, biopsy was performed under computed tomography (CT) guidance which on pathological examination showed “mainly compacted bone, likely to be normal cortical bone.”
After ruling out all other possibilities, a diagnosis of CRMO was made. He was treated with bisphosphonates and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The child was pain free after 3 months of treatment. MRI scans done after 9 months revealed satisfactory response as well . The patient was followed up for 18 months and had complete resolution of symptoms.