A 48-year-old East-Asian man, who was previously a light smoker, underwent resection of a recurrent adenocarcinoma at pT1N0M0 stage IA in his right lower lobe of the lung. The patient was diagnosed as having recurrence in the right supraclavicular and axillar lymph nodes, and right thoracic wall. Although no EGFR mutations were observed, the echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like (EML) 4-ALK fusion gene was detected in 2009 at the Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious diseases Center Komagome Hospital . The patient was treated with chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin (75 mg/m2, day 1, every 3 weeks) and pemetrexed (500 mg/m2, day 1, every 3 weeks) from June 2009 for four cycles and subsequent pemetrexed maintenance therapy (500 mg/m2, day 1, every 3 weeks) for six cycles, resulting in a partial response. Thereafter, he received palliative radiotherapy and participated in a clinical trial and during which he was treated with erlotinib (150 mg/day) ± tivantinib (ARQ197, 720 mg/day) from August 2012 until March 2013. Then, we started to treat the patient with crizotinib at a dose of 250 mg twice daily. Grade 3 QTc prolongation was observed; consequently, we reduced the dose to 200 mg/day. Consistent anorexia with vomiting was seen during treatment for 9 months until progression. The patient was treated with three cycles of docetaxel (60 mg/m2, day 1, every 3 weeks), which ended in multiple brain metastases accompanied by Cushing syndrome; he was subsequently treated with whole brain irradiation. Nine cycles of nanoparticle-albumin bound paclitaxel (100 mg/m2, weekly) were administered, followed by alectinib (600 mg/day) from December 2014 for 6 months, resulting in a partial response.
During the third cycle of gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2, days 1, 8, 15, every 4 weeks) as the sixth line of chemotherapy, the patient had gradually presented with weakness and appetite loss accompanied by neck stiffness; therefore, we suspected meningitis carcinomatosa. Laboratory data demonstrated no significant abnormality, while the multiple enhanced lesions appeared with meningeal thickening . As salvage therapy, considering the patient’s poor performance status, we administered 250 mg of crizotinib twice daily from August 2015. One week after the commencement of crizotinib treatment, magnetic resonance imaging revealed shrinkage of metastatic foci and peritumoral edema in the brain and meningeal thickening . However, hepatic metastasis had progressed and the patients’ nausea and poor performance status were not greatly improved. Crizotinib treatment had to be discontinued and the patient was transferred to the palliative care unit. The nausea was slightly improved; however, he died 1 week later because of respiratory failure stemming from aspiration.