A 45-year-old Brazilian man from Manaus, Western Brazilian Amazon, presented to the hospital of the Fundação de Medicina Tropical Doutor Heitor Vieira Dourado with fever, headache, and myalgia during the previous 5 days. Physical examination showed no alterations. He was diagnosed with P. vivax malaria (parasitaemia of 0.26%), and, after a normal qualitative G6PD test, treatment with chloroquine and primaquine were prescribed following the national guidelines [for this patient, chloroquine for 3 days (600 mg the first, 450 mg the second and 450 mg the third day) and primaquine for 8 days (30 mg/day)].
The patient was discharged, but 2 days later, he returned to the hospital with abdominal pain, dyspnea, dry cough, oliguria, and fever, showing hypotension, tachycardia, pallor, and sweating on arrival. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the left hypochondriac region, rebound tenderness and abdominal guarding. A blood film showed a P. vivax parasitaemia of 0.006%. Blood analysis revealed 5.53 g/dL of haemoglobin, 15.98% of haematocrit, 22,000 platelets/mm3, 1.59 mg/dL of total bilirubin, 1.48 mg/dL of indirect bilirubin, 3.1 mg/dL of creatinine and INR of 1.43. Despite the low parasitaemia, severe malaria was considered as a result of the combination of clinical and laboratory data. No other laboratory tests were done to rule out different infectious causes. The patient received a blood transfusion and primaquine was suspended because of thrombocytopaenia. At this moment, due to a suspicion of spleen rupture and patient instability, a portable ultrasound scan was performed. This revealed a layer of free fluid in the splenorenal space and in the pelvis. The patient was referred to a surgery hospital (Hospital Pronto Socorro 28 de Agosto, also in Manaus), where he underwent an emergency splenectomy. Ten days after surgery, the patient had a positive blood smear (0.007%), anaemia and thrombocytopaenia. A negative blood smear was obtained 14 days after abdominal pain appeared. It was only a month after the splenectomy that blood parameters began to ameliorate, and primaquine was re-started at this point to attempt clearing of hypnozoites. The dose of primaquine given was 30 mg/day for 8 days, representing a total dose of 3.2 mg/kg.
Two months after the beginning of the symptoms and 1 month after reintroducing primaquine, the patient had another malaria episode. He presented with fever, headache and myalgia for 1 day, and parasitaemia was 0.32%. He received a new chloroquine + primaquine treatment cycle. Seven days later, the patient was asymptomatic and the blood smear negative. The dose of primaquine was the same as the previous time, although treatment was not supervised. However, 2 months after the latest episode, the patient suffered another malaria attack (1.3% parasitaemia), and he received the same treatment one more time, although again treatment was not supervised. No features of severe malaria were present in either of the two episodes. Patient follow-up after the last episode was not possible as he moved out of Manaus.
The patient gave consent to analyse the removed spleen at the time of splenectomy. Upon visual inspection, the spleen appeared enlarged and displayed multiple lacerations. After being immersed in a fixative solution, examination of the ruptured spleen showed areas of different coloration and consistency . Very solid brownish areas, some more liquid reddish ones and an almost black, large subcapsular haematoma could be distinguished. The size of the organ was 17 × 14 × 7.5 cm. Splenic sections were embedded in OCT (Optimal Cutting Temperature compound) and frozen for histopathology analysis 6 months later. This analysis revealed red pulp cord infiltration by lymphoid cells and remnants of parasite’s haemozoin . In addition, DNA from different spleen portions was extracted, and a PCR using primers for the P. vivax-MSP1(19) (merozoite surface protein) gene, showed the presence of the parasite .