In 2006 November, a 27 year old diagnosed HbE-Beta thalassaemic Sri Lankan Muslim male patient presented to the medical ward with rapidly progressive weakness of both lower limbs for about 1 week duration and ended up in total paralysis of both lower limbs with double incontinence. It did not progress to the upper limbs or respiratory muscles. On examination he had spastic paraparesis with a sensory level at thoracic 8 (T8) level. At that time his haemoglobin was around 5 g/dl and had a number of blood transfusions which settled his paralysis.
In 2007 November, once again he presented to the neurology ward with similar symptoms. Physical examination revealed a young male with a characteristic facies with frontal bossing, prominent malar prominences, short upper limbs and multiple skeletal deformities. He was severely pale and icteric as well. Splenectomy scar was there and liver was moderately enlarged (5 cm below costal margin). Higher functions and cranial nerves examinations were normal. Motor system examination revealed normal upper limbs with increased tone in lower limb muscles and complete loss of power in all muscle groups of the both lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated in both lower limbs with bilateral extensor planter response. Superficial abdominal reflexes were absent and there was a complete sensory loss below T8 level.
On admission he had haemoglobin of 6.5 g/dl with normal white cell and platelet counts. All the biochemical investigations were normal except high serum bilirubin indirect fraction and very high level of serum ferritin (2488 ng/mL). X ray thoracic spine did not provide any clues of compressive lesions. MRI of the thoracic spine revealed multilevel, lobulated soft tissue mass in the extradural space extending from T5 to T8. The spinal cord and thecal sac was severely compromised with anterior displacement of the cord due to pressure effect on dorsal cord suggesting extra- medullary haemopoiesis.
The patient had undergone number of packed cell transfusions with iron chelating therapy (Intravenous desferioxamine). With blood transfusions the lower extremity power improved gradually and regained sphincter control once his haemoglobin level comes around 10 g/dl. Post transfusion MRI of thoracic spine revealed the reduction of the size of soft tissue mass with minimal pressure effect on the cord, which further strengthening the diagnosis of cord compression due to extramedullary haemopoiesis to overcome the anaemia.