This HIPAA-compliant case report was approved by the Institutional Review Board with a waiver of informed consent.
The patient was a 77-year-old man with a remote history of left knee total knee arthroplasty (TKA) complicated by infection requiring revision at age 57. For twenty years, he suffered from worsening painful left knee effusion that was refractory to conservative management, which included immobilization, application of ice packs, limb elevation, massage, and cessation of blood thinners. Both oral (e.g., non-narcotic, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, and gabapentin) and topical (e.g., lidocaine and diclofenac patches) regimens provided little pain relief. Multiple prior knee aspirations performed by the referring orthopedic surgeon demonstrated recurrent acute-on-chronic hemarthrosis with extensive intraarticular thrombus precluding complete evacuation of the joint despite aspiration of acute blood products. His laboratory workup did not show evidence of prosthetic joint infection or other infectious processes, including negative culture of the aspirate fluid, normal white blood cell counts, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP). At his initial consultation visit, the patient endorsed marked chronic swelling and severe pain (10/10 on Visual Analog Scale [VAS]) most pronounced at the left medial compartment of his knee. These symptoms were associated with limited flexion and weight-bearing, resulting in the deconditioning of his left leg musculature . Preprocedural cross-sectional MR or CT imaging was not performed because of the lack of a standardized imaging protocol or metal artifact reduction available at the time of this case report.
The patient underwent angiographic evaluation with the plan for genicular artery embolization to treat recurrent hemarthrosis. Under ultrasound guidance, antegrade right (contralateral) common femoral artery access was obtained, followed by placement of a 5F × 45 cm Ansel sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN) over the aortoiliac bifurcation with tip in the contralateral common femoral artery. The left lower extremity arterial system was catheterized using a 4F × 100 cm glide catheter (Terumo Medical©, Somerset, NJ), 2F × 150 cm Pursue microcatheter (Merit Medical Systems, South Jordan, UT), and 200 cm 0.014-inch Fathom wire (Boston Scientific©, Marlborough, MA). Diagnostic arteriography showed marked diffuse periarticular hyperemia about the medial and lateral joint spaces of the left knee with capsular distention . Given these findings, selective embolization was performed targeting the following genicular arterial branches: 1) the superomedial genicular artery using 0.1 vial 100–300 µm Embosphere Microspheres (Merit Medical Systems, South Jordan, UT), 2) the superolateral genicular artery using 0.1 vial of 300–500 µm Embosphere Microspheres, 3) the recurrent anterior tibial artery using 0.05 vial of 300–500 µm Embosphere Microspheres , and 4) an accessory superolateral genicular artery using 0.05 vial of 300–500 µm Embosphere Microspheres. Post-embolization arteriography showed marked reduction in periarticular hyperemia about the medial and lateral joint spaces . The patient had no immediate post-procedural complications.
At the one-month follow-up, the patient reported a 50% reduction in pain (5/10 on VAS) but had persistent left knee swelling. Left knee joint aspiration removed 80 cc of sanguineous fluid, without further reduction in pain or joint distension. Culture of the aspirate fluid was negative, and the patient remains afebrile without leukocytosis. Given his persistent pain, the decision was made to proceed with genicular nerve block. Needle placement was performed under fluoroscopic guidance, with confirmed juxtacortical location in both anterior and lateral planes of the left superolateral, superomedial, and inferomedial genicular nerves . 5 cc of 0.25% bupivacaine was injected at each targeted location with an immediate subjective reduction in pain severity.
One month after the genicular nerve block, the patient reported reduced pain (2/10 on VAS), which was about 80% decreased compared to his initial presentation and 60% decreased compared to post-genicular artery embolization levels. This reduction in pain severity persisted through the 10-month follow-up despite limited changes in joint distention. Functionally, he improved weight-bearing and subjectively increased knee flexion. With concurrent topical lidocaine patch, the patient was able to participate in physical therapy.