A 54 years old Saudi man, known case of Hypertension, Diabetes Miletus type II for 6 years with history of percutaneous coronary intervention which has been done 2016, due to Ischemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation and old stroke. He presented to emergency department with history of acute confessional state for 1-day duration. He was in his usual state of health till 1 days prior to admission when he presented with symptoms including fever, confusion and decrease oral intake associated with right leg pain. He was discharged recently from the hospital – 2 weeks back – when he was complaining of obvious swollen and erythematous on the right leg below the knee a diagnosis of Right lower limb cellulitis was established, he was vitally stable and treated by antibiotics (clindamycin, ciprofloxacin, meropenem). There was no history of limbs weakness, loss of consciences, seizure, trauma nor facial asymmetry. Furthermore, He denied a recent travel and ingestion of raw seafood. On physical examination, the patient was moderately obese, appeared very ill and agitated. Had temperature of 37.6 °C heart rate of 112 beats per min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per min, blood pressure of 150/93 mm of mercury, and normal oxygen saturation while breathing room air as measured by pulse oximetry, Glasgow coma scale 14 out of 15. His lungs were clear, he was tachycardic, and the abdomen was normal without organomegaly. The right lower extremity showed gross swelling of the right lower limb up to the level of the thighs with tense right calf muscles, evident bullae and pus discharge from the sole of the right foot. Laboratory tests revealed a leukocytosis of 16.3 × 109/L, elevation of C-Reactive Protein (15.30 mg/dL) and liver enzymes.
The patient was diagnosed to have infected right foot and impending sepsis. Sepsis protocol was initiated including cultures of blood and wounds. He was admitted on 27/07/2018 to the surgical intensive care unit and underwent surgical debridement of the right foot ulcer with right calf fasciotomy on 28/07/2018 .
He remained in the surgical intensive care unit for 16 days for further resuscitation. The initial blood culture taken on 27/07/2018 flagged positive for Vibrio cholerae after 8.5 h of incubation in the BACT/ALERT® VIRTUO® (bioMérieux, US). Microscopic examination showed short Gram negative, slightly curved rods (image). As per the lab protocol, it was subcultured on blood, chocolate and Macconkey agar plates. 18 h later, pure growth of non-lactose fermneters was noted which gave positive oxidase and catalase reactions. Vitek MS (matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight MS) gave the identity as V. cholerae.
Manual testing confirmed it showing it as Non O1, Non O139 serotype. The organism was grown in TCBS Selective medium (SPML, Saudi Arabia) at 42 C as yellow colonies.
Biochemical reactions, nitrite negative, lysine negative, VP positive and ONPG positive) were illustrated using Vitek II (bioMérieux, US) using the VITEK®2 GN ID card. Non-halophilic nature of the spp. was shown by ability to grow on specialized low salt medium, CLED (SPML, Saudi Arabia).
The initial antimicrobial therapy was of 1 mg IVP of Meropenem, Vancomycin and Tigacyclin 50 mg IVP. The Vibrio cholerae showed antibiotic-resistant to ampicillin. He also received further medications during his Hospital stay. He was moved to surgical ward on 06/08/2018. The right foot wound has improved with healthy granulation tissue on the right leg wound, however, right foot still has some slough along granulation tissue. Therefore, the patient was vitally stable, ready for discharge on 02/09/2018 and to continue daily dressings as an out-patient. The next day 03/09/2018 patient readmitted with urosepsis to medical word. The Surgical team of the hospital followed up as consultation for the progress of the wound and dressings continued. The calf wound was very clean however, the foot wound has minimal slough that needed daily dressings and occasionally bed side debridement. On 03/10/2018 he intubated again due to overwhelming sepsis and set on inotropic support and transferred to medical ICU. Due to the vasopressor effects the whole right leg to the level of the knee became ischemic and black with evidence of wet gangrene .
Guillotine above knee amputation was done on 07/10/2018 and then patient returned to the medical ICU and continued on inotropic support. Eventually, he passed away at 2:00 am on 09/10/2018.