A 40-year old woman, diagnosed with NF1 complained of acute, severe back and abdominal pain during work. She was transferred to the emergency room at our hospital due to syncope. Upon admission, her blood pressure was 85/41 mmHg and heart rate was 129 beats/min. Computed tomography (CT) showed a large retroperitoneal hematoma, with extravasation around the duodenum, and intraperitoneal blood . After CT scanning, her systolic blood pressure decreased to 50 mmHg. Laboratory data revealed severe anaemia (haemoglobin, 5.4 mg/mL) and mild coagulopathy (prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, 1.31; activated partial thromboplastin time, 41.0 s). No thrombocytopenia (platelets, 225 × 1000/μL) and no history of anticoagulant therapy were noted. Her blood pressure was only slightly increased to 70 mmHg by a rapid infusion of packed red blood cells (two units); thus, an intra-aortic balloon (Rescue Balloon®-ER, Tokai Medical Products, Inc., Aichi, Japan) was introduced via the left femoral artery, and balloon was partially inflated at the lower level of the thoracic aorta to stabilize her systemic blood pressure. Because we suspected a PAA rupture associated with NF1, based on CT findings , emergency TAE of the PAA was planned shortly thereafter.
After the introduction of a 5-F sheath via the right femoral artery, celiac arteriography was firstly performed, which showed extravasation from the anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (ASPDA), as well as its disruption .
Because isolation of the pseudoaneurysm was difficult due to the disruption of the ASPDA, the ASPDA was embolized from the disrupted site to a healthy segment with five pushable platinum coils (2.0 mm diameter with 60 mm length, C-stopper coil, Piolax Medical Devices Inc., Kanagawa, Japan), using a 1.7-F coaxial microcatheter (ASAHI Veloute, Asahi Intecc Co., Aichi, Japan) advanced through a 4-F Mikaelson catheter . Aiming to isolate the disrupted PAA completely, angiography of the SMA was subsequently performed, which showed a huge pseudoaneurysm and extravasation of the anterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery (AIPDA), as expected. In addition, rupture of the posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery (PIPDA) was also suspected, but was not definite . At this time, her blood pressure was still unstable. The catheter and sheath were changed to a 5.2-Fr balloon catheter (Selecon MP® balloon, TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan) and J-shaped sheath (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) for temporal selective occlusion of the SMA (to stabilize the bleeding from the SMA), rather than a complete IABO. Selective catheterization via a microcatheter advanced through an inflated 5.2-Fr balloon catheter was difficult due to the steep angles of the PAA (both the AIPDA and PIPDA); thus, after several attempts, the microcatheter was changed to a 2.4-F steerable microcatheter (SwiftNINJA, Sumitomo Bakelite, Tokyo, Japan). A huge pseudoaneurysm of the AIPDA with early visualization of the portal vein, indicating an arterioportal fistula , was embolized with three detachable microcoils (2.0 mm diameter with 60 mm length, Target® Detachable Coils; Stryker Corporation, Kalamazoo, Michigan 49,002, USA) from the disrupted site to a healthy segment, as with the ASPDA. However, complete haemostasis was not obtained by coil embolization alone . Therefore, we added a 1:1 mixture of n-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate (NBCA; Histoacryl Blue; B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) and iodized oil (Lipiodol; Guerbet, Aulnay- Sous-Bois, France). Complete flow stasis was achieved and the disrupted anterior PAA was isolated successfully. There was no overflow of glue into the SMA . The PIPDA was embolized by gelatin sponge particles, followed by two detachable microcoils (1.5 mm diameter with 30 mm length), as selective angiography of the PIPDA showed multiple minor bleeding sites via tiny its branches.
However, even after complete TAE of the PAA, minor extravasation around the main trunk of the proximal SMA continued, and her vital signs remained unstable . Because bleeding from the main trunk of the SMA or a fine vessel was suspected (radiologically not confirmed), stent-graft placement (Viabahn® 7 mm × 5 cm; Gore & Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, AZ, USA) was selected to stop the haemorrhage and maintain the normal blood flow of the SMA trunk . Placement was performed using a 7-Fr guiding sheath (Flexor Tuohy-Borst Side Arm Introducer, 55 cm, Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA) and a stiff wire (V18, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). Extravasation completely disappeared immediately after stent-graft placement. Subsequently, her vital signs became stable.
Administration of aspirin (100 mg/day) and edoxaban tosilate hydrate (because of the huge plexiform neurofibromas; Lixiana®, Daiichi-Sankyo Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, 30 mg/day) was initiated at 24 days after stent-graft placement, which was changed to aspirin (100 mg/day) and warfarin potassium (3 mg/day) at 31 days after treatment. Excellent patency of the stent graft was confirmed on follow-up contrast CT at 28 days after treatment . She was discharged at 56 days after treatment.