A healthy 33-year-old woman (Gravida 3, Para 2) delivered a live female infant by cesarean section at term, after an uneventful pregnancy except for polyhydramnios. During her pregnancy, all of the antenatal ultrasounds done were normal. Her social history included a non-consanguineous marriage with a family history free of congenital malformation, and her previous two pregnancies had been normal and had produced one normal boy and one normal girl. However, the current pregnancy was unplanned and the mother had received a Zoladex implant for endometriosis 2 months before this pregnancy.
At birth, the baby was dysmorphic, weighed 2.370 kg (7th percentile), was47 cm long (25th percentile), and had microcephaly, with a head circumference of 29 cm (<1st percentile). The microcephaly was associated with a severely deformed nose with only one stenotic nostril and the presence of a cul-de-sac detected by probing and dilating, in addition to hypotelorism, cleft palate, microphthalmia, micrognathia, and respiratory distress .
The patient was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and septic workup was done. Four hours later she developed severe respiratory distress, so endotracheal intubation was done. Complete blood count (CBC), blood electrolytes, and blood gases were normal. Chest X-Ray was normal, and an echocardiogram revealed a small atrial septal defect with a patent ductus arteriosus. Both kidneys appeared normal in size and echogenicity by renal ultrasound. The brain ultrasound revealed a mild lateral ventricle dilatation with the absence of the septum pellucidum. Subsequently, a three-dimensional computed tomography scan was done and revealed a single midline mono-ventricle with a dorsal cyst of holoprosencephaly; fused cerebral hemisphere and thalami; and no midline septum pellucidum, corpus callosum, and flax cerebri. She also had a mono-nostril, hypotelorism, and a lobar holoprosencephaly, all features suggestive of partial arhinia. The skeletal survey did not reveal any abnormality, and here karyotype was normal (46 XX). A feeding was started at day 3 of life by orogastric tube and it was tolerated. Two weeks after her NICU admission, the patient developed gram-negative sepsis (Pseudomonas aeruginosa) and died due to Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC).