A 20-year-old male, active duty US Army Combat Engineer was brought to the emergency department (ED) via ambulance after ingesting a small piece of C-4, with a volume estimated to be about 1.2 cubic inches, or three-quarter ounce. As a combat engineer, his duties involved detonation of explosives, including C-4, in support of combat operations. During a lull between training iterations at a demolition range, he was dared by a colleague to eat a 4 × 1 centimeter piece of plastic explosive. Immediately following the ingestion, he began to have nausea and a headache. Approximately 30 minutes later, he sustained a witnessed, generalized tonic-clonic seizure lasting two minutes. His unit members contacted their medical support and he was transported to the nearest military ED.
Per emergency medical services, he was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation with reassuring vital signs. No antiepileptic medications were administered prior to arrival at the ED. In the ED, the patient reported feeling confused, dizzy, and weak for about 60 minutes following the seizure. He complained of new onset of lower back pain. His initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 149/71 millimeters of mercury; heart rate 96 beats per minute; respiration 15 breaths per minute; and his rectal temperature was normal. His physical examination was remarkable for warm skin, hyperreflexia, and non-sustained bilateral lower extremity clonus.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia without evidence of ischemia, and borderline corrected QT interval prolongation was reported; however, no specific measurement was provided in the patient’s record. Radiographs of the chest, thoracic spine, and lumbar spine showed no acute abnormalities, and there was no mention of radiopaque foreign bodies. Computed tomography of the head showed no evidence of acute hemorrhage, edema, or mass effect.
When it became clear the patient had been exposed to C-4, the West Texas Regional Poison Center was consulted. Additional laboratory tests were recommended to assess for signs of organ damage and metabolic aberrations: urinalysis for hematuria; blood gas for methemoglobinemia; comprehensive metabolic panel for elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis, acute kidney or liver injury and hypokalemia; and creatine kinase to assess for rhabdomyolysis. Supportive care was recommended for seizures and nausea. Twenty-four hour observation was recommended as well.
The patient received lorazepam 1 milligram (mg) intravenously (IV), ketorolac 30 mg IV, and 1 liter (L) normal saline bolus. Laboratory results were significant for leukocytosis of 16.4 103/microliters (uL) (reference range 4.5 to 11.0 x109/uL); elevated D-dimer of 2003 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) D-dimer units (reference range <250 ng/mL); and elevated lactate at 2.41 millimoles (mmol)/L (reference range 0.5–1 mmol/L).
He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for monitoring. On admission, the consulting neurologist recommended doses of valproate 20 mg per kilogram (kg) and levetiracetam 40 mg/kg IV for seizure prophylaxis. In addition, the inpatient team elected to order two 16-ounce doses of polyethylene glycol oral solution and magnesium citrate for gastrointestinal decontamination. There was no report of C-4 found in rectal effluent. He remained on seizure precautions and had resolution of gastrointestinal symptoms, and no further seizure activity or other neurologic symptoms.
Once medically cleared, he was seen by a behavioral health specialist per standard Army protocol. He met face-to-face with a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) and was evaluated using a battery of seven standardized psychological screening tools routinely used in the US Army Behavioral Healthcare Clinic. There were no concerning results and he was cleared by the LCSW and returned to full duty after his 24-hour observation period.
At follow-up with his primary care provider four days later, he denied any recurrence of symptoms and did not have any further complaints or seizure-like activity.