The patient was 2 years and 6 months old when she was injured in a traffic accident between a private car and a truck. She underwent cardiopulmonary arrest and was rushed to an acute care hospital where she was resuscitated. She was diagnosed with C3 CSCI and tibial fracture . Acute physical findings revealed left conjugate deviation of the eyes, complete quadriplegia below C3, and respiratory paralysis. Thus, she was managed on a ventilator. Treatment consisted of posterior fusion and halo vest for C3 CSCI and fixed seine for her tibial fracture. Rehabilitation was started in the ICU on the fifth day after the injury. During the acute phase, rehabilitation focused on respiratory rehabilitation and early mobilization for complete quadriplegia below C3, respiratory dysfunction, and orthostatic hypotension. Training was conducted through play using toys such as soap bubbles and whistles to increase ventilation and, as appropriate, with the use of assistive devices such as sit-to-stand and standing tables. . Her general condition gradually improved and she was discharged from the ICU 46 days after the injury. Six months after the injury, she was transferred to a local hospital for environmental adjustment for home discharge under ventilator control with ADL requiring full assistance. The American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) motor score was 0. Her ADL status at the time of discharge is shown in Fig. using the Functional Independence measure (FIM). The total FIM score was 35 points, and all items such as selfcare and locomotion required full assistance.
The FIM is one of the most reliable and widely used methods in assessing the basic quality of ADLs for people with disabilities . The FIM is designed to assess the amount of assistance needed for a person with a disability to safely and effectively perform basic ADLs and consists of 18 items. These activities include minimal skills related to self-care, sphincter control, transfer, locomotion, communication, and social cognition. Each item was rated on a 7-point scale and graded according to common criteria. Patients are classified as "7: Complete independence" if they are able to perform activities in a completely normal manner, and "6: Modified independence" if they need tools to assist with activities or need more time to perform them. The FIM is also graded according to the degree of assistance: "5: Supervision," "4: Minimal Assistance," "3: Moderate Assistance," "2: Maximal assistance," and "1: Total Assistance” . In this case report, the same experienced physiotherapist in charge of the patient calculated the total, motor, and cognitive scores.
Rehabilitation until school age was conducted for developmental and mobility impairments. Specific examples include the assembly of a mouse stick and an electric wheelchair. Figure shows the actual mouse stick and the training scene. Using the mouse stick, the child underwent repeated training to write through games and to operate a computer until she entered school. Figure shows the electric wheelchair. The wheelchair was made when she was 4 years and 6 months old. Since she still had quadriplegia, she was repeatedly trained to safely maneuver the wheelchair with chin control. As a result, at 6 years of age, she was able to go to the local elementary school like most children.
As for her education, she entered a local regular elementary school at the age of 6 years, a regular junior high school at 12 years, and a support high school at 15 years. During her elementary school life, she was able to participate in field trips and sports events with her classmates using an electric wheelchair. She attended regular lectures as much as possible by using a mouse stick to write and operate a computer. In addition, lectures were held with one teacher accompanying the students to assist them depending on the content of the lecture. Figure shows her actually attending the lecture using the mouse stick and the pictures and letters she drew. In addition, Fig. shows her FIM score at the end of elementary school over time. The total FIM score increased to 46 points, with improvement in locomotion, communication, and social cognition. The improvement was attributed to the fact that she was able to operate a power wheelchair and move around while supervised. She was also able to interact with others at her own will. There was no change in the ASIA motor score.
During her middle school years, she experienced travel by air. In her life up to junior high school, her only means of transportation was a motorized wheelchair and full-assistance private car transportation. Therefore, the first time she flew, a rehabilitation physician and a physical therapist boarded the plane with her to check her boarding and vitals . This experience enabled the family to travel alone thereafter. As she grew older, her knowledge further improved, and she was able to use a computer to conduct research. This led to an improvement in the locomotion and social cognition items in the FIM at the end of middle school, with a total score of 48 .
After entering a special support high school, rehabilitation using a robot was started to improve self-care skills. As a result, she was able to use the assistive robot to perform eating movements . By placing food in a container and operating a chin controller, it became possible for the patient to eat what she wants to, eat in the order she wants to, and choose the timing of her feedings. In addition, her physical education lectures enabled her to participate and play in local sports tournaments . As a result, her total FIM score has increased to 54 points in her second year of support school. Her self care and social cognition items have improved. There was no change in the ASIA motor score. Details of her current total FIM score are shown in Table .
In addition, the chronological progression of this long period of time is summarized in Fig. .
She had quadriplegia and respiratory paralysis as sequelae of her CSCI. In addition, her ASIA score did not change over time, and weaning from the ventilator was difficult. The ventilator mode was controlled mechanical ventilation (CMV) at the time of injury, and was changed to synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) as her level of consciousness improved and her respiratory status changed. After discharge from the ICU and transfer to the general pediatric ward, the ventilator setting was gradually changed from SIMV to continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) mode, and she was discharged home on a portable ventilator. During the following period until schooling, she felt better with the respiratory frequency (f) set at 3 breaths rather than 0. During schooling, the ventilator was set to pressure support (PS); 12 mmH2O, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP); 4 mmH2O, f; 3 times (6 times at bedtime) and has remained at the same settings to date. Furthermore, during the course of the disease, paralysis and spasticity resulted in spasticity of the lower extremities and scoliosis of the spine. Physical therapy, orthotics, and botox injections were administered as needed for the lower limb. Functional scoliosis was detected when she was 8 years old, and a trunk brace was prescribed. By 12 years of age, her scoliosis progressed to a Cobb angle of 43° in T7-L3 and 45 degrees in C5-T7. By the age of 13 years and 10 months, the Cobb angle progressed to 70° in T6-L4 and 49° in T6-C5. This resulted in difficulty sitting and lying on the left side; hence, a posterior spinal instrumentation and fusion of Th2-S2 (PSIF) was performed . Postoperatively, pleural effusion and pneumonia were observed. With appropriate medical treatment and rehabilitation, the patient was discharged 14 days after surgery with the same respiratory setup as preoperatively.
Data collection was carried out according to the international ethical standards with humans of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and her family to publish any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article. This study conforms to all case report guidelines and reports the required information accordingly.