The patient is a woman in her early fifties. She was diagnosed with MS after a sensory attack in the left shoulder in 2008 and a sensorimotor attack in the right leg in 2013. She was treated with interferon beta 1a from April 2013, and with fingolimod from September 2013 after a motor attack in the left leg from which she recovered partially. Treatment was changed again to natalizumab in January 2014 when macula edema was suspected. She remained clinically and radiologically stable until natalizumab was terminated in the beginning of June 2015, after she tested positive for John Cunningham virus. Alemtuzumab was started at the end of July 2015. During the first cycle (12 mg for 5 days) she had transient sinus bradycardia down to 30 beats per minute but no other adverse events.
The patient remained clinically stable with an expanded disability status scale (EDSS) score at 2.5 until the second cycle (12 mg alemtuzumab preceded by 1000 mg methylprednisolone, 12 mg cetrizine and 1000 mg paracetamol for three consecutive days) in July 2016. Except for transient bradycardia there were no immediate adverse reactions, but some hours after the last infusion of alemtuzumab she became sick with nausea and fever up to 40 °C. At admission to hospital she was awake and did not have neck stiffness or other focal signs except abdominal discomfort and mild headache. She was febrile (39.5 C) and clinically dehydrated but normotensive. C-reactive protein was 180, lymphocytes were below the detection limit but the number of granulocytes was normal. As she did not have new neurological symptoms, neither detailed neurological examination, brain imaging nor lumbar puncture were performed. Four out of four blood cultures were positive for L. monocytogenes (confirmed by 16S RNA sequencing) which was susceptible to trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole, ampicillin, erythromycin, meropenem and penicillin. She recovered rapidly and completely upon treatment with ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole.