A 67-year-old woman was referred to our department with ocular pain, hyperemia, and blurred vision in the right eye. Cataract surgery had been performed for both eyes in a clinic at 3 months ago. She had no history of systemic disease and was in an immunocompetent condition. At first presentation, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA, measured with a standard Japanese visual acuity chart and converted to Snellen visual acuity) and intraocular pressure (IOP) in the right eye were 20/20 and 17 mmHg, but slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed a white clump of 3 mm diameter, anterior inflammatory cells, and an iris posterior synechia in the anterior segment . There was no inflammation in the posterior segment . Serum examination showed a slight increase in white blood cells (8,600/mm3) but not in β-d-glucan (9 pg/dL) or inflammatory proteins. Bacterial culture of the anterior humor and histological analysis of the white clump did not detect the cause of the endophthalmitis. As well, increase of 18S/28S rDNA (18S rDNA, not detected; 28S rDNA 2.4×102 copies/mL) was not presented by broad-range PCR using the aqueous humor. Because the white clumps in the anterior chamber strongly suggested fungal endophthalmitis, treatment with systemic and topical antifungal agents (systemic fosfluconazole [504 mg/d, 4 days] and topical pimaricin ophthalmic ointment [4 times/day]) was initiated in addition to antibacterial treatment (systemic cefepime [1,000 mg/d, 4 days] and topical moxifloxacin hydrochloride [6 times/day], vancomycin eyedrops [6 times/day], and ceftazidime eyedrops [6 times/day]). These medications were tapered according to the remission of the clump and inflammation in the anterior segment. At 14 days, the endophthalmitis was resolved and the subjective symptoms had disappeared.
On day 47 after the initiation of treatment, she visited our hospital for headache, recurrence of ocular pain, hyperemia, and blurred vision in the right eye. BCVA was decreased to hand motion, and IOP was elevated to 40 mmHg in the right eye. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed reappearance of a white clump in the anterior segment, anterior inflammatory cells, large iris nodules, fibrin formation, and a posterior synechia . The posterior segment was not visible due to inflammation in the anterior segment. Serum examination did not present an increase in β-d-glucan. Vitrectomy was emergently performed, and the aqueous humor and vitreous humor samples were obtained. Examination of microbial culture using samples from both the anterior chamber and the vitreous identified Penicillium species. We diagnosed fungal endophthalmitis caused by Penicillium species, and treatment with systemic micafungin (100 mg/d, 9 days), oral voriconazole (200 mg/d, 9 days) and flucytosine (6,000 mg/d, 9 days), and voriconazole eye drop (4 times/day) was initiated. The ocular inflammation by fungal endophthalmitis was gradually resolved with contraction of the clump after 14 days , although the iris nodules remained. BCVA was improved to 20/16, and IOP was decreased to 16 mmHg. No recurrence was found 16 months after the second treatment.