A 30-year-old Caucasian woman with para 2 was admitted to our department for right side flank pain, dysuria and suprapubic pain. She had no complaints of vaginal discharge, bleeding or painful menstruation. Her menstrual cycles were normal and lasting for three to four days. She did not have a family history or any surgical interventions. A physical examination revealed a right side costovertebral angle and suprapubic tenderness. Laboratory test results including a complete blood count, serum biochemical analysis, urine analysis and urine culture were normal. Urinary ultrasonography showed right side hydroureteronephrosis with renal cortical thinning. We suspected a right ureteral stone obstructing the ureter and a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. The CT scan revealed similar right side hydroureteronephrosis with obstruction of the ureter. No signs of stone were observed on the CT scan.
After preclinical and radiologic evaluation of the patient, we decided to perform a right side diagnostic ureterorenoscopy (URS) and retrograde pyelography. Retrograde pyelography and diagnostic URS showed a focal stricture with a length of >3cm at the distal ureteral part and secondary hydroureteronephrosis. The stricture site could not be passed with URS and a double J stent was inserted and the operation was terminated. We planned to perform an excision of the affected ureteral segment and a ureteroneocystostomy with Boari flap six weeks later.
Open partial ureterectomy and ureteroneocystostomy with Boari flap were performed. First, we dissected and excised the affected ureteral segment, which was followed by mobilization of the spatulation of the remaining ureteral parts. Then, the bladder was mobilized anteriorly and a Boari flap was created. The flap was pulled to the spatulated ureter without tension. A new 26cm 4.8F double J stent was inserted and the ureter was anastomosed to the apex of the flap with absorbable 4/0 sutures. Control of the anastomosis was confirmed by filling the bladder with 300ml saline and no leakage was observed. A pelvic drain was placed at the end of the procedure.
No extravasation was observed from the anastomosis site on the 10th postoperative day and the urethral catheter was removed. We took out the pelvic drain the day after. Our patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day and the double J stent was removed after six weeks. The pathologic specimen demonstrated intrinsic endometriosis of the right ureter with endometrial glandular cells and stromal tissue . Now, our patient is in the second year of follow-up and has not experienced any signs of recurrence during the last year and control urinary ultrasonographies revealed no evidence of hydronephrosis.