A previously healthy 3-year-old boy (weight 17.5 kg and height 102.5 cm) presented with viral laryngo-tracheobronchitis (croup). His initial heart rate was 120 beats per minute (bpm). One milligram epinephrine was administered via a nebulizer without significant changes in his heart rate. As respiratory symptoms persisted, a second dose of epinephrine (1 mg) was prescribed, but was inadvertently administered by intravenous push into a peripheral line. This amount was approximately 6-times the recommended dose (0.01 mg/kg body weight). The child suddenly developed facial flushing, tachycardia (187 bpm), hypertension (110/75 mmHg), hypoxemia (O2 saturation 90% in room air) and worsening of his dyspnea. There was neither gallop nor hepatomegaly. Chest x-ray showed increased vascular markings, which improved after a dose of furosemide.
The child developed multifocal atrial tachycardia with multiple distinct P-wave morphologies, irregular P-P intervals, isoelectric baseline between P-waves and rapid ventricular rate (187 bpm). The QRS complex ≤ 100 ms and ST-segment elevation ≥ 3 mm were evident on the rhythm strip . Tachycardia persisted for about 12 hours although the wandering pacemaker persisted after normalization of the heart rate. This was confirmed on 24-hour Holter tape recording from 12 to 36 hour after the IV epinephrine administration; the ventricular rate and QRS duration were normal. ECG and 24-hour Holter tape recording at 2, 12 and 18 months showed persistent wandering pacemaker with normal QRS duration and ventricular rate (about 100 bpm).
During the acute episode, echocardiogram showed normal heart structure and ventricular function. Serum Troponin-T and creatine kinase-MB were also normal. His vital signs (including heart rate and blood pressure), O2 saturation and ECG were closely monitored. His blood pressure normalized 4 hours after the epinephrine dose. He received a dose of intravenous furosemide and oxygen supplementation. He was discharged after 48 hours with normal vital signs.
Another cardiac event noted in this patient was an elevated ST-segment (~4 mm, a sign of coronary spasm), Figure .
Fleming et al. have published evidence-based centile charts from birth to 18 years of age for normal heart rates . Between 1 and 5 years, the heart rate (mean ± SD) is 109 ± 14 bpm for males and 108 ± 15 bpm for females. The corresponding values for infants are 132 ±12 bpm and 135 ± 14 bpm . Thus, the heart rate noted for this patient (187 bpm) was 5 SD above the mean.
Children with marked tachycardia (≥4 SD) should be monitored (vital signs, pulse oximetry and ECG). Serum troponin-T, serum creatine kinase-MB and chest x-ray may be necessary based on clinical and ECG findings. Echocardiography is also needed to rule out underlying cardiac pathology. Treatment with adenosine, beta-blockers or calcium-channels blockers should be individualised. Therapeutic interventions are justified in symptomatic children (e.g., heart failure, chest pain and dyspnea), persistent tachy-arrhythmia, ischemic changes on ECG or abnormal serum cardiac biomarkers. In specific cases, electrophysiological studies may be necessary to rule out sinus node re-entry or right atrial tachycardia. Follow-up by a pediatric cardiologist may be necessary, especially in the presence of abnormal ECG.