An 18-year-old boy presented with complaints of back pain and progressive weakness in bilateral lower limbs for one month. He was a known case of thalassemia major since four years, and he had been receiving regular RBC transfusion. On examination, the power in bilateral knee extensors, ankle plantar flexors, and ankle dorsiflexors was 2/5. Knee reflex and ankle reflex was exaggerated in both lower limbs (4+), and the plantar reflex was extensor. There was no sensory abnormality, and bladder function was normal. Liver was palpable and a previous scar over the splenic area was seen, consistent with a past history of splenectomy. A complete blood count (CBC) analysis showed hemoglobin of 9.5 gm/dl, hematocrit of 27.6%, RBC count of 3.32 million/ul, and platelet count of 3,95,000. Peripheral smear analysis showed anisopoikilocytosis, predominantly normocytic normochromic RBCs with the presence of a few macrocytes, polychromasia, the presence of nucleated red cells (68% of total nucleated cells), and target cells. Chest x-ray showed a widening of diploic spaces in all the thoracic ribs with a thinning of their inner table along with prominent widening of anterior ends of the ribs.
A MRI of the dorsal spine showed the presence of a large T2 hyperintense paravertebral mass extending from thoracic 4 to thoracic 10 (T4-T10) vertebrae. The lesion was homogenously enhancing, involving the epidural fat and caused a complete obliteration of the corresponding subarachnoid space, leading to marked cord compression . The differential diagnoses considered were a hematological malignancy or an EMH. An emergency spinal cord decompression was planned. A T5 to T10 laminectomy was performed. The lesion was soft, completely extradural, and grayish white in color. The bony tissue was firm with an abnormal marrow appearance. Complete resection was done to achieve adequate decompression. Intraoperatively, the patient received two pints of packed RBC transfusion. On histopathology, the dorsal lamina of the spine showed fibrocollagenous hyperplastic bone marrow and the mass showed erythroid hyperplasia. By the time of discharge, the patient was able to walk with support and at a follow-up of 6 months, he showed complete recovery.