A 6-year-old girl (height 110 cm, weight 20.3 kg) with no medical history had a fever 1 month before surgery. She visited a clinic and general hospital due to jaundice and malaise. At admission to the general hospital 2 weeks before surgery, she was diagnosed with acute hepatitis and was given liver protection drugs (Stronger Neo-Minophagen C, Lactulose, Vitamin K) and fresh frozen plasma, although her liver and coagulation function deteriorated during the course of treatment, along with decrease in platelet count. She was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) of our children's medical center for blood purification therapy 4 days before surgery.
On examination, she looked ill. Physical examination revealed the following: blood pressure 95/56 mm Hg, pulse rate 72 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min with SpO2 of 99% on room air, body temperature 37.3 °C, and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of E3V4M6. Abdominal examination was unremarkable, with no hepatosplenomegaly. Examination of the eyes and skin revealed icterus.
Initial laboratory investigations revealed thrombocytopenia (hemoglobin 13.0 g/dL, white cell count 3.4 × 103/μL, platelet count 9.1 × 104/μL). Electrolytes were normal (Na 139 mmol/L, K 4.2 mmol/L, Cl 103 mmol/L, Ca 9.5 mg/dL, Mg 2.3 mg/dL, P 3.9 mg/dL). Her coagulation profile was prolonged (prothrombin time 23%, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio 2.36, activated partial thromboplastin time 63.7 s) and liver function tests were abnormal (albumin 4.0 g/dL, total bilirubin 18.76 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 13.17 mg/dL, venous ammonia 70 μg/dL, lactate 2.2 mmol/L). Infectious disease screening tests were negative. Computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen showed lower absorption in the liver compared to the spleen, suggesting ALF. Cranial CT scan and fundus examination were normal. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed slow spindle waves with a frequency of 1–2 Hz, without laterality or triphasic waves . Daily plasma exchange and continuous hemodiafiltration were started for ALF with HE. Mannitol was administered to prevent cerebral edema. A day before surgery, GCS scores worsened to E1VTM1. Clinically, she was unresponsive to pain and auditory stimuli, and her EEG showed high voltage continuous slow waves with a frequency of 0.5–1 Hz, without lateralization . Assuming deterioration of HE, emergency LT was considered vital. After obtaining informed consent from her family, urgent living donor LT with an extended left liver graft from her mother was planned on the 5th ICU day.
General anesthesia was induced with fentanyl (50 mcg) and rocuronium (20 mg) and maintained with remifentanil and rocuronium infusions (0.1–0.4 mcg/kg/min and 7 mcg/kg/min, respectively), along with sevoflurane inhalation at 0.5%. A BIS Quatro Brain Monitoring Sensor (Medtronic plc, Dublin, Ireland) was placed on the frontotemporal region, and her electroencephalogram, including BIS values, 95% spectral edge frequency (SEF95), and suppression ratio (SR), was continuously recorded at each phase of liver transplantation by the BIS monitor until the end of anesthesia . The durations of anesthesia and surgery were 708 min and 637 min, respectively. The graft volume was 254 g, graft volume/recipient standard liver volume (GV/SLV) was 46.1%, and graft-to-recipient weight ratio (GRWR) was 1.27%. Warm and cold ischemia times were 40 min and 51 min, respectively. BIS values ranged from 10 to 20 from the start of the operation to reperfusion . From reperfusion to the end of the operation, BIS values ranged from 10 to 80, and the variation in BIS values also increased. The frequency of EEG waveforms and BIS values seen with BIS monitoring gradually increased . She was re-admitted to the PICU after surgery, extubated on postoperative day (POD) 2 and discharged from the PICU on POD 7. Follow-up EEG on POD 5 showed low amplitude and fast waves with a frequency of 9–10 Hz, without laterality or paroxysmal waves . However, she spoke only a few words until POD 7. Two weeks postoperatively, she was newly diagnosed with hepatitis-associated aplastic anemia. Her immunosuppressant regimen was changed and continued for post liver transplantation prophylaxis and aplastic anemia. She was discharged after 4 months of hospitalization. The cause of liver failure in the present case remains unknown.