A male Caucasian 8-year-old child presented at the hospital’s emergency department in Belgium. The circumstances of the accident were reported as a fall on the left knee complicated by a contact trauma with another child. At consultation presenting, complaints were a sharp pain in his left knee and difficulties to walk. The pain was scored as 4/10 on the visual analogue scale. In clinical examination, anterior pressure pain, swelling, and a restricted range of motion(flexion up to 100° and extension deficit of 5°) were the main findings. Performing ananterior drawer test and Lachman test, no laxity was documented. On conventional anteroposterior and lateral view of the X-ray, a minimal displaced fracture of the intercondylar eminence, two loose bone fragments, and a bloated suprapatellar bursa indicating hemarthrosis could be evidenced . A CT scan confirmed a fracture of the intercondylareminence . The fracture was classified as Meyers and McKeever Type II . The initial treatment provided an adequate pain management with appropriate analgesics and plaster immobilization in 0—° of flexion. Based on the clinical and radiological findings, a knee arthroscopy was performed 3daysafter injury. The indication for arthroscopic surgery was removal of the intra-articular bony fragments and to evaluate whether the fracture was stable. The fracture of the proximal tibia was visualized through arthroscopy . The ACL was still intact yet showed a discrete laxity. No other fractures or injuries were visualized. Furthermore, the joint was rinsed and the loose bone fragments were removed to improve thee xtension and deep flexion. Peroperatively, the ROM was tested and was complete. Postoperatively, the knee was immobilized in extension with a hard cast. Weight-bearing was not allowed. Physiotherapy was established to strengthen and stabilize the knee. In the first follow-upconsultation 1 week after surgery, a new hard cast was applied for one more week. The patient was instructed to continue the isometric exercises for adequate revalidation. After 2 weeks of cast immobilization, an extension brace was applied for another 2— weeks. 6 weeks after the initial trauma, clinical examination showed a positive clinical course. A follow-up CT scan was performed that could show a starting consolidation. A CT scan examination was discussed with the family of our patient since his wish was to start sporting (football) early. Furthermore, CT scan is superior to X-ray with the disadvantage of a higher radiation dose. The extension brace was removed and a soft walking brace was applied. The patient was allowed to walk by full weight-bearing, taking pain and stability into account. A T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed at 8weeks of follow-up . This examination was initially performed because of a new trauma and was ordered by the general practitioner. However, it is useful to present the result of the MRI in this case report. The MRI showed an almost complete consolidation alongside very limited edema of the bone ( and ). The ACL and posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)weretotally intact ( and ). Clinically, the knee showed normal stability. The walking brace was permanently removed, and the patient was allowed to perform routine daily activities including all sportive activities. No more follow-up consultations were planned.