A 19-year-old Greek woman consulted at the emergency department for recurrent episodes of non-specific cramping and intermittent abdominal pain in her left lateral abdomen of 4 days’ duration. The pain was accompanied by nausea and vomiting. She had already been admitted to the hospital two times in the past with symptoms of incomplete obstructive ileus accompanied by partial retention of gas and feces. The patient had no significant past medical history, reported no tobacco use or alcohol intoxication and was on no medications. Her family history was also not significant, and thus her symptoms were not deemed to be associated with inherited PJS. Her general condition and vital signs were normal. Her physical examination was unremarkable, except for a mild tenderness to the left lateral abdomen. On the day of admission, the results of her routine laboratory investigations were within normal ranges, except for mildly increased leukocytes, which were measured at 15,200/μl (normal range: 3,500 to 10,800/μl). Ultrasound (US) of the abdomen was performed, which revealed a target-like mass that suggested an intussusception of the small bowel to the left abdominal quadrant and very closely to the ligament of Treitz . Computed tomography (CT) was then immediately carried out to clarify the US findings. The findings were in agreement with the sausage-type appearance of intussusception visualized on the CT scan, with alternating areas of high and low attenuation . Continually, CT enteroclysis was carried out to scan the whole intestine for the existence of other polyps. However, this technique confirmed only the solitary polyp close to the ligament of Treitz .
After a pre-operative consultation with the patient and her family, we performed SILS. The patient was placed in the Lloyd-Davies position. Afterward, we performed a 25mm incision to the patient’s umbilicus. We used SILS™ Port 5mm-12mm (Covidien™; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), which we also used to create a pneumoperitoneum. By using the patient’s umbilicus as a single port, first we recognized the pathogenic segment of the small bowel at a distance of 90cm from the ligament of Treitz, and continually we managed to reduce the intussusception by using articulate graspers . Then, we exteriorized the polyp-bearing small intestine through the umbilicus port, resected the solitary polyp and excised the invalid part of the bowel by performing a side-to-side enterostomy using Endo GIA Universal Single-Use Stapler 12mm AutoSuture (Covidien™; Medtronic).
Macroscopically, the excised polyp measured about 3cm and was sent for pathological examination.
The pathology report confirmed the polyp to be a hamartoma with characteristics of a PJP .
Post-operatively, the patient had an uneventful recovery, and she did not experience any complications. Her recovery was quick, and she was discharged on post-operative day 4. Three months later, an endoscopic examination of the upper and lower gastrointestinal system was performed without confirmation of any polyps.