A 33-year-old female visited our hospital for severe, right-sided, temporal headache, chemosis and proptosis in the left eye. Physical examination showed body temperature of 40.5°C, periorbital edema and chemosis in the left eye, left abducent nerve paresis, both pupils were equal, round and reactive to light and accommodation . Congestion of the erythematous nasal mucosa, and purulent nasal discharge drained from the right, contralateral, superior nasal meatus. Cranial nerve examination showed no paralysis and ophthalmological examination showed no abnormalities. Laboratory tests showed leukocyte count of 21700/mm3, C-reactive protein 15.0 mg/dL, and d-dimer, 54.8 mg/dL. No other disease was evident clinically.
Contrast enhanced CT of the orbits showed right proptosis and fat stranding in the left orbit. The left superior ophthalmic vein was enlarged, suggesting thrombosis. Contrast enhancement was noted within left cavernous sinuses and dilation of the cavernous sinus, indicative of inflammation of the cavernous sinus. Paranasal sinuses were clear on the left side. In contrast, the maxillary, ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses on right side showed mucosal thickening and retention of purulent material. The right sphenoid sinus was predominant and occupied the area underneath the cavernous sinus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the CT findings. Post-contrast T1 images showed enlargement of the left cavernous sinus with some defects, representing thrombosis of the left cavernous sinus. Coronal CT showed the right sphenoid sinus was dominant and much larger than the left .
The patient was immediately treated with intravenous ceftriaxone sodium, betamethasone and a therapeutic dose of low-molecular weight heparin. On the next day, bilateral endoscopic sinonasal surgery under general anesthesia was performed. Intraoperatively, the left sphenoid sinus and ethmoid sinus were checked, any accumulation of pus and mucous thickening by inflammation were not seen in both sinuses, whereas the right sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses contained pus and were lined with polypoid mucosa. The right sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses were opened widely and mucopurulent discharge was drained to clean the sinus. No surgical procedure was given for bilateral maxillary sinuses. After nasal packing, operation was finished .
Repeated cultures of samples obtained from the sphenoid sinus for microorganisms identified the presence of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. However, due to the seriousness of the condition, the patients received a 14-day course of pazufloxacin mesilate.
Endoscopic drainage of the sphenoid sinus resulted in marked improvement in the clinical symptoms and signs. The low-molecular-weight heparin was continued for 10 days post-operatively, but was later replaced with warfarin, which was continued for another 3 months, with the aim of achieving the target international normalized ratio of 2–3. Inflammation-related blood test improved after surgery, reaching normal ranges at 7 days after surgery. The patient was discharged from hospital on 12 post-operative day and was examined regularly during the follow-up period in the Outpatient Department. One month later, MRI showed no evidence of thrombosis of the cavernous sinus. One year later, the patient was in good condition without any morbidity.