An 8-year-old girl reported to pedodontic clinics with mild pyrexia, lethargicness lower lip swelling, and a sore tongue. The lymph nodes were significantly enlarged. On oral examination, lips were found to be dry, cracked, red, and localized swelling was seen of the lower lip . This swelling was accompanied by itching and subsided on its own. This painless swelling of lower lip has very rarely been reported in the oral manifestation of this disease, thus making this case report a novel presentation of Kawasaki disease. The patient first reported lower lip swelling and after few days strawberry tongue was seen. Her past medical history revealed that the child had developed Kawasaki disease at the age of 4 years for which she was hospitalized for uncontrolled fever.
The oral examination also showed the presence of a red bright erythematous tongue(strawberry tongue) with tongue tie , dry erythematous fissured lips that bled easily, along with prognathic maxilla and protruded maxillary teeth . Differential diagnosis of recurrent Kawasaki disease and scarlet fever was made because of the presence of strawberry tongue. As the patient was not having a history of sore throat or tonsillar exudate, the chances of scarlet fever were minimal. No oral exudates, ulcerations, or Koplik's spots were reported. The family history did not reveal any similar complaints in the family. The child was diagnosed with Kawasaki disease at 4 years of age. Lateral cephalometric radiograph of the nasopharynx showed enlargement of adenoid gland causing narrowing of the air passage .
The patient was referred by us to a pediatrician for further checkups as there was suspicion of recurrence of Kawasaki disease. Investigations showed total white blood cells (WBC) count of 15,600/mm3 with 70% neutrophils, increased ESR (60 mm at the end of 1 hour) and serum C-reactive protein (96 mg/L) and low platelet count (80,000/mm3). Urine examination and culture study showed sterile pyuria. Tuberculosis test was negative. Electrocardiogram (ECG) reports showed cardiac changes. X-ray of the chest showed an enlarged heart and cardiac involvement .
Generalized lymphadenopathy along with desquamation of the fingertips of the girl was seen within 2 days of reporting. Based on the investigations report and clinical picture, a diagnosis of recurrent Kawasaki disease was made by the pediatrician. She was treated with a single dose of 2 g/kg of intravenous immunoglobulin, and regular daily aspirin was adviced. The discharge was given after 3 days and the patient was free of the oral signs and symptoms within a month.