A 51-year-old man was involved in a high-impact trauma (motor vehicle accident) with a right bicolumnar acetabular fracture, according to the Letournel classification. He also had a concomitant left humeral shaft fracture, left pneumothorax, head injury, and liver contusions. He was initially admitted to the intensive care unit of another hospital. When he was stabilized, he was admitted into the orthopaedics department of the same hospital he was admitted. Thus, he was treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with plates and screws in both fractures .
He came to our attention six months after the treatment of the pelvic fracture with ORIF with no weight-bearing, right groin pain, a fever > 38 °C, and a discharging sinus in the right peritrochanteric region next to the surgical scar of the right hip (a KocherºLangenbeck approach was used). The diagnosis of the infection was made thanks to the presence of a discharging sinus. We firstly performed clinical evaluation and blood tests with an ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) and CRP (C-reactive protein) evaluation; then, we decided to perform instrumental planning with X-rays, and computed tomography (CT) scans. We observed a fracture-related infection of the right acetabulum with necrosis of the right femoral head. The patient reported previous oral antibiotic therapy with Amoxicillin (1 g) three times a day and Minocycline (100 mg) two times a day, with the lack of a noted germ. Due to the clinical, instrumental and laboratory indications, we decided to treat him for the fracture-related infection. A two-stage revision was planned using the same approach (Kocher–Langenbeck). In the surgery, we planned to perform implant removal, irrigation, and debridement; in the second surgery, we planned to complete the new osteosynthesis and implant a total hip arthroplasty (THA). In the first stage, we started to perform fistulotomy, then continued with implant removal (plates and screws) from the acetabulum. During the removal of implanted devices, irrigation (about 10–12 L of saline solution) and accurate and aggressive debridement were performed .
Five samples were taken and put in Fluid Thioglycollate Medium; then, cultural examinations were performed by a microbiology laboratory: the presence of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) was isolated. After the surgical procedure, empiric antibiotic therapy was set up by the specialist in infectious disease: teicoplanin (600 mg) once per day was administered intravenously. After the first dose of teicoplanin, an adverse drug reaction was observed, with rash and severe dyspnea. For this reason, the antibiotic therapy was switched to daptomycin (750 mg) once daily for eight weeks. This antibiotic therapy was confirmed after the results of the cultural examinations were received. In these eight weeks, the negativization of the laboratory examinations (CRP and ESR) was observed with the resolution of the symptoms. The surgical wound healed well, the patient had no fever, and no localized pain was observed. At the suspension of antibiotic therapy, no symptoms were observed, so the second stage was planned. Due to the case’s complexity, accurate planning was performed, with a three-dimensional reconstruction of the pelvis from standard CT scans. We requested a 3D-printed model from an external company (Medics Srl, Turin, Italy) .
Before the second stage, we performed a dry surgery on a 3D-printed model: we selected the type and size of devices for the implant and the direction of implanted components (i.e., the screws). Then, we decided how to reduce the fracture and obtain a new functional acetabulum. In the first stage, we observed significant bone loss and a complete alteration of the normal anatomy. There was a lack of bone in the roof of the acetabulum, severe circumferential osteolysis due to infection, and the interruption of both columns with a bone gap. A standard osteosynthesis could not be performed. In addition, due to the previous infection, the use of an allograft or synthetic graft was contraindicated, so the bone loss could not be treated with it.
After three months, the second stage of the surgical procedure was performed. In this stage, two approaches were planned. Firstly, we used a modified Stoppa approach with a lateral window to perform a second debridement, breaking the callus and mobilizing fracture fragments. At this point, thanks to pre-operative planning with a 3D-printed model, we reconstructed the acetabulum and pelvis and, finally, performed the osteosynthesis of the anterior column with two plates and a screw, which was supported by an autologous graft of platelet-rich plasma. Subsequently, we used Kocher–Langenbeck approach, resuming the approaches of previous surgical procedures. From this approach, we conducted a further debridement of the fracture and performed the osteosynthesis of the posterior column . As in the first stage, five samples were taken, and the cultural examinations were negative.
Since we had planned to implant a total hip arthroplasty, we conducted the femoral head resection before the new osteosynthesis to perform a better debridement. At this moment, after the osteosynthesis of the posterior column, the patient suffered a cardiogenic shock: the anaesthetist forced the stoppage of the surgical procedure for the safety of the patient. The planned total hip arthroplasty was postponed. After one month, the total hip arthroplasty was performed, resuming the previous Kocher–Langenbeck approach, with no complications .
Postoperatively, the patient had no weight-bearing activity for one month despite the total hip arthroplasty. Prophylaxis for heterotopic calcification was set. The mobilization of the right hip was immediately allowed with no limits. After one month, gradual weight-bearing was allowed with the goal of total weight-bearing at two months.
One year after the last surgical procedure, the patient had no symptoms, a comparable range of motion of the right hip to the left hip and was fully weight-bearing with no walking aids. An EQ-5D-3L score of 1.000 was observed.