A 16-year-old high school boy presented to us in the emergency department with history of fall on the ground from the third floor accidentally. On examination, he was conscious and had high fever due to common cold. He complained of low backache radiating to both lower limbs. He had hypoesthesia at L5 dermatome and bilateral weak dorsiflexors (Grade IV/V), without any bladder or bowel involvement. MRI and 3D-CT scan of the lumbo-sacral spine revealed a burst fracture (type A 3.3 according to Magerl/AO spine classification) of L4 vertebrae with bony fragments impinging on the dura causing spinal canal compression . Surgical planning was done, and a decision for delayed surgery was taken as the anticipated risk of intra-operative bleeding was significant in addition to his poor general condition. He was put on a hard corsette and was advised bed rest for a week prior to the planned surgery. Sextant (Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Tennessee, USA) percutaneous pedicle screw fixation was performed under general anesthesia using the posterior midline approach. Five cms linear skin incision was given in the midline and subsequent L4 and L5 laminectomy was performed. Without removing the midline ligamentum flavum, the dural sac and bilateral L5 nerve roots were exposed. Bone fragments in the canal were impacted back into the vertebral body using an impactor. Thereafter, bilateral L3 and L5 pedicles were localized, cannulated, drilled and tapped. Screws were then placed percutaneously using the Sextant system for fixation . An extension sleeve was used which allowed remote manipulation of polyaxial screw heads and engagement of screw locking system. The Sextant rods are pre-contoured into a curvilinear shape that precisely matches the contour of the rod inserter. The rods were then placed in a standard submuscular position with minimal manipulation and no muscle dissection. The consumed time for pedicle screws and rod placement was approximately 90 minutes.
Postoperatively thin sections of CT scan were obtained to determine the accuracy of screw placement. Scans revealed accurate placement of all pedicle screws along with adequately decompressed spinal canal . He experienced an immediate improvement in backache postoperatively. The patient was mobilized 1-2 days post-operatively and was put on external brace for a short period. He started his daily routine activities gradually and presently he is asymptomatic without any residual neurological deficits. At 6 months follow up there was no delayed loss of correction due to short segment spine fixation.