A 52-year-old female patient with no obvious abdominal symptoms was admitted for liver mass found by ultrasound examination. A hypoechoic solid mass ranged 5.7 * 5.6 * 5.0 cm was detected in the left lobe, with a clear outline and abundant blood flow inside the tumor. Physical examination showed no jaundice in the skin and sclera, liver palms, and any spider angioma. The abdomen was flat and soft, with no varicose veins. No tenderness or rebound pain was induced by palpation. All investigations of chest and limbs were normal. Laboratory tests showed normal blood cell count and liver functions except a slightly increase of total bilirubin to 21.3 μmol/L. Liver tumor related cell markers, including alpha feto-protein, carcino-embryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 199 were all within normal values. Hepatitis serological tests were all negative. No family or personal history of malignancy disease either.
Both CT and MRI examinations revealed the mass in the IVth segment of the liver with a multi-lobular appearance, clear boundary, and internal separations. The solid mass can be enhanced in the CT scan from 20Hu to 30Hu. Long T1 and T2 signal were showed in MRI, with only a weak strengthening in the delayed phase, suggesting the high probability of a benign hepatic tumor .
Preoperative biopsy was suggested but denied by the patient and an open abdominal surgery was performed to exclude any risk of malignancy. The tumor was identified on the diaphragm side of the liver, with a size of 6 * 5 * 5 cm and white-yellow color, in an exophytic growth pattern .
The tumor was resected, and no intraoperative frozen sections were taken because the mass was recognized as a benign lesion. A smooth capsule with a clear boundary can be visualized outside the solid-cystic cortex, containing yellow colored jelly-like substance in the central portion with white fibrous septa .
Microscopy findings showed that the tumor was composed with different proportions of loose fibroelastic connective tissue, hypocellular mucus-containing stroma, and scattered bile duct epithelium, associated with partial hemorrhage .
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed staining of Vimentin , SMA, CK, CK7, CD34, < 2% Ki67, but no CD117 and S− 100. Pathological diagnosis was collectively determined as the hepatic mesenchymal hamartoma by three pathological experts. According to AJCC classification, this mass belongs to T2bN0M0/IIb. Based on FNCLCC system, the hepatic tumor belongs to Grade 1 and the nodules of omentum metastasis belongs to Grade 2.
Three years after the surgery, the patient was readmitted because of massive ascites. Severe peritoneal effusions and omental thickening were detected by both ultrasound and enhanced CT scan. An ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy of the omentum was performed and followed by H.E. staining. It was found that spindle-shaped cells were distributed in a bundled or interlaced pattern with a relative high density. Multi-sized nuclei were slightly enlarged and eosinohilic cytoplasms were transparent but lack clear boundaries with surrounding myxoid stroma .
IHC staining of the biopsy specimen showed positive of vimentin, calretinin, and D2–40, < 5% Ki67, but weak for CK and negative for CK7, CK20, SMA, CEA, CA125, GLUT-1, WT1, CD34, and S− 100. Combination of the clinical progress with histopathological findings indicated that these metastatic lesions were developed from a malignant tumor with a mesenchymal origin, thus considered as low-grade MFS. Pathological consultation was carried out and a historical review of the original liver tumor slices indicated a high homology between these two lesions. The second onset was therefore considered as peritoneal metastasis of the primary liver tumor. This patient passed away 4 months later due to multiple organ failure.