A 75-year-old Japanese woman presented with pain and weakness in her left leg. She had had low back pain for 10 years before she presented at our institution. She had gradually become unable to walk owing to impairment of the cauda equina or to maintain a sitting position because of increased pain in both legs, and for those reasons she was admitted to our hospital. She was short in stature, with a height of 118cm; she had an overly prominent forehead; and the bridge of her nose was scooped out. These features were considered consistent with achondroplasia.
Her neurological examination revealed weakness of the iliopsoas, tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus and flexor hallucis longus muscles, with grades of 4/5 recorded upon manual muscle testing. Her deep tendon reflexes were hypoactive in her bilateral lower extremities. She had sensory loss in the bilateral lower extremities and the perineal region. She also complained of mild bladder dysfunction.Axial computed tomographic (CT) scans revealed a congenital developmental deformity with spinal canal stenosis from L1 to L5 and OLF at L1/2 , L2/3 and L3/4 . Interpedicular distances were narrow, especially at L4 and L5. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed narrowing of the spinal canal from L1/2 to L5/S1 . On the basis of these findings, we diagnosed the main cause of her symptoms as severe congenital spinal stenosis combined with OLF. Therefore, we performed a wide decompressive laminectomy and resection of the OLF from L1 to L5 using the spinous process-splitting approach. The spinous processes and laminae from L3 to L5 were in close contact with each other because of hyperlordosis at the lower lumbar spine. The ossified ligamentum flavum was closely adherent to the dura mater from L1/2 to L3/4. After the laminectomy and OLF resection, pulsation of the dura matter was observed . The patient’s neurological symptoms improved markedly after surgery. Postoperative CT and MRI scans revealed posterior decompression at the site of the resection of the laminae and OLFs from L1/2 through L5/S . The lateral portion of the OLF at the level of L1/2 remained, but sufficient decompression of the spinal canal was carried out from L2 through L5. The patient could walk with a T-cane one year after surgery and was still able to walk at the time of her four-year follow-up examination.