A 29-year-old man without previous medical history initially presented with chronic left upper extremity weakness, paresthesias, and diffuse polyarticular pain and swelling. He was found to have elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate to 95 mm/h (0–13 mm/h) and C-reactive protein to 154.5 mg/L (0–5 mg/L) with erosive changes in multiple joint radiographs. He was treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, gabapentin, and low-dose oral prednisone with plan for further outpatient workup but did not follow-up.
He presented the next year with inability to ambulate due to severe dyspnoea and bilateral knee arthritis. Family history included a maternal grandmother with arthritis; however, there was no family history of cardiovascular disease. He was euvolemic, his bilateral knees were swollen and there was severe pes cavus deformity of the feet. Labs included chronic lactataemia of 4–6 mmol/L (0.5–2.2 mmol/L), hyperammonaemia to 177 µmol/dL (11–33 µmol/dL), and hyperuricaemia to 11.5 mg/dL (3.7–7 mg/dL). Autoimmune panel, anti-Trypanosoma cruzi antibodies, and Coxsackie virus antibodies were negative. There was radiographic enlargement of the cardiac silhouette with echocardiographic left ventricular dilation, ejection fraction (EF) of 25%, and diffuse hypokinesis . Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed left axis, left bundle branch block, and diffuse tall QRS complexes . No evidence of coronary disease was found during cardiac catheterization at an outside facility a month prior to presentation. The patient resumed treatment for arthritis with oral steroids and began medical therapy for heart failure with carvedilol, furosemide, and lisinopril. He refused implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) placement and was lost to follow-up upon discharge.
He presented later that year with shortness of breath and episodes of haemoptysis and was admitted to the medical intensive care unit due to elevated lactate to 18 mg/dL without acidosis (bicarbonate 27.3 mmol/L; 22–29 mmol/L). Vitals and physical exam were otherwise benign. Troponin-T peaked at 0.798 ng/mL (<0.01 ng/mL) but EKG was unchanged. Repeat echocardiography showed worsened EF to 18% with marked reduction of tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, RV dilation, and presence of biventricular thrombi in the apical walls . Intravenous contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis found wedge-shaped hypodensities in the lung parenchyma and kidney representing thrombotic infarctions . He was anticoagulated and stabilized. Biventricular ICD placement was considered but deferred in the setting of intracardiac thrombus. The patient was not a candidate for cardiac transplant due to continual medication non-compliance and social instability.
In the following year, he was admitted multiple times for polyarthritic flares and dyspnoea. Arthrocentesis found monosodium urate crystals and he was treated with intra-articular and systemic steroids and colchicine. He had multiple episodes of hypoglycaemia and concurrent evaluation showed non-insulin-mediated hypoglycaemia with decreased glucose, insulin, and c-peptide. Electromyography was performed to evaluate weakness and showed mild, diffuse myopathy affecting the lower extremities and distal hand muscles. Left vastus lateralis biopsy showed prominent glycogen in skeletal muscle on electron microscopy. Targeted next-generation sequencing of genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) for the full coding regions plus ∼20 bp of non-coding DNA flanking each exon of the 14 genes known to be involved in GSDs detected a novel heterozygous c.993-1G>T mutation at the junction of intron 7 and exon 8 of the GBE1 gene which was further confirmed by Sanger sequencing. A splicing prediction software, Human Splicing Finder, predicted that the patient’s novel variant alters GBE1 splicing resulting in pathogenicity.
Follow-up echocardiogram with contrast showed worsening biventricular function with an RV thrombus within a hypertrabeculated RV. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging found absent LGE with increased RV trabeculation and thrombus . He was referred to a tertiary centre with glycogen storage disease specialists and was subsequently lost to follow-up from our facility. He was later found to have expired under unknown circumstances prior to presentation to that facility and no further information could be obtained.