A 47-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a headache for one week and sudden syncope in the morning.
A 47-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a headache for one week and sudden syncope in the morning.
The patient had no history of polyuria or polydipsia. No other illnesses were observed.
The patient had no known comorbidities or family history, but had a 15-year smoking history.
No rash or positive neurological signs were found on physical examination.
Laboratory tests results showed increased in carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (7.03 ng/mL, reference: 0-5 ng/mL), with no other abnormal findings.
Non-contrast brain CT showed irregularly shaped nodular foci with isodensity at the left frontal corticomedullary junction. Large patches of hypodense edema were noted in the adjacent white matter . Contrast-enhanced brain CT showed significant heterogeneous enhancement in the left frontal foci . Coronal and sagittal views of contrast-enhanced CT images showed irregular morphology of the lesion and poor demarcation with the adjacent skull . Bone window CT showed no abnormalities in the adjacent skull . Subsequently, the patient underwent a brain MRI. Axial T1-weighted images (T1WI) showed heterogeneous hypointense lesions in the left frontal lobe . Axial T2-weighted images (T2WI) showed a heterogeneously mixed hyperintensity signals with hypointense areas in the left frontal lobe lesion . After administration of gadolinium, the lesion showed heterogeneous enhancement on axial , coronal , and sagittal T1WI . No abnormalities were found on sagittal T1WI of the sellar region .
Considering the elevated CEA levels and CT and MRI manifestations, further investigation was required to rule out brain metastases. Therefore, 18F-FDG PET/CT was performed. Maximum-intensity-projection imaging showed a focal increase in 18F-FDG uptake in the right maxillary sinus and multiple foci of increased 18F-FDG uptake in the bilateral lung fields . Axial and coronal views of the selected PET, non-enhanced CT (NE-CT), and fused PET/CT images showed moderately increased 18F-FDG uptake in the left frontal nodule [the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the lesions and surrounding tissues are shown in ]. No abnormal 18F-FDG uptake was observed in the sellar region . Axial views of the selected PET, NE-CT, and fused PET/CT images showed multiple cysts with peripheral exudation in the upper lobes of bilateral lungs, with slightly increased 18F-FDG uptake. HRCT was performed to further evaluate the pulmonary lesions. Axial , coronal , and sagittal views of HRCT images showed multiple scattered small thick-walled irregular cysts and small nodules. Sinusitis was diagnosed in the right maxillary sinus. Bilateral lung manifestations should be differentiated from pulmonary LCH, but brain nodules are more difficult to diagnose and should be differentiated from gliomas.
The patient underwent brain tumour resection. Gross examination showed that the specimen was a grey-brown solid tumour and the cut surface was grey-brown and grey-white . Histopathological examination revealed mononucleated and multinucleated histocytes with abundant cytoplasm and slight staining (haematoxylin and eosin, magnification, × 200; Figure ). On immunohistochemistry, the specimen stained positive for S100, CD207 (Langerin), CD4, and CD1a, and negative for CD3 and CD20. Ki67 (MIB-1) index was slightly > 30%.