A 32-year-old, previously healthy, African American man presented to an emergency department 45 minutes after the acute onset of left facial droop and right-sided weakness . A thorough history confirmed an episode 1-week prior, during which he developed sudden onset of dizziness associated with nausea and vomiting that resolved within hours. He denied any past medical or surgical history and was taking no medications. He has no family history of tumors. In the emergency room, his vital signs were within normal limits. His physical examination was significant for a left facial droop and right hemiparesis. Auscultation of his chest revealed a regular rate and rhythm with no appreciable murmur. No additional significant findings were noted. Stroke protocol was initiated. A chest X-ray was normal and an electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. A head computed tomography (CT) scan was negative for signs of intracranial hemorrhage. He was subsequently started on tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) therapy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain demonstrated a right basal ganglia infarct and an old left cerebral infarct. A carotid ultrasound was negative. TTE demonstrated a 1 cm by 1 cm mass on the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve with a moderate mitral regurgitation In addition, TTE revealed a questionable mass on the left coronary cusp of the aortic valve. These findings were confirmed with TEE , which verified no sign of endocarditis and no atrial septal defect. A complete hypercoagulable workup was negative. Stroke protocol continued with the working diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident secondary to emboli from the mitral valve mass. Within 24 hours, he regained function of the right side of his body and had complete resolution of symptoms. He was diagnosed as having transient ischemic attack (TIA) and discussion was undertaken regarding surgical excision of his mitral valve mass.
A median sternotomy was performed and cardiopulmonary bypass was employed via aortic and bicaval cannulation with full anticoagulation. His aorta was cross-clamped and his heart arrested with retrograde cardioplegia. The aortic valve was examined through an ascending aortotomy and all three valve leaflets appeared normal. A left atriotomy was made and the mass was easily identified on the posterior mitral valve leaflet adjacent to the mitral valve annulus . The mass was excised and a frozen section confirmed globular myxoma cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm consistent with myxoma. The valve leaflet was reconstructed with an autologous pericardium patch and the annulus was supported using a running DeVega-type suture. The valve appeared normal and was tested; no regurgitation was noted. His left atrium and aorta were closed. His aorta was unclamped, after aggressive venting and de-airing maneuvers, and his heart returned to normal sinus rhythm with successful weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass. Anticoagulation was reversed with protamine and his chest was closed after placement of drains and pacing wires. At the conclusion of the operation, TEE confirmed appropriate mitral valve function and normal aortic valve with no evidence of a mass and no regurgitation at either location.