A 20-year-old male presented to the Nephrology Department of our hospital complaining of limb soreness, and after 5 mo, the patient began to develop proteinuria and edema in both lower extremities.
In February 2016, the patient developed limb soreness. The initial laboratory data were as follows: hemoglobin of 128 g/L and a platelet count of 398 × 109/L. Other values were as follows: Serum albumin was 29.4 g/L, alanine aminotransferase was 246.6 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase was 314.8 U/L, and creatine kinase was 4612.9 U/L. We considered that chronic rejection after transplantation resulted in myositis and liver damage, so the patient was treated with corticoid therapy by administration of oral methylprednisolone (32 mg/d). The outcome was favorable. However, after 5 mo, the patient began to develop proteinuria and edema in both lower extremities.
The patient diagnosed with T lymphoblastic lymphoma (stage IIIA, aaIPI 1) in September 2013 was treated with six cycles of hyper-CVAD and achieved complete remission. Then, he underwent syngeneic HSCT in June 2014 , and had no kidney disease history before the transplant. The donor was his twin brother, and HLA matching at high resolution for the HLA-A, B, C, DRB1 and DQB1 loci revealed that the loci were completely consistent in the donor and recipient. Additionally, short tandem repeat analysis was performed on both the donor and recipient, and the results showed that the 20 loci were completely consistent . After transplantation, the patient used 8 mg glucocorticoids daily and then tapered off gradually, and he also received 3 mg sirolimus daily for 3 mo to prevent potential GVHD, which achieved good results.
The patient had a free medical history.
At admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.8 °C, the heart rate was 70 bpm, the respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, the blood pressure was 112/80 mmHg, and the oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. The clinical physical examination revealed moderate edema in both lower limbs without any other pathological signs.
The blood analysis results were as follows: Leukocyte count of 9.60 × 109/L, neutrophil count of 6.66 × 109/L, eosinophils at 0.20%, and hemoglobin of 132 g/L. The blood biochemistry results were as follows: Albumin of 15.7 g/L, total cholesterol of 9.45 mmol/L, calcium of 1.97 mmol/L, and alkaline phosphatase of 144.7 U/L. The thyroid function testing results were as follows: free triiodothyronine of 1.96 mmol/L, triiodothyronine of 0.61 nmol/L, thyroxine of 36.5 nmol/L, thyroglobulin of 39.30 ng/L, and free thyroxine of 9.51 pmol/L. Immunoglobulin G was 4.99 g/L, d-dimer was 1.48 mg/L, 25-hydroxyvitamin D was 7.50 nmol/L, blood kappa light chain was 0.866 g/L, and L light chain was 0.413 g/L. The patient had undergone testing for antinuclear antibody, rheumatism, hepatitis B virus antigen, hepatitis C, and syphilis, the results of which were all negative. Furthermore, his level of serum phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) autoantibodies was 4.36 RU/mL (normal value < 20 RU/mL according to ELISA), which was also a negative result.
The electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, kidney, ureter and bladder ultrasonic imaging, and positron emission computed tomography/computed tomography results were all negative.
A percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed, which led to a diagnosis of glomerulonephritis with characteristics of MN on the basis of light microscopy, electron microscopy and immunofluorescence findings.
Light microscopy: Thirty-two glomeruli were observed. The number of glomerular cells was not increased, and the mesangial hypercellularity was mild. The mesangial matrix expansion was slight, and few intracapillary fibrin thrombi were observed. The capillaries were open, showing few microthromboses. Basement membrane thickening was observed, with a small number of capsule adhesions but no double contours or spikes. The renal tubular epithelial cells were basically normal. The lumen showed evidence of protein casts, red blood cell casts and few cellular casts. The interstitium showed little infiltration of inflammatory cells and no obvious fibrosis, and the wall of the arteriole was not thickened .
Electron microscopy: A large number of fibroblasts were seen in Bowman's space. There were few capillaries, and the opening was in acceptable condition. The endothelium was not hypercellular. The thickness of the basement membrane was approximately 300-500 nm. No clear mesangial area was seen, and only one podocyte showed lamellar vacuolar degeneration. There were epithelial electron dense deposits in the glomeruli .
Immunofluorescence (IF): Findings were as follows: IgG, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (++++); IgA, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (+); IgM, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (+++); C1q, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (++); C3, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (++); C4, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (++); Fibrinogen, diffuse granular immune reactant on the basement membrane (+) .