A 66-year-old Japanese man was referred to our university hospital in April 2011 with a complaint of food impaction in his left buccal region. The patient had no history of injury, tumor, or cyst in the oral and maxillofacial region. He had a medical history of hypertension, gastric ulcer, gout, nephrolith, and alcohol dependence, but no family history of congenital anomalies. He had been smoking 10–15 cigarettes per day for 45 years. He denied having any allergies. On general physical examination, his physical and nutritional statuses were good. Upon intraoral examination, an orifice containing inspissated food debris was observed posterior to the papilla of the parotid duct in the left buccal mucosa. Neither a mucinous discharge nor a communication with the parotid duct could be observed. A pouch measuring 14 mm in diameter and 8 mm in depth was noted after removing the food debris . A CT examination revealed a discontinuity of his buccal mucosa and a cavity containing fluid and air . An additional CT image with radiopaque, contrast medium-soaked gauze placed in the cavity outlined the extent of the pouch . The MR examinations provided T2-weighted images that showed a pouch with an opening and a slightly thickened wall, with a partial defect in the buccinator muscle on the left side . Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR images revealed enhancement of the wall extending over the surrounding tissues antero-posteriorly in the buccal lesion and superiorly in the maxilla on the left side, which was considered to indicate an inflammatory reaction . The lesion was diagnosed as a diverticulum of the buccal mucosa and was surgically resected with the patient under general anesthesia. A partial defect in the buccinator muscle was found underneath the pouch during the operation.
Macroscopically, the excised tissue specimen showed a pouch measuring 14 mm in diameter and 8 mm in depth, that was whitish in color and had an elastic, soft, and smooth surface. . Microscopic examination revealed a cyst-like lesion lined by stratified squamous epithelium and granulation tissue, with chronic inflammatory cell infiltration in the stroma. The affected mucosa was focally depressed and the muscular tissue below the lesion could not be clearly visualized, though the muscle tissue was partially observed in the surrounding tissue .
These findings led to the final diagnosis of a diverticulum of the buccal mucosa. There has been no subsequent food impaction and no evidence of disease recurrence in the 5 years and 10 months since the lesion was resected.