In September 2015, a 60-year-old Algerian woman was seen in the emergency department in Marseille, France for a 4-day history of headache, nausea and vomiting, and behavioral disorders. She had an unremarkable medical history apart from obesity (body mass index at 30.9 kg/m2). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a single 40×35 mm tumor in her right mesial temporal region and a mass effect compression of her right lateral ventricle with transtentorial herniation . She was transferred to our neurosurgery department, where levetiracetam and methylprednisolone led to neurological improvement. At that time, her leukocyte count was elevated at 22×109/L (neutrophil count was 21×109/L, lymphocytes were decreased at 0.47×109/L, and her platelet count was 291×109/L). Surgery for tumor removal was performed on day 5 of her admission. A histological examination revealed glioblastoma multiforme . No bacteria were seen on histological analysis.
On the seventh day post-surgery, she presented a sudden neurological deterioration with a meningeal syndrome, confusion and fever of 39.8 °C. Laboratory investigations revealed an elevated leukocyte count at 13×109/L, elevated neutrophils at 12.62×109/L, low lymphocytes at 0.15×109/L, normal platelets at 154×109/L, and elevated C-reactive protein at 304 mg/L. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample analysis revealed an elevated protein level of 2.93 g/L, a low glucose level of 0.1 mmol/L, and a leukocyte count of 5400 cells/mm3 with 80 % neutrophils. CSF cultures and blood cultures were positive for S. enterica. The isolates from the CSF and blood were further identified as S. enterica subsp. enterica serotype Enteritidis as identified by our national reference center for Salmonella (Institut Pasteur, Paris). The isolates were susceptible in vitro to amoxicillin, ceftriaxone, imipenem/cilastatin, gentamycin, co-trimoxazole and fluoroquinolone.
A diagnosis of Salmonella meningitis was made and she was treated with ceftriaxone administered intravenously 2 g/day and oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg every 8 hours. On the 17th day post-surgery, she presented a new neurological disorder and purulent discharge from the surgical wound. Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed a large cerebral abscess located at the operative site . Surgical drainage of the abscess was performed by craniotomy, which confirmed the diagnosis of intraparenchymal abscess located at the glioblastoma resection site. Microbial cultures of surgical deep samples were positive for S. enterica subsp. entericaserovar Enteritidis, which were susceptible to all antibiotics tested above. She was discharged 6 weeks after admission. Prolonged 10-day anaerobic bacterial cultures of her CSF, bloodstream and brain abscess were negative. A combination of ceftriaxone-ciprofloxacin was given for 6 weeks, and ciprofloxacin treatment was prolonged for 3 months because of the infectious risk due to chemotherapy immunosuppression. No neurological sequelae were noted. Evaluation of the immune system remained normal and HIV serology was negative.