The patient was a 38 year old woman, married, third grade middle school, unemployed, diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus 5 years ago, and was admitted to a general educational hospital in northern Iran due to chronic rheumatologic symptoms and complaining about abdominal pain. The patient mentioned that this pain was not related to eating and defecation and was not exacerbated by her activities. The results of initial laboratory tests and sonography were normal.
Cyclosporine tab 50 mg twice daily were administered to the patient. Two weeks after cyclosporine was prescribed, the blood cyclosporine level was checked. She had a history of treatment with sertraline, trazodone, quetiapine and duloxetine due to mood disorders. The patient also mentioned a history of suicidal attempts in the past. At that time, she used quetiapine 100 mg nightly. In the psychiatric examination, she was oriented, alert, had a dysphoric mood and was able to communicate well. The patient mentioned that she had attempted suicide twice due to marital conflicts but her children prevented the final action to suicide. In the period of her hospitalization, she had no suicidal thoughts. Quetiapine continued and venlafaxine was started at 37.5 mg per day. For 2 days, the patient received only cyclosporine, and had no bradycardia but after prescribing a single dose of venlafaxine, the patient became bradycardic (heart rate 52 ppm) . In cardiac counseling, a 24-h Holter monitoring was done for the patient and the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 55. Also, for assessment of QTc prolongation, daily electrocardiography (ECG) was requested 72 h later. Due to bradycardia, it was advised to discontinue venlafaxine and quetiapine. Also, the rheumatologist discontinued cyclosporine prescription. Psychiatric counseling was requested as a result of continuing psychiatric symptoms and she was visited by the psychiatrist twice a day for 72 h. Within 48 h of discontinuation (venlafaxine and cyclosporine), bradycardia was gradually eliminated.