The patient was a 33-year-old married woman who underwent sigmoid colpoplasty at our hospital in 2003 (when she was 15 years old) for vaginal agenesis(Classified as U0C4V4 according to 2013 ESHRE-ESGE ); she had a normally developed uterus. A few months after surgery, the patient was found to have a purulent pelvic mass and underwent another surgical procedure to remove it. The patient married at the age of 27 years and engaged in sexual activity twice a week, but was unable to conceive spontaneously. She had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption, and there was no family history of any hereditary diseases. The patient presented with lower abdominal pain and vaginal spotting that had persisted for 1 month at the time of consultation; gynecological examination indicated partial cervicovaginal stenosis and an inability to expose the cervix. Transvaginal ultrasonography indicated fluid collection in the upper uterine cavity measuring approximately 1.3 × 2.9 × 0.8 cm and an endometrial thickness of approximately 1.0 cm in the lower uterine cavity. Enhanced pelvic magnetic resonance imaging indicated an 3.8 × 1.2 × 2.0 cm irregular mass in the lower uterine cavity-cervical region with a prominent thickening of the posterior cervical wall; penetration of the posterior vaginal wall with rectal involvement was also suspected . Laboratory examination revealed a carcinoembryonic antigen level of 160.8 ng/mL and cancer antigen 19-9 level of 722.7 U/mL. Gastroscopy was subsequently performed, and pathological examination suggested mild inflammation of the intestinal tract. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography indicated increased fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the cervix and endometrium with involvement of the lower uterine corpus and vagina . Behind the cervix and vagina, an irregular mass with low fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism and poor demarcation from the adjacent rectum and sigmoid colon was observed.
Because the primary origin of the tumor was unclear and the vaginal segment of the cervix was narrow, hysteroscopic exploration was initially performed during which the operator required several attempts to penetrate the cervical opening and required the use of ultrasonography to explore the uterine cavity. Endometrial thickening was observed in the cervical opening, and the cervical canal itself was thickened and fragile. Postoperative pathology of cervical and endometrial tissue revealed highly differentiated adenocarcinoma consistent with an intestinal epithelial origin . Immunohistochemistry revealed positive staining for carcinoembryonic antigen, Ki-67 (approximately 70%), cytokeratin (CK) 20, caudal-related homeobox 2, and special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2; partially positive staining for p16 protein; and negative staining for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, p53 proteins, and CK7 . Additionally, the tissues were positive for the mismatch repair proteins MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6.
Evidence from the pathological examination indicated that the tumor in the cervix and endometrium originated from the intestine. Given the patient’s history of sigmoid colpoplasty 18 years prior, the primary lesion was presumed to have originated in the sigmoid colon-derived neovagina. Considering the patient’s current pelvic anatomical disorder, severe tissue adhesions, and the early stage of the localized tumor, we planned to administer neoadjuvant treatment to reduce the tumor stage followed by combined gynecological/colorectal surgery to remove the cancerous tissue. However, the patient refused surgery and was treated instead with four cycles of oxaliplatin plus capecitabine (the CapeOX chemotherapy regimen). Three months after chemotherapy, the patient was followed up once, and enhanced pelvic magnetic resonance imaging indicated that the cervical mass was slightly larger than before, and the posterior irregular mass was smaller than before. We decided that the patient was not suitable for continuing chemotherapy and decided to undergo surgery, but the patient still refused surgery.