A 72-year-old man underwent upper endoscopy for epigastric discomfort, which revealed mucosal erosion on the posterior wall of the middle body of the stomach , an elevated lesion on the duodenal bulb , and a raised tumor on the antrum of the stomach . A histopathologic examination of the mucosal erosion on the posterior wall of the middle body of the stomach and elevated lesion on the duodenal bulb showed that small atypical lymphoid cells proliferated diffusely and occasional lymphoepithelial lesions were also present. Immunohistochemically, the lymphoid cells were positive for CD20 and BCL2, while they were negative for CD10. Moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma was revealed in the antrum of the stomach. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor 2 cm in size in the antrum of the stomach and no signs of lymph node or liver metastasis. Based on these examinations, the initial diagnosis was gastric and duodenal MALT lymphoma with early gastric cancer. The urea breath test showed H. pylori infection. To avoid postoperative MALT lymphoma remnants and shorten the resection range of the duodenum, H. pylori eradication therapy, which was expected to reduce gastric and duodenal MALT lymphoma lesions, was thus performed.
One month after performing eradication therapy, the second upper endoscopy revealed no improvement in the gastric or duodenal mucosa, and an area of strong redness with a shallow recess just below the cardia of the stomach . Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was revealed in the cardia of the stomach. The preoperative diagnosis was gastric and duodenal MALT lymphoma with two gastric cancers. One month after the last upper endoscopy, total gastrectomy with proximal duodenum resection using intraoperative upper endoscopy and regional lymph node dissection was performed. No improvement in either the gastric or duodenal mucosa was observed by intraoperative endoscopy. Three cancer lesions found in whole tissue sections of a resected specimen after fixation were examined according to the 15th edition of Japanese Classification of Gastric carcinoma . In lesion A, measuring 3 × 3 cm and located in the cardia, cancer cells arranged in small nests and cords had proliferated and invaded the subserosal layer (por2, T3) . In lesion B, measuring 1 × 1 cm and located in the small curvature of the middle corpus, cancer cells arranged in well-formed glands had proliferated and remained in the lamina propria (tub1, T1a) . In lesion C, measuring 2.5 × 1.5 cm and located in the small curvature of the antrum, cancer cells arranged in fused glands had proliferated and remained in the lamina propria (tub2, T1a) . Of the 60 perigastric lymph nodes, 1 showed metastatic carcinoma (N1). In both the posterior wall of the middle body of the stomach and the duodenal bulb , small atypical lymphoid cells proliferated diffusely and deeply from the lamina propria to the submucosa, and occasional lymphoepithelial lesions were present. Immunohistochemically, the lymphoid cells were positive for CD20 and BCL2 and negative for CD10, and lymphoepithelial lesions were highlighted by CAM5.2 . The morphological features and immunohistochemical staining patterns supported the diagnosis of gastric and duodenal MALT lymphoma. No MALT lymphoma lesions were detected outside the range of green and purple frames in Fig. .
We diagnosed the disease as stage IIB (T3N1M0) gastric cancer (the 15th edition of Japanese Classification of Gastric carcinoma) and stage I gastric and duodenal MALT lymphoma (Lugano classification). The patient was discharged 11 days after surgery and received adjuvant chemotherapy (S-1 100 mg/day/body).