A 57-year-old female patient presented with a chief complaint of abnormal findings upon medical examination. She had no significant lifestyle/family history or medical history. Regarding her history of present illness, the patient was referred to our department after undergoing a computed tomography (CT) scan in September 2017, which revealed a tumor in the descending colon.
Hematological analysis revealed the following results: White blood cell count, 7900/μl; hemoglobin level, 12.6 g/dL; platelet count, 28.4 × 104/μl; carcinoembryonic antigen level, 3.3 ng/mL; and CA 19–9 level, 11.1 U/mL. The results were not significant.
Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy findings revealed a 25-mm type 0-Is lesion observed in the ascending colon and a 30-mm type Is lesion in the descending colon. In the abdominal contrast-enhanced CT findings, the tumors could not be located, and lymph node, lung, or liver metastases were not observed. Regarding histopathological findings, biopsy results revealed that the tumor in the ascending colon was a high-grade adenoma and the tumor in the descending colon was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic tumor resection was not possible due to the difficulty in maneuvering the endoscope in the ascending and descending colon. Thus, surgery was considered.
In the first round of surgery, surgery was initiated with five ports. No ascites, peritoneal dissemination, or liver metastases were observed. The ascending colon polyp was adenoma, but there was a polyp near the ileocecal valve. Therefore, it was difficult to resect the ascending colon and we chosed the right hemicolectomy. The descending colon polyp was adenocarcinoma on biopsy. However, we diagnosed intramucosal cancer and performed descending colon resection. Laparoscopic resection of the descending colon and right hemicolectomy was performed according to standard procedures. There were two functional end-to-end anastomoses. Regarding the clinical course after the first round of surgery, mechanical intestinal obstruction occurred on the 9th day postoperatively, and CT scan showed that intussusception occurred from the functional end-to-end anastomosis . An attempt at endoscopic reduction was unsuccessful , and open surgery was considered on the 16th day after the first round of surgery.
In the second round of surgery, when midline laparotomy was performed, the site of the ileocolic anastomosis was found to be firmly adhered to the side wall and right retroperitoneum. Because the staple used for anastomosis may have adhered to the peritoneum. The intestines in the proximal side of the anastomosis were not fixed. Examination of the anastomosis revealed that the ileum had passed through the anastomosis and entered the transverse colon . Although manual reduction was attempted, manipulation was challenging. The ileocolic anastomosis was resected. End-to-end anastomosis was performed, and surgery was completed. Histopathological findings revealed no lesions in the resected intussusceptum . Regarding the clinical course after the second round of surgery, the postoperative clinical course was favorable, and the patient was discharged on the 10th day after the second surgery.