A 12-year-old girl was admitted to our unit with syncope. She had fainted after climbing the stairs. She was born to non-consanguineous parents. Her history was negative for systemic disease, and she denied taking any medicine or exposure to toxins. She had experienced two syncope attacks during exercise, four months previously.
By physical examination, her the heart rate was 95 beats min-1, respiratory rate was 25 min-1, and blood pressure was 90/55 mmHg. Body temperature was 37 °C. While she was awake, the respiratory sounds were diminished. Laboratory examinations showed leukocytosis (13.5000 mm3) and elevated acute phase reactants (erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 83 mm/h; C-reactive protein: 8.2 mg/dL). Chest X-ray showed bilateral diffuse pneumonic consolidation and mild cardiomegaly. Except for a stable ST depression, electrocardiography (ECG) was normal . Echocardiography showed thickening of the mitral and aortic valves and mild mitral valve insufficiency. The left ventricle was mildly dilated, but systolic function was within normal limits (the ejection fraction was 68%). The troponin-1 level was high (66 mcg/dL, upper limit: 0.04 mcg/dL). Influenza A virus DNA was detected by respiratory viral panel screening. The toxicologic screening was negative. Throat, blood, and urine cultures were negative. Antistreptolysin O titer was within normal limits. Cranial computed tomography and electroencephalography were normal. We did not detect any arrhythmia by 24 h ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring. Intravenous immunoglobulin was given for treatment of myocarditis. We started combined wide-spectrum antibiotics and antiviral oseltamire treatments. At the third day, she had no complaint; acute phase reactants and cardiac markers were negative. Normal cardiac size and clear lung fields were detected by chest X-ray. We stopped giving antibiotics after ruling out bacterial infection. However, there was a stable ST depression in the inferior leads by ECG. Coronary angiography by computed tomography displayed a suspected atheroma plague in the left anterior descending (LAD) aorta. Meanwhile, she had experienced another syncope attack. ECG showed an ST depression in the inferior leads, but the cardiac marker was negative. A cardiovascular stress test showed significant ST depression in the inferior leads . Conventional coronary angiography revealed a significant occlusion of the LAD artery and circumflex artery . High serum levels of total cholesterol (756 mg/dL) and LD-cholesterol (LDL-C) (556 mg/dL) were noticed. Carotid artery Doppler imaging showed moderate occlusion in both carotid arteries. When the patient’s medical history was re-taken, we found that her grandmother had been diagnosed with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HeFH) and underwent a coronary bypass surgery at 50-years-of-age. Her parents and 4-year-old sister’s blood analyses showed hypercholesterolemia, which was suggesting of HeFH. Diagnosis of HoFH was made in our case based on elevated plasma cholesterol levels, premature CAD, and positive family history. Her coagulation and thrombus panel and thyroid function tests were normal, and metabolic screening tests were negative. She had no tendon xanthomas. A coronary bypass surgery was performed between the left internal mammary arteries (LIMA) and LAD. Rosuvastatin, ezetimibe (a calcium-canal blocker drug), and aspirin treatments were started. After 1 year, she was in good condition and had no complaint. Her electrocardiography was normal. On echocardiogram, mitral and aortic regurgitations persisted. The LDL cholesterol level was slightly decreased (350-450 mg/dL), and we have planned lipid apheresis. She was consulted by the Pediatric Gastroenterology and Transplantation committee at our hospital. Meanwhile, the combined and high doses of ezetimibe and rosuvastatin therapy have resulted in a 37% reduction in her serum LDL level. She has remained free from treatment-related adverse responses, and CVD during follow-up and her parents did not accept liver transplantation. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents.