An 11-year-old boy was referred to pediatric orthopedics due to pain in the chest. There reported no remarkable family history or trauma history. Radiological examination showed multiple cystic lesions in the left ribs, right humerus, and proximal left radius, accompanied by the fracture of the right lib. The left ribs exhibited multiple lytic lesions with the attenuation of cortical bone . Computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple lytic of the bone in the ribs, right clavicle, vertebra thoracalis, mandibula, and shoulder blade without tissue swelling. The biopsy surgery was performed for the lesion bone of the left rib and right humerus, which, however, regrettably reported no definite pathological result. Unfortunately, the boy exhibited a pathological fracture in the affected area of the humerus after surgery and was treated by a brace of the upper limb.
The boy was later referred to our hospital. Routine blood results showed alkaline phosphatase (ALP) to be 393U/L, with a normal of 20–110 U/L and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 287.26 pg/ml, with a normal of 0–142 pg/ml. The results of positron emission computed tomography (PET) showed avid radioisotope uptake in affected areas covering vertebra thoracalis, rumpbone, acetabular bone, pubic bone, skull, mandibula, clavicle, and shoulder blade . The open biopsy was additionally performed on the left ribs. The cortex of the ribs was thinned with the cortex surface of kermesinus, of which the inside space was dilated, filled with the hydatid fluid of erythrina. The pathological examination result of the second rib showed collagen sclerosis in hyperplastic fiber connective tissue, lymphocyte infiltration, and partial foam-like tissue cells, without obvious eosinophile granulocyte in the lesion. Besides, the affected area in the third rib exhibited fibrous connective tissue and dilated blood vessels with bleeding in the trabecular bone, and the dilated lymphatic vessels with lymphocytes . There involved CD31(+), D2-40(+), SATB2(+), CD20(+), SMA (+), S-100 (−), and BRAF-V600E (−) in immunohistochemical staining. There was no pathological examination evidence of malignancy. The final diagnosis was generalized as cystic angiomatosis.
According to whole exome sequencing, there were some single-nucleotide substitutions in the coding region covering BRIP1 (c.2071A>T (p.I691F) 8.3%), CHEK2 (c.1555C>G (p.R519G) 2.7%; c.1525C> T (p.P509S) 1.8%), GRM4 (c.278G>C (p.R93P) 5.4%), and MUC16 (c.39613C>T (p.P13205S) 3.2%; c.39611A>C (p.K13204T) 1.3%). Besides, the upregulated genes involved CASC15, CENPF, ABCA13, ALK, BLM, and FGFR3. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis revealed the biological process (BP) of an upregulated gene involving regulation of ossification, embryonic cranial skeleton morphogenesis, and chondrocyte differentiation . Cellular component (CC) analysis revealed that upregulated DEGs were primarily enriched in the ciliary membrane, spectrin-associated cytoskeleton, and spectrin. Molecular function (MF) of upregulated DEGs were demonstrated to cover bHLH transcription factor binding, ionotropic glutamate receptor binding, and Wnt-protein binding . According to KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, upregulated DEGs were mainly enriched in pathways involving pathways in cancer, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, MicroRNAs in cancer, and transcriptional misregulation in cancer (P<0.05).