The patient was a 40-year-old male recreational bodybuilder with no significant prior medical history who presented to the emergency department (ED) with lower abdominal pain. He trained five days a week with a focus on weightlifting and included a variety of endurance exercises in his regimen. Of note, he had recently increased his endurance training and core isolation exercises.
At the patient’s first ED visit, he complained of debilitating abdominal pain that was located below the umbilicus, constant and progressively worsening. His pain was aggravated by running, abdominal isolation exercises, and deadlifting. The patient had not tried any medications to alleviate the pain. He denied any constitutional symptoms, dysuria, hematuria, vomiting, or diarrhea. Physical exam was significant for severe suprapubic tenderness to palpation. Lab work was within normal limits, and computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast revealed no abnormalities. The patient was given ondansetron, normal saline, viscous lidocaine, and famotidine and was discharged home with primary care follow-up.
The patient returned three months later with persistent lower abdominal pain. He reported that his aggravating and alleviating factors had not changed, but that his abdominal pain had progressed. He had not followed up with a primary care physician or any other specialist since his first visit. He once again had labs drawn and CT abdomen and pelvis imaging, which were again within normal limits. The patient was again given pain medicines and was discharged home with a diagnosis of “unspecified lower abdominal pain,” and given follow-up with gastroenterology and urology.
The patient presented again after another three months with continued abdominal pain, which he noted still occurred after the same exacerbating exercises from prior. Physical examination was significant for pain elicited with flexion of the abdominal muscles and palpation. Additionally, the patient was evaluated by soft tissue ultrasound over the most painful area of the abdomen. Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) of the abdominal rectus muscle demonstrated disrupted abdominal muscle fibers bilaterally with anechoic fluid between abdominis muscle layers and streaks of edema intramuscularly . The emergency physician diagnosed the patient with rectus abdominis strain and instructed him to rest and follow up with a sports medicine physician.
The patient was contacted two months after discharge from the ED. He had stopped performing the culprit exercises until his abdomen no longer hurt. He modified aggravating isolation abdominal exercises and progressively over the course of two months returned to his previous normal activity without pain.