A 60-year-old woman presented with acute upper abdominal pain, fever, nausea and shivering as well as elevated liver and pancreatic enzymes. A computed tomographic scan confirmed the suspicion of lithogenic pancreatitis but also revealed an unclear mass on both ovaries as well as signs of peritoneal carcinomatosis, omental cake, infiltration of the liver and spleen and substantial ascites at the same time.
CA125 tumour marker was elevated up to 305 U/mL suggesting the presence of an advanced ovarian cancer (normal value 0–35 U/mL). No other blood abnormalities beyond high tumour marker levels were found. Consequently a surgical tumour debulking was performed. Intraoperatively, a highly distinct peritoneal carcinomatosis with cementation of all the internal abdominal organs could be seen. The ovaries were buried under this tumourous mass and couldn’t be fully visualised during the operation. Under these circumstances no optimal cytoreduction could be performed. The histology later confirmed the presence of a high-grade serous carcinoma of the ovary. Chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel was induced postoperatively.
Already prior to surgery, approximately when the ovarian cancer was diagnosed, the patient complained about a disturbing skin alteration on both her feet. Inspection revealed laminar hyperkeratosis and scaling of the plantar skin (enhanced in areas under compressive stress), which was unbeknownst to her. Dermatological examination as well as punch biopsy of the skin suggested the presence of a paraneoplastic acrokeratosis. Histology of plantar skin revealed compact hyperkeratosis and irregular epidermal hyperplasia. Mycosis was excluded histologically. A regression of the cutaneous lesion together with the normalisation of the CA125 tumour marker (a drop to 9.3 U/mL) under first-line chemotherapy containing carboplatin and paclitaxel was observed, which further supported the suspected diagnosis of a paraneoplastic phenomenon . Cutaneous eruptions in other areas (eg. face, hands), as seen in some cases of paraneoplastic acrokeratosis, could not be found [, ].