The patient was a 13-year-old male, right hand dominant football player who was referred for a left wrist mass. He was brought in by his step-mother, who had noticed the mass and was concerned about the patient’s progressive decrease in wrist range of motion. Upon chart review, the patient had radiographs of the forearm documenting a left distal radius mass one year prior to his initial visit with an orthopedic oncologist. Further history revealed that after presenting the previous year, the patient was lost to follow-up and did not obtain further imaging or treatment during the interim. Physical exam revealed a large solid volar mass at the wrist without any sensorimotor deficits. The radial and ulnar pulses were both 2+. He had limited range of motion at the wrist with approximately 15 degrees of supination and 10 degrees of pronation. He lacked approximately 15 degrees of flexion and extension compared to the contralateral wrist. New radiographs demonstrated that the mass had grown approximately 3 mm in width, 5 mm in length, and increased in radiopacity compared to imaging one year prior . MRI with IV contrast was obtained, which showed an approximately 3.5 × 3.2 × 6.3 cm heterogeneous corticomedullary mass arising from the ulnar aspect of the radial metadiaphysis that appeared hyperintense on T2 and hypointense on T1 sequences. The mass was found to extend locally to the adjacent ulna causing cortical thinning and deformation .
Significant negative ulnar variance was noted on the affected wrist. It appeared as though the tumor abutment caused growth delay of the distal ulnar physis. The Hafner Method was utilized to determine the degree of negative ulnar variance. The difference between the most proximal point to the radial and ulnar metaphysis (PRPR) and the difference between the most distal point of the radial and ulnar metaphysis (DIDI) were measured to be approximately 1.35 and 1.6 cm on initial presentation one year prior. Similarly, more recent radiographs demonstrated approximately 1.15 to 1.68 cm of ulnar shortening.
Differential diagnosis at this time included osteochondroma, melorheostosis, high grade surface osteosarcoma, bizarre parosteal osteochondromatous proliferation, and low grade parosteal osteosarcoma. An open surgical biopsy targeting the ulnar aspect of the mass under fluoroscopic guidance was performed. Intraoperative frozen sections revealed lesional tissue with benign fibrous tissue and bone. Biopsied tissue was decalcified for permanent histology preparation. Therefore, molecular studies on the samples obtained were not able to be done. Permanent tissue histology demonstrated hyaline cartilage merging with bony trabeculae and associated bland fibrovascular and fatty tissues. The biopsy was ultimately deemed nondiagnostic.
Due to the unique location, an inconclusive biopsy, and the tumor’s growth over the past year, there remained an ongoing suspicion of malignancy. Multiple discussions were had with the patient and family to perform a repeat biopsy of the mass and 3 months later a repeat open biopsy was performed following the initial procedure. Tissue was sent to an outside institution for consultation with molecular studies. The outside facility found the biopsy to be MDM2 positive on stain, and the patient was diagnosed with a low-grade parosteal osteosarcoma .
Attempt was made to expediently schedule the patient for operative resection of the mass. However, the patient and family expressed the desire to complete his school football season despite inherent risks. The patient ultimately underwent wide resection and reconstruction of his left distal radius and ulna approximately 18 months after the mass was first found. Due to the tumor’s proximity to the wrist, priority was to obtain margin-negative wide resection and to maximize postoperative function with maintaining the radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joints while preserving the articular portion and preserve the DRUJ and radiocarpal joint. This was done using custom 3D printed patient-specific cutting guides were developed from preoperative CT scans . The mass emanated from the ulnar side of the radius and was in direct contact with the ulna. The ulna was hypoplastic, with a notably thin cortex, which could potentially pose challenges for a hemicortical resection. Therefore, custom cutting guides were developed for both the radius and ulna so that precise total ulnar resection could be done if unable to complete a hemicortical resection. The radius cutting guide was designed to provide a geometric resection with close margins to preserve native bone stock, and provide native bone on the radial aspect, adding stability and increasing contact between host and graft for increased healing potential.
Intraoperatively, the distal radius was resected en bloc just proximal to the physis salvaging the distal articular segment as planned with the 3D generated cutting guide. The ulna was not resected en bloc with the radius so that frozen sections of the ulnar periosteum and cortical bone could be obtained separately to evaluate intraoperative margins and if full resection was indicated. Frozen section did show suspicion for invasion of tumor cells therefore the custom fitted ulna cutting guide was used for resection. The resected tumor measured 7.6 cm by 4.3 cm . All neurovascular structures were identified and confirmed to be intact after resection. Matching distal radius and ulna fresh frozen allografts were selected preoperatively and cut to shape using 3D printed cutting guides that matched the preoperative planned resection and bone deficits from the resection. The allografts were fixed onto the proximal segments of the patient’s radius and ulna using plates and locking screws, respectively.
The patient had a normal neurovascular exam postoperatively. He was placed in a cast and made nonweight bearing to the extremity for three months. Final pathology sent to an outside institution (Mayo Clinic in Rochester, MN) concluded that there were negative margins for malignancy and confirmed the diagnosis of low-grade parosteal osteosarcoma of the distal radius. The Ulna did have reactive changes however it did not have MDM2 amplification which favored the radiographic changes being due to “extensive erosive mass effect” rather than tumor involvement. At his six-month postoperative appointment, the patient had almost regained full range of motion . Radiographs show bony union at the allograft junction. At this six-month visit imaging of the contralateral forearm was taken showing neutral ulnar variance . He has been overall satisfied with his progress and plans on playing football this fall.