A 70-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with chief complaints of cough and back pain. She had never smoked and had no history of malignancy. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 4-cm-diameter mass in the left upper lobe, enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes, and left pleural dissemination (Figure ). Asymptomatic brain metastasis was also detected on magnetic resonance imaging. A transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) specimen from the left upper lobe showed combined SCLC and adenocarcinoma (Figure ), and the TNM classification of the tumor was cT2aN3M1b(BRA). The TBLB specimens were analyzed using a peptide nucleic acid-locked nucleic acid PCR clamp test, and EGFR exon 21 L861Q mutations were detected in both SCLC and adenocarcinoma components (Figure ).
The patient underwent four cycles of chemotherapy comprising cisplatin (60 mg/m2) and irinotecan (60 mg/m2). The total effect of chemotherapy was partial response, and symptoms resolved. Serum sialyl Lewis X antigen (SLX) level decreased from 35 U/mL at the initiation of chemotherapy to 5.2 U/mL after four cycles of chemotherapy, and plasma levels of pro-gastrin releasing peptide (pro-GRP) also decreased from 695 pg/mL to 102 pg/mL. Complete remission of the brain metastasis was also achieved, and whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) was postponed at the request of the patient.
Seven months after initial diagnosis, disease progression with enlargement of the primary tumor and lymph nodes was observed. Serum SLX level was elevated to 14 U/mL, while plasma pro-GRP level remained stable (102 pg/mL). TBLB of the primary tumor was performed again, and only adenocarcinoma with the EGFR L861Q mutation was detected (Figure ). Treatment with erlotinib (150 mg daily) was thus started.
After two months of disease stabilization, multiple brain metastases developed without any symptoms. The patient underwent WBRT of 30 Gy. Soon after the completion of WBRT, mediastinal lymph node enlargement occurred again. Serum SLX level was decreased (9.1 U/mL), but plasma pro-GRP level increased to 133 pg/mL. Endobronchial ultrasonography-guided transbronchial biopsy was performed. At that time, only SCLC with the EGFR L861Q mutation was identified (Figure ). PIK3CA mutation analysis of the second (adenocarcinoma) and third (SCLC) biopsy specimens was performed, but no mutation was detected from either sample. Erlotinib was stopped, and chemotherapy with amrubicin (35 mg/m2) achieved partial response after two cycles. This treatment was therefore continued for nine cycles without disease progression. SLX and pro-GRP levels both decreased, to <2.5 U/mL and 79.8 pg/mL, respectively. However, chemotherapy was terminated when performance status decreased after lumbar vertebral compression without bone metastasis. Chemotherapy was then terminated. The patient remains alive as of 21 months after diagnosis.