A 73-year-old woman presented to our hospital for evaluation of hematemesis. Her medical history included type 2 diabetes and chronic renal failure, and she was undergoing dialysis.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed Mallory-Weiss syndrome. Computed tomography unexpectedly showed a mass lesion in the pancreatic tail with dilatation of the main pancreatic duct , and enhanced magnetic resonance imaging also revealed a 12-mm-diameter mass lesion in the pancreatic tail. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) concentrations were within normal limits (3.8 ng/mL and 26 U/mL, respectively). Endoscopic ultrasound showed a mass lesion in the pancreatic tail, and atypical cells were detected by aspiration cytology using endoscopic retrograde pancreatic drainage. We diagnosed the patient with pancreatic tail carcinoma without lymph node or distant metastasis. Therefore, she underwent laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy. We used two 5-mm ports and three 12-mm ports. Two 5-mm ports were placed in the left and right hypochondrium, two 12-mm ports were placed in the left and right lateral abdomen, and one 12-mm port was inserted in the umbilical region by the open method . Carbon dioxide was used for pneumoperitoneum, and the pressure was set to 10 mmHg. The patient was kept in the supine position, and we used a LigaSure™ Maryland jaw device (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) for dissection. An Endo GIA™ stapler (Medtronic) was used for transection of the pancreas. Intraoperative cytology was not performed. During surgery, no deviations were observed in any ports and the tumor had not been injured. A drain was placed near the stump of the remnant pancreas through the right 5-mm hypochondrium port site .
The operative time was 315 min, and the estimated blood loss was 100 mL. The drain was removed on postoperative day 5, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 14 without a pancreatic fistula or other complications. The pathological examination revealed moderately differentiated invasive ductal adenocarcinoma and no lymph node metastasis, and curative resection was achieved with 5 mm surgical margins; the pathological stage was IA. Intraductal dilatation of main duct was about 4 mm. The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy because of her renal failure.
Five months after surgery, the patient developed pain and a mass in the right hypochondrium located on the wound of the 5-mm port site, through which the drain had been placed. Her serum carcinoembryonic antigen and CA19-9 concentrations were within normal limits (3.9 ng/mL and 28 U/mL, respectively). Computed tomography demonstrated a 10-mm-diameter mass in the right abdominal wall without any other metastasis. The lesion was considered one of the peritoneal disseminations, or local recurrence of the port site. However, she could not receive any chemotherapy because she had been undergoing dialysis. Therefore, we followed up the patient considering the possibility of peritoneal dissemination without invasive treatment. However, even 10 months after surgery, we could not detect another findings of peritoneal dissemination. Then, we diagnosed the tumor to as the PSR. Because the tumor grew to a diameter of 25 mm and the patient’s CA19-9 concentration increased (111 U/mL) without any other recurrences 10 months later , we resected the tumor under general anesthesia. The tumor was 30 mm in diameter, and pathological examination showed well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, similar to the specimen obtained at the time of distal pancreatectomy. In hematoxylin- and eosin-stained sections of each specimen, common features are observed which include clear cytoplasm of ductal carcinoma cell (arrowhead) and back-to-back infusion of each duct (arrow) . Therefore, we finally diagnosed PSR after laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer. Immunohistochemical examination of each specimen revealed strong positivity for E-cadherin , negativity for vimentin , and positivity for Ki-67 . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 15, and her serum CA19-9 concentration was decreased after surgery. At the time of this writing (15 months after the second surgery), she was clinically well with no evidence of cancer recurrence.