A 79-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Surgery at the Onomichi General Hospital following abnormal upper gastrointestinal series findings. He did not have any complaints such as epigastric pain, nausea, or weight loss. He had no comorbidities and his previous surgical history included right cataract removal. Laboratory data showed that his white blood cell (WBC) count and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were within the normal range. He had no anemia and his serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) levels were not elevated. Endoscopic findings showed a Borrmann type III lesion in the cardiac end of the stomach and irregular wall thickening in the lesser curvature . Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT indicated that the lesser curvature was modestly enhanced, and bulky lymph nodes were detected . Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed an accumulation of fludeoxyglucose (18F) in the stomach wall, and bulky lymph nodes were detected by CT . The pathological findings led to a diagnosis of group 5, papillary adenocarcinoma. He was diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer with bulky lymph nodes (cT4aN3M0 cStage IIIC) and underwent 4 cycles of preoperative chemotherapy using tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S-1) and oxaliplatin. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT after preoperative chemotherapy demonstrated that the size of the tumor and bulky lymph nodes remained unchanged . Endoscopic examination revealed that the tumor had expanded and laparoscopic examination did not identify the presence of peritoneal dissemination. The patient subsequently underwent open total gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection. The total surgery time was 258 min and the total intraoperative bleeding volume was 350 ml. Macroscopically, a specimen of tumor measuring 15 × 8 cm was analogous to the polypoid tumor (Borrmann type III) that was found in the lesser curvature. An ulcer was also identified in the cardiac end of the posterior wall in the lesser curvature . Histopathologically, the tumor was diagnosed as carcinosarcoma consisting of both carcinomatous and sarcomatous components. Lymph node metastasis was not identified. The lymph nodes had no tumor cells nor necrotic changes of tumor cells, but severe venous invasion was detected. The tumor cells were mainly intravenous inside and outside of the stomach wall; however, they were not detected in the stomach wall stroma . There were mainly spindle cells identified with some adenocarcinoma cells. The tumor had transitional zones between the carcinomatous and sarcomatous components and contained cells with eosinophil-abundant cytoplasm. The adenocarcinoma component was detected in the mucosa of the stomach where we also identified a venous invasion. The invasion consisted of adenocarcinoma cells from the submucosa . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor was positive for vimentin and partly positive for cytokeratin CAM5.2 . The tumor had a rhabdomyosarcoma component, identified by the presence of cells with eosinophil-abundant cytoplasm that were positive for desmin . The patient was diagnosed with true gastric carcinosarcoma with severe venous invasion; both the proximal and distal margins were negative.
Abdominal CT 2 months after surgery showed a low-density area in the liver, which was a suspected metastasis. A month later, the low-density area increased. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a low intracellular density and ring enhancement .