A 64-year-old Japanese woman was referred to us for the treatment of acute renal failure and elevated of free light chain κ (FLCκ, 6900 mg/L, normal, 2.42–18.92 mg/L). Her past medical history was unremarkable except for treatment of hypertension. One week before her referral, she was admitted to the local hospital for malaise and anorexia. Laboratory examination revealed anemia, (hemoglobin 9.2 g/dL) increased serum creatinine (5.6 mg/dL; normal, 0.6–1.2 mg/dL) and hypogammaglobulinemia (IgG 385 mg/dL; normal 680–1626 mg/dL, IgA 59 mg/dL; normal 84–438 mg/dL, IgM 5 mg/dL; normal 57–280 mg/dL)). She had 2+ urine protein by dipstick and urine protein was 1800 mg/day with 72.8% of albumin. Hematuria was negative. Hepatitis A, B, and C viruses and HIV were negative. The tentative diagnosis was acute renal failure due to glomerulonephritis of unknown cause. She was treated with 1 mg/kg of prednisone, but her symptoms had worsened. On admission to our hospital, mild ascites, pleural effusion, and enlarged both kidneys (13 × 7 cm) were noted by whole-body computed tomography (CT). Whole body diffusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging detected a focal plasmacytoma in the left jaw. Laboratory findings showed marked elevation of serum creatinine (6.31 mg/dL), free light chain κ (763.0 mg/L), and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP, 3643 pg/mL; normal, 0–125 U/mL) levels. Liver function test were normal, including aspartate aminotransferase (AST) alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase were normal. Urinalysis showed proteinuria of 1800 mg/day with 73% of albumin. Serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) showed a a small notch in the γ-lesion. Serum and urine immunofixation (IFx) revealed a faint monoclonal IgDκ band and a clear κ-light chain band, respectively. Serological studies for anti-nuclear antibody was negative and complement levels (C3 and C4) were within normal limits. Bone marrow biopsy showed 19% of plasma cell infiltration by CD138 immunostaining. Multicolor flow cytometry showed that 5% of monoclonal plasma cells those were restricted to κ light chain and were positive for CD56 and negative for CD19. Cytogenetic abnormalities including del17p, t (11;14), t (4;14), t (14;16), and del13p, and 1q gain were negative by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the CD138 purified bone marrow cells. A kidney biopsy revealed the nodular glomerulosclerosis and casts by light microscopy . Congo red staining was negative. An IF study demonstrated the positive staining of Igκ and negative staining of Igλ light chain along the glomerular and tubular basement membranes. Immunohistochemistry showed linear staining of glomerular basement membrane positive for Igκ and negative staining for Igλ. Ribbon-like deposits by periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining. Tubular casts positive for Igκ and negative for PAS and Igλ were also seen (, a-f). Electron microscopy showed the powdery electron-dense deposits along the tubular and glomerular basement membrane consistent with the diagnosis of LCDD involving the kidney. To determine the glomerular deposits, laser microdissection (LMD) of the of the glomerulus of paraffin-embedded kidney biopsy material followed by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (MS) was performed. By LMD/MS, we identified Igκ light chain with more than 95% probability but not IgD heavy chain and Igλ light chain . Taken together, these observations support the diagnosis of κ-LCDD of the kidney. Although the patient did not show any evidence of portal hypertension or liver cirrhosis, but had unexplained ascites. There was a possibility that ascites could be caused by liver involvement of LCDD. Therefore, we performed a liver biopsy was performed using the CT-guided transjugular catheter technique. Liver biopsy specimens revealed the atrophy of hepatocytes and expansion of sinusoid . IF revealed the positive staining for anti-κ and negative staining for anti-λ along with the perisinusoidal membrane and vessels consisting with the involvement of κ-LCDD in the liver. Other tissue involvement included skin and salivary gland were negative. The patient was diagnosed symptomatic IgD MM and LCDD involving kidney and liver.
Because of a rapid decline in kidney function and worsening oliguria, intermittent hemodialysis was initiated. Treatment with cyclophosphamide, bortezomib and dexamethasone (CyBorD)) followed by weekly daratumumab (16 mg/kg) was instituted. After 2 cycles of CyBorD and 8 doses of daratumumab, serum FLCκ decreased to 20.2 mg/L and the FLCκ/λ ratio normalized. Serum IFx for IgD became negative. Her serum creatinine decreased to 3.19 mg/dL after 8 infusions of daratumumab and 2 cycles of CyBorD and she became dialysis independent. Pleural effusion and ascites present at diagnosis were disappeared after treatment. The patient is received continuous treatment with daratumumab, bortezomib and dexamethasone combination with hematologic complete response.