A 45-year-old woman with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department with right upper abdomen tenderness and jaundice for 2 days. Lab examination revealed leukocytosis (white cell count: 13.5 × 103) and elevated serum bilirubin and liver enzyme (total bilirubin 8.0 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase 333 U/L). An abdominal echography revealed a gallbladder stone with a dilated common bile duct. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a contracted gallbladder with a 2 × 2 cm-sized stone impacted in the junction between the cystic duct and common bile duct (CBD) area causing compression of the CBD . Type II Mirizzi syndrome (McSherry classification) was diagnosed. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was arranged for relieving jaundice. Meanwhile, one plastic stent was placed. Four weeks later, after the patient’s jaundice and gallbladder inflammation fully recovered, we proceeded with robotic-assisted cholecystectomy.
During the operation, type II Mirizzi syndrome was confirmed. A partial cholecystectomy was performed with stone retrieval and closure of the cholecystobiliary fistula. Owing to unclear anatomy and severe adhesion over the Calot triangle, the anterior branch of the right hepatic artery was damaged. The proximal and distal stump of the right hepatic artery branch was then controlled by Hem-o-lok with mild intraoperative bleeding . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on day 6 after the operation.
On the 7th day after discharge, she presented in the emergency department again with right upper abdomen tenderness, melena, and jaundice. A panendoscopy revealed fresh blood coming from the ampulla of Vater. The total bilirubin level elevated to 9 mg/dl. ERCP revealed a blood clot inside the common bile duct without any biliary leakage. A computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed a 3 cm pseudoaneurysm located in the distal stump of the right hepatic artery anterior branch, supplied by the anastomosis from the posterior branch of the right hepatic artery . Then TAE was done via the posterior branch of the right hepatic artery using gelfoam material. No more pseudoaneurysm was found by angiography after embolization. Unfortunately, 3 days after TAE, the patient suffered from a sudden onset of abdominal pain. A panendoscopy revealed active bleeding from the ampulla of Vater. A new angiography showed a recurrent pseudoaneurysm at the same location with afferent artery from the branch of the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) . After several attempts, microcoil embolization was successfully performed via the GDA branch. The patient did not complain of any discomfort during the rest of the hospitalization and liver enzymes returned to normal. She was discharged one week after the second TAE. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient did not feel any discomfort and CTA revealed no further right hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm.