A 57-year-old female presented to the Emergency Room in a critical condition, severe abdominal pain (NRS 8/10), diarrhea, nausea without vomiting or dyspnea. Abdominal pain was present for 3 days, initially intermittent and colicky changing to a constant and sharp quality with increasing intensity. She reported no co-morbidity and a hysterectomy 29 years ago. The initial clinical examination showed the following findings: the patient was hemodynamically increasingly unstable with marbled skin color. Peritonism was present with tinkling peristaltic bowel sounds of mechanical obstruction. The patient was in a septic shock with severe lactate acidosis (9.5 mmol/l; pH 7.279), a base excess of -16.0 mmol/L and an O2-saturation of 84% prior to receiving high flow oxygen. Further laboratory testing revealed elevated creatinine (3.0 mg/dl), increased C-reactive protein (407.9 mg/l, ref.: < 5), interleukin-6 of 14,864.0 pg/ml and a procalcitonin of 37.1 ng/ml. E. coli was subsequently detected in blood cultures. CT scan revealed prolapsed colon through the left diaphragmatic center with sero-pneumothorax under tension . While preparing for emergency laparotomy, the patient had a cardiac arrest requiring CPR for 5 min. An immediate laparotomy and retraction of the splenic flexure and left colon, which herniated through a defect of the tendinous center of the left diaphragm accompanied by a perforation due to transmural ischemia, was performed. Two liters of feces and a large amount of gas were evacuated from the left thorax. A left hemicolectomy with an end transverse colostomy and sigmoid closure resulting in a Hartmann-type procedure was performed. Rigorous pleural lavage via the traumatic tear of 7–10 cm in diameter unmasked an empyema with a pleural membranous thickening of up to 8 mm. Meticulous debridement of the lower lobe and caudal parts of the upper lobe trans-diaphragmatically was conducted via the diaphragmatic opening was followed by a defect reconstruction with a woven running suture in two rows. Subsequently, the reconstructed diaphragm stayed intact for the total clinical course as revealed by chest X-ray examination on postoperative day 3 . Due to pneumonia and recurring pleural empyema in the course of a prolonged ICU-stay, repetitive bronchoscopies and two redo debridements of the left pleural cavity via open thoracotomy were required. Weaning of ventilation was supported by temporary tracheostomy. A wound infection of the laparotomy wound was managed with vacuum dressing followed by secondary closure. The patient was discharged on day 56. A thorough history of possible trauma revealed a bicycle-fall trauma 7 months prior to this hospitalization with a fracture of the left femur, stabilized by internal fixation, and conservatively treated fractures of ribs 3–9 on the left side.