A 44-year-old African-American man with a previous medical history of uncontrolled hypertension (noncompliant with antihypertensive medications), smoking cigarettes, and chronic alcohol and cocaine abuse presented to an outside hospital with the complaint of altered speech that had waxed and waned for one week. On presentation to the outside hospital, his National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 2 for isolated dysarthria. His blood pressure was 285/185mmHg. After treatment with hydralazine, his systolic blood pressure decreased to about 130mmHg and he became acutely aphonic. He remained alert and followed all commands, but was unable to produce speech. With maximal effort, our patient was able to produce short breathy sounds. His NIHSS increased to 9, primarily based upon his inability to verbally respond to questions. Given his severe speech deficit, our patient was treated with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator with a subsequent improvement in NIHSS, returning to 2. He was transferred to our hospital for further workup.
On arrival at our hospital, our patient’s blood pressure was 169/98mmHg with a pulse of 86 beats per minute. Initial general physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable except for aphonia and mild right nasolabial flattening, with an NIHSS of 4 consistent with those deficits. The remainder of his neurological examination was non-focal. A toxicology screen was positive for urine cocaine metabolites. Our patient’s electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with left atrial enlargement and ventricular hypertrophy, ST elevation, a prolonged QT interval and T-wave abnormality, consistent with possible inferior anterolateral ischemia. His level of troponin I was elevated. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed severe concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with impaired relaxation grade 1 diastolic dysfunction. Computed tomography of his brain revealed a chronic lacunar infarct in his right basal ganglia. Computed tomography angiography of his head and neck showed no evidence of vascular stenoses. Magnetic resonance imaging of his brain demonstrated bilateral areas of acute infarction within his lentiform nuclei on diffusion-weighted imaging . The corresponding regions appeared dark on the apparent diffusion coefficient sequence (not shown). Specifically, both acute lesions were symmetrically located in the lateral part of the caudal aspect of his putamen. The right lesion was only visible in two axial magnetic resonance imaging slices, whereas the left lesion was visible in four axial slices. The maximal diameters of the diffusion-weighted imaging lesions in his right and left putamen nuclei were 5mm and 10mm, respectively.
These findings were compatible with acute ischemic infarcts within the regions supplied by the distal lateral lenticulostriate arteries. Magnetic resonance imaging fluid attenuated inversion recovery was also consistent with the acute ischemia seen on the diffusion-weighted imaging and apparent diffusion coefficient sequences, with a slightly more superior cut demonstrating the chronic lacunar infarct in his right basal ganglia, as seen on the initial head computed tomography. Our patient was hospitalized at our facility for five days; throughout this time he remained grossly aphonic and developed no further symptoms. He was started on daily statin and aspirin therapy and his blood pressure slowly normalized. He was counseled to quit smoking and discontinue all cocaine use. He was discharged home under 24-hour supervision.
While at home approximately two weeks after discharge, our patient experienced two episodes of transient right eye vision loss. The first episode lasted for approximately 30 minutes and resolved spontaneously; the second episode occurred two days later and our patient was again hospitalized. On presentation to our Emergency Department, he was hypotensive with a blood pressure of 101/68mmHg. His vision loss resolved spontaneously within five hours after aggressive hydration. Our patient's hypertensive medications, lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide, were held. He was seen by our Ophthalmology Department, who suggested transient retinal ischemia in the setting of significant hypertensive retinopathy and potential medication-related hypotension. Our patient’s ability to speak had improved since his prior admission although his speech remained extremely hoarse and dysarthric. No other neurological deficits were noted. Our patient was evaluated by our Otolaryngology Department, who carried out an endoscopic examination and described decreased bilateral vocal fold (cord) function, more so on the right than left. Our patient was again discharged home with close follow-up.
At a follow-up visit to our neurology clinic approximately one month after the onset of the primary aphonic event, our patient continued to have moderately severe hoarseness and dysarthria, although his speech had improved in comparison to his second hospital admission. Our patient had experienced no further neurological events in the interim.