A 38-year-old G3P3023 woman presented to the emergency department with three days of cramping epigastric abdominal pain radiating to the periumbilical area. The pain was constant, not associated with food, and accompanied by nausea but without vomiting. She had no fevers or chills and denied gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms, including vaginal bleeding or discharge. Her last time of sexual intercourse was 8 days prior to presentation. Her surgical history was significant for an uncomplicated single site robotic-assisted hysterectomy with bilateral salpingectomy and cystoscopy performed 60 days prior, using the da Vinci® surgical robot system. This procedure was performed for recurrent cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) III, a premalignant transformation that typically occurs near the cervical os, which had persisted despite loop electrosurgical excision procedures (LEEP). Prior to presentation, her recovery from this procedure was uncomplicated, with all follow-up appointments followed and only her annual physical exam being scheduled. Her surgical history was also significant for a remote cesarean delivery for oligohydramnios using a Pfannenstiel incision.
On exam her abdomen was soft and nondistended without rebound or guarding, but tender to palpation in the epigastric area. She was afebrile and her vital signs were largely normal with pulse 77, respirations 16, blood pressure 119/68, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. A complete blood count showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 11.8 with 78.4% neutrophils and urinalysis showed cloudy urine with 3+ leukocyte esterase and 11–50 WBCs. X-rays of the chest and abdomen were obtained which showed free air under the diaphragm . A follow-up abdomen and pelvis CT scan without contrast confirmed free air in the abdomen, particularly around the porta hepatis .
Based upon these findings the patient was taken urgently for an exploratory laparoscopy for possible perforated viscus. Intraoperative findings were grossly normal with no intraperitoneal free fluid, edema, inflammatory changes and minimal adhesions which were easily taken down with blunt dissection. The stomach, gallbladder, liver, and pelvis were all visually inspected and the large intestine and small bowel were run. These were found to be normal. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed, which demonstrated no ulcerations, blood, or other abnormalities. Warm saline was placed into the intraperitoneal cavity and no gas bubbles were seen following insufflation of the stomach and duodenum in the peritoneal cavity.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was admitted to the surgical floor for pain control and observation, as well as continued intravenous antibiotics. However, on postoperative day one, the patient stood up and reported a large amount of blood-tinged, watery discharge from her vagina. The Obstetrics and Gynecology Service was consulted as there was a suspicion for vaginal cuff dehiscence. The patient was then taken to the operating room for exam under anesthesia and a 1 cm vaginal cuff dehiscence was found, which was repaired with 0 Monocryl suture. Her postoperative course was uncomplicated, and she completed a 48-hour antibiotic course with eventual resolution of abdominal pain. She was discharged following routine postoperative monitoring.