A 52-year-old white man, who experienced breathing difficulties and nasal speech for 15 months, was hospitalized for nasal polyps. A radiograph of his paranasal sinuses (21 January 2005) showed a soft tissue lesion in the mediosagittal line, suggesting a nasal polyp. A biopsy (18 February 2005) of the polyp revealed that it was immovable and provoked bleeding. The provided tissue (0.5 cm3) was diagnostic for nasopharyngeal angiofibroma after routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining , the stromal cells were negative for both cluster of differentiation (CD) 34 antigen and smooth muscle actin (SMA) antibodies and C-kit antibody was rarely detected in single cells.
Digital subtraction angiography showed the pathological vascularization of the tumor (8 March 2005; Figure ). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the viscerocranium with intravenous contrast revealed a 56 mm × 48 mm large, soft tissue growth that filled the nasopharynx and extended to the left nasal cavity (24 February 2005; Figure ). A multiple slice CT carotidography (10 May 2005) revealed that there was blood supply to the tumor from the external carotid vessels .
With a diagnosis of nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (Radkowski's stage Ib), the patient was subjected to RFITT using a Celon AG medical instrument (radiofrequency power, 15 to 20 W and a 5-minute application time). The therapy was performed three times over a 2-month period (1 June 2005, 9 June 2005 and 31 August 2005). The lesion did not bleed but hardened. The second surgical specimen (21 September 2005) was 5 cm3 of angiofibroma tissue with multiple 2 to 3 mm centers of coagulation . After RFITT, the clinical symptoms were alleviated despite the incomplete reduction in tumor size. Staining for Ki67 showed low overall proliferation in the first biopsy but increased proliferation in the second (1% and 10%, respectively). A control CT scan (29 September 2005) of the epipharynx revealed a residual tumor, an enlarged left maxillary sinus with a missing medial wall, thickened mucosa without post-contrast opacification and no enlarged lymph nodes.
A third biopsy 10 months after RFITT provided 0.075 cm3 of residual tumor with an overall Ki67 proliferation index of 10%. Plump SMA-positive and predominantly Ki67-negative cells were detached from the vessel wall and formed sheets resembling angiomyofibroblastoma after H&E staining. The second and third biopsies respected the recovery time from RFITT and were not complicated by hemorrhage.
One year after RFITT, angiography found no arteries feeding the residual tumor. The patient underwent surgery at another institution without prior embolization (no hypertrophic feeding arteries were found at repeated angiography before the operation).
The primary intention was to reduce the tumor and alleviate the symptoms using RFITT before the operation. Double immunostaining was planned later because of increased Ki67 staining observed in the control biopsy after RFITT. Ki67 is a proliferation marker providing nuclear staining when the cell is in the S phase preparing to enter mitosis. To determine which cell type is proliferating in a tissue, a second differentiation marker is added, that is, CD34 for endothelial cells or SMA for pericytes. The immunohistochemical analysis of all three angiofibroma biopsies was repeated with a double-staining technique for both Ki67/CD34 and Ki67/SMA to distinguish between endothelial cell and pericyte proliferation over time . Three parameters were used to quantify proliferation. The endothelial cell proliferation index (EPI) and pericyte proliferation index (PEPI) were defined as the percentage of Ki67-positive nuclei per 1000 cells for each cellular compartment. This was different from routine, less expensive single Ki67 immunostaining where the proliferation index takes into consideration all the cells in the tissue without distinguishing between vessel cells and stromal cells. The number of vessel sections per field was obtained and the results were expressed as microvessel density (MVD), which is the number of lumina per square millimeter. The proliferating capillary index (PCI) was defined as the percentage of vessel sections of any cell type whose nuclei stained positive for Ki67. The proliferation analysis results are shown in Table .
Double immunohistochemical staining revealed higher proliferation indices for cells of the vessel compartment compared with single Ki67 staining of each routine biopsy. The EPI slightly decreased while the PEPI increased 10 months after RFITT. The third biopsy contained a large number of detached SMA-positive cells. There were scattered Ki67-positive nuclei of cells outside the vessel wall that were defined by neither CD34 nor SMA in all three biopsies. The MVD increased 20 days after RFITT and further increased with time. The PCI also increased with time. Measurements and images were obtained using a BX-40 Olympus microscope, Sony CCD-Iris color video camera and ISSA 3.1 software (Vamstec, Zagreb).