A 25-year-old, non-smoker, Caucasian male was admitted to our department with a 10-day history of vomiting, watery diarrheas, high fever (39oC) and crampy abdominal pain. His medical history was remarkable for hyperthyroidism due to a thyrotoxic goiter diagnosed 4 months before. However, it was left untreated and the patient mentioned a gradual body weight loss of 10 Kg during the last four months. His family history was unremarkable.
On admission the patient was febrile and looked severely ill. His height and weight were 186 cm and 95 Kg respectively (BMI 27.5 Kg/cm), and his vital signs included a temperature of 39oC, a blood pressure 130/80 mmHg, and a heart rate of 130 beats per minute. Physical examination revealed a mild to moderate tenderness at the epigastrium and the right upper abdominal quadrant. His thyroid gland was diffusely enlarged without tenderness. Laboratory data were remarkable for polymorphonuclear leukocytosis (WBC 17 × 103/μl, neutrophils 77%), thrombocytosis (PLT 540 × 103/μl), mild normocytic anemia (Hb 11.8 g/dl, MCV 88 fl), hypoalbuminemia (2.8 g/dl) and significantly elevated markers of inflammation (ESR 115 mm/1st hr, CRP 126 mg/dl). Thyroid function tests included low thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (<0.03 μlU/ml; normal value 0.38-3.8 μlU/ml), high serum free T4 (FT4) (2.86; normal value 0.75-1.54 ng/dl) and normal serum free T3 (FT3) (3.7; normal value 1-3.8 pg/ml). Anti-thyroid antibodies were also elevated; the anti-thyroperoxidase antibody (anti-TPO) was 385.8 (normal value <50 IU/ml) and the anti-thyroglobulin antibody (anti-TG) was 88.5 (normal value <50 IU/ml).
Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland revealed a multinodular goitre, whereas 99mTc scan of the thyroid showed a moderate thyroid gland enlargement with increased thyroid gland total mass (32 gr; normal value <20 gr) and increased homogenous parenchymal uptake of technetium pertechnetate (4.78%; normal value 0.3-3%) . Treatment for thyrotoxicosis was promptly started with propranolol 20 mg tid and methimazole 10 mg tid.
Soon after admission (2nd day) the patient had bloody diarrheas without signs of hypovolemic shock and endoscopy of the upper and lower GI tract was performed. Colonoscopy to the terminal ileum demonstrated mild cecal inflammation with edematous, erythematous, non-friable and non-ulcerated mucosa without specific features on histology, while the upper GI endoscopy showed a normal esophagus, stomach and duodenum except for two fistulous tract openings, one in the greater curve of the stomach and another in the second part of the duodenum. The histologic examination of the biopsies which were obtained from the fistulous openings showed non-caseating granuloma formation , while the random biopsies from the stomach and the duodenum were normal without features of inflammatory bowel disease.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed an abscess formation without well-defined margins (phlegmon) in the lesser sac , thickening of cecum, ascending and transverse colon wall and localized thickening of the omentum and mesentery .
In the context of the findings above, treatment for severe active fistulizing Crohn’s disease (CDAI score: 452) complicated with an abdominal abscess was initiated with the institution of total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and the intravenous (IV) administration of high-dose prednisolone (75 mg/day), ciprofloxacin (400 mg bid), metronidazole (500 mg tid), and pantoprazole (40 mg bid), along with oral mesalamine (3 g/day), and azathioprine (2 mg/kg/day).
During the next 2 weeks, a gradual improvement of the patient’s clinical and laboratory findings was noted and barium upper GI series with a small-bowel follow-through study were performed. The small bowel series showed a colo-duodenal fistula between the ascending colon and the second portion of the duodenum and multiple fistulas between the jejunum and the lesser sac , whereas the course of the gastric fistulous tract was not identified.
One month down the line, although the patient’s condition remained stable with partial clinical improvement under intense medical treatment, the clinical and laboratory signs of a quiescent ‘brewing’ inflammation were evident (ESR of 60 mm/1st hour, CRP 60 mg/dl, low grade temperature, clammy skin, heart rate of 90 beats per minute), despite adequate control of the thyroid function (TSH 1.55 μlU/ml, FT3 1.1 pg/ml, FT4 0.84 ng/ml) and a CDAI score of 172. A second colonoscopy was performed and revealed a stenotic area in the transverse and ascending colon with erythematous, edematous, and friable mucosa with ulcers and a fistulous tract opening at the proximal transverse colon near to the hepatic flexure .
In the light of these findings and because of the suboptimal clinical course of the disease, despite the intense medical treatment, surgical intervention was decided to be performed. Right hemi-colectomy with ileo-transverse anastomosis, drainage of the abdominal abscess and primary closure of the upper GI tract openings (gastric, duodenal and jejunal) were performed at one stage operation. The postoperative medical management included oral steroids with gradual tapering, azathioprine, mesalamine, and antibiotics with gradual introduction of oral feeding. Still though, 3 weeks postoperatively, the markers of inflammation were high (ESR 76 mm/1st hr, CRP 42 mg/l) and the patient was clammy and tachycardiac with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute despite good control of his thyroid function and a CDAI score of 105. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was unremarkable for intraperitoneal abscess or mass. At that point we decided to start anti-TNFa therapy with infliximab and taper-off corticosteroids, since the latter were proved insufficient in controling the disease. Infliximab infusions (5 mg/kg) were well tolerated and induced a sustained to date (36 months postoperatively) endoscopic, clinical and biochemical response. Azathioprine and mesalamine are also continued as maintenance treatment. The thyroid function maintains normal without any treatment.