A 57-year-old Caucasian man presented with profuse blood-streaked mucous drainage from his penis. Past medical history was significant for T12 spinal cord injury secondary to a motor vehicle accident in 1971. Due to urinary incontinence exacerbating his multiple decubitus ulcers and severe bilateral vesico-ureteral reflux, the patient underwent ileal conduit urinary diversion in 1975 with his bladder left in-situ.
On initial evaluation for his penile discharge, he was found to have a right prostatic nodule on physical examination with a normal prostate specific antigen level of 1.5 ng/mL. Prostate biopsies showed mucinous adenocarcinoma in six of eight cores with large collections of mucin dissecting the prostatic parenchyma. Banal appearing columnar cells lined these mucous lakes, and nests of these cells were seen floating in the mucin . Immunohistochemical evaluation revealed that neoplastic cells were positive for carcinoembryonic antigen, cytokeratin-7, cytokeratin-20 and were negative for prostate specific antigen and prostatic acid phosphatase.
Further workup included colonoscopy showing multiple adenomatous polyps were identified without invasive malignancy and cystoscopic evaluations. Cystoscopy revealed a massive amount of mucoid material within the bladder associated with a mass. Bladder washings and biopsies revealed copious amounts of mucin with associated malignant nests and single cells also consistent with mucinous adenocarcinoma. Staging evaluation revealed no evidence of metastatic disease but at the time of radical cystectomy, periaortic lymphadenopathy and a locally extensive tumor mass were identified. Palliative cystoprostatectomy was performed. The cystoprostatectomy specimen demonstrated a circumferential mass with glistening mucosal surface that involved the posterior and lateral bladder surfaces, trigone, bladder dome, and invaded the prostatic parenchyma. On histologic examination, lakes of infiltrating mucin dissected through the muscularis propria of the bladder and into the perivesicular fat . The adjacent mucosa showed extensive glandular metaplasia with areas of high-grade dysplasia. The metaplastic glandular changes extended into the remnant distal ureters .
Postoperatively, the patient underwent adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy, but developed metastatic intraperitoneal and pulmonary masses 18 months following diagnosis. He expired 29 months after diagnosis.