SA is a 6-month-old Saudi male who was born to healthy first-degree cousins from fourth-generation consanguineous families. There was no history of maternal risk factors during pregnancy. His mother is a 30-year-old housewife with three apparently healthy offspring. Reduced fetal movements were reported by the mother during pregnancy and were detected by antenatal ultrasound scans. The patient was delivered at term by elective cesarean section due to breech presentation.
Apgar’s score was 5 and 7 at 1 and 5 min respectively. Birth weight was 2595 g (50th centile) and occipitofrontal circumference was 37 cm (50th centile). At birth, there was severe hypotonia and the baby was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit with poor respiratory efforts which might be attributed to his generalized severe hypotonia. He required intubation with positive pressure ventilation. There was no family history suggestive of any neuromuscular diseases.
His examination revealed subtle dysmorphism in form of a long narrow face, long philtrum, depressed nasal bridge, flat occiput, and large ears. He had arthrogryposis multiplex in the upper & lower limbs, involving interphalangeal joints, metatarsophalangeal joints, thoracolumbar scoliosis, bilateral knee dislocation, bilateral club feet, clenched hands, and overlapping fingers .
Neurological examination showed generalized muscle wasting, and severe hypotonia. Mild facial weakness was observed without ophthalmoplegia. Deep tendon reflexes were absent. Neither pyramidal nor cerebellar involvement was noticed.
Abdominal examination showed no organomegaly and normal looking genitalia with bilateral undescended testis. His other body system review was unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations revealed normal complete blood count, renal and hepatic functions, normal electrolytes, and normal creatinine kinase as well as metabolic screening.
Echocardiogram showed a small mid-muscular ventricular septal defect and small patent ductus arteriosus with otherwise normal cardiac structure and function.
His electromyogram showed normal motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities with no other conclusive findings, and it was advised to be repeated after 6 months. Muscle biopsy was not done and Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed no abnormal findings.
Karyotyping was done and revealed a normal 46, XY male karyotype. Accordingly, whole-exome sequencing was requested.
Molecular genetic analysis of whole-exome sequencing was done .
The coding exons of more than 20.000 genes of the patient DNA were enriched and sequenced. Filtering of the exome data targeted recessive, X-linked, and dominantly inherited diseases.