A 20-year-old male patient presented with right-sided genu valgum deformity and 2 cm true shortening without DNVD. The patient had a history of trauma over the right knee 5 years ago which was managed conservatively with a splint. The patient noticed right knee deformity at the age of 16 years which progressed gradually until the age of 19 years. The deformity is non-progressive since then. The patient complained of occasional pain over knee. On examination, no tenderness over knee could be elicited and patellar tracking was normal. There was no ligamentous laxity around knee. His medical history and family history were unremarkable. The patient wanted correction of deformity and consented for surgery for same.
Specific pre-operative radiological investigations performed were standing bilateral lower limb scanogram for exact measurement of deformity (essential for bony deformities ) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate both compartments of knee. shows pre-operative scanogram. On scanogram, angles were calculated on computer software to avoid manual error and to take account of magnification on the film. Lateral distal femoral angle was 67° with knee joint line obliquity of 7° varus which is abnormal. Joint line obliquity on opposite side was 3° varus. When adjusted for joint line obliquity, genu valgum deformity turned out to be 16° at the level of distal femur. Usually, genu valgum occurs due to distal femoral malalignment and should be corrected with distal femoral osteotomy while genu varum occurs due to proximal tibial malalignment and should be corrected with high tibia osteotomy . Medial proximal tibial angle could not be calculated accurately because of bowing of tibial shaft. Tibial bowing was considered as multiapical deformity and total deformity of tibial shaft turned out to be 6°. This gives total deformity of 22°. There was 2 cm of true shortening as well. Center of rotation of angulation (CORA) of bowing deformity of tibial shaft was found at the level of junction of upper third and middle third of shaft of tibia. There is marked mechanical axis deviation (MAD) to lateral side. Neck shaft angles were 130° on the right side and 135° on the left side. No deformity was noted in sagittal plane. MRI revealed normal lateral compartment, medial compartment and other structures of knee obviating need of diagnostic arthroscopy.
Goals of correction were to restore mechanical axis of lower limb while maintaining knee joint line obliquity (3° varus) and to achieve single-stage correction without neurovascular injury.
Total genu valgum deformity (22°) was divided into two components: Distal femoral component (16°) and tibial shaft component (6°). Surgical plan was devised for a single-stage correction utilizing medial distal femoral closing wedge osteotomy with translational osteotomy at CORA of shaft tibia. Closing wedge osteotomy was chosen over opening wedge due to higher biomechanical stability and scope of allowing early weight-bearing . shows planned osteotomy.
Medial distal femoral closing wedge osteotomy was done using medial approach to distal femur. Initial 2 K-wires were placed exactly parallel to knee joint line at metaphysis anteriorly and posteriorly. Perfect parallel placement of K-wires prevents flexion or extension deformity. Mediolateral diameter of osteotomy was calculated from these K-wires using subtraction method. Size of the wedge to be resected for desired correction in mm.
Size of the wedge to be resected was calculated from trigonometric table devised by Wylie et al. . This table has inputs in form of mediolateral diameter of osteotomy and degrees of correction required . Once the size of wedge was calculated, the second pair of K-wires was placed in convergent fashion after measuring the medial base with scale. Blunt Hohmann retractors were placed anteriorly and posteriorly to prevent injury to quadriceps anteriorly and neurovascular structures posteriorly. Osteotomy was carried out using oscillating saw using K-wires as guide. Specific care was taken to stop osteotomy 10 mm before lateral cortex to maintain lateral bony hinge and improve inherent stability of construct. Furthermore, completion of osteotomy at posterior cortex was done with osteotome to prevent injury to neurovascular structures. Bony wedge was removed and osteotomy was closed gently. Correction was checked by interoperative c-arm imaging using cautery wire. Osteotomy was fixed using 4.5 mm locking compression plate placed on anteromedial aspect of distal femur under direct visualization.
Translational osteotomy of tibia was done at CORA followed by internal fixation with tibia interlocked nail. Specific care was taken to prevent eccentric placement of nail after osteotomy which may lead to suboptimal alignment. First, tibial entry was taken with awl and guidewire was placed centrally in tibial canal. Progressive reaming was done over guidewire which created a centralized track for nail. Under fluoroscopic control, tibial osteotomy was completed with oscillating saw. Curved Hohmann’s retractors were placed around tibia to prevent iatrogenic tissue injury. Osteotomy of fibula at same level was achieved manually with osteotomes using mini-open method. Tibia interlock nail was introduced over guidewire and locking was done. This technique ensures adequate correction of tibia valga due to central placement of a straight nail in the bone. Final alignment was checked using cautery wire method which showed perfect restoration of mechanical axis. shows immediate post-operative scanogram.