A 9 year old boy presented with complaints of difficulty in swallowing, change in voice and snoring for one year associated with a weight loss of 4 kgs during this period. The child did not have any complaints of breathing difficulty, fever or night sweats. On examination the oral cavity was normal. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. Indirect Laryngoscopy showed a single globular mass seen occupying the base of the tongue and epiglottis. Bilateral vocal cords could not be visualized. Video laryngoscopy done showed a single globular mass with irregular surface arising from epiglottis extending till vallecula and base of tongue .
Fibre Optic Laryngoscopy showed bilateral vocal cords were mobile, pyriform fossa free on both sides. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) neck was done to look for the extent of the lesion which showed hyperdense lesion measuring 2.8 x3.7 x3.5cms involving epiglottis extending into vallecula obstructing the airway .
The patient underwent coblation assisted complete excision of the growth by ENT surgeons. Histopathological examination showed fragment tissues lined by stratified squamous epithelium with underlying subepithelium showing sheets of a monomorphic population of lymphoid cells infiltrating into the mucosal and adjacent cartilaginous tissue .
By immunohistochemistry, the cells were diffusely positive for CD20, CD45 which was confirmative of B cell lymphoma. As part of the metastatic evaluation, whole-body PET CT and bone marrow biopsy done were normal. CSF analysis done to rule out CNS involvement was also normal.
He was risk stratified as Group B disease and treated with chemotherapy as per LMP 96 protocol. He received COP (Cyclopho- sphamide, vincristine, prednisone), COPADM 1 and 2, (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, doxorubicin, methotrexate) CYM1 & 2 (cytarabine, methotrexate) and intrathecal methotrexate and cytarabine.
PET CT and video laryngoscopy done after completing chemo- therapy showed no evidence of recurrent or residual tumor. He was on regular follow up with pediatric oncology and ENT. A repeat video laryngoscopy done on follow up after 1 year of diagnosis showed normal findings .