A 10-year-old boy from the Indian subcontinent presented with persistent jaundice, intermittent itching, and the passage of clay-colored stool from 10 days after birth. His parents noticed a slowly growing lump over the upper part of his abdomen of 7 years’ duration. He also had a 6-year history of intermittent productive cough associated with sneezing, soreness of throat, rhinorrhea, and occasional fever. Episodes of productive cough usually occurred at intervals of 5–6 months (mostly during the winter months and rainy seasons), lasted for 3–5 days, and improved following treatment with expectorant and anti-allergic cold syrup. For the last 4 years he had experienced intermittent bleeding from his nose and the occasional appearance of post-traumatic violaceous-red patches at the site of trauma, as well recurrent post-traumatic fractures of his upper limbs following mild trauma. For the last 3 years, he had difficulty with night vision.
Our patient had no prior history of altered sensorium, blood vomiting, or passage of black stool. He was born 2 weeks after the expected date of delivery, had low birth weight (2.1 kg), delayed cry (cried after 5 minutes of birth), delayed mile stone development, and poor weight gain since early infancy. There was no family history of a similar type of illness, liver disorder, or consanguineous marriage: his parents, and his grandparents, were not related. He had no family or personal history of tuberculosis or, asthma. He had two elder asymptomatic healthy siblings.
His height was 113 cm (z-score < −3), weight 13 kg (z-score < −3), body mass index 10.23 kg/m2, and mid-arm circumference 9 cm. He had mild pallor, icterus, clubbing, multiple hyperpigmented spots (café au lait spot), and scratch marks over his skin. There was no pedal edema, purpura, palmer erythema, spider nevi, gynecomastia, or testicular atrophy. Our patient had peculiar facial features in the form of a triangular face with broad forehead, deeply set eyes, hypertelorism, prominent ears, small pointed chin, and saddle nose with a bulbous tip. The skin manifestation is shown in Fig. , which illustrates the presence of multiple hyperpigmented spots resembling café au lait spots.
Examination of his abdomen revealed enlargement of the left lobe of his liver. His liver was firm in consistency with an irregular margin and slightly nodular surface. His liver span was 9 cm along the right mid-clavicular line and his spleen was palpable 3 cm below the left costal margin and firm in consistency. An eye examination demonstrated posterior embryotoxon, iris strands, increased intraocular pressure . Findings from respiratory and neurological examinations were normal.
The biochemical parameters of the patient along with corresponding reference ranges for the laboratory are described in Table . He tested negative for hepatitis-B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies. An X-ray of his wrist showed gross osteopenia, and an X- ray of his chest revealed cardiomegaly. Two-dimensional echocardiography showed pulmonary hypertension and tricuspid regurgitation. On gastroduodenoscopy there were no esophageal or gastric varices. An ultrasonographic study of his abdomen reported a shrunken right lobe with coarse hepatic parenchyma, an enlarged left lobe, mild splenomegaly, and poorly visualized hepatic and portal veins. Liver biopsy tissue stained with hematoxylin and eosin showed 10 portal tracts with a conspicuous absence of interlobular bile ducts adjacent to the hepatocytes, a portal area with mild inflammation, some degree of fibrosis, occasional nodules, and a few feathery hepatocytes without any inflammation .
Our patient was finally diagnosed as having the syndromic form of paucity of bile ducts (AGS) because, along with bile duct paucity, he had cholestatic jaundice and the typical ophthalmic and facial appearance. He was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid, vitamin D3, calcium, vitamin A solution, and multivitamins. His parents were advised to attend regular follow-up appointments but did not attend. Our patient died 1 year after the final diagnosis because of massive blood vomiting.