An 82-year-old woman presented with a one-day history of dark red bloody diarrhea.
The symptoms appeared one day prior to presentation, with the patient experiencing 10 episodes of dark red bloody diarrhea. She reported feeling dizzy and fatigued but denied experiencing any abdominal pain or bloating.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and chronic heart failure (NYHA Classification IV). The patient was administered oral dabigatran anticoagulation therapy.
She had no family history of gastrointestinal tumors or psychological or genetic disorders.
Upon admission, the patient appeared apathetic. Physical examination revealed a hypotensive state with a blood pressure of 79/45 mmHg, heart rate of 142 beats/min, and normal body temperature.
Laboratory analysis revealed decreased levels of red blood cells and hemoglobin (8.5 g/dL), along with an elevated ultrasensitive C-reactive protein level of 17.61 mg/L. Coagulation parameters were found to be abnormal, including a prolonged prothrombin time of 18.9 s, activated partial thromboplastin time of 51.4 s, reduced prothrombin activity of 51%, increased international normalized ratio of 1.55, and a fibrinogen level of 4.6 g/L. The patient’s serum potassium level was 3.05 mmol/L, and hepatic and renal functions were within the normal range.
Ultrasound examination revealed a well-defined hypoechoic mass measuring 50 mm × 32 mm × 30 mm at the terminal ileum of the right lower abdomen, suggesting a possible lipoma. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography confirmed the presence of a lipoma with partial intestinal invagination into the ascending colon, indicating the possibility of intestinal intussusception .
The preliminary clinical diagnosis was hemorrhagic shock. Anticoagulant medication was temporarily discontinued. As the hemoglobin level did not meet the clinical transfusion threshold, she received a comprehensive treatment approach that included fluid resuscitation, combination therapy with proton pump inhibitors and somatostatin to promote hemostasis, correction of coagulation abnormalities, and provision of nutritional support. Subsequent colonoscopy revealed a submucosal elevation 6 cm from the ileocecal valve consisting of two distinct parts with clear demarcation and varying texture upon palpation (softer at the base) . Narrow-band imaging indicated a type II opening (stellate) of the glandular portion at the top of the lesion and a type I opening (consistent with the surrounding mucosa) at the lower end. A specimen was obtained from the upper surface of the lesion for biopsy, and histopathological results indicated a diagnosis consistent with JP.