An asymptomatic 41-year-old Tibetan man was referred to our hospital in January 2020 with a pancreatic tumor incidentally detected on computed tomography (CT).
The patient underwent a chest CT scan at a local medical institution because of chest tightness. Although no obvious abnormality was found in the chest, a space-occupying lesion was incidentally found in the pancreas, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable. He had not been previously diagnosed with hyperparathyroidism or pituitary adenoma (to exclude the possibility of MEN-1 related disease).
There was no family history of cancer.
There were no specific positive findings during physical examination.
Routine laboratory test results on admission, including routine blood test results, coagulation test results, and levels of blood glucose, liver function, renal function, and serum tumor markers [carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 12-5, CA 19-9, CA 15-3, and CA72-4], were within normal ranges.
An abdominal CT scan revealed a 4.0 cm × 3.9 cm solid, heterogeneous soft tissue dense tumor behind the pancreatic body, and nodular calcification was also discovered. During the arterial phase, the tumor showed marked enhancement , which was maintained, to a certain degree, during the venous phase . Tumor enhancement was similar to that in the pancreas, and the tumor was not clearly demarcated from the adjacent pancreas, suggesting a pancreatic origin. The tumor was hypervascularized and supplied by a branch of the superior mesenteric artery .
To further define the lesion, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was performed. EUS showed a 41.4 mm × 39.8 mm hypoechoic para-pancreatic solid mass with a modest blood flow signal. The tumor had an obscure boundary with the pancreas, and both the bile duct and pancreatic duct showed no dilation . Pathological examination by EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) identified scattered glandular epithelial cells with slight pleomorphism, and malignancy could not be excluded.
Based on preoperative imaging features and EUS-guided FNA findings, a provisional diagnosis of pancreatic NEN (pan-NEN) was made.