A 59-year-old woman was referred to our hospital after a pancreatic tail tumor was detected by CT prior to surgery for small bowel obstruction at another hospital. She was asymptomatic, and a physical examination revealed no remarkable abnormalities. A laboratory examination showed normal findings. The tumor markers CA19-9 (34.6 U/mL; normal range, < 37 U/mL) and CEA (0.8 ng/mL; normal range, < 5.0 ng/mL) were within the normal range. Enhanced-contrast abdominal CT showed a unilocular cystic lesion measuring 16 mm in size in the pancreatic tail . The wall of the cyst appeared to be enhanced. MRI showed that the cystic lesion exhibited low intensity on T1-weighted images and high intensity on T2-weighted images . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a unilocular cystic lesion with a partial thickened wall in the pancreatic tail . Contrast-enhanced harmonic EUS with Sonazoid showed that the thickened wall was enhanced . The cystic lesion did not communicate with the main pancreatic duct. Given that cystic neoplasms including mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCN) were included in the differential diagnosis, robot-assisted distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was planned as a minimally invasive method for both diagnostic and treatment purposes. Robot-assisted distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed with the da Vinci system . Taking sufficient margins, we transected the pancreatic tail with a stapler device and extracted it from the abdominal cavity in an endobag. The total operation time was 288 min, with a total blood loss of 161 ml.
Macroscopically, a cystic lesion with a small cyst was found with a septum with a diameter of 20 mm at the tail of the pancreas. Histologically, the cyst wall consisted of splenic tissue . The inner surface of the cyst wall was covered with squamous epithelium . The epithelium was positive for CKAE1/3, p40 and CK5/6. Based on these findings, ECIPAS was established as the final pathological diagnosis. The patient was discharged on the 14th postoperative day after an uneventful postoperative course.