We present a 72-year-old man with history of systemic arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus Type 2 and end-stage renal disease, secondary to diabetic nephropathy requiring renal substitution therapy since 2013, initially under peritoneal dialysis modality, migrating to HD with jugular Mahurkar catheter in 2015.
On the 25 March 2016, he started with intermittent high fever and purulent discharge at the Mahurkar catheter insertion site; he was treated with vancomycin without response, for which he was hospitalized in the Medical Centre ISSEMYM Arturo Montiel, Toluca City. During his stay, the right jugular catheter was removed and a left jugular catheter and right femoral vascular access for dialysis were placed. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) reported a mobile mass in the right atrium, suggestive of vegetation that generated severe obstruction of the tricuspid valve. Treatment with meropenem and gentamicin were given for IE as soon the causative agent of infection was identified (Staphylococcus epidermidis) based on MC&S from catheter tip.
On the 29 April 2016, the patient was referred to the National Institute of Cardiology Ignacio Chavez to continue therapeutic and surgical management. At admission he was haemodynamically stable (heart rate (HR) 89/min, blood pressure (BP) 140/90 mmHg, respirtory frequency (RF) 18 r.p.m., and temperature 36.6°C). On auscultation no murmurs were heard and the electrocardiogram (ECG) reported atrial fibrillation with a mean heart rate of 89 b.p.m., without ST segment or T-wave alterations and right bundle brunch block . The inflammatory markers at his admission were: C-reactive protein, 161 mg/L (normal ranges 0.00–6.80); erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 86 mm/h (normal ranges 1.00–8.00); and white blood cell, 10 × 103/µL (normal ranges 4.00–10.5).
Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a mobile mass of 39 × 27 mm in the right atrium, which was corroborated on the transoesophageal echocardiography with dimensions of 40 × 39 mm; the mass was attached at the junction of the inferior vena cava outlet and the right atrium, . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) using the sequences T1, T2, T2-short tau inversion recovery (STIR), early gadolinium, and late gadolinium, showed a 53 × 45 × 36 mm mobile oval mass in the right atrium, attached to the floor of the atrium, adjacent to the inferior vena cava outlet, with suggestive characteristics of myxoma .
The patient underwent surgery to remove the mass of approximately 5 × 6 cm attached to the floor of the right atrium, next to the inferior vena cava outlet, without affecting the tricuspid valve, or the interatrial septum. The histopathological report gave the diagnosis of infected thrombus with Gram-positive bacterial colonies sensitive to cefalotin, antibiotic was given for 2 weeks and also enoxaparin 40 mg/24 h our, and before discharge acenocoumarol was added guided by International normalised ratio (INR) in order to suspend enoxaparin. The repeat TTE performed on 31 May 2016, showed no evidence of residual mass in the right atrium. The patient showed full clinical recovery during this period and was discharged on 14 June 2016. No adverse and unanticipated events were detected in the regular follow-up at the nephrology clinic and cephalexin 500 mg was continued every 8 hrs orally, for 4 weeks. The most recent follow-up was on 29 August 2017 and the patient is in good clinical condition.