A 49-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a 2-month history of lower back pain and a mass in her lumbar region. The patient provided written informed consent for the use of her case data. Physical examination revealed a tender, immobile mass in her lumbar region, but no weakness or sensory deficits. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 3 × 3 × 4 cm mass exhibiting inhomogeneous contrast enhancement in the vertebral arch of the L1 vertebra , as well as a lytic lesion in the vertebral arch of the L1 vertebra . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an extradural tumour in the L1 vertebral arch with mild hyperintensity on T1-weighted imaging and heterogeneously hyper- and hypointensity on T2-weighted imaging . Axial T2-weighted imaging demonstrated that the mass had compressed the spinal cord . Gadolinium-enhanced fat-suppressed T1-weighted images revealed a well-enhanced tumour that extended to the subcutaneous tissues at the L1 level . An open biopsy was performed to facilitate diagnosis, and specimen pathology indicated a type of undetermined malignant neoplasm. The patient received one course of chemotherapy comprising ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide.
A marginal resection and anterior spinal fusion were performed from the 12th thoracic (T12) to the third lumbar (L3) vertebra. During surgery, the patient was placed in the right lateral position. The extrapleural retroperitoneal approach was used, and the lateral aspect of the vertebral body was exposed from T12 to L3. Anterior vertebral screws were placed in the vertebral bodies from T12 to L3, and the disks and end-plates were removed. Subsequently, iliac bone and rib allografts were implanted, and rods were inserted using screws. After wound closure, the patient was placed in the prone position.
A lens-shaped incision that included the biopsy scar was made with a 2-cm margin from the tumour and deepened carefully to maintain a wide curative margin. The bilateral pars interarticularis of T12, tips of the transverse processes of L1 and L2, facet joint of L2/3, and vertebral arch of L3 were exposed. The bilateral pars interarticularis of T12 were cut using a high-speed drill, and a L2/3 facetectomy was performed. Elastic T-saw guide tubes were inserted into the spinal canal from the outside of the L1/2 neural foramen and was advanced cranially (to cut the L1 pedicle) or caudally (to cut the L2 pedicle). The T-saw was subsequently passed through the guide tube and successfully placed around the bilateral L1 and L2 pedicles . Finally, the pedicles were cut, and the tumour was resected en bloc along with the posterior elements of T12 to L2 and the surrounding soft tissue .
Macroscopically, the resected tumour measured 3.7 × 3.4 × 4.4 cm in diameter. The cut surface revealed a pale, solid mass with skeletal muscle and subcutaneous tissue infiltration.
Haematoxylin and eosin were used for routine staining. Histologically, the tumour exhibited pleomorphic spindle cell proliferation with focal eosinophilic material . Initially, we considered the tumour extracellular matrix to be osteoid. The nuclei were spindle- or oval-shaped, and nuclear atypia was obvious. A hypocellular area with abundant mitotic activity was also observed .
Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumour cells were positive for CD34 , CD99, and B cell lymphoma (Bcl)-2, but negative for epithelial membrane antigen, α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), and S-100. Our immunohistochemical findings were not typical of osteosarcoma, which commonly expresses S-100 protein or αSMA. However, the observed CD99 positivity and consistent histological features led to an initial diagnosis of osteosarcoma.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and chemotherapy was initiated 1 month after surgery. Ifosfamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, and cisplatin were discontinued 4 months after surgery. Upon discharge, the patient could ambulate with a cane.
Five years after surgery, chest CT scans showed a 20-mm nodule in the middle lobe of the right lung . A second operation was performed to remove this tumour via middle lobectomy and upper lobe wedge resection. A histological examination was conducted under the suspicion that the findings would indicate a malignant SFT and not metastasis of an osteosarcoma.
The first surgical specimen, which had been embedded in a paraffin block and cryopreserved, was re-examined using immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The immunohistochemical analysis of paraffin-embedded sections prepared from this specimen revealed a diffuse positive STAT6 staining in the tumour cell nuclei . RT-PCR detection of the NAB2-STAT6 fusion gene was conducted using total RNA isolated from the frozen material and PCR primer sets that had been designed according to a previously reported method . The forward primer, which targeted exon 6 of NAB2 (5′-3′), was F-NAB2 ex6 forward-2, AGCAGACACTGATGGACGAG, and the reverse primer, which targeted exon 16 or 17 of STAT6 (5′-3′), was STAT6 ex 17 reverse, TGGGCTTCTTGGGATAGAGA. These primers yielded PCR-amplified DNA fragments with approximate lengths of 219 bp . Direct sequencing of the PCR products detected a NAB2-STAT6 fusion gene, NAB2 exon 6-STAT6 exon 16 . Based on these findings, the final diagnosis was malignant SFT of the lumbar spine.
Systemic chemotherapy with gemcitabine and paclitaxel was initiated. However, CT scans taken 2 months after the second surgery revealed a metastatic lesion in the pancreas . Although the patient had no evidence of local recurrence, she died from uncontrolled disease progression 8 years after the first surgery.