A 5-year-old Indian girl presented at our national referral center for KD in the Netherlands. One year and 6 months before, she was diagnosed with KD while living abroad. On the 8th day of fever she was treated once with 2 g/kg IVIG and high dose aspirin. Despite timely treatment with IVIG, the initial echocardiographic imaging showed the development of giant CAAs in the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) (luminal diameter 12 mm, Z score + 27) and the right coronary artery (RCA) (luminal diameter 9 mm, Z score + 17). She was treated with acetylsalicylic acid (3 mg/kg) and warfarin immediately . Blood tests repeatedly confirmed that the International Normalized Ratio (INR) was within an effective therapeutic range (2.0–3.0). Family history did not reveal coagulation disorders or arterial or venous thromboembolic events.
One and a half years after onset of disease a cCTA was performed which confirmed the giant CAAs (as detected by echocardiography), and showed no signs of thrombosis.
Figure shows a schematic timeline overview of the imaging and intervention performed during the first 2 years of the course of the disease.
Warfarin is not registered in The Netherlands and therefore was replaced by oral acenocoumarol. During this switch the INR was subtherapeutic once (INR 1.7) being again in the therapeutic range within 7 days upon adapting the acenocoumarol dose.
The cCTA scan was repeated upon arrival to the Netherlands shortly after warfarin was replaced by acenocoumarol and showed no signs of thrombosis.
However, three months later, at 1 year and 9 months after the initial onset of disease, a routine echocardiography showed a new echo density in the LAD despite adequate antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapy. A subsequent cCTA confirmed intraluminal thrombus growth causing an a reduction in patent lumen of the dilated LAD . Clinical symptoms such as angina and/or shortness of breath were absent and the INR was within an effective therapeutic range (2.0–3.0). In order to prevent further thrombus progression, anticoagulation therapy was intensified with the INR targeting at 2.5–3.5, acetylsalicylic acid was increased to 5 mg/kg and clopidogrel 1 mg/kg was added. After a short uneventful clinical observation she was further followed on an outpatient basis.
In spite of the triple anticoagulation therapy, one month later, the patient presented to the Emergency Department with the classical presentation of myocardial ischemia i.e. pain in the left arm, nausea and vomiting. ECG showed a ST-depression and blood test revealed an elevated troponine-T of 0.114 μg/L (normal range 0–0.05μg/L) . Echocardiography showed an end diastolic Left Ventricular Inner Dimension of 40.2 mm and left ventricle ejection fraction of 18.7 44%. Laboratory results showed a consistent increase in NT-proBNP and the ECG showed that the ST-depression progressed into ST-elevation (supplementary Fig. ). With these findings, the clinical criteria for myocardial ischemia were met . Systemic thrombolysis with continuous infusion of recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator 0.2–3 mg/kg/hr. (rTPA, alteplase) and continuous nitroglycerine was started. Anticoagulation with acenocoumarol was switched to continuous unfractionated heparin and dual antiplatelet therapy continued with acetylsalicylic acid and prasugrel instead of clopidogrel.
Persistent ST-segment elevation led to a prompt PCI with balloon dilatation with thrombosuction and local thrombolysis with a 15-min drip of rTPA (0.1 mg/kg). Subsequently, 12-h thrombolysis was accomplished following PCI. Blood flow in the LAD restored partially, but a substantial proportion of the thrombus remained detectable.
The following week gradual improvement in ECG and troponine-T levels was seen and continuous heparin was switched to low molecular weight heparins (nadroparin) with therapeutic antiXa levels. However, after one week echocardiography showed again growth of the thrombus , for which rTPA and heparin was restarted with reduction of the thrombus. After discontinuation of rTPA which lasted for 6 h, ECG showed yet again an increase in ST-elevation coinciding with a growth of the thrombus by echocardiography. Because of the rapidly progressive growth of the thrombus despite aggressive anticoagulant therapy, CABG was performed. A left internal mammary artery (LIMA) graft to the LAD and a right internal mammary artery (RIMA) graft to the RCA were placed. The thrombus was removed and the CAA in the RCA was clipped.
The now eight-year-old patient is clinically well and leads an active life. The perseverant thrombotic occlusion that caused a major anteroseptal myocardial infarction has led to a lasting compromised cardiac function with a markedly dilated left ventricle and aneurysmatic and abnormal left ventricular wall motion. At 22 months post-CABG, the left ventricular Inner Dimension is 56.9 mm with an ejection fraction of 30%. The patient remains on triple anticoagulation (acenocoumarol, acetylsalicylic acid and prasugrel) without any increased bleeding tendency. She is also treated for heart failure (bisoprolol, enalapril, furosemide, prasugrel and spironolactone) with which the NT-proBNP has shown a decrease during the outpatient follow-up (Suppl. Fig. ). The patient was not placed on statins.