A 55-year-old female.
Swelling in the body after exposure to ignition coal fumes.
She had operated a second-floor bar 5 years. In 2011, she experienced body swelling, sputum, and muscular symptoms beginning when the meat roasting restaurant on the first floor of the same building replaced charcoal with ignition coal a few weeks before presentation to the division of rheumatology. She was diagnosed with FMS and treated. Her symptoms were improved when she took her prescribed FMS medicine. Her symptoms recurred after exposure to the fumes of ignition coal when she returned to work. Within a few weeks, she moved into a new house which used city gas (previously, she had lived in a house using an oil boiler). Her symptoms, such as whole body swelling (both arms and both calves were especially edematous), sputum, myalgia, and arthralgia worsened, and she had the new onset of headache after exposure to the smell of city gas. She vomited at night when she moved to a new house. To remove the city gas fumes, she began to use an air purifier. If symptoms recurred, she took FMS medication, but the symptoms did not improve. Eventually, 1 year later, she moved into a different house. Gradually, she developed a sensitivity to the smell of burning and exhaust gas. After exposure to the fumes, symptoms such as swelling, myalgia, arthralgia, poor concentration, and nausea occurred. The symptoms consistently occurred when she inhaled the fumes of ignition coal, so she finally quit her job 1 year later from first induction of symptoms. She underwent a pulmonary function test because she had difficulty breathing, whole body swelling, and a sore throat, but the laboratory tests results were normal. In 2013, a multiple allergen simultaneous test (MAST) was performed; the result was non-specific except for a weak positive outcome for house dust mites. There was no improvement in the symptoms, so she was treated for rheumatism at the hospital. Even though the treatment was conducted, her symptoms continued to be aggravated by city gas fumes. Hence, she plans to move to a new house where city gas is not used.
Atopy, hormonal treatment of menopause symptoms (5 years).
There is no family history of skin disease. Her daughter did not complain of symptoms similar to her when her daughter came home to visit.
No smoking. No drinking.
She operated a bar on the second floor above a restaurant. She quit her job 1 year later from first induction of symptoms.
In the past, she jogged almost every day for two hours. But during the last two years, she has usually exercised by walking.
The bar employees reported being aware of smelling ignition coal, but none experienced symptoms such as swelling, sputum, and myalgia like she did.
Results of one set of hospital tests: A clinical examination including a complete blood count (CBC), liver-renal function test (LRFT), electrolyte tests, rheumatoid factor (RF), uric acid, hepatitis B test, antinuclear antibody (ANA test), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP antibody), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and urine analysis (UA) were performed, 2011. No specific findings were revealed except mild elevation of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and cholesterol. After that, 10 months later, she underwent a re-examination for CBC, LRFT, uric acid, and electrolytes but the results were within normal range again. Three more months later, pulmonary function tests and simple chest radiography and chest computed tomography did not show specific findings. The test results for MAST were low positive (1+) for total immunoglobulin E and house dust mites (mite-farinae, mite-pterony), and very low positive for Acacia, Timothy grass, dog, and cockroach mix.
Symptom changes before/after exposure to the city gas fumes: The most sensitive triggering substance was city gas. After becoming aware of the smell of city gas, she developed symptoms including dyspnea, chest discomfort, sputum, body swelling, myalgia, arthralgia, and headache within 5 minutes. When she was exposed to the smell of city gas, her dyspnea worsened. Therefore, she had to avoid the place of exposure. When she moved to a different location, her symptoms gradually disappeared within 2–3 hours.
First visit to our hospital: The other hospital examinations showed no abnormal findings from blood tests, urine tests, pulmonary function tests, and lung imaging tests. After medical examination by interview, a physical examination was performed according to her symptoms. We considered MCS, FMS, CFS, and somatization disorder, based on the diagnostic process and differential diagnosis proposed by Chae et al .
Physical examination: The patient reported that her body weight was highly changeable after exposure to certain smells. Therefore, we measured her height and weight (148.1 cm, 53 kg). We examined the degree of swelling, but there were no abnormal findings. She also complained of joint pain including that of both metacarpal phalangeal joints (MCP joints), the right metatarsal joint of the thumb, and both the Achilles tendons, but there was no swelling, tenderness, or joint deformity. Although she complained of myalgia (including that of the right arm, left forearm, and both calves), there was no swelling or tenderness.
The symptom graph differed before and after exposure to ignition coal . The symptom severity score was 25 points before exposure to ignition coal and it was 56 points after exposure to ignition coal. Before exposure to ignition coal fumes, the score of “skin related symptoms” and “genitourinary related symptoms” was high because of her medical problems with atopic dermatitis and menopause-related symptoms. After exposure to ignition coal fumes, her existing symptoms worsened and new symptoms occurred (including airway or mucous membrane symptoms, musculoskeletal symptoms, affective symptoms, and head-related symptoms). On the Korean Version of the QEESI, all of the area scores were high and very suggestive of MCS.
The symptom severity score was 56 points, chemical intolerance score was 53 points, other intolerance score was 60 points, life impact score was 77 points, and masking index score was 7 points.
Second visit to our hospital, differential diagnosis with FMS: We used the 2010 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) preliminary diagnostic criteria for FMS. We scored each situation, to compare before and after the exposure to the smell. Before exposure to ignition coal, the widespread pain index (WPI) score was 1 point and the symptom severity scale (SSS) score was 8 points. This results did not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of FMS. After exposure to ignition coal, the WPI score was 7 points and the SSS score was 9 points. These met the criteria for the diagnosis of FMS. However, she did not show common FMS clinical features. She had no symptoms of pain worsening with exercise, sleep disturbance (characterized by non-restorative sleep and increased awakenings), or cognitive difficulties including short-term memory problems. After exposure to ignition coal fumes, the diagnostic criteria for FMS was fulfilled because the symptoms are similar to MCS. Hence we excluded FMS.
We used the 1994 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) diagnostic criteria for CFS. Before exposure to ignition coal fumes, the patient had no symptoms among the diagnostic criteria. However, after exposure to ignition coal, she showed six symptoms among the diagnostic criteria (poor mental function, sore throat, myalgia, multiple arthralgia, new onset headaches, and feeling unwell). However, when she was exposed to fresh air or avoided exposure to triggering substances, all of her symptoms disappeared. Because CFS symptoms are not improved by avoiding the triggers, we excluded CFS.
We used the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV (DSM-IV) in considering somatization disorder. She had social impairment with 4 or more pain symptoms and 2 or more gastrointestinal symptoms, and her symptoms did not start before the age of 30. She also had no sexual symptoms or pseudoneurological symptoms. Therefore, we excluded somatization disorder.
Her weight was 53.4 kg. She complained of more edema than before. Pitting edema was observed in both forearm regions (1+) and both anterior tibial regions (2+).
Pitting edema is an abnormal accumulation of fluid in the interstitium characterized by indentations persisting after the release of pressure . Generally, pitting edema occurs because homeostasis of the interstitial fluid has broken. It can be caused by heart failure, liver failure, renal failure, pregnancy, or electrolyte imbalance. She has not observed any organ dysfunction. She was in menopause and her electrolytes were within normal range. No other diseases were suspected.
The patient had multi-organ symptoms when exposed to a triggering chemical that is normally considered to be safe. Her symptoms also occurred repeatedly with chemical exposure, and improved with removal of the chemical exposure. Her symptoms were chronic, and she was sensitive to many chemicals. Considering the diagnostic criteria for MCS agreed upon in Atlanta in 1999 and her results from the Korean version of the QEESI, our case fits the criteria well and the diagnosis is obvious. The patient was educated about MCS and avoiding exposure to triggering substances. She showed changing social behavior in that she moved house twice, reduced her hobbies, and quit her job. Therefore, we aimed to help her return to work and live in her new house by avoiding triggering substances in the environment. She was educated about air purifiers and air purification plants. We also explained long-term care and the necessity of moral support.