A 40-year-old female with past medical history of migraine and no family history of CM, presented with unilateral scotomas with a gradual onset over 7 months and progressive visual deterioration, referred as blurred vision of the right eye (RE), with a significant worsening few days before seeking medical care.
She was initially admitted at Ophthalmology outpatient clinic for observation. The ophthalmologic evaluation revealed a decreased visual acuity (7/10) and a visual field defect on the RE. Her left eye (LE) was completely normal (10/10, without field defect). The computerized campimetry (CC) disclosed a supero-inferior arciform defect in the RE. LE CC was normal .
Visual evoked potential responses showed results compatible with a right second cranial nerve dysfunction due to compressive optic neuropathy on the RE. A noncontrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and revealed a spontaneous hyperdense focal nodular lesion, heterogeneous, with irregular contours and a punctate area of increased attenuation coefficient related to calcification, on the right optic-carotid cistern, adjacent to the ipsilateral ON. No surrounding edema or mass effect was documented. No evidence of subarachnoid or intraventricular hemorrhage .
Based on the CT scan result, the patient was referred to the outpatient clinic of the Neurosurgery Department. She completed the diagnostic neuro-imaging evaluation with a CT angiography (CTA) , a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and a MR angiography (MRA) of the brain.
The MRI showed a focal solitary well-defined rounded lesion involving the right ON in its intracranial prechiasmatic segment, sparing the chiasm. The T1-weighted noncontrasted sequence showed a spontaneously hyperintense lesion [Figures -]. In the T2-weighted MRI, the lesion exhibited a heterogeneous signal intensity and a peripheral hypointense rim [. No large vessels adjacent to the lesion were identified.
The MRA demonstrated a hyperintense mass due to hemosiderin. No enlarged vessels were identified .
These features were considered to be consistent with an occult vascular malformation, presenting an inner hematoma (blood and blood by-products in various states of evolution) surrounded by a peripheral hemosiderin rim, suggesting the diagnosis of a CM of the intracranial segment of the right ON.
The patient complaints remained unchanged for one week. After this period of time, she was electively operated on, through a right pterional craniotomy. An intradural optic canal unroofing, through a drilling technique, was performed to completely expose and microsurgically remove the CM . The CM was found over the superior surface of the ON at the entrance of the optic canal with an anterior canalicular extension.