A 75-year-old male with no special medical history was inflicted with dry mouth and constipation for 2 months, and symmetric proximal muscle weakness for 1 month. The muscle strength of the both proximal limbs was 4/5, and that of the distal limbs 5/5. There was no sign of tendon reflexes in all the limbs while the reflex of the right knee increased to 1+ after a sustained 30-s contraction. Notably, the cutaneous response to scratch was positive. Orthostatic hypotension was found by upright tilt-table testing. Chest computed tomography, brain magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasounds of abdomen and lymph nodes, and serum tumor markers showed absolutely no evidence of tumor. Electromyography showed no neurogenic or myogenic damage, and the conduction velocity of the sensory nerve and motor nerve was normal. Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) at 3 Hz on the right common peroneal nerve resulted in 30% decrement of the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude while that on the left common peroneal nerve reached 32% . 20 Hz RNS test showed large increment of CMAP amplitude on bilateral common peroneal nerves (left one: 164%; right one: 112%). Voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) antibody was positive while anti-SRY-Related HMG-Box Gene 1(SOX1) antibody was negative. All considered, the patient was diagnosed with Lambert-Eaton syndrome. Because of the prominent symptom of autonomic disorder, the patient further underwent skin sympathetic response (SSR) test so as to confirm the autonomic dysfunction . Longer latency and lower amplitude were detected on bilateral palms in the first SSR, while it evoked no response in the sole after three times of stimulation. The patient received a five-day treatment by intravenous immunoglobulins (0.4 g/kg/d). Until now, the patient has been followed-up for 6 months. Recently, he suffers from muscle weakness and difficulties in walking. But the symptoms of dry mouth and constipation do not occur again. The chest CT and blood tests for malignancy are performed every 3 months and the results show that he remains cancer-free.