A 66-year-old female patient visited the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Seoul National University Dental Hospital, with a complaint of severe difficulty in eating due to limitation of jaw function and trismus. The patient had a history of multiple TMJ surgeries for reduction of condyle fracture of both sides and arthroplasty/coronoidectomy due to trismus. Clinically, the patient exhibited the maximum mouth opening of 8 mm and relapse of severe trismus . After CT scan was taken, type IV TMJ ankylosis on both sides was confirmed . Since the glenoid fossa and condyle of both sides were completely fused, the anatomic structures were indistinguishable. Gap arthroplasty or interpositional arthroplasty could not be applied to this patient because bony TMJ ankylosis in both sides was complete and recurrent. Therefore, we decided to use the 3D virtual surgical planning, CAD/CAM-fabricated surgical guide, and stock TMJ prosthesis system (Biomet, Jacksonville, FL, USA) for total joint reconstruction.
The 3D virtual surgery was performed with a specific navigation surgery software (FACEGIDE, MegaGen implant, Daegu, South Korea). As the first step, both condyles and their surrounding hyperplastic bone were removed, while making it sure to avoid the mandibular foramen. The second step was virtual placement of the condyle and fossa components of the stock TMJ prosthesis. After placement of the fossa and condylar components, any areas of interference were investigated by virtually opening the jaw.
After confirmation of the position of the fossa and condyle components, the surgical guides were fabricated by using the CAD/CAM technology. The surgical guides consist of the upper and lower parts. The upper part is designed to be adapted onto the root of the zygoma, which guides the location of upper margin for resection of the root of the zygoma and the position of the fossa component of the stock TMJ prosthesis. The lower part is designed to be adapted onto the mandibular angle area, which guides the location of lower margin for the resection of the ankylosed condyle and has several drill holes for fixation screws of the condyle component of the stock TMJ prosthesis .
Under general anesthesia, the total joint reconstruction surgery was performed via preauricular and submandibular incisions. Osteotomy and placement of the stock TMJ prosthesis were carried out according to the 3D virtual surgical planning . At 2 months post-operative follow-up , the patient was able to open her mouth up to 30 mm without complication. She could undergo dental treatments that had been unavailable due to severe limitation of jaw function and trismus. One year after surgery of follow-up, the patient stated that she was living without any change of mouth opening range and side effects.