A 63-year-old G2P2 female presented ambulatory to the ED with the chief complaint of abdominal pain, described further to the triage nurse as abdominal cramping and a mass in her vagina. The patient described that she had had a "bulge" in her vagina for the past 2 years and was currently being treated by her gynecologist for an enterocele with estrogen cream. Elective surgical repair of an enterocele was planned. She complained to the triage nurse of abdominal pain intermittently for the preceding 1 week. She stated that when she coughed something protruded from her vagina and she believed that her rectum had prolapsed. She was initially triaged to the lower acuity area of the emergency department, but due to worsening pain, she was brought back to a room on the acute care side approximately 30 min after her arrival. She described working in her garden when she coughed, experiencing a "bulge" extending through and out of her vagina. According to the patient, this "bulge" had been worsening for 2 months but had never extended past her labia. The patient complained of severe cramping in the left lower quadrant of her abdomen, but denied any diffuse abdominal pain. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension and breast cancer treated with surgery and chemotherapy without radiation. The patient did not have a history of vaginal or vulvar cancer. Her surgical history was significant for mastectomy and breast reconstruction, laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy and bilateral oopherectomy (5 years previously), and pubovaginal sling (4 years previously).
On examination she was pleasant, appearing well and in no acute distress, with a temperature of 36.8 C°, pulse of 70, and blood pressure of 142/97 mmHg. Initial abdominal examination demonstrated no tenderness to palpation and no peritoneal signs. On genitourinary exam approximately 15 cm of small bowel protruded through the vaginal introitus (see Figure ). The bowel exhibited peristaltic waves and was dark red in color. Manual reduction was attempted to reduce strangulation, but was unsuccessful because of the large amount of bowel present and to the patient's discomfort during the attempt. Intravenous morphine was administered for pain control. Sterile moist gauze was placed over the eviscerated bowel, and the gynecology department was immediately consulted for surgical management of the patient. The patient was given a bolus of 1 l normal saline and intravenous ertapenam and metronidazole to cover enteric organisms.
Laboratory data results included white blood cell count, 5.9 k/ul; hemoglobin, 13.1 g/dl; hematocrit, 38.6%; platelets, 287 k/ul; prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time were normal. Sodium was 142 mEq/l; chloride, 109 mEq/l; potassium, 3.8 mEq/l; bicarbonate 23 mEq/l; glucose, 123 mg/dl; blood urea nitrogen, 17 mg/dl; creatinine, 0.7 mg/dl; calcium 9.3 mg/dl. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, with left atrial enlargement.
While awaiting surgical consultation and 45 min after being placed in a room, the patient developed relative hypotension; her blood pressure decreased from 183/108 to 107/63 mmHg. She became less responsive and experienced rigors. Repeat abdominal exam showed diffuse abdominal tenderness with peritoneal signs that rapidly progressed to frank peritonitis. The herniated bowel had become dark and dusky. A second large bore IV was placed, and aggressive fluid resuscitation with 2 l normal saline was initiated. Her bed was placed in the Trendelenburg position to reduce tension on the eviscerated bowel, and preparations were made to intubate the patient because of her rapid decline. The fluid resuscitation was successful in improving her mental status and blood pressure, and she did not require intubation. She was transported quickly to the operating room for repair by both gynecology and general surgery physicians. General surgery resected approximately 20 cm of the distal ileum, which they noted to be inflamed and thickened with two areas of ischemia. This was followed by resection and repair of the vaginal cuff by gynecologic surgery. The patient was discharged from the hospital 6 days later in improved condition.