An 86-year-old man was transferred to our hospital because of hematemesis and melena. He had no obvious medical history other than hypertension. A hemorrhagic gastric ulcer was found in the lesser curvature of the antrum by emergency endoscopy . Endoscopic hemostasis with hypertonic saline–epinephrine and endoscopic hemoclips was performed. There was no evidence of bleeding after the procedure, and he was discharged 10 days after admission. Follow-up screening endoscopy was performed approximately 1 month after discharge. Endoscopy revealed a tumor-like lesion in the lesser curvature of the antrum that was diagnosed as well-differentiated adenocarcinoma by biopsy . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no evidence of lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis; therefore, we planned radical surgery. However, the patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 infection by preoperative PCR screening. He had no symptoms, such as fever or respiratory symptoms. CT did not identify pneumonia . Because of his advanced age and the presence of cancer, he was at high risk of developing a serious clinical condition. As a result, he was hospitalized for follow-up observation. All members of the patient’s immediate family were negative for COVID-19 on PCR. He was discharged 10 days after admission with neither medication nor oxygenation because he met the criteria for discharge regarding COVID-19 infection, and we confirmed his PCR-negative status for COVID-19. At this time in our institution, we had no experience performing surgery under general anesthesia in patients with COVID-19 infection. Therefore, we consulted anesthetists and the infection control team to determine the appropriate timing of surgery after the patient’s recovery from COVID-19 infection. As a result, we planned radical surgery 6 weeks after he recovered from the infection. We repeated CT before surgery and found no evidence of progression of the gastric cancer or new development of pneumonia. We did not perform repeat endoscopy before surgery because of the exposure risk for COVID-19 infection. A PCR-negative status for COVID-19 was confirmed before hospitalization for surgery. At admission, the patient’s height was 162.7 cm, and he weighed 55.6 kg. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 6.0 × 109/L, red blood cell count of 4.89 × 1012/L, and hemoglobin concentration of 15.3 g/dL Tumor markers, such as carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen, were within the reference ranges. We initially planned laparoscopic gastrectomy for this patient. However, considering the COVID-19 infection, we decided to perform open gastrectomy to avoid the risk of surgical mist generated by laparoscopic surgery. Therefore, open distal gastrectomy with D1-plus lymph node dissection and Billroth I reconstruction was performed. The anesthetist and the operating room staff members used personal protective equipment and took measures to prevent infection during intubation. A muscle relaxant was used, and the cough reflex was avoided. We avoided ultrasonic scalpels and used a Crystal Vision 450D surgical smoke evacuator (I.C. Medical, Inc., Phoenix, AZ, USA) to reduce intraoperative surgical smoke . The operation time was 165 min, and the blood loss volume was 80 mL. There was no evidence of respiratory complications perioperatively. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged from the hospital on the 18th day postoperatively. Microscopic examination of the gastric specimen revealed well- to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the subserosal layer without lymph node metastasis, described as pT3(SS)N0M0, pStageIIA in accordance with the TNM classification criteria .