A 75-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department with vomit, diarrhea, confusion and epigastric pain. She had a diagnosis of chronic renal insufficiency for several months, and she recently suffered several episodes of urinary tract infection and acute renal failure due to severe dehydration consequent to diarrhea. Furthermore, she reported consistent weight loss in the last period. She had hypertension, cardiac insufficiency, chronic pulmonary obstructive disease, hiatal hernia and an history of cardiac arrhythmias. On admission, blood pressure was 140/85 mmHg and pulse rate was 95. On physical examination, abdomen was nontender. Abdominal ultrasound was negative. An electrocardiograph was normal. Laboratory analysis were significant for hyponatriemia (124 mmol/L, normal range: 135–145 mmol/L), hypokalemia (3.1 mmol/L, normal range: 3.5–5.0 mmol/L), high creatininemia (318.24 μmol/L, normal range: 53–106 μmol/l), hyperazotemia (188 mg/dl, normal range: 10–50 mg/dl), leukocytosis (10.810 x 10^9/L, normal range 4.0–10.0 x 10^9/L), and proteinuria (2.5 g/day, normal value: <0.15 g/day). After adequate rehydration and PPI infusion epigastric pain subsided. She was admitted to the nephrology department, where she was treated with intravenous 0.9 % saline and potassium infusion. A complete normalization of her biochemistry, followed by normalization of her creatinine values, occurred only after 10 days of intravenous therapy. In light of her persistent, mucous diarrhea a digital examination was performed, documenting a circumferential lesion of the rectum, with mucosal involvement of the anal canal up to 1 cm from the anal verge, and a colonoscopy was ordered.
The colonoscopy showed sigmoid diverticula and a giant polyp of the rectum, occupying three quarters of the luminal circumference, with a cranial-caudal extension of 8–9 cm and . Considering the typical clinical presentation, McKittrick-Wheelock syndrome was diagnosed.
A biopsy was performed on the polyp, and pathology showed a villous adenoma with focal high-grade dysplasia. Subsequently, the patient underwent a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the thorax and abdomen for staging of the disease. The CT scan did not show any signs of mural involvement, nor sphincterial or mesorectal involvement or signs of distant metastases . She was finally transferred to our department and referred to surgery.
Given the dimension and the extension of the polyp transanal surgery was excluded, and considering the good general conditions and continence status of the patient a low anterior rectal resection with mucosectomy of the anal canal had initially been planned. However, an intra-operative frozen section pathological examination showed involvement of the distal margin by intramucosal adenocarcinoma, and a conventional abdomino-perineal resection with end-colostomy was performed .
Pathological examination on the whole specimen showed a villous adenoma with areas of intramucosal adenocarcinoma and high grade dysplasia (TisN0).
After surgery, the patient showed persistent normalization of physical and serological parameters and full recovery of her renal function. She did not have any medical or surgical postoperative complication. At 10 months follow-up, she was in good general conditions, without signs of local recurrence, with a regular GI function and no signs of renal insufficiency or electrolyte disturbance.