We present the case of a 66-year-old Caucasian woman who presented with a left pertrochanteric fracture caused by a fall from the same level. Her standard emergency antero-posterior (AP) radiographic examination revealed that the fracture was associated with primary hip OA . Because of the pathological combination (the distal extension of the trochanteric fracture beyond the supporting area of a primary femoral stem) and in accordance with previous publications [–] the decision was made to treat her with a uncemented modular femoral component with diaphyseal support (Revitan® Straight, Zimmer, Warsaw IN), while the acetabular component was a primary uncemented metal backed polyethylene component (Trilogy® Acetabular System, Zimmer, Warsaw IN).
At her one-year follow-up visit she had no pain on her left hip, with the expected range of motion (ROM); flexion of 105°; abduction 32°. However, she had intense pain in her right hip associated with a progressing limp for the past five months. Her X-ray revealed stage VI femoral head avascular necrosis (AVN), with the proximal migration of her femoral head with secondary acetabular rim destruction. She was scheduled for a primary THA. A few days after the visit she sustained a fall from the same level that resulted in extreme pain over her already painful right hip, and pain and deformation of the normal anatomy of her right arm. She presented to our emergency room and was diagnosed with a right pertrochanteric fracture and a wedge-type humerus shaft fracture.
A pelvic three-dimensional computed tomography scan was performed to investigate the amount of acetabular erosion and the true diaphyseal extent of the fracture. After routine preoperative preparation it was decided that a primary THA would be the best indication to treat her right hip. Taking into account the operative and clinical success of the previous surgery, the small amount of acetabular destruction and the extension of the fracture line to just below the level of the lesser trochanter, the same implants were selected as for the previous surgery, apart from the component sizes . Antegrade nailing was used to treat the humeral fracture. Cerclage wiring was used in both surgeries to fix the fractured parts of the trochanter to the femoral stem. This has been shown to increase the overall strength of the implant-bone construct in fracture and femur osteotomy cases [–].
In the clinical setting of this particular case we feel that both hips had a strong indication for a primary THA with an uncemented modular femoral stem. On her left hip the trochanteric fracture was associated with hip OA . She reported a history of moderate anterior hip pain that was ongoing for about five months previous which was aggravated by prolonged walking and standing. Accounting for her previous degenerative symptoms and the trochanteric fracture, a one-stage primary THA was performed with the modular femoral stem for diaphyseal support. On her right hip the associated AVN with secondary OA and the extension of the fracture line below the level of the lesser trochanter made osteosynthesis undesirable. The advantages of the modular system include a wide range of proximal and distal components allowing for both metaphyseal and diaphyseal support combined with the advantages of an uncemented stem. At three months postoperatively, radiographic union was documented and she could walk unassisted. Her Harris Hip Score was 68 and her WOMAC (Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index) score was 64.8. At one-year postoperatively, she was ambulant, with a Harris Hip Score of 84 and a WOMAC score of 81.1.
On her left hip an osteolysis line can be observed at the level of the proximal cerclage wire with the proximal migration of the greater trochanter, caused by a non-union at this level. Tension banding has been reported to have good results for the fixation of trochanteric fractures and osteotomies . Trochanteric nonunion is a known complication of THA with a modular femoral stem, and also one that has minor adverse effects on the final result . In our case it caused a mild, painless, Trendelenburg gait with associated mild abductor weakness. The possibility of a trochanteric claw plate fixation was presented [–] but her choice was to continue with conservative treatment.