A 53-year-old Caucasian British woman originally presented to her local hospital in 2002 with shortness of breath secondary to atrial fibrillation. During the admission, chest radiography revealed widespread pulmonary nodular infiltrates, and a subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of widespread pulmonary metastases, most marked in the lower lung fields . The CT scan also demonstrated extensive retroperitoneal and para-aortic lymphadenopathy and hepatic abnormalities consistent with metastases, but no obvious primary site for the disease .
Before admission, our patient had no symptoms of liver dysfunction and her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. She had no family history of malignancy. Routine haematology, clotting, serum biochemistry and liver function tests, hepatitis screen and tumour markers were all within normal limits. After the standard medical management for atrial fibrillation was completed, a CT-guided biopsy of the predominant hepatic lesion was performed.
Histological examination of the biopsy confirmed the presence of an infiltrating tumour with pleomorphic elongated cells that stained positively with the vascular markers Factor VIII, CD31, and CD34. These morphological and immunohistochemical features were consistent with the diagnosis of HEH. In the presence of disseminated disease, surgical management was not indicated, and our patient was referred to the oncology team for ongoing management.
In response to radiological evidence of disease progression, first-line therapy with interferon was commenced in accordance with the dosing recommendations published in an earlier case report . A CT scan performed after three months therapy demonstrated stable disease; however, as our patient was experiencing significant interferon-related side effects, the treatment was discontinued. After a six-month break from therapy, there was evidence of disease progression within the spleen seen on an updated CT scan, and the decision was taken to explore treatment with thalidomide.
Starting initially at 100 mg per day, the dose of the drug was increased at weekly intervals up to 400 mg. Treatment was well tolerated and currently remains at 400 mg daily, more than seven years later. During this period, our patient has had regular restaging by CT scans; the disease has remained stable in the lungs and liver by Recist criteria, but with the development of calcification within the predominant liver lesion . At present, our patient continues to have no symptoms of the disease, and throughout the course of treatment has not had any treatment-related toxicity that has required either hospitalization or dose reduction.