A 6-year-old male of Turkish origin had been treated since birth because of adenohypophysis aplasia and ectopic neurohypophysis resulting in panhypopituitarism with secondary adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroidism and growth hormone deficiency. Due to persistent hypoglycemia, muscular hypotonia, hyperbilirubinemia and unclear respiratory and hemodynamic situations a cranial MRI (cMRI) had been performed, showing an aplasia of the adenohypophysis while the neurohypophysis presented as a punctiform enhancement in the pituitary stalk. Laboratory markers of the adrenal glands had been in concordance with the MRI findings showing a blood plasma cortisol level of <0.5 μg/dl and free cortisol <10 μg/24 h in urinalysis. ACTH level was <5 pg/ml supporting the diagnosis of hypopituitarism. Levels of Thyreoid-stimulating were <0.1 μIU/ml (0.35–4.5 μIU/ml), fT4 0.1 ng/dl (1.5–2.6 ng/dl), growth hormone (GH) <0.05 ng/ml (random sample, 0.43–2.40 ng/ml), Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) 0.88 mg/l (0.80–3.60) and Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) <25 ng/ml (41–313 ng/ml). Replacement treatment was initiated with hydrocortisone, L-thyroxine and growth hormone .
However, beginning at the age of 2 years, recurrent episodes of abdominal pain, vomiting and raised temperature were noticed. As no infectious causes could be detected these episodes were attributed to the panhypopituitarism and were followed by changes in treatment. During a hospitalization for treatment optimization, the suspicion of a second underlying disease was raised. While being admitted the patient was suffering from relapsing episodes with abdominal pain, vomiting, headache and fever (38–40 °C). The parents later commented that the patient had been suffering from similar episodes for about 4 years. Such episodes occurred suddenly twice a month lasting for 1 day. While the attacks were interpreted as recurrent minor infections and symptoms of secondary adrenal insufficiency, hydrocortisone dosage was increased repeatedly. Despite the increased dosage no clinical improvement was observed. Clinical examination during those episodes showed a pale boy in pain with diffuse moderate abdominal pain, normal bowel sounds, and normal cardiopulmonary findings.
The following blood tests were normal during these episodes: complete blood count, liver and renal function tests and levels of ferritin and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 70 mm/h [normal value: <10 mm/h]. Furthermore infectious causes were excluded as all tests were normal, namely urine tests, stool microbiology and virology, and calprotectin in the stool.
There was no indication of chronic inflammatory bowel disease; however, the parents reported a female cousin of the patient who had been suffering from relapsing abdominal pain, joint pain and fever since the age of 6 years. Since the parents were consanguineous the clinical suspicion of familial Mediterranean fever was raised.
Laboratory diagnostics showed serum amyloid A (SAA) remarkably elevated at 1180 mg/l [normal value: <10 mg/l]. Molecular genetic testing revealed a homozygous M694V mutation of the MEFV gene (p.Met694Val, c.2080A>G), confirming the diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever. Therapy with colchicine was started at a dose of 1 mg per day. Within 3 weeks SAA decreased to 4.20 mg/l and neither fever nor abdominal pain have occurred again within 6 months. During long-term follow-up the patient was not admitted again due to abdominal pain or episodes of recurrent fever; on long-term follow-up severity of symptoms was mild under colchicine treatment. Hormonal substitution was adjusted repeatedly for weight and clinical needs, and an interaction of both treatment regimens was not observed.