Our patient was a 55-year-old white man who presented to our emergency department (ED) with a 2-day history of severe, dull, constant left flank pain with radiation to his groin, and nausea with no vomiting. He denied hematuria, fever, chills, dysuria, or discharge from his penis. He denied any history of renal colic, chest pain, shortness of breath, or any recent traumatic injury.
His past medical history was pertinent for psoriasis, tympanostomy tubes during childhood, cholecystectomy, and temporomandibular joint (TMJ) pain. He took adalimumab (Humira™) for psoriasis and was recently prescribed prednisone for his TMJ pain. His only allergy was to penicillin. He specifically denied any history of renal disease.
His initial vital signs were 36.2 °C (97.2 °F), 64 beats per minute (bpm), 18 respirations per minute (rpm), blood pressure (BP) 150/89, and blood oxygen saturation (spO2) 99%. On examination, he was in moderate painful distress. His skin was warm and dry and he did not have any diaphoresis. The only positive findings on his abdominal/back examination was left upper quadrant tenderness and left flank/costovertebral angle (CVA) tenderness.
His white blood cell (WBC) count was 15.6 with 85% neutrophils and no band neutrophils. His electrolytes were unremarkable, but he had blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 21 and creatinine (Cr) of 1.6 with no history of renal disease. (See Table for pertinent laboratory values.) A urine analysis was normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast was done to assess for renal stones; it was interpreted as normal per radiology.
He received fluids administered intravenously, hydromorphone, ketorolac, and ondansetron and felt significantly improved. He was discharged home with prescriptions and follow-up instructions for abdominal pain and instructed to return if his condition worsened. He returned to our ED the following day. On arrival, he complained of 2 hours of “crushing” midsternal chest pain described as an “elephant sitting on my chest” with “ripping” radiation from his front to this back associated with diaphoresis. He was uncomfortable and in severe painful distress and could not cooperate with the medical examination or with obtaining an electrocardiogram (ECG).
He initially received 3 mg of IV hydromorphone administered intravenously in order to evaluate him and obtain an ECG, which was normal. His vital signs were 35.9 °C (96.7 °F), 83 bpm, 16 rpm, BP 156/95 in both arms, and spO2 100% on room air (RA). He was profusely diaphoretic but his examination was otherwise unremarkable. Of note, he no longer had flank or abdominal tenderness.
He was taken immediately for a CT angiogram (CTA) of his chest/abdomen/pelvis to evaluate for aortic dissection. On laboratory diagnostics, he had a WBC count of 17.7 with 83% neutrophils, a normal troponin level, BUN and Cr of 26 mg/dL and 1.7 mg/dL, and a potassium level of 5.0 mEq/L (see Table for additional diagnostics). His CTA was interpreted by a radiologist as: “a segment of proximal left renal artery demonstrating significant focal stenosis/near occlusion, with severely delayed left nephrogram and only minimal left renal parenchymal enhancement…(the) stenosis appears to represent asymmetrical mural thickening and could represent an eccentric thrombus or focal thrombosed dissection”.
On review of the CTA results with the attending radiologist, the departments of interventional radiology (IR) and vascular surgery were both immediately consulted. Our patient was taken to the IR suite for acute intervention. Under fluoroscopic guidance, it was discovered that his left renal artery had dissected, and a stent was placed. A heparin infusion was initiated and he was admitted to our medical intensive care unit (MICU) for further monitoring. The rest of his hospital course was unremarkable with some improvement in his renal dysfunction. A transesophageal echocardiogram was negative for aortic dissection. He was discharged home after 4 days.