One 49-year-old male visited to the neurosurgical department for the intermittent headache lasting for 3 months. The cranial MRI revealed a sellar tumor, which reminded as pituitary adenoma . Thyroid function tests were performed after the patient was admitted into Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, which showed a significant increase in TSH, more than 150 uIU/ml (the normal range 0.34–5.5 uIU/m), FT3 and FT4 was lower than normal levels. Prolactin was slightly increased: 13.65 ng/ml (2.64–13.13 ng/ml). Because pituitary adenoma was clearly diagnosed while TSH was significantly elevated, TSHoma or central hypothyroidism caused by nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas was initially diagnosed. It was difficult to explain the decrease in FT3 and FT4 in TSHoma and central hypothyroidism, the multidisciplinary consultation was used and suspected that the patient had a primary disease of the thyroid gland. Thyroid ultrasonography showed diffuse destruction and nodular lesions of the thyroid gland. According to the endocrine findings and clinical manifestations, TSHoma with primary hypothyroidism was diagnosed. In addition, the prolactin of patient was slightly elevated, which may be caused by pituitary stalk effect. After multidisciplinary discussion, the treatment scheme was oral administration of levothyroxine (L-T4) at a dose of 75 ug daily, the tumor was excised by surgery until thyroid function was improved. After 4 weeks of oral administration of L-T4, the rechecked TSH was still very high (150 uIU/ml), then the tumor was removed by the transnasal endoscopic surgery, the boundary between the tumor and the normal pituitary gland was carefully identified during the operation, to protect the pituitary tissue, and remove the tumor in blocks and completely. After removing the tumor, the less leakage of cerebrospinal fluid was observed. Thus, the sellar floor was filled with a small amount of autologous fat to prevent the postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Postoperative re-examination of cranial MRI showed no residual tumor , and re-examination of thyroid function was shown with a significant decrease in TSH. The histopathological result was pituitary adenoma, and immunohistochemistry findings were shown in Table . The patient recovered uneventfully without complications and his headache symptoms were gradually improved. Oral administration of L-T4 was taken at a dose of 75 ug daily and thyroid function was closely monitored. Re-examination of thyroid function 20 months after surgery showed that FT3 and FT4 were in the normal range, and TSH decreased to the normal range. Thyroid function tests before the surgery and after the surgery are shown in Table .