A 69-year-old Chinese female presented to Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH) in the end of Oct 2020, complaining decreased vision in her left eye for 5 months and blurred vision with floaters in her right eye for 1 month. Her past medical history included bilateral phacoemulsification and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation performed in 2016. On presentation to PUMCH, her best correct visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.6 OD and NLP OS. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 13 mmHg OU. In the right eye, there was no obvious anterior chamber inflammation, and there were mild dusty opacity in the vitreous and punctate gray-white lesions in the retina. In the left eye, there were gray-white keratic precipitates (KPs), mild anterior chamber cells and flare, a large amount of white granular opacity in the vitreous and blurred fundus. B-scan ultrasonography showed mild vitreous opacities in the right eye and severe vitreous opacities with proliferative membrane, as well as detachment of retina and choroid in the left eye. The results of systemic examinations including head enhanced magnetic resonance imaging were normal.
Anterior chamber paracentesis was performed in both eyes. Aqueous humor Interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-6 levels were 251.2 and 56.7 pg/mL (ratio 4.4) OD, 858.4 and 499.2 pg/mL (ratio 1.7) OS. Diagnostic vitrectomy was performed in the left eye on November 9, 2020, very few atypical cells were found in the vitreous, but gene rearrangement and flow cytometry of vitreous were all negative. As the vitreous opacity deteriorated and the vision decreased quickly to 0.1, vitrectomy was performed in the right eye on December 7, 2020, which demonstrated the monoclonality of B cell for lymphoma cells in the flow cytometry test. Meanwhile, in the cerebral spinal fluid, the IL-10 level raised significantly (108.0 pg/mL) and myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MYD88L265P) mutation was detected. Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed as PVRL OU. The treatment regimen was intravenous rituximab 600 mg, once every 21 days for a total of 6 times, combined with oral zanubrutinib 160 mg twice a day. Local treatment was bilateral intravitreal MTX for 1 year (once a week for 4 weeks, once every 2 weeks for 4 weeks, once a month for 10 months, 16 times in total).
After intravitreal MTX once a week for three times, the BCVA was 1.0 OD, NLP OS. The fourth intravitreal MTX combined with paracentesis was performed on January 12, 2021, but the patient felt blurred vision in the right eye and redness, swelling and pain in the left eye a few hours later. When the patient presented, the vision of the right eye was hand motion, IOP was normal OU. Floating blood cells and a small amount of hyphema in the anterior chamber , moderate vitreous hemorrhage, and blurred fundus were found in the right eye, while the anterior chamber was full of blood in the left eye . The B-scan ultrasonography showed suspected vitreous hemorrhage in both eyes . The aqueous humor IL-10 levels were 2.59 pg/mL OD and 25.23pg/mL OS, which were significantly lower than before treatment. The blood routine and coagulation function were within the normal range, but the result of collagen-induced platelet aggregation test was 10%, which was much lower than normal (70∼94%). We then discontinued the use of zanubrutinib. Three days later, the result of collagen-induced platelet aggregation test increased to 20%, and then increased to 78% after another 4 days. The vitrectomy and silicon oil tamponade were performed in the left eye on January 22, 2021. After cleaning up the large amount of blood in the anterior chamber, we found that the IOL was dislocated to the anterior chamber. After the removal of IOL, the patient’s eye pain was greatly relieved, which may be caused by the stopping of IOL stimulation on the anterior chamber angle and the iris. When the patient presented 5 weeks after the onset of intraocular hemorrhage, the vision of her right eye increased to 0.6, IOP was 16 mmHg OD and 7 mmHg OS. Conjunctival congestion was found in her left eye, and the hemorrhage in both eyes was absorbed. The B- ultrasonography showed silicone oil filling and retinal detachment in the left eye . She continued the intravitreal MTX injection in the right eye and the systemic treatment. Zanubrutinib was stopped 3 days before the intravitreal injection and was continued 1 day after the injection. Three months later, the BCVA of the right eye increased to 1.0.