A 29-year-old man presented to the orthopedics department with progressive right wrist pain. He sustained a blunt injury caused by assault 3 days ago and initially evaluated in the emergency department. Radiographs of the wrist were obtained, and he was diagnosed with wrist sprain. He was prescribed with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory and muscle relaxants drugs, and a volar short arm splint was applied. He was referred to the orthopedics clinics when his pain did not respond to treatment. The splint was removed, and inspection showed wrist edema along with loss of the dorsal ulnar styloid prominence .
The wrist was tender to palpation, and the ulnar styloid process was not palpable at the dorsal aspect of the joint. He had mildly limited dorsiflexion and palmar flexion, and no forearm rotation. His previous X-rays, obtained 3 days ago in the emergency department, revealed an obvious UVD .
Closed reduction was attempted under local anesthesia, however failed due to extreme pain. A computerized tomography (CT) was taken for possible locked dislocation. Axial views and volume-rendered images of the DRUJ revealed volar dislocation of the ulnar head engaged with the sigmoid notch .
The patient was taken to the operating room and under general anesthesia, the ulnar head was reduced by forceful pronation. The DRUJ was stable during passive forearm rotation. A long arm cast was applied with the forearm in semi-prone position and kept for 3 weeks. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained to inspect possible injuries to the stabilizing soft tissues and showed incomplete triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) tear and bone impaction injury caused by engagement of the ulnar head to the sigmoid notch . The cast was removed at the 3 weeks, and rehabilitation was initiated. The 3-stage wrist rehabilitation program was prescribed for the patient: Progression to each stage was guided by pain response. The stages of rehabilitation were described as pain control and ROM, regaining wrist stability with ROM, axial loading on the wrist and neuromuscular control. The patient performed isometric strengthening of the DRUJ stabilizers, PQ, and extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU). Isometric exercises were applied to the ECU and PQ muscles. Once the patient was able to complete two sets of 10 repetitions of isotonic strengthening exercises without significant increase in pain, a variety of balance, weight-bearing, and coordination activities was performed. After 3 weeks, he reached full range of forearm supination and pronation without pain. At the last follow-up, more than 24 months after closed reduction, he was doing well without any pain or limitations in range of motion . Since the hospital outpatient service visits were limited due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient evaluated with a quick dash score (0) through online interview.