A 13-year-old Caucasian boy, from an urban area, started follow-up in our Pediatric Gastroenterology Department with a complaint of abdominal pain of 1.5 years’ duration. He presented periumbilical pain, associated with abdominal distension, diarrhea (three to eight episodes per day), without mucus or blood, associated with nausea and a 10 kg weight loss. He had no previous history of illness or hospitalization, and he presented good psychosocial and school development. He reported no respiratory symptoms and a chest X-ray was normal .
At admission, he was dehydrated, swollen, and presented diffuse tenderness with abdominal palpation on physical examination. Initially, celiac disease was discarded and upper and low digestive endoscopies were requested. The upper endoscopy was normal. A colonoscopy examination showed colonic segments with multiple confluent deep serpiginous ulcerations, covered with fibrin and friability at the touch of the device, suggesting Crohn’s disease . During the colonoscopy, biopsies were performed and histopathology revealed ulcerative chronic inflammation without any other findings, despite special staining for identifying fungal forms.
An abdominal ultrasound revealed a slight hepatosplenomegaly with increased abdominal lymph nodes and a small volume of ascites, suggesting a systemic disease. The results of the laboratory tests were: hemoglobin 11.7 g/dL; hematocrit 35%; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 53 mm/hour; C-reactive protein (CRP) 24.7 mg/L; alkaline phosphatase 63 UI/L; gamma-glutamyltransferase 9 UI/L; aspartate transaminase 12 UI/L; alanine aminotransferase 5 UI/L; urea 21 mg/dL; creatinine 0.42 mg/dL; and albumin 3.5 g/dL.
Basic infections of the GI tract were ruled out before putting our patient on biological therapy. A chest X-ray, serology for hepatitis B and hepatitis C, serology for HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), skin test for tuberculosis, fecal culture, and screening for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Clostridium difficile were performed and results were all negative. Since the endoscopic findings suggested Crohn’s disease, and the first biopsies only revealed chronic inflammation without evidence of specific infection, Crohn’s disease was considered and biological therapy was started. Our patient received a first dose of infliximab, which is an anti- tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and made no improvement. After the second dose, he got worse and started to have bloody diarrhea. Another colonoscopy with more biopsies was scheduled; histopathological analysis revealed ulcerative chronic inflammation with non-caseating granulomas and with fungal structures (budding forms) compatible with Paracoccidioides brasiliensis . He underwent intravenously administered and then orally administered trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole treatment, but he developed a drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome, thus requiring intensive care. Due to this drug intolerance, he was treated with amphotericin B and itraconazole; he showed clinical improvement and mucosal healing as shown by a follow-up colonoscopy .