A 27-year-old Asian male patient was referred to our hospital after experiencing pain in his right leg over a period of 3 months. He had no family and psychosocial history. His medical history is as follows. At the age of 20 years, he first visited the neurosurgeon’s office for chronic headache. No clinical findings were observed in his extremities. Head gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumor located in the left cerebellopontine angle . Surgery was performed for resection followed by histological evaluation of the tumor, which revealed a sheeting architecture containing round to polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm and many small clumps of collagen fiber. The tumor was diagnosed as CCM . When the patient was 23 years old, local recurrence of the tumor was detected adjacent to left foramen of Luschka. Re-resection was performed followed by radiotherapy 38.0 Gy in 10 fractions. No local recurrence and no symptoms were observed for the following 4 years.
At the age of 27 years, the patient complained of pain in his right lower extremity and required the assistance of a cane to walk. No muscle weakness, bowel dysfunction, or bladder dysfunction were detected. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association score (maximum score of 29 points) was 20 before the surgery. No intracranial tumor was detected. A lumbar MRI showed two intradural masses without “dural tail signs” at the L1 and L4/L5 levels . Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI images showed homogeneous enhancement of the masses . Surgery was performed 3 months after the patient’s first examination in our department. After T12-L1 and L4-5 laminectomy, tumor margins underneath the dura mater were identified using ultrasound, and the dura was split. Under the arachnoid membrane, the tumors were growing separately in the right L1 and L5 roots and no dural attachment was detected, mimicking schwannoma. Complete total resection of the tumors was performed after severing the afferent and efferent nerves. The tumor was covered with a capsule, and no adhesion to surrounding tissue was observed.
Histologically, the tumor showed sheeting architecture containing round to polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm and many small clumps of collagen fiber. Whorl formation and psammoma bodies were poorly formed . A few peripheral nerves were involved. Immunohistochemistry revealed nuclear loss of SMARCE1 expression in the tumor cells . The pathology of the intracranial CCM that occurred 7 years prior and this intraspinal CCM were similar .
The postoperative course was uneventful. The pain and numbness of the right lower extremity were completely alleviated. No recurrence was observed 2 years after surgery.