A 31-year-old Caucasian Georgian woman visited our clinic complaining of rapidly progressive painful proptosis of the right eye that had begun two weeks earlier. Approximately two months earlier, she had received antibiotics for sinusitis.
At presentation, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) for both eyes was 1.0 decimal 20/20. Slit-lamp and dilated fundoscopic examinations were normal, and there were no significant changes in the anterior and posterior segments of the eyes. There was no evidence of chorioretinal folds, optic nerve oedema, or pallor. Hertel exophthalmometry readings revealed a 5-mm protrusion of the right eye, but no restriction of eyeball movement or binocular diplopia. Her complete blood cell count was within the normal range. A computed tomography scan of the paranasal sinuses showed heterogeneous structural opacification of the ethmoidal, sphenoidal and frontal sinuses, mainly of the soft tissue; low-density opacification of the maxillary sinuses, mainly of the viscous fluid; and oval-shaped soft neoplastic tissue of 3.1 × 1.3 mm with sharp margins on the medial rectus of the right orbit that had caused anteriotemporal dislocation of the eyeball . Brain magnetic resonance imaging and angiography of the cranial vessels with an intravenous contrast agent identified right-sided proptosis and oval-shaped structure with highly dispersed protein content . There was no intracranial structural pathology, and a diagnosis of a retrobulbar abscess with inflammation of the paranasal sinuses was made.
Right-sided medial orbitotomy was conducted under general anaesthesia, and a 1 × 3-mm soft tumour was excised. Histomorphological analysis of the excised tissue revealed a “starry-sky” appearance characteristic of BL. Immunohistochemical evaluation of the tissue against a panel of markers, including CD20, CD19, CD79a, CD3, CD30, CD15, epithelial membrane antigen, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, and the ki-67 proliferation marker confirmed the diagnosis of idiopathic BL .
During the postoperative period, the patient developed oedema of the orbital tissue and eyelids, proptosis, external strabismus, and problems with eye movement and diplopia. She was referred to the Oncohematological Department. Her complete blood cell count was within the normal range, and there were no changes on a bone marrow biopsy. Cytological analysis revealed a negligible increase in lymphocyte count in the cerebrospinal fluid. Aggressive BFM-90 chemotherapy with methotrexate, ifosfamide, and dexamethasone was initiated and was administered every 20 days for six cycles.
Three months after the initiation of chemotherapy, strabismus and diplopia had resolved, and proptosis markedly decreased, although there was no change in her BCVA. A CT scan showed bilateral low-density opacification of the maxillary, frontal, and sphenoid sinuses and oedematous enlargement of the right medial rectus, but no opacification of the retrobulbar space.