A 38-year-old man presented to the emergency room at our institution with the complaints of dizziness and a near-syncopal episode. This episode was preceded by a 1-week history of nausea, vomiting, and dysarthria. He also reported a 2-month history of new headache. The patient denied any visual disturbances, hearing changes, recent seizures, loss of consciousness, weakness, or sensory changes. Medical history was significant for a diagnosis of TSC with mild mental retardation and seizures in the distant past as well as hypertension. The patient had had a cataract removed remotely. Physical examination revealed adenoma sebaceum on the patient's malar surfaces. Complete neurological examination revealed no focal deficits. The results of laboratory tests were within normal ranges. A computed tomography (CT) of the head from an outside hospital demonstrated a brain mass with high attenuation. The mass appeared adjacent to the left cerebellar hemisphere near the Foramen of Lushka and extending into the foramen magnum. The patient had mild hydrocephalus evidenced by the prominence of his ventricular system. Periventricular calcifications were consistent with his diagnosis of TSC . The patient was admitted for work-up of this brainstem mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast demonstrated deep cortical white matter changes typical of patients with TSC . MRI also showed an extra-axial, irregularly shaped, well-marginated mass with heterogeneous enhancement in the left aspect of the medullary cistern with displacement of the brainstem and cerebellar peduncle to the right . Further careful review of the imaging showed that the majority of the clivus also demonstrated uptake and enhancement of contrast. Increased T2 signal in the brainstem and cerebellum was consistent with edema. The patient was administered steroids and discharged with a plan to return to the hospital for elective removal of the brain mass.
The patient was taken to the operating room for a left far lateral approach for removal of the tumor. Upon opening of the dura and release of cerebrospinal fluid, the tumor could be seen under the arachnoid and appeared to originate intradurally. Several cranial nerves were adherent to the mass, eliminating the possibility of a total resection. During the operation, no connection between the intradural mass and the clivus could be appreciated. The tumor was carefully debulked within the limits of safety. A significant amount of cerebellar swelling was encountered during the case and ultimately led to early termination of the operation before subtotal resection could be completed. The patient was then transferred to the ICU. He remained intubated but was following commands with all four extremities. Postoperative MRI showed significant reduction of tumor burden from surgical debulking .
Grossly, the tumor was gray-tan in appearance. Microscopic examination of the tumor revealed plump, vacuolated cells within a mucinous matrix . Tumor cells were positive for pan-cytokeratin (pan-CK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), focally positive for S-100, and negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and neurofilament (NF). Less than 1% of nuclei labeled positively for Ki-67. These histologic and immunohistochemical staining characteristics were consistent with a diagnosis of chordoma. This diagnosis was unexpected given the location of the tumor both within the lateral medullary cistern as well as under the arachnoid.
Postoperatively, the patient developed dysphagia and required placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube as well as a tracheostomy. The patient also developed a pneumonia, which was treated with moxifloxacin on the recommendation of the infectious disease team. The patient's pneumonia resolved and his dysphagia improved, and he was discharged with plans to follow up with radiation oncology for radiotherapy of his residual tumor.