A 64 year old white male patient was admitted to our tertiary care hospital with dyspnoea, cough and malaise. Past medical history was significant for small-cell bronchial carcinoma (diagnosed 11 months prior) with lymph node, cerebral and adrenal metastases. He was treated with chemotherapy (cisplatin/etoposide) and radiotherapy due to cerebral and mediastinal progress. Second line immunotherapy was established with double checkpoint inhibitor therapy with ipilimumab/nivolumab and additionally dexamethasone (12 mg/d, started 1 month ago after seizure) because of cerebral edema as well as for immune-related thrombocytopenia under therapy with checkpoint inhibitors. There was a history of steroid-induced diabetes mellitus and subsegmental pulmonary emboli 10 months prior to presentation.
On clinical examination - after two cycles nivolumab/ipilimumab and still under dexamethasone - the patient was afebrile, hypotensive and normocardic. Pulmonary exam revealed reduced breath sounds bilaterally, poor oxygenation (oxygen saturation 91% with 2 L O2) and a respiratory rate of 19/min.
Laboratory examinations on admission revealed a markedly elevated CRP (424 mg/l) and LDH (520 U/l), slightly elevated alanine transaminase (61 U/l), exacerbated pancytopenia with anaemia (Hb 120 g/l), thrombocytopenia (82G/L) and leukocytopenia (2.1G/L) with normal granulocytes (absolute 1.3G/l) and lymphopenia (5%, absolute 0.1G/l). A chest CT-scan showed signs of pneumonitis with new tree-in bud pattern and peribronchially localized ground glass opacities . The bronchial mass was stable compared with a CT performed 3 weeks ago. Legionella antigen in urine was negative.
There was no clinical improvement despite improving signs of inflammation with antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and clarithromycin. Therefore bronchoscopy, which showed macroscopic erythematous lesions in the trachea, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were performed . Microscopically a lot of alveolar macrophages and some polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) were visible with normal respiratory flora, so BAL was perfectly consistent with a good sample of the lower airways with an acute inflammation. There was no bacterial or mycobacterial growth on routine culture. A viral respiratory multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR, AllplexTM Respiratory Panel 1–3 [Seegene)]) and antigen for Pneumocystis jirovecii were negative. Cytology revealed elevated cell count (833 × 106/L cells) and neutrophilic granulocytes (68.7%).
There was an extensive cytopathic effect including a positive immunocytochemical stain for HSV-1/2 suggesting HSV-infection in numerous cells . Fungal or malignant cells were not detected.
Retesting of bronchial secretions with non-quantitative HSV-PCR (Artus® HSV-1/2 QS-RGQ Kit (QIAgen)) detected HSV-1 (Ct value 18.97). Serology (Liaison®HSV-1/2 IgG, Liaison®HSV-1/2 IgM, DiaSorin) showed positive HSV 1/2 IgG (OD-index: 29.0; cut-off: 1.0) and borderline positive (OD-index: 0.97; cut-off: 1.1) IgM. Antiviral therapy with acyclovir 10 mg/kg body weight was started intravenously upon receipt of cytology 3 days after admission. The dose was transiently decreased to 5 mg/kg body weight for 1 day, but in light of reduced vigilance suggesting a possible affection of the central nervous system the dose was increased again to 10 mg/kg body weight on the following day.
Despite improvement of inflammatory parameters the patient continued to deteriorate clinically. With progressive cognitive deterioration cerebral HSV involvement was suspected but was not proven as a diagnostic lumbar puncture could not be performed due to severe and progressive thrombocytopenia (minimum 22G/L) which was attributed to the immunotherapy. A cranial MRI eventually showed progressive cerebral metastases as likely cause of deterioration.
Because of the significantly progressive underlying disease management was altered to palliative care after 10 days of acyclovir. The patient died 2 weeks after admission. No autopsy was performed.