The patient was a 69-year-old male with chief complaints of right-sided chest pain and intermittent hematuria. An intrahepatic mass was suspected based on ultrasonography, and the patient was referred to the internal medicine department of our hospital. Based on contrast-enhanced CT, the patient was diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma with a right-sided thoracic wall and bilateral adrenal metastases . The patient underwent a right-sided thoracic wall metastasis biopsy and was diagnosed with CDC and referred to our department. Upon admission, the patient had a frail appearance and exhibited a palpable, hard mass on the right side of the chest. We diagnosed CDC stage cT2N1M1 which was categorized according to the International Metastatic Renal-Cell Carcinoma Database Consortium prognostic risk categories as “poor risk”.
A combination of pembrolizumab plus axitinib was initiated. Axitinib was administered at 10 mg/day. Other than slight hoarseness, no obvious irAEs occurred. Oxycontin (10 mg/day) was administered for the right thoracic wall pain. Tumor shrinkage was observed 2 months after treatment initiation. In addition, the right chest pain decreased. Oxycontin was discontinued. The greatest tumor shrinkage was observed 4 months after treatment initiation, during which we evaluated PR . Although shrinkage was maintained for several months, tumor growth was observed and evaluated PD at 7 months after treatment initiation, which we evaluated PD . Forty milligrams of cabozantinib was selected as the second-line therapy. However, 1 month after initial administration, the patient experienced left upper extremity pain and difficulty in lifting. The patient was diagnosed with a pathological fracture due to left humeral metastasis. We discontinued cabozantinib, and humeral fixation was performed by an orthopedic surgeon. The CT was reviewed retrospectively, and the humeral metastasis was also visible during the previous treatment. Therefore, we planned to continue the cabozantinib without considering that this treatment may have been ineffective. Two weeks after humeral fixation, engraftment was confirmed, and cabozantinib was resumed at the same dose. One month after resumption (9 months after the start of treatment), imaging evaluation revealed no increase or decrease in tumor size. The treatment was continued at the same dose. However, the patient began to complain of fatigue. The cabozantinib dose was tapered to 20 mg every other day. Imaging performed 13 months after the start of treatment revealed tumor enlargement. Due to the magnitude of the patient weight loss, fatigue, and frailty, we concluded that proceeding with cabozantinib and subsequent treatments would be difficult for the patient. After a total of 14 months of treatment, we consulted with the patient and his family and decided to transition to optimal supportive care. The patient died 1 month later, 15 months after the initiation of treatment.