A 29-year-old man, in whom a VPS had been inserted at the age of 4 months to treat congenital hydrocephalus, presented in our clinic with altered state of consciousness and gait apraxia. The patient did not report other symptoms typical for raised intracranial pressure or shunt infection such as nausea, vomiting, meningism, or fever. His routine laboratory investigation was normal. Emergency computerized tomography (CT) of the head revealed a hydrocephalic ventricular system, suggesting a functional VPS failure . A shunt series showed a Codman-Hakimventil (pressure level: 90 mmHg) without evidence of shunt disconnection. However, radiographs of the abdomen revealed fecal retention and a striking distention of the right colon . Furthermore, the patient was operated on a week ago to treat adhesive small bowel obstruction in another hospital. The department of abdominal surgery was advisedly contacted. The performed CT of the abdomen showed a large amount of stool in the small intestine and colon, confirming the diagnosis of severe constipation. Therefore, the patient’s manifestation of shunt failure was attributed to his severe constipation. He was conservatively treated by administration of neostigmine. In the following, the neurological status of the patient improved continuously as his constipation resolved. Moreover, the CT imaging of the head demonstrated that the width of his ventricular system had returned to its previous size . Therefore, operative VPS revision was not necessary.
Further evaluation of the medical history of the patient revealed a similar situation in 2017. The patient underwent ileus surgery and was admitted to our hospital with suspected meningitis because of fever and alteration of consciousness 2 days after. The patient was immediately transferred to the intensive care unit and endotracheal intubation was required. A spinal tap was ensued, thereby excluding meningitis. A CT of the head showed an advanced hydrocephalus . Shunt series did not display a shunt disconnection but revealed an obvious meteorism and a right-sided pneumonia, which was treated by antibiotic. The patient’s condition started to improve after administration of antibiotics. In addition to the shunt series, a shuntogram (using a contrastive medium) was performed. It demonstrated a good peritoneal dissemination of the contrast medium. Therefore, no surgical shunt revision was necessary. Consequently, the valve pressure was reduced from 120 to 90 mmHg. This measure led to complete resolution of shunt dysfunction . The patient was extubated the following day with no neurological deficits.