A 44-year-old male, a non-smoker with no comorbidities, presented to us with complaints of cough for 6 months and fever for 2 months. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group score was 0. His computed tomography (CT) scan showed a heterogeneous left lower lobe mass 75 mm × 56 mm in size with a few adjacent nodules and a significant adjacent thickened pleura. Histopathology of the lesion was significant for adenocarcinoma grade III, thyroid transcription factor-1 positive .
A positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan revealed a highly active mass in the lower left lobe of the lung, accompanied by lymph node enlargement in the mediastinum and left level IV cervical region . Based on the AJCC 8th edition guidelines, the final diagnosis was T4N3M0 disease.
The patient was treated with two cycles of cisplatin 75 mg/m2 and pemetrexed 500 mg/m2. Followed by concurrent chemoradiation therapy using 55 gray units in 20 fractions with cisplatin 100 mg/m2 on Day 1 and vinorelbine 50 mg/m2 on Day 1, 8 and 15. The patient had a near complete response to treatment and remained on follow-up, with his subsequent scan showing no recurrent disease.
After 8 months of treatment, the patient presented with pain in the right side of the abdomen radiating to the back. CT abdomen was performed, which showed a progressive soft-tissue mass in the paraduodenal (peripancreatic area), inseparable from the uncinate part of the pancreas. Subsequently, endoscopic ultrasound and biopsy of the lesion were conducted, which showed a 46 mm × 31 mm mass involving the duodenum. Histopathology showed metastatic adenocarcinoma from the primary lesion with EGFR mutated at exon 21 and anaplastic lymphoma kinase rearrangement not detected . PET-CT showed hypermetabolic activity in the mass .
The patient was treated with palliative radiation therapy using 20 grey units in five fractions for pain control. The pain settled a week after the completion of the radiation therapy. Based on his EGFR mutation, he was started on erlotinib 150 mg once daily (by mouth). There was a significant response to treatment clinically and radiologically. After 6 months, the CT scan revealed disease remission . The patient reported no grade 2 or 3 side effects, including fatigue and diarrhoea on erlotinib. The patient remains on active follow-up and has been using the medication for the past 2 years.