A 36-year-old Chinese female presented to the ophthalmology department of Xinjiang 474 Hospital in May 2020. She was born to parents of fourth-degree consanguineous marriage. The patient's parents, siblings, and two sons all underwent tests including corneal topography, optometry, and a general physical examination, all of which showed no abnormal findings . The patient had severe osteoporosis, scoliosis of approximately 20° , hyperextensibility of the joints , anti-thyroglobulin antibodies, and an elevated parathyroid hormone level. The best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 14/20, with a manifest refraction of 4.50/-3.75 × 5. The best corrected visual acuity in the left eye was 12/20 with a manifest refraction of -5.25/-3.50 × 5. Intraocular pressure was found to be within normal levels (13 mmHg in both eyes). Slit lamp microscopy showed horizontal nystagmus in both eyes, significant bluish discoloration of the sclera, with decreased central corneal transparency . High-definition optical coherence tomography (HD-OCT) showed thinning of the entire cornea as well as a heterogeneous and mildly elevated stromal layer density . The posterior segment showed normal characteristics of the retina. Pentacam anterior segment tomography showed increased corneal curvature in both eyes, with a maximum keratometric power of 50.5 D in the right eye and 50.60 D in the left eye. The thinnest point of each of the patient’s corneas was assessed by Pentacam, which showed that the right eye had a minimum corneal thickness of 285 μm with astigmatism (-4.4D at 174 degrees) and the left eye had a minimum corneal thickness of 280 μm with astigmatism (-3.9 D at 11 degrees), with a white to white value of 11.6 mm in the right eye and a value of 11.7 mm in the left eye . Corneal densitometry results showed a significant increase in optical density in the 2-mm central area of the cornea. The values for the right and left eye were 29.3 grayscale units (GSU) and 30.6 GSU, respectively . IVCM results showed that corneal epithelial cell morphology in the central cornea zone was disturbed. Furthermore, nerve fibers under the basal cells were found to be disordered with visible and highly reflective fibrotic structures. The number of stromal cells in the anterior part of the cornea was significantly reduced, their cell structure was difficult to distinguish, and they had visible highly reflective fibrotic structures. Furthermore, the corneal stromal nerves were found to be thicker than average; with the nuclei of the posterior stromal cells showing uneven size distribution with no apparent activation state . Axial length values were determined to be 21.25 mm in the right eye and 21.13 mm in the left eye, respectively. Utilizing high-throughput sequencing, a homozygous mutation in PRDM5; NM_018699.2:c.247C > T(p.Arg83Cys) was detected. Therefore, the patient can be definitively diagnosed with BCS (OMIM:614,170). Since the patient had fair vision, we educated the patient about safety precautions and asked her to come for follow-up visits every 3 to 6 months. Fortunately, there was no significant decrease in the patient's best-corrected visual acuity, corneal topography curvature, corneal thickness, or corneal densitometry during the two-year follow-up period.