Mr. SL is a 63-year-old entrepreneur who has been running his own business for about 30 years, achieving success and admiration from his peers. However, due to the economic crisis, he started facing financial difficulties and had problems in carrying out his business, paying salaries to his long-lasting employees, and supporting his family. After trying many options to get support from banks, he realized that his company was in danger. Because of this situation, he started experiencing sadness, insomnia, loss of appetite, hopelessness, and irritability. He described how he saw no way out, and he described himself as in a tunnel with no real solution to his economic problems. Things got worse as the crisis eroded the money he had saved for emergencies.
He also experienced unimaginable physical suffering with unpleasant sensations at the hypochondrium (the upper part of the abdomen) related to anxiety, and he sometimes had dyspnea. Despite these symptoms, he tried his very best to continue and attend to his work activities. After almost 3 months of feeling depressed, he started thinking about suicide. He reported that suicidal ideation gradually became the companion that could provide help and relief from the pain he was experiencing. Having realized that he could rely on suicide as a way out from his problems, he experienced both the pressure of the precarious economic state and a state of relief when lousy news regarding his debts continued to arrive. He thought that he would not be alive anymore in a week or two. A peculiar aspect of his psychopathological state was an “ossimoric” feature, that is, while he was experiencing the sadness and despair for what has happened to his life, he was still able to enjoy some activities such as maintaining his status and playing at his tennis club, as well as going out for dinner and other leisure activities.
After experiencing depression with suicidal ideation for a while, he then concluded that suicide was the only option left. Although he had spent a pleasant bank holiday, early in the morning on returning to work, he thought that he had to put an end to his life. He went to his office, got his gun and started driving at random for hours. He had left two letters for his children explaining what was behind his choice. He had switched off his cellular phone, and his family lost his track oh him for hours. Just before the moment when he decided to use the gun for killing himself, he thought he wanted to speak to a friend to ask him to support his family. This friend proved to be skilled in maintaining a conversation and supporting the patients’ wish to live. The conversation on the cellular phone helped police to trace the patient. Police officers stopped him and brought to a psychiatrist who diagnosed major depression and the need for psychiatric hospitalization.
However, after a few days, he was able to decide whether to remain or discharge himself. After returning home, his children noticed the poor mental state of their father and sought a consultation with the author. The patient underwent a full psychiatric evaluation, as well as an in-depth assessment of suicide risk, with an analysis of his reasons for living versus his reasons for dying. Although the patient was depressed, an intervention for the treatment of depression would not have provided relief for this man. Lithium was prescribed, in association with small doses of an atypical antipsychotic at night, and regular sessions of psychiatric evaluation combined with sessions of psychotherapy were scheduled. This treatment proved to be of great relief for the patient, and he reported a feeling of being understood by my collaborators and by me. He improved dramatically over 2 months and, despite having the same economic problems that had led him to contemplate suicide; he never reported suicidal ideation again.