A 53 year-old female, with past medical history only notable for hypertension, initially presented to a rural hospital for evaluation of chest pain that was noted to be sharp, radiating towards her back, worse with inspiration and supine positioning, and relieved by sitting forward. This was associated with several days of malaise, poor oral intake, as well as diffuse myalgias. Initial vitals and cardiovascular exam were unremarkable, but ECG on intake demonstrated ST elevations and Q waves in the inferior leads, as well as T wave inversions in leads aVF . Troponin I was elevated to 0.49 ng/ml. Initial d-dimer was elevated to 4870 ng/ml, with a CT angiogram of the chest obtained being negative for both pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection. However, coronary calcifications were noted with an empiric diagnosis of ACS. As sublingual nitroglycerin did not provide relief, IV morphine was given along with aspirin 325 mg. IV heparin bolus and infusion were started. The patient was then transferred to our facility for further evaluation and management.
Five hours later, she arrived at our facility. Her physical exam was unchanged. She was noted to have an increased temperature of 38.4 degrees Celsius and elevated troponin I to 2.51 ng/ml. Further lab workup revealed elevations in ESR (42 mm/hr), high sensitivity C reactive protein (296 mg/L), and AST (57 U/L). ECG after transfer demonstrated persistence of the Q waves with resolution of the ST elevations in the inferior leads . Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated no wall motion nor valvular abnormalities. Given the continued presence and character of her chest pain, she was diagnosed with presumed myopericarditis. With IV heparin discontinued, she was started on naproxen and colchicine, and underwent further workup for a suspected inflammatory process with two separate blood cultures, ferritin (elevated to 2073 ng/ml), procalcitonin (elevated to 2.7 ng/ml), and a full autoimmune panel that was negative.
On the evening of hospital day #2, the patient experienced substernal chest pain, altered mental status, and new ST elevations on telemetry monitoring. ECG demonstrated ST elevations highest in the inferior leads, with minor elevation in the anterior as well as lateral leads . Upon further questioning, patient was diagnosed with right-sided homonymous hemianopsia. CT and the MRI of the brain revealed left-sided parietal-occipital hemorrhagic infarct as well as a small right frontal cortical stroke. Patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit for further monitoring and neurosurgery consultation. Soon after her transfer, blood cultures returned positive for methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). A transesophageal echocardiogram was then obtained, demonstrating a mobile 2.7 cm density attached to the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve that was intermittently prolapsing into the right coronary ostium . No wall motion abnormalities were noted. A diagnosis of infective endocarditis was made. IV nafcillin was started per infectious disease consult recommendations.
Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for assistance in management. As invasive angiography was contraindicated due to her aortic valve endocarditis and hemorrhagic stroke, a coronary CT angiogram was obtained demonstrating significant coronary artery calcifications without obvious focal stenosis. No masses on the aortic valve were noted . The patient remained hemodynamically stable and free of chest pain for 8 days after transfer to the intensive care unit, with no recurrence of ST elevations on telemetry monitoring. Given her attained stability, as well as the high risk of surgery given her hemorrhagic stroke, the initial plan was for medical treatment with IV antibiotics and no surgical intervention. However, on hospital day #10, patient suffered ventricular fibrillation arrest requiring CPR and defibrillation. After achieving return of spontaneous circulation, the decision was made to proceed with emergent aortic valve surgery given the concern that the origin of cardiac arrest was ischemic in nature from occlusion of the right coronary ostium by the vegetation. A high-risk aortic valve debridement was performed with removal of a 1.0 × 0.4 cm linear vegetation . Due to the emergent nature of the procedure as well as the lack of obvious focal stenosis on the prior coronary CT angiogram, bypass grafting was not performed.
Her post-operative course was complicated by ventricular tachycardia on post-operative day 2, requiring urgent coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention with a drug-eluting stent to a 90% stenosis of the ramus intermedius artery. No other significant lesions were seen, including a normal right coronary artery. . After recovery in the intensive care unit, she was transferred to inpatient rehabilitation for further recovery. Her course was further complicated by two readmissions. The first was 2 weeks after surgery for brain abscess managed conservatively with IV antibiotics. The second was 4 weeks after surgery for subsegmental pulmonary emboli managed conservatively without anticoagulation due to her recent hemorrhagic stroke. She developed a drug rash to nafcillin, requiring her antibiotic to be changed to IV vancomycin.
Since then, she has fully recovered from her hospitalizations. An ECG on two-month follow-up showed persistent Q waves in the inferior leads, as well as flat-to-downsloping ST segments and T wave inversions in the anterior and lateral leads, suggestive of prior infarction . However, a transesophageal echocardiogram 1 month after her surgery as well as a transthoracic echocardiogram 3 months after surgery revealed a normally functioning aortic valve with no signs of infection, as well as no wall motion defects. Her most recent encounter was on a one-year follow-up visit to cardiology, where she reported full recovery of her vision and no additional cardiac nor neurologic complications.