In April 2019, a 3-year-old boy was referred to our hospital with a 4-week history of recurrent fever (39.5 °C), progressive hepatosplenomegaly and pancytopenia. From birth to presentation, the boy displayed repeated pneumonia 3 times, each lasting approximately 2 weeks, which improved on antibiotics. The boy was hospitalized at 1 year of age for a perianal abscess and at 1.5 years of age for septicemia caused by Salmonella Typhimurium. There was no family history of immunodeficiencies, autoimmune diseases or early childhood deaths.
His initial physical examination showed normal blood pressure and high body temperature (38.5 °C). Remarkable lymphadenopathy was observed throughout the bilateral neck, with soft quality and clear boundaries. Laboratory tests revealed pancytopenia. Elevated levels of C-reactive protein, lactic dehydrogenase, serum ferritin, sCD25, triglyceride (5.99 mmol/L), IFN-γ, IL-6, IL-18, IL-1β, TNF-α and IL-10 were also observed. The fibrinogen level and NK cell activity were below the normal range . A bone marrow aspirate showed hemophagocytosis . Blood and bone marrow culture confirmed the presence of Salmonella Typhimurium. Serological tests for CMV, EBV, HSV and other pathogens were all negative results. Biochemical tests, protein content and cell count of the cerebrospinal fluid were within the normal range. An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed massive hepatosplenomegaly accompanied by a large amount of calcification. His family history was unremarkable.
Based on the presence of the 8 HLH-2004 diagnosis criteria of fever, splenomegaly, pancytopenia, hypertriglyceridemia, hypofibrinogenemia, histological evidence of hemophagocytosis, hyperferritinemia, elevated levels of sCD25 and low NK cell activity, a diagnosis of HLH was made. Due to the obvious increase in IFN, IL-10 and sCD25 levels, we considered the condition of HLH to be serious. Methylprednisolone (10 mg/kg/d) was given for 3 days, then at 5 mg/kg/d for 3 days, at 2 mg/kg/d for 3 days, and finally tapered to 1 mg/kg/d oral administration. However, due to the unknown etiology and significantly high level of CRP, serious infection could not be ruled out. Therefore, we did not add VP16 for chemotherapy. On day 3, septicemia was diagnosed based on the results of blood and bone marrow culture, and meropenem was given according to the results of a drug sensitivity test.
After 1 week of antiinfection and methylprednisolone treatment, the child’s situation improved. His hemoglobin increased to 106 g/L, his WBC count improved to 4.8 × 109 cells/L, and his platelet count was 189 × 109 cells/L. The levels of serum ferritin (697 ng/ml), sCD25 (567 pg/ml), IFN-γ (0.9 pg/ml) and IL-6 (3.06 pg/ml) decreased, and the fibrinogen level (1.56 g/l) increased . Two weeks after treatment, mutation analysis revealed that the patient carried a hemizygous mutation in the CYBB gene (c.302A > G (p. H101P)) encoding the gp91phox protein. The mutation rate of this locus is low in the normal population, and it has not yet been reported in the relevant literature. CGD was diagnosed based on repeated bacterial infection and genetic results. Therefore, the patient had IASH secondary to CGD triggered by Salmonella Typhimurium septicemia.