A 28-year-old male presented to the neurosurgery clinic with complaints of headache and left-sided weakness for 2 weeks. He had no previously known comorbidities. His past medical history was not significant for diabetes or any immunocompromised state.
General physical examination was unremarkable. On neurological examination, Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was 15. The patient was alert, awake, and oriented to time, place, and person. Pupils were bilaterally equal and reactive. No cranial nerve deficits were found. Motor examination revealed normal bulk and tone with power of 5/5 in upper and lower limbs bilaterally and the reflexes were normal. Sensory system was intact with no deficits.
The investigation done to arrive at a diagnosis included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The scan showed a large infiltrating heterogeneous mass involving the right parietal lobe. The mass was also seen to be extending to corpus callosum. Based on these features, a presumptive diagnosis of a neoplastic mass, most likely glioblastoma, was made. Images are shown in .
On further reviewing of DWI, there was homogenous diffusion restriction in the center of lesion. In addition, its aggressive behavior as evident by conventional sequences confirmed it to be a fungal abscess as shown in .
Subsequently, patient was planned for neuronavigation-guided craniotomy and excision of the space-occupying lesion. Intraoperatively, a firm-to-hard diffuse mass was noted in the right parietal lobe with mild-to-moderate vascularity. Postoperatively, patient recovered well and had no neurological deficits.
Microscopic examination of the resected lesion showed dense acute and chronic inflammation along with scattered granulomas and multinucleated giant cells. Rhinocladiella mackenziei was identified as the causative pathogen in the fungal culture as shown in .
Patient was started on antifungal therapy. The patient remained stable and afebrile. Occupational physiotherapy was done. Patient was discharged in a stable condition.