A 21 year old nulliparous female presented to the emergency department (ED) with the complaint of right lower quadrant abdominal pain. During her ED course, she admitted that her real reason for presentation was for examination of a mass that had been growing on her right labium. Following a brief physical examination by the ED physician, the gynecology team was consulted and verification was made of a right labial mass. The patient admitted that she first noticed a marble-sized “bump” on her right labium about six months earlier. The bump increased in size over the course of the six months until its current size on presentation. She reported being too embarrassed and afraid to address the growth but due to the polyp’s burdensome size she was forced to present for evaluation. She was on day two of her menstrual cycle and denied any nausea, vomiting or any constitutional symptoms. The patient denied any significant medical or surgical history. She denied any history of sexually transmitted disease or gynecology-related surgery. She reported a history of regular menstrual cycles with a menstrual index as follows - menarche at age 10, 30 day cycle intervals and 4 to 6 day cycle lengths with moderate flow. She had not been sexually active for over a year and was on no contraception. She was a non-smoker and denied alcohol or drug use. Her physical exam was remarkable only for a large, non-tender, skin colored, grapefruit-sized ulcerating pedunculated mass extending from the right labium majus. Transvaginal ultrasound showed normal anatomy of the uterus and ovaries but also described a broad-based encapsulated soft tissue mass of the right labium at the level of the clitoris. The patient was discharged home for follow up with outpatient Gynecology-Oncology. Physical exam by the oncologist again verified a right labial pedunculated mass. The stalk was noted to be vascular with an area of ulceration over the serosal surface of the polyp. There was no increase in the size of the mass with valsalva. An in-office procedure to amputate the polyp was completed at the oncologist’s office. The base of the mass was infiltrated with Xylocaine, 3 large Kelly clamps were placed across the base and the mass was excised. The pedicle was ligated with 0 Vicryl suture and adequate hemostasis was obtained. The patient received Percocet for pain control with instructions for a 1- week follow up appointment. At her follow up appointment the vulva was noted to be healing well and the stalk was retracted. The pathology report returned as a giant fibroepithelial stromal polyp and she was advised to return to her routine gynecologist for continued surveillance.