We present a 29-year-old Sri Lankan female doctor who presented to Teaching Hospital Peradeniya, with a history of on and off fever for 23 days. It was a low-grade fever that occurred several times per day without chills or rigors and was associated with arthralgia and myalgia. She was well in between fever spikes, and she did not complain of loss of appetite or loss of weight. Fever was associated with headache for five days duration. It was gradually worsening in severity with minimal response to paracetamol. There was associated phonophobia, but no photophobia, nausea, or vomiting. She had a background history of migraine, and the last attack was in 2018.
She was diagnosed with asymptomatic COVID-19 in October 2020 and was subsequently vaccinated with Oxford AstraZeneca (AZD-1222) vaccine. Two weeks after the 2nd dose, she got fever with left axillary pain, and was noted to have left side axillary lymphadenopathy on self examination. The pain and the nodes regressed within two days. She was clinically well for the following six weeks, until presenting with this episode of acute febrile illness. There was no history of sexual risk exposure, prior blood transfusions, or needle stick injuries. She had no features of connective tissue disorders, history of tuberculosis or unacceptable risk exposure.
On examination, she was a small built female with a body mass index of 20 kg/m2. She was febrile (39.3 ℃), ill and was in pain. She was not pale or icteric, and there were no skin rashes. She had no neck stiffness or focal neurological signs. The pupils were equally reactive to light. Her lung fields were clear, and there was no hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy on presentation. Her hemodynamic parameters were stable, with a pulse rate of 88 beats per second and a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg.
Her investigation results were as follows,
As her CSF was compatible with partially treated bacterial meningitis, she was started on intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g bd. Initially, she showed mild clinical improvement but developed spiking fever with painful axillary (mainly left side) and cervical lymphadenopathy. She did not have other organomegaly at that time. Ultrasound scan of the neck and axilla showed enlarged lymph nodes with relatively preserved architecture with thick cortex in bilateral level II and level I B with largest measuring 1.5 cm * 1.1 cm. Her abdomen was ultrasonically normal. Contrast-enhanced CT showed prominent, nonspecific, axillary, para-aortic, and mesenteric lymph nodes with enlarged, oval-shaped, peripherally enhancing cervical lymph nodes at level II B on the right side with suspicion of early suppuration or necrotizing lymphadenitis. Axillary lymph node biopsy showed nodal tissue with preserved architecture. Further, necrotizing regions with histiocytes and numerous karyorrhexis was noted in para-cortical distribution. Hyperplastic follicles were noted. Granulomas were not present. Evidence of Lymphoma was not present. The appearance of necrotizing lymphadenitis, more in favor of post-viral Kikuchi's disease was concluded and systemic lupus erythematosus, drug hypersensitivity, and other vasculitides had been suggested as differential diagnoses. Her bone marrow biopsy showed reactive marrow and Mantoux test, and the sputum for acid-fast bacilli was negative. The vasculitic screening was negative.
On day 38 of the illness, she was started on 45 mg of prednisolone daily. Two days after the commencement of steroids, she showed a good clinical response with reduction of the size of lymph nodes, settling of headache and fever. She was discharged with a diagnosis of Kikuchi disease complicated with aseptic meningitis, which was supported by lymphocytic pleocytosis with a negative CSF culture and necrotizing lymphadenitis in lymph node biopsy .