A 15-year-old Caucasian female with a history of smoking (10 cigarettes/day), multiple allergies and asthma was admitted to the Emergency Room due to respiratory failure in November 2020, following a four-days-history of dyspnoea associated with dry cough and no fever. She’d never been on treatment for her asthmatic condition due to partial improvement in adolescence and a low familiar compliance. She was started at home on amoxicillin-clavulanic acid by her general practitioner, but spontaneously decided to stop the antibiotical therapy after three days as she saw no improvement. At the admission, she presented severely dyspnoeic with a SatO2 of 75% and she was started on supplemental oxygen support at a flow rate of 3 l/min. Bilateral wheezes with prolonged expiration were present at lung auscultation. Her bloodwork showed WBC 20.000 cells/mcl (89% neutrophils) and a CRP of 0,4 mg/ml. As she was evaluated amid the COVID-19 pandemics, she underwent a first nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV2 PCR (polymerase chain reaction) assessment, which turned out negative. Her chest CT (performed at another hospital, where she was first admitted) showed a central ground glass pattern with peripheral sparing .
She was started on empirical antibiotic therapy with clarithromycin and ceftriaxone, initially intravenously and subsequently orally. She was also started on HFNC, systemic steroid and aerosol with salbutamol, ipratropium, and corticosteroids. Her clinical conditions improved within the first 48 h, with progressive reduction on oxygen support. At a second evaluation performed after 24 h, bloodwork reported WBC 14,710 cells/ µl (neutrophils 85%) and a CRP of 2,6 mg/dl. In consideration of her clinical presentation, the following microbiological tests were performed: nasopharyngeal swab for respiratory viruses, M. pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae, chronic germs and a Quantiferon-TB Gold test for MBT (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) and a second nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV2; the exams only came out positive for Rhinovirus, with absence of significant microbiological evidence explaining the radiological findings.
At the anamnestic recall, the patient revealed to be an e-cigarette smoker and an occasional marijuana user. Her mother reported her last joint was at the end of October and the patient disclosed she’d discontinued e-cigarette use one month prior to hospital admission.
Upon completion, further tests were performed: pulmonary function testing showed a restrictive pattern, without bronchodilator reversibility. Bronchial eNO (exhaled nitric oxide) was 3 ppb (normal reference value: < 20 ppb) and nasal eNO was slighlty reduced, with a probable influence of Rhinovirus on the latter result. The 6MWT (six-minute-walk-test) showed a slightly reduced functionality. It's significant to specificy both for the pulmonary function testing and 6MWT that the patient was slightly overweight with a sedentary lifestyle.
Furthermore, in order to re-evaluate the history of multiple allergy to inhalant allergens, total IgE and specific IgE were tested with evidence of raised total IgE 419 kU/l (normal reference value: < 100.0 kU/l). Before discharge, given the clinical stability, six days after the admission, a chest radiograph was performed in order to monitor the radiologic improvement. The chest radiograph showed bilateral hilar opacities (virtually superimposable to the CT findings). A final bloodwork assessment, performed 7 days later, showed WBC 16,120 cell/ml, neutrophils 12,240 cells/ µl, lymphocites 2340 cells/ µl, CRP 0,06 mg/dl. She was discharged after 7 days with a planned follow-up at the pulmonary clinic after one month in order to assess the clinical-radiological evolution of the case. She was also prescribed with prophylactic aerosol bronchodilator/corticosteroid and antileukotriene. In total, she followed a 14-day course of clarithromycin and a 7-day course of third generation intravenous cephalosporin. Due to the presence of acute respiratory failure, evocative imaging (“central ground grass pattern with peripheral sparing”), the history of vaping, absence of significant microbiological evidence and signs of aspecifical inflammation the diagnosis of EVALI was made. At the clinic follow-up one month later, the girl reported she's stopped smoking tobacco and e-cigarette. She reported she'd been following her prophylactic therapy as prescribed.
A toxicological exam on urine was performed, turning out negative.
Blood exams showed WBC 7580 cells/ µl, neutrophils 4500 cells/ µl, lymphocites 2340 cells/ µl, CRP was negative, renal, hepatic function and electrolytes were normal. As a first immunological assessments, total IgA, IgM, IgG, lymphocites and IgG subsets were tested: all results were in the norm. A sweat test was also performed, turning out negative. Complimentarily to the microbiological exams that were performed during hospitalization, serology for C. Pneumoniae and M. Pneumonia was done as well, with a positivity in IgG for M. Pneumoniae. The patient's case was discussed with a rheumatologist, infectivologist and radiologist. It was decided to schedule a new appointment in order to repeat the CXR (chest X-ray) scan imaging if in good health. The therapy with bronchodilator/corticosteroid was prolonged.
The patient reported a significant improvement 48 h after she’d started the treatment.
Her mood improved along as her willing to communicate and disclose important information (such as marijuana abuse) and be active part of the healing process. She did not report any adverse reaction from the treatment.