An 8-year-old female presented to the neurosurgery department with intermittent headache, nausea and vomiting for 8 days. Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. She had no familial cancer or extracranial tumor history.
The brain MRI revealed a heterogeneous mass in left parietal lobe which was predominantly hypointense on T1 , inhomogeneous hyperintense on T2 , and iso-intense on fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) . After the administration of contrast, the mass displayed heterogeneous enhancement . The patient underwent a craniotomy via left parietal approach, which revealed a well-defined, soft, gray and gelatinous lesion attached to the falx cerebri (5 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm). The postoperative course was uneventful and postoperative CT scan showed that the intracranial tumor had been completely removed .
Light microscopy examination revealed sarcomatous neoplasms predominantly presented with spindle-shaped cells in a fascicular pattern . There was a clear boundary between tumor and peripheral brain tissue . In some areas, a myxoid stroma matrix was found with a few multinucleated tumor giant cells . The nuclei of the tumor cells were with brisk mitotic activity . Prominent cytoplasmic eosinophilic globules were easily identified .
Immuno-histochemical staining was performed to diagnose and identify the direction of tumor differentiation by Ventana Benchmark Ultra automated stainer (Ventana, Tucson, Arizona, USA) . Firstly, we labeled markers commonly used in the diagnosis of meningioma and non-meningothelial mesenchymal sarcoma. But the tumor cells were only stained positively for Vimentin and had focal expression of Desmin. Considering that the primary location of the tumor was intracranial, the diagnostic markers for neuroepithelial tumors were also stained. The tumor cells were stained positively for some neurogenic makers, for instance S100, Syn, MAP2, NFP, Nestin, CD56, and SOX2, which highlighted the neural lineage differentiation of tumor cells. However, the tumor cells were negative for GFAP, OLIG2, CgA, and SOX10. It also failed to provide strong diagnostic evidence. The possibility of rare tumors began to be considered. INI1 and BRG1 were retained. The DICER1 protein immunostaining was extensively positive in the tumor cells, indicating the high possibility of DICER1 mutation. Moreover, though the frequent nuclear positivity of TLE1, loss of H3K27me3 and loss of ATRX expression in DCS has been reported [, ], it was not observed in this case. In addition, the P53 expression was negative. The tumor cells displayed with a large amount of thin reticulin fibers . In summary, a diagnosis of primary intracranial spindle cell sarcoma with neurogenic and myogenic differentiation, possibly associated with DICER1 mutation, was favoured.
Next, WES was performed in surgical formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues and paired normal control (peripheral blood) in order to determine whether this patient harbored somatic DICER1 mutation and other genetic variants. In brief, WES analysis sequencing libraries were generated using Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon V6 kit (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). DNA libraries were sequenced on Illumina Hiseq platform and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated and cleaned. The reads were mapped to the reference human genome b37 by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) software . The identification and filter of SNPs followed the workflow of GATK . The parameters were set as default. The somatic mutation of DICER1 p.E1813D (c.5439G > T, VAF: 76.47%) located within the Ribonuclease III domain was detected. The loss of heterozygosity (LOH) event in DCIER1 was identified, which caused by deletion of the wild-type allele. And other mutations frequently mutated in DCS were detected, including TP53 mutation (c. 560-2A > T, 81.29%) and RAF1 mutation (p.R191T, 40.96%) which was predicted to cause activation of the MAP kinase signaling pathway. Moreover, several sarcoma-associated gene mutations were found, including AR mutation (p.G473del, 11.11%), AXL mutation (p.T45P, 8.11%), and ETV5 mutation (p.F11Y, 33.33%). Hence, with DICER1 mutation accompanied by LOH and several DCS frequent mutations detected by WES, a final diagnosis of DCS was established.
The result of analysis based on WES indicated that the tumor presented a high level of tumor mutational burden (TMB, 5.63 Mut/MB) as reported before , while showing no microsatellite instability (MSI). In addition to the mutations described above, 158 other somatic alterations were detected. To identify the potential molecular function of these variant genes, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) analysis using DAVID website . The parameters were set as default. The result of GO analysis showed that mutated genes in this case were mainly involved in chromatin organization (SATB1, ATAD2 and CHD4), neuron development (TENM4, SECISBP2 and HS6ST1), and histone deacetylation (SIN3B, CHD4 and MTA2) processes . Meanwhile, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed as previously described , but we did not find any gene fusions.
Subsequently, the patient received postoperative radiotherapy (60 Gy/30f) with the following cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and vincristine for the first, third, fifth and seventh chemotherapy cycles. In the second, fourth, sixth and eighth cycles, ifosfamide and etoposide were used for chemotherapy. After eight cycles (median duration of 21 days among cycles) of combination chemotherapy, brain MRI revealed no evidence of tumor recurrence at the 19-month follow-up . At the 21-month postoperative follow-up, no clinical symptoms were observed.