An asymptomatic, 68-year-old Japanese woman with no significant past medical history was found incidentally to have a low-echoic nodule in the pancreatic head via abdominal ultrasonography. No endocrine tumors or diseases were detected in any of her family members. Her father died of stomach cancer. She neither smoked nor drank alcohol. Her blood pressure (127/69 mmHg) was well controlled via antihypertensive drugs. She was slightly obese (body mass index = 25.8 kg/m2). Physical examinations did not show any abnormalities. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy did not detect any lesions in the stomach or duodenum. Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a 21.6 mm diameter, low-echoic nodule in the pancreatic head. No dilation of the biliary or pancreatic duct was detected. On contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans, the above-described lesion was peripherally enhanced during the arterial phase and was weakly and heterogeneously enhanced during the portal phase . In addition, CT scans identified an 8-mm mass in the pancreatic tail with a well-defined border and marked enhancement, and a 12-mm mass in the left adrenal gland with heterogeneous enhancement. On fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (18F–FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, the mass in the pancreatic head demonstrated a high 18F–FDG uptake with a maximal standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.8 , which implied a potential for malignancy. The masses in the pancreatic tail and the left adrenal gland exhibited negative 18F–FDG uptake. All the laboratory data was within normal limits, including serum tumor markers, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9), pancreatic cancer-associated antigen-2 (Dupan-2), s-pancreas-1 antigen (Span-1), pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (Pro-GRP), and neuron-specific enolase (NSE). Pancreatic endocrine hormones were also within normal limits. Needle biopsies from the pancreatic head and tail did not provide a sufficient amount of materials for a pathological diagnosis. The patient underwent pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with lymph node dissection, distal pancreatectomy, and left adrenalectomy.
DNA was extracted from a peripheral blood sample and sequences corresponding to exons 2–10 of the MEN1 gene, exons 1–3 of the VHL gene, and exon 16 of the RET gene were PCR amplified. The PCR products were directly sequenced using the BigDye Terminator v1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Life Technologies, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and analyzed on an automated sequencer (3130xl Genetic Analyzer, Life Technologies).
Macroscopic examination revealed a poorly demarcated, solid, yellowish-white tumor, measuring 22 × 22 × 17 mm, in the head of the pancreas . Microscopically, the tumor was composed of an admixture of three cell types: epithelioid cells, ganglion-like cells, and spindle cells . The epithelioid cells, the major component of the tumor, were rather uniform in size and formed small nests , exhibiting fine granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and round-to-ovoid nuclei with stippled chromatin. This component of the tumor showed vascular, perineural, and peripancreatic adipose tissue invasion. The ganglion-like cells, the smallest component of the tumor, had vesicular nuclei, conspicuous nucleoli, and an abundance of cytoplasm . The spindle cells exhibited thin, elongated, wavy-shaped nuclei resembling Schwann cells and were arranged in intertwining fascicles. Mitosis was not conspicuous, and foci of intratumoral necrosis were not observed. The surgical margins were negative for tumor cells. Tumor tissue, composed of all the three cell types, also showed metastasis to a peripancreatic lymph node .
The immunohistochemical findings of the three components are summarized in Table . The epithelioid cells were positive for chromogranin A , synaptophysin, and pancytokeratin (AE1/AE3) but negative for catecholamine-synthesizing enzymes (tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine β-hydroxylase, dopa decarboxylase, and phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase). The ganglion-like cells were positive for synaptophysin and chromogranin A . Some of these cells were weakly positive for neurofilament, pancytokeratin, and phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase. The spindle cells were positive for S-100 protein and neurofilament. The Ki-67 labeling index (LI) of the tumor cells was 0.3%, with no apparent difference among the three cell types. The immunohistochemical features of the metastatic lesion were identical to those of the primary tumor.
We also investigated the immunohistochemical expression of hormonal products and hormone receptors . Somatostatin receptor (SSTR) 2A was expressed on the cell membranes of more than 50% of epithelioid cells , which was defined as a score of 3 . SSTR2A expression was also detected in a small number of ganglion-like cells . The epithelioid cells and some ganglion-like cells were positive for progesterone receptor (PgR). All the three cell types were negative for pancreatic polypeptide (PP).
A well-demarcated, grayish-white tumor, 7 × 7 mm in size was found in the pancreatic tail. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of round-to-columnar cells with uniformly round nuclei, a salt-and-pepper chromatin pattern, and an eosinophilic, finely granular cytoplasm, arranged in trabecular and ribbon-like patterns and accompanied by fibrous stroma . There was no evidence of mitotic figures, necrosis, or lymphovascular invasion. Immunohistochemical examination showed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin . The Ki-67 LI was 0.5%. Accordingly, the tumor was diagnosed as a pancreatic NET G1.
Table also shows the results obtained from the immunohistochemical evaluation of hormonal products and hormone receptors. The tumor cells were diffusely positive for glucagon and PgR, but negative for PP.
Macroscopic examination showed that the nodular lesion in the left adrenal gland was 15 × 12 mm in size, well-circumscribed, and with a yellowish-tan coloring. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of both spongiocytic cells with a clear lipid-rich cytoplasm and lipid-poor compact cells with an eosinophilic cytoplasm . There was no evidence of mitosis, tumor necrosis, or vascular invasion. The pathological diagnosis was an adrenocortical adenoma. The surgical margins were negative for tumor cells.
DNA analysis of a peripheral blood sample showed no mutations in exons 2–10 of the MEN1 gene, exons 1–3 of the VHL gene, and exon 16 of the RET gene.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. No signs of recurrence or metastasis were detected during a 1-year follow-up period.