A 30-year-old German female semi-professional tennis player presented with immobilizing groin pain during sporting activities. Clinical examination (impingement and labral tests), radiography, and high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hip revealed a FAIS of cam type accompanied by a labral tear . After positive intraarticular infiltration test, the patient underwent hip arthroscopy by a highly experienced hip surgeon at a nationwide reference center.
The patient was positioned supine in a standard hip distraction system (Arthrex®) with 30-cm foam padded perineal post and well-padded traction boots . Regional anesthesia block was not carried out, according to our standard. Hip arthroscopic labral repair with two suture anchors was performed . Specific cartilage therapy or pincer correction was not indicated. Once central compartment work was completed, traction was released after 30 min. Cam resection was done in the peripheral compartment (30 min). After skin closure, periportal local anesthesia was applied.
Postoperative X-rays showed a correct spherical femoroplasty . Physiotherapy started immediately, including continuous passive motion. Pain level was normal during hospitalization, with discharge at the third postoperative day.
Physiotherapy (three times/week), lymphatic drainage, and partial weight-bearing (15 kg) were performed correctly. Pain medication, ossification (celecoxib 100 mg 1–0–1), and venous thromboembolism prophylaxis were taken daily.
Three weeks postoperatively, the patient presented with a cold, blue, swollen, and painful lower right leg (VAS 7.5/10) . Neurological examination revealed mild paresis of foot extensor and flexor (4/5), brisk muscle reflexes, a temperature difference, and paresthesia in the toes. Deep vein thrombosis and arterial insufficiency were excluded by vascular surgeon. Blood test was inconspicuous. No previous illnesses are known. The patient was concerned that she could not do sports again.
In conclusion, the diagnosis of a fulminant CRPS type I was confirmed by two independent neurologic and one anesthetic specialists. Fortunately, the interdisciplinary cooperation was uncomplicated. Immediately, therapy was accommodated and intensified: Daily physiotherapy with free range of motion and return to full weight-bearing. Multimodal pain management including nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ibuprofen, 400 mg 1–1–1) and neuropathic pain medication (gabapentin: week 1–2, 300 mg three times a day, week 3–4, 200 mg three times a day) was performed. The patient was compliant.
In the clinical and neurological follow-up at 3, 6, and 9 months later, the patient’s CRPS symptoms improved constantly . Clinical outcome scores were obtained preoperatively—1 month (CRPS maximum) postoperatively—12 months postoperatively via Hip Outcome Score (HOS: 72.2–8.3–83.3), 33-item International Hip Outcome Tool (iHOT-33: 60–25.4–80.93), and visual analog scale for pain (VAS: 6–7.5–0) . After 12 months, a delayed (compared with our normal FAIS outcome) but finally full return to sports including competition level (tennis) could be achieved with high patient satisfaction until last check-up 19 months postoperatively .