A 37-year-old Chinese female with a history of primary Sjögren syndrome presented with progressive unsteady gait for 3 months. She first presented with inflammatory arthritis involving bilateral shoulders, wrists, hands, knees, and feet in 2014. She also had sicca syndrome, and she tested positive for Schirmer’s test in both eyes. Her anti-SSA was positive. Laboratory tests were positive for speckled-type antinuclear antibodies and rheumatoid factor. Anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (anti dsDNA) antibody test was negative. Assay for antiphospholipid antibodies (anticardiolipin and anti-B2 glycoprotein), SS-B/anti-La, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen (Hbs antigen), and hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody were all negative. She was diagnosed as PSS and treated with prednisolone, hydroxychloroquine, and methotrexate. One year later, she developed bilateral lower limb numbness and a nerve conduction study showed evidence of mononeuritis multiplex involving bilateral tibial and peroneal nerves. She was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone leading to full neurological recovery later.
In August 2016, she presented with bruises, thrombocytopenia (platelets 5 × 103/µL) and leukopenia (total white cells (TWC): 3.3 × 103/µL). She underwent further workup, and bone marrow aspiration and trephine (BMAT) showed increased megakaryopoiesis, which was suggestive of peripheral destruction of platelet. B-lymphoproliferative studies showed no evidence of clonal B-lymphoproliferative disorder. Computed tomography (CT) of the neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis revealed multiple prominent intraparotid, cervical, left supraclavicular, and bilateral axillary lymph nodes; posterior nasopharynx diffuse bulkiness was likely due to lymphoid tissue. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of posterior nasal space demonstrated scattered lymphoid cells likely due to florid reactive lymphoid proliferation. She was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 1 mg/kg/day and followed by prednisolone 70 mg with gradual tapering dose. Her blood counts normalized subsequently. In 2017, she was treated for herpes zoster infection.
In January 2018, she had palpable cervical lymph nodes. CT scan reported multiple prominent lymph nodes in the neck and diffuse enlargement of the parotid glands. The large right-sided intraparotid mass was markedly reduced. The axillary lymph nodes noted previously had also reduced. However, interval development of multiple pulmonary nodules with areas of consolidation were seen. There were stable cystic changes in the lungs. Biopsy of the posterior nasal space showed atypical lymphoid infiltrate. Flow cytometry of the posterior nasal space reported intermediate-size, kappa-restricted B-cells along with increased plasma cells, suggestive of marginal zone lymphoma. PET scan revealed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid bilateral cervical, and right intraparotid nodes were suspicious for disease. Bilateral multiple minimal to intensely FDG-avid pulmonary nodules of varying sizes were seen. Subsequently, she refused further interventions and was discharged with hydroxychloroquine 200 mg, prednisolone 7.5 mg, and calcium carbonate 1 g daily.
There was history of nonadherence to medical therapy since 2014. She was not under rheumatology follow-up since March 2018. She only took 5 mg of prednisolone, 500 mg of calcium carbonate, and thyroxine 100 μg daily from her general practitioner after she was noted to have hypothyroidism.
She presented to us in 2019 with 3 months history of unsteady gait and tremors over all four limbs. There was no family history of gait disturbance or familial history of neurological disorders. The patient had no exposure to toxins such as alcohol. She denied smoking and recreational drug usage. She was married with no children. She lost her job as a clerk since she acquired unsteady gait. There was no known food intolerance, medication allergy, or significant past surgical history.
On examination, the patient was afebrile and normotensive with a pulse rate of 80 beats per minute. Respiratory, cardiovascular, and abdominal examinations were normal. Her neurological examination revealed ataxia. She was unable to walk without assistance. She also had dysmetria, dysarthria, and intention tremor of the four limbs, especially her hands. Other motor and sensory examinations were normal. Her deep tendon reflexes were normoactive, and her plantar responses were flexor bilaterally. She had horizontal nystagmus and titubation. Examination of the cranial nerves did not reveal any abnormalities. There was Jaccoud deformity of both hands with limited range of movement of the right wrist. She did not have active synovitis. Left parotid swelling was present. There was no lymphadenopathy.