The patient was a 62-day-old female infant who was referred to our hospital’s pediatric outpatient clinic with the complaint of fever and poor feeding since two days beforehand. Since the appearance of fever, she had been prescribed Acetaminophen drops, but her symptoms persisted until admission. During this period, the patient had no sneezing or coughing. The patient’s 28-year-old mother had given birth to the patient through normal vaginal delivery (NVD) after a term pregnancy, and the patient’s birth weight had been 3200 grams. The patient had been fully immunized, except for the vaccination administered at an age of two months old. The mother’s whole pregnancy had elapsed without any specific problem. From her birth until the day she was admitted, the patient had not experienced any health issues.
During physical examination, the infant appeared ill but not toxic. Rectal temperature, heartbeat, and respiratory rate were recorded as 38.8, 123, and 42, respectively. No lesions were observed during a physical examination of the patient’s skin. No conjunctivitis, lacrimation, or rhinorrhea was discerned during a head examination. The otoscopic exam was normal bilaterally. The examination of the patient’s oral cavity and pharynx revealed a mild erythema with abundant dark exudates on pharynx and right tonsils. The soft palate appeared normal and no petechia was found. Multiple right-sided submandibular lymphadenopathies with 1 × 1-centimeter size were found during an examination of the patient’s neck. The physical examination was not significant otherwise.
The infant’s mother mentioned that she herself had been suffering from sore throat and fever. She complained of malaise and denied having rhinorrhea, sneezing, and coughing. The mother’s vital signs were a blood pressure of 120/80, a heart rate of 79 bpm, a respiratory rate of 14 per minute, and an oral temperature of 38.5°C. She had no tegumentary lesions and her eyes, ears, and nose examinations were normal. The pharynx and uvula were erythematosus, and the posterior pharynx and the pharyngeal tonsils were covered with exudates. The rest of the mother’s physical exam was normal.
Considering the patient’s clinical findings, paraclinical examinations were requested. The complete blood count results showed 16,000 WBC (neut: 70%, lymph: 20%, eos: 5%, mixed: 5%), with a blood sedimentation rate (ESR) of 24 mm/hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was negative. Throat swabs were obtained from the mother and the infant, and the collected samples were cultured in sheep blood agar plates (HiMedia, India). After a 24-hour incubation period, immobile, catalase-negative, oxidase-negative, Gram-positive cocci colonies grew in chains. The cocci were positive in the pyrrolidonyl arylamidase (PYR) test and showed complete hemolysis, which represents Streptococcus pyogenes.
Since she showed no improvement during this period, the patient was given 200,000 units of penicillin, which were injected intramuscularly. The mother was also treated with a single dose of intramuscular penicillin benzathine G, at a dose of 1,200,000 units. The next day, our patient’s fever disappeared, and the clinical symptoms of the mother improved after penicillin administration. One week later, a second culture of the throats of the mother and the infant came back negative for Streptococcus pyogenes.