A 58-year-old female presented to our hospital with complain of bilateral knee pain with the left side worser. The patient experienced progressively worsening pain on weight-bearing activities. The pain gradually increased over the course of 35 years to the present state, with the inability to perform her activities of daily living. She had history of more than one episode of patellar dislocation in her left knee during her junior school when she was 14 years old, which was treated conservatively. She had no associated complains of other joint involvement and no family history of rheumatoid arthritis.
On clinical examination, both her knees were markedly tender and effused, with the left side being more symptomatic. The knee range of motion was severely restricted on the left side with a movement arc of 35–100° compared to the right side of 10–100°. Patellofemoral crepitus was felt throughout the range of motion. Pre-operative knee society score (KSS) was 25 on bilateral sides, quality of life assessed using japan knee osteoarthritis measure (QOL-JKOM) was 68 and visual analog scale pain scale (VAS)-8 on the left side . The clinical and radiological examination of Hip and Spine was normal with bilateral Hallux Valgus noted in the foot. The patient was evaluated for inflammator y arthropathy with the inflammatory blood parameters and RF factor in the normal range.
Osteoarthritis was Kellgren-Lawrence Grade 4 with a concave shaped patella on radiological evaluation and the femoral-tibial axis was 166° with a Q-angle of 13° . The patella was thickest at 12 mm superomedially and thinnest at 5 mm centrally on computed tomography (CT) imaging .
The knee was exposed using a midline incision followed by a medial parapatellar arthrotomy . On everting the patella, an egg-shell like morphology devoid of cartilage cover was found.
After the bone cut of distal femur and proximal tibia, the posterior condyle of the femur was cut using by the modified gap balancing technique. An autologous cortical bone was harvested from proximal tibial cut and preserved for bone grafting.
Using the ROM/Self adjustment method, the unsecured tibial tray could seek its own rotation on the cut surface of proximal tibia with the femoral trial, patella relocated with trail in-situ and medial arthrotomy held by three tissue clamps followed by flexion/extension cycling movements of the knee . The rotational axis was marked on the proximal bone cut surface of tibia and was confirmed more externally rotated compared to the previously drawn Akagi’s line .
Then, the autologous bone from proximal tibia was reshaped to match the patellar defect . The graft was inlaid in the defect after curetting the surface of cartilage and augmented with three cortical cannulated screws of 16 mm to the patella. The final thickness of the patella after grafting was 16 mm on which a 32 mm size, 8.5 mm thick patellar button trial implanted after strategically placing the peg holes based on pre-operative planning by the Zedknee system (LEXI, Tokyo, Japan). The patellar tracking was reconfirmed with passive flexion and extension of the knee joint after temporarily fixing the tibial trial component as per the previously determined axis without lateral release.
Cemented posterior stabilized TKA (Zimmer Persona) was implanted with tibial component orientation based on the ROM/Self-adjustment method. The patella was resurfaced with a 32 mm button with cement in strategically placed peg holes avoiding the screws.
The patient received compression stockings, mechanical calf pumps, and enoxaparin as once a day for post-operative thromboprophylaxis. She underwent the same post-operative physiotherapy protocol as other TKA patients in the institution. Continuous passive motion from 0° to 60° was started on the day of operation followed by 0° to 90° on post-operative day (POD) 1, and then 0° to maximal flexion as tolerated from POD 2 onward. Full weight bearing was allowed immediately postoperatively.
At 1-year postoperatively, her KSS functional score improved to 90 and QOL-JKOM improved to 8. Her VAS pain score reduced to 0 and she could return to her work. The quadriceps strength and knee range of movement improved drastically with an arc of 0–135° of flexion with no patellofemoral crepitus. At 1- year, the patient could kneel and squat without pain with radiographs revealing no loosening . Follow-up CT at 1-year revealed consolidation of the bone graft with maintained patellar thickness and freely able to perform kneeling activities .