A 66-year-old female patient, with a history of hypothyroidism and essential hypertension, presented at the emergency room of Baotou Central Hospital in August 2021 with persistent pain for the previous 10 h. In addition, Murphy’s sign was revealed in the physical examination. The laboratory studies of the patient showed a higher white blood cell (WBC) count (16.19/L) and elevated aspartate aminotransferase (463 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (641 U/L), total bilirubin (66.5 µmol/L), direct bilirubin (40.1 µmol/L), and indirect bilirubin (26.4 µmol/L). Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed a coarse-walled gallbladder with multiple calculi. A clinical diagnosis of acute cholecystitis was supported by computed tomography findings of gallbladder lumen distention with gall stones, moreover, there was the discovery of wall thickening in computed tomography . Subsequent Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed for preoperative evaluation . The results revealed acute cholecystitis with multiple gall stones and calculi of the lower end of common bile duct. Additionally, the cystic duct showed a low confluence of CD to CBD in MRCP . Subsequently, laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed. The liver was normal and the gallbladder was thick-walled with pericholecystic adhesions during surgery. Additionally, the cystic duct was identified as a low and wide tubular structure entering the gallbladder, which was clipped and divided. However, we found that another tubular structure was also seen arising from the neck of the gallbladder, joining the right hepatic duct. We then ligated the tubular structure with a clip, which obstructed the stones. Besides, the gallbladder was successfully isolated from the liver. Then the choledocholithiasis was removed by choledochoscope. To determine whether this was a double cystic duct connected to a double gallbladder, we performed cholangiography under fluoroscopic guidance. Foremost, identifying a double cystic duct with a clip, we open it with scissors. The results revealed the second cystic duct and a normal right hepatic duct with contrast outlining the CBD and draining into the first cystic duct. The double cystic duct with a single gallbladder hypothesis was valid . The operation was completed without any complications.