A 42 year old man with a history of epigastric pain for two years, weight loss and an episode of rectal bleeding was referred for colonoscopy after gastroscopy revealed only antral gastritis. Physical examination was unremarkable except for the presence of mild epigastric tenderness. Serum lipase levels, liver function tests and full blood count were essentially normal. A pedunculated polyp, 5 mm in diameter, was removed from the transverse colon and sent for histopathological evaluation. No other endoscopic abnormalities were identified.
On histological examination, a proliferation of uniform, plump spindled cells in the lamina propria surrounded and separated serrated and nonserrated crypts that resembled those of microvesicular hyperplastic polyps . A separate fragment showed morphological features identical to those of a hyperplastic polyp and did not show the spindled stromal proliferation seen in the first fragment. The spindled cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm, indistinct cell borders and ovoid to spindled nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli. Necrosis, pleomorphism and mitotic figures were absent. The surface epithelium was separated from the stromal proliferation by a zone of uninvolved but inflamed lamina propria containing ectatic capillary vessels. Inflammatory cells in this zone included lymphocytes, frequent eosinophils, occasional histiocytes and a few plasma cells. Prominent hemosiderin deposition, confirmed with Perls’ prussian blue stain, occurred at the interface of the stromal proliferation and the superficial lamina propria . Extravasated red blood cells occurred in the superficial lamina propria just below the surface epithelium.
Immunohistochemical staining with a monoclonal epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) antibody, using clone E29 (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) at an antibody concentration of 1:500, showed weak positive staining in the stromal proliferation while both glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) and collagen type IV showed moderate to strong staining. GLUT1 expression was accentuated around crypts. Stains for CD34, CD117, desmin, α-smooth muscle actin and S100 protein were all negative. Desmin highlighted a disorganized muscularis mucosae with a few smooth muscle cells that extended into the perineurial proliferation. A monoclonal antibody directed against the mutated protein BRAF V600E (clone VE1, Ventana Medical Systems) showed moderately intense cytoplasmic staining in serrated colonic crypt epithelium but was negative in nonserrated crypt epithelium (nuclear staining only) and in the perineurial proliferation .