A 62-year-old man with well-controlled hypertension and diabetes was admitted to the hospital after a fall due to intoxication. He lost consciousness after the accident and regained consciousness shortly after arrival at the emergency department. His initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 14 (E4V4M6). Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right temporal skull fracture, bilateral frontal and right temporal tip contusions, and acute subdural hematoma . During admission, the patient’s condition deteriorated to a GCS score of 6 points (E1V1M4). Follow-up CT showed hemorrhagic progression of the left frontal and right temporal contusion with midline shift and brainstem compression . Emergency surgery was performed for TICH in the left frontal lobe and right temporal lobe. Considering the bilateral TICH and the need for rapid decompression, endoscopic surgery was chosen. Endoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia. A 4-cm incision was made on the scalp where a burr hole was subsequently made with a hand drill, after which the dura was opened in a cruciate fashion. A corticotomy was performed to place the access system using a transparent trocar identical to that used for intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). The length of the trocar was estimated using pre-operative CT images, and a stylet was inserted until it reached the hematoma. After the removal of the stylet, a 4-mm zero-degree rod lens endoscope was inserted into a transparent sheath to allow visualization during TICH removal. A suction catheter was then inserted with the endoscope to evacuate the hematoma. As the hematoma was removed, the cavity gradually collapsed, revealing normal brain tissue. The residual hematoma was visible through the transparent trocar, which was removed by adjusting the depth and angle of the trocar. In cases where arterial bleeding was detected, the bleeder was identified and cauterized. Once hemostasis was achieved, the trocar and endoscope were removed, the dura repaired and the wound closed in a standard fashion. Blood loss was <10 mL and the operative time was 100 min.
Postoperative CT showed more than 90% TICH removal with adequate decompression . The patient regained consciousness postoperatively to a GCS score of 14 points (E4V4M6), but with higher cerebral dysfunction including cognitive dysfunction and irritability. He was discharged with a Glasgow Outcome Scale score of 4 after 2 months.