A 44-year-old man complaining of intermittent constipation for 3 years presented to his local hospital with an increased severity of constipation of 3-month duration. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large presacral mass measuring 9 cm in diameter, and he was then referred to our hospital. His past medical history was significant for colostomy performed just after birth for anal atresia and anorectoplasty with stoma closure when he was 3 years old. He had occasionally, several times a year, suffered from incontinence. In his family history, his father died of lung cancer at the age of 65, and his mother was 80 years old and healthy. He had no siblings or children. He had no family history of hereditary diseases. He was not receiving regular medications.
Physical examination of the abdomen showed a surgical scar extending from the left upper to lower quadrants without palpable masses. At the perineum, the rectal mucosa was anastomosed to the skin by the previously performed anoplasty. Digital rectal examination showed that the aperture of the rectum (plastic anus) was hard and that the lumen of the rectum was narrow. An elastic hard presacral mass was palpable at 4 cm from the anal verge. He could voluntarily constrict the anal sphincter. The rest of the physical examination, including urinary and genital systems, did not reveal any abnormalities.
Laboratory analyses were normal, including tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, anti-p53 antibody, alpha-fetoprotein, prostate-specific antigen, neuron-specific enolase, and squamous cell carcinoma antigen).
Anorectal manometry revealed an impaired anal function; the maximum static pressure was 22 mmHg (normal range 26–64 mmHg), and the voluntary contraction pressure was 43 mmHg (normal range 59–206 mmHg).
Colonoscopy and contrast enema showed that the lower rectum was stenotic but with intact mucosa.
CT scan showed a partial defect in the right side of the sacrum with deformity, a 60 × 30 × 21-mm meningocele which was protuberated anteriorly from the level of the S3 vertebra, and a 90 × 85 × 68-mm cystic mass which was located anterior to the meningocele, compressing the rectum ventrally . In addition, double renal pelvises were observed in the right kidney, and the inferior mesenteric artery branched from the superior mesenteric artery. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the inside of the cystic tumor showed heterogenous high intensity in T2-weighted image, and an almost homogenous low intensity in T1-weighted image, with the wall showing enhancement with Gadolinium . The existence of the fat component highly suggested teratoma as a preoperative diagnosis. The levator ani muscle appeared intact, except for partial atrophy.
Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography showed no abnormal uptake. Myelography showed an inflow of the contrast agent into the meningocele, but not into the presacral tumor.
Resection of the presacral mass was performed, based on a diagnosis of Currarino syndrome associated with presacral teratoma and meningocele. A postsacral midline incision was made with the patient in the jackknife position. After S3-4 laminectomy, the meningocele was dissected by ligating the root at the level of the dura. Then, the removal of the coccyx with an extended incision provided excellent visualization of the teratoma . The posterior wall of the most distal area of the rectum was severely adherent, resulting in tumor rupture during dissection. We completely removed the clay-like content and the capsule. The peritoneal cavity was not opened. The wave of the anal sphincters, monitored by motor-evoked potential (MEP), did not attenuate throughout the operation. The operation time was 8 h 56 min and intraoperative blood loss was 430 ml (including spinal fluid).
Pathological examination revealed a mature teratoma . The cyst wall was composed of keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium surrounded by fat, sweat glands, and peripheral nerves. The content, 200 g in weight, was composed of a histologically keratinized substance. The coccyx showed no abnormality.
Oral intake was started on the fourth postoperative day. He was discharged from the hospital on the 15th postoperative day with no morbidity. His constipation dramatically improved postoperatively. No urological or rectal complications, or lower extremity neuropathy, were observed.