A 35-year-old male had experienced headaches for one month and was subsequently admitted to our hospital department. He reported having a fever (body temperature of 38.5 °C) one month prior to presentation. His headaches began four days later, located at the forehead and bilateral temporal regions and occurring several times a day, each lasting approximately three hours. After 20 days, he began to develop amnesia, followed by mild slurring in his speech, slow and unclear speech, psychiatric symptoms (low spirit, bad mood, suicidal behaviour, and paranoia prior to hospitalisation), cognitive decline, sleep disorders usually following a temporal pattern characterised by a severe reduction in sleep duration at disease onset, and urinary incontinence. Physical examination revealed grade IV muscular strength on the right side of the body, dysarthria, a positive Kernig sign, and neck resistance. The patient’s medical history included ankylosing spondylitis for six months. He had been prescribed methylprednisolone (16 mg/day), iguratimod (40 mg/day), and sulfasalazine (2 g/day) orally. There was no history of smoking or alcohol consumption, no additional family history, and no hereditary conditions.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral paraventricular, corona radiata, semioval centre, and right subcortex fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities. Contrast-enhanced scans also showed patchy and linear perivascular radial gadolinium enhancement in these areas . No abnormal findings were detected on nuclear MRI scans of the cervical spinal cord. While urinary incontinence, one of the patient’s symptoms, may be associated with lumbar spinal cord disease, a nuclear MRI of the lumbar spinal cord was not performed. Electroencephalography showed low to medium amplitude alpha waves of 10–11 Hz, and alpha rhythms were observed in both occipital leads when the eyes were open and closed, with poor amplitude and rhythm modulation and basic symmetry bilaterally. When awake and quiet, slightly more medium-wave amplitude 4–7 Hz theta waves were seen in bilateral leads, with significant anterior head, mixed with few low-wave amplitude 14–25 Hz beta waves and basic symmetry bilaterally . The CSF pressure was normal, with leucocytosis of 94 × 106 /L (reference range: < 8 × 106 /L, proportion of neutrophils 22%), elevated protein (0.85 g/L), and normal glucose (2.95 mmol/L). Due to the patient’s psychiatric symptoms, herpes simplex virus (HSV) encephalitis was also considered. However, a CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay was negative for HSV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Other viral PCRs were performed, including those for varicellovirus, cytomegalovirus, roseolovirus, lymphocryptovirus, and rhadinovirus; the results were all negative. While the patient’s CSF was positive for oligoclonal bands (OCB), his serum was negative for the same. The pattern of OCB was 2. Macroeconomic DNA detection of pathogenic microorganisms in the CSF were negative. Using a cell-based indirect immunofluorescence test , anti-NMDAR antibodies were detected in the CSF (1:10). The microscope used is EUROStar III Plus fluorescence microscope. The camera model for screen imaging is LU375C. The filter system is FITC. The magnification of the microscope eyepiece is 10 times, and the objective lens is 20 times. Acquisition Software is EUROLABOFFICE. The resolution of the camera is 2048 × 1536 pixels. The resolution of the acquired image is 96 dpi. The titre changed to 1:32 when the test was repeated after eight days. Unfortunately, the patient had the test was performed at another hospital and did not provide original pictures. The serum was consistently negative for anti-NMDAR antibodies. Because contrast-enhanced scans showed patchy and linear perivascular gadolinium enhancement in the areas shown in Fig. , a combined GFAP antibody was considered a possibility. Cell-based assays detected anti-GFAP antibodies in the CSF (1:32) , leading to the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis. Anti-GFAP antibodies in the CSF were validated using cell-based assays. The CSF was positive for GFAP-IgG (a-c, 1:32). Green color indicates successful transfection of a GFP-tagged plasmid encoding GFAP with a green fluorescent tag, and red represents antibody signals. Specimens were incubated with an Alexa Fluor 546 secondary antibody against human IgG (1:1000; Thermo Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature with red fluorescence. GFAP-IgG was tested by a cell-based assay (CBA). HEK293 cells were co-transfected with full-length human GFAP and pcDNA3.1-EGFP. Thirty-six hours after transfection, the HEK293T cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 20 min. Cells were incubated with the patient's CSF for 2 h and then immunolabeled with an Alexa Fluor 546 secondary antibody against human IgG (1:1000; Thermo Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature. First, use the green light channel to observe cell transfection. If the plasmid transfection is successful, the cell can be observed to have green fluorescence. Then observe with the red channel, if the cell membrane of the successfully transfected cells in the sample well has a more obvious red fluorescence, the sample is positive for the antibody; if the cell membrane of the successfully transfected cells in the sample well does not have a more obvious red fluorescence or the cells that are not successfully transfected have red fluorescence, the sample is negative. The results can be further confirmed by overlapping the green and red channels. Two independent masked assessors classified each sample as positive or negative based on immunofluorescence intensity in direct comparison with non-transfected cells and control samples. Once confirmed, the positive specimens were then serially diluted from 1:10 to 1:1000 to determine the titers. Antibody titer is the highest dilution at which a specimen is tested for a positive reaction after a series of dilutions. The detection of GFAP antibody, cerebrospinal fluid routine non-dilution operation, and then for the positive samples, is the sampling end point dilution (end-point dilution) to determine the final titer. According to the fluorescence intensity of the test, the positive sample is further diluted at 1:10,1:100, and 1:1000 and then detected by the CBA method. Suppose the sample does not detect a positive signal when diluted at 1:100, and a positive signal is detected when diluted at 1:10. In that case, the titer is determined to be 1:10 or 1:32 (the specific situation is judged by the fluorescence intensity that can be seen when diluted at 1:10. If the fluorescence intensity is weak at 1:10 dilution detection, the titer is determined to be 1:10, and if the signal is strong at 1:10 dilution detection, the titer is determined to be 1:32). Images were acquired using a Leica DM IL LED fluorescence microscope. The filter system is L5 ET,s. The magnification of the microscope eyepiece is 10 times, and the objective lens is 20 times. The resolution of the camera is 3072 × 2048 pixels. The resolution of the acquired image is 96 dpi. However, the serum was negative for anti-GFAP antibodies. Other autoimmune antibodies, including anti-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid 1, anti-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid 2, anti-gamma-aminobutyric acid β, leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1, anti-contactin-associated protein-like 2, and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65-kilodalton isoform, were absent in both the CSF and serum. Other abnormal serum indicators were increased anticardiolipin antibodies, antibodies against β2-glycoprotein, human leukocyte antigen-B27, and anti-polymyositis/scleroderma (PM/Scl). A chest computed tomography scan was negative for malignancy.
Based on the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis, the patient intravenously (IV) administered methylprednisolone and acyclovir; the antiviral drug acyclovir, used to treat HSV infections, was administered even though CSF PCR analysis was negative for HSV DNA. The patient was also treated with venous antibiotics, B vitamins, and other supportive measures. His psychiatric symptoms were in remission after ten days of IV methylprednisolone treatment. No serious adverse events occurred during this period, and the patient was subsequently discharged. Prednisolone acetate and mycophenolate mofetil were prescribed as maintenance therapies. This treatment regimen was well-tolerated with no side effects. Further cancer screening is planned for the patient’s follow-up appointments. Figure depicts the patient's clinical milestones. We used PhotoshopCS3 to adjust the resolution of all the figures.