A 53-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department for the treatment of a right, large, obstructive renal pelvic stone and smaller lower pole calyceal stone . She had no remarkable previous or family history, and the laboratory data showed no remarkable findings, except for microhematuria on a urine analysis. In April 2011, she was admitted to our department for PCNL to treat a right renal stone located at her ureteropelvic junction. In brief, under general and epidural anesthesia, she was placed in a modified-Valdivia position (Galdakao-modified Valdivia position) . A flexible URS (Flex-X2, Karl Storz, Germany) was inserted through an inserted ureteral access sheath (Flexor® 12-Fr, 35cm, Cook Urological, USA) into her ureter. A stone occupied the area around her ureteropelvic junction, and the URS could not be advanced to the target calyx. Therefore, we first made a root using holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Ho:YAG) laser lithotripsy in order to reach the target calyx. Intracorporeal lithotripsy was subsequently performed using a Ho:YAG laser (with a 200μm fiber, 1.0J, 5Hz; VersaPulse® 30W, Lumenis Surgical, USA), and the URS was then advanced to the target spot in order to puncture it through the root.
Next, a Lawson retrograde nephrostomy puncture wire (Cook Urological) was inserted into the flexible URS, and the calyx was successfully punctured from the target spot to the skin. A 24-Fr percutaneous NAS (X-Force® nephrostomy balloon dilation catheter, BARD Medical, USA) was passed over the balloon under continuous visualization with the URS, and, following insertion of the NAS into the renal collecting system, calculus fragmentation was undertaken using a Swiss LithoClast® pneumatic lithotripter (EMS, Switzerland) through a rigid nephroscope (percutaneous nephroscope, Karl Storz, Germany). A postoperative kidney, ureter and bladder film showed no residual stones . The length of the operation was 175 minutes; no major or minor complications were observed. The postoperative ureteral stent was removed 2 weeks after the procedure, and no residual stone fragments or signs of postoperative ureteral stricture were noted on computed tomography . A stone analysis showed the stone to be composed of calcium oxalate.