A 61-year-old Japanese woman with paraplegia secondary to spina bifida and no history of cigarette smoking was referred to our hospital for investigation of a rapidly growing elevated lesion around a cystostomy site . A suprapubic cystostomy and colostomy had been performed at the age of 27 years. Tumor biopsy confirmed well-differentiated SCC . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a tumor along the catheter involving the bladder wall . No lymph node or visceral metastasis was evident on computed tomography. The serum SCC level was elevated to 19.4 ng/mL. Local excision with partial cystectomy was performed . The abdominal wall defect was closed primarily and a new suprapubic catheter was inserted in the bladder. Pathological examination confirmed SCC arising from SCT . Five months after surgery, a right pelvic lymph node metastasis and subcutaneous metastasis in the right inguinal region were identified on computed tomography. The right inguinal metastasis strongly compressed the right femoral vein and the right lower extremity became edematous. The pelvic lymph nodes were dissected, the subcutaneous metastasis was resected, and the right lower limb was amputated. Adjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin 75 mg/m2 on day 1 and doxorubicin 40 mg/m2 on day 2) was administered. After 2 courses of chemotherapy, new subcutaneous metastases were found in the pelvis and right abdominal wall, and lymph node metastasis was detected in the right axilla. Chemotherapy (irinotecan 100 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, 15, and 22) was administered. The metastases progressed after 2 courses of irinotecan. Multiple new subcutaneous metastases appeared in the right chest wall and right thigh. She died 14 months after initial treatment.
IHC was performed for VEGF, EGFR, COX-2, Ki-67, p53, p21, cyclin E, and Bcl-2. The antibodies used for the analyses are described in Figure . The expression level of each biomarker was evaluated according to the staining intensity and proportion of positive cells in the total cell population. The immunoreactivity of each biomarker was classified as altered or not altered as reported previously., , , , VEGF expression was scored by assigning an intensity score and a proportion score. The intensity score represented the average intensity of positive cells (0, none; 1, weak; 2, intermediate; 3, strong). The proportion score represented the estimated proportion of cells that stained positive (0, 0–24%; 1, 25–49%; 2, 50–74%, and 3, 75–100%). The intensity and proportion scores were then combined (0–6). VEGF expression was considered altered if the combined score was ≥3, EGFR expression as altered if >25% of tumor cells stained positive, COX-2 expression as altered if >20% of tumor cells stained positive, Ki-67 expression as altered if the Ki-67 labeling index was >20%, p53 expression as altered if ≥10% cells stained positive, p21 expression as altered if <10% cells stained positive, cyclin E expression as altered if <30% cells stained positive, and Bcl-2 expression as altered if >20% cells stained positive.
In our patient, the combined score for VEGF was 5. The percentage of EGFR-positive cells was 100% and that of COX-2-positive cells was 30%. The Ki-67 labeling index was 50%. The percentage of p53-positive cells was 5%, that of p21-positive cells was 40%, and that of cyclin E-positive cells was 60%. There were no Bcl-2-positive cells . Therefore, the immunoreactivity of VEGF, EGFR, COX-2, and Ki-67 was considered altered and that of p53, p21, cyclin E, and Bcl-2 was considered not altered.