We present a case of a 51-year-old otherwise healthy man, who suffered from rapid visual loss in the left eye following contusion. Ocular trauma was caused during a football match by a ball, which hit an index finger located just in front of the bulbus. The patient attended our department on April 27, 2004, one week after the injury, when the vision in the left eye decreased to light perception with inaccurate light projection and hand movements in a lower part of visual field. The best-corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 1.0. Intraocular pressures were 18 mmHg in the right eye and 45 mmHg in the left eye. Examination of the anterior segment and fundus of the right eye revealed no pathology. The left eye showed discrete injection of the conjunctiva and keratic precipitates with mild anterior chamber flare and cells. There was iridodonesis, cleft syndrome and a relative afferent pupillary defect in the left eye. The fundus examination of the left eye revealed swelling of the optic disc, large ischemic macular edema, superficial retinal hemorrhages, narrowing of the arterioles and dilatation of the venules . Fluorescein angiography of the left eye showed macular edema and vascular leakage in the venous phase . Duplex Doppler ultrasonography and computed tomography scans of the brain and orbits were normal.
Based on the clinical findings, the presumed diagnosis of ocular ischemic syndrome was made. The patient was initially treated with vaso-active drugs in addition to corticosteroids. Intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg daily for 5 days) followed by 60 mg of oral prednisone daily was indicated due to swelling of the optic disc and macular edema. Despite intensive therapy, the fundus examination showed progression of ischemic lesions. Visual acuity in the left eye was light perception with inaccurate light projection. The finding on the right eye was without changes. The patient was discharged on oral prednisone 50 mg daily.
On May 24, 2004, four weeks after pulse intravenous corticosteroid treatment, vision in the initially uninvolved right eye decreased to 0.25. Fundus examination of the right eye disclosed swelling of the optic disc with hemorrhages, blurring of the optic disk margins and ischemic macular edema . In the left eye, massive vitreous opacities made evaluation of the fundus impossible.
A differential diagnosis of antiphospholipide syndrome, masquerading syndrome, viral retinitis or specific inflammation was considered.
No neurological or other abnormalities were found on systemic examination. The findings from magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography of brain and orbits were within normal limits. The cerebrospinal fluid was negative for VZV DNA and enteroviruses RNA. Chest X ray and abdominal ultrasonography were normal. Leukocyte count, hematocrit and activated partial tromboplastin time (APTT) were normal, liver tests showed elevated levels of alaninaminotranspherase (ALT; 2.63 ukat/l). Anti-cardiolipin antibodies were negative. Serologic tests for syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1/-2) were negative. Serum was evaluated regarding evidence for herpesviruses by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Low levels of VZV and EBV EBNA-1 IgG antibodies were detected in serum, whereas IgM antibodies were absent; as well antibodies of respiratory infections or neuroinfections were negative. Blood cultures were also negative. Immunofenotypization showed lower count of lymphocytes in peripheral blood, without plasma cell neoplasia.
On May 27, 2004, an aqueous tap of the left eye was performed and samples were submitted for cytological and virological analysis. PCR of aqueous humour was negative for herpesviruses family and cytology confirmed non-purulent intraocular inflammation. The patient was treated with corticosteroids. The best-corrected visual acuity in the right eye decreased to 0.02. Due to progressive impairment of the clinical status, the corticosteroid therapy was stopped. Fundus examination demonstrated several enlarging foci of necrotizing retinitis with extensive posterior pole involvement . Based on the clinical appearance, a diagnosis of presumed necrotizing herpetic retinopathy was made. The patient was commenced on high-dose intravenous acyclovir (4 × 500 mg per day for 2 weeks). Two days later, visual loss with acuity reduced to light perception with inaccurate light projection occurred in the right eye. In the left eye, there was progression of vitreous opacities and the vision was light perception with inaccurate light projection.
On June 4, 2004, a diagnostic pars plana vitrectomy and retinal biopsy were carried out in the left eye. The vitreous cavity was filled with 16% perfluoropropane (C3F8) gas. A part of retina and samples of diluted and undiluted vitreous were obtained. Due to failure of the antiviral treatment and ocular disease progression, the patient underwent a pars plana vitrectomy in the right eye on June 9, 2004.
PCR of retina of the left eye and undiluted vitreous of both eyes were positive for VZV. Undiluted vitreous was negative for HSV-1 and -2, CMV, EBV. PCR of diluted vitreous was negative for herpesviruses family. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was not detected using PCR in vitreous of both eyes. Cultivation of vitreous for bacteria and fungi was negative; Toxoplasma gondii antibodies were also negative. Histopathological examination confirmed non-purulent intraocular inflammation. Immunofenotypization of vitreous of both eyes showed no plasma cell neoplasia.
In two weeks, intravenous acyclovir was followed by oral acyclovir (5 × 400 mg daily). In the right eye, large foci of retinal atrophy with reduced inflammatory reaction were present. Owing the cataract induced by gas, fundus of the left eye was not visible.
The patient was discharged on acyclovir 4 × 400 mg daily. However, an exudative retinal detachment was seen in the right eye and vision decreased to 0. Vision in the left eye was light perception with inaccurate light projection. On examination 4 weeks later, B-scan ultrasonography of the left eye confirmed the exudative retinal detachment. Nevertheless, despite intensive treatment with intravenous antiviral medication, the patient became completely blind in both eyes.