A 73-year-old man presented with an 11-year history of paroxysmal stabbing facial pain. The pain occurred repeatedly and was sometimes associated with loss of consciousness after the pain attack. The patient was referred to a cardiologist for evaluation of the syncope and was diagnosed with sick sinus syndrome. A pacemaker was introduced, although syncope still recurred.
Five years after the first pain episode, the pain progressively worsened. The patient was diagnosed with the right trigeminal neuralgia at a pain clinic and was treated with carbamazepine and nerve block injection. However, the effect of the treatment was limited, with recurrence of the attacks of pain and loss of consciousness. Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was considered, the pacemaker introduced in the patient precluded performance of MRI. However, after his pacemaker was replaced with an MRI-compatible one during the current year, he was referred to our department for further evaluation and treatment of the facial pain.
The patient’s physical/neurological examination revealed no abnormal findings. The pain was located at the right side of the pharynx and the root of the tongue, with radiation to the ipsilateral cheek and ear. It was triggered by swallowing and gargling, with the pain being provoked when food touched his right soft palate while swallowing. The pain was intolerable and lasted for 2–3 min. Chewing or physical stimulation of the face did not cause pain. The patient sometimes lost consciousness after the pain.
MRI revealed a looped branch of the right posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) contacting the root exit zone (REZ) of the right glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves . There was no arterial contact with the right trigeminal nerve. Organic or functional abnormalities in the cardiovascular system were not observed. Subsequently, the cardiologist diagnosed neuromodulatory syncope. Based on the above, we diagnosed VGPN due to neurovascular compression and performed MVD.
A small 4 cm craniotomy was performed on the right occipital bone with the patient in the park bench position. The looped branch of the PICA was confirmed as compressing the REZ of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves from the ventral side . The PICA was transposed with two Teflon felts. Postoperatively, the pain and syncope disappeared and have currently not recurred as of 9 months after MVD.