A 63-year-old Caucasian male with a background of arterial hypertension and mild obesity (BMI 30.5 kg/m2) was admitted to hospital with dyspnea under COVID-19. He initially tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 via a polymerase chain reaction swab conducted in the ambulatory setting. When he arrived at the primary care hospital, he displayed a reduced general condition. Admission observations revealed: blood pressure 100/40 mmHg, heart rate 115 beats/minute, peripheral oxygen saturation 71%, body temperature 40 °C. His breathing noises were reduced, and there were rattling noises over his lungs bilaterally. He was cooperative and orientated, and showed no focal neurological deficit. His renal function markers were elevated [creatinine 1.66 mg/dl, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 45 ml/minute], and the liver function markers were in the normal range. He was admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) 5 days later owing to worsening of respiratory symptoms. After 1 day of noninvasive ventilation, the patient decompensated into global respiratory insufficiency, and endotracheal intubation was required. Because of persistent global respiratory insufficiency under exhausted conservative therapy, the patient was transferred to our university hospital for venovenous extracorporeal support (vvECMO) in severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Computed tomographic (CT) imaging before transferal showed diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacities. On admission at our hospital, his acute phase reactants were elevated: white blood cell count 20,400/µl (normal range 3600–10,000/µl), CRP 316.5 mg/l (normal range < 5 mg/l), IL-6 420 ng/l (normal range < 7 ng/l), soluble IL-2-receptor 1549 kU/l (normal range 223–710 kU/l), ferritin 916 µg/l (normal range 27–365 µg/l), and fibrinogen > 9 g/l (normal range 1.8–3.5 g/l). He showed lymphocytopenia with a cell count of 470/µl (2.3%). SARS-CoV-2-PCR diagnostic was repeated from tracheal aspirate on arrival at our hospital and remained positive (cycle threshold 25). His medical treatment taken at home included valsartan, bisoprolol, amlodipine, and chlorthalidone as well as atorvastatin and mirtazapine. The patient did not smoke or consume alcohol regularly. He is married and has been working as a specialist in internal medicine until his recent retirement.
He received therapeutic anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin (UFH). Monitoring of anticoagulation was done by measurement of activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) every 6 hours with a target of 50–60 seconds. Preexisting treatment with acetylsalicylic acid was continued. Sedation proved to be difficult even under a multimodal intravenous sedative regime. First signs of pulmonary hemorrhage were noticed on day 11. Because of a suspected hyperinflammatory syndrome , dosage of dexamethasone was increased from 6 to 18 mg per day. For a detailed depiction of events, see timeline .
Over the following days, the patient continuously produced extensive aqueous and slightly bloody discolored tracheal secretion. Chest x-ray on day 15 in supine position showed a progressive extensive opacity projecting to the right inferior lobe . This corresponded with a heavy decline in pulmonary gas exchange. A diagnostic bronchoscopy on the same day revealed hemorrhagic pneumonia with extremely vulnerable mucosa and plenty of viscous mucus as well as extensive coagulum in segment 9. After removal of the coagulum, gas exchange improved at first. Because pulmonary hemorrhage remained persistent and gas exchange declined yet again alarmingly, the patient underwent a second bronchoscopy on the following day. Here, another extensive coagulum in right lung segment nine was cautiously and, due to high risk of bleeding, incompletely recovered. Dependence of extracorporeal support remained very high, and the patient became increasingly unstable. On day 17, the patient developed profound hemorrhagic shock without evident source of bleeding. The patient required extensive doses of norepinephrine, epinephrine, and vasopressin as well as a massive transfusion of red blood cells, plasma, and platelets for stabilization. At the same time, a severe acute decrease of pulmonary compliance was noticed.