A 77 year old female with end stage renal failure secondary to systemic amyloid light chain (AL) type amyloidosis on long term haemodialysis was referred to the interventional radiology department following difficulty in cannulating her AVF and clinical reduction in the palpable fistula thrill. Her significant medical comorbidities include type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia and a pacemaker for Mobitz type 2 second degree atrioventricular block.
Doppler ultrasound revealed a stenosis 2 cm distal to the anastomosis. With systemic heparinisation, we performed fistulography under intravenous sedation (2 mg Midazolam, 50 μg Fentanyl) and local anaesthetic (10 ml 1% Lidocaine). Glyceryl trinitrate (800 μg) and Amlodipine (10 mg) were administered during the procedure due to a systolic blood pressure of over 200 mmHg on a background of known hypertension. This controlled the systolic pressure to 150 mmHg.
Under ultrasound guidance, retrograde puncture of the fistula was performed. A 5F sheath was inserted and the catheter and wire were successfully passed across the stenotic lesion. The initial venogram confirmed a single juxta-anastomotic venous segment stenosis .
This was initially dilated with a 4 mm Sterling balloon (Boston Scientific) which resulted in suboptimal reduction of the stenosis after which a 5 mm Sterling balloon was used to overcome the tight stenosis. To achieve optimal dilatation of the affected vessel, a short segment of the balloon was positioned and inflated within the arterial segment to attain adequate vessel patency and to prevent migration of the balloon proximally due to arterial-flow back pressure. This was complicated by rupture at the juxta-anastomotic radial artery segment which immediately presented as pain and swelling in the patient’s forearm and was confirmed by fistulography .
Intermittent balloon tamponade was maintained with a 3 mm balloon at the level of contrast extravasation. To ensure safety of the distal limb whilst the balloon was inflated, the neurovascular status of the patient was clinically assessed together with ultrasound of the radial artery distal to the fistula which demonstrated adequate retrograde blood flow from the complete palmar arch via the ulnar artery. This was further confirmed with a Barbeau test which showed no dampening of the pulse oximeter waveform on the ipsilateral thumb with balloon inflation. Confirmation of the above allowed for prolonged balloon tamponade for a total duration of 30 minutes without concern for neurovascular compromise to the distal limb.
Whilst intermittent balloon tamponade minimised extravasation, a small pseudoaneurysm subsequently formed within the short arterial segment . After discussion with the renal transplant team, a joint decision was made to deploy a covered stent-graft within the arterial portion of the anastomosis. A 4 mm BeGraft coronary stent-graft (Bentley InnoMed GmbH) was deployed in an adequate position within the arterial portion of the anastomosis .
The completion fistulogram demonstrated excellent flow through the fistula with no evidence of active bleeding and complete exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm . There was no clinical evidence of compartment syndrome.
The patient recovered well post-procedure and was admitted overnight for monitoring and neurovascular observations. Her post-operative haemoglobin levels were within normal limits (113 g/L; ref.: 110-150 g/L). The forearm swelling improved significantly, and no neurovascular complications were noted the following morning. The patient was reviewed in haemodialysis clinic 3 months later and successfully continued with haemodialysis through the stented fistula, reporting no further complications.