The 17 year old female presented with a 4 months history of constant, dull, non-radiating abdominal pain and a right upper quadrant mass progressively increasing in size. This was associated with yellowish discoloration of eyes, urine and clay colored stools plus one episode of vomiting but no history of diarrhea, fever or weight loss. There was no significant past medical or surgical history. One month prior to admission, she reported to have visited a peripheral lower level health facility that referred her to the regional referral but delayed to come due to financial constraints.
On physical examination, she was in a fair general condition, well nourished, with obvious deep jaundice. Abdominal exam revealed a distended abdomen with a large palpable mass extending from the epigastrium to the hypogastrium. The mass was non tender, soft, non-mobile, couldn't go above it or below it and measured 30 cm × 20 cm. There were no visible collateral vessels, no inguinal masses or palpable lymph nodes.
The deranged laboratory measurements included total bilirubin (6.41 mg/dL), direct bilirubin (4.8 mg/dL), Alanine Transaminase (144 u/L), Aspartate Transaminase (208 u/L), Alkaline phosphatase (1827 u/L), Pro-thrombin time (18 s) and International Normalized Ratio (INR) (1.72). Complete blood count, renal function tests, serum electrolytes, hepatitis surface antigen and HIV test were unremarkable. CT scan revealed a huge cystic mass in the right upper quadrant extending inferiorly to the right lumbar region, surrounded by a thin enhancing wall on intravenous contrast. It was continuous with common bile duct and was compressing the gall bladder, head of pancreas and the right kidney. There was no focal or diffuse masses seen on the liver and there was no regional lymphadenopathy.
Laparotomy through an extended midline incision was done by a general surgeon. The laparotomy revealed a grossly enlarged cystic mass extending from the liver up to the hypo-gastric region with the duodenum, the gall bladder, greater omentum and transverse colon adherent onto the cystic mass . Adhesions were carefully divided, separating the duodenum and transverse colon from the cystic mass while achieving hemostasis. Dissection continued medially and laterally to release the attachments of the cyst from other intra-abdominal wall structures. The mass was 30 cm by 25 cm by 20 cm containing over 2 L of greenish, bilious fluid . The Cystic duct was identified and anterograde cholecystectomy was performed. A loop of jejunum 45 cm from the ligament of treitz was brought near the stump of common hepatic duct through a defect created on the left side of the middle colic vessels in the transverse mesocolon. Hepaticojejunostomy and jejunojejunostomy was done. A drain was left in proximity to the site of biliary reconstruction and was removed after it stopped draining. The specimen was sent for histo-pathological examination and was reported to contain chronic inflammatory infiltrate with no evidence of malignancy. Patient was discharged on the 7th post-operative day. At two months post operation, the patient had recovered completely when reviewed at the regional referral hospital and the liver function tests had normalized.