A 23-year-old male stabbed in the right paravertebral lower-back region, 5 days before admission, comes to the emergency room. He presented with a headache that worsened with sitting and standing but was relieved in the supine position. In addition, he noted clear fluid flowing out from his wound. Physical examination revealed a 3-cm skin wound at the right paravertebral lower-back region, 3 cm from the middle line, and 6 cm cephalic from the Tuffier’s line leaking clear fluid [ Panel A]. Due to these findings and his intracranial hypotension headache, a traumatic CSFL was suspected. Fluid glucose (40 mg/dl) and B2 transferrin (1.5 mg/dl) confirmed the diagnosis. Neurologic examination was unremarkable.
Lumbar puncture at the L3–L4 level was performed. Low opening cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure, pleocytosis, high protein, and low glucose were found. Bacterial meningitis was highly suspected, and broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated. Spine X-rays documented no foreign body. T2-weighted and T1-contrast-enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) were performed and confirmed a traumatic CSFL extending from the inferior border of the L4 right lamina, including the paravertebral longissimus, iliocostalis muscles, up to the skin .
Nonsurgical treatment for traumatic CSFL was indicated, including Trendelenburg positioning, carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (acetazolamide), subarachnoid catheter at L3–L4 level for 7 days, skin wound closure, and 14 days of broad-spectrum antibiotics. No bacterial typification was disclosed, and normal control CSF chemistry was obtained after antibiotic therapy completion.
Three days after removing the subarachnoid catheter, the recurrence of the CSFL was noted . The decision was to perform a primary closure using paravertebral muscle flaps. During the procedure, interspinous and flavum ligaments tears of 1 cm in length were documented. A right L4 laminectomy was completed, and the right L5 root was exposed. Just above the L5 root previously exposed, a 2 cm dura mater tear with an active leak was visualized. An ipsilateral paravertebral Longissimus thoracis muscle plus fascia free-flap was required to achieve complete dural closure .
Postoperatively, resolution of the subcutaneous collection and headache was noted . The patient was discharged on 5 day postoperative, and during the 1-month follow-up appointment, complete resolution of the CSFL was evident.