A 70-year-old male patient reported suffering from lumbosacral pain and walking difficulty for several months.
From his personal medical history, he had arterial hypertension disturbance and he had undergone a bilateral total knee replacement and a total right hip replacement several years algo. He did not refer claudication and nor neurological damage was found during the clinical examination. The patient referred important impairment since he found it difficult to maintain an upright position, presenting a limitation to keep the horizontal field of vision, and needing a walking stick to stand still and to walk.
A standing full spine X-ray assessment showed rigid spine signs with anterior spinal osteophytes due to the calcification of the anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL), which is compatible with DISH. The sagittal vertical axis (SVA) C7-S1 was 22 cm, the lumbar lordosis (LL) was 10º, and the spinopelvic parameters showed a pelvic incidence (PI) of 46º, a sacral slope (SS) of 23º and a pelvic tilt (PT) of 23º . In the pelvic and lower limbs X-Ray images, both pelvic and knee replacements were adequately positioned. The acetabular component inclination angle was 59º and anteversion cup angle of 24.6º. Measurements were performed following Lewinnek method using Surgimap (Nemaris) software. The magnetic resonance (MR) revealed a decrease of LL and signs of moderate lumbar spinal stenosis, mostly at the L3-L4 level. Supine decubitus with bolster in the apex of the deformity X-Ray image was done to check for deformity’s flexibility .
Information about the different surgical and non-surgical options was provided to the patient. After trying medical treatment with no clinical response, a surgical procedure by a spinal osteotomy was agreed with the patient.
Positioning the patient in prone, using somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP), motor evoked potential (MEP) and electromyography (EMG) monitoring, a posterior approach was performed, which began with the subperiosteal dissection of paravertebral muscles and bilateral T11-S1 pedicle (except from L3) and iliac screws were used. This was followed by an L2 partial inferior and an L4 partial superior laminectomy, with the facetectomy of both L2 inferior facet joints, were performed. Then, an L3 pedicle subtraction osteotomy was performed. At the L4-L5 levels, a circumferential arthrodesis via transforaminal interbody fusion (TLIF) with interbody Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) implants and autologous bone from the posterosuperior iliac spine (PSIS) was performed. Finally, a T11-S1 postero-lateral arthrodesis with autologous bone from the surgical field was executed to prevent mechanical failure.
In the immediate postoperative period, surgical wound drainage was observed, with the microbiological confirmation of an infection by Klebsiella oxytoca, Enterococcus faecalis, Corynebacterium amycolatum and Finegoldia magna, which was treated and resolved after debridement, irrigation and antibiotics, without any further complications.
Two years after the surgery, good clinical assessment was observed, not referring any lumbosacral pain or neurological damage and not needing the use of a walking stick. The X-ray images showed improvement presenting the following and in comparison to the previous 2 years as follows: a SVA of 64 mm (from a SVA of 22 cm), a LL of 30º (from 10º), PI of 46º, a SS of 18º (from 23º) and a PT of 28º (from 23º). Postoperative inclination angle of acetabular cup was 59º and anteversion of 27.7º. Complications related to THA such as impingement or luxation weren´t observed .