A 69-year-old male underwent bilateral sequential knee arthroplasty with patellar resurfacing for grade 4 osteoarthritis with bilateral fixed flexion feformity of 30-40 degrees. He was also diabetic and had cardiac ejection fraction of only 20%. Surgery was uneventful with good post-operative recovery. He had normal patellar position on post operative radiographs . Post TKA, rehabilitation protocols were initiated and he was able to achieve limited indoor ambulation within three days. He continued with range of motion and strengthening exercises along with proprioceptive training. Surgical drains were removed on the 2nd post-operative day and he was discharged on 7th postoperative day. By this time, his range of motion (ROM) was more than 90 degrees and muscle strength in quadriceps was MRC grade 4/5. On 30th post operative day, he experienced buckling and excruciating pain in both knees while getting up from a low lying toilet chair and he was unable to stand. He could not extend his knees, which were swollen. He required assistance from family member for mobility. After that incident, he was unable to walk without support due to severe pain and the knees giving way on weight bearing. He sought medical advice after 2 days when the pain and swelling did not improve. On enquiry, there was history of three intraarticular steroid injections within a period of one-year. This was two years before the patient presented to us for knee arthroplasty. Upon examination, both knee joint were warm, tender and swollen. Swelling and skin discolouration were suggestive of hematoma formation. He was unable to actively extend his knee joint and the range of motion was painful. The patella was mobile and high riding on clinical examination. X-ray of the knee joint revealed patella alta ( and ) while rest of the joint was normal. MRI of the both knee was done and it revealed bilateral patella midsubstance tendon rupture.
Bilateral patellar tendons were repaired with augmentation by semitendinosus graft and anchors over tibial tuberosity (-6). Ater repair, knee was immobilised in extension for 6 weeks, followed by subsequent mobilisation and rehabilitation. Within 2 weeks of mobilisation, patient was able to achieve ROM upto 60 degree, grade 4/5 (MRC) power in quadriceps and extensor mechanism. There was no extensor lag. At 12 weeks of follow up, patient was able to walk independently with cane and achieved range of motion of 0 – 110 degrees. At 2-years follow-up at present, patient walks without support and has no activity limitations.