A 38 years old gentleman, chronic alcoholic, having a previous history of a single episode of hospitalization with acute pancreatitis 3 months back, presented with fever (102 degrees Fahrenheit) and a huge severely painful swelling in the epigastric region . The swelling, initially mild dull aching and smaller in size, started 2 months back and gradually attained the present size [20 cm (horizontal) X 15 cm (vertical)] in the last 7 days. He gradually developed tenderness and induration over the swelling after a trivial blunt trauma on the area 7 days back. General examination revealed a normotensive person (BMI of 19.6) without any ascites, dysuria or any sign of intestinal obstruction. He was significant only for the swelling which was located in the epigastric region. The swelling was round-shaped, intra-abdominal, fixed to deeper tissue, tense-cystic, poorly trans-illuminant, non-pulsatile and irreducible. The swelling showed no expansile impulse on coughing and was devoid of any bowel sound within it. He neither had a history of any previous abdominal surgery nor had he received any treatment for this disease. He had no history of coagulopathy or similar illness in his family.
The possibility of pyogenic liver abscess, infected hydatid cyst, post-traumatic infected hematoma or infected pseudocyst of the pancreas was considered clinically. Urgent relevant blood tests and urine analysis were within normal limits except leucocytosis (14,500/mm3;reference range 4000-8000/mm3) with neutrophilia (81%) and elevated plasma pancreatic amylase(342 IU/L;reference 20-96 IU/L) and lipase (456 IU/L;reference -43IU/L) levels. Ultrasonography (USG) of the whole abdomen revealed a thick-walled echogenic cystic swelling of size 18 cm × 12 cm in the epigastric region, anterior to the stomach and inferior to the left lobe of the liver without any communication to adjacent organs and there were no ascites. Colour Doppler flow study failed to show any vascular component of this swelling. USG guided needle aspiration of the cyst revealed mixed purulent brownish fluid. Cytological examination of the fluid showed inflammatory cells but no malignant cell was found. The fluid was sent for bacterial culture and antibiotic sensitivity tests. The cyst fluid examination was negative for mucin stain and contained high amylase level (8680 IU/L) with low CEA level. Cyst fluid study was suggestive of infected pancreatic pseudocyst. Contrast-enhanced Multi-Detector CT Scan with the pancreatic protocol (MDCT) of the abdomen revealed a large (17.07 cm X 11.08 cm) well defined enhancing thick-walled (6 mm) exophytic cystic space-occupying lesion (SOL) that was located inferior to the left lobe of the liver, displacing the stomach posteriorly . MRCP failed to show any communication of the cystic SOL with pancreatic ducts.
After proper resuscitation and pre-operative workup of the subject, considering the presence of (on pre-operative USG Scan) high volume non-drainable tissue debris and abscess formation within the cyst, open drainage procedure was considered through an upper midline laparotomy. On entering the abdomen, one large thick-walled cyst was identified within the hepato-gastric ligament. . Aspiration of the thick pus mixed cyst fluid, along with tissue debris, was done avoiding any spillage in the abdomen. Through irrigation of the cyst was done with normal saline. The cyst wall was de-roofed leaving a small part that was adherent to the inferior surface of the left lobe of the liver. A portion of omentum was securely placed over the cleaned inner surface of the residual cyst wall. Abdomen was closed leaving a positive pressure closed abdominal drain over the operative site. The cyst wall and tissue debris were sent for histopathological examination.
His postoperative stay in the hospital was uneventful. The cyst fluid culture showed significant growth in Escherichia coli. He was put on IV antibiotics according to the drug sensitivity report. Oral feeding was started the next day. He became afebrile after 2 days and early ambulation was encouraged. On the third postoperative day, after removal of the drain, total collected 110 ml of serosanguinous fluid from the abdomen was again sent for study. Post-operative serum amylase, lipase level came to be normal as well as pancreatic enzymes level in drain fluid was also found negligible. There was no surgical site infection. The patient was discharged in a stable condition after 5 days.
The histopathological confirmation of pancreatic abscess was made when multiple sections from the cyst wall showed features of compressed fibro-collagenous tissue infiltrated by mixed inflammatory cells (rich in neutrophils, macrophage, lymphocytes, and plasma cells). The tissue debris also showed features of necrosis with rich inflammatory infiltrates suggesting chronic infective cystic lesion. Although no feature of granuloma or malignancy could be detected.
Six months after the operation, the subject is asymptomatic and has returned to his usual life without any clinical sign of recurrence. He was advised regular follow up in our surgical Out-Patient Department (OPD) to detect any recurrence by clinical examination and ultrasonography.