A 2-year old, otherwise healthy, Khmu boy presented to the emergency department of a pediatric referral hospital in North-Central Laos with a two-day history of progressively worsening abdominal pain, hematemesis, and distension. This was associated with fevers, dark stools, and poor oral intake. The patient had been born at home and had no prior contacts with healthcare.
On physical examination, the child alternated between irritability and listlessness. He appeared moderately dehydrated, with associated tachycardia and fever to 39.2 °C. His abdomen was distended, rigid, diffusely tender, with percussion tenderness and absent bowel sounds. The patient had bounding peripheral pulses with flash capillary refill. His left hemiscrotum was notably enlarged with a reducible inguinal hernia.
On further investigation of the patient’s history, his mother reported that he had inguinal swelling since birth. After a delay, while re-assessing recent trauma history, the family finally reported a history of dog bite to the scrotum by a stray 2 days prior to the development of symptoms. On closer examination, the patient’s scrotum showed two small puncture marks at opposing locations on the anterior and posterior surfaces of the left hemiscrotum. There was minimal erythema around the posterior wound, but not the anterior. Neither wound demonstrated purulence, induration, tenderness, or other signs of infection. The child had suffered no other injuries during his encounter with the dog and the parents had cleaned the skin wounds at home.
Initial studies revealed leukopenia (white blood cell count 3.3 × 10^9 cells/L), anemia (hemoglobin 11.3 g/dL) and uremia (blood urea nitrogen 63 mg/dL). The patient’s electrolytes were within normal limits, and a rapid typhoid test was negative. A lateral decubitus abdominal X-ray demonstrated air fluid levels with a sentinel loop of dilated small bowel . He was fluid resuscitated with normal saline, then given broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with ceftriaxone and lincomycin. He also received tetanus toxoid, and rabies vaccine due to the unknown vaccination status of the canine. Despite this resuscitation, the patient became progressively more tachycardic, and his mental status declined into obtundation. Given the patient’s acute abdomen and deteriorating status, he was taken urgently to the operating theatre.
During open laparotomy, the patient was noted to have purulent material throughout his abdominal cavity. Small bowel contents were herniated into the scrotum, and were manually reduced. His small bowel had two puncture perforations . He ultimately had 2 cm of small bowel resected, and the inguinal hernia was repaired. On post-operative multidisciplinary review with the surgical and medical teams, the patient’s mechanism of injury was identified as a penetrating puncture into the herniated small bowel contents in his scrotum. The tract traveled superiorly to the testes and spared the spermatic cord.
The patient’s clinical course was complicated by the development of a delayed anastomotic leak requiring repeat laparotomy on post-operative day 14 with placement of an ileostomy. He had a prolonged inpatient stay following his second operation, complicated by extensive time nil per os due to concern for ongoing anastomotic leak, severe weight loss, and high-output ostomy losses. He was switched to hydrolyzed formula with slow reintroduction of F100 with improvement in his diarrhea and subsequent weight gain. Neither of his testicles were compromised in the course of his injury, or subsequent surgeries. He was discharged home after 54 days in the hospital. He returned 3 months later and his ileostomy was reversed during an uncomplicated surgery and he was ultimately discharged home in good condition.