A 57-year-old female who underwent orthotopic heart transplantation (HTx) in 2008 for ventricular arrhythmias presented with refractory right heart failure (RHF). After antibody-mediated rejection in 2013, she developed reduced functional capacity and volume overload with worsening renal function over four years. Workup revealed severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) requiring annuloplasty ring in 2018. Post-operatively, she developed acute kidney injury, recurrent pleural effusions, and ascites. Due to progression to stage 5 chronic kidney disease, she underwent a deceased donor kidney transplantation (DDKT) in 2020. Symptoms of volume overload returned, requiring admission in December 2020. Medications included tacrolimus 6 mg twice daily, prednisone 10 mg daily, valganciclovir 450 mg twice weekly, and high-dose torsemide. Mycophenolic acid was discontinued due to leucopenia. NT-proBNP and high-sensitivity troponin were elevated without significant change from prior values.
Physical examination noted elevated jugular venous pressure with prominent v-wave, S3 gallop, hepatomegaly with pulsatility, and bilateral lower extremity oedema. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated preserved biventricular function (LVEF 71%) with RA greater than LA enlargement and moderate TR . Mitral inflow pulse wave Doppler demonstrated large E without significant A wave despite sinus rhythm at 65 b.p.m. by electrocardiography with a right bundle branch block . Endomyocardial biopsy (EMBx) and renal biopsy were negative for rejection and recent coronary angiogram was unremarkable for obstructive disease or distal vessel pruning. Transesophageal and intracardiac echocardiography, and cardiac MRI quantified moderate TR but notably, MRI showed a significantly enlarged RA and abnormal atrial contraction . Hemodynamics showed no ventricular interdependence. Pressures supported restrictive physiology: RA 17 mmHg without significant v waves, but blunted x descent and prominent y descent, RV 35/3/12 mmHg with ‘square root’ sign, PA 37/16/24 mmHg, PCWP 15 mmHg, Fick CI 3.14 . RHF was not attributed to renal failure alone due to normal PCWP. With limited treatment options, she underwent redo-HTx and DDKT March 2021 with resolution of RHF symptoms. Pathologic analysis of the explanted myocardium demonstrated fibrosis without ischaemic injury. Specifically, fibrosis of the RA with a firm palpable texture was reported.