A 71-year-old woman was evaluated in the Internal Medicine Department for a 15 kg-weight loss during the preceding 14 months and a 20-day history of watery diarrhea. Laboratory studies, including blood tests and urinalysis, carried out a few days before presentation were normal. Moreover, computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen as well as upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy performed seven months and one year before presentation, respectively were unremarkable. The patient had a medical history of hypertension for the last 5 years and depression since the age of 25.
Her medication included olmesartan 40 mg and amlodipine 5 mg which were stable for the past 5 years, whereas there was a recent modification in her antidepressant medication (venlafaxine 75 mg was replaced by amitriptyline 50 mg, duloxetine 40 mg and clorazepate 15 mg) about 15 days before presentation. However, there was no change in her symptoms with this treatment modification. She denied using tobacco, alcohol or illicit drugs. Her father died at 67 from lung cancer and her sister at 47 from breast cancer; the rest family history was insignificant.
At presentation the temperature was 36°C, the blood pressure was 143/82 mmHg, the heart rate was 69 beats per minute, the respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute and the oxygen saturation was 98%, while the patient was breathing ambient air. Her height was 1.60 m and her weight was 43 kg (body mass index 17 kg/m2). Bilateral pitting edema was detected on her lower extremities, while the remainder physical findings were unremarkable. The electrocardiogram was normal. Laboratory and imaging studies were obtained.
The laboratory exams were significant for International Normalized Ratio (INR) prolongation, which was corrected with vitamin K administration, hypoalbuminemia without albuminuria and hypokalemia. Stool was negative for clostridium difficile, parasites or other enteropathogens. Chest radiograph and CT of brain, chest and abdomen were normal. The remainder thorough investigation for underlying infections, endocrinopathies, immunological diseases and malignancy was negative. Upper endoscopy demonstrated an edematous, reddish duodenal mucosa with reduced mucosal folds. Duodenal biopsies demonstrated the increased presence of inflammatory cells and crypt cell proliferation with substantial villous atrophy. Lower endoscopy was insignificant. Tissue transglutaminase antibodies (IgA) and deaminated gliadin peptide antibodies (IgA and IgG) were negative, while a gluten-free diet was found to be ineffective.
Taking into account the aforementioned examinations and by excluding almost with certainty celiac disease and neoplasia, we considered the possibility of olmesartan-induced enteropathy and discontinued olmesartan. Ten days after drug removal diarrhea resolved completely. Few months later, complete recovery of weight was observed along with normalization of laboratory tests . The patient denied a new upper endoscopy to confirm resolution of the lesions. As all symptoms disappeared and the patient returned to her usual condition after olmesartan withdrawal, we decided not to re-introduce the drug; in fact, we substituted olmesartan with a blood pressure lowering drug from another class.