A 34-year old HIV negative woman presented for evaluation of an abscess in her right breast which developed one month prior to presentation and was associated with pain and tenderness. She denied fever, night sweats, weight loss or respiratory symptoms. There was no family history of breast cancer and no personal history of diabetes, immunosuppression, previous treatment for tuberculosis or recent exposure to a person with tuberculosis. Right axillary lump removed in 2000 the nature of which was unclear. She had migrated to Australia from Bangladesh 6 years ago. She had one five-year-old child and had ceased breast-feeding three years prior. She was not pregnant at the time of presentation and denied recent use of hormonal contraception. On examination, she had a 12 × 9 cm firm mass in the upper quadrant of her right breast and no associated palpable adenopathy. There was some nipple inversion but no discharge. Complete blood picture showed a total white cell count of 15 × 109/L(normal range 4–11 × 109/L) and C-reactive protein of 72 mg/L (normal < 10 mg/L). Ultrasonography of the right breast lump showed a diffuse hypoechoic abnormality in the upper central aspect. Mammography showed increased density and coarsened trabeculation but no microcalcification or suspicious focal abnormalities. An excision biopsy of the breast mass was performed which showed granulomatous inflammation in a mixed inflammatory cell background consisting of lymphocytes, plasma cells and polymorphs. The granulomas were within the ducts and caseous necrosis was not identified . There was no evidence of atypical epithelial hyperplasia or malignancy. Gram stain, Z-N stain, PAS-D stain were negative but bacteriological cultures grew Corynebacterium kroppenstedtii. A chest x-ray did not suggest current or previous TB disease.
The patient was treated with doxycycline for suspected granulomatous mastitis abscess. During six weeks of antibiotic therapy there was sinus formation and discharge of foul smelling purulent material. Based on patient profile, histological findings and lack of clinical response to antibiotic therapy, M. tuberculosis was considered the most likely causative pathogen for the breast abscess. Standard 6-month anti TB therapy (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) was commenced with good clinical response. Two months after completion of anti TB therapy, no breast mass was palpable, total white cell count was 8.71 × 109/L and C-reactive protein was 4 mg/L. Mammogram and ultrasound confirmed resolution of the mass lesion with residual scar tissue only. Two years after completion of therapy she remains asymptomatic with no recurrence of abscess.