44-year-old man had a history of trauma and splenectomy dating back to 2008 due to a high fall accident injury. The patient came to our hospital for routine follow-up health check for trauma. During the interview with the doctor, the patient had complaints of fatigue, flu-like symptoms and occasionally had the sense of thoracalgia for about a week. During the physical examination, a well healed laparotomy scar measuring about 10 cm in the upper left abdomen was identified. No spleen was palpable when palpation of left costal region was conducted by the doctor. No other significant findings were identified. All laboratory findings were within normal range. Hematology and biochemistry tests were within normal range. All other laboratory findings were within normal range too. Pulmonary function tests and cardiovascular examination showed the normal state. Plain chest computed tomography (CT) with an attenuation value 52HU was performed. There were multiple nodules under the left upper lobe tongue segment, lower lobe basal segment subpleural and right diaphragmatic, partial fusion showed wavy changes with uniform density. There were clear boundary and enhanced scanning lesions, measuring up to 18 mm, suggesting suspicious for primary lung cancer. There were old fractures of the left side 9th and 10th ribs, and no right sided pulmonary lesions or mediastinal lymphadenopathy were seen on CT. Contrast-enhanced CT scans showed obvious enhancement in soft tissue masses .
Based on CT imaging, the surgery of left thoracic exploration and lumpectomy of the chest wall was planned to relief symptom, remove masses. After discussed with patient. Via video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) was performed to remove the masses. During the operation, we found mass on the surface of the upper lobe of the left lung, and a large number of nodules that scattered on the surface of left lung surface, diaphragm and mediastinal pleura. The largest nodule was tough in texture, regular in shape, and was measured about 1.82.0 cm on pleura. We completely removed this biggest mass and other masses on left pleura through thoracotomy. After careful hemostasis, a chest tube was placed in the seventh intercostal space at the mid-axillary line and attached to an underwater seal. The left lung was re-inflated under direct vision. On the third day after surgery, the chest drain was removed after minimal drainage.
The patient had an excellent recovery after surgery and was discharged properly. Final pathological findings: on H&E slide, the mass was consisted of red pulp and white pulp of spleen with splenic corpuscle and spleen trabecular structure, which showed viable splenic tissue. Immunohistochemically, cells of masses were CK(−)、CD3(T cell+)、CD20(B cell+)、TTF-1(−)、Syn(−)、Ki-67(+,5%)、CD34(sinusoid+)、CD8(sinusoid+)、CD1a(−)、S-100(−)、CD68(sinusoid+) . The final pathological diagnosis was splenosis without malignancy.