A 16-year-old Chinese female presented with a 4-month history of painful erythematous nodules on her right lower leg. She visited a local hospital before referral to our hospital and received antibiotic treatment (sulbactam and cefoperazone) and ichthammol ointment. However, there was no improvement. On physical examination, clusters of small, tender nodules, 1–2 cm in diameter, were palpable on her right posterior calf. The erythema overlying the nodules merged, forming a lesion 10 cm in diameter without ulceration. Right ankle swelling was also observed. A painful erythematous nodule was discovered near the medial malleolus . The patient had no cough, fever, night sweats, fatigue, or weight loss. She was reported to be previously healthy and not taking any medication. She was vaccinated with the Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine at birth and had no known exposure to M. TB or family history of TB. Laboratory tests, including routine blood tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate calculation, C-reactive protein detection, and other autoimmunity marker detection, did not reveal abnormalities. However, there was a slight increase in interleukin 6. She was HIV negative. Chest computed tomography (CT) findings revealed multiple cavitary lesions and nodules in the lower left lobe, as well as hyperplastic mediastinal lymph nodes . A skin punch biopsy was performed, and histopathology showed granulomatous septal panniculitis and small-vessel vasculitis . The T-SPOT.TB test result was strongly positive. The sputum smear was negative for acid-fast bacilli, as was the sputum culture. The identification of M. TB DNA in skin lesions by polymerase chain reaction had not been performed. The patient was diagnosed with cavitary TB. The differential diagnoses in this case included erythema nodosum, sclerosing panniculitis and polyarteritis nodosa. She was put on a six-month regimen that consisted of 2 months of isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide followed by 4 months of isoniazid, rifampin and ethambutol. Adherence to treatment was assessed every month. After 2 months of intensive therapy, the nodules disappeared, and the erythema turned a dark, reddish-brown color. A significant reduction in cavity size and fewer residual lesions were shown by chest radiography after 6 months of treatment. Adverse and unanticipated events were not observed.