A 24-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to another hospital with nausea, vomiting, and general fatigue. She had a 2-month history of strongly feeling thirsty, and she had lost 5 kg during that period. She had no history of infectious diseases such as bronchitis before feeling thirsty. Her only medical history was seasonal allergic rhinitis, but her family history included T1DM. Her mother was diagnosed with T1DM at 29 years of age. Blood tests in the present patient showed a high blood glucose level (340 mg/dL), ketoacidosis (pH 7.21; bicarbonate [HCO3], 8 mmol/L; anion gap, 21.3 mmol/L), and hemoglobin A1c (12.7%). The anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody test result was 708 U/mL, and she was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis and T1DM.
Her symptoms, hyperglycemia, and ketoacidosis were alleviated by rapid normal saline infusion and insulin administration. Shortly after the first insulin lispro injection, however, she exhibited an itchy eruption, and the insulin lispro was changed to insulin aspart. Insulin glargine was also added. Two weeks after admission, the patient developed nephrotic syndrome, and her urine volume decreased rapidly. She was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of acute kidney injury.
On admission, she was found to have gained 4 kg in weight within the past 2 weeks due to oliguria. Physical examination showed lower-leg pitting edema. Her blood pressure was 106/66 mmHg, and urinalysis and blood test results revealed findings that were consistent with nephrotic syndrome and renal dysfunction . Her serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) level was very high (4882 IU/mL), and there was no eosinophilia.
Insulin treatment for T1DM was continued, and hemodialysis was initiated on day 2 and continued three times per week because of acute kidney injury. A renal biopsy was performed on day 15 after admission. Among the 46 glomeruli that were obtained in the biopsy, one glomerulus showed global sclerosis, and the others showed some mesangial matrix expansion but without hypercellularity or extracapillary or endocapillary proliferation. The pathological diagnosis was minor glomerular abnormalities including immunofluorescence and electron micrographic studies , and we diagnosed her with MCNS.
The patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . Treatment with oral prednisolone (PSL) at a dose of 0.8 mg/kg (50 mg/day) was started on day 22. Her urinary volume increased within 2 weeks, allowing discontinuation of hemodialysis on day 38, although her urinary protein remained at 5 g/day. Because nephrotic syndrome is not a result of MCNS but, rather, it is caused by focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), we started low-density lipoprotein apheresis (LDL-A) on day 42. LDL-A was performed twice a week for 3 weeks. Her urinary protein decreased, and the urine volume gradually increased. On day 55, she was in complete remission. PSL was tapered by 10 mg every 2 weeks, and she was discharged from the hospital at a reduced PSL dose of 30 mg/day on day 71.
Seven weeks later, the patient had a relapse of nephrotic syndrome, and cyclosporine 1.5 mg/kg (75 mg/day) was added to PSL. However, NS relapsed twice within the next 4 months, so we started her on a single dose of rituximab (375 mg/m2) after explaining the prognosis of frequently relapsing nephrotic syndrome. Serum CD19/CD20 levels decreased to 0.1/0.0% after 1 month, and we discontinued cyclosporine. PSL was tapered from 30 mg/day to 5 mg/day over 6 months, and hemoglobin A1c remained at 7.1–7.9% with insulin treatment. At 6 months after initiating rituximab, she remained in complete remission without any reported side effects.
To investigate the genetic background of the co-occurrence of both diseases, we performed an HLA testing on the patient and her mother. The patient had HLA-DRB1*09:01/09:01, DQB1*03:03/03:03, and her mother had HLA-DRB1*04:05/09:01, DQB1*03:03/04:01.