The patient was an 81-year-old man. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder at the age of 67 years. He had been hospitalized on numerous occasions for the treatment of mania and depression. Because his depression had deteriorated and he had suicidal tendencies, he was hospitalized again (day 1). Asenapine maleate had been used as maintenance therapy before admission. No obvious side effects were observed, including elevated blood glucose levels.
At the age of 70 years, he suffered from volvulus of the stomach, which caused widespread ischemic gastritis. As a result, his pylorus narrowed and he was unable to orally ingest food. Consequently, he had been fed enterally through an intestinal fistula. He was taking insulin and oral hypoglycemic medication for the treatment of diabetes. Because lamotrigine (200 mg/day) was not fully effective for the depressive symptoms, he additionally started to take lurasidone (10 mg/day) on day 30. On day 34, the dosage of lurasidone was increased to 20 mg/day. At that time, he received 1240 ml/day of tube feeding (including 1016 ml of water and 1500 kcal). On day 37, he vomited and his level of consciousness declined. The patient’s vital signs were a body temperature of 36.7°C, blood pressure of 123/65 mmHg, and pulse rate of 158 beats/min. The results of blood tests and urinalysis on admission (day 1) and day 37 are shown in Table . Head and abdominal computed tomographic scans showed no intracranial or trunk lesions that could cause these symptoms.
On the basis of these findings, he was diagnosed with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome. The administration of lurasidone was stopped. Intravenous fluid supplementation was started to treat dehydration, and the insulin dosage was adjusted to lower blood glucose concentrations. After his blood glucose concentrations and osmotic pressure normalized, he recovered from hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome the next day. Adjusting the dosage of the enteral nutrition agent led to a further improvement in blood sugar control.