A 3-year-old boy was referred to the Montreal Children’s Hospital to assess for the possibility of MWS given a history of hives and recurrent episodes of fever observed shortly after birth and the recent diagnosis of this syndrome in the child’s mother.
The patient had a past medical history of asthma. He had also received bilateral pressure equalizing tubes (PET) in the context of conductive HL, speech delay, presence of middle ear effusion and 4 episodes of acute otitis media in one year.
The patient’s mother was suspected of having MWS when amyloid was identified on small bowel biopsy as part of an evaluation for chronic diarrhea and weight loss. She also had nephrotic range proteinuria. Her history revealed that she had an urticarial rash since infancy and had later developed SNHL. Genetic analysis confirmed that she was heterozygous for D305N mutation in the NLRP3 gene. Given these results, her son was referred to the rheumatology as well as the medical genetics clinics of the Montreal Children’s Hospital. Genetic blood analysis confirmed the presence of the NLRP3 gene mutation and thus the diagnosis of MWS in this boy.
The child underwent a complete workup. His inflammatory markers were elevated: C-Reactive Protein (CRP) at 72 mg/L (normal 0–5) and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) at 45 mm/h (normal 0–10). He had a normal complete cell count, normal creatinine and normal urinalysis with normal urine protein/creatinine ratio. An initial eye exam demonstrated the presence of papilledema which was thought to be most likely secondary to this syndrome. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head was performed and it did not reveal any abnormalities or enhancing lesions.
The patient was started on Canakinumab in April 2012 at a dose of 50 mg (~ 2 mg/kg) subcutaneous (sc) every 8 weeks. The patient’s mother was also started on Canakinumab, however was quickly switched to Anakinra given persistent enhancement of the cochlea on MRI. A referral was made for evaluation for both child and mother at the National Institute of Health (NIH) and they were seen in October 2012. Following this, the patient was co-managed by both teams. In November 2012, the child’s dose of Canakinumab was changed to every 6 weeks because of persistent mildly elevated inflammatory markers (CRP 4.9–7.5; ESR 41). An effective response was observed with this change including normalization of the CRP and resolution of the papilledema.
In March 2013, the patient began having breakthrough symptoms of urticarial rash, as well as reappearance of an elevated CRP and ESR. The dose of Canakinumab was thus increased to 75 mg (5 mg/kg) every 6 weeks. Over the next few months, the patient improved with normalization of the inflammatory markers.
In July 2013, one year after starting Canakinumab, audiogram evaluation demonstrated new right-sided mild SNHL with a possible mixed component . Speech reception thresholds remained good at 15 decibels of HL (dBHL) in the left ear and 20 dBHL on the right ear. Tympanometry results displayed left sided large volumes compatible with a PET in place, however, negative pressure were observed on the right side.
At that time, MRI was repeated and continued to be normal with no enhancement of the cochlea or meninges. A lumbar puncture (LP) was done, which revealed the presence of aseptic meningitis with 19 white blood cells (WBCs) and an elevated protein count of 24 mg/dl in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). These occurred in the context of the child feeling well with no headaches, rash or fever and a normal CRP at 0.5 mg/L. The SNHL and abnormal LP results prompted an increase in the dose of Canakinumab to 150 mg every 6 weeks (8 mg/kg).
Follow up in otolaryngology and audiology continued to demonstrate mild SNHL on the right side. Approximately 7 months following the increase of Canakinumab to 8 mg/kg, the patient was still experiencing difficulties at school, perhaps secondary to hearing impairments. A repeat audiogram continued to demonstrate mild SNHL in the right ear from 750 Hz to 4000 Hz . The left ear hearing remained within normal limits, except for a mild conductive HL at 2 kHz. Speech reception thresholds were mildly elevated in the right ear at 25 dBHL. Given this HL and aforementioned difficulty in school performance, the patient received a hearing aid for the right ear.
In May 2014, repeat LP showed persistent elevation in WBC at 13 (20% lymphocytes; 44% neutrophils) and protein at 17. The SNHL remained stable. At that time, the inflammatory markers remained normal (CRP 0.7; ESR 8). Due to the persistence of pleocytosis in the CSF and SNHL, in June 2014, Canakinumab was discontinued and the patient was started on Anakinra 100 mg sc daily (5 mg/kg).
By January 2015, within 7 months of initiating Anakinra, he had improving aseptic meningitis with CSF WBC’s decreasing to 9/mm3. The dose of Anakinra was increased further to 142 mg (6.5 mg/kg). Interestingly, at that time, from an otologic perspective, resolution of the HL was observed at the NIH and confirmed in follow-up at our center in September 2015. Audiograms demonstrated hearing that was within normal limits bilaterally, with normal otoacoustic emissions. When comparing to previous, a 20 dB improvement was seen spanning the 1000-4000 Hz frequency range . Within another 7 months of the increase in dose of Anakinra, complete resolution of the aseptic meningitis was also observed with a CSF WBC count at 4/mm3 .
The patient continues to be treated with Anakinra at 6 mg/kg, and at the time of this publication, there has been no relapse of the HL or aseptic meningitis. He continues to be clinically well and persists with normal inflammatory markers and urinalysis.