An 8-month-old Han Chinese girl, the only child of her parents, was born full-term weighing 2.60 kg by vaginal delivery. Her father was 32 years old and her mother 26 years old. She was diagnosed with suspected MFS at birth caused by the presence of finger and toe arachnodactyly, elbow and knee flexion contractures, a characteristic ‘senile’ facial appearance, and loose skin, so was referred to the pediatrician. At the age of 8 days, an x-ray of the bilateral knee and elbow joints showed bone overgrowth with no apparent abnormalities of the joints or bone substance. After that, she received continuous follow-up at the Division of Children’s Healthcare, West China Second University Hospital, Chengdu, China. During this period, she was shown to have pectus excavatum, malnutrition, growth retardation, and feeding difficulties, with vitamin D levels at the lower end of normal limits; she was therefore administered vitamin D3 and calcium, although she failed to respond to treatment.
At the age of 6 months, she was admitted to hospital with bronchial pneumonia and then transferred to a pediatric cardiovascular ward because of a newly found grade 2–3 precordium murmur. On physical examination, in addition to malnutrition, she was observed to have a ‘senile’ facial appearance, loose skin, downslanting palpebral fissures, frontal bossing, downturned corners of the mouth, and skeletal abnormalities including big ears, micrognathia, arachnodactyly, a pectus deformity, pes planus, and dolichocephaly (Additional file ). X-ray analysis of her bilateral calves showed that the margins of the distal tibial and fibular metaphysis were not smooth, and that the gap around the ankle was blurred. Cardiac enlargement and pectus excavatum were confirmed by computed tomography. Electrocardiography (ECG) suggested a sinus rhythm with abnormal Q waves in I and aVL leads. Echocardiography indicated mitral valve prolapse and regurgitation with a grade 3 insufficiency, tricuspid valve hypertrophy and regurgitation with a grade 1 insufficiency, left atrial chamber enlargement, and aortic root dilatation at the sinuses of Valsalva (23 mm, Z > 2) . Ectopia lentis could not be determined because of the failure of pupils to dilate during several ophthalmologic examinations.
Neither parent had experienced any symptoms similar to those of their daughter, and their ECG examination and echocardiography were normal. According to the revised Ghent criteria for the diagnosis of MFS , the detected systemic features (scores) of the present patient included the wrist and thumb sign (3), pectus excavatum (1), pes planus (1), facial features (1), skin striae (1), and mitral valve prolapse (1). These systemic features (score >7) combined with the presentation of severe aortic root dilation (Z > 2) resulted in a diagnosis of MFS. After 5 days of antibiotic therapy administered intravenously for bronchial pneumonia, the patient recovered and was discharged. She was advised continuous follow-up at the Pediatric Cardiovascular Division to monitor cardiac function.
At the age of 8 months, the patient presented to the Department of Medical Genetics, West China Hospital, Chengdu, China. Her mother stated that no disease or condition had potentially affected the pregnancy, including hypertension, diabetes, thyroid disease, infection, medication, or toxic exposure. Moreover, the parents are not consanguineous and there is no family history of unexplained disorders or hereditary disease. After informed consent had been obtained, peripheral blood samples of the patient and her parents were collected for genetic testing to identify the causal FBN1 mutation. All 65 exons of FBN1 and their splice sites in the patient were sequenced by Sanger sequencing. This identified four variants, including a homozygous synonymous variant in exon 15 (c.1875 T > C, p.Asn625Asn) (rs25458), two heterozygous missense variants in exon 26 (c.3331 T > C, p.Cys1111Arg) and exon 27 (c.3442C > G, p.Pro1148Ala) (rs140598), and a heterozygous intronic variant (c.3464-5G > A) (rs11853943).
Total RNA was extracted from buccal epithelial cells and Sanger sequencing of the reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR product further confirmed the presence of the variant c.3331 T > C. Direct sequencing of parental PCR products showed that substitution c.3331 T > C was absent in both parents, and also from 208 ethnically matched controls without the MFS phenotype. There was no evidence of parental mosaicism of the missense mutation. The patient’s mother was found to be homozygous for the c.3442C > G substitution. At this time, an echocardiogram of the patient showed a progression of mitral valve regurgitation with a grade 3–4 insufficiency. She was advised of the possibility of cardiovascular surgery if the severe mitral valve insufficiency led to further ventricular dysfunction. The CARE Checklist of information of the case report is available as Additional file .