Fever and abdominal pain for 3 d, and vomiting, swelling in the lower limbs, and itching and rashes all over the body for 1 d.
A young man in his 20s, previously healthy and with no substance abuse, suddenly felt ill. For the past 3 d, he had been experiencing an intermittent, documented, high-grade fever with associated chills that did not resolve despite taking medication. He also had abdominal pain for 3 d, initially as acute onset persistent nonprogressive dull aching pain in the right hypochondriac region, which later became diffuse without any aggravating or relieving factors. He experienced 3-4 episodes of non-bilious, non-blood-stained vomiting containing food particles. Additionally, he had bilateral symmetrical painless swelling in the lower limbs, without any decreased urine output, burning micturition, frothy urine, haematuria, or pyuria. He initially sought medical attention at a local hospital and took some medication, but approximately 30 min later, he developed skin itching and rashes all over his body, which was suspected to be a drug reaction. Further evaluation revealed deranged renal function, and he was subsequently referred to our centre.
Non-contributory.
Non-significant.
Upon presentation, the patient was fully conscious of tachycardia and tachypnoea and maintained saturation at room air. A general physical examination did not reveal any major findings, except for bilateral pitting edema. Abdominal examination showed diffuse tenderness and guarding without any rigidity, distension, or palpable organomegaly. The patient was intubated due to acute hypoxic respiratory failure and subsequently shifted to the intensive care unit. On day two of admission, he demonstrated high-grade fever, accompanied by subconjunctival dot haemorrhages, erythematous skin and non-blanching hemorrhagic petechiae, mucosal and skin erosions, splinter haemorrhages, Janeway lesions, and bilateral pitting pedal oedema with pan systolic murmur at the mitral area. It is possible that the murmur might have been missed due to subjective variations in the examiner's assessment on the first day of examination .
The patient's initial laboratory tests showed an increase in neutrophilic white blood cells with a decrease in platelet count, along with an elevated level of procalcitonin at 38 ng/mL (normal range, < 0.05 ng/mL; a marker for bacterial infection) and acute kidney injury . A peripheral blood smear revealed normocytic normochromic cells with toxic granules, indicating toxic changes in white blood cells. Further investigations revealed disseminated intravascular coagulation, as evidenced by elevated levels of prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, activated partial thromboplastin clotting time, and D-dimer. As per institution policy and surviving sepsis guidelines 2021, the patient had clinical and biochemical evidence of definitive sepsis. Hence, two sets of blood cultures were sent before administration of antibiotics. Workups for tropical fever infections such as corona virus disease 2019, H3N2 and H1N1 influenza virus infection, dengue, malaria, scrub typhus, leptospira, and typhoid were negative. Arterial blood gas analysis showed normal anion gap metabolic acidosis with lactic acidosis and acute hypoxic respiratory failure.
Blood cultures were sent for suspected infective endocarditis, and after 48 h of incubation, two sets of blood cultures revealed MDR methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which was sensitive to linezolid, vancomycin, clindamycin, and tigecycline, but resistant to penicillin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, erythromycin, co-trimoxazole, and gentamicin. On the fourth day of admission, nested multiplex PCR (BioFireR) test of an endotracheal aspirate revealed the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, human rhinovirus, and enterovirus but sterile on culture. Microbial gene testing detected the presence of mec A/C (MRSA) cassette, which confers resistance to methicillin and other beta-lactam antibiotics, and MREJ genes (Mobile RmtE/J group genes, which encode rRNA methyltransferases that confer resistance to aminoglycoside antibiotics). The urine culture was sterile.
Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed hepatosplenomegaly, and an X-ray of the abdomen did not reveal any acute surgical emergencies. Chest X-ray showed bilateral areas of opacity in the middle and lower lobes of the lungs with air bronchograms. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the thorax revealed consolidation and air bronchograms in bilateral lung areas, along with interspersed ground glass opacities and bilateral pleural effusions . A two-dimensional echocardiography was done due to high suspicion of infective endocarditis, which revealed findings suggestive of rheumatic heart disease: Moderate mitral regurgitation, moderate mitral stenosis, mild aortic regurgitation, thickened anterior mitral leaflet with hockey stick sign with restricted leaflet motion, dilated left atrium, vegetations on the mitral valve, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%.