A 69-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the coronary care unit with unstable angina five years following coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) of his left internal mammary artery to his left anterior descending artery and a saphenous vein graft from the aorta to the diagonal, obtuse marginal branch and right descending posterior artery. Three years prior to presentation, the patient also underwent a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the stenotic ostium of the saphenous vein graft supplying the obtuse marginal coronary artery, with a Lekton motion 4.0 × 15 mm stent (Biotronik, AG, Bülach, Switzerland) at 16 atmosphere . One year after PCI, the patient still suffered from stable angina (NYHA III), and a second attempt to engage the stent in the vein graft ostium was performed. Unfortunately, the engagement was unsuccessful and the procedure was aborted. Another conservative approach was proposed and a PCI of the native left main and left circumflex artery was recommended in the event of progressive anginal complaints. Anti-anginal drug treatment was optimized with long acting nitrates.
Three months later the patient was readmitted with unstable angina pectoris (NYHA IV). A third attempt to reengage the protruding stent in the vein graft ostium was discussed and planned. The protruding part of the aorta was long and pointed towards the aortic valve at an angle of about 45 degrees from the aortic wall. This made reengagement unsuccessful despite multiple attempts with the use of many 6F guiding catheters. Thereafter, an attempt to dilate the angulated and calcified left main coronary artery was aborted when rupture of the balloon complicated the procedure. Instead of trying to engage the stent by its true lumen, a maneuver that had repeatedly failed, the treating doctor chose to float a 3.5-mm coronary catheter (Medtronic) towards the protruding part of the stent until it stabilized. Subsequently, a rather supportive Pilot 150 wire (Guidant, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used to moor the catheter to the stent through a side strut and further advanced the wire to the peripheral portion of the graft. After a new channel was created by predilatation of the strut, a 3.5 × 15 mm Endeavour stent (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was delivered and post-dilated with a 4.0 × 15 mm balloon through the newly placed stent at 18 atmospheres, allowing the proximal part of the protruding stent to become crushed at the ostial side . Care was taken not to leave a large part of the stent protruding into the aorta . Clinical follow-up at 12 months showed stent patency after selective vein graft cannulation .