A 20-year-old Caucasian woman, with no past medical history, presented to the emergency room of a general hospital, with numbness and weakness of her left-sided limbs. Neurologic examination revealed no cranial nerve deficit and 4/5 left-sided hemiparesis. No cerebellar impairment was noted. She was unable to localize tactile stimuli or to judge objects' size and shape. She had no pain, pressure, or temperature loss. Brain computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large (2.1 cm), well-demarcated hypodense lesion in the right parietal lobe, without perifocal edema. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without contrast showed a hypoisointense concentric mass on T1- and hyperintense on T2-weighted images . After contrast, the lesion appeared to enhance inhomogeneously, in a pattern resembling separate, alternating enhancing rings . These MRI findings were highly suggestive of the concentric pattern of demyelination (BCS).
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), serum, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis were normal. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and antinuclear antibody (ANA) tests were negative. The chest radiograph (CXR) was normal. Under the presumptive diagnosis of BCS, the patient received high-dose intravenously administered methylprednisolone (500 mg/day for ten days). The subsequent proton MR spectroscopy (MRS) revealed reduction in N-acetylaspartate and an increase in choline, lipids, and lactate. The findings were not specific and were consistent either with an acute demyelinating lesion or with a low-grade glioma. Ten days later, the patient showed moderate clinical improvement and continued with oral steroid treatment.
A brain CT-guided stereotactic biopsy was scheduled to establish the diagnosis, as MRS and laboratory findings were not specific. Four specimens within and from the periphery of the lesion were taken. Histologic examination failed to show the presence of a significant number of histiocytes, foamy macrophages, or myelin loss that would otherwise be expected in Balo sclerosis. It showed, however, mild to moderate nuclear atypia, whereas Ki-67 immunostaining was positive in 1% to 2% of the nuclei. The pathologist commented that the findings were suggestive of a grade II astrocytoma.
In the face of this diagnostic dilemma, a conservative approach was adopted. Oral steroid treatment was continued, and the patient was scheduled for a new 1H-MRS and MRI scan one month later. The spectroscopic findings were identical to the previous ones. However, the new conventional MRI images showed significant differences, in that the signal intensity was lower in the center of the lesion in T2 images , whereas the enhancing rings appeared to fade away centrifugally . The dimensions of the lesion were unchanged. These findings were considered sufficient enough to establish the diagnosis of BCS.
No relapse in the symptoms occurred during the next 12 months of follow-up. A serial MRI showed a low-signal, non-enhancing lesion.