A 16-year-old boy presented to the emergency department with a history of accidental exposure to diesel fuel while siphoning from a motor vehicle tank. He gave a history of progressive shortness of breath, non-radiating pleuritic chest pain, and cough without sputum or mucus production. The dyspnoea was associated with exertion, and there were no complaints of orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. The fever was low-grade, and an on-off pattern not associated with chills and rigors occurred one day after his hospitalization. There was no significant history of wheezing, hemoptysis, night sweats, weight loss, anorexia, altered sensorium, limb weakness, recent travel, or close contact with a diseased person or animal. The patient’s father revealed that the boy accidentally drank diesel from the vehicle. The patient has no history of allergies and has not taken any drugs or medications in the past. None of his family members has similar history or disease.
During the general examination, he was conscious, oriented, and ill-looking. His axillary temperature was 99.8°F, heart rate 112 bpm, respiratory rate 26/min, blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, and his peripheral oxygen saturation SpO2 was 87% while breathing ambient air. He was dehydrated, but no pallor, icterus, lymphadenopathy, cyanosis, clubbing, or oedema were noted. On systemic examination of the chest, there was a decreased chest wall excursion, reduced breath sounds bilaterally with diffuse bilateral basal crepitations, and a dull, stony percussion note bilaterally. The systemic examination of other systems did not reveal any significant abnormalities.
The laboratory tests showed that the patient had an increase in inflammatory markers, with total white blood cell count was 19 120/mm3, and differential count consisted of 84.7% neutrophils and 11.1% lymphocytes. Haematocrit, platelet count, and haemoglobin were all within normal ranges. The results of the serology tests, coagulation assay, liver function test, and renal function test were also normal. The electrocardiogram shows sinus tachycardia and arterial blood gas analysis was normal. A plain X-ray of the chest showed patchy bilateral parenchymal ground-glass hazy opacities in the right lower zone and the left mid and lower zones as shown in Figure .
Based on the radiological scans, the clinical manifestations, and the history of siphonage, diesel-induced chemical pneumonitis was diagnosed. Since South Asia is a tuberculosis-endemic region, pulmonary tuberculosis was also considered as a potential alternate diagnosis. However, the acid-fast bacteria were not detected by sputum analysis. The patient received conservative, supportive care and was maintained on high-flow oxygen, antipyretic tablets taken every 8 h, and intravenous cefuroxime 750 mg given every 8 h for 7 days. Throughout his hospital stay, the patient experienced no further complications. When there was a considerable radiological regression of consolidations, improvements in pulmonary symptoms, and maintenance of oxygen saturation over 94% in room air, the patient was discharged after 1 week. The patient was informed to see the outpatient clinic frequently for follow-up after a week. The patient complained of no respiratory problem and stated feeling of well being.