A 20-year-old woman presented with chronic floaters OS. Examination revealed visual acuity of 20/20 OD and 20/25 OS with intraocular pressures of 14 mm OU, and a normal slit-lamp examination OU. The right fundus examination was unremarkable, and the left revealed a peripheral, homogenously pigmented intraocular lesion inferiorly . Ultrasonography showed a large mushrooming tumor on B-scan and a highly reflective lesion measuring 9.88 mm in thickness by 11.06 mm by 10.75 mm in basal dimensions on A-scan . The reflectivity was not consistent with melanoma and the differential diagnosis included melanocytoma, adenoma of the pigmented ciliary body epithelium, and medulloepithelioma.
She was scheduled for a follow-up in 4 months but failed to keep several appointments and returned 3 ½ years later with left eye pain and loss of vision over several weeks. Examination at that time revealed a visual acuity of 20/20 OD and a small area of hand motion OS. Her intraocular pressures were 17 mm OD and 42 mm OS. Slit-lamp examination OS showed mild conjunctival injection without dilation of conjunctival vessels, mild corneal edema, and posterior synechiae with heavy deposition of pigment on the posterior lens capsule. There was no red reflex and no view of the fundus.
An ultrasound exam demonstrated a lesion measuring 15.73 mm in thickness by 16.43 mm by 15.94 mm in basal dimensions. Due to the size of the lesion, ultrasound biomicroscopy was unable to fully characterize the lesion . The lesion was visualized in its entirety on 10 MHz immersion B-scan ultrasound .
The significant growth and intraocular pigment deposition were concerning for a melanoma, but the high reflectivity on A-scan was most consistent with a melanocytoma or adenoma of the pigmented ciliary body epithelium. Due to the continued clinical concern for melanoma, despite the ultrasound findings, enucleation was proposed to the patient given the size of the lesion and status of the eye. Through shared decision-making, the patient elected for enucleation.
The eye was enucleated, and pathology described a large ciliary body mass. Low power microscopy revealed a melanocytoma with pseudocysts . Higher power microscopy showed cells with heavily pigmented cytoplasm, small nuclei without dysplastic features, and pigment-laden macrophages . The pseudocyst formation was demonstrated . Microscopy of double-bleached slides revealed bland nuclei, small nucleoli, and low nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio typical of melanocytomas . The microscope used for pathology imaging was an Olympus model BX40F4 with Olympus DP20 mounted camera. No detectors, filters, or acquisition software were utilized.