In June 2017, a 15-year-old boy was admitted to the emergency department following blunt abdominal trauma after being hit by a car while he was observing a car race.
The patient was intubated and was haemodynamically stable (blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, pulse rate 88/min); therefore, laboratory tests and CT-scan were performed.
The computed tomographic scan of the thorax and abdomen showed bilateral pleural effusions with rib fractures and a large haemoperitoneum associated with a traumatic rupture of the spleen with multiple injuries (grade III of the Organ Injury Scale, of AAST ) and a 7-cm mass at the left side of the retroperitoneal space . A thoracic drain was inserted on the left side of the thorax, and non-operative management for the spleen started.
Haemoglobin decreased from 14.4 to 8.9 g/L during hospitalization with four hours of conservative treatment, with appearance of haemodynamic instability that was considered an indication for surgery.
An incision was made on the midline. The abdomen was packed and explored. The operation began with clearance of the haemoperitoneum. The spleen appeared with multiple longitudinal lesions in the visceral aspect. It was gently grasped and displaced medially towards the incision. The avascular peritoneal attachments and ligaments are incised with by electrocautery, followed by dissection of the splenogastric ligament and ligation of the short gastric vessels near the spleen to avoid injury or late necrosis of the gastric wall. The splenorenal, splenocolic and splenophrenic ligaments were divided. To avoid pancreatic injuries, dissection was carried out in close proximity to the hilum of the spleen, where the splenic artery and veins were identified, carefully dissected, doubly ligated and fixed with suture ligatures. After removal of the spleen, haemostasis was obtained and confirmed in a systematic fashion through careful inspection of the left subphrenic area, the greater curvature of the stomach and the short gastric vessel area, as well as the splenic hilum. Inspection of these areas showed an accessory spleen connected to the omentum by a vascular pedicle that was moved to the splenic fossa and fixed to the diaphragmatic peritoneum by prolene stitches to protect it from future traumatic injuries . A closed drainage was placed in the splenic fossa. Assuming that the 7-cm mass on the left side of the retroperitoneal space was an accessory spleen, given the vascular dynamics of the mass at the CT scan with contrast, it was decided to leave the retroperitoneal mass.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day. He was followed up for 7 months, during which he was well with no complications. A CT scan performed a couple of months after the surgical procedure showed the viability of the small spleen close to diaphragm. Radiological examination revealed the mass in the retroperitoneal space confirming a second accessory spleen .