A 5-year-old male was taken to a nearby clinic with complaints of abdominal pain and vomiting. Blood examination showed an elevated inflammatory response, progressive acidosis, and acute renal dysfunction; Computed tomography (CT) findings revealed a poor contrast effect on the small intestine, with extensive necrotic changes . He was diagnosed with strangulated bowel obstruction and underwent emergency operation. The necrotic intestine (340 cm) was resected because of strangulated bowel obstruction caused by an intestinal mesenteric hiatal hernia . The length of the residual intestine was 51 cm. His respiratory and circulatory status stabilized and inflammatory findings improved after the operation. Stoma closure was performed 8 days postoperatively. His general condition remained stable without any complications; however, bloody stools appeared 19 days after the first operation . No pathogenic bacteria were detected in the stool at the time of bloody stool appearance. The patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy. Diffuse redness and edema were observed in the colonic mucosa throughout the colon . In contrast, no inflammatory findings were observed in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Pathological findings in the colonic mucosa showed moderate inflammatory cell infiltration and numerous eosinophil counts, > 20 cells/high-power field (cells/HPF) . A blood examination revealed an eosinophil count of more than 20%. The patient was diagnosed with EGIDs. The treatment for SBS was considered effective as the EGIDs treatment. Nutritional therapies, which comprised PN using fat and amino acid formulas and enteral nutrition (EN) using elemental and low residue diet, were initiated. A second colonoscopy 9 days later revealed that the colonic mucosal erosions and edema tended to improve in response to the nutritional and medication therapy, which also included probiotics. However, he experienced repeated episodes of bloody stools that disappeared and flared up. Furthermore, liver dysfunction due to long-term parenteral nutrition was observed. Although the patient was complicated with liver dysfunction and eosinophilic inflammation, the EN was continued in order to prioritize the prevention of liver dysfunction progression, based on a comprehensive assessment of his blood parameters and general condition. A third colonoscopy showed worsening colonic mucosal erosions and edema. Additional treatment with montelukast sodium was initiated, however, the bloody stools persisted. He was transferred to our hospital to treat EGIDs 5 months after the first operation .
At our hospital, he was managed with parental nutrition, including fish oil (Omegaven®; Fresenius Kabi), and EN, including an elemental diet . Prednisolone was administered at a 1.4 mg/kg/day dose 6 days after the transfer . The bloody stools disappeared a few days after prednisolone administration. The prednisolone dose was then reduced by approximately 0.2 mg every 2 weeks based on symptoms. The quantity of the elemental diet was gradually increased. As symptoms improved, dietary restrictions were lifted in a step-wise approach, including starting an allergic diet. At 85 days after the transfer, nutritional management was established without parenteral nutrition. Colonoscopy after prednisolone administration showed that the redness and edema of the colonic mucosa had disappeared . Pathological findings showed that inflammatory cell infiltration improved, and eosinophil counts were 1–10 cells/HPF . He was discharged 92 days after transfer (8 months after the operation). At the time of discharge, the prednisolone dose was reduced to 0.4 mg/kg/day. Prednisolone therapy was completed 5 months after discharge (13 months after the operation). Seven months after discontinuation of the medication, the patient had no recurrence of symptoms.