The patient is a 67-year-old female Japanese farmer who had a history of hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, diabetes, hypothyroidism and osteoporosis. She had artificial joints on both knees. She was referred to Naga Municipal Hospital as she had a severe headache, where, using contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), she was diagnosed with a subarachnoid haemorrhage. Hence, coil embolization treatment using a cerebrovascular catheter was promptly enforced. Although her postoperative recovery was smooth, her body temperature rose to >39.4 °C on the seventeenth day of illness. Following this, two sets of blood culture were performed. Haematological tests revealed a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 19.76 mg l−1 and a white blood cell (WBC) count of 4.35×106 l−1, with 87 % neutrophils.
Blood culture was performed using the BACTEC 9050 system (Becton, Dickinson and Co.). Blood was collected in two aerobic and two anaerobic bottles from two separate sites. Of the four blood culture vials, two aerobic culture vials showed a positive signal 40 h later, and Gram staining of the blood culture fluid samples showed Gram-negative rods . Identical oxidase-positive, urease-positive, non-lactose-fermenting colonies were isolated from both blood culture vials the next day . Using the Vitek2 automated identification and susceptibility system (bioMérieux) and API system with API20 NE (bioMérieux), both colonies were separately identified as Rhizobium radiobacter (API code 1667744). Using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) with MALDI Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics), the isolate was identified as R. radiobacter. For species confirmation, 16S rRNA gene sequencing using universal eubacterial primers was performed. A Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (blast) search for the sequence obtained was performed using the taxonomy browser of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). The sequence result (GenBank accession number LC208007) showed 99.93 % similarity (1349/1350 bp) with the type strain of R. pusense and 99.06 % similarity (1365/1350 bp) with the type strain of R. radiobacter. According to phylogenetic trees created using neighbour-joining method , this strain (Naga 0113=PAGU 1967) was most closely related to the R. pusense genotype, among all species of the genus Rhizobium. To supplement the 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis, additional recA and atpD sequences of Naga 0113 were obtained and compared with those of the type strain of R. pusense using blast. Partial sequence analysis of these housekeeping genes revealed 97.2 % similarity for recA and 96.2 % for atpD with the type strain of R. pusense and 94.6 % similarity for recA and 91.92 % for atpD with the type strain of R. radiobacter. The results reinforced our observation that the clinical isolate is most similar to R. pusense.
The antimicrobial susceptibility of strain Naga 0113 was tested using a broth microdilution method according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) standard M100-S23 guidelines . Minimal inhibitory concentration was obtained using a dry plate (Eiken Chemical Co.) incubated at 35 °C for 24 h, and the results were interpreted according to breakpoints established for the other non-Enterobacteriaceae. The results are shown in .
The patient was treated with intravenous meropenem (MEPM) (3 g/d) for 4 weeks. Both R. pusense and Bacillus cereus were isolated from the blood culture on day 21 and hence intravenous levofloxacin (LVFX) was additionally administered for 1 week and follow-up of oral LVFX was performed for 1 week. Sepsis recovered completely by antimicrobial treatment and the patient was safely discharged from the hospital.