The proband is an 11 year old boy introduced to our clinic with global developmental delay and verbal apraxia at the age of four. He is the third of four-children of non-consanguineous parents of Chinese descent. His mother and his paternal grand-mother have a history of recurrent spontaneous pregnancy losses with unknown cause. His parents and three siblings are apparently healthy . The proband was born after 39 weeks of uneventful pregnancy via caesarean section for fetal distress with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at one and five minutes after birth, respectively. His birth weight was 2175 gram (<3rd percentile (%ile)), length was 47 cm (10th %ile) and occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) was 34 cm (25th %ile). The patient exhibited feeding difficulty, low muscle tone, bilateral ptosis, club foot, bilateral undescended testes, and flexion contracture of hand and wrist. The proband’s laboratory diagnostic workup was normal and included routine karyotype, subtelomeric FISH, fragile X, biochemical assessment, cranial MRI and CT scan. Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 revealed a 709.2 kb duplication of 16p11.2 (29,425,199–30,134,432) in the proband, confirmed by FISH and parental studies indicating maternal inheritance. The proband’s siblings were not tested for dup16p11.2 per the family’s request.
We examined the mother who is a carrier of dup16p11.2 for the possibility that apparently healthy carrier parents might have some unnoticed clinical features, and for the presence of phenotypic commonality with his child. She showed no sign of ID, ASD, psychiatric disorder (anxiety, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD)), underweight or microcephaly. She was also negative for history of other dup16p11.2 features including epilepsy, speech and motor delay, and congenital anomalies.
DNA samples of family trios were sent to PerkinElmer Company for exome enrichment using the TruSeq Exome Enrichment Kit (Agilent v5 + UTR), followed by paired-end sequencing (Illumina HiSeq 2000, read length of 100 bp). Using Golden Helix (GH) software (SNP & Variation Suite 7.7.8), the WES data from a single VCF file for sequenced family members was analyzed (Additional file : Figure S1). Two novel splicing mutations of VPS13B (8q22.2) with compound heterozygous inheritance were identified in the proband and subsequently confirmed by Sanger sequencing . A sequence variant of c.1426-1G > A located in the acceptor splice site of intron 10 was identified in Proband A and his mother. The second variant, a nucleotide change of G > T at c.4157 + 1 situated in the donor site of intron 27, was inherited from his father. Mutations and/or CNVs in the VPS13B gene lead to a rare autosomal recessive condition called Cohen syndrome (CS) .
Functional prediction tools used for WES data analysis anticipate the effect of non-synonymous variants (coding region). However, both variants of VPS13B are located at canonical splice sites. ALAMUT software predicted that two intronic variants of VPS13B would result in skipping of the exon 11 and 27. To confirm this prediction, we performed PCR on cDNA samples of proband and a control using two separate sets of primers covering exons 9–12 and 26–29 of VPS13B, followed by Sanger sequencing of the PCR products. This confirmed that both variants abolish the canonical splice sites and create aberrant RNA sequences . Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) for VPS13B demonstrated reduced expression in the proband compared to two controls (Additional file : Material and methods). The mother also showed reduced RNA expression compared to one control . Other family members were not available for VPS13B or dup16p11.2 testing.
The VPS13B gene, also known as COH1 (OMIM: 607817), is approximately 864 kb in length and located on chromosome 8q22.2. It consists of 62 exons encoding a transmembrane protein of 4022 amino acids . VPS13B is a peripheral membrane protein that is required for function, orientation and structural integrity of the Golgi apparatus and thus plays a role in vesicle-mediated sorting and intracellular protein transport [, ]. Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations/CNVs of VPS13B cause CS . ﻿
Intronic point mutations within donor and acceptor sites at mRNA splice junctions typically cause mRNA mis-splicing, leading to subsequent nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), and altered protein with effect on the clinical phenotype . Indeed, Sanger sequencing of RT-PCR product corresponding to each specific VPS13B variant demonstrated that both variants create aberrant RNA sequences and frameshift and thus probably lead to NMD. Moreover, the RNA expression level of VPS13B in the proband was significantly reduced compared to two controls. VPS13B expression in his mother was intermediate between the proband and one control, suggesting that partial loss-of-function in carriers of autosomal recessive disorders is not sufficient to produce a complete disease phenotype.
Absence of dup16p11.2 -related phenotype in the mother, presence of some CS features in the proband, and the discovery of pathogenic VPS13B mutations warranted re-evaluation of our patient at 10 years of age. CS has a broad clinical phenotype spectrum including ID, microcephaly, hypotonia, dysmorphic facial features, truncal obesity, slender extremities, joint hypermobility, myopia, retinal dystrophy, intermittent isolated neutropenia, and happy personality. Neutropenia is characterized as a neutrophil count of <1.5 × 109/L in children and <1.8 × 109/L in adults . The facial gestalt includes down-slanting palpebral fissures, wave-shaped eyelids, thick eyebrows and eyelashes, low hairline, prominent and beak-shaped nose, malar hypoplasia, short philtrum, high-arched palate, maxillary prognathia and prominent central incisors [–]. Patients with CS grimace when they are asked to smile [, ]. Other signs and symptoms include short stature and scoliosis [, ]. In addition, individuals with CS have high rates of ASD or autistic features . The estimated prevalence of CS is 1:105,000 , however, its frequency may be considerably higher due to the fact that patients are often not diagnosed until they reach their teenage or adult years. The early diagnosis of CS is challenging because facial features are less noticeable in pre-school age, truncal obesity may evolve in late-childhood, neutropenia is rarely identified due to its intermittent pattern and absence of clinical consequences, and diagnosis of retinal dystrophy usually occurs in later childhood [, , ].
Reverse phenotyping of our patient at 10 years of age unequivocally confirmed a pattern of features consistent with CS . Table shows the presence or absence of clinical features observed in our proband relative to patients with CS [, , –], or dup16p11.2 [, , –].
Being underweight is a known feature of dup 16p11.2. Although the proband was underweight at birth, his weight changed with age to the 5–10th %ile at the age of 10. He also developed truncal obesity with slender extremities, mild scoliosis, and evolving facial gestalt consistent with CS. Similar to the report by El Chehadeh-Djebbar et al. , our study suggests that some CS features are age-dependent and evolve later in childhood .