A 59-year-old female with a history of chest X-ray examination revealing bilateral lung ground-glass appearance 4 years ago was undergoing regular chest computed tomography (CT) for follow-up observation. On the recent CT, a giant abdominal tumor was identified, and she referred to our hospital. Her height was 158 cm, and body weight was 66 kg. The abdominal examination revealed a flat and soft abdomen, with no palpable mass detected on the surface. Laboratory findings showed no significant abnormalities. An abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 34 cm tumor with a similar density to subcutaneous fat . A high density area was observed on the ventral side of the tumor. Abdominal plain magnetic response imaging (MRI) revealed that the tumor was suppressed on the fat-suppressed images, indicating a predominance of fatty components. The area that showed high density on CT exhibited equivalent-signal intensity area to renal parenchyma on T2-weighted images, and not suppressed on fat-suppressed images. The upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no abnormalities without hiatal hernia.
The tumor was suspected of liposarcoma and decided to proceed with surgery. The tumor appeared to be composed of homogeneous fatty tissue, and there was no clear evidence of infiltration into the surrounding organs on imaging. Therefore, a well-differentiated liposarcoma was the most likely diagnosis, but the areas showing high density on CT and not suppressed on MRI fat-suppression images were considered to potentially indicate dedifferentiation. Artery running through the tumor was recognized, and 3D-CTA showed that the tumor was supplied by a branch of the dorsal pancreatic artery (DPA) . The branches of the right gastroepiploic artery (RGEA) and superior mesenteric artery (SMA), such as the middle colic artery (MCA), were observed to be compressed and displaced by the tumor, and they were not supplying blood to the tumor. Regarding the origin of the tumor, at first, given the appearance of the tumor occupying the intraperitoneal space, we thought it originated from an intra-abdominal organ. However, considering that the tumor’s feeding artery was branches of the DPA, we concluded that the tumor originated retroperitoneally. Upon reevaluating the CT images, we suspected that the tumor arose from the peripancreatic fat tissue, exerting pressure on the stomach and greater omentum ventrally and displacing the transverse colon and transverse mesocolon dorsally . In addition, the drainage vein was flowing into the middle colic vein (MCV).
She underwent midline laparotomy from the xiphoid process to the lower abdomen, and the tumor was found to be a soft, yellowish mass, approximately the size of an adult’s head, with an extremely thin but distinct capsule . It did not invade the abdominal wall or other organs. The greater omentum and the tumor capsule could be easily separated without causing injury, as their color and texture differed from the surrounding tissue. Similarly, during the dissection of the transverse colon and transverse mesocolon, separation at a layer that did not injure the visceral peritoneum or tumor capsule was mostly possible. The vein on the back of the tumor was found to be flowing into the transverse mesocolon, confirming the preoperative assessment of the venous drainage into the MCV. To avoid injuring the tumor capsule, the transverse mesocolon was partially attached to the tumor and dissected. Once the dissection between the greater omentum, transverse colon, and its mesentery, and the tumor was completed, only an artery remained at the lower border of the pancreas. Based on the preoperative 3D-CTA, it was determined that this artery was branch of the DPA suppling as the feeding artery. The point of origin of the feeding artery was the fat tissue at the lower border of the pancreas, which was initially suspected as the primary site of the tumor. Therefore, a portion of the pancreatic capsule and the transverse mesocolon were attached to the tumor, and the feeding artery was dissected without injuring the tumor capsule, leading to successful tumor resection. After the tumor was resected, the right gastroepiploic artery and vein (RGEV), MCA, MCV, accessary right colic vein (AcRCV) were clearly visualized, confirming that the feeding arteries of the tumor were distinct from these vessels. The operation time was 1 h and 47 min, with a blood loss of 30 g.
The resected specimen measured 34 × 23 × 7 cm, 2620 g . The tumor had a thin fibrous capsule, and its cut surface was predominantly composed of yellowish fatty tissue, with some areas showing white nodules. Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was mostly composed of slightly enlarged adipocytes of varying sizes, along with atypical stromal cells and lipoblast . The white nodules corresponded to the high density areas observed in the CT and showed an increase in fibrous tissue, but no signs of necrosis, nuclear atypia, or mitotic figures were observed, and no dedifferentiation was evident. Immunohistochemical examination revealed positive results for CDK4, MDM2, and p16, weakly positive results for CD34 and S-100, with a Ki-67 index of 2%. Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a well-differentiated liposarcoma. The tumor was resected without injuring the capsule, and the surgical margins were negative, indicating complete resection.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the third day after surgery. She did not receive any postoperative therapy. Follow-up evaluations were performed with CT or MRI every 3 months. Two years postoperatively, she remains alive with no evidence of disease recurrence.