A 46-year-old male patient was hospitalized in March 2015 because of bilateral lower extremity edema, and a diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome was made. The patient displayed evidence of chronic bilateral lacrimal gland inflammation, with exophthalmos, tearing, and bulbar conjunctival hyperemia. Laboratory test results are shown in Table . The immunofluorescence assay results from a renal biopsy were as follows: IgA−, IgG+++, IgM++, C1q−, and C3+++; and particle-like deposition was seen along the capillary wall. Light microscopy showed diffuse thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, subepithelial deposition of fuchsinophilic protein, segmental spike formation, vacuolar degeneration of renal tubules, and mild interstitial edema; however, while there was no infiltration of inflammatory cells, thickening of small arterial wall was observed. Electron microscopy showed the proliferation of glomerular mesangial cells and interstitial cells, diffuse and irregular thickening of basement membrane, electron-dense deposits in the subepithelial, intrabasal, and mesangial areas, and diffuse fusion of the foot processes among epithelial cells; however, no specific lesions were seen in renal tubules or the interstitium. All these findings met the diagnostic criteria for stage II MN . While he was hospitalized, his serum creatinine increased progressively, his albumin levels were extremely low, the edema gradually worsened, and his urine output was low. To prevent further deterioration of renal function and secondary thrombosis, we administered prednisone acetate (60 mg/day for 8 weeks, which was then reduced by 5 mg every 4 weeks as the patient’s condition permitted) and cyclophosphamide (0.6 g/month by intravenous injection, to a total of 6 g). After 11 months of treatment, the patient’s condition was completely relieved. The prednisone acetate and cyclophosphamide were discontinued, and irbesartan was administered as maintenance therapy.
In August 2016, the patient was re-hospitalized because of nephrotic syndrome recurrence, accompanied by AKI. The results of relevant tests are shown in Table . Considering that AKI is seldom caused by MN, we performed another renal biopsy. Immunofluorescence assay results were as follows: IgA−, IgG+++, IgM++, C1q−, and C3+++, and mass- and particle-like depositions were seen along the mesangial area and capillary wall. Light microscopy showed the mildly diffuse proliferation of glomerular mesangial cells and interstitial cells, moderate aggravation of focal segmental lesions, diffuse thickening of basement membrane (together with diffuse spike formation), subepithelial deposition of fuchsinophilic protein, vacuolar and granular degeneration of renal tubular epithelial cells, multifocal loss of brush border, dilation of the renal tubules, multifocal atrophy, diffuse infiltration of lymphocytes, monocytes, plasma cells in the renal interstitium, multifocal fibrosis, and thickening of small arterial walls. Electron microscopy showed the proliferation of glomerular mesangial cells and interstitial cells, diffuse and irregular thickening of basement membrane, electron-dense deposits in the subepithelial, intrabasal, subendothelial, and mesangial areas, diffuse fusion of the foot processes among epithelial cells, detachment and partial atrophy of the microvilli of renal tubular epithelial cells as well as edema, infiltration of lymphocytes/monocytes, and fibrosis in the renal interstitium. Immunohistochemistry revealed CD38+, CD138+, IgG+, and IgG4+ cells (approximately 30% of IgG+ cells) . Based on the immunohistochemical findings, clinical manifestations, and exclusion of other secondary factors, a diagnosis of IgG4-TIN accompanied by MN was made.
The patient had acute kidney injury and was in critical condition. Prednisone acetate and cyclophosphamide were administered in accordance with the previous treatment regimen. A further 6 g of cyclophosphamide was then administered (to a total of 12 g), and prednisone acetate was continued at 10 mg/day for maintenance. His renal function returned to normal after 2 months, and nephrotic syndrome was ameliorated after 5 months. The patient has been closely followed-up to date .