A 67 year old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department with complaints of high grade fever, cough with yellowish phlegm for the past three days. He also had exertional dyspnea New York Heart Association (NYHA grade 3), which was attributed to his heart failure from under lying ischemic heart disease. The dyspnea had worsened from Grade 2 to Grade 3 over the past 5–6 months. There was no chest pain.
He had a history of atherosclerotic heart disease status post coronary artery bypass graft done three years ago and congestive heart failure (CHF), Diabetes Mellitus type II and hypertension for the past 15 years. He smoked a pack of cigarettes every day for thirty years. He was on aspirin, carvedilol, lisinopril, atorvastatin, furosemide and glipizide.
On examination, the patient was in no apparent distress. He was icteric, not cyanosed, no clubbing, no palpable lymph nodes, poor peripheral pulses and bilateral pedal edema. Jugular venous distension of 3–4 cm was noted. Auscultation of the lungs revealed decreased air entry in right lower zone and bibasilar rales. A systolic ejection murmur grade 2/6 was heard in the aortic area. Abdomen was soft with a 2 finger breadth enlargement of the liver. Rest of the examination was normal.
Complete blood count showed leukocytosis with predominant neutrophils and a left shift. Hemoglobin-hematocrit and platelet count was normal. The patient had slight hyponatremia (132 meq), hypercalcemia 13.5 mg/dl, while other serum electrolytes were within normal range. He had a raised total bilirubin (5.3 mg/dl) while other liver function tests were normal.
Chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion, right lower lung field infiltrate, cardiomegaly and chronic interstitial lung changes. The impression was right lower lobe pneumonia . An EKG demonstrated sinus rhythm with q waves in leads II, II, aVF and V1-V5 suggestive of old infarct.
A presumptive diagnosis of pneumonia was made and he was started on intravenous ciprofloxacin, Piperacillin/Tazobactam. The increase in bilirubin was speculated to be secondary to congestion of the liver due to CHF and he was treated with furosemide, digoxin, and captopril.
Chest CT without contrast showed a mixed density pleural based lesion in the right lower lobe measuring 7 cm (SI) × 5.4 cm (AP) × 7.9 cm (TV) for which a diagnostic consideration of cavitating neoplasm, infectious lesion and sequestration was entertained There was no evidence of mediastinal, axillary or hilar adenopathy. Abdominal CT without contrast showed a large amount of intraperitoneal ascites present within abdomen and pelvis. The liver demonstrated a nodular contour suggestive of cirrhotic morphology. Multiple bilobed low attenuation lesions with a peripheral rim enhancement of varying sizes suggestive of metastases versus septic emboli were seen . A soft tissue mass adjacent to the posterior segment of the right lobe of the liver which could represent an exophytic liver lesion versus a mesenteric soft tissue mass was seen. A CT scan with contrast was suggested but the patient refused due to previous contrast allergy.
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was done on the 5th days after admission and patient tolerated the procedure well. No endobronchial lesions were seen. Bronchial lavage, aspirate and brushings from the right lower lobe were done and 20 cc of hemorrhagic fluid was sent for analysis which showed few atypical squamous cells, mixed respiratory flora, no acid fast bacilli, no growth on culture. A transbronchial biopsy of the right lower lobe was done and the biopsy specimen consisted of several tan grey soft tissues measuring 1.2 × 0.2 × 0.1 cm. The biopsies showed essential bronchial mucosa with respiratory epithelium and foci of squamous metaplasia with acute inflammation.
Since fiberoptic bronchoscopy was inconclusive a CT guided transthoracic needle biopsy was done which yield 50 cc of yellow brown purulent material was aspirated from posterior pleural based collection in the right lower lobe at the same time due the questionable.
The purulent material obtained on CT guided biopsy of the lung revealed squamous cell carcinoma with extensive coagulation necrosis. There was no evidence of infection. Hence, all antibiotics were discontinued and oncology consult was obtained. CT guided needle core biopsy of the liver was negative for malignancy and showed mild inflammatory changes. Whole body PET scan was done to detect secondaries, but showed degenerative arthritic changes in knees and feet and no other focal changes that would suggest metastases. The patient had a persistent elevated leukocyte count with an elevated polymorphonuclear cell count and elevated calcium levels. The patient was offered sugary but the patient and the family refused surgery as the patients had moderate to high risk mortality from the surgery due to his multiple medical problems. The patient's poor prognosis was discussed with him and was placed in hospice care.