A 69-year-old female, with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus on insulin therapy, was brought to the hospital by emergency medical services due to encephalopathy. The patient also had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, asthma, and panniculitis of the abdominal wall. She was post-surgery, which was complicated by a chronic non-healing abdominal wound. The patient, who at baseline was ambulatory and independent in activities of daily living, was found by her neighbors to be confused, agitated, and yelling incoherently. Upon arrival, paramedic staff found the patient to be disheveled and lying on the floor in a pool of her urine and feces. Upon physical examination, she was tachycardic, only oriented to self, with a foul-smelling discharge emanating from her abdominal wound. Laboratory evaluation revealed the following readings: white cell count of 12.6×109 cells/L, blood glucose level at 444 mg/dL, bicarbonate reading of 17 mmol/L, anion gap level of 17, positive ketones, pH of 7.26, and base excess of −8.3. She tested positive for influenza B, and urinalysis indicated urinary tract infection (UTI). The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit and initially managed with intravenous insulin infusion for DKA, broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics (vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam) for UTI and the abdominal wound infection, and oseltamivir for influenza B. DKA resolved by the next morning, and the patient was transitioned to a subcutaneous insulin regimen.
On the second day of her hospitalization, the psychosis of the patient became more evident and was characterized by hallucinations, paranoia, incoherence, screaming, inappropriate laughter, and combativeness with the staff. That afternoon she had a fever (101.2°F) with worsening sinus tachycardia (and her heart rate was greater than 130 bpm). The symptoms the patient showed were attributed to delirium associated with sepsis and DKA. However, there was concern for a possible underlying central nervous system infection, and after a diagnostic lumbar puncture, the patient was empirically started on acyclovir. Cerebrospinal fluid studies, however, were not suggestive of infection. The patient was evaluated by multiple consultants for psychiatry, neurology, and infectious diseases. For symptomatic management, quetiapine and haloperidol were initiated, but she continued to manifest severe psychosis. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed an old right pontine infarct, which did not correlate with her symptoms. Additionally, vitamin B12 and ammonia levels were within normal limits. On the third day, the initial diagnostic workup was revisited and showed low thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (0.06 mIU/mL). Further thyroid analysis was performed, which showed high free T4 at 2.38 ng/dL and low total T3 at 72 ng/dL; suggestive of hyperthyroidism. Based on the Burch and Wartofsky scoring (BWS) system for TS , our patient's score was 65, which a result of 45 or greater is considered highly suggestive of TS .
Based on more recent diagnostic criteria suggested by Akamizu et al. , our patient also met the criteria for TS grade 1. Immediate treatment with methimazole, Lugol's iodine solution, hydrocortisone, and propranolol was started. Within several hours, the patient's mental state and tachycardia improved. She appeared more lucid, calm, and her speech became coherent. By the third day of treatment, the mental state of the patient had returned to her baseline. She behaved appropriately, and her psychosis resolved. Her overall condition improved, and the patient was discharged to a skilled nursing facility, in a stable condition, after three days.