A 21-year-old healthy primigravida woman referred for emergent cesarean section due to Intrauterine Growth Retardation (IUGR) and fetal distress. Routine monitoring including pulse oximetry, noninvasive blood pressure, and ECG was established and cesarean section was performed under spinal anesthesia by hyperbaric 5% lidocaine 70 mg in sitting position from L3-L4 inter vertebral space by 25 gauge Quincke needle. Before and during surgery and in the recovery room, the patient was hemodynamically stable with blood pressure in range of 115/65 before surgery and 90/55 to 115/78 during and after surgery. She received 500 mL ringer lactate solution before neuraxial block and 2 L during surgery, estimated blood loss was 500 mL. Oxytocin 40 IU as continuous infusion was administered in the first hour after delivery. She also had normal conscious level. Three hours after transmission to the ward, the patient had generalized tonic-colonic seizure lasting less than one minute. The patient was immediately transmitted to ICU (intensive care unit) and had another generalized tonic-colonic seizure just after transmission that lasted for more than one minute and was controlled by administering 10 mg diazepam IV (intravenous), then the patient entered into the postictal phase. Five minutes later, seizure occurred again and the patient was intubated and infusion of sodium thiopental 1.5 mg/kg/h started due to resistant seizures. Meanwhile, the consultant neurologist administered 750 mg phenytoin and 800 mg Depakine, and as eclampsia was suspected, the obstetrician administered magnesium sulfate 4 g bolus intravenously in 10 minutes followed by infusion of 2 g/h. In the ICU blood and urine samples were taken. Blood glucose level was normal and ABG (arterial blood gas) analysis showed metabolic acidosis that was corrected by administering sodium bicarbonate. Hypokalemia (K = 3.1) and hypocalcemia (Ca = 7.1) were observed in primary laboratory tests that were corrected with intravenous infusion of potassium 10 mEq/h and slow IV injection of calcium 1 g. Cell blood count, PTT (partial thromboplastin time), PT (prothrombin time), INR (international normalized ratio) and liver function tests were in normal range (AST = 35 U/L, ALT = 42 U/L, PT = 13 seconds, PTT = 30 seconds, INR = 1.2, proteinuria = negative). On blood pressure monitoring, she always had normal systolic, diastolic and mean levels. Therefore, eclampsia and HELLP (Hemolysis, Elevated Liver enzymes, Low Platelet count) syndrome were excluded and other causes of seizure were thought more probable.
On ophthalmic examination, there was no sign of papilledema. The patient had not hemiparesis, hemiplegia or cranial nerve involvement on neurologic examination.
Despite all treatments, the patient had three more seizures in 1 - 1.5 hour(s) intervals that were controlled by injection of 100 mg sodium thiopental. Six hours after the last seizure, infusion of sodium thiopental was reduced to 1 mg/kg/h and after 36 hours infusion of sodium thiopental was stopped and the patient was extubated. After extubation, the patient was a little lethargic; however, she gained complete consciousness within 6 - 8 hours later.
As the seizures were not controlled by magnesium sulfate, neurologic problems were considered and in the second day brain MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) was performed that revealed obstruction of the cerebral venous plexus . Immediately, anticoagulation therapy was established by Celexane 40 mg twice daily. Four days later, magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) showed that the obstruction was resolved.
After confirming the diagnosis of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, some laboratory screening tests including antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (perinuclear and cytoplasmic) [ANCA(P.C)], anti-double strain DNA (anti DSDNA ), Protein C and S, C3, C4, CH50 (50% hemolytic complement), anti-thrombin 3 and rheumatoid factor (RF) were performed to evaluate coagulation state; all showed normal values. Based on the normal laboratory results and no previous history of coagulopathies in the patient and her relatives, the final diagnosis was cerebral venous sinus thrombosis probably due to hypercoagulable state in pregnancy.
After 11 days, the patient was discharged in good health condition without any neurological complications with warfarin prescription.