A 46-year-old woman presented with an 8-month history of abnormal vaginal bleeding. Cervical biopsy and Papanicolaou test results showed squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a cervical tumor with direct invasion of the right parametrium, multiple uterine myomas, and bilateral hydronephrosis . Laboratory test results revealed a BUN level of 21 mg/dL and a Creatinine level of 0.7 mg/dL. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIIB cervical cancer was diagnosed. There was no evidence of distant metastasis at that time. The patient underwent CCRT. The major tumor and whole pelvis was treated with 54 and 48.5 Gy in 27 fractions over 6 weeks with simultaneous integrated boost techniques. The Pinnacle3 treatment planning system with 6- MV linear accelerator (Philips Healthcare, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) was used for treatment. Weekly cisplatin at a dose of 40 mg/m2 was administered during external radiation for 5 weeks concurrent with radiotherapy. Because of the presence of multiple uterine myomas with bleeding tendency, the SBRT technique with 24 Gy delivered to primary tumor part with 0.7 cm margin as PTV in 6 fractions over one week was used in place of brachytherapy after receiving approval from the institutional ethics committee of the Far Eastern Memorial Hospital. The field width, pitch, and modulation factor (MF) used to optimize SBRT treatment were 2.5 cm, 0.32, and 3.0, respectively. Moreover, the 90% isodose surface covered between 95% and 98% of the planning target volume (PTV). Volumes of overdose exceeding 115% < 5% of the PTV were considered acceptable. Follow-up MRI taken one month after completion of treatment showed no evidence of tumor recurrence . However, at 6-week follow-up, the patient presented with several days of continuous vaginal bleeding accompanied by abdominal pain. The etiology of the bleeding and abdominal discomfort was believed to be due to the multiple uterine myomas. Therefore, a total abdominal hysterectomy was performed. Histopathologic examination revealed chronic inflammation of the cervix with no residual tumor . Toxicity of treatment was scored according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v3.0 (CTCAE v3.0). Only grade 1 nausea and vomiting during treatment were noted. At 14-month follow-up, controllable ulceration and mucositis were noted in the rectal area. At the 22-month follow-up, no haematological, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary toxicities were noted. In addition, there was no evidence of fistula formation, local recurrence, or distant metastasis.