A boy aged 3 years and 1 month visited our outpatient clinic with a complaint of a mass of the left hand. There were no problems with his delivery, medical history, or family history. At the age of 2 years and 7 months, his parents noticed a protuberance on the volar side of his left hand. There was no apparent episode of trauma. The lesion was diagnosed as a ganglion cyst at a nearby hospital and he was followed-up. However, the mass continued to grow, and further examination was recommended at a health screening when he was 3 years old.
On physical examination, an elastic hard mass approximately 20 mm in diameter was palpated on the volar side of the left little finger from the distal palmar crease to the proximal interphalangeal crease . There was no redness, tenderness, or adhesion to the skin, but it had adhered to the basal tissue. The range of metacarpophalangeal joint flexion of the left little finger was 70°, whereas it was 90° for the right little finger. Plain X-ray images showed a soft tissue shadow without calcification or bony alteration . Ultrasonography revealed a well-circumscribed hypoechoic mass with internal heterogeneity on the flexor tendon . Blood flow, signaling flow into the mass, was observed by color Doppler imaging . Because a cystic lesion such as a ganglion cyst was unlikely and a solid tumor was considered, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed under general anesthesia. On MRI, the mass showed iso signal intensity to muscle on T1-weighted images (T1WI) containing low signal intensity bands and homogeneously low signal intensity to muscle on T2-weighted images (T2WI) . It was peripherally enhanced on gadolinium-enhanced T1WI with fat saturation. Non-enhancing low signal intensity bands were seen inside the mass . Differential diagnosis considered FTS and TSGCT on the basis of its location and signal properties, an imaging diagnosis of FTS was made because the lesion showed homogeneous, low signal intensity on T2WI and relatively weak, peripheral contrast enhancement, compatible with the diffuse and rich proliferation of collagen.
Because of the restricted range of motion and the increased difficulty of using his left hand in daily life, we decided to perform surgical resection after obtaining informed consent from his parents. The surgery was performed under general anesthesia when he was 4 years old. After a zigzag skin incision, a yellowish-white mass was found below the skin. There was no obvious adhesion to the surrounding tissues including the skin, flexor tendon, and neurovascular bundles . The mass size was 22 × 11 × 10 mm . Skin closure was performed without the need for any special technique.
Microscopically, the excised mass was well-circumscribed and contained scattered spindle cells embedded in a prominent collagenous matrix . A high-power view revealed spindle cells with elongated, cytologically bland nuclei in a fine chromatin pattern. Necrosis, nuclear pleomorphism, mitoses, multinucleated giant cells, hemosiderin, and eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies were not observed . Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the tumor cells were focally positive for α-SMA, and negative for desmin, CD34, and KIT (CD117). There was no nuclear staining for β-catenin. On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of FTS was made. One year after surgery, no signs of local recurrence were observed. The range of motion of the left little finger was the same as the right little finger and the patient could use his left hand without any difficulties.