A 14-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with a sudden onset of left leg pain and oedema. She had a fever of 38 °C once a few days before. Physical evaluation revealed a swollen and painful left leg with reduced range of motion of the left hip and bumps palpated on the right tibia proximal metaphysis. No signs of arthritis, possible intestinal inflammation or skin changes were seen during physical evaluation. The patient’s blood pressure and urinary output were normal. After the emergency ultrasound exam revealed a diagnosis of femoral and pelvic deep vein thrombosis, she was admitted to the hospital. According to her parents, the patient had had no chronic diseases to date. They indicated that she had a foot fracture at the age of 8 years. There were no autoimmune or auto-inflammatory disorders in the patient’s family history.
Initial investigations revealed high levels of inflammatory markers (CRP and ESR), and a severe microcytic anaemia as well as thrombocytosis, hypoalbuminemia and elevated fibrinogen concentration and D-dimer values . Suspecting an infectious cause, a urinalysis was performed, and haematuria and proteinuria were detected. Both blood and urine cultures were sterile. X-rays of the legs were done , showing sites of hyperostosis and sclerosis in the metaphysis of the right tibia along with a periosteal reaction, suggesting a possible osteomyelitis or oncological processes in the bones. As the diagnosis of acute osteomyelitis could not be disproved, broad-spectrum antibiotics were prescribed. However, the CRP level did not change significantly over the first few days, so other causes of acute thrombosis and inflammation were investigated. An abdominal ultrasound showed a giant, homogenous pelvic mass and hydronephrosis of the left kidney. Kidney function was quite abnormal as the creatinine level was 185 μmol/L and urinary protein excretion of 7 g over 24 h was detected. Within the next few days the patient’s kidney function deteriorated further, with a creatinine value increasing to 307 μmol/L with poor urine output and high blood pressure. The patient had no prior history of kidney problems.
Due to the findings of the abdominal ultrasound and leg X-ray, the child underwent a whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan. Multiple bone lesions were observed, the most severe of which were located in the left scapula, the fifth rib projection near the spine and a large deformity of the left pelvic bone close to the acetabulum . The left iliopsoas muscle also appeared to be abnormal. Moreover, renal parenchymal thickening and oedema were found. Investigations for possible endocrine disorders were performed . Signs of hyperparathyroidism were present together with hypocalcaemia, hypomagnesaemia and a low vitamin D3 concentration, as well as hypocalciuria in the 24-h urine test and hyperphosphaturia based on phosphate fractional excretion .
Bone and left kidney biopsies were performed. The bone biopsy from the affected site of the left pelvic bone demonstrated intertrabecular stromal fibrosis, several epithelioid granulomas with a central zone of necrosis and polymorphonuclear cells. Moreover, histological evaluation showed a few sites with plasma cell infiltration, including some cells positive for immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4). Histological examination of the surrounding connective tissue found mucoid oedema. The renal biopsy revealed an acute and active crescentic glomerulonephritis (GN) with ANCA-associated vasculitis . Special staining was performed for the kidney sample, and no IgG subclasses were found.
Due to the results of left kidney biopsy together with thrombosis of the deep veins, additional screening for autoimmune diseases was carried out. The child tested positive for antinuclear antibodies (ANA 1:100), antibodies against centromere protein B (anti-CENP B), antibodies against proliferating cell nuclear antigens (anti-PCNA) and C-ANCA . High levels of ferritin were also found (448 μg/L), indicating the possibility of both autoimmune and thrombotic causes of anaemia. However, antiphospholipid antibodies were not detected. Concerning the bone biopsy results, serum IgG levels were tested and only IgG4 was slightly increased .
Since multiple bone lesions were detected, the fracture history was reviewed. At the age of 8 years our patient had not only a foot fracture, but also complained of pain in the left elbow and back. It appeared that she was diagnosed with CRMO at that time, based on the results of a biopsy from the fracture site as well as a CT of the left foot and a whole-body radionuclide scan. The radionuclide scan showed multiple sites of CRMO lesions, with three in the spine, one in the left hand, one in the left scapula, one in the left pelvic bone and two in the right leg. Surgery for the broken foot was performed and treatment with antibiotics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) was prescribed for a month. When the patient’s pain decreased over time, analgesics were discontinued due to the impression of a self-limiting disease course. For the next 6 years she was free from complaints except for painless unilateral right periorbital oedema appearing on and off for the last 2–3 years and observed without medical supervision. Due to this oedema and slight exophthalmos of the right eye during current episode, additional head and spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, and a new CRMO lesion in a right periorbital region was diagnosed together with deformation and lipoid degeneration of the seventh neck vertebrae .
Treatment was started for the vasculitis with cyclophosphamide and prednisolone according to the renal-limited vasculitis management protocol. No pain reliever was necessary. Severe metabolic disturbances and hyperparathyroidism were treated with alfacalcidol, calcium and magnesium supplements. Kidney and ureter stents were placed for 1 month due to hydronephrosis. Secondary GN-associated hypertension was treated with ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme) inhibitors. Anticoagulants were prescribed for deep vein thrombosis for 6 months until full recanalisation of the left femoral vein had occurred.
After 1.5 years of treatment, the child is free of complaints. Her auto-inflammatory, metabolic and endocrinological conditions are being monitored by a multidisciplinary team of physicians. All microelements and parathormone levels are within the normal range. There are no signs of hypertension and the patient’s kidney function has recovered. To date, there are no clinical or diagnostic signs of deep vein thrombosis. The patient is still on maintenance treatment with azathioprine according to the kidney vasculitis treatment protocol and receiving microelements supplementation.