A 20-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our hospital with a rapidly growing abdominal mass associated with anemia and mild abdominal and left flank pain. Past medical history was positive for sporadic TSC diagnosed 9 years before. She was on mTOR inhibitor therapy for a cerebral subependymal giant cell astrocytoma. The patient reported a history of abdominal swelling in previous years and was on follow-up for bilateral angiomyolipoma since early infancy. The physical examination showed a palpable abdominal tender mass extending from the left flank to the right iliac fossa. She had no dermatologic lesions.
A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a left renal tumor of 28 cm × 17 cm × 27 cm , suggestive of a giant angiomyolipoma, occupying the entire abdominal cavity and shifting abdominal organs. A 10 cm × 6.7 cm × 7.9 cm angiomyolipoma was also present in the right kidney . The left renal artery and vein were dilated to 11 and 26 mm, respectively. The estimated glomerular filtration was 127 ml/min/1.73m2. She denied hematuria.
A careful multidisciplinary assessment involving urologists, vascular surgeons, anesthesiologists, and nephrologists was carried out. m-TOR treatment was considered ineffective, while it could be considered an option in renal cell carcinoma to shrink the tumor . Due to the kidney size, location, and bleeding risk, nephrectomy with a hybrid approach was suggested.
Percutaneous temporary occlusion of the main renal artery was performed in the same session of nephrectomy. Surgery began with a preliminary angiography through a left femoral artery percutaneous access to evaluate the left renal artery . The renal artery was end-clamped using a 12 mm × 40 mm angioplasty balloon (Cordis Powerflex Pro, Cordis, Miami Lakes, FL, USA) . Through the balloon catheter guidewire, 2,500 IU of heparin was infused to reduce the risk of tumor vein thrombosis and venous embolism. By a left thoracic-phreno-laparotomy at the level of the ninth intercostal space, a retroperitoneal kidney dissection was performed . After careful isolation of the kidney, the renal artery was progressively accessed and exposed after kidney displacement. Then, the endovascular balloon was removed, and the main renal artery was ligated and sectioned. Nephrectomy was completed after isolation, ligation, and section of the renal vein. Surgical time was 234 min. The estimated blood loss was 300 ml. A left thoracic drain was left in place for 72 h. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient required no blood transfusion. The patient was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. A postoperative CT scan showed a complete resection . Pathological examination revealed a tumor measuring 40 cm × 30 cm × 9 cm and 10 kg of weight and confirmed the presence of AML .
According to recent recommendations , the patient has started treatment with everolimus to reduce the growth of the right AML and cerebral subependymal giant cell astrocytoma. One year after surgery, the patient is still under everolimus treatment and in follow-up. Her estimated glomerular filtration is 120.5 ml/min/1.73m2, with no proteinuria or hematuria. The right angiomyolipoma grew up to 11.1 cm × 6.9 cm × 8.1 cm, but the patient refused partial nephrectomy and is currently asymptomatic.