A 60-year-old man was admitted for a 1-month history of paroxysmal left periorbital pain accompanied by various symptoms, including left ptosis, blurred vision in the left eye, and diplopia during each episode. Episode duration ranged from minutes to hours. The patient suffered from one to three attacks per day, and his condition continued to worsen. He had visited an oculist, and his visual acuity, visual field and intraocular pressure were normal. The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension 2 years prior and subsequently began taking extended-release nifedipine tablets. He denied any history of chronic headache, trauma or preliminary infection.
At admission, neurologic examination produced unremarkable findings during symptom remission. By 7 days after admission, the patient had suffered 6 episodes, which are summarized in Fig. . The patient’s symptoms were due to impairment of different combinations of multiple cranial nerves (CNs), including the oculomotor nerve (CN3), the first division of the trigeminal nerve (CN 5–1) and the optic nerve (CN2), restricting the location of the lesion to the regions from the posterior cavernous sinus to the orbital apex.
Results for routine blood tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor and C-reactive protein were normal. Negative results were obtained for all tests for autoimmune antibodies and ultrasound assessments of temporal arteries. Lumbar puncture was performed with a pressure of 210 mmH2O, and tests revealed normal findings for cell counts, protein, and glucose as well as negative PCR results for herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2, cytomegalovirus, and EB virus. Computed tomography (CT) and contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that brain structures, the orbital cavity, the cavernous sinus, and optic nerves were normal.
Because the patient’s symptoms could disappear rapidly, even within minutes, angiopathy was considered. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed normal imaging of cervical and cerebral vessels and no tortuous vessels in the cavernous sinus. Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD) demonstrated an abnormal spectrum for the bilateral ophthalmic arteries (OA) with decreased PI and high flow velocity in the left OA. Ultimately, DSA confirmed bilateral CCF and shunts to the cavernous sinus from bilateral branches of the ICA and ECA .
A microcatheter was passed through the left inferior petrosal sinus into the cavernous sinus, and Onyx, an embolic agent, was placed in the cavernous sinus for occlusion. Simultaneously, DSA was performed to ensure complete closure of the CCF without residual arteriovenous shunting . The patient’s symptoms disappeared completely during more than 1 year of follow-up.