A 58-year-old male consulted with his primary doctor regarding right abdominal pain. The patient was referred to our hospital with suspicion of HCC after conventional computed tomography (CT). Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed an approximately 10 × 7 × 7 cm-sized tumor showing early enhancement and later washout with portal vein invasion in the right hepatic lobe . Chest CT showed pulmonary nodules in the right lower lobe of the lung, and lung metastasis were considered . Gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumor with heterogenous enhancement on early phase and washout during portal vein phase (data not shown). Laboratory examination showed slight hepatic dysfunction; aspartate transaminase was 57 IU/L (normal 13–30), alanine transaminase was 57 IU/mL (normal 10–42), alkaline phosphatase was 356 IU/mL (normal 106–322), serum albumin level was 4.3 g/dL (normal 4.1–5.1), total bilirubin was 0.75 mg/dL, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.02 (normal 0.85–1.15), and the ICG retention rate at 15 min was 10.2% (normal ≤ 10%). Serology for hepatitis virus showed that the hepatitis B surface antigen was positive, anti-hepatitis C antibody was negative, and the hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA was found to be 1.3 Log IU/mL. The levels of tumor markers before initial treatment were high; alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 74.4 ng/mL (normal ≤ 13.4) and protein induced by the absence of vitamin K or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) was 1204.58 mAU/mL (normal ≤ 40).
Considering the lung metastasis and the large right lobe tumor invading the right portal vein, chemotherapy was selected over primary surgery. Lenvatinib (12 mg/day) was applied for two weeks with an anti-HB agent (tenofovir alafenamide). Re-evaluation with contrast-enhanced CT after 2 weeks of lenvatinib administration showed tumor necrosis, the reduction of tumor vascularity, slight shrinkage of pulmonary nodules, and a little extension of portal vein invasion . Grade 2 hypertension was observed 7 days after the initiation of lenvatinib therapy. Levels of AFP and PIVKA-II sharply decreased . From the findings of the portal vein invasion, we were concerned about the possible extension of the invasion to the contralateral branch and then loss of the chance of hepatectomy. Therefore, we decided to do portal vein transection and continue further lenvatinib therapy after that. Even at this moment, the estimated liver remnant volume was not enough (estimated liver remnant volume: 482 mL, 40.3% of total liver volume), and we were reluctant to do an extended right hepatectomy. He underwent a right portal vein transection after 1-week withdrawal from lenvatinib intending for the enlargement of the left lobe while more lenvatinib therapy were added . The laparotomy revealed invasion to the right diaphragm. Enhanced abdominal CT showed left lobe hypertrophy and progression of tumor necrosis 1 month after the transection of the right portal vein . Estimated liver remnant volume after extended right hepatectomy was 42.1% of total liver volume. Although estimated liver volume showed only a slight increase, we decided to perform the operation not to lose the chance of conversion hepatectomy. He underwent an extended right hepatectomy with partial resection of the left medial segment and a part of the right diaphragm 2 months after the initial right portal vein transection . The resected tumor was 5.2 × 3.6 cm in size, and the pathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma (pT4pN0M0 pStage IVA, vp3, vv0, b0, p0 UICC 8th) . Intraoperative irrigation cytology was negative, and the resected diaphragm and tumor of right portal vein showed necrotic changes of the carcinoma as well as the absence of viable carcinoma. Non-cancerous liver tissues were noted to be A1F2 based on New Inuyama Classification . The level of AFP and PIVKA-II returned to normal values after the hepatectomy. Although lenvatinib was resumed 1 month after the second operation, he developed grade 2 thrombocytopenia 2 weeks after resumption. This adverse event prompted the halting of lenvatinib administration 1 week after its reduction . Platelet count recovered immediately after halting of lenvatinib. Even after discontinuation of lenvatinib, AFP and PIVKA-II remained within the normal range . Chest CT showed a decrease in size of the nodules after 3 months and subsequent disappearance 6 months (data not shown) after hepatectomy. At 9 months after the hepatectomy and 1 year after diagnosis, the patient is doing well with no tumor recurrence.