A 44-year-old woman presented to A&E with a 2-week history of bilaterally progressive painless visual deterioration. She denied any other symptoms and had been prescribed reading glasses a month previously, which she found unhelpful. Her optician referred her to the ophthalmology clinic where she was seen 9 days later and it was noted that her vision had deteriorated further to 6/60 bilaterally. Bilateral central scotomas were present on confrontational testing with a red pin. Goldman visual fields looking at peripheral fields were normal. The optic discs appeared normal and were not pale. She was unable to see any of the Ishihara test plates for colour vision. In view of the rapid deterioration in her vision, she was referred to the medical team for further investigations.
Her past medical history was unremarkable and she consumed 14 U of alcohol(1.5 bottles ie 1125 ml of 12.5% wine) per week and 20 cigarettes per day. She was a housewife who denied any exposure to toxic substances or loss of weight but did admit to poor dietary intake. Her diet usually consisted of a cup of milk tea and a slice of toast with butter for breakfast. She usually drank 2–3 cups of tea or coffee during the day and would have a bag of potato crisps for lunch or skip this meal. Her evening meal would usually include some meat and potatoes but she admitted to having a limited intake of vegetables, particularly of the green leafy type and usually had these once or twice a month.
Clinical examination was normal apart from the previously noted visual abnormalities. Investigations revealed a folic acid level in the serum of 1.5 ng/ml (2.5–18 ng/ml), red cell folate 208 nmol/l (220–620 nmol/l), haemoglobin 14 g/dl (11.5–16 g/dl) with a mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 122.8 fl (78–100 fl). Vitamin B12 levels were 354 nmol/l. It was interesting to note that she had had a history of low folate levels 3 years previously, but no further blood tests in the interim.
Thyroid function tests, endomysial and gliadin related antibodies were negative. An MRI brain scan revealed a tiny focus of high T2 signals in the left frontal lobe consistent with a benign perivascular space, but no evidence of demyelination. A diagnosis of folate deficient optic neuropathy was subsequently made and she was commenced on long-term oral folate supplementation of 5 mg/day. She was also advised to reduce her alcohol and tobacco consumption and a further ophthalmology follow-up arranged where it was noted 4 weeks later that her vision had improved to 6/36 bilaterally.