A 31-year-old gravida 4 para 0 African American woman at 22-weeks gestation presented with vaginal bleeding to an outside hospital. Her obstetric history was significant for 2 therapeutic abortions and 1 spontaneous abortion. During prenatal care, the fetus was noted to have a unilateral dysplastic kidney. The patient’s family history was significant for two family members with cervical cancer and two family members with endometrial cancer. She was placed on bedrest with inpatient admission. 48 h after admission she developed pelvic pain and uterine contractions. She expelled a mass vaginally measuring 11 × 9 × 5 cm with no fetal contents. The pathology from the outside facility showed a showed a highly cellular tumor composed of spindle-shaped cells and bizarre multinucleated giant cells with focal myxomatous change with mitotic count is greater than 50 per 10 high power field (Positive for CD10, SMA, ER, PR, EMA) with the differential diagnosis including endometrial stromal sarcoma and undifferentiated uterine sarcoma. The patient underwent examination under anesthesia, demonstrating a 3 × 3 cm defect of the posterior vaginal wall with active bleeding, which was sutured for hemostasis. The cervix was long, closed, and high with no evidence of bleeding and the fetus was intact with normal heart tones. She was discharged in stable condition.
At 27-weeks, the patient was referred to our institution for maternal-fetal medicine, and gynecology oncology consultation. On initial evaluation, she reported no prior abnormal gynecology history and no history of infertility issues. She denied dyspareunia and bulk symptoms prior to or during pregnancy, and her periods before pregnancy were normal. A pap smear at 27-weeks gestation was normal and negative for human papilloma virus. Her intake physical exam at our institution revealed a normal pelvic exam with no evidence of residual vaginal mass, and an ultrasound revealed no intrauterine myomas.
Given the differential diagnosis included an endometrial stromal sarcoma, an undifferentiated uterine sarcoma, and a primary vaginal sarcoma, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without contrast of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis at 27 weeks. MRI findings were notable for a peri-centimeter cyst in the cervix consistent with a Nabothian cyst, a multiloculated cystic structure in the fetal abdomen consistent with dysplastic kidney, and an anterior placenta. There was no evidence of metastatic disease.
Due to the inability to ascertain whether the cancer had originated in the uterus, cervix or vagina, the patient desired definitive management for possible uterine sarcoma. In consultation with maternal fetal medicine and gynecology oncology specialists, the decision was made to proceed with a cesarean hysterectomy at 36 weeks. Betamethasone 12 mg intramuscularly was given for two doses 24 h apart with the first dose at 35 weeks and 6 days gestational age.
At 36 weeks and 1 day, she underwent planned exam under anesthesia of the vaginal canal with cesarean hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, and peritoneal biopsies. She delivered a male infant weighing 2520 g with Apgars of 9 and 9. Operative findings were notable for normal appearing pelvic organs. There were no palpable or visibly enlarged pelvic/periaortic lymph nodes or evidence of metastatic disease throughout the peritoneal cavity. The neonate was admitted to the NICU post-delivery for prematurity. Neonatal US confirmed a right multi-cystic dysplastic kidney. He was transferred out of NICU on day 2 of life, and discharged home with his mother.
The final surgical pathology report was benign: no malignant or neoplastic cells were seen. The patient was seen at her 6-week postpartum visit and was doing well with a normal pelvic exam. At a follow-up surveillance visit 3 months postpartum, she was noted to have a 1 cm posterior vaginal wall lesion; biopsy results showed a high-grade sarcoma. The tumor was estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor positive. Computer tomography (CT) with contrast of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no evidence of metastatic disease. The patient underwent an upper vaginectomy and proctoscopy. Operative findings were notable for 1.5 cm polypoid lesion in the posterior vagina wall 5 cm distal to the posterior vaginal apex. A 1 cm surgical margin was obtained circumferentially around this lesion where feasible, and surgical pathology showed high-grade sarcoma of the polyp lesion with negative surgical margins. The tissue removed from this excision showed residual sarcoma, morphologically similar to the original pathology from the outside hospital pathology. All other vaginal biopsies were also negative for malignancy. Marker seeds were placed in the proximal and distal margins of the areas where the sarcoma was excised. She was treated adjuvant high dose rate vaginal brachytherapy using a multi-channel vaginal cylinder. She received a biologically equivalent 2 Gy dose (EQD2) of 45 Gy to the whole length of the vagina and 60 Gy to the post-operative bed . A CT scan 36 months after surgery continue to show no evidence of disease. She remains disease free 58 months after completion of vaginal brachytherapy.