A 23-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department with abdominal pain and recurrent nausea of 6 days’ duration, which had progressively worsened over the past few hours, but without vomiting. The pain, she described, was rather diffuse but more intense in the epigastric region. She denied reflux, diarrhea, urinary symptoms, and fever. She reported that she had been having intermittent problems with diffuse abdominal pain throughout her adult life, but usually milder than this current episode.
Regarding her medical history, she had suffered from a jejunal atresia in her left-upper abdomen which required surgical treatment in her neonatal period. It was initially treated with a Bishop–Koop side-to-side jejunojejunostomy with chimney. The stoma was reversed approximately 7 months later.
A physical examination revealed a flat and soft abdomen with a big scar across her upper abdomen, without any evidence of a hernia. Abdominal palpation revealed a mild tenderness in her lower abdomen, particularly in the right lower quadrant. No abdominal masses were palpable. Bowel sounds were normal. A laboratory examination (complete blood count, electrolytes, C-reactive protein, liver, pancreatic, thyroid, and renal function) revealed no abnormality.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen with rectal contrast enema was performed. The CT scan demonstrated a markedly altered anatomy of the midgut with a rather usual course of the hindgut . The normal anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract and the anatomical situation in the present case are graphically illustrated in Fig. and , respectively. The duodenum crossed from right to left ventral to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), suggesting an intraperitoneal position in all of its portions, with the duodenojejunal flexure situated slightly to the left of the midline. The proximal jejunum then crossed back to the right abdomen, posterior to the SMA, suggesting a retroperitoneal position . The following slightly dilated jejunal loops were found lying in the right abdomen. Further distally the distal jejunum/proximal ileum crossed back to the left lower abdomen, remaining in an intraperitoneal position ventral to the mesenteric root. Most of the ileal loops were situated in the left lower abdomen ; the cecum was found slightly left of the midline in the umbilical region in close proximity to the ligament of Treitz , thus suggesting a narrow mesenteric pedicle. The ascending colon coursed from the right mid-abdomen toward the ileocecal pole in the left mid-abdomen. Both ascending colon and cecum remained ventral to the mesenteric root in an intraperitoneal position. The transverse colon dorsally crossed the pedicle of the SMA and the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) in a retro-arterial position , defining this anatomic midgut variation as reversed rotation, and extended to the left abdomen to continue as a normal left colic flexure and descending colon. We further noted an inverted relationship of the SMV to the SMA with the vein lying to the left of the artery and an aplasia of the uncinate process . No thickened bowel walls or peritoneal fluid were present.
CT demonstrated no evidence of frank volvulus, bowel ischemia, or acute bowel obstruction. The patient was diagnosed as having a variant of reversed intestinal rotation.
She was immediately started on intravenously administered fluids and analgesics (metamizole), which offered instant pain relief. The clinical findings did not indicate a need for immediate hospital admission or surgical intervention.