A 26-year-old black male patient with 2-year history of a painless swelling involving the left mandibular body. No reports of drug use, underlying diseases or harmful habits. Family history without relevant associated information. Extraoral clinical examination showed an asymmetry in the left lower third of the face (A). Intraoral examination identified marked expansion of the lingual and buccal cortical bones in the region of the left mandibular body and angle with involvement of soft tissues (B). Imaging scans revealed signs suggestive of two well-delimited and osteolytic lesions, unilocular and multilocular in the left maxilla and mandible, respectively (A). The lesion involved the mandibular body, angle and ramus and resulted in displacement of the affected teeth. (B) In the maxilla, the lesion measuring approximately 2.0 cm was associated with root resorption of the affected teeth and extended to the maxillary sinus (C). Pulp vitality testing of the teeth associated with the lesions was positive. The diagnostic hypotheses for the mandibular and maxillary lesions were ameloblastoma and keratocystic odontogenic tumor (KOT), respectively. An incisional biopsy was obtained from the mandibular lesion and the histopathologic diagnosis was compatible with myxoma. In view of the aggressive features of the lesions, treatment planning consisted of surgical resection with safety margins for the mandibular lesion and curettage and peripheral osteotomy for the maxillary lesion (A and B). Surgery performed in a specialist training program accompanied by an experienced surgeon in the field.
Histopathologic analysis of the two lesions revealed characteristics of JTOF. shows fragments of the mandibular lesion exhibiting intensely cellularized fibrous connective tissue that contained numerous irregular bone trabeculae at different stages of mineralization (A) and spherical basophilic structures with osteoid margins, sometimes with a brush border appearance (B). Some trabeculae also had an osteoid margin that fused with the underlying connective tissue (B). In the connective tissue, some myxoid areas intermingled with more fibrous areas were observed (C). The lesion was partially lined with a fibrous capsule that separated it from normal bone tissue. The maxillary lesion exhibited characteristics similar to those described above (A and B). The patient is under periodic follow-up at intervals of 1 year and shows no signs or symptoms of recurrence of the lesions. The patient has now been referred for mandibular reconstruction.