A 46-year-old Caucasian male presented with occasional palpitations and shortness of breath with exertion for 7 months. The patient denied any past medical history and had not seen a physician since age 16. The patient’s vitals on presentation was a heart rate of 75 b.p.m., with a blood pressure of 135/95. Physical exam was positive for a Grade II/IV systolic ejection murmur and delayed upstroke of the peripheral pulses. The patients point of maximum apical impulse was laterally displaced and on chest auscultation there were faint bibasilar crackles. Initial electrocardiogram on presentation was sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 90 b.p.m., right bundle branch block present with a QRS duration of 126 ms, and no left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy by voltage criteria. The patient underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and during the original report was found to have a BAV with aortic stenosis. His echocardiogram revealed mild LV hypertrophy with mildly reduced LV end-diastolic dimension. The patient was found to have a preserved ejection fraction of 61% and a peak/mean gradient of 42.53 mmHg/24.14 mmHg across his aortic valve with an aortic valve area (AVA) of 1.1 cm2 and AVA index to be 0.56 cm2/m2. LV inner diastolic diameter was measured to be 3.8 cm with the interventricular septal diastolic thickness of 1.4 cm and a LV posterior wall diastolic thickness of 1.3 cm. Additionally, his two-dimensional echo showed mild to moderate aortic regurgitation with a pressure half time of 547 ms as well as a >5 cm aortic aneurysm. Figure below shows a highly calcified aortic valve, which at the time was interpreted to be a BAV. Figure notes the aortic valve stenosis with a dilated aortic root. Additionally, the patient underwent dobutamine stress echo that showed no areas of stress induced ischaemia. These findings were unique in this patient had a reverse area gradient mismatch for the diagnosis of aortic stenosis, which will be discussed later.
A computed tomography (CT) angiography was requested to assess the size and location of the patient’s aortic aneurysm. He was found to have a 5.55 cm anterior to posterior diameter ascending thoracic aneurysm at the sinotubular junction with normal caliber aortic arch and patent branching vessels and no obvious coronary anomalies . Subsequent myocardial perfusion imaging revealed no definite focal areas of pharmacologically induced stress ischaemia with LV ejection fraction of 52%.
At this time, a decision was made to proceed with an aortic valve replacement and aortic aneurysm repair via the Bentall procedure. This recommendation was supported by both the 2017 ESC/EACTS and the 2014 AHA/ACC valvular heart guideline, as well as the 2016 update to the thoracic aortic disease guidelines both being Class IIa level C evidence recommendation for tube graft repair for ascending aortic aneurysm with congenital valvular abnormalities. Of note the patient did not undergo three-dimensional transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) before surgery.
The patient underwent surgery with the placement of a 25 mm On-X valve as well as a 32 mm Gelweave Dacron tube graft. Upon removal of patients native aortic valve, he was found to have a UAV. During the surgery, the patient’s anatomical coronary placement was assessed and found to be normal. There were no surgical complications and the patient was transferred to the cardiovascular intensive care unit for recovery. During the surgery, the patient prophylactically had a temporary epicardial pacemaker placed and in recovery was found to be in an accelerated junctional escape rhythm with a high degree atrioventricular block and occasional heart rates in the 40’s. Temporary pacing was set to occur if the patient’s heart rate dropped below 70. Over the next few days, the patient’s junctional rhythm did not improve, and it was determined that the patient had postoperative complete heart block with need for a permanent pacemaker. Permanent pacemaker was placed on postoperative Day 5, and patient was discharged on postoperative Day 9.