In March 2018, a 72-year-old man was referred to our department for surgical treatment of early-stage gastric cancer. Laparoscopic distal gastrectomy was performed by the Billroth-I producer using delta-shaped anastomosis. The posterior walls of both the stomach and the duodenum were joined using a 45-mm linear stapler in delta-shaped anastomosis. The enterotomy was closed with a 60-mm linear stapler. The patient consumed food and water between postoperative days 4 and 9. On postoperative day 9, the patient experienced left abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed that the luminal continuity of the anastomotic part was wide enough for the passage of food . However, on postoperative day 19, an endoscopic investigation revealed anastomotic stenosis with severe edema . Contrast-enhanced CT scans also revealed that the anastomotic part was narrower compared to that observed in previous CT scans . Fluoroscopy clearly showed the presence of anastomotic stenosis . EBD was performed with 10 mm, 12 mm, and 15 mm-balloons approximately every week to treat the anastomotic stenosis. The stenosis sustained even after the injection of steroids into the anastomosis section during the third EBD . Consequently, we started systemic steroid treatment on postoperative day 56. For the first 4 days, the steroid (prednisolone) was injected intravenously at a dose of 40 mg/day. Stenosis started to improve soon after the onset of steroid treatment . Hence, for the next 3 and 8 days, the systemic steroid treatment was continued at a lower dosage of 20 mg/day and 10 mg/day, respectively. Thereafter, we started oral administration of steroids (5 mg/day). Although oral steroid administration was temporally increased (10 mg/day for 3 weeks) due to reappearance of nausea, fluoroscopy on postoperative day 93 showed improvement of anastomotic stenosis . Steroid treatment was discontinued for 3 months after completion of systemic steroid treatment. Endoscopic analysis approximately 1 month after completion of systemic steroid treatment showed improvement in anastomotic stenosis. . A summary of the EBD and steroid treatments is shown in Fig. . No dietary restrictions were required for 6 months following the completion of systemic steroid treatment. Moreover, no adverse events were found to be associated with steroid treatment.