A 33-year-old black female patient, housewife, born and resident in the city of Niteroi, Brazil attended a Municipal Hospital with complaints of fever, weakness, prostration, chest pain, non-productive cough, long-term dysuria, and significant weight loss of 20 kg in the last 6 months. At the time of the care, a rapid test for HIV was positive. She reported that approximately six months before, she noticed the appearance of vaginal discharge and genital ulcers, and in the previous three months, with afternoon fever along with all other complaints described above. In relation to the vital signs, she presented blood pressure of 100 × 40 mmHg, heart rate of 104 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute and axillary temperature of 36.2 °C. Furthermore, the patient was pale (++ / 4+), anicteric, non-cyanotic, eupneic, very emaciated, oriented but with slowed reasoning, responsive to the verbal request. She had exuberant oral candidiasis, angular cheilitis, and purulent crusts on her lips. Gynecological examination showed ulcers on right labium minor and majus, presence of vaginal discharge, and nodular lesion on the right labium majus. Moreover, she presented umbilicated pubic lesions indicative of Molluscum contagiosum. Upon laboratory tests, she presented significant pancytopenia and altered liver function enzymes. The other biochemical blood tests were normal. Sputum examination of an acid-alcohol resistant bacillus (BAAR) was positive, and chest X-ray revealed bilateral infiltrations, being more pronounced in the two lower thirds. Abdominal ultrasound scan presented liver with increased dimensions suggesting steatosis. Retroperitoneal lymph node enlargement was described, with the largest lymph node measuring 2.2 cm and mild/moderate ascites. The pelvic endovaginal ultrasound was unremarkable. A Rifampin, Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Ethambutol (RIPE) therapy scheme for tuberculosis was started, a red blood cell transfusion for the correction of anemia, antiretroviral therapy, Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim for urinary tract infection and Acyclovir for the initial genital herpes lesion suspicion. A Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) non-treponemal serum test showed a 1:8 result. Also a cerebrospinal fluid VDRL was performed with a negative result. Thus, therapy with crystalline Penicillin G was started for 21 days. Material was collected from the vulvar lesion to perform a Dark Field Examination, which evidenced live treponema. After the 17th day of penicillin, a biopsy of a persistent nodular lesion was performed in the external surface of the right labium majus , whose microscopic analysis of the obtained material showed proliferation of endothelial cells and the presence of fusiform cells, as well as vascular neoformation and extravasated red blood cells, confirming the diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma. Also, an excisional biopsy of shiny and umbilicated pubic lesions was performed confirming the Molluscum contagiosum clinical diagnosis. The antiretroviral regimen used was Lamivudine, Stavudine, and Efavirenz, and the laboratory results after the treatment were: the viral load of 170 copies, log 2230; TCD4 count 314; TCD8 count 336 and TCD4 / TCD8 ratio equal to 0.93. The treatment employed contributed to the patient clinical and immunological improvement whose oral lesions regressed completely after the improvement of the patient’s immunity into two years.