An 83-year-old woman was referred to our hospital approximately 96 hours after sudden onset of painless central visual loss in her right eye (OD), the patient denied any triggering events. She reported a 13-year history of mild systemic hypertension but no other relevant medical or ophthalmological history. At baseline, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was Count Fingers (CF) OD and 20/50 left eye (OS), the respective intraocular pressure values were 12 and 14 mmHg. A relative afferent pupillary defect (APD) was present in the right eye. Funduscopic examination of the right eye showed a normal-appearing optic nerve with multiple splinter hemorrhages on the rim, as well as multiple large CWS in a circumpapillary distribution that partially obscured retinal veins. An heterogenous pattern of grey translucency in the macula with notable periarterial sparing was evident. Neither segmental narrowing of the retinal arteries nor a defined cherry-red spot were visible, but a darker hue to the retinal veins was apparent . The left eye had a normal fundus appearance. A horizontal foveal spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) scan revealed a generalized retinal thickening, with a significant increase in reflectivity signaling edema localized to the inner layers . Fluorescein angiography was performed, showing normal choroidal filling including a patent cilioretinal artery, and an important delay of the retinal circulation ; slight leakage and staining of the optic disc and peripapillary arterioles were also noted in later phases with some dye masking corresponding with the location of the CWS . A hyperfluorescent/hypofluorescent-speckled pattern was noted in the periphery related to the retinal pigment epithelium degeneration both in early and late phases. Carotid and vertebral artery Doppler echography showed a mild endothelial atherosclerotic plaque in the right carotid bulb that involved 20% of the vessel lumen but without hemodynamic repercussion, with normal flow velocity and resistance indexes. Systemic examination showed no other diseases, and extensive bloodwork revealed moderate hypercholesterolemia as the only abnormality. Ophthalmic and central retinal artery Doppler echography studies were undertaken, finding a noteworthy reduction in CRA blood flow. Based on these findings, the case was diagnosed as a partial CRAO; the patient was referred for management of her hypertension but otherwise did not undergo specific therapy for CRAO because of the delayed presentation.
The areas of retinal whitening and CWS progressively disappeared during the next 2 weeks. The patient’s visual capacity also gradually improving during this time, being 20/50 at last follow-up; approximately 4 weeks after initial presentation. The latest fundus findings showed normal retinal characteristics and resolution of the APD .