A 67-year-old obese female patient with plasma cell leukemia, an aggressive form of multiple myeloma, was brought into our ED with complaints of generalized tiredness and altered sensorium for 1 day. She had been undergoing treatment for her malignancy at a tertiary care center for 2 years.
On presentation to the ED, her initial physical examination revealed a patent airway, bilateral crackles at the lung base with respiratory rate 30 cycles/min and Spo2 70% in room air; her peripheral pulses were feeble, blood pressure un-recordable and heart rate 120 bpm. She was responding to verbal stimulus and had normal finger stick glucose levels. She was pale, had jugular venous distension, and had bilateral pitting pedal edema. Her heart sounds were muffled, without audible murmurs or friction rubs. Neurologic exam findings included no focal deficits and bilaterally equal pupils. Her other physical exam findings were within normal limits.
After securing large bore intravenous (IV) lines, she was started on IV fluid resuscitation, cautiously monitoring for the worsening of volume overload. However, she failed to respond to fluid therapy and hence was started on vasopressor and inotrope supports titrated as per her clinical response. In view of the clinically worsening sensorium and hemodynamic instability she was intubated in the ED. Because her clinical features were consistent with BECK’s triad, she was considered to have cardiac tamponade. She was placed on continuous cardiac monitoring and supplemental oxygen through a ventilator. In accordance with the RUSH protocol, a bedside goal-directed ECHO was performed and she was diagnosed as having a massive pericardial effusion. We could observe the right ventricular collapse during diastole and plethoric IVC and this was an indication for an emergency pericardiocentesis although there was a lack of specific and widely used catheters, namely multi-holed or pigtail. After the necessary counseling and consent, we decided to perform the procedure using a central venous catheter under sonographic guidance in the sub-xiphoid view. We used a PHASED ARRAY probe (2.5–5 MHz), which revealed a 42 mm thickness effusion inferiorly. Using aseptic precautions, an area of 1 cm inferior to the left xiphoid was marked under sterile conditions and a local anesthetic was applied. A trocar needle was introduced and angled at 30° from the skin, aiming toward the left shoulder. Under real-time USG guidance, the pericardial sac was punctured and pericardial fluid aspirated whilst noting the presence of the needle tip in the pericardium. An active aspiration was performed using a 3-way stopcock valve with a syringe. Around 250 ml of fluid was aspirated and the patient was reassessed; she was well perfused, her heart sounds were audible, and her JVD had returned to normal. At this point, her heart had globally expanded within the pericardium, as seen on USG . The aspiration was stopped; with ongoing support, the patient was transferred to the intensive care team for further management and placement of a pericardial drain in
situ.