The patient is a 5-year-old male with a history of acute-on-chronic suppurative left otitis media status post bilateral percutaneous tympanostomy tube placement and multiple courses of antibiotics. He initially presented to his local emergency department with left-sided otalgia, lethargy, emesis, and decreased oral intake. As per the family, he did not have any focal neurological deficits or headaches at that time. He was diagnosed with suppurative acuteotitis externa and prescribed ciprofloxacin ear drops.
Five days later, he returned to his local emergency department with a tactile fever and seizures. Upon arrival, his temperature was 38.4°C and he was found to have tonic-clonic movements. A febrile seizure was suspected, successfully aborted with acetaminophen and lorazepam, and he was loaded on levetiracetam. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a low-density temporal lesion with left to right midline shift. There was increased density of the external auditory meatus, middle ear, and inner ear. Laboratory studies were notable for a white blood count (WBC) of 33.9 (82.3% neutrophils, 11% bands). He was given one dose of ceftriaxone and piperacillin/tazobactam, intubated, started on a midazolam infusion, and was transferred to our institution for further evaluation.
He was stabilized in our pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) with a non-focal neurologic examination. Vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole were started for empiric coverage. On hospital day 2, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated left tympanomastoiditis with a 3.0 × 1.7 × 2.5 cm left temporal lobe brain abscess. Stereotactic burr hole aspiration yielded 3 mL of foul-smelling yellow-gray fluid, which was sent for cultures . The left external auditory canal was found to be filled with copious purulent otorrhea, the tympanic membrane was bulging with purulent middle ear effusion, and the middle ear space filled with granulation tissue. A left tympanoplasty tube was also placed.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was extubated without any complication. Post-operative MRI demonstrated interval drainage of the left temporal lobe abscess . He recovered well neurologically with only a mild receptive and expressive aphasia. He continued to receive a combination of vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole. On hospital day 7, cultures from aspirated pus grew Trueperella bernardiae, Actinomyces europaeus, and mixed anaerobic Gram-positive cocci. Cultures from the left ear were positive for Trueperella bernardiae, Corynebacterium amycolatum, and Corynebacterium aurimucosum. These species were identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization. Antibiotics were switched to intravenous meropenem 40 mg/kg every 8 h for a total of 6 weeks. The remainder of his hospital course was unremarkable, with no further febrile episodes or seizures. He was discharged on hospital day 13 at his baseline neurological status with a PICC line for continued meropenem administration.
After returning home, the patient was doing well until he presented to his ED the next day with persistent emesis and left ear pain with intermittent purulent drainage. An MRI obtained at this time demonstrated an interval increase in size of the left temporal lobe abscess with small satellite abscesses extending to the ependymal surface of the left lateral ventricle . His antibiotics were re-broadened to vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole. Out of concern for recurrence of the abscess, he was taken for stereotactic aspiration and mastoidectomy. Intraoperatively, 26 mL of thick purulent liquid was aspirated from the abscess.
Cultures of the repeat aspiration remained sterile. Our infectious disease colleagues recommended continuation of triple therapy of vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole for 6 weeks and he was discharged on hospital day 14 at his neurologic baseline. Susceptibility testing later revealed that this particular strain of Actinomyces was sensitive to the penicillin class; therefore, after he completed a 6-week course of triple therapy, and he was transitioned to oral amoxicillin monotherapy for 6 additional months.