A previously healthy 64-year-old Caucasian female presented to the emergency department (ED) with melena and syncope. She showed signs of hypovolemia with a heart rate of 110 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 100/50 mmHg. Digital rectal examination demonstrated hematochezia. A nasogastric tube was inserted and revealed clear gastric contents. Initial hemoglobin and hematocrit were 9 gr% and 26% respectively. Platelet count was normal. Subsequent blood counts demonstrated a drop in hemoglobin and hematocrit to 7 gr% and 20%, accompanied by a mild thrombocytopenia of 100*109/L. She received two units of packed red blood cells and was started on intravenous proton pump inhibitors. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was normal up to the third part of the duodenum, while colonoscopy demonstrated passage of blood from the terminal ileum without identifying the source of bleeding. Computerized tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a mass lesion in the jejunum with active intravenous contrast extravasation (Figure ). The patient’s unstable condition determined immediate intervention. In order to accurately mark the location of the lesion, thereby avoiding an exploratory laparotomy, the patient underwent diagnostic angiography of the superior mesenteric artery arcade system, revealing a hypervascular jejunal mass (Figure ). Selective metal coil embolization of the feeding vessel was performed. On the same day the patient was taken to the operating theatre for a laparoscopic exploration of the abdomen. A 2.5 cm tumor arising from the anti-mesenteric border of the proximal jejunum was identified (Figure ). The embolization coil was visualized adjacent to the bowel wall, with segmental ischemic discoloration of the serosa. Small bowel resection with primary anastomosis was performed. Postoperative course was uneventful. Pathology results showed a CD 117 positive gastrointestinal stromal tumor with a low MIB-1 proliferation index of 1% (Figure ). Surgical margins were free of tumor. Small erosions were noted in the adjacent mucosa, the most probable source of bleeding.
The patient was discharged in good overall medical condition. Medical therapy (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) was not started due to the low chance of GIST recurrence.