A 37-year-old male presented to the orthopedics outpatient department with chief complaints of pain and swelling over left foot for the last 1.5 months. The swelling increased slowly in the 1.5-month duration. There was no history of such swelling anywhere else in the body. The pain was dull aching and increased on weight bearing and walking. The pain was relieved by taking analgesics and giving rest to the foot. There was no history of trauma, fever, malaise, loss of appetite, or weight loss. The patient had neither history of contact with TB nor history of TB.
Local examination revealed an erythematous, tender swelling of about 3 × 3 cm on the anteromedial aspect of the dorsum of the left mid-foot with slightly raised local temperature. Fluctuation could not be appreciated. There was no discharging sinus, ulcer, or healed scar in the area. The patient had a normal range of motion around the ankle and foot.
A radiograph of the foot showed a lytic lesion in the navicular bone with the fuzziness of margins specifically toward the distal part . His Chest X-ray was within normal limits. MRI foot revealed hypo intensity in the navicular bone on T1-weighted and hyperintensity on T2-weighted films which was suggestive of inflammation of the navicular bone with intraosseous abscess.
Laboratory investigation revealed a raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (50) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (79) with a normal TLC count (6000). A clinical diagnosis of Pyogenic/Tubercular/ Fungal Osteomyelitis was made.
Thick bore needle aspiration was done and about 5 mL pus was aspirated . Samples were sent for: Pus cs and gram stain, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear, liquid culture, and sensitivity to 13 anti-tubercular drugs (Isoniazid, Rifampicin, Kanamycin, Amikacin, Capreomycin, Levofloxacin, Moxifloxacin, Ethionamide, Para aminosalicylic acid, Linezolid, Bedaquiline, Delamanid, and Clofazimine), cytopathology, cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CBNAAT) and line probe assay (LPA). CBNAAT detected M. TB and was rifampicin sensitive. The patient was started on cat-1 anti-tubercular therapy (ATT) based on clinico-imaging and CBNAAT findings. LPA also detected MTB and was sensitive to both 1st line (INH and RIF) and 2nd line drugs (FQs and SLIDs). The stain for AFB was negative. Culture detected MTB and liquid drug sensitivity testing revealed sensitivity to all 13 anti-tubercular drugs.
In follow-up, the radiographs and blood tests in the form of CBC, ESR, CRP, and LFT were performed at 2 months, 4 months, and 7 months of ATT intake (, , and ). The foot was protected in a below-knee slab for 8 weeks. Partial weight bearing was allowed at 8 weeks followed by full weight bearing at 16 weeks.
The patient took cat-1 ATT 4 drugs: Rifampicin 450 mg, INH 300 mg, ETB 1200 mg, pyrazinamide 1500 mg fixed-dose combination for the first 2 months in the intensive phase and then rifampicin 450 mg, INH 300 mg, and ETB 1200 mg in continuation phase for 9 months and then stopped on his own and presented to us 3 months post stoppage of ATT. Complete resolution of pain and swelling was there without any recurrence. Blood investigation revealed normal ESR (5) and slightly raised CRP (11) with normal TLC count (4540).
Radiographs and CEMRI were done which showed signs of healed lesion. X-ray showed sclerosis around the residual lytic cavity . CEMRI showed focal residual marrow edema without any post-contrast ring enhancement .