A 60-years-old female was admitted with signs of posthepatic jaundice and
coagulopathy: total bilirubin (TB) — 538.7 μmol/L, direct bilirubin (DB) —
412.1 μmol/L. Coagulation test showed fibrinogen level at 110 mg/dl (normal range
180-350 mg/dl), prothrombin Quick value — 46% (normal range 0.85-1.2), international
normalized ratio (INR) — 2.4 (normal range 0.85-1.2), indicating high risk of
bleeding. A diagnosis of Klatskin tumor of the left hepatic duct (type 3B by
Bismuth-Corlette classification) was established based on a contrast-enhanced CT
scan and biopsy. The CT scan analyses revealed the tumor to be intimately adherent
to the common hepatic artery (highly suspicious for invasion) as well as wrapped
around the half of the portal vein. The resection of the liver with major vessels
was not performed because such operation is not covered by the Medical Guarantees
Package from the National Health Service of Ukraine due to poor financing of
healthcare in Ukraine, and the patient was not able to cover such expenses by herself. The
malignancy was diagnosed as an unresectable tumor; therefore, a palliative minimally
invasive approach was chosen. The study was approved by the local ethical committee
at Bogomolets National Medical University. The patient provided written informed
consent to participate in the study. All data generated or analyzed during this
study are included in this published article.
Initially, we thought that percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage might be
favorable compared to the endoscopic approach. However, the decision was made to
performed an endoscopic approach because the patient had a Klatskin tumor with a
spread into the left hepatic duct, whereas the right hepatic duct was dilated and
free from tumor, indicating a good prognosis for endoscopic management in this
particular case. The dilation of the right hepatic duct was due to obstruction at
the level of bile duct confluence. Also, a high risk of bleeding was taken into
consideration, and a decision was made to perform endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) followed by endoscopic sphincterotomy and
endobiliary stenting. Application of self-expanding metal stents (SEMS) is
associated with better clinical outcomes and enhanced biliary decompression. As
compared to plastic stents, SEMS have a wider diameter, which is resulted in
enhanced bile flow after the stent insertion. In such a condition, biliary
decompression is rapid, and the risk of liver failure is increased according to
Khoronko et al and our clinical observations (unpublished data). Hence, we decided to use a
plastic stent in order to achieve gradual decompression because of signs of liver
failure due to posthepatic jaundice. The polyvinyl chloride (PVC) stent (10 Fr,
150 mm) was placed into the right hepatic duct and colorless “white” bile was
received. The selective stenting of the right hepatic duct was achieved by
maneuvering the flexible part of the endoscope and its elevator as well as using
guidewires with J-tip, fixed, and moveable core. Also, a significant decrease in
bilirubin levels was achieved. In 2.5 months after the PVC insertion, the patient
was diagnosed with posthepatic jaundice and cholangitis: TB — 120.6 μmol/L, DB —
86.3 μmol/L, WBC — 12.7 × 109/L, band neutrophils (BN) — 18%, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) — 29 mm/hour. Occlusion of the PVC stent was established by
MRI, followed by ERCP , and replacement of the stent was performed with a larger diameter
(11.5 Fr, 130 mm). The patient was administrated chemotherapy with 3 g of
capecitabin (18 courses).
Two months later after the endobiliary restenting procedure, the patient reported
fever up to 38°C and dry cough with a sudden onset. According to the patient, she
had an active lifestyle, doing regular chores like farming and gardening in the
countryside. During the next 7 days after the initial presentation, the dry cough
was changed to a wet one with an admixture of bile, indicating biliptysis. The blood
test showed WBC — 10.5 × 109/L, ESR — 66 mm/hour, TB — 12 μmol/L. CT scan
showed the proximal migration of the endobiliary stent with penetration through the
liver, the right dome of the diaphragm, and right lung . The distal part of the stent was
at the level of the common hepatic duct ( and ). The patient was not able to receive
immediate endoscopic management, because such a clinical facility was not available
in the area of her residence, and transportation to a tertiary referral center was
not possible because of patient’s fear to get infected with COVID-19. In such
circumstances, conservative therapy was started by administration of Meloxicam
15 mg/day, Amoxicillin 1.5 g/day, Ceftazidim 3 g/day, and Furosemide 40 mg/day. The
normalization of body temperature and blood parameters as well as the absence of
biliptysis were reported in 2 weeks.
During the follow-up of 9 months, there were detected neither signs of BBF nor
posthepatic jaundice. MRI investigation showed signs of fibrotic tissue around the
part of the endobiliary stent in the pulmonary parenchyma with a clear demarcation
from the normal lung tissue .
As the epidemic situation with COVID-19 became better, the patient arrived at a
tertiary center for endoscopic treatment in Kyiv (National Military Medical Clinical
Center of Ministry of Defense of Ukraine). To remove the proximally migrated
endobiliary stent we visualized its proximal tip by ERCP in the common bile duct at
the level of the cystic duct. Then, the tip was captured with 4 wire Dormia basket
followed by its removal. The removed stent was replaced with a PVC stent (10 Fr,
150 mm) by ERCP .
The surgical team considered possible technical problems and complications
associated with fibrosis around the migrated stent, and conversion to open surgery
was considered in case of unsuccessful endoscopic management. Complications were not
observed at follow-up.