The patient was a 57-year-old woman whose chief complaint was abdominal pain, diarrhea, and bloody mucus stool for more than 2 mo.
Diarrhea with bloody mucus stool occurred suddenly more than ten times a day since early August 2018. The patient also had periumbilical pain, which can be relieved after defecation. She did not have fever, cough, chest tightness, or other discomfort.
The patient was hospitalized in early June 2016 for eyelid edema, limb weakness, and swallowing difficulties. She had a series of typical clinical symptoms of DM, such as Gottron’s papules in the extensor surfaces of the metacarpophalangeal joints, V-neck sign, facial erythema, and periorbital edema . Electromyography showed myogenic damage. Muscle biopsy pathology and magnetic resonance imaging supported myositis. The patient was initially given prednisone [50 mg every day (qd) orally (po)] and methotrexate (15 mg once a week po). She did not stop taking the glucocorticoid and methotrexate for a long time after discharge, during which she added immunosuppressive drugs, such as cyclosporine and hydroxychloroquine, in combination and adjusted the dosage of hormones because of her unstable condition. The patient continued to suffer from limb weakness and dysphagia in early August 2018, but no new rash or edema appeared throughout the body when she was taking prednisone (10 mg qd po), methotrexate (10 mg once a week po), and cyclosporine [50 mg twice a day (bid) po]. She had a history of hypertension and depression and had undergone appendectomy.
The patient did not have a history of smoking or drinking.
The patient was 160 cm tall, weighed 45 kg, and had a body mass index of 17.58. Blotchy pigmentation was present on the neck, both legs, and hips. She had abdominal tenderness but not rebound pain. Her limbs and neck muscles also had tenderness. Her distal muscle strength was level 4, her proximal muscle strength was level 3, and her muscle tone was normal.
The result of routine blood examination was as follows: White blood cell count, 5.03 × 109/L; red blood cell count, 2.42 × 1012/L; and hemoglobin, 70.70 g/L. Routine stool examination showed positive occult blood with red and white blood cells in the stool. Liver function showed that her albumin decreased to 32.60 g/L. D-dimer was 742 ng/mL. The autoantibody test results were as follows: antinuclear antibody (+), anticentromere antibody (+), anti-Ro52 antibody (+), and anticentromere protein B antibody (+). Immunofluorescence staining indicated a centromeric-type disease (1:320). Parasites and bacteria were not found in the feces. Cardiac enzymes, tuberculosis antibody, T-spot test, cytomegalovirus DNA and antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus antibodies, and tumor markers were normal.
Colonoscopy showed multiple hyperemia, erosion, and ulcers in the whole colon and rectum. The ulcer was approximately 0.3-0.6 cm and was accompanied by yellow and white moss-like structures and edema of the surrounding mucosa. Part of the ileum had hyperemia and erosion. Multiple broad basal and pedicled polyps with a red surface and a size of 0.3-0.7 cm was found in the ileocecal region .
Pathological results showed a moderate chronic inflammation of the transverse colon mucosa accompanied by neutrophil infiltration and appendage as the ulcer changed .
Computed tomography enterography showed that the wall of the splenic curvature, descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum were slightly thickened and the colonic pouch became shallow, part of which was like sausage. These characteristics turned out to be UC .