A 57-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our unit with a one-week history of jaundice, itching and dark urine. She denied history of liver disease, metabolic syndrome (obesity, diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia) and alcohol exposure. She has been diagnosed as thyroid cancer (papillary thyroid cancer) and performed total thyroidectomy 3 months ago. The patient was further treated with 100 mCi radioactive I-131 therapy 21 days ago (Emission Computed Tomography (ECT) image taken 5 days after I131 therapy was shown as Figure ). Before starting I131 treatment, she had undergone ultrasonography of the liver and serum biochemical tests including liver chemistry, with all results being within the normal range.
On examination she presented with skin scratching, yellowish discoloration of the skin and sclerae (eyes), no edema, ascites nor encephalopathy were presented. Laboratory tests were abnormal: elevated total bilirubin (TB) = 131.1 μmol/L (7 folds above the upper limit of normal); Direct bilirubin(DB) = 82.1 μmol/L (10 folds increased); alanin aminotransferase(ALT) = 370 μ/L (9 folds increased); Aspartateaminotransferase(AST) = 189 μ/L (4.5 folds increased); gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) = 275 μ/L (6 folds increased); alkalinephosphatase (ALP), serum albumin, total bile acid and international normalized ratio (INR) were normal. Viral hepatitis (HAV(Ab), HBV (Ag/Ab), HCV(Ab, RNA),HEV(Ab), EBV(Ab), CMV(Ab) and HSV(Ab)), autoimmune serologies (antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody/M2, anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibody, anti-liver cell plasma antibody, anti-soluble liver antigen/liver–pancreas antigen) and serum tumor markers (AFP, CEA, CA125, CA19-9, CA15-3, CA72-4, FER, FPSA, PSA, SCC, NSE) were negative. No coagulopathy were observed. Iron and copper status were normal. Abdominal ultrasound revealed chronic diffuse hepatopathy, decreased size of gallbladder without gallstones or sludge and thicken gallbladder wall. There is no pericholecystic fluid. The common bile duct has a normal caliber. Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Magnetic Resonance CholangioPancreatography (MRCP, Figure ) were normal.
The patient was initially treated with basic hepatic protection for 40 days, including glutathione, magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate, essential Nutrition, transmetil, and/or tauroursodeoxycholic acid. The total bilirubin was not efficiently controlled and kept increasing to 223.9 μmol/L 40 days later, even though the level of AST and ALT were decreased. Liver biopsy was further performed and the results showed swollen hepacytes, predominant piecemeal necrosis within the lobules, obvious canalicular and hepatocellular cholestasis . The portal inflammation, hepatocyte rosettes and fibrosis were not detected . On the basis of Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment Method (RUCAM = 6 for this patient, shown as Table ) , it indicates the patient is probable I-131 administration induced liver injury. Therefore, the patient was further treated with methylprednisolone (40 mg iv drip qd*14d followed by maintenance and step-down withdrawal of oral methylprednisolone), the TB and ALT/AST were finally lowered back to normal in the end of follow-up visit . Considering the safety and validity to easterners, 40 mg iv drip qd is the standard initial dose in our institution for cholestatic DILI patients, who are insensitive to basis hepatic protection. The maintenance time and gradual reduction regime depend on the response of patients. Usually, the initial dose will be hold for the first 2 weeks, and the dose will be reduced 10% every 1-2 weeks when TB level was effectively controlled.