A 54-year-old male patient, following severe head trauma associated to acute subdural hematoma , underwent a right hemispheric decompressive craniectomy, a SDH evacuation and, subsequently, a cranioplasty implant with a polyetheretherketone (PEEK, Stryker Craniomaxillofacial Kalamazoo, MI, USA) and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE or Gore-Tex, GORE® PRECLUDE® PDX Dura Substitute, WL Gore and Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, Arizona) duroplasty . About 10 years later, he presented worsening headache with sensory alterations; therefore, he underwent an urgent brain CT scan that showed a right hemispheric cSDH expanding in subsequent radiological examinations . Because of symptoms’ worsening, he underwent cSDH evacuation through a burr hole centered on the parietal region of the PEEK prosthesis, associated with mini-reopening of duroplasty. During the burr hole procedure, an antibiotic prophylaxis was performed (once-daily intravenous dose of cefazolin 1 g and once-daily intravenous dose of teicoplanin 400 mg). Subsequent postoperative brain computed tomography (CT) scan documented a progressive brain re-expansion, associated with a significant clinical-neurological improvement that allowed him to be discharged in postoperative day 5. Two years after the procedure, he was admitted to the emergency department because of the appearance of a serum-purulent material drained from the previous surgical site. He underwent a brain CT scan that showed a 3 cm gas-fluid collection extending from the subdural to the epidural space and communicating through the burr hole . PEEK cranioplasty removal was performed. A purulent mixed to necrotic material was found, with a severe pial congestion. A debridement of the surgical site was performed with copious antibiotic-impregnated irrigation and a new duroplasty was performed . Postoperative course was uneventful. From the bacteria, culture tests resulted that a high positivity rate for S. aureus, Streptococcus haemolyticus, and Acinetobacter lwoffii was found and a targeted antibiotic therapy (twice-daily intravenous dose of ceftriaxone 1 g and once-daily intravenous dose of INN-daptomycin 500 mg) was administered. The patient was discharged on the 14th postoperative day with inflammatory index and white blood cells count within normal range. A novel titanium custom-made cranioplasty was performed after 3 months because the patient presented the “sinking skin flap” syndrome. After 2 weeks, he presented a complete recovery with return to work.