A 59-year-old woman saw her family doctor with upper abdominal pain, nausea, and dizziness and presented to our hospital. She had never pointed out of atrium fibrillation or other heart diseases. From neurological examination, no significant neurological symptom was observed except mild dysmetria and decomposition, but those findings were equivocal. Brain Magnetic resolution imaging (MRI) revealed shower embolization under the cortex of the left temporal lobe and parietal lobe . Contrast-enhanced whole-body computer tomography (CT) showed renal infarction and splenic infarction , and a tumor was observed in the retrohepatic area . From Laboratory data, d-dimer was elevated (46.3 ng/ml) and tumor maker (CA 19–9) was extremely elevated (>120,000 U/dl). Other tumor maker was negative. Because Trousseau syndrome was strongly suspected, heparin 10,000 U/day administration was started after hospitalization. The tumor was suspected of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. On day 9, sudden right side joint prejudice, neglect of left half space, and left hemiplegia were observed. National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 18. MRI revealed ischemic stroke; obstruction of proximal of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA). On the same day, endovascular treatment was performed and reperfusion was obtained .
Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction (TICI) was Grade 3.
Sheath: 9Fr(femoral).
Guiding catheter: 9Fr Branker®
Inner catheter: 8Fr JB2 countdown®
Micro catheter: Penumbra 5MAX ACE®, Velocity®
Micro guidewire: CHIKAI 14®
Clot retriever: Solitaire 6x40®
The right femoral artery was punctured, and the 9Fr long sheath was placed. Branker® was guided to the right internal carotid artery with 9Fr Branker®/6Fr JB2 countdown®/35 Angle® and photographed. Obstruction was confirmed at the proximal part of the right MCA. We tried lesion cross, but it was difficult because thrombosis was very hard. Selective imaging was performed after leading the wire and guiding Velocity® to M2. We expand Solitaire 6x40 and angiography was performed to confirm the position of the thrombus. We guided Penumbra 5MAX ACE68® and started suction. After 90 s, clot retrieve succeeded. Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction(TICI) was Grade 3.
Onset to puncture: 12:30.
Onset to repurfusion: 13:42.
After endovascular treatment, joint prejudice and neglect of hemilateral space disappeared but hemiplegia remained. NIHSS score improved to 9. While joint prejudice and neglected spatial neglect improved, we decided on a radical surgery policy because there were a primary lesion and a high risk of new embolism, and no distant metastasis or invasion was seen on the image. Right hepatectomy and partial diaphragmatic resection were performed. The postoperative course was good. After the operation, Heparin 10,000 U/day administration had continued till D-dimer inversion. The patient was transferred to rehabilitation without recurrence of cerebral infarction. The pathological examination showed the thrombosis was fibrin thrombosis. Tumor was intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma.