A 38-year-old female patient, gravid 3 para 2 abortion 1 was referred to our hospital with a one-year history of vaginal mass. One year before admission, the patient felt vaginal uncomfortable and found a mass in her vagina. The patient, lived in a remote rural area, did not go to the hospital for further examination due to her poor economic condition. She experienced discomfort in the vagina and felt the vaginal mass was growing progressively in the past year before admission. Her general medical history revealed no surgery and disease. At the time of consultation, vaginal examination demonstrated a large fixed mass was located in the right lateral wall of the vagina and occupied the upper and middle third of the vagina. Laboratory blood test results, including serum tumor markers, were all within the normal ranges. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 17.6 cm× 10.4 cm solid mass in pelvic cavity . The urinary bladder, rectum and uterus were displaced to the left side of the pelvic cavity, but there was no ascites and enlargement of pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes. Transverse , sagittal and coronal CT images revealed the tumor mass was highly suspected to originate from vagina.
Exploratory laparotomy was carried out to remove the mass after adequate preoperative preparation. Intraoperatively, a solid mass with the size of about 18 cm in diameter was found from pelvic floor to pelvic cavity. The lower boundary of the tumor mass was at the level of vaginal orifice. The urinary bladder, rectum, uterus and bilateral adnexa were separate from the mass and displaced to the left side of the pelvic cavity. The boundary between the mass and the surrounding urethra and bladder was clear, and there was no invasion to adjacent organ or metastasis. After Separating the tumor from the surrounding tissue, we found the tumor had a thin, fibrous capsule and originated from the right lateral wall of vagina. The tumor mass was completely removed by blunt dissection.
Pathological finding revealed the large mass was multinodular and the cut section was gray-white, with areas of necrosis. Cytopathologic features of the tumor mass showed hypercellularity and infiltrative overgrowth of spindle cells with nuclear atypia . Histological examination revealed the features of spindle cells with high to moderate cellularity, pleomorphism and moderate to marked cellular atypia with cells disposed in loose fascicles, with a storiform pattern in some parts. The mitotic index was high, and variable amounts of necrosis can be seen . Its mitotic count was 8 mitoses per 10 high power fields (HPF). In addition, well-differentiated liposarcoma component could be find in the excision specimen , which may contribute to the diagnosis of dedifferentiated liposarcoma. The mesthothial tumor was suspected, and then detection of a serial of markers were performed. The tumor lacks epithelial component and cells were rarely stained with p53. These findings didn’t support a diagnosis of anaplastic carcinoma of the vagina. Further, the tumor didn’t express desmin, ck-pan, α-smooth muscle actin, S-100, myoglobin and CD34, suggesting a dedifferentiated tumor . Overexpressions of human murine double minute 2 (MDM2) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) were detected. In addition, detection of MDM2 gene amplification was performed by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, and the tumor was positive for amplification of the MDM2 gene . The final histological and immunohistochemical results confirmed the diagnosis of DDLPS deriving from vagina.
The patient was discharged 7 days after surgery without any immediate postoperative complications. Medical oncology was consulted, and additional chemotherapy were recommended. Six courses of combination chemotherapy with a regimen of pirarubicin plus ifosfamide (pirarubicin 30 mg/m2, ifosfamide 2000 mg/m2) were performed for the patient. The patient remains well with no evidence of disease recurrence with 13 months of follow-up. We are still following-up this patient.