A 26-year-old young man with low rectal cancer without family history was admitted in August 2020 with a complaint of rectal bleeding. Physical examination revealed a rectal mass located 7 cm from the anal verge (by digital rectal examination) and enlarged lymph nodes (LNs) in the left groin area. Colonoscopy demonstrated a cauliflower-shaped tumor located 7 cm from the anal verge, confirmed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma on biopsy. Laboratory findings demonstrated elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9) levels (92.9 ng/mL and 146.8 U/mL, respectively). Magnetic resonance (MR) scan revealed a rectal tumor with irregularly shaped and enlarged lymph nodes in the left lateral pelvic (1.8 × 0.6 cm) and the left inguinal (2.0 × 1.5 cm) region, as depicted in Fig. A, B (MRI sequence can be seen in Additional file : Fig. S1). Furthermore, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan also demonstrated left lateral pelvic and inguinal lymph node metastasis. According to the multidisciplinary team's decision, the patient received preoperative chemoradiotherapy (pCRT), including radiation (total dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions) to the whole pelvis and bilateral inguinal regions, as well as 8 cycles of FOLFOX (oxaliplatin, fluoropyrimidine, and leucovorin) and 3 cycles of bevacizumab targeted chemotherapy. After pCRT, MR scan revealed a significant response of the primary tumor to CRT, as shown in Fig. C, D. However, MR scan revealed enlarged left lateral pelvic (0.7 × 0.5 cm) and inguinal (1.4 × 0.8 cm) lymph nodes, as shown in Fig. C, D. PET/CT scan demonstrated hypermetabolism of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose into both primary tumor (SUV max 1.0) and the left swollen lateral pelvic (SUV max 3.0) and inguinal lymph nodes (SUV max 3.4). In addition, the serum levels of CEA and CA199 have decreased dramatically (8.8 ng/mL and 21.8 U/mL, respectively).
After four months from the completion of radiation (2 months after the last course of bevacizumab targeted therapy), the patient underwent laparoscopic-assisted ultra-low anterior resection according to the principle of total mesorectal excision (TME). The patient was placed in the Trendelenburg semi-right lateral position under general anesthesia. After a lateral-to-medial approach of sigmoid colon mobilization, the inferior mesenteric artery was highly ligated. The splenic flexure was mobilized to ensure a tension-free anastomosis. Pelvic autonomic nerves were identified and preserved when mobilizing the rectum down to the pelvic floor.
Then, the rectum was transected 2 cm below the lower edge of the tumor. The specimen extraction was extracted via the stoma site. The proximal colon was transected 10 cm proximal to the tumor.
After completion of TME, NIR/ICG fluorescence imaging was used via a near-infrared camera system (KARL STORZ SE & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany) to guide laparoscopic LLND (Additional file : Video 1). Two ml of ICG was injected around the tumor transanally 1 day before the operation. Using a fascia priority approach, the ureterohypogastric nerve fascia along the ureter was isolated, and the pelvic plexus was identified and preserved. The vesicohypogastric fascia along the internal iliac artery was isolated, and the parietal pelvic floor, such as the iliopsoas muscle and internal obturator muscle, was exposed. Next, the internal iliac LNs between the ureterohypogastric nerve fascia and the medial aspect of the vesicohypogastric fascia were dissected. An enlarged LN around the external iliac vein found positive in NIR/ICG fluorescence imaging was also separated from the external iliac vein and internal obturator muscle, and the obturator nerve was preserved. The obturator lymph nodes between the vesicohypogastric fascia and external iliac vessels were dissected. The residual soft tissues were examined by NIR/ICG fluorescence imaging to prevent the omission of LNs during LLND. After completion of LPLND, the uterus, the pelvic plexus, the internal and external iliac vessels and their branches, and the obturator nerve remained. Then, an end-to-end anastomosis was constructed using a circular stapler. A diverting ileostomy was performed to protect low rectal anastomosis.
Next, the patient was switched to a supine position with thigh abduction. First, a 1.5 cm incision was made 2 cm below the lower vertex of the femoral triangle. NIR/ICG guided VEIL was performed using three ports, as shown in Fig. A. Scissors and digital maneuvers created a working space superficial to Scarpa’s fascia and then insufflated with CO2 at 12 mm Hg to maintain a visualization. The assistant grabbed the skin and lifted it to provide traction . As seen in Additional file : Video 2, the dissection boundaries of VEIL, including the sartorius muscle (laterally), adductor longus muscle (medially), and the inguinal ligament (superiorly), were well visualized. Then, superficial inguinal LNs were separated from Scarpa’s fascia. The saphenous vein medially and the spermatic cord, and the external inguinal ring superomedially were also identified and preserved. The saphenous vein is spared when superficial inguinal LNs dissection superior to the Scarpa’s fascia. Deep inguinal LNs dissection was then carried inferomedially starting from the transected Saphenofemoral junction around the femoral vein. Then, NIR/ICG fluorescence imaging confirmed that there were no residual LNs. Finally, the resected LNs were packed in a specimen retrieval bag and then extracted through the 10 mm trocar, and a suction drain was placed through the access of the 5 mm trocar. The total operating time was 480 min, and the estimated blood loss was 50 mL.
The surgical specimens showed a 1.2 × 1.5 cm scar after pCRT. The pathology revealed no residual carcinoma in the rectum with no tumor involvement in the perirectal, intermediate, and principal LNs, as shown in Fig. B, C. The internal iliac LN showed no tumor involvement, while pathology revealed infiltrated 7 of 11 dissected obturator LNs and 2 of 2 external iliac LNs. Noteworthily, pathology revealed infiltrated 2 of 3 dissected deep inguinal LNs, while the superficial inguinal LN had no tumor involvement. The tumor was classified as ypT0N0M1 according to the TNM classification of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC). No postoperative incisional and urinary dysfunctions were observed, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8. Until now, the patient received FOLFOX chemotherapy for 4 cycles and bevacizumab targeted chemotherapy for 3 cycles. Postoperative surveillance (6 months) revealed no locoregional or systemic tumor relapse.