A 57 year-old woman was referred to the Unit of Oral Medicine and Laser Surgery of the University of Parma, Italy, because of a 15 days standing, painful lesion on the right border of the tongue. Clinical investigation revealed the presence of a round, nodular, ulcerated, slightly exophytic lesion of the right posterior border of the tongue, in proximity of the ventral portion . Lesion measured approximately 3 cm in diameter. According to the patient, no mechanical or thermal trauma had occurred.
Swelling of the affected part of the tongue was appreciable on palpation; no mobility impairment or presumptive infiltration in the deeper muscular layers were evident. Gauze swiping did not remove the fibrin-like material from the surface of the lesion.
Neck palpation did not allow the disclosure of enlarged cervical, supraclavicular, occipital and pre-auricular nodes.
Medical history was negative. Patient was non-smoker and she referred no alcohol consumption.
Differential diagnosis included: SCC, bacterial infections (e.g.: tuberculosis), lymphoproliferative disorder, chronic eosinophilic ulceration and possible trauma or chronic mutilation of which patient was not aware.
Two incisional biopsies were taken in the most suspicious parts .
Further work-up included complete blood tests, chest x-rays, neck nodes and spleen ultrasonography (US), and magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck region.
Histological features included a polymorphic lymphocytic infiltrate with slight eosinophilia . Epithelium presented ulceration with signs of pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia.
IHC analysis showed a lymphoid infiltrate with the following characterization: CD3+, CD2+, CD4+, CD8-, CD5+, CD7-, CD56-, Perforin -, CD30−/Ber-H2-, CD20-, CD1A-. Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) investigation (Fluorescein-Conjugated Epstein-Barr Virus staining, EBER) was negative. Proliferation index Ki67 was 50%. Cytokeratin pool investigation was negative.
Multiplexed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) revealed the presence of a monoclonal pattern and TCRγ (T cell receptor gamma) gene rearrangement (region Vg1–8/Vg10 - Jg 1.1/2.1 - Jg 1.3/2.3) .
Imaging and laboratory work-up was negative. In contrast with the seriousness of the clinical appearance, complete remission with mucosal healing spontaneously occurred in 15 days .
In view of the very peculiar clinical and histological features, a retrospective diagnosis of a TUGSE with scarce eosinophilic infiltrate (possibly in regression), displaying CD30- T-clonal proliferation was eventually rendered.
The patient did not report signs of recurrence after a 3-year follow-up period .