A 44-year-old man, who was a known alcoholic, presented to the First Department of Surgery, University of Athens with symptoms of epigastric abdominal pain, vomiting, and weight loss. Clinical examination demonstrated mild tenderness throughout, but no masses were noted. Biochemical analysis revealed Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 172 U/L, Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT) 163 U/L, alkaline phosphates (ALP) 464 U/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 84.90 mg/L. The serum levels of various tumour markers were not increased: Alfa Feto Protein (AFP) 1.6, Carbohydrate Antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) 12.3, Carbohydrate Antigen 72-4 (CA72-4) 1.8, and Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) 3.6.
A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of a 4 cm × 4.2 cm cystic lesion in the body and tail of the pancreas. There was also a minor increase in diameter of the peripheral segment of the pancreatic duct and disseminated damage of the pancreatic parenchyma, suggestive of multiple episodes of pancreatitis in the past. There was no ascites or any other suspicious findings from the scan. Fine-needle aspiration biopsies with endoscopic ultrasound guidance (EUS) of the pancreatic lesion were performed. The biochemical analysis was positive for amylase (23,000 U/L), and cytology was consistent with the diagnosis of a serous cystadenoma. Tumour markers (CEA, AFP, and CA 19-9) were negative. The patient's symptoms subsequently improved with conservative management only: fluid resuscitation, analgesia, and antiemetics. Drainage of the cyst itself was not performed. Six days after admission, the patient was discharged with outpatient followup with repeat scanning. Four months followed without symptoms, and a second CT scan indicated only a small increase (4 cm × 4.5 cm) in the pancreatic cystic lesion. No other abnormalities were detected from the scan.
Three months later the patient presented acutely with recurrence of severe epigastric abdominal pain. Biochemical analysis again demonstrated deranged liver function and elevated inflammatory markers. Tumour markers were negative. A repeat CT in addition to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed only marginal enlargement in the pancreatic cystic lesion, but now there were also multiple lesions in the liver ranging from a few milimetres to 2.5 cm in diameter . The patient underwent laparoscopy and biopsy which revealed infiltration of the liver tissue by a giant cell carcinoma. The neoplastic cells were anaplastic or spindle often acquiring giant cell features. The growth pattern was diffuse with pseudospaces, and the stroma was loose and abundant with inflammatory infiltrates . The neoplastic cells showed cytokeratin 7 and cytokeratin 19 immunopositivity. The morphological and immunohistochemical features from the hepatic, pancreatic, and lymph node biopsies revealed the diagnosis of pleomorphic giant cell carcinoma, with the organ of origin the pancreas. At this advanced stage, surgical resection was not possible and the patient died four months later.