A 49-year-old woman complaining of uncontrollable oozing from her left breast tumor presented to our hospital in September 2003. She had been aware of her left breast tumor for > 10 years and had self-managed her left breast erosion for > 3 years. Laboratory test results revealed anemia (hemoglobin 9.1 g/dL) and elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 65.2 ng/mL) and carcinoma antigen 15-3 (44.2 U/mL). However, the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 value was not elevated (12.1 U/mL). Furthermore, the late arterial phase of dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed heterogeneously enhanced multiple solid mass lesions with necrotic foci in the pancreatic tail and body —up to 6.2 cm in size—with peripancreatic and paraaortic lymph node swelling . A left breast tumor projecting to the skin approximately 9.3 cm in diameter as well as left axillary lymph node swelling was simultaneously noted. The largest pancreatic mass, in this case, was a solid mass that was contrast-enhanced to the same extent as the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma although the common imaging finding of pancreatic ductal carcinoma is hypovascular. This mass was also not hypervascular enough to raise the suspicion of a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor. In addition, other noncontiguous pancreatic masses were found, and the presence of breast cancer was suggested, which led to the suspicion of pancreatic metastases from breast cancer rather than the primary pancreatic tumor, radiologically. The next day, emergent left simple mastectomy and reconstruction of the left breast by inferior lateral rectus abdominis muscle flap were performed to control bleeding. Macroscopically, the tumor was 7 cm in diameter and protruded from the skin. The cut surface of the tumor was solid and grayish-white with central necrosis, and the surgical margin was negative. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of large nests with central comedo necrosis. The tumor cells had large, round vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and pale eosinophilic granular cytoplasm. Mitotic figures were frequently observed . Immunohistochemically, the tumor was negative for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), and the HercepTest score was 0.
She began chemotherapy 2 weeks later with epirubicin and cyclophosphamide hydrate once every 3 weeks. Her CEA level increased (83.6 ng/mL) after four treatment cycles, and CT demonstrated a slight expansion of the pancreatic tumor. Weekly paclitaxel treatment started in December 2003. Her CEA level decreased gradually (to a minimum of 6.1 ng/mL in June 2004), and CT performed in July 2004 revealed shrunken pancreatic tumors that could not be recognized as masses with different densities. Thereafter, her CEA level increased again (up to 14.0 ng/mL in December 2004), and the pancreatic tumor regrew. Recurrent peripancreatic and paraaortic lymph node swelling was noted on CT performed in October and December 2004. Bone scintigraphy showed no evidence of bone metastasis, and CT revealed left axillary lymph node swelling to keep vanishing.
She underwent DP with splenectomy, left adrenalectomy, partial stomach resection, and paraaortic lymph nodes excision in December 2004. A gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a multinodular tumor at the pancreas tail, 3.5 × 3 × 2 cm in size. The tumor invaded the lymph nodes around the pancreas. The cut surface of the tumor was solid and grayish-white with focal hemorrhaging. Microscopically, the tumor invaded the pancreas and surrounding tissue, forming solid nests with central necrosis. The tumor cells had large round vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli and pale eosinophilic granular cytoplasm. Mitotic figures were frequently found . These histological features were similar to those of this patient’s primary breast cancer . Immunohistochemically, the tumor was negative for ER, PR, gross cystic disease fluid protein-15, and mammaglobin. Although immunohistochemical markers of breast cancer were negative, the patient was diagnosed with primary breast cancer metastases to the pancreas based on the histological similarity between these two tumors.
Ultrasonography and CT performed in May 2005 revealed left parasternal lymph node metastasis, which was subsequently treated by radiation therapy comprising 60 Gy/30 f. She took 5′-deoxy-5′-fluorouridine for 2 years after pancreatectomy. The patient was doing well with no evidence of disease as of January 2020.