A male in his late seventies was scheduled to undergo holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HOLEP) owing to benign prostate hypertrophy. He regularly consumed alcoholic beverages but was otherwise healthy. Since prolonged surgery was anticipated, the patient underwent subarachnoid block with hyperbaric bupivacaine, followed by general anesthesia; the airway was secured with a supraglottic airway (SGA).
Ninety minutes after the start of the HOLEP procedure, the anesthesiologist experienced progressive difficulty in ventilating this patient with increased airway pressure, poor end-tidal CO2 trace, and abdominal distention. These circumstances prompted the anesthesiologist to consider the possibility of SGA malposition and inadvertent insufflation of the stomach via a misplaced SGA. Therefore, the anesthesiologist intended to remove the SGA and re-intubate using a standard tracheal tube. During intubation, the provider found abnormally swollen oral and pharyngeal mucosa; nonetheless, intubation was successful. The presence of clinically relevant upper airway edema was confirmed by laryngofiberscopy performed by an otorhinolaryngologist immediately after intubation.
After intubation, arterial blood gas analysis revealed marked hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis . Derived parameters such as NaCl base excess effect, albumin base excess effect, and lactate base excess effect are also presented in Table .
Based on these findings, we suspected translocation of irrigating saline to the intravascular space from the peritoneal cavity through the perforated bladder. This hypothesis was supported by the large positive difference between the infused and recovered amounts of irrigating fluid and decreased hemoglobin and albumin levels without any major blood loss and was verified by fluid collection in the peritoneal space found by ultrasound examination. The balance between the used and recovered irrigation fluid was estimated to be +6400 ml.
Owing to concerns regarding airway compromise, the patient remained intubated and mechanically ventilated in the ICU until postoperative day 1. Diuresis with furosemide and carperitide during the ICU stay resulted in a negative fluid balance of 5200 ml and normalization of hyperchloremia . The patient was transferred to the hospital ward without any sequel on the next day.