A 28-year-old Thai man presented to Siriraj Hospital with a history of a progressively enlarged left supraclavicular mass, significant weight loss, and night sweats for four months.
Two months prior to this admission, he noticed hoarseness associated with ptosis of his left eye and double vision. The physical examination at presentation revealed ptosis of his left eye with a miotic pupil and anhydrosis on his left hemifacial area, all of which were compatible with Horner's syndrome. His skin examination disclosed several dermatologic signs such as multiple well-defined brownish café au lait patches on the abdomen, areolae, arms, back and buttocks, and axillary freckles . There were also soft movable skin-colored nodules located on his left thigh, left forearm, and back. Subsequent ophthalmologic slit-lamp examination detected multiple Lisch nodules which are raised pigmented hamartomas of the iris. He reported having multiple pigmented skin lesions and rubbery nodular skin lesions over his entire body since childhood. His father also had similar skin lesions over the whole body area. Other pertinent examination included a large non-tender and rubbery mass (15 cm in length and 10 cm in width) in the left supraclavicular region with no palpable lymph nodes elsewhere in the body.
Routine laboratory tests revealed a hemoglobin level of 14.5 g⁄dL, a total leukocyte count of 8.2 × 109/L (70% neutrophils, 22% lymphocytes, and 8% monocytes) and a platelet count of 280 × 109/L. Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 525 U/L (normal range, 225 to 450 U/L) and serum uric acid was 13.4 mg/dL (normal range, 2.4 to 7 mg/dL). His liver function tests were normal. Chest X-ray revealed a large anterior mediastinal mass . Computed tomography (CT) of his neck showed matted lymphadenopathy on the left side of the neck, which extended along the carotid vessels to the left thoracic cavity. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest disclosed a large (10.9 × 9.7 × 18 cm) lobulated heterogeneous-enhancing mass with a central necrosis in the anterior and middle mediastinum which extended superiorly into the left anterior neck (C5-C6 level), and encased around his aortic arch, left subclavian artery, left jugular vein, trachea, left main bronchus and left pulmonary artery . Multiple subcentimeter mediastinal lymphadenopathies were also observed. Left pleural effusions with adjacent atelectasis of the left lower lobe were also present. From these findings, the differential diagnoses of this mass were lymphoma, teratoma, lung cancer or metastasis and malignancy associated with NF1, such as MPNSTs and chromaffin cells tumor. Therefore, supraclavicular lymph node biopsy was performed to make a definite pathological diagnosis which revealed diffuse, mixed small and large lymphoid cells compatible with malignant lymphoma (intermediate grade). Immunostaining of the cells demonstrated that neoplastic cells were marked with CD20, CD10, CD43, BCL2, BCL6, and MUM1, but not with CD3, CD5, CD23, CD34, TdT, or cyclin D1. Kappa but not lambda light chain restriction was also demonstrated. The malignant cells possessed a B-cell phenotype with mixed germinal center B-cell and activated B-cell features which were consistent with a DLBCL subtype according to the 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of neoplasms of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues . Staging studies showed no bone marrow involvement and computed tomography (CT) of the whole abdomen revealed normal attenuation of liver parenchyma without a definite space occupying lesion. The spleen was unremarkable and no intraabdominal lymphadenopathy could be demonstrated. Once the diagnosis and the staging were completed, he was treated with the standard CHOP (Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), Hydroxyrubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (Vincristine), Prednisone) chemotherapy regimen for eight cycles, to which the tumor responded well .