A healthy 21-year-old male presented to the emergency department with left ankle pain and an inability to weight bear after a fall from a motorcycle. He was driving at approximately 5 mph when he hit gravel and lost control, causing his motorcycle to tip over onto his left leg. The patient described catching his toe and a forced external rotation mechanism. He had immediate pain and swelling in his ankle and had been unable to bear weight. On presentation, he reported tingling across the top of his toes.
On examination, he had mild deformity at the left ankle and was found to have diminished sensation in the distribution of the deep peroneal nerve at the first dorsal web space. Sensation was otherwise intact, motor function was limited due to pain but intact, and vascular function was intact. Severe edema was present localized at the medial ankle and moderate edema at the lateral ankle, with several small superficial abrasions across the medial ankle and foot. He reported mild tenderness over the lateral ankle and severe tenderness just distal and medial to the medial malleolus, with no tenderness at the medial malleolus itself or the proximal fibula.
Initial radiographs of the left ankle in the emergency department demonstrated medial clear space widening of 8–9 mm. The lateral view demonstrated abnormal alignment of the ankle but was thought to be due to poor imaging, so repeat lateral films were ordered. Subsequent ankle films re-demonstrated abnormal alignment of the ankle, with the distal fibula appearing posteriorly translated ( and ). Tibia-fibula radiographs were scrutinized and were negative for fractures at the proximal fibula. No fractures or other dislocations were present at the ankle, leg, or knee. A computed tomography (CT) scan was then performed that demonstrated a complete posteromedial dislocation of the distal fibula, with the distal fibula located posterior to the distal tibia and the talus subluxated approximately 25% laterally. There were no fractures present at the ankle or elsewhere in the tibia or fibula, indicating a purely ligamentous dislocation of the distal fibula behind the distal tibia ( and ).
A closed reduction was performed under conscious sedation using 25 mg ketamine and 50 mg propofol. The leg was held by an assistant in 90° of flexion at the hip and knee. The assistant also provided counterforce at the ankle with one hand on the anterior aspect of the distal tibia. The orthopedic provider then held the foot in plantar flexion, inversion, and a small amount of adduction. The other hand was placed with the fingertips wrapped posteriorly around the distal fibula. Once adequate sedation had been obtained, an anterolateral force was applied to the distal fibula, along with a small amount of internal rotation and a small amount of traction on the ankle. There was a palpable and visible snap as the fibula was reduced back into the incisura. The ankle was then placed in a well-padded, plaster short-leg splint and appropriately molded. Post-reduction radiographs demonstrated a reduced ankle in anatomic alignment ( and ). The patient was neurovascularly intact upon re-examination, with resolution of his deep peroneal nerve paresthesia. He was made non-weight-bearing and was discharged home with plans for outpatient follow-up.
The patient followed up in the office 3 days after the injury, where repeat radiographs in the splint demonstrated a maintained reduction of the left ankle and syndesmosis. He then underwent a minimally invasive syndesmotic fixation using the FIBULINK® Syndesmosis repair system (DePuy Synthes, Monument, CO) 12 days after initial presentation ( and ). After surgery, the patient was placed in a splint and made non-weight-bearing. He followed up 2 weeks after surgery for splint removal, radiographs, and an incision check, then was placed in a tall fracture boot. At that visit, he was cleared to start range-of-motion exercises out of the boot and continued non-weight-bearing restrictions for a total of 6 weeks. At the 6-week follow-up, the patient was allowed to start weight-bearing in the boot for 2 weeks, then transitioned to a lace-up brace out of the boot. He participated in 1 month of formal physical therapy, starting 6 weeks after surgery. At his 3-month follow-up, the patient had 0/10 pain and was walking without a boot or brace. Radiographs demonstrated the maintained alignment of his ankle joint. He was released to all activities at that time. At 1-year follow-up, the patient had 0/10 pain, maintained anatomic alignment of his ankle joint, and was participating in soccer as well as running for leisure without pain or difficulty ( and ).