The patient, an 83-year-old man, was admitted to the hospital due to episodic nocturnal gibberish for 3 d and worsening for 1 d.
A member of his family acted as a proxy and provided an account of the patient's symptoms during the episodes which included: incoherent speech, slurred words, bilateral drooling, and impaired recognition of family members, lasting for approximately 20 min. The symptoms ameliorated following sleep, and partial recollection was observed upon awakening. At approximately 4:00 on the same day, the above symptoms recurred.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension, managed through the long-term use of sustained-release nifedipine and candesartan tablets for treatment. He was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes over 20 years ago. Initially, oral hypoglycemic drugs were prescribed to manage blood glucose levels. However, 3 months ago, owing to inadequate glycemic control, the patient was initiated on insulin aspart injections before meals at a dose of 8 units in the morning, 10 units at noon, and 10 units in the evening. The subcutaneous administration of insulin glargine was initiated at a dose of 10 units at 20:00. Unfortunately, specific details regarding blood glucose control are unavailable as the patient did not monitor their blood glucose levels at home. Moreover, the patient's medical history included chronic bronchitis, old cerebral infarction, hepatitis B, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and left knee arthritis.
The patient denied any specific family history.
Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.3 ℃, respiratory rate of 19 times/minute, pulse rate of 76 times/min, blood pressure of 130/75 mmHg, SPO2 level of 99% (with oxygen supplementation), height of 170 cm, weight of 70 kg, and body mass index of 24.22 kg/m2. His random blood glucose level on admission was 13 mmol/L. No significant abnormalities were detected during cardiovascular or abdominal examinations, and no edema was observed in either lower limb. Neurological examinations did not reveal any apparent abnormalities.
Complete blood count, thyroid function test, plasma ammonia, coagulation profile, liver and kidney function tests, electrolytes, B-type natriuretic peptide, cardiac enzyme spectrum, three indicators of myocardial infarction urinalysis and routine stool examination, glomerular filtration rate, rheumatoid factor test, and autoimmune liver disease antibody levels were within normal ranges. Serum cortisol levels at 8:00 and 16:00 were also within normal limits. Tumor markers including alpha-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 125, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, total prostate-specific antigen, neuron-specific enolase, cytokeratin fragment 19 and cancer antigen 72-4 were all normal except for carcinoembryonic antigen which was elevated (6.15 ng/mL, reference value: 0-4.00 ng/mL). His glycated hemoglobin level was 7.0%.
The patient’s electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. Enhanced computed tomography of the pancreas revealed pancreatic atrophy, bilateral renal cystic lesions, and kidney stones in the right kidney. Brain diffuse-weighted magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated multiple lacunar infarctions in the brainstem, bilateral basal ganglia, and frontal and parietal lobes. There was also evidence of cerebral atrophy, white matter degeneration, and cerebral arteriosclerosis. Abdominal ultrasound indicated fatty liver and slightly increased echogenicity of the bilateral renal parenchyma with bilateral cystic lesions. The bladder wall appeared rough, with diverticulum formation. Additionally, an enlarged prostate with stones or calcified spots was identified.
Around 2:00 on the day of admission, the patient presented with delirium, palpitations, and fatigue. His finger blood glucose measurement revealed a level of 2.6 mmol/L. Consequently, 20 mL glucose solution was orally administered and 10% glucose solution was intravenously infused. Hence, the blood glucose levels increased to 9.4 mmol/L. After the gradual relief of symptoms, the insulin dosage were reduced. On the second night after admission, the patient experienced another episode of palpitations and discomfort. Immediate venous blood glucose measurement showed a level of 2.7 mmol/L (reference range: 3.9-6.1 mmol/L), an insulin level of more than 600 mU/L (reference range: 8.5-22.70 mU/L), and a C-peptide level of 3.40 ng/mL (reference range: 0.78-5.19 ng/mL). This indicated an insulin-C-peptide dissociation phenomenon. The insulin and C-peptide release tests of the patient yielded results consistent with previous reports, suggesting an association between hypoglycemia in the patient and high serum insulin concentrations. Therefore, immediate discontinuation of insulin was implemented. Dynamic blood glucose monitoring in the patient revealed fluctuations ranging from 2.4 to 18.0 mmol/L, with episodes of low blood sugar predominantly occurring between 2:00 to 5:00, where blood sugar levels fluctuated within the range of 2.4 to 3.3 mmol/L; hence, hypoglycemia occurred intermittently. The insulin antibody and gene tests were completed. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles were HLA-DRB1*0803/1202, HLA-DQB1*0601/0301, HLA-DPB1*0501/0501.