An 89-year-old female was transferred to our institution with massive gross hematuria in March 2011. The patient’s medical history included uterine cervical cancer for which surgical treatment was performed at the age of 45 and gastric cancer treated by total gastrectomy at the age of 55. Medical history did not include renal biopsy, renal injury, percutaneous nephrolithotomy, or no trauma at the flank region. On admission, blood pressure was 143/67 mmHg, heart rate was 83 beats/min, body temperature was 37.2°C, and oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. On clinical examination, weight was 45 kg, height was 143 cm, and body mass index was 22.0 kg/m2. Inspection of the palpebral conjunctiva revealed evidence of anemia. Blood chemical analyses were shown in Table . A urinalysis revealed urine protein level of 3+, urine occult blood level of 3+, white blood cell count of 10–19/HPF, and red blood cell count of >100/HPF. Plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed dilated left renal pelvis with high-density contents and hematoma was suspected . Contrast enhanced CT was not performed because this condition was not considered to have association with renal vascular diseases. Subsequent plain abdominal magnetic resonance imaging revealed left hydronephrosis and blood retention in the dilated left renal pelvis. No cancer in the renal pelvis or ureter was detected .
Despite conservative treatment with hemostatic agents (carbazochrome sodium sulphate and tranexamic acid), hematuria persisted. Repeated urinary cytology revealed no malignant cells. On day 9 after admission, consciousness deteriorated, systolic blood pressure decreased to 60 mmHg, and a high-grade fever of 39.0°C developed. Laboratory blood tests revealed a markedly elevated white blood cell count (35,000/μL), markedly elevated C-reactive protein levels (32.5 mg/dL), and moderate anemia (red blood cell count, 206 × 104/μL; hemoglobin, 6.0 g/dL). The patient went into septic and/or hemorrhagic shock. Therefore, fluid and catecholamine infusion, blood transfusion, and antibacterial drugs were rapidly initiated. Consciousness level and circulatory condition gradually improved. Repeated blood culture prior to administration of antibacterial drugs revealed no evidence of bacterial infection. On day 10 after admission, abdominal ultrasonography revealed expansion of hematoma in the left renal pelvis. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT confirmed marked expansion of hematoma in the left renal pelvis and identified microaneurysms in the segmental arteries of the left kidney .
Inflammation improved and a left double-J stent was inserted to improve hydronephrosis. Selective renal angiography that was simultaneously performed revealed renal arteriovenous malformation with microaneurysms in the left segmental arteries . Catheter embolization using metallic coils was then successfully performed ; thus, hematuria ceased. Subsequent plain abdominal CT confirmed the absence of hematoma in the left renal pelvis . Abdominal radiography revealed a well-positioned double-J stent . The subsequent clinical course was uneventful. No postembolization syndrome (fever, lumbago, elevation of lactase dehydrogenase, or hematuria) was observed. The patient was ambulatory on discharge.