A 71-year-old woman visited another hospital for an investigation of hypoalbuminemia, liver dysfunction, and systemic edema. The patient’s medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension, for which she had been undergoing treatment since the age of approximately 50 years. There was no remarkable family history, and the patient was a social drinker who never smoked cigarettes. The results of laboratory tests were as follows: total bilirubin (T-Bil), 0.4 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 67 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 76 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 590 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), 279 IU/L; and albumin (Alb), 2.8 g/dL. Anti-nuclear antibody was 1:80, and antimitochondrial antibody was 12.7 U/mL. Computed tomography (CT) showed no remarkable finding except for subcutaneous edema and ascites . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed atrophic gastritis, and a biopsy of the gastric mucosa showed H. pylori infection; however, it did not reveal giant gastric folds; a characteristic feature of Menetrier's disease . Colonoscopy showed lymphatic hyperplasia in terminal ileum and cecum , and histology of the cecum showed proliferation of lymph vessels. Capsule and balloon endoscopies showed multiple angiodysplasia and lymphatic hyperplasia in the ileum. The fecal alpha-antitrypsin clearance test result was 170 mL/day (0.4–19.0 mL/day), and 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-binding human albumin scintigraphy showed protein leakage from the cecum to the transverse colon . Finally, the patient was diagnosed with PLGE complicated with aPBC. The time course of treatment at the previous hospital is shown in Fig. . Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) was administered for aPBC. After administering UDCA, liver function rapidly improved; however, hypoalbuminemia and edema remained; hence, prednisolone 50 mg was started for PLGE. No improvement of symptoms was observed after prednisolone administration. After several weeks, azathioprine (AZA) 100 mg/day was started for PLGE, but it was not effective and was tapered and discontinued . As the patient's edema did not improve after 6 months of hospitalization, she was transferred to our hospital for rehabilitation.
At the time of admission, the patient’s height was 152 cm, body weight was 74.2 kg, and body mass index was 32.1 kg/m2. Physical examination revealed conjunctival anemia, a Levine II/VI systolic murmur, and anasarca. The patient was unable to walk independently due to severe leg edema. The results of the laboratory investigation on admission were as follows: C-reactive protein, 1.38 mg/dL; total protein, 5.7 g/dL; Alb, 1.8 g/dL; T-Bil, 0.2 mg/dL; AST, 8 IU/L; ALT, 3 IU/L; ALP, 411 IU/L; and GGT, 57 IU/L . We continued the previous doctor’s prescription after the patient was transferred to our hospital, and albumin transfusion was performed several times. As hypoalbuminemia persisted after administering UDCA for aPBC, we considered that the occurrence of PLGE was not due to aPBC. The EGD performed at the previous hospital showed no suspicious findings for Menetrier's disease, and 99mTc-labelled albumin scintigraphy showed no protein leakage from the stomach. We hypothesized that PLGE may have developed due to changes in the intestinal immune system associated with H. pylori infection, and we decided to eradicate H. pylori. Therefore, we performed H. pylori eradication by prescribing 1500 mg of amoxicillin, 400 mg of clarithromycin, and 40 mg of vonoprazan for 7 days. On day 45 after H. pylori eradication, we performed a urea breath test and confirmed that H. pylori was successfully eradicated. The time course of treatment at our hospital is shown in Fig. . Except for H. pylori eradication therapy, the patient's treatment was unchanged. Diuretics were continued at the same dose as in the previous hospital. The hypoalbuminemia improved slowly, but the edema improved markedly. The patient continued physical therapy and was able to walk independently. Therefore, the patient was discharged on day 107 after hospitalization at our hospital. Her body weight had decreased from 74.2 kg at presentation to 48.0 kg at discharge (26.2 kg loss). After discharge, abdominal CT revealed complete disappearance of ascites and subcutaneous edema . Follow-up colonoscopy showed improvement of ileal and cecum lymphatic hyperplasia . Albumin recovered to 3.4 g/dL, 1 year after H. pylori eradication. After approximately 4 years of follow-up, ascites and edema have not recurred after discontinuing diuretics, and Alb was sustained over 3.0 g/dL with no adverse events.