A 60-year-old man presented with back pain and PSA level above 100 ng/mL in laboratory tests referred to radiation oncology ward of Hafte-tir hospital Tehran Iran in 2020. Core biopsy of prostate showed prostate adenocarcinoma with Gleason score of 4 + 5. A 99mTc-MDP bone scan and a whole-body CT scan were ordered to evaluated metastases, which revealed widespread bone metastasis with no evidence of visceral metastases. The patient was treated with leuprolide (11.25 mg each 84 days), bicalutamide (50 mg daily), zoledronic acid (4 mg every 28 days) and palliative irradiation (3000 cGy in 10 fractions) for bone metastases, which resulted in good clinical and biochemical response. Serum PSA level decreased to 27 ng/mL. Chemotherapy and abiraterone acetate was recommended to the patient but refused due to the economic issues. After 2 years of follow up, while receiving leuprolide, progressive headache and fatigue was reported by the patient. The laboratory tests showed rising PSA level to 98 ng/mL despite testosterone level of lower than 20. In complete blood count (CBC), Hemoglobin and platelets level was 8 g/dL and 45 000/μL. Brain MRI manifested diffuse abnormal thickening of meninges with possibility of metastatic meningeal infiltration . Patient was considered to have leptomeningeal carcinomatous according to high level of PSA and MRI findings. Bone marrow aspiration was done due to anemia and thrombocytopenia. Microscopic view showed bony trabeculae with inter-trabecular marrow tissue replaced by aggregations of atypical epithelial cells, as a result of metastatic carcinoma . Whole brain RT (30 Gy in 10 fractions) was done which resulted in symptoms improvement. The patient performance status according to Eastern cooperative oncology (ECOG) was 1. Patient was treated with combination of docetaxel 50 mg weekly (for 12 cycles), abiraterone 1000 mg daily and prednisolone (10 mg per day). Nplate® and Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF) were administrated according to laboratory tests. After 5 month of systemic therapy serum PSA level was 18 ng/m and CBC improved (platelet level of 110 000/μL). In the last follow up after 11 months the patients is still symptom free with no rise in PSA level. Clinical, biochemical, and treatment course of disease is shown in Figure .