A 70-year-old man presented to the emergency department at our institution, with angina-like chest pain, palpitations, and sweating.
One year prior to his current admission, he underwent endocrine evaluation following an incidental adrenal finding on imaging measuring 25 × 34 mm2. A 24-hour urine collection for catecholamines revealed a urine epinephrine level of 150 μg (normal limit: <27 μg/day). A 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test was abnormal, with serum cortisol level of 188 nmol/l (normal limit < 50 nmol/l). He then underwent an ambulatory high dose dexamethasone suppression test. That day he was referred to the emergency department due to angina-like chest pain, palpitations, and sweating. He underwent cardiac catheterization, which demonstrated no significant pathology in the coronary arteries, and was discharged the next day. Past medical history was significant for hypertension, type II diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia.
A year later, on current admission, the patient's electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, new T wave inversion in lateral and posterior leads, with no conduction abnormalities. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated hypokinesis in the distribution of the left anterior descending coronary artery. The patient underwent urgent catheterization which once again demonstrated no pathology in the coronary arteries. A subsequent echocardiogram demonstrated normal ventricular function with moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation.
During his stay in the coronary care unit, the patient experienced several episodes of hypertension and tachycardia, refractory to treatment with calcium channel blockers, beta and alpha adrenergic blockade, angiotensin receptor blockers, and furosemide. As part of resistant hypertension evaluation, abdominal computed tomography was performed and a 36 × 34 × 22 mm3 right adrenal mass was identified. The adrenal mass had a density of 39 Hounsfield units (HU) prior to intravenous contrast injection, increasing to 74 HU following contrast injection. Notably, the patient experienced a severe event of hypertension, palpitations, and chest pain following administration of 100 mg hydrocortisone as preparation for contrast agent infusion as he had received a diagnosis of sensitivity to intravenous contrast material. Plasma metanephrine was found to be 1200 pg/ml (normal < 90 pg/ml) with a normal normetanephrine level of 163 pg/ml (normal < 196 pg/ml). Plasma cortisol level at 8 am, after overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression, was 2770 nmol/l, while level at 8 am without dexamethasone suppression was 3292 nmol/l (normal range 100–690 nmol/l). ACTH level was 174 pmol/l (normal range 1.9–10.2 pmol/l). Renin and aldosterone levels were within normal limits.
The patient's case was presented at a multidisciplinary team meeting and surgery was advised. Following 2 weeks of alpha blockade, uneventful laparoscopic right adrenalectomy was performed, with stable blood pressure throughout the procedure. The postoperative course was uncomplicated and the patient was discharged on day two.
Pathology revealed a 36 mm pheochromocytoma of the adrenal gland with a scaled score (PASS) of 7 (vascular invasion, predominantly diffuse growth, high cellularity, and spindling of cells). Diffuse adrenal cortical hyperplasia was noted . Immunostaining was positive for ACTH and synaptophysin and negative for chromogranin, inhibin, calretinin, and S-100 protein. shows the pathology of adrenal tumor, pheochromocytoma, and diffuse growth pattern. depicts positive immunostraining for ACTH. depicts the tumor's vascular invasion, and the adrenal gland's hyperplastic cortex.
During 23 months of follow-up the patient had no cardiac events, his blood pressure decreased to 126/79, and he was able to decrease his antihypertensive medications. A CT scan performed 7 months following surgery revealed normal postoperative changes with no evidence of recurrence.