A 52-years-old non-smoker female, with a past medical history of undocumented and unexplored heart disease for 15 years and recurrent miscarriages, presented to our department for progressive dyspnea on exertion (New York Heart Association class III) with orthopnea. Her symptoms developed 4 month prior to presentation but worsened 1 week prior to admission.
On presentation, the patient was dyspneic and tachycardic at rest. The oral temperature was 36.5 °C, the blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg. Examination revealed marked jugular venous, distension, a distended and globally tender abdomen with positive fluid shift, pulmonary bilateral basal rales, as well as marked bilateral lower leg edema.
An electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 94 b.p.m, left axis deviation with bifascicular block (right bundle branch block with left anterior fascicular block) .
Chest x-ray showed symmetrical globular enlargement of the heart and pulmonary congestion in a perihilar distribution, with a small right pleural effusion .
Her laboratory tests revealed elevated BNP and d-dimers level, lymphopenia and normal Troponin level. Routine blood investigations including coagulation parameters, liver and renal function tests were normal.
Echocardiogram revealed a significant biventricular enlargement with diffuse hypokinesis and a markedly depressed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF = 11%). A large apical thrombus was noted in the left ventricle. No pericardial effusion and no significant valvulopathy was observed .
Reversible causes of cardiomyopathy were considered. Chest computed tomography angiography was not supportive of pulmonary embolism as the underlying etiology of right sided heart failure. Laboratory tests revealed normal iron and vitamins levels and normal thyroid function. Serological examination for viral infections, including SARS COV2, herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus, EpsteinBarr, rubeola, hepatitis B and C, and HIV were all normal. A search for underlying malignancy was also negative. Coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries with no evidence of stenosis.
The combination of a negative cardiomyopathy screen and the history of recurrent miscarriages, suggested that the most likely etiology was autoimmune. Autoimmune screen showed strongly positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA) at 640 IU/ml (N < 7), with presence of anti-dsDNA antibodies, positive IgM anticardiolipin at 15 IU/ml (N < 10) and IgM anti-β2GP1 antibodies at 14 IU/ml (N < 7). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, creatininemia, urinary protein excretion, CRP, C3/C4 and CPK were normal.
After a multidisciplinary discussion, the diagnosis of SLE along with antiphospholipid syndrome was made, based on 4 of the 11 criteria of the American College of Rheumatology (pleural effusion, lymphopenia, positive ANA, anti-dsDNA, anticardiolipin and anti-β2GP1 antibodies).
Treatment with prednisone 20mg per day and hydroxychloroquine 400mg per day was begun. The patient was also started on anticoagulation therapy and conventional therapy for heart failure (furosemide, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, betablocker and dapagliflozin).
One month later, echocardiography showed only a mild improvement (LVEF = 18%) and unfortunately the patient died few week later at home while sleeping.