A 28-year-old pregnant woman was referred to our center for prenatal echocardiography at 24 weeks of gestation with fetal cardiac abnormalities identified during routine second-trimester screening. The woman was in good health, with no family history of cardiovascular disease and no medication history during pregnancy. She and her husband are not consanguineous.
Detailed fetal echocardiographic examination revealed a subaortic ventricular septal defect (3.4 mm) with an enlarged aortic valve and a right ventricular outflow tract and pulmonary stenosis . The echocardiographic findings supported the diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot. After a detailed consultation, the couple decided to terminate the pregnancy and undergo genomic sequencing but declined an autopsy.
We performed a trio (fetus and the parents) whole-exome sequencing and copy number variation sequencing using methods described previously [, ]. We found no chromosomal abnormalities or disease-causing variants in the known CHD genes. However, we identified a de novo heterozygous frameshift variant in SMARCC2 (NM_003075.5: c.3561del, p.Leu1188fs) in the fetus . This variant has not yet been described as pathogenic or benign and has not been reported in the general population database (gnomAD: ). It is predicted to result in either an abnormal truncated protein product or loss of protein from this allele via nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Furthermore, recent evidence indicates that SMARCC2 is intolerant to loss-of-function variants . In conclusion, we classified this variant as pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines .
Since none of the previously reported patients had CHD, the association between SMARCC2 variants and CHD is uncertain. We further conducted literature and public database surveys to determine the association between SMARCC2 variants and CHD. We identified three additional patients with congenital heart disease, two of which carried a contiguous gene deletion containing SMARCC2, and one had a de novo SMARCC2 loss-of-function variant [, ]. Detailed genotypes and phenotypes of these patients are summarized in Table .