A 66-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for further treatment with a history of right upper abdominal pain and progressively increasing jaundice for 1 mo. The abdominal pain was paroxysmal and dull, mainly after meals.
The patient suffered from persistent abdominal pain and vomiting occurred when the pain was severe. The pain usually lasted for 3-5 min and can be relieved on its own. The patient had no other significant discomfort, such as nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, fatigue or melena.
The patient underwent a right total mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection because of right breast cancer 2 years ago and the pathology was invasive ductal carcinoma. After surgery, she was given eight courses of chemotherapy with a TC regimen [docetaxel: 75 mg/m2, d1, intravenous (iv) drip; cyclophosphamide: 600 mg/m2, d1, intravenous (iv) drip. Every 21 d is 1 cycle of chemotherapy]. The patient did not apply trastuzumab due to personal financial reasons.
There was no personal or family history of acute or chronic disease (hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, etc). There was no family history of tumors.
Physical examination revealed obvious jaundice in the skin and sclera, absence of right breast, flat abdomen, soft abdominal muscles, right upper abdominal pressure pain without rebound pain, negative Murphy sign, and no obvious masses were palpated in the abdomen. The liver and spleen were not touched. Bowel sounds are 5 times per minute.
Laboratory results showed liver function impairment. Alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were significantly elevated to 159.2 U/L (normal range 0-27 U/L) and 202.1 U/L (normal range 0-27 U/L), respectively. Tumor markers showed that carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), a-fetoprotein and carbohydrate antigen (CA)15-3 were at normal levels, CA125 was significantly elevated at 140.4 U/mL (normal range 0-35 U/mL) and CA19-9 was 31.2 U/mL (normal range 0-27 U/mL). Elevated aminotransaminases and tumor markers suggested the possible presence of bile duct or liver tumors.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed an occupying lesion of the bile duct, significant stenosis of the bile duct, and dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. The tumor was located in the bile ducts of the porta hepatis, measured 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed no significant abnormalities and no occupying lung lesions. Due to the patient’s previous history of breast cancer, a whole-body bone scan was performed and no bone metastasis was observed.
Combining the patient’s clinical manifestations, elevated tumor markers, and imaging examinations, the patient was initially diagnosed with bile duct tumor and a history of breast cancer. It was more likely that the bile duct tumor was a primary tumor. Due to the presence of jaundice in the patient, removal of biliary obstruction was necessary. After obtaining the consent of the patient and her family, surgery was performed in June 2021. Intraoperatively, the tumor was located in the upper part of the bile duct, with a hard texture, with compression of the bile duct causing luminal narrowing, marked dilatation of the proximal bile duct, and chronic inflammatory changes with thickening of the gallbladder wall. The tumor was 40 cm, 70 cm and 130 cm from the flexural ligament with a size of about 2 cm × 2 cm, 1 cm × 2 cm and 2 cm × 2 cm, respectively, with a hard texture, and invaded the whole intestinal wall, resulting in incomplete obstruction of the small intestine. The nature of the tumor was not clear, but there was biliary and intestinal obstruction, so radical bile duct cancer surgery, cholecystectomy and small intestine tumor resection were performed successfully. Postoperative pathology confirmed that the small intestine tumor was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma , with cancerous tissue infiltrating the entire intestinal wall, and a cancerous thrombus was found in the vasculature with nerve invasion. The bile duct tumor was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with most of the bile duct epithelium missing , replaced by inflammatory exudate and necrotic tissue, and one metastatic lymph node was found in the surrounding fatty tissue. Immunohistochemistry of small intestine tumor and bile duct tumor was negative for cytokeratin (CK)20, lymphocyte common antigen (LCA), caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX-2) , villin , estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), and positive for gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP)-15 , GATA binding protein-3 (GATA3) , CK7, CK8, CK19 and HER-2(++++).