A 75-year-old man presented with abrupt-onset of bilateral faciobrachial dystonic seizures (FBDS) (right > left), often accompanied by vocalization and oro-buccal automatisms. The patient was amnesic and unaware about these events. Patient past history reported only cutaneous psoriasis and benign prostatic hyperplasia. In few weeks, these episodes increased in frequency to up to 12–24 times a day and were associated by rare generalized tonic-clonic seizures, leading to patient's hospitalization (timeline of the clinical and paraclinical features are shown in ). At admission to the hospital, the patient presented memory disfunction, episodes of visual hallucinations and seizures leading to several falls [modified Rankin Scale (mRS) = 4, CASE score = 8]. Neurological examination did not reveal strength or sensory deficits, cranial nerves or coordination impairment. Brain MRI was unremarkable. EEG showed bilateral temporal slow waves without ictal activity. Blood tests revealed mild hyponatremia and positive anti-thyroglobulin and anti-thyroperoxidase antibodies. CSF analysis was normal. Anti-LGI1-antibodies were detected in serum and CSF by using commercial kits (Euroimmun), confirming the diagnosis of anti-LGI1-Abs encephalitis. Given the final diagnosis and the therapeutic failure of anti-seizure medications (ASM) with Levetiracetam and Lacosamide in the first month after disease onset, corticosteroids (intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily over 5 days followed by oral prednisone 1 mg/kg daily) and intravenous immunoglobulins (0.4 g/kg daily over 5 days) were administered leading to regression of hallucinations and apparent disappearance of seizure (mRS = 2, CASE score = 4). Nevertheless, LTMV-EEG revealed the persistence of paroxysmal events consistent with FBDS (around 25 in 86 h) and a distinctive behavioral pattern manifesting as “pedalage” during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (Supplementary Video 1). Moreover, brain 18F-FDG-PET showed moderate right amygdala hypermetabolism and bilateral temporomesial, frontoanterior and frontomesial hypometabolism in spite of the normal brain MRI scan . Lastly, neuropsychological evaluation was performed and showed moderate auditory-verbal memory loss [Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) 20/30]. Based on these findings—in the uncertainty of further clinical improvement—second-line therapy with rituximab (1,000 mg ev twice, 2 weeks apart) was administered with total regression of FBDS and further cognitive improvement (MoCA 23/30). PET scans showed progressive improvement of the alterations toward complete disappearance of the amygdala hypermetabolism up to 10-months after rituximab administration . Oral corticosteroids were tapered to discontinuation along with ASM withdrawal. Twenty-two months after disease onset the patient was seizure-free, cognitive stable (MoCA 24/30) and independent in his daily activity (mRS = 0, CASE = 1). The patient and his caregivers reported complete remission of the disease and full return to previous daily life activities.