A 49-year-old non-smoking female patient, who received a diagnosis of rectosigmoidal carcinoma 4 months prior and was treated with (laparoscopic) rectosigmoidal resection and adjuvant FOLFOX chemotherapy, was admitted to the hospital due to progressive dyspnoea approximately 3 weeks after the sixth chemotherapy session. CT examination of the lungs revealed extensive abnormalities in both lungs with diffuse ground glass abnormalities in both the upper and lower lobes and areas of consolidation at the level of the lower lobes . Antibiotics were empirically prescribed (moxifloxacin) from day one. Hypoxic respiratory insufficiency arose and necessitated intubation 1 week after admission. Immediately thereafter, she was referred to our university hospital. On admission to our intensive care unit (ICU), 70% oxygen (PEEP 8 cm H20) was needed to prevent frank hypoxemia. The serum white blood cell count amounted to 19 × 10 9/L (the normal value is up to 10 × 10 9/L). Predominantly, neutrophils (78.8%, 14.97 × 10 9/L) and to a lesser extent lymphocytes (16.3%, 3.10 × 10 9/L), were present. There was no peripheral eosinophilia. The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was low (1.2 mg/dl), and there were no biochemical signs of other organ failure (i.e., serum creatinine 0.55 mg/dl).
Shortly after admittance to our ICU, a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed in the right middle lobe and revealed a white blood cell count of 44/m3 that mostly consisted of neutrophils (90%) in addition to 4% lymphocytes, 6% macrophages and no eosinophils, which suggested infectious lung disease or acute diffuse lung injury . However, no microorganisms (e.g., (myco)bacteria, moulds, fungi, or viruses (entero-, rhino-, parainfluenza, adeno-, herpes simplex, or cytomegalovirus)) were detected. PCR on the BAL fluid for herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Bordetella pertussis also proved negative. Additional histopathological examination of the lavage liquid did not reveal malignant cells. There was no family history of interstitial lung disease (ILD), and there were no coexisting medical conditions that favoured the development of ILD. Moreover, there had been no occupational exposure to pulmonary toxins and no prior use of potential ILD-causing drugs (e.g., bleomycin, busulphan, gemcitabine, mitomycin, paclitaxel, docetaxel, nitrofurantoin, amiodarone), with the exception of the FOLFOX chemotherapy.
Given the proof of the absence of pulmonary infection, at 48 h after admission, high-dose corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 4 × 250 mg per day) were administered intravenously (IV) over 5 consecutive days followed by a tapering scheme. This therapy was initiated while considering the possibility of an autoimmune disease or chemotherapy-related pulmonary toxicity . Meanwhile, IV acetylcysteine (1800 mg per day) had been administered from day one in our hospital with the initial intention of preventing contrast-induced nephropathy in this CT-scanned patient.
In view of the fact that screening for autoimmune and systemic diseases (e.g., anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmatic antibodies, complement factors, circulating immune complexes, lupus anticoagulant, immune globulin dosage, retinal fundoscopy) revealed no aberrations, and based on the absence of a favourable respiratory evolution after 14 days of therapy, a surgical (open) lung biopsy (right middle lobe) and a tracheotomy were performed.
An initial quick examination of the lung biopsy fragments revealed an interstitial pattern of disease with widening of the alveolar septa. While awaiting further microscopic characterization, immune globulins (Sandoglobulin 0.4 g/kg) were administered intravenously during a five-day period in an attempt to reduce the pulmonary inflammation that led to fibrosis [–]. Approximately a fortnight later, a single dose of cyclophosphamide (10.5 mg/kg = 1000 mg, Endoxan, Baxter, Braine-l-Alleud Walloon Brabant, Lessines Hainaut, Belgium) was administered due to the persistent need for ventilatory support and the possibility of an unspecified immunological process. The intravenous administration of acetylcysteine was continued. After these therapeutic interventions, the oxygen demand gradually fell. The definite histopathological findings validated the presence of on-going damage of the alveolar epithelium with evolving pulmonary fibrosis. Thickened alveolar septa with lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate and fibrosis and an exudate in the alveolar lumina lined with reactive cuboid pneumocytes were present. There were no arguments for concomitant vasculitis, infection or malignancy .
The interstitial pattern on chest X-ray and follow-up CT gradually dissolved. A follow-up CT-scan 13 weeks after admittance to our ICU revealed a good resolution of the ground glass abnormalities and consolidation with only minor residual parenchymal changes in the upper lobes .
The patient remained dependent upon mechanical ventilation until day 80 due to intercurrent ventilator-associated pulmonary infections that were treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, acute bilateral pulmonary embolism, critical illness myopathy (secondary to the glucocorticoid treatment) and polyneuropathy (electromyographically confirmed), all of which contributed to the general neuromuscular weakness and failure to wean from mechanical ventilation.
On day 101, she was referred to the department of respiratory medicine for further care still receiving oral methylprednisolone at a dosage of 20 mg per day and acetylcysteine in a daily dosage of 1200 mg.
She left the hospital 8 months after admission and resumed work 1 year after discharge. She remained under medical supervision and, in a diagnostic work up for evolving carcinoembryonic antigen, underwent computed tomography of the lungs more than 4 years later. No residual pulmonary abnormalities were found .