A 31-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department with sudden onset of abdominal pain, fever, chills, and malaise. She had a history of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 2008 complicated by bile leak requiring biliary stents. In 2011, she developed hepatic cysts, which were surgically extirpated in 2011 and 2012. She remained afebrile and mostly asymptomatic, with only occasional mild right upper quadrant pain until the current presentation which caused her to seek medical attention at the emergency department. Importantly, she denied any history of solid organ transplants, hematologic malignancy, chemotherapy, transplantation neutropenia, cirrhosis, seafood ingestion, or proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use.
Vital signs on presentation were temperature of 98.1 °F, heart rate of 85 beats per minute, respiration of 18 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 126/83 mmHg. Physical examination revealed an afebrile, anicteric female in moderate, painful distress with slight, diffuse abdominal tenderness on palpation. Laboratory/radiographic tests revealed a white blood cell count of 41.1 cells/μL; elevated liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase 102 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase 74 U/L); alkaline phosphatase of 318 U/L; and total bilirubin of 2.4 mg/dl. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) were significant for dilated right intrahepatic bile duct with evidence of a surgically absent gall bladder . During admission in the emergency room, the patient became febrile, and blood cultures (BC) were drawn. In light of the clinical picture and imaging studies, biliary sepsis and bacteremia due to intrahepatic duct stricture were suspected. The patient was admitted to the hospital and empirically started on piperacillin/tazobactam. The BC was positive for gram-negative rods in two of two peripheral BC after 24 hours. R. planticola was reported as the isolate on the third hospital day and was resistant to ampicillin and piperacillin but susceptible to ceftriaxone (microbial resistance and susceptibilities were completed by Quest Diagnostics). Therapy was changed to ceftriaxone 2 g parenterally every 24 hours, and the patient quickly improved clinically, with normalization of liver function within 3 days (hospital day 6). She was discharged on home therapy with referral for subsequent evaluation and treatment of her intrahepatic duct strictures.