A 37-year-old female was admitted to the hospital on May 12, 2021 due to limb weakness and walking instability for 3 years.
Three years prior to admission, the patient began to develop limb weakness and walking instability without obvious inducement. She reported an episode in which she became clouded in mind and fell to the ground, which was accompanied by limb stiffness, convulsions and upturned eyelid. The symptoms were alleviated after 3-5 min, and she did not experience dizziness, headache, nausea or vomiting. Atonic-clonic seizure was diagnosed.
Two years prior to admission, the limb weakness worsened. The patient reported slow movement, unstable walking, bedridden status, fear of the dark, paroxysmal chills and toothache. There was no memory loss or unconsciousness disorder. The family members were sent to another hospital for hospitalization. At that time, “brain atrophy” was considered.
One year prior to admission, the patient’s symptoms again worsened, with obvious emaciation, chills, intermittent memory loss, speech disorder, and the inability to walk independently. Ataxia and involuntary limb shaking were present. She was admitted to another hospital, but her symptoms did not improve significantly by the time she was discharged.
Four days prior to admission, her symptoms had worsened significantly . The patient reported numbness in the left lower limb below the knee and the right upper limb fingers and wrist joint, recurrent seizures, hand and foot pain, decreased appetite and a high temperature of 37.8 °C. The patient did not experience nausea, vomiting or incontinence.
The patient denied having a history of hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, infectious disease and food and drug allergies. The patient’s vaccination history was unknown.
The patient was a life-long resident of the area and denied any long-term exposure to radioactivity, poisons or drugs. She was legally married and had a daughter. Both her husband and daughter were in good health. The patient and her family denied any disease-related family history. However, her sister had a similar history of walking instability, photophobia, seizures and poor memory.
Physical examination of the patient showed poor orientation to the surrounding environment, poor memory and a decline in comprehension capacity and numeracy. She had tremor of tongue and high limb muscle tension, and the limb muscle strength was level 4. Superficial sense hypoesthesia of the left lower extremity below the knee and the right upper extremity finger and wrist joints and paresthesia of deep sensation and combined sensation accompanied by involuntary tremors in the extremities were observed. We noted bilateral ankle clonus (+), detection of ataxia (+) and left side pathological sign (+).
Routine blood work revealed white blood cell count of 8.09 × 109/L (normal range: 3.5-9.5 × 109/L), neutrophil percentage of 76.8% (normal range: 50%-70%), hemoglobin of 144 g/L (normal range: 113-151 g/L) and platelets of 221 × 109/L (normal range: 100-300 × 109/L). No abnormalities were found for hypersensitive C-reactive protein, calcitonin, blood culture, bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, fungi and ink stain. No abnormalities were found in the routine stool and urine tests. Potassium levels were 3.34 mmol/L (normal range: 3.5-5.3 mmol/L). Liver and kidney function, heart function and blood lipids were normal. Tumor indexes and immune indexes were not abnormal. No abnormality was found in thyroid function, rheumatism, tuberculosis antibody and the antinuclear antibody spectrum. The patient was negative for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis. Blood coagulation function, trace elements, N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide and troponin were normal. The intracranial pressure was 110 mmH2O. Routine examination of cerebrospinal fluid showed it to be colorless and clear, with normal cell counts and biochemistry.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography revealed leukoaraiosis and brain atrophy. No cerebral infarction was observed. Cerebral atherosclerosis was considered, and no obvious vascular stenosis was observed .
The basic rhythmic activity on electroencephalogram was the mid-potential 8-9c/s alpha wave and poor amplitude adjustment. Both sides were approximately equivalent. The visual response existed, and increased fast waves in both hemispheres were recorded without an obvious spike and slow wave .
Electromyography revealed normal nerve conduction in the extremities and abnormal F waves and sympathetic skin response in both lower extremities. Somatosensory evoked potential test revealed poor waveform differentiation and bilateral asymmetry as well as event-related evoked potential latency delay and potential instability. Abdominal ultrasound, cardiac ultrasound and neck vascular ultrasound showed no abnormalities.
After consultation with experts from the neurology, neuroelectrophysiology, pediatrics, imaging and oncology departments, genetic examination was arranged with the patient and her family to determine the genetic basis for the symptoms.
The patient’s younger sister also had similar symptoms of unsteady walking and seizures that were induced by light stimuli. A genetic family map was constructed on the basis of clinical symptoms, laboratory examinations and imaging examinations of patients to exclude other related diseases.
The patient and her immediate family members consented to peripheral blood collection for gene detection and analysis. Whole exome sequencing revealed the following CLN6 gene mutation in the patient and the patient’s father and sister: Exon 7 c.872C>T (p.Pro291Leu). This mutation causes amino acid 291 of the encoded protein to change from a proline to a leucine, which is a missense mutation , and results in impaired protein function. Another mutation in the CLN6 gene was identified in the patient and the patient’s mother and sister: Intron 5 c.542+5G>A(p.?) . The recessive compound heterozygous mutations in the proband were considered to be pathogenic based on the clinical and laboratory findings. Consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance, it is a recessive compound heterozygous mutation.