A 74-year-old man with no personal or family history of cancer or thyroid disease presented to an orthopedic surgeon with a painful nodule in the left buttock. The nodule was speculated to be an inflammatory soft tissue tumor, and the patient was prescribed anti-inflammatory drugs. However, the mass and symptoms did not improve. He was referred to our hospital because of slow progression in the mass size and pain over a period of 1 year. Physical examination revealed a nodule 30 mm in diameter in the left buttock with tenderness. Laboratory findings were unremarkable, including tumor markers (e.g., carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 2.9 ng/ml) and thyroid hormones. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass in the left gluteus maximus muscle with T1-weighted image low intensity, T2-weighted image high intensity, and short-TI inversion recovery very high intensity. Enhancement was seen in the mass after administration of gadolinium . Needle biopsy was performed, and the pathological findings showed adenocarcinoma. The tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) on immunohistological staining. Computed tomography (CT) of the neck and chest was performed, but there were no abnormal findings, including the thyroid gland and both lungs. Ultrasound examination was also negative for nodules in the thyroid glands . Positron emission tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose-computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed positive accumulation of FDG in the mass in the left buttock (SUVmax 6.2, Fig. a) and was negative for other locations . Endoscopic examinations, including esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy, revealed no abnormal findings. The soft tissue tumor was diagnosed as metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown primary origin. The tumor was resected with wide margin to control local pain and prevent local progression.
The resected specimen measured 80 × 55 × 25 mm and weighed 74 g. The cut surface showed a white solid tumor within the skeletal muscle. The size of the tumor was 33 × 18 mm . Microscopically, tumor cells, which were polygonal with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, formed nests, trabeculae, or glands. The nuclei were round to oval in shape with coarse chromatin . Mitotic activity was low (a single mitosis per 10 HPF). The surgical margin was negative. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK)-AE1/3, CK7, TTF-1 , CEA , calcitonin , synaptophysin, and chromogranin A, but negative for CK20, Napsin A, Pax8, and p40. These findings indicated metastasis of MTC. Congo red staining was negative for amyloid deposition.
Plasma calcitonin was measured after resection and showed a normal level (4.94 pg/ml). Rearranged during transfection (RET) proto-oncogene mutations were examined but not detected at least in exons 10, 11, and 16. The local pain was relieved after resection of the soft tissue mass, and the patient has remained well without any recurrence or relapse of the disease for over 1 year after resection. In addition, no mass has been undetected in the thyroid gland and plasma calcitonin and CEA levels remain to be within the normal limits.