A 9-year-old boy was admitted to pediatric department with chief complaining of multiple subcutaneous masses for 2 months. During this period, the patient had no fever, lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. The patient had a history of Nuss procedure for funnel chest 7 years ago and diagnosed with microsomia 3 years ago. The patient was treated with growth hormone for 6 months after diagnosis with an outcome of 2 cm growth of stature. His family history was unremarkable for early-onset cancers or other hereditary diseases.
The physical examination showed body height of 110 cm (<-3 standard deviations, SDS) with multiple subcutaneous masses located in shoulders, nape, submandibular regions and left hypochondrium , but the spleen and liver were impalpable. The blood routine test revealed the white blood cell count of 14.3 × 10^9/L (reference range 3.5–9.5 × 10^9/L), platelet count of 417 × 10^9/L (reference range100–300 × 10^9/L) and hemoglobin of 101 g/L (reference range115-150 g/L). The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was measured as 264 U/L (reference range 35-105 U/L) while the EBV-DNA was detected of 418 copies/ml in serum. The insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) load in serum was only 79.6 ng/ml which was far lower than the low-normal level. An excisional biopsy of subcutaneous mass in the abdomen had been performed after admission.
Microscopically, it appeared that medium to large-sized atypical lymphocytes proliferated and diffusely infiltrated into subcutaneous tissue in mosaic arranging, with round or oval single nucleus, punctate nuclear chromatin and visible nucleoli, numerous mitotic figures; partly with lobular nuclei , slightly condensed chromatin and central eosinophilic inconspicuous nucleoli, high nucleocytoplasmic ratio, numerous mitotic figures and vessel invasion. Many small lymphocytes were appeared in the background with scattered tumor giant cells. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were CD2+, CD3p+, CD8+, CD30+, Granzyme B+, TIA-1+, CD5-, CD7-, CD4-, CD56-, MPO-, TdT-. The proliferation index was approximately 80%, evaluated by Ki-67 staining. and the result of EBER-ISH appeared positive for most of the atypical cells . Monoclonal TCR-γ gene rearrangement was detected by the Polymerase Chain Reaction heteroduplex analysis (PCR-HA) and gene-scanning (Additional file : Figure S1). In conclusion, the final diagnosis was made as EBV + PTCL.
STAT5B variant analysis was performed on both formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) neoplastic tissue and blood sample by sanger sequencing (Additional file ). In the neoplastic tissue, 2 variants (S420Y and E623K) were detected in STAT5B , however, such variants were not found in blood sample.
After diagnosis, a positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) was applied and revealed an increasing 2-Deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose (18F-FDG) uptake of multiple masses in subcutaneous tissue and muscles but no lymph node was involved (Additional file : Figure S2A). The patient showed impalpable subcutaneous masses after 2 cycles of chemotherapy (SMILE: Methotrexate, Ifosfamide, Dexamethasone, Etoposide, L-asparaginase), however, a second PET-CT was ordered 26 days later after chemotherapy which implied the relapse since the Deauville 5-point score (DS) was 5(Additional file : Figure S2B). Therefore, the protocol had been switched to more aggressive as modified SMILE regimen, leading to a complete remission after 8 cycles of chemotherapy (Additional file : Figure S2C). However, 3 months after the treatment, another subcutaneous mass was palpable in the right thigh and the excisional biopsy suggested relapse .