A 56-year-old woman with a history of rheumatism complained of right upper abdominal distension half a month prior. Abdominal distension was not accompanied by pain, exacerbated after meals and relieved after rest. Decreased urine output, nausea, vomiting, fever or chills were denied by the patient. Physical examination revealed the following: temperature, 37.2 °C; blood pressure, 123/70 mmHg; heart rate, 70 per minute; and respiratory rate, 18 per minute. There was no evidence of jaundice. Cardiac, pulmonary and neurologic abdominal examinations were all unremarkable. Dermatologic examination demonstrated pigmentation of both lower extremities. Laboratory tests showed elevated indirect bilirubin (15.2 μmol/L; RR, reference range: 1.7–10.2 μmol/L), decreased albumin (34.8 g/L, RR: 38–48 g/L), mild anemia with hemoglobin (97 g/L, RR: 110–150 g/L), and elevated CA125 (39.4 U/mL, RR: < 35 U/mL), while other tumor markers, creatinine, autoimmune and serum IgG4 were all within normal ranges. On the abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, a rim of soft-tissue density in the retroperitoneum extended and encased the upper end of the bilateral ureter, causing bilateral hydronephrosis by ureteral obstruction . In addition, an abnormally enhanced soft tissue density in the gallbladder was suspected to be involved with dilatation of the hilar bile duct and proximal biliary. A cystic density lesion in the tail of the pancreas was also noted. Given these findings, the diagnosis of GBC with retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis and pancreatic cyst was preliminarily considered, and immune-related diseases could not be completely ruled out.
Laparotomy was performed by abdominal adhesiolysis, cholecystectomy, partial hepatectomy, bilateral intraoperative transurethral ureteral stenting and cyst puncture. The retroperitoneum was filled with white and hard fibrous tissue. Pathologic examination showed mild chronic inflammation of fibrovascular tissue, diffuse proliferation of collagen fibers, interstitial edema, no increase in the proportion of plasma cells stained by IgG4, and no cell atypia, consistent with the pathological results of RPF . The patient was discharged 10 days after the operation without any complications. Abdominal distension was gradually relieved after the postoperative oral administration of methylprednisolone (24 mg per day for 1 month). Four months after surgery, repeat abdominal CT showed that dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts had improved compared with the previous scan , and effusion of the bilateral upper ureter was no longer significant .