A 55-year-old female was admitted in our hospital for right eye epiphora and right nasal intermittent bleeding on August 2018. Nasal endoscopy revealed a right nasal mass located in the middle nasal meatus. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans showed a large soft tissue masse in the right nasal cavity and ethmoid sinus, which invaded the right lamina papyracea, the right frontal sinus and the right side of nasal septum. The medial wall of the right superior collar sinus, middle turbinate and part of ethmoid sinus septum were accompanied by erosive bone resorption . Swollen lymph nodes can be seen in the right neck. The patient underwent endoscopic biopsy of the right ethmoid sinus and pathological examination. Fragments of soft to firm gray and tan tissue were submitted for pathologic examination. The sinus tumors in the right nasal cavity were resected under nasal endoscope.
Diagnosis required confirmation of histopathological features, polyphenotypic immunohistochemical reactivity, and molecular/cytogenetic findings , therefore the following experiments were performed.
Under the light microscope, the lesions were composed of irregular lamellae and nested tumor cells and the surrounding fibrous interstitial cells. The tumor cells in the nest are small round or oval, with few cytoplasm, unclear cell boundaries, round or oval hyperchromatic nuclei, unclear nucleoli, and mitotic figures were easy to observe . The stroma is a proliferative dense fibrous connective tissue composed of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts with mucoid degeneration. In this case, the tumors invaded bone.
Immunohistochemistry gave the following phenotypic markers: CD56 (+) , Vimentin (+), WT-1 (+) , S-100(−), Desmin (−), CD99 (−), with a Ki-67 index of 95% . Vim showed characteristic dot-like perinuclear staining pattern , and did not express EMA, Desmine, S-100, MyoDl, CD20, CD3, CD7 and P63.
Blood smear: There is no obvious increase or decrease of white blood cells, neutrophils are almost normal, and middle and late red blood cells account for 6/100 nucleated cells, and platelets are scattered. .
Bone marrow smear: Bone marrow proliferation was active, G = 49.0%, E = 21.0%, G/ E = 2.33:1. The main stage of granulocytes was below the middle and young granulocytes, with no obvious morphological abnormalities. All stages of the erythroid system were noticed, there was no obvious abnormality in morphology, and the size of mature red blood cells was uneven. The cancer cells were scattered or clustered. Their cell bodies were large, the boundaries were unclear, round or irregular, with a large amount of cytoplasm, stained with purple-blue or purple-red, partially foamy, with large nuclei and chromatin accumulation. Naked nuclear tumor cells were frequently observed. Plasmacytes and histiocytes were easy to observe. No megakaryocytes and thrombocytopenia were found in the whole smear. .
During the operation, a small part of the tumors were removed by forceps and sent for rapid frozen pathological diagnosis. The results showed that the tumors were small cell malignant tumors. After the uncinate process was removed, the maxillary sinus was opened and the purulent secretions in the maxillary sinus were sucked out. The maxillary sinus orifice and the medial wall of the maxillary sinus were removed and sent to pathology. The pathological results showed that the orbital cardboard was partially absorbed. Then the orbital cardboard and the orbital fascia were fully separated and removed. After resection of the right frontal sinus mass, the right middle turbinate was removed. It was found that the nasal cavity mass was grey-white fish-like and invaded the right frontal sinus, the right orbital cardboard and the medial wall of the right maxillary sinus. The orbital fascia was intact. Postoperative pathology showed that the tumors were found in the right orbital wall, the right maxillary sinus wall, the posterior wall, the posterior inferior wall and the right middle turbinate root. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy was performed, but the patient was found to have bone marrow metastasis and presented with persistent nasal bleeding and she died 2 months after operation.