A 32-year-old Indian female presented with continuous fever for 5 days, recorded as 100–101 °F by the patient, associated with chills in the evening and relieved by over-the-counter antipyretics. She complained of a dull aching pain in the lower abdomen, without any specific exacerbating/relieving factors. Subsequently, she started to experience right upper quadrant abdominal pain, lesser in severity as compared with the lower abdominal pain. This was followed by insidious-in-onset and gradually progressive yellowish discoloration of the eyes, dark-colored urine, abdominal distention, and nonbilious, nonprojectile vomiting episodes. Fatigue was noted over the past 1 month. She denied burning micturition, abnormal discharge per vaginum, rash, or bleeding tendencies.
The patient reported an episode of jaundice in her adolescence. She denied any addictions and had no history of significant blood loss, IV drug abuse, or tattooing. Her bowel and bladder habits were unaltered.
On examination, pulse was 120 beats/min and regular, with all peripheral pulses palpable. Blood pressure in the right arm in supine position, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation were recorded as 110/70 mmHg, 20 cycles/min, and 98%, respectively. Pallor, icterus, and bilateral pitting pedal edema were present. Clubbing and peripheral lymphadenopathy were absent. On palpation and percussion, tenderness in the right hypochondrium and hypogastrium and shifting dullness was present. The patient was first admitted under surgical care to rule out acute cholangitis.
Laboratory testing revealed:
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a normal biliary tree, moderate hepatomegaly with homogeneous enhancement pattern and no focal lesions; ascites and diffuse peritoneal thickening, large loculated peripherally enhancing pelvic collection (approximately 100 cc, measuring 4.8 × 5.5 × 3.9 cm3). The collection had incomplete septa and was seen extending laterally on both sides from the pouch of Douglas, closing abutting bilateral ovaries .
Evaluation of icterus was further sought; the patient tested negative for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis A and E IgM antibodies, hepatitis C antibodies, and HIV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) antibody. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 40 mm in the first hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 1.2 mg/dL. Considering the liver enzyme levels, the patient was not tested further for other viral etiologies of hepatitis. Tuberculous hepatitis was also ruled out as imaging did not reveal any suggestive findings such as macronodules/micronodules/focal lesions .
Unexplained deranged liver function tests (LFT) in a young female with anemia, without any history of blood loss, raised ESR and CRP levels, with a previous history of jaundice, raised high suspicion for autoimmune pathology.
Autoimmune workup was done, which revealed:
Urinalysis and urine microscopic examination showed:
Renal biopsy was performed and demonstrated lupus nephritis class V with index of activity and index of chronicity of 0/24 and 0/12, respectively. The patient fulfilled the European League against Rheumatism (EULAR)/American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 2019 criteria for diagnosis of SLE with a score of 14 (fever: +2; autoimmune hemolysis: +4; renal biopsy showing lupus nephritis class V: +8). The high positive anti-smooth muscle cell antibody titres, normal complement levels, and raised IgG levels, with negative viral markers, drug and alcohol history, indicated the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis (score of 6 on the simplified scoring system and 17 on the revised international AIH group scoring system). We reached a probable diagnosis of AIH–SLE overlap syndrome.
To evaluate the cause of gross ascites and tubo-ovarian mass revealed on imaging, ascitic fluid analysis was performed. It revealed:
Ascitic fluid adenosine deaminase (ADA) levels were checked as ADA levels >36I U/L suggest tuberculosis . Among tumor markers, CA-125 was elevated at 152.2 U/mL, whereas carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, and beta-hCG levels were within reference values. Fitz–Hugh–Curtis syndrome and malignancy were ruled out based on the imaging findings and tumor marker levels, respectively. In view of CECT abdomen and pelvis findings along with large loculated pelvic collection and bilateral tubo-ovarian mass, SAAG of 0.48, and high ascitic fluid ADA levels, in an endemic setting, we concluded a diagnosis of tuberculous pelvic inflammatory disease with tuberculosis peritonitis. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was not detected by ascitic fluid cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CB-NAAT). The patient was advised to undergo ultrasound-guided liver biopsy (for histopathological examination for grading and staging AIH) and laparoscopic omental and peritoneal biopsy (for histopathological examination, CB-NAAT, and mycobacterial growth indicator tube test), but the patient did not consent to the procedure.