A 21-year-old Canadian female, with known anorexia nervosa binge/purge subtype, and no other medical conditions, was admitted with mild abdominal pain following an episode of binge eating. The patient reported 5 days of constipation and abdominal distension. She was able to pass flatus but could not vomit. There was no other relevant family or social history.
On initial physical examination, her vitals were stable. She appeared severely underweight with a body mass index less than 18. She did not have signs of purging such as Russell’s knuckles. On abdominal examination, she had a distended abdomen, with no peritoneal signs. She had no signs of chronic liver disease. Cardiopulmonary examination was unremarkable.
Abdominal x-ray revealed a large soft tissue density displacing the transverse colon inferiorly, seen in Fig. . There was no pneumoperitoneum and no evidence of bowel obstruction. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a massively distended stomach, measuring 17 × 18 × 24 cm, approximately 4 l. There were round radiodense bodies within the stomach, which were later found to be undigested medication. There was progression of dilation into the proximal duodenum with an abrupt taper at the 3rd part of the duodenum, which was compressed as it crossed over the aorta, with collapse of distal loops of small bowel.
The images showed return of normal caliber small bowel within the pelvis, with gas and a very large volume of stool present throughout the colon. The mesentery was compressed posterior to the stomach, and evaluation of small bowel loops was limited by the absolute absence of intraperitoneal fat. There was no free air or free fluid. The hepatobiliary and genitourinary systems were unremarkable .
General surgery and gastroenterology were consulted. Obstruction and perforation of the small bowel were ruled out by esophagogastroduodenoscopy; the stomach was noted to be mildly irritated, but the small bowel was widely patent, and the mucosa was normal.
Her gastric distention was thought to be secondary to reduced gastric dysmotility in the setting of anorexia with frequent binge/purge episodes [, ]. Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome with compression of the duodenum between the aorta and SMA was considered but deemed less likely on the differential diagnosis; it is a known, albeit rare, complication in patients with eating disorders presenting with acute gastric distention [, ]. No further work up of SMA syndrome took place as the patient improved with conservative therapy. Decompression of the stomach followed by refeeding was commenced through nasogastric tube. Within 2 days, her constipation resolved through treatment with promotility agents and rectal sodium phosphate laxatives.
The medicine team worked with the patient, the psychiatry team, and the dietician to increase her oral intake until she was medically stable for transfer to the inpatient eating disorders program. However, clinical challenges arose related to her worsening anorexia symptoms, which included refusing refeeding and intention to leave hospital, despite not being medically fit. A full interdisciplinary team approach was utilized in order to ensure standard of care for the patient.