The patient presented with epigastric discomfort that had persisted for 3 mo.
A 65-year-old woman complained of abdominal discomfort and had visited the hospital previously. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed an advanced type 4 lesion in the pylorus of the stomach. The patient received a detailed medical examination and treatment at the current hospital.
The patient had an appendectomy due to acute appendicitis at the age of 15.
The patient had no smoking or alcohol intake history. There was no family history of cancer.
The abdomen was soft and without tenderness.
Initial laboratory data revealed a hemoglobin level of 7.2 g/dL, a white blood cell count of 5700 cell/µL, and a platelet count of 3.95 × 105/µl. The creatinine level was 0.64 mg/dL, total bilirubin level was 0.44 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase level was 11 U/L, alanine aminotransferase level was 9 U/L, albumin level was 3.6 g/dL, and amylase level was 75 U/L (normal range 37 to 125 U/L). The level of the carcinoembryonic antigen tumor marker was 445.4 ng/mL, the cancer antigen 125 level was 317.3 U/mL, the squamous cell carcinoma antigen level was 4.1 ng/mL, and the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 level was less than 2 U/mL.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated wall thickening in the duodenal first portion extending toward the pylorus and pancreatic head . Lymph node swelling in the common hepatic artery and in the portal vein and venous tumor thrombosis in the pancreatic head were also observed. There was no gross tumor mass in the orthotopic pancreas. The patient was referred for gastroduodenoscopy. The tumor was located in the first portion of the duodenum with ulcer formation . The stomach pylorus was stenotic due to the extrinsic compression of the tumor. Histologic evaluation of the duodenum biopsy specimens revealed tubular adenocarcinoma, and HER2 overexpression was detected by immunohistochemistry . The clinical diagnosis of unresectable duodenal cancer was made based on cancer invasion of the pancreas and portal vein tumor thrombosis; thus, stomach bypass surgery and gastrojejunostomy were performed. Capecitabine and cisplatin plus trastuzumab chemotherapy was applied due to the potential efficacy of this treatment for HER2-overexpressing gastric cancer cells reported in the Trastuzumab for Gastric Cancer (ToGA) study. After 1 cycle of treatment, the patient developed renal impairment due to the side effects of cisplatin. The drug combination was changed to capecitabine and oxaliplatin plus trastuzumab. To assess the effects of treatment, a CT scan was performed after 2 cycles of capecitabine and oxaliplatin plus trastuzumab administration, and tumor size and lymph node swelling were dramatically reduced . The same chemotherapy was continued for two more cycles, and then pancreatoduodenectomy was conducted. No obvious tumor was visible in the duodenum or liver and there was no peritoneal metastasis.
The histological evaluation of the biopsy specimens from the gastroduodenoscopy revealed an adenocarcinoma mass predominantly located in the duodenal submucosa . The cancer cells were strongly positive for HER2 membranous expression on immunohistochemical analysis (+3). On gross examination of the resected duodenum, no discrete mass lesion was visible, but a flat, slightly elevated mucosal fold was present in the first portion of the duodenum. On histological assessment, carcinoma cells were localized in the duodenal submucosal layer, forming small nodules, and in the pancreas head and pancreaticoduodenal lymph nodes . Heterotopic pancreas tissue was located close to the carcinoma cells within the submucosal layer and laminar muscularis mucosa of the duodenum, composed of acinar and duct structures . In the immunohistochemical analysis, the cancer cells showed positive staining for cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, MUC1 and MUC5AC and negative staining for MUC2 and CDX2 . Positive staining for MUC6, a specific marker for Brunner gland adenocarcinoma, was positive in the Brunner glands but negative in the cancer cells .