A 45-year-old female presented to the emergency department of a tertiary care hospital with severe, non-radiating central abdominal pain for one day, associated with non-bilious vomiting related to meals, abdominal distension, and inability to pass stool and flatus. A lower-segment cesarean section was performed 15 years back. There is no history of abdominal trauma, fever, cough, chest pain, or prior medical illness. On examination, she was conscious and ill-looking with a feeble pulse of 114 beats per minute and blood pressure of 80/50 mmHg. The abdomen was moderately distended with direct and rebound tenderness and absent bowel sounds.
Aggressive fluid resuscitation was done with 3 l of normal saline via two wide-bore cannulas, and her blood pressure improved to 110/70 mmHg. Nasogastric decompression and transurethral catheterization were then performed. Abdominal radiograph revealed multiple air-fluid levels and dilated bowel loops, suggestive of acute intestinal obstruction . Emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed, which showed a loop of ileum wrapping around the cecum forming a knot, and a segment of gangrenous ileum, measuring 130 cm in length, extending proximally from 5 cm proximal to the ileocecal junction . Hemorrhagic ascitic fluid was noted. Peritoneal lavage with untwisting of the knot and warm mopping of the gangrenous ileum were done. The non-viable segment was then resected, and a double barrel ileostomy was created. The abdomen was closed with a drain in situ.
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and upon improvement, transferred to the ward on the fourth postoperative day, where she was managed with intravenous fluids, analgesics, and antibiotics. The drain was removed on the 10th postoperative day. The patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day with a stoma bag. At the time of discharge, the patient was hemodynamically stable with no abdominal pain or distension, was tolerating oral intake, and the stoma was functioning. Skin stapler removal was performed during a follow-up visit 10 days after hospital discharge.