A 78-year-old female patient presented to our ophthalmology department in September 2007 for a painful right eye. There was no history of associated diseases in medical records. Slit lamp examination found conjunctival hyperaemia associated with a central corneal whitish infiltrate . The patient had been given topical norfloxacin 3 mg/mL QID prior to admission in our department. As herpetic keratitis was suspected, the patient was treated with 3 g/day oral valacyclovir but the corneal ulcer progressively increased in depth. Despite further intensive treatment by topical antibiotics (levofloxacin 5 mg/mL, gentamicin 14 mg/mL and vancomycin 50 mg/mL eye drops hourly), a corneal paracentral perforation occurred. Fungal keratitis was then clinically suspected and the patient was treated with local amphotericine B 2 mg/mL and oral itraconazole, 200 mg/day. Surgical treatment by Gore-tex patch suturing and a further amniotic membrane graft was done to close the corneal perforation. The patient was then treated by 500 mg/day oral levofloxacin and topical dexamethasone 1 mg/mL without any success. Then a choroidal detachment related to ocular hypotonia led to total visual loss. An evisceration was performed 3 months later related to chronic ocular pain.
At first examination, a corneal swab and a corneal scraping was made as part as a “keratitis kit” and remained sterile after 10-day incubation at 37°C on 5% sheep-blood agar. In the meantime, additional microbiological analyses including fungal culture and the molecular detection of amoeba, mycobacteria and herpes simplex virus (based on the 18S rDNA, rpoB and DNA polymerase genes, respectively) were negative. Ten days after initial examination, the corneal scraping however tested positive for 16S rDNA in the presence of negative controls and sequencing the 16S rDNA PCR product yielded 982/990 bases (99%) and 881/881 bases (100%) sequence similarity with the homologous sequence of D. pigrum reference strain (GenBank X70907) and with D. pigrum clone 6113702 (GenBank EF517957.1) and only 93% with the following identified species Alloiococcus otitis.