A 4-year-and-7-month-old boy (95.6 cm, 14.7 kg) with Sprengel deformity associated with KFS underwent a left-sided scapular Y-osteotomy . Symptoms of KFS included fusion of the cervical C2-3 vertebrae and C5-6 vertebrae. Previously, he underwent a right lower lobectomy at 8 months of age due to a congenital pulmonary airway malformation.
Slow induction was achieved using sevoflurane and nitrous oxide. After securing the peripheral venous line, fentanyl and rocuronium were administered, and the patient was intubated. Tracheal intubation was performed smoothly with McGRATH™ MAC (Covidien, Tokyo, Japan), considering the pterygoid neck and KFS. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and remifentanil at 0.1–0.2 μg/kg/min. Nitrous oxide was administered only during anesthesia induction. After induction, the SSNB was performed in the supine position. The needle was inserted using the in-plane technique under ultrasound guidance (Sonosite PX; Fujifilm Sonosite, Japan). Following negative blood aspiration, SSNB was performed using 5 mL of 0.25% ropivacaine . After the patient was placed in the prone position for surgery, ESPB was performed at the Th6–7 level with 10 mL of 0.2% ropivacaine . The decision regarding local anesthetic concentrations and amount for SSNB and ESPB was based on previous studies to ensure the administration of a maximum total amount of 2.5 mg/kg of ropivacaine [, ].
The operative and anesthetic times were 172 and 300 min, respectively. The patient received intravenous fentanyl (75 μg; 25 µg at intubation, at the start of the operation, and at the end of the operation, respectively) and 220 mg of acetaminophen. Postoperative pain was managed in the ward with regular acetaminophen administration (every 6 h) and continuous intravenous infusion of 10 μg/h fentanyl combined with 10 μg fentanyl for intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (IV-PCA) with a 10-min lockout to obtain reliable overnight analgesia. Pain was assessed using the Wong-Baker face scale (0: no hurt; 10: hurts worst) after surgery, which was 2, 2, and 0 at 2 h, 1 day, and 2 days postoperatively, respectively. IV-PCA was discontinued 22 h postoperatively because of nausea and the absence of pain at rest. The patient was discharged on postoperative day six without any adverse events.