A 29-year-old Caucasian woman with a 32.3 week, twin bicorial biamniotic pregnancy was admitted to the Emergency Service with threat of preterm labor. Tocolysis with atosiban and fetal lung maturation pattern were provided.
Social and medical history were remarkable for gestational diabetes and a previous evaluation for primary sterility through laparoscopy and hysteroscopy, but were otherwise non-contributory.
The first day of hospitalization (32.3 weeks), third trimester fetal ultrasound was performed. An abdominal mass occupying the entire left hemiabdomen with mixed echogenicity was identified in the first fetus (cephalic presentation) . No calcifications were observed. The fetus's stomach and amniotic fluid volume were normal. Neuroblastoma or meconium pseudocyst were suspected. The first fetus had abnormal umbilical artery and normal middle cerebral artery Doppler studies. The second fetus (transverse situation) had no apparent pathology and normal Doppler studies. Previous ultrasound examinations of both fetuses before 32 weeks were normal.
Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (performed at 32.4 weeks) identified a 72 × 58 mm, heterogeneous, mesenteric mass without necrosis causing significant distortion of the small intestine to the left. There were no pathologic findings in the rest of abdominal structures . There were no calcifications, ascites, polyhydramnios or bowel loop dilatation.
At 32.6 weeks of gestation, uterine contractions and cervical ripening began. Urgent cesarean section was performed due to preterm labor associated with fetal malposition (transverse situation). Birth weights were 1980 g (fetus 1) and 2060 g (fetus 2).
Laparotomy and bowel resection were performed within the first day following delivery. During surgery a 10 cm, volvulated, necrotic portion of small intestine was identified, at 10 cm from ileocecal valve. Small bowel volvulus resection, termino-terminal anastomosis, and appendectomy were performed.
Pathological anatomy reports revealed distal ileum vascular congestion, intestinal wall bleeding and areas of acute inflammation.
The final diagnosis was a perforated ileum volvulus and secondary meconium pseudocyst.
Bowel obstruction was suspected at three days following the initial surgical intervention. A second laparotomy identified a segment of obstructed bowel. This was resected and a termino-terminal re-anastomosis was performed. Sweat chloride test for cystic fibrosis was negative.
Due to the newborn's torpid post-operative course and lack of gastrointestinal tolerance, an exploratory laparotomy was performed 51 days after birth. Intra-operatively, a stenosis of the re-anastomosis was observed. Resection of a 5 cm section of bowel including ileocecal valve, as well as ileostomy and colostomy were performed.
The newborn remained hospitalized receiving total parenteral nutrition and with secretory diarrhea due to short bowel syndrome, and died during the seventh month of life.