A 40-year-old male, otherwise well, presented with recent onset pain in midfoot region. Physical examination revealed non-palpable mass. No constitutional symptoms of fever or weight loss were present. Hemoglobin was 15 g %, red blood cells 5.15 × 1012/L, total blood count was 9000 × 109/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 10 mm/h. Patient was referred to radiology department for imaging. Radiographs of the foot showed a lytic expansile lesion in first metacarpal with wide zone of transition, no sclerotic margin, and no matrix calcification . Subsequently, the patient was referred for a MRI examination with computed tomography (CT) correlation to further characterize the lesion. The lesion was well defined, lobulated with endosteal scalloping. It was heterogeneously hyperintense on T2W images, hypointense on T1W images, with slow progressive peripheral nodular enhancement in dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCEMRI) curves, and area of cortical breach with extraosseous soft-tissue component (, , , ). Few areas of diffusion restriction were noted within the lesion .
In view of above findings, the radiological diagnosis of enchondroma with a pathological fracture was made. However, due to atypical presentation of the lesion (heterogeneous hyperintensity on T2W images, early progressive peripheral nodular enhancement, extraosseous soft-tissue component, and areas of diffusion restriction), a possibility of aggressive/malignant etiology was also considered and, hence, a biopsy was performed.
The biopsy demonstrated a hypocellular tumor composed of short spindle and stellate shaped tumor cells embedded on a markedly myxoid stroma without any chondroblasts or osteoclastic giant cells on HPE ( and ). Diagnosis of LGMFS was made. Immunohistochemistry was positive for smooth muscle antigen, vimentin and negative for synaptophysin-100, cluster of differentiation 34, desmin ( and ). MiB-1 labeling index was focally high (10–25%).
Surgical excision was further carried out. The patient underwent surgical removal of first metatarsal proximal to tumor along with fibular grafting. The specimen was a greyish-white hard mass measuring 3.3 × 1.5 × 2 cm. There was no particular breach. Diagnosis of LGMFS was confirmed on the excised specimen.
The patient was discharged and was advised to come for follow-up after 6 months. The patient was also advised to come to the hospital earlier in case of any increased pain or fever. Follow-up CT post 6 months of surgical resection demonstrated no recurrence or metastases.