A 53-year-old woman was admitted to the infectious diseases department presenting with a 24 h history of high fever, chills, vomiting, headache, confusion and altered general condition. The patient had a cholecystectomy several years ago and in the last month was evaluated for a possible diabetes mellitus. The patient had no history of travelling in foreign countries in the past five years. At admission the clinical examination revealed a partially conscious, delirious patient with nuchal rigidity, oliguria and haematuria. The skin was pale, with several bilateral ecchymoses on the legs and arms and papular exanthema on the calf . The ophthalmic examination showed retinal haemorrhage and uveitis in the right eye.
Laboratory test showed leukocytosis (19 700 cells mm−3) with neutrophilia (18 700 cells mm−3) severe thrombocytopenia (7000 cells mm−3), high d-dimers (15 505 ng ml−1), inflammation (fibrinogen 8.1 g l−1, serum procalcitonin 60.3 ng ml−1), creatinine (406.7 µmol l−1), urea (244.5 mg dl−1), hyponatraemia (131 mmol Na l−1), hypokalaemia (3.3 mmol K l−1), cytolysis: aspartate aminotransferase 1.1× upper limit of normal (ULN), alanine aminotransferase 1.5× ULN, increased gamma-glutamyl transferase level (3× ULN), hypoalbuminaemia (2.5 g dl−1) and hyperglycaemia 14.2 (mmol l−1).
Because of the haemorrhagic risk, the lumbar puncture was delayed, but we microbiologically sampled the skin lesions on her calves and we took three sets of blood cultures. Treatment with vancomycin and ceftriaxone was started. We used insulin in order to normalize hyperglycemia and collyrium with dexamethasone, antibiotics and an anticholinergic for eye involvement.
A head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination was performed, showing diffuse oedema and a minor lenticular lesion, possible an infarction. The echocardiography did not retrieve endocardial lesions. Abdominal echography revealed a liver mass and MRI was performed that showed an abscess with dimensions of 9.0×6.0 cm in the VIIth liver segment. Considering the probable involvement of a Gram-negative rod, the antibiotic treatment was changed to meropenem (2 g every 8 h).
On the second day of hospitalization the cultures performed from the skin lesions yielded Gram-negative lactose-fermenting rods, subsequently identified as Klebsiella pneumoniae through MALDI–TOF MS. The isolated strain had a positive string test, indicating a possible hypermucoviscosity phenotype. The antimicrobial susceptibility test yielded an isolate susceptible to cephalosporins, aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones and we changed the antibiotic therapy to ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 h). On the third day of hospitalisation the blood cultures were also positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae with similar antimicrobial susceptibility.
On day 7, platelets count were 84 000 mm−3 and a lumbar puncture was performed, sampling a xanthochromic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), with pleiocytosis, 15 leukocytes mm−3, elevated lactic acid (5.4 mmol l−1) and elevated proteins (2.54 g l−1). After 15 days of ceftriaxone (4 g per day) the patient underwent percutaneous drainage of the hepatic abscess. Combined therapy, both antibiotic and surgery, leaded to important improvement of the patient. The antibiotherapy was switched to oral amoxicillin–clavulanate (1 g three times a day) and the patient was discharged with close follow up until total remission of the hepatic abscess was confirmed through abdominal echography. Three months later she had good glycaemic control with oral medication and almost normal visual acuity.