A 58-year-old lady was clinically admitted for phacoemulsification surgery and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation in the left eye. She had the same surgery done to her right eye two years ago and later developed posterior capsule opacification requiring YAG posterior capsulotomy. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/30 on the right eye and 20/100 on the left eye. Anterior segment examination revealed grade II nuclear sclerosis and grade I cortical cataract in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits, and no other significant ocular abnormality was noted.
Surgery was performed under topical anaesthesia with 2% xylocaine gel. A 2.75 mm superior corneal incision was created with keratome. Continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis, hydrodissection and hydrodelineation were performed uneventfully. Phacoemulsification was then carried out using a standard 20-gauge phaco tip. Towards the end of segment removal, the anterior chamber (AC) was noted to be unstable. The followability and aspiration of nuclear fragments also appeared to be impaired. There was a sudden backflow of balanced salt solution (BSS) emerging from the corneal incision . The AC was still formed at this stage. The surgeon then attempted to withdraw the phacoemulsification probe out of the incision.
Resistance was encountered upon withdrawal of the phacoemulsification probe, with the sleeve apparently jammed against the cornea. This resistance suddenly gave way upon increased traction with resultant severance of the silicon probe sleeve, the distal part of which remained inside the anterior chamber . Viscoelastic was used to reform the AC and the retained sleeve was retrieved with a pair of fine non-tooth forceps through the corneal incision site, which did not require widening . The anterior chamber was checked for any possible retained smaller fragments of the sleeve and none were noted. The two broken pieces of sleeve were examined carefully. The broken ends matched and there were no missing fragments . A thorough search for any potential fragments using the operating microscope did not reveal anything. The operation, including IOL implantation, was completed uneventfully and the incision was closed with one 10-O nylon suture. She had uneventful recovery and at three-month follow-up, patient recovery was satisfactory and her BCVA of the left eye was 20/25.