A 65 year old woman presented with a long standing goiter of 10 years duration and recent swellings over the back and the scalp since 3 months. The thyroid swelling was slow growing with no history of a rapid increase in the recent past. The patient's thyroid function tests (T3, T4 and TSH) were within normal limits and she had no pressure signs and symptoms. Her past history was non-contributory. A complete physical examination revealed a large, firm multinodular swelling involving the entire thyroid gland. There was no palpable cervical adenopathy and a review of all other systems was negative. Endoscopic and radiological (barium swallow) examination of the upper aerodigestive tract were normal. Her vocal cords were mobile. Examination also revealed fluctuant swellings of the left parietal and left thoracic paraspinal regions. An ultrasound of the neck revealed a 7.4 cm large heterogeneous tumor of the thyroid with bilateral lymphadenopathy of intermediate origin at levels II and III. Fine needle aspiration cytology of the thyroid gland and the scalp lesion confirmed a follicular variant of papillary carcinoma with metastatic deposits in the scalp. A biopsy of the scalp lesion was not performed in view of fine needle aspiration cytology diagnosis. A biopsy of the paraspinal mass too showed a follicular variant of papillary carcinoma. An elevated serum thyroglobulin level (> 800 ng/ml) supported the thyroid origin of the primary tumor. The chest x-ray was normal. The patient was staged as cT3 N0 M1 (Stage IVc, AJCC – TNM) . The patient underwent a total thyroidectomy with central compartment clearance and bilateral selective neck dissections (levels II, III & IV). At surgery, the tumor was confirmed to arise from the gland. There were no separate lesions to suggest the presence of a thyroglossal cyst remnant or infiltration of the thyroid gland by a primary from an adjacent organ. Histopathology revealed a collision tumor with components of both a follicular variant of a papillary carcinoma and a squamous carcinoma. In view of the large tumor and dual histology, we planned for radio iodine therapy directed toward the follicular derived component of the thyroid tumor and external beam radiotherapy for the squamous component. The patient was referred for adjuvant treatment but unfortunately did not come for follow-up. At the last follow-up on the 4th August 2005 the patient was free of primary tumor; three months after completion of surgical therapy. Attempts to contact the patient via all possible resources were futile.
The total thyroidectomy specimen measured 8.5 cm × 5.5 cm × 3.0 cms, with a solid, encapsulated tumor involving the right lobe and the isthmus. On cut surface, a tan colored fleshy tumor measuring 6.0 × 5.0 × 2.5 cms was seen with a thin rim of thyroid parenchyma partially surrounding it. Juxtaposed to this tumor was another distinct gray-white tumor measuring 3.0 × 2.5 × 2.0 cms showing a central irregular cystic area. The left lobe was unremarkable. The largest node dissected was 0.8 cm in diameter and was grossly unremarkable.
Multiple sections from the thyroid mass displayed an invasive follicular variant of papillary carcinoma with foci of capsular invasion. There was an obvious extrathyroidal extension of the tumor. Juxtaposed with the papillary carcinoma in close proximity was an independent primary tumour with histology of a moderately differentiated non keratinizing squamous carcinoma. The two tumours were separated by fibrous septae over a broad area. They intermingled minimally at the interface representing a true "collision tumor" . The follicular variant of papillary carcinoma showed a uniform follicular differentiation without papillary areas or squamous morules. Classical nuclear features of papillary carcinoma namely nuclear crowding, nuclear clearing, overlapping and grooving with irregularities of the nuclear membrane were evident . These two tumors were distinct morphologically and were also independent without a zone of transition from papillary to squamous carcinoma. As the squamous carcinoma was non-keratinizing in nature, keratin pearls were not seen but clusters of cohesive cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and distinct cytoplasmic borders were noted . The squamous carcinoma revealed a large area of cystic degeneration in the center and also showed muscle infiltration at the periphery. A diligent search failed to reveal remnants of thyroglossal cyst or areas of anaplastic carcinoma. There was an absence of lymphoid tissue around the component of squamous carcinoma. The uninvolved lobe showed no evidence of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
One of the fourteen dissected nodes showed a focus of metastatic papillary carcinoma (micrometastasis) without extranodal invasion. The disease was staged histopathologically as pT3 N1 M1 (Stage IVc, AJCC – TNM) .
The components of papillary carcinoma were strongly positive for thyroglobulin and TTF1 (Thyroid transcription factor) while they were negative for calcitonin. The squamous carcinoma cells were positive for cytokeratin only but negative for thyroglobulin, TTF1 and calcitonin, confirming the independent origins of the tumors.