The patient is a 40-year-old, gravida 0, para 0, who presented with two years of infertility. The patient was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus at the age of 20 and is currently taking medication. She had a history of laparoscopic myomectomy a year ago. Menstrual cycles had been regular with normal flow. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed that the anteverted and anteflexed uterus and both ovaries were normal. Baseline hormonal assays showed the following: follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 7.2 mIU/mL, luteinizing hormone (LH) 11.5 mIU/mL, estradiol (E2) 30.4 pg/mL, progesterone (P) 0.35 ng/mL. Serum anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) level was 4.1 ng/mL. The hysterosalpingography (HSG) and semen analysis were unremarkable. She had received several cycles of timed intercourse at local clinic before coming here and two cycles of ovulation induction with clomiphene citrate at our clinic, but all failed. After counseling, she was scheduled for a long protocol of down-regulation using gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist. For oocyte maturation, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was given when the leading follicle was more than 18 mm. Nineteen oocytes were retrieved by an ultrasonic-guided transvaginal route 36 h later, of which 11 fertilized. After filling the bladder, a clear line from the cervix to the endometrium was confirmed by ultrasound. Embryo transfer was attempted using a Wallace catheter with stylet (Smiths Medical, Norwell, MA, USA) under transabdominal ultrasound guidance 5 days after oocyte pickup. However, the entrance into the external cervical os was not possible. Therefore, after holding the cervix with an Allis forcep, the catheter was tried again, but failed. We tried again with a sound and it was very difficult to successfully enter. After removing the sound, we tried to enter the catheter again, but we failed, so we used a Hegar dilator of 3 mm diameter (Hegar number 1) to widen the entrance of the cervix. After removing the Hegar dilator, the Wallace catheter passed through the internal cervical os, but stopped at about 1 cm from the internal os and did not proceed further. We widened a Hegar dilator of 4 mm diameter (Hegar number 2) to insert the catheter using a sound as a guide. However, the sound went close to the uterine fundus, but the catheter was no longer accessible close to the internal os. Eventually, the Hegar number 1 lifted the catheter and changed direction, allowing it to enter the uterus. The procedure took almost an hour. Three embryos were transferred, but pregnancy was unsuccessful.
Frozen embryo transfer (FET) started with administration of GnRH agonist (decapeptyl 0.1 mg; Ferring, Saint-Prex, Switzerland) in the mid luteal phase of the preceding cycle followed by administration of oral estradiol valerate (progynova 6 mg/day; Bayer Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany) daily starting on cycle-day 3. Vaginal sonography showed endometrial thickness of 8.3 mm with trilaminar pattern. Therefore, GnRH agonist was stopped and 100 mg vaginal progesterone (Lutinus; Ferring Pharmaceuticals) two times daily was administrated until the day before embryo transfer. To facilitate embryo transfer, it was planned to use of a Foley catheter with the cotton swab after oral administration of misoprostol (Cytotec; Ali Raif, Istanbul, Turkey). After taking 200 µg of misoprostol orally twice every six hours, the procedure was performed 6 h after taking the last misoprostol. After inserting the wooden part of the cotton swab through the bladder opening of a 13-Fr Foley catheter, when it reached the length of the cervical canal, a knot was made and the rest was cut off . The Foley catheter easily passed through the cervix and stopped due to the knot. Transvaginal ultrasound was confirmed that the Foley catheter was well inserted from the cervix to the internal os . After removing the Foley catheter after 24 h, it was confirmed that a Hegar number 1 passed well. However, the entrance of the Wallce catheter into the uterus was not possible at the time of embryo transfer after 2 days. The same situation was repeated as in the first cycle. The embryos were difficultly transferred, but the pregnancy was unsuccessful. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to determine the cause of the catheter not proceeding anymore after entering the catheter 1 cm above the internal os. On MRI, a fibroid of about 1 cm in size was identified at the location . After discussion, it was decided to continue the FET. The next FET was performed according to the protocol of the previous FET, but only Foley catheterization was performed 2 days before embryo transfer, and at the same time, atosiban (Tractocile; Ferring Arzneimittel, Kiel, Germany) was administered with an initial bolus dose of 6.75 mg followed by a high dose rate of 24 ml/hour during 3 h then reduced to 8 ml/hour up to 45 h. It had been planned that the Foley catheter with cotton swab would stay in situ and be removed immediately before embryo transfer. After removing the catheter, embryo transfer was easily performed using Cook® Sydney IVF (Cook Medical, USA). The serum hCG on day 13 after embryo transfer was at 927.2 IU/L. The patient had no specific findings on antenatal care except for polyhydramnios. She delivered a healthy female baby weighing 3870 g by cesarean-section delivery.