A 27-year-old woman presented to a regional hospital with acute central, pleuritic chest pain, dyspnoea, and a 3-day history of fevers. She reported a 2-month history of intermittent visual loss in her right eye, suspicious for amaurosis fugax. She had a history of histologically proven ileal Crohn’s disease diagnosed 5 months prior to her presentation and had a previous splenectomy for sterile splenic abscesses and an appendicectomy. She did not take any medications at the time of presentation and was an active smoker.
The patient was unstable with a heart rate of 110 b.p.m. and a blood pressure of 80/50 mmHg. She was febrile to 39°C. There were no peripheral signs of infective endocarditis. Her heart sounds were dual with no murmurs, there was no evidence of heart failure and her chest was clear to auscultation. On examination of visual acuity, this was normal (6/6) in both eyes, and there were no emboli on fundoscopic examination.
This was a young patient who was unwell with chest pain, fever, and visual loss. Following the history and examination our differential diagnoses were broad and included infection, inflammation, and autoimmunity.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with T-wave inversion inferiorly. There were no arrhythmias on cardiac monitoring. A chest X-ray was unremarkable. Blood tests were consistent with inflammation/infection. There was an elevated white blood cell count of 21.0 × 109/L (normal range 4.0–11.0 × 109/L) and a C-reactive protein of 115 mg/L (<10.0 mg/L). A full blood count showed a microcytic anaemia with a haemoglobin of 106 g/L (115–165 g/L) and a mean cell volume of 75 fL (76–96 fL) and thrombocythaemia with a platelet count of 572 × 109/L (150–400 × 10°/L). There was an elevated troponin of 900 ng/L (0–20ng/L). The renal function was normal with an eGFR of >90 mL/mn/1.73 m2 (>60 mL/mn/1.73 m2).
A transthoracic echocardiogram (, Video S1) was performed due to the chest pain, ECG changes, and elevated troponin and this showed an ejection fraction of >50% with an echodense, markedly thickened, and hypokinetic basal inferolateral wall. A mobile mass was seen on the atrial side of the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve, with mild mitral regurgitation. There was no pericardial effusion.
Blood cultures were taken prior to the commencement of antibiotics and empirical treatment for infective endocarditis was commenced with flucloxacillin, vancomycin, and gentamicin. On Day 7, we performed a transoesophageal echocardiogram and echodensities were seen on the posterior and anterior mitral valve leaflets. The ascending aorta and proximal arch appeared normal.
Blood cultures were negative after 8 days and empirical treatment for culture negative endocarditis was commenced (ceftriaxone, flucloxacillin, high dose vancomycin). The patient had persistent fevers but no arrhythmias.
We performed a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) study on Day 9, due to the patient having persistent fevers, wall thickening on echocardiogram, and an elevated troponin. This revealed a thickened and oedematous basal-mid inferior and posterior wall with diffuse late gadolinium enhancement and overlying left ventricular thrombus. The mobile masses were seen on the mitral valve leaflets, correlating with the echocardiogram findings. Transmural inflammation (pancarditis) was present with clinical evidence of pericarditis and imaging evidence of myocarditis and endocarditis on CMR.
Further imaging was performed including a computed tomography coronary angiogram on Day 10, which revealed normal coronary arteries and normal calibre and appearance of the thoracic aorta and proximal great vessels. A nuclear medicine gallium scan showed no abnormal tracer uptake in the aorta or major vessels to suggest vasculitis. Magnetic resonance enterography was performed on Day 16, to assess for active Crohn’s disease and showed fat stranding, wall thickening, and enhancement of the terminal ileal wall.
A lack of response to broad-spectrum antibiotics, multiple negative blood cultures, and the persistent appearance of a thickened ventricular wall suggested a myocardial inflammatory process was more likely than infection. Inflammatory myocarditis was considered in association with active ileal Crohn’s disease. Valvular lesions (marantic endocarditis) can be seen in severe cases of myocarditis and are associated with microvascular obstruction, stasis, and thrombus formation. The regional wall motion abnormalities are likely secondary to the myocarditis.
The management paradigm was changed and prednisolone 20 mg three times per day was commenced with a plan to taper, as well as enoxaparin 60 mg twice a day with a plan for warfarin therapy. The patient defervesced and symptomatically improved, supporting the diagnosis of inflammatory myocarditis. She developed a pericardial rub and colchicine was commenced. Azathioprine 25 mg daily was added as a steroid sparing agent and aspirin 100 mg daily was added for ongoing amaurosis fugax.
A CMR was performed at the 6-month follow-up and this showed a thinned basal infero-lateral left ventricular wall with hypokinesis and resolution of myocardial oedema, consistent with previous myocarditis.
Since discharge our patient has had one myocarditic relapse presenting as shoulder and chest tightness with an elevated troponin (109 ng/L) 7 months after presentation. Repeat transthoracic echocardiogram showed no pericardial effusion and a thinned basal infero-lateral wall. Prednisolone was weaned by 5 months post-discharge and azathioprine 175 mg and colchicine were continued. Bacterial serologies for brucella, Q fever, bartonella, yersinia, and streptococcus A were negative. Thrombophilia and autoimmune screens were also negative.
At the most recent cardiology follow-up our patient was well and pain free. She had a further CMR 1 year after presentation, which showed laminated thrombus over a thinned area of scar from myocarditis, preserved overall function and no active myocarditis. Despite being advised against pregnancy she has had her second successful pregnancy. She is maintained on anticoagulation and immunosuppression.