A 27-year-old woman with a 2-month history of acute urinary retention was admitted to our institution on February 2016. Her symptoms started with weakness and numbness on the left lower limb with progressive involvement of the upper left limb and the right lower limb.
Laboratory tests did not show any significant alterations. Patient underwent spine MR imaging.
MR evaluation was performed on a 1.5 Tesla MR Scanner (Philips Ingenia Philips, The Netherlands, Best). Morphological sequences included a TSE T2-weighted in axial, sagittal, and coronal plane (TR/TE = 3000/120 ms with a slice thickness of 3.5mm for sagittal and coronal planes and 6mm slice thickness for the axial one); a sagittal TSE T1-weighted (TR/TE = 500/9 ms with a slice thickness of 2.5mm) before and after gadolinium administration (15ml of Gadovist; 0.1 mmol per kilogram of body weight). Diffusion data were also acquired by using a DWIBS sequence (TR/TE = 3299/68 ms, 5 mm thickness, no interstice gap, b = 1000 s/mm2), and a DTI with 32 different diffusion gradient with a b = 1000 s/mm2 (TR/TE = 4299/91 ms, voxel size = 2 mm × 2 mm × 2 mm). ADC map was also created. No interslice gap was used in any of the abovementioned sequences. MR diffusion data for tractography were processed after motion correction and eddy current-induced distortion correction. Tractography and 3D rendering were performed with DSI Studio software .
MR conventional imaging showed an extensive cervicothoracic spinal mass with longitudinal size of 145 mm and axial maximum size of 11 mm. The mass extended from C2 to T3 and was characterized by a solid part slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted images and hypointense on T1-weighted images; some cystic components and a small amount of late subacute bleeding inside the neoplasm were also detected (methemoglobin) .
Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images showed a significant degree of lesion enhancement . MRI showed also syringomyelia at T6-T9 level and caliber change of the spinal cord at C2-C3 level with moderate widening of spinal canal.
DTI FT of the spinal cord showed that neoplasm did not infiltrate the spinal cord with a disruption of axonal tracts. Moreover, DTI FT showed the sparing of white matter fiber tracts by the neoplasm and the peripheral displacement of fiber bundles . In particular, sagittal color-coded fractional anisotropy (FA) map with spinal cord tractography overlaid showed different point of fiber displacement by the neoplasm, rather than infiltration. Sagittal color-coded FA map, FA map, and ADC map, showed low intensity values corresponding to an high cellularity lesion, centrally placed .
By using a manipulation of the 3D FT output data, we performed a “virtual cut” of part of the spinal cord fibers, obtained at C2-C3 and C3-C4 levels respectively [Figure –], showing properly that white matter fiber tracts were peripheral displaced, surrounding the lesion, without any apparent sign fibers interruption. On these bases, the raised suspect of intramedullary cervicothoracic ependymoma became stronger and the patient underwent spinal surgery.
The patient underwent a C2–T5 laminectomy through a posterior approach. Once the dura was opened, the spinal cord appeared compressed, bulging through the dural opening. A central myelotomy D2–D4 was performed. After the myelotomy, a mass with a caudal and cranial identifiable cleavage plane was found, as previously shown by tractography which was used during the presurgical planning.
The tumor was brownish colored, soft, highly vascularized, and due to the cleavage plane from the spinal cord was easily removed “en block.” The length of the tumor was 145 mm. Optimal decompression of the spinal cord was achieved. Electrophysiological monitoring of motor, somatosensory evoked potentials and D-wave was performed. The patient underwent C3–D2 stabilization with a titanium Vertex Medtronic system.
Sections of the tumor microscopically showed a glial neoplasm characterized by a lot of cells with rounded nuclei, perivascular pseudorosette formations, ependymal canals, and ependymal rosettes .
Few foci of coagulative necrosis were also detected. Immunohistochemical analysis showed neoplastic cells positive for GFAP, S100, and EMA (dot-like), and negative for IDH1, R132H, and p53. The Ki-67 labeling index was 2%. The final pathologic diagnosis was an ependymoma WHO grade II.