The participant is a woman in her 30s, diagnosed with MID and BPD. For over a decade, she has lived in a 24-hour residential care facility specialized for people with MID and severe behavioral problems. Her daily routine typically consists of working in the house (e.g., cooking, cleaning), she likes to take walks, and enjoys playing board games. For several days a week she goes to an activity center where she works creatively (e.g., draw paintings, make music), alone or together with others. This provides important structure in her daily routine. Staff is available 24 − 7 to support her. Even seemingly regular tasks, such as arriving in time for appointments, may be perceived as onerous. Staff are therefore reminded to compliment her regularly, even with seemingly trivial accomplishments. She best thrives when she experiences support that is clear and structured, because that makes her feel calm and secure.
Before she lived in the care facility, during her childhood and teenage years, she experienced traumatic events that undoubtedly contributed to challenges she faces nowadays. She often perceives her life as a struggle, some days more than others. She mostly communicates her struggles calmly to others, but sometimes her tensions become explicit to her environment when she self-injures or is physically aggressive. According to her care professionals, her overall well-being is poorer on days when she shows these behaviors. Her care professionals have several hypotheses about factors contributing to her challenging behaviors. One is that she does not trust herself to be alone. The self-injuring and aggressive incidents are, at least sometimes, perceived as a call for reassuring attention from staff. Another hypothesis is that her challenging behaviors are a maladaptive emotion-regulation strategy. Unpleasant emotions can (sometimes unexpectedly) accumulate very rapidly. Over time, she has learned that she can immediately achieve short-term relief from this overwhelming emotional experience by self-injuring. Alternatively, difficulties regulating negative emotions are also considered a cause of aggressive behaviors. After self-injurious or aggressive incidents, staff need to ensure the participant’s and others’ safety, sometimes by imposing freedom restricting measures such as seclusion or fixation. Such drastic measures are resented by staff and the participant alike. She is highly motivated to change her challenging behavioral patterns, and therefore follows dialectical behavior therapy that aims to increase her emotion regulatory abilities .