A 68-year-old Chinese female was admitted to our department for an incidental discovery of a nodule in her left breast. She was diagnosed with grade 2 clear cell RCC 10 years earlier, and she underwent a nephrectomy for an incidental kidney mass found during a routine imaging examination. No abnormal findings were revealed during the physical examination or laboratory tests. Diagnostic mammography showed an asymmetric, dense shadow in the inner, upper quadrant of the left breast, and no obvious nodules were identified in the oblique view. Breast ultrasonography (US) of the left breast revealed a solid hypo-echoic nodule of approximately 10 mm × 6 mm in size with an oval shape, smooth edges and a well-defined boundary. Color Doppler flow imaging showed abnormal blood flow. The resistive index (RI) was 0.62–0.67. Elastography showed a completely soft lesion, which was classified as E2. We paid close attention to the extensive vascularity accompanying the nodule. Subsequent breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a nodule with marked homogenous contrast enhancement in the left breast adjacent to the chest wall. The nodule was given a score of IV B based on the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) .
Due to the limited volume, deep location, and abundant vascularity of the lesion, as well as the risk of bleeding, percutaneous US-guided core needle biopsy was not performed. Surgical excision of the nodule was performed. Macroscopically, a suspicious nodule was found at the site of the specimen, but unfortunately, no pictures were taken during the surgery. Microscopically , the nodule was similar in appearance to the RCC in the primary renal site. Nests, sheets, and cords of polygonal cells were present in the nodule and were associated with a rich sinusoidal vascular network . Immunohistochemistry staining revealed strong positive labeling for the cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10) and vimentin, and an absence of labeling for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (Her-2). This staining pattern further suggested metastatic RCC to the breast . Currently, there are no clinical or radiological findings regarding the recurrence of metastasis after 2 months of follow-up. The patient has undergone no further therapy since the surgery.