A 65-year-old male patient was in a coma for more than a month due to a high fall.
A 65-year-old male patient presented to Zhangping City Hospital in Fujian Province on May 2, 2021 with loss of consciousness for 20 min following a fall from a high height. Cranial computed tomography (CT) revealed a bilateral acute temporal subdural hematoma and contusion in the right frontotemporal lobe. The patient was admitted to the hospital and underwent physical examination. The Glasgow Coma Scale score of the patient was 7 (E1, V2, M4), and he was slightly unconscious, irritable, and unable to answer and cooperate during examination. The bilateral pupils were equally round and large, 0.2 cm in diameter, and slow to respond to light. Lacerations were observed in the left temporal area with obvious local swelling. Bright red bloody fluid was observed in the left external auditory canal and bilateral nasal cavity, with slight resistance in the neck. Lacerations were present in the left thorax, waist, and left anterior abdominal region, with slightly greater muscle tension. The Barnberg sign and Ke's sign were negative. In the Emergency Department, "right craniotomy + intracranial hematoma removal + bone decompression + secondary artificial dural repair" was performed . After the operation, fluid rehydration therapy, hemostatic agents, nutritional support, brain tissue assessment, infection prevention treatment, stomach protection measures, electrolyte balance therapy, and sedation and analgesia were administered. After the operation , the patient’s condition gradually improved, but he was unable to speak. On May 24, 2021 , "hyperbaric oxygen" (inside the cabin, gauge pressure 0.1 mPa, oxygen inhalation for 30 min, rest for 10 min (air inhalation), and oxygen inhalation for 30 min) was administered. The next day (May 25, 2021, Figure ), the bone window collapse was obvious; however, local doctors considered it to be normal and thus continued two courses of hyperbaric oxygen treatment. The duration of each treatment course was 10 d, and the degree of bone window collapse did not significantly improve. The patient’s family considered that the treatment response was poor due to his speech disturbance, dysphagia, and occasional dizziness. On June 14, 2021, the patient was transferred to a higher-level hospital for rehabilitation treatment, and on June 15, 202, he was transferred to the Rehabilitation Hospital Affiliated with Fujian University of Chinese Medicine. On the day after admission, cranial CT examination revealed paradoxical herniation . An attempt to lower cranial pressure using mannitol resulted in drowsiness. On June 17, 2021 , craniocerebral CT revealed worsened paradoxical herniation, and further treatment was not effective. Five days later (June 22, 2021), a craniocerebral CT review revealed no improvement, and consultation was requested due to continued drowsiness. The patient was referred to our hospital on June 25, 2021, at which point the effects of fluid rehydration were unsatisfactory. A review of the craniocerebral CT images revealed that the paradoxical herniation was still present (June 27, 2021; Figure and ). Cranioplasty was performed on July 1, 2021 , and the patient was no longer drowsy on the second day after surgery. The stitches were removed, and the patient was discharged from the hospital one week later.
The patient had a medical history of pulmonary tuberculosis.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors or other genetic conditions.
The vital signs of the patient were as follows: Body temperature, 36.9 °C; heart rate, 68/min; respiratory rate, 20/min; and blood pressure, 123/83 mmHg.
Laboratory examinations showed no abnormalities.
Cranial CT showed the presence of paradoxical herniation on the next day of HBOT initiation (May 25, 2021, Figure ), abnormal aggravation of the cerebral hernia on June 17, 2021 after receiving mannitol treatment , and the disappearance of paradoxical herniation following cranioplasty on July 1, 2021 .