A 28-year-old man, medically free, complained of axial low back pain over the past year that has progressed during the last three months, and he also started to have radiating pain to the left lower limb. The pain is associated with perianal anesthesia without any sphincter disturbance. Neurological examination revealed an inability to walk on toes and heels with preserved sensory function. Straight leg raise test was positive at a level of 60 degrees.
Initial spinal MRI showed intense enhancing intradural intra-medullary lesion from the level of the conus medullaris extending to the filum terminalis from the level of T12 to L3, and it displays low signal intensity in T1WI and heterogeneous predominant high signal intensity in T2WI. Furthermore, multiple enhancing lesions are seen opposite to L4 and L5 levels and within the exiting nerve roots, at the left side of L1/L2 and L2/L3 and right side of L3/L4 and L5/S1 levels ( and ).
Management
Decision was made to surgically resect most likely symptomatic lesion which was the largest conus medullaris lesion. Patient underwent T12- L3 laminectomy and resection of targeted largest lesion. Patient tolerated surgery with marked improvement on his initial complain.
Histopathological examination
A fresh specimen was sent to the pathology for frozen section diagnosis, which revealed an Ependymal tumor consistent with Myxopapillary Ependymoma. An additional tissue has been fixed in 10% Neutral buffered formalin and sent to the pathology lab for permanent section diagnosis, totally submitted in six cassettes. The microscopic examination reveals a lesioned tissue displaying papillary architecture . Elongated cells are radially oriented around hyalinized fibrovascular cores with mucoid degeneration with no significant cytological atypia or mitotic figures . Based on the histopathological evaluation, the final diagnosis is Myxopapillary Ependymoma, WHO grade 2. A Ki-67 proliferation index is about 1%.
Post operative MRI
Follow up post operative MRI reveal status post laminectomy at T12-L3 level with resection of the lesion extending from T12-L3 with underlying postoperative changes noted in form of subcutaneous surgical tract with enhancing of the thecal sac at the surgical bed as well as enhancing paraspinal soft tissue ( and ).