A 15-month-old Asian male baby presented to our center with precocious puberty and a hepatic mass. He was a product of cesarean section at 37 weeks of gestation. He had meconium aspiration at birth but had no history of hypoglycemia. His birth weight was 3.75 kg (in the 75th centile). At the age of eight months his mother noticed enlarging genitalia with sparse pubic hair and changes in his voice. These symptoms progressed over time and six months later, he started to have persistent fever and abdominal distension. A right upper quadrant mass was palpable at that time, so he was referred for evaluation. His family history was significant for an older sibling who died after being diagnosed with Wilms' tumor at the age of ten years and for a grandparent who died of lung cancer. There was no family history of overgrowth syndrome or other pediatric tumors. His parents were not related by blood.
At the time of presentation, his height was 82 cm (in the 90th centile for age) and his weight was 12.45 kg (in the 95th centile). There was no evidence of hemihypertrophy or dysmorphic features. He had a large-for-age, uncircumcised penis that measured 10 cm from the base with a large thick scrotum and scarce suprapubic hair (Tanner stage was III, as seen in Figure ). A workup revealed a bone age of two years and eight months and blood investigations showed elevated AFP (356,474 ng/mL, normal for age < 12 ng/mL), β-hCG (13.7 mIU/mL, normal for age < 2 mIU/mL), and free testosterone (10 pmol/L, normal for age 0.09-5.4 pmol/L) along with thrombocytosis (platelet count of 1244 × 103/μl). An abdominal ultrasound revealed a right hepatic lobe mass. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large heterogeneously enhancing right hepatic lobe measuring 10.5 × 11.5 cm and involving mainly segment VII and parts of segments V, VI and VIII in keeping with a 2-sector involvement with inferior vena cava (IVC) extension almost reaching his right atrium (PRETEXT II-V3). A metastatic work-up showed no metastasis to his lung. Other hormonal laboratory tests, including serum prolactin (16.69 ng/mL, normal for age 4.1-18.4 ng/mL), androstenedione (0.6 ng/mL, normal for age 0.3-3.5 ng/mL), dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (0.182 μmol/L, normal for age 0.9-11.7 μmol/L), thyroid stimulating hormone (3.7 mIU/L, normal for age 0.3-5 mIU/L), free thyroxin (1.4 ng/dL, normal for age 0.71-1.85 ng/dL), free triiodothryronine (0.44 pg/mL, normal for age 1.45-3.48 pg/mL), follicular stimulating hormone (0.5 IU/L, normal for age 1-8 IU/L), luteinizing hormone (1.08 mIU/mL, normal for age 5-12 mIU/mL), and a gonadotrophin releasing hormone test, were all within normal range for age. Brain magnetic resonance imaging did not detect any abnormality in his brain or pituitary gland. A testicular ultrasound (US) appeared normal and unremarkable. A testicular biopsy was not done.
Our patient was treated with four cycles of preoperative chemotherapy (cisplatin, alternating with carboplatin/doxorubicin). The tumor showed a good partial response with more than 50% reduction in the size of the mass and a resolved IVC thrombus. Doppler US confirmed patency of the hepatic, portal and IVC veins. During therapy, we observed a decline in the level of free testosterone with an arrest of further virilization. Our patient underwent surgery with complete excision of the tumor, followed by two additional chemotherapy cycles containing cisplatin. A pathology review showed residual hepatoblastoma with 90% necrosis. The viable part showed fetal histology and stained positively for Hep Par1 and CD34. The resection margins were free of tumor and there was absence of blood vessel invasion. Laboratory and radiologic evaluation revealed no evidence of tumor recurrence one and a half years after completion of therapy. Our patient was 33 months old on the last visit and no further development of secondary sexual signs were elicited. His height was 96 cm (between the 50th and 75th centile) and his weight was 14.2 kg (at 50th centile).