A 71-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with 1 h of substernal chest pain after hiking up a steep hill. Medical history was only significant for gastroesophageal reflux disease, which she initially thought was the cause of her chest discomfort. Vital signs included a heart rate of 59 beats per minute, blood pressure of 82/56 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Physical examination was notable for an uncomfortable appearing woman with a 2/6 holosystolic murmur localized to the left upper sternal border, jugular venous pressure of 12 cm H2O, and cool bilateral lower extremities. Electrocardiogram demonstrated 1-mm ST-elevations in leads I and aVL with reciprocal ST depressions in the inferior leads, concerning for a lateral ST-elevation myocardial infarction and the patient was taken urgently to the catheterization laboratory . Coronary angiography showed no significant coronary artery disease and a left ventriculogram demonstrated marked apical akinesis with basal hyperkinesis, consistent with takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Right heart catheterization revealed cardiogenic shock [Fick cardiac output of 2.74 (ref 4–8) L/min and index of 1.61 (ref 2.5–4) L/min/m2] with elevated filling pressures [mean right atrial pressure 10 (ref 2–6) mmHg, right ventricular pressure 46/13 (ref 15–30/2–8) mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 44/21 (mean 29) (ref 15–30/8–15; 9–18) mmHg, mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 27 (ref 6–12) mmHg with a peak v-wave of 45 mmHg] . Given the presence of cardiogenic shock, severely depressed LV systolic function, and marked hypotension with a blood pressure of approximately 70/50 mmHg, a trial of dopamine and placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was attempted but resulted in worsening hypotension. With increasing suspicion for possible LVOT obstruction, invasive assessment with catheter pull back from the left ventricle to the aorta demonstrated a gradient of 34 mmHg, suggesting dynamic LVOT obstruction . Echocardiogram, performed immediately after catheterization, showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 32 (ref 52–72) % with apical akinesis, hyperdynamic basal segments, the systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve with LVOT obstruction [Vmax 2.6 (ref 0.8–1.0) m/s] and severe mitral regurgitation (MR) . Chest X-ray demonstrated moderate pulmonary oedema . Labs were notable for a troponin T generation 5 peak of 1692 (ref <22) ng/L, CK-MB peak of 36 (ref 0.0–4.8) ng/mL, creatine phosphokinase (CPK) peak 309 (ref 0–175) U/L, and NT-pro brain natriuretic peptide of 420 (ref 0–449) pg/mL.
The patient was monitored for 5 days in the intensive care unit for cardiogenic shock and acute hypoxic respiratory failure. In the presence of LVOT obstruction, blood pressure was primarily supported with phenylephrine. Low-dose norepinephrine was added to help with concomitant systolic dysfunction, but with cautious up-titration due to fear of worsening obstruction with beta agonism. Aggressive beta-blockade was deferred due to systolic dysfunction and sinus bradycardia, but low-dose metoprolol succinate was initiated after resolution of cardiogenic shock. Fluid administration was avoided due to symptomatic respiratory failure from pulmonary edema. Oxygen supplementation was administered via nasal cannula and was successfully weaned off with the resolution of shortness of breath after gentle diuresis following improvement of LVOT obstruction on repeat echocardiogram. The patient initially received one dose of intravenous furosemide 20 mg with a net negative fluid balance of 750 mL and then transitioned to oral furosemide 20 mg daily to maintain an even to slightly negative fluid balance. Chest discomfort was initially treated with low-dose narcotics and improved after resolution of cardiogenic shock and the patient was pain free prior to discharge on Day 7 of the hospital course. Two weeks after hospitalization, the patient had resumed low-intensity exercises and remained asymptomatic on beta-blocker and diuretic therapy. Repeat echocardiography 21 days after diagnosis showed normalization of systolic function and complete resolution of apical akinesis, LVOT obstruction, and MR.