A 65-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to our hospital with a history of slowly developing pain in his left thigh in April 2015. The patient has undergone a THA of his left and right hip, respectively, due to HLA-B27 positive ankylosing spondylitis (AS) fifteen and twelve years prior to this presentation. Clinical examination disclosed a typical stiff spine and a pain-free right hip with excellent range of motion (ROM). Left hip was painful and has reduced ROM. There was no sign of palpable soft-tissue mass or enlarged inguinal and pelvic nodes. Pelvic and hip X-rays showed a radiolucent osteolytic zone around the tip of the uncemented left femoral stem consistent with aseptic loosening of prosthesis .
Chest X-ray and blood tests were normal. According to these findings, the patient was scheduled for regular revision and replacement of the left THA. The prosthesis used in primary THA was an anatomically shaped uncemented model, made of Titanium Aluminum Vanadium (Ti6Al4V) Alloy (Ti, Al-6 %, V-4 %) proximally coated with hydroxyapatite.
During the revision procedure, the femoral stem was found loose and the acetabular component was well fixed. However, there were signs of wear and tear at the modular head and acetabular inlay. It was decided to replace all components of the primary arthroplasty. Routine tissue samples were collected for microbiological analysis and histologic examination from several different locations. The femoral bone was thinned and the soft tissue around femoral shaft of the loosened prosthesis was not suspicious for tumor. Frozen section of the tissue around the loosened femoral stem was not performed.
Several small tissue samples from different locations (labeled as pseudocapsule, bone, tissue from the femoral canal) were submitted for histopathologic examination. In some of the samples, rare thin normal bony trabeculae were found; in most samples the submitted tissue was hypercellular, fibroblastic, and arranged in poorly formed fascicles .
More collagenized tissue revealed a less dense cellularity. The cells were focally pleomorphic and haphazardly arranged. Necroses were not found. Mitotic figures were present in hypercellular spindle- and pleomorphic-cell areas .
In less than 10 % of examined tissue, a lace-like eosinophilic osteoid without signs of mineralization or ossification was seen among pleomorphic cells .
All tumor cells in fibroblastic areas were immunohistochemically diffusely positive to NSE, CD99, smooth muscle actin, calponin, focally for CKAE1/AE3, and calretinin. Only few isolated cells were positive for EMA, β-catenin, E-cadherin, S-100 protein, caldesmon, CD56 NCAM, Bcl-2, and CD117. All cells were negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors, CD34, and desmin. Predominantly in osteoblastic foci, the cells were mostly SATB2 positive .
The so-called arthroplasty effect was not present in or near the tumor. According to morphology and immunohistochemistry, the lesion was recognized as a secondary, orthopedic implant-related conventional osteogenic osteosarcoma, a fibroblastic type with rare osteoblastic foci, without lymphovascular invasion. All microbiology samples were sterile.
Unaware of the histological diagnosis during the operation, the orthopedic surgeon did not perform a radical femoral resection. Instead, an uncemented revision total hip prosthesis with long femoral stem was inserted .
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on day 6 postoperatively. Regarding the histopathological diagnosis, the patient was readmitted for computed tomography of the chest revealing two possible lung metastases and suspicious lesions in the 4th, 9th, and 10th thoracic vertebrae. Since the tumor has not been radically excised and a possible metastatic dissemination was suspected, the patient was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin, doxorubicin, and Lonquest to reduce neutropenia); 6 months after the diagnosis was established, he is well and shows no signs of local recurrence or systemic progression.