A 56-year-old man was referred to our emergency department with a 10 days history of pyrexia, productive cough and appetite loss. He reported an adverse reaction to penicillin and he had no history of intravenous drug abuse. Physical examination showed coarse crackles in lower right lung field, and patient’s laboratory workup was remarkable for elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (16 mg/dl) and leukocytosis (16.000/mm3) with neutrophilia of 88%. Chest X-ray showed right lobar consolidation. The patient was admitted to our hospital based on a diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia. Blood samples for hemocultures were collected and empirical therapy with levofloxacin (500 mg/day) was undertaken (day 1). Considering the worsening of the patient’s general conditions, a computed tomography (CT) scan of abdomen and thorax was performed: the diagnostic imaging revealed left pleural effusion, extensive SI caused by thrombosis of the splenic artery and a hyperdense round lesion of the right hepatic lobe suspected for hepatic aneurysm (1.4 cm × 1.1 cm) . Blood cultures, taken on day 1, were positive for penicillin-sensible GBS and the patient immediately underwent a transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography finding an infective vegetation (1.0 cm × 1.5 cm) on the mitral valve associated with mitral chordae tendineae rupture and severe regurgitation. Intravenous antibiotic therapy was consequently switched to intravenous vancomycin (2 g/day) and emergency mitral valve repair with artificial chordal replacement was performed (day 12). During post-acute cardiac rehabilitation program the patient developed jaundice and laboratory tests showed a total bilirubin of 7.4 mg/dl and elevation of alkaline phosphatase and γ-glutamyl transferase (day 20). A new emergent abdomen CT scan found an enlarging MA of the right hepatic artery of 2.4 cm × 2.0 cm of size and a 2.7 cm × 3.0 cm intrahepatic aneurysm in segment VIII, causing displacement of the portal vein and compression of the right biliary duct . Furthermore, CT images detected three smaller left hepatic artery aneurysms located in segment IV and confirmed massive SI. Thus, multiple hepatic MAs associated with GBS endocarditis was diagnosed. The patient was immediately submitted to surgical intervention, which consisted in ligation of the right hepatic artery and splenectomy. Initial postoperative course was favorable with reduction of conjugated bilirubin level. A duplex ultrasonography performed 4 days after surgery demonstrated complete thrombosis of the proximal right hepatic artery aneurysm, partial thrombosis of the aneurysm in segment VIII and no further enlargement of the small aneurysms of the left hepatic artery. However, on day 28, an episode of melena associated with low hemoglobin count emerged. The patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy, which did not show any gastrointestinal bleeding. On day 42, because of progressive decrease of hemoglobin level, a multislice abdomen CT angiography was performed . The radiological findings were consistent with hemobilia due to a suspected rupture of the partially thrombosed MA of segment VIII into the biliary tree. On the following day, the patient underwent a selective angiography of the coeliac axis, which revealed blood supply to the segment VIII MA from intraparenchymal branches of the left hepatic artery. The patient was then successfully treated with transcatheter coil embolization, resulting in complete obliteration of the residual segment VIII MA and of the three segment IV small aneurysms . The post-procedural course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on day 58, after 10 weeks of antibiotic therapy. A follow-up CT angiography was performed 8 weeks later, showing complete embolization of the residual MAs without any evidence of bile duct dilatation. The patient remained asymptomatic at follow-up of 12 months, with no signs of relapse of biliary obstruction or gastrointestinal bleeding .