A 58-year-old Caucasian female visited the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Human Studies Facility in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, to participate in a study requiring sequential exposures to filtered air and concentrated ambient particles (CAPs). Protocols and consent forms were approved by the University of North Carolina (UNC) School of Medicine Committee on the Protection of the Rights of Human Subjects, and the subject provided informed consent. Two years previously, she had participated in an identical exposure protocol without any complication. At that time, two 24-hr Holter examinations obtained during the exposures to filtered air and CAPs demonstrated 29 and 54 episodes of supraventricular ectopy, respectively.
On the day of exposure to CAPs, the volunteer had no symptoms. The participant had a history of osteoarthritis and hypertension, and she was being treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a diuretic (10 mg lisinopril and 12.5 mg hydrochlorothiazide, respectively) for the hypertension. Previous surgeries included a hernia repair, a cholecystectomy, and a total left knee arthroplasty. Her family history was significant due to the death of her father at 57 years of age from a myocardial infarction. The volunteer was a lifetime nonsmoker. On physical examination, she was 173 cm tall and weighed 104.4 kg (body mass index, 34.9; waist, 45 inches). Her pulse was regular at 66/min, and her blood pressure was 144/61 mmHg. The baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm . A Holter monitor demonstrated evidence of increased supraventricular ectopy, with 157 ± 34 premature atrial contractions per hour during the 3 hr immediately preceding the exposure to CAPs.
Twenty-three minutes into the exposure to CAPs (filter weight, 112 μg/m3; particle number, 563,912/cc), the telemetry monitor revealed that the subject had nonsustained atrial fibrillation that quickly organized into atrial flutter. She was immediately removed from the exposure chamber. The volunteer reported no symptoms, and there was no change in the physical examination. The 12-lead ECG verified that she remained in atrial flutter . Her serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, and complete blood count were all normal. Creatine kinase and the MB fraction were also normal. During the transfer to the UNC Medical Center (~ 2 hr after the onset of the arrhythmia), she spontaneously reverted to a normal sinus rhythm.
The patient was admitted to the hospital overnight for observation and telemetry. The next morning, the ECG documented normal sinus rhythm. Her serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, creatine kinase, and the MB fraction were again normal, and her complete blood count was normal except for a hematocrit of 35.7% (the lower limit of normal is 36.0%). Resting transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated normal right ventricular contraction with an ejection fraction of 55–60%, aortic sclerosis, and diastolic left ventricular dysfunction. The left atrium was considered mildly dilated; all other chambers of the heart were normal in size. She was discharged and was not prescribed a new medication. Approximately 6 weeks later, she underwent electrophysiology study, which did not provoke atrial fibrillation or significant atrial ectopy. The study did indicate a reentrant circuit of the cavotricuspid isthmus, which was ablated to prevent potential future episodes of atrial flutter.