The patient was a 76-year-old woman who used to work at a self-owned shop. In her 40s, she had experienced dizziness and vomiting, which led to a diagnosis of autonomic nervous system dysfunction. This condition eventually resolved naturally. After her husband's sudden death from cancer at the age of 74, she had occasionally experienced episodes of anxiety, which did not require any treatment. During that period, she developed follicular lymphoma and was treated with bimonthly infusions of 1000 mg of obinutuzumab (a molecular-targeted medication with long-term immunosuppressive side-effects due to its direct destruction of B cells) for a period of 18 months. Her last dose was administered 29 days before she contracted COVID-19.
At the age of 76 years, the patient had developed a cough and tested positive for COVID-19 by PCR test (day 0). Considering the timing of onset in the latter half of 2022, she was presumed to have been infected with the omicron variant. She was treated with molnupiravir, an antiviral drug for COVID-19, but experienced nausea and discontinued the drug 3 days later. Despite the resolution of coughs on day 6, she continued to experience persistent nausea and became restless. Her symptoms led to a visit to the emergency department on day 8. Blood tests and her head computed tomography (CT) scan showed no abnormalities. On day 10, she exhibited severe restlessness, a substantial loss of appetite, severe suicidal ideation, and a depressive mood. According to the DSM-5 criteria, she was diagnosed with major depression with a score of 52 on the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) indicating severe depression. She was admitted to our psychiatry ward on day 11. Since her COVID-19 symptoms had already disappeared and the recent infection could result in a positive finding in reverse transcriptase loop-mediated isothermal amplification test (RT-LAMP test), no screening test was performed. Blood tests on admission showed normal inflammatory markers with minimal evidence of infection. Likewise, her chest CT scan on admission showed no abnormal findings. She then underwent modified electroconvulsive therapy (mECT). Infection-prevention measures were taken during hospitalization and the mECT procedure. After four sessions of mECT, her depressive symptoms were resolved.
On day 21, however, she presented with a fever of 38°C and a cough, leading to further investigations. The result of her RT-LAMP test was positive, and her chest CT scan revealed scattered ground glass and reticular opacities in the peripheral areas of both lungs , leading to a diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia. We monitored the blood lymphocyte count closely due to obinutuzumab's action as an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, which directly destroys B cells and may lead to lymphopenia. The lymphocyte count had dropped to 700/μL on day 21, although it had been 1900/μL on day 8. This decrease in lymphocyte count continued to progress gradually over a long period of time, reaching 200/μL on day 94. On the other hand, the neutrophil count was 2500/μL on day 21 and remained above 2500/μL without any decline thereafter. From day 21, the patient received intravenous infusion of the antiviral drug remdesivir along with a short period of oxygen therapy, which led to the improvement of pneumonia, and she was discharged on day 32. However, COVID-19 pneumonia recurred on days 64 and 74. No COVID-19 outbreaks were recorded in the psychiatric ward during her hospitalization.