A 15-year-old male was referred to our paediatric cardiac surgery services in the UK with a history of worsening exercise tolerance, exertional chest pain and confirmed rheumatic fever whilst he was in the Philippines 3 years prior. He had no other past medical history. A grade 2/4 soft, high pitched early diastolic murmur at the 3rd left intercostal space was auscultated. The patient was not breathless at rest and all peripheral pulses were palpable.
Echocardiography found a tricuspid aortic valve with a central, broad jet of severe aortic regurgitation (AR), with no stenosis of the valve. Peak Doppler velocity across the aortic valve was 1.6 m/s. The AR pressure half-time was 337.4 ms with an AR deceleration slope of 4.1 m/s2. There was holo-reversal of flow in the descending aorta and abdominal aorta. The aortic root measurements were 2.45 cm, 3.24 cm, 2.69 cm, and 2.9 cm at the valve, aortic root, sinotubular junction, and ascending aorta, respectively. Left ventricular (LV) dilation with mild mitral regurgitation secondary to tethering of the posterior leaflet was seen [end-diastolic diameter 60.4 mm (z-score 7.9), end-systolic diameter 42.1 mm (z-score 7.7)] with good function (ejection fraction 56.7%) based on the patient’s weight of 36.5 kg and height of 144 cm (Videos 1 and 2). The patient’s M mode echocardiography is shown in . The patient was a candidate for surgical intervention and was planned for AV neocuspidization using autologous pericardium.
Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography showed a deficient left coronary cusp and a retracted right coronary cusp of the AV. Once the sternotomy was performed, a window of pericardium was removed to harvest tissue for AV cusp construction. Using the Ozaki sizers (a stencil to draw the size and shape of the leaflet), three valve cusps were outlined onto the excised pericardium, which was treated in glutaraldehyde in order to decellularize and promote cross-linking of the tissue to prevent valve calcification and degeneration. The leaflets were sutured onto the preserved aortic valve annulus. The smoother, visceral side of pericardium was facing towards the aorta to minimise leaflet thrombosis and obstruction of the coronaries. The patient was under cardiopulmonary bypass for 124 min and on cross-clamping for 99 min with no intraoperative complications. The remainder of the pericardium was sutured closed around the heart and the sternum was closed. Immediate post-operative echo had shown perfect coaptation of the newly constructed valve leaflets, no subaortic LV outflow tract obstruction, normal flow in the descending aorta and preserved LV systolic function.
Following surgery, the patient was taken to the intensive therapy unit and was extubated that evening. Post-operative day 1, the patient’s inotrope and vasopressor agents (dopamine and milrinone) were discontinued. Other than pericarditis and post-operative pneumonia which were simply treated with diclofenac and tazobactam-piperacillin, there were no complications following surgery. By post-operative day 11, the patient was stable, afebrile, well perfused and was discharged to his local paediatric services before being discharged home. The patient was planned to be on warfarin for 3 months, along with prophylactic phenoxymethylpenicillin, lisonipril, spironolactone, and furosemide.
On follow-up at 3 months, symptoms of reduced exercise tolerance had resolved, and echocardiography had shown resolution of normal valvular function (Video 3 and , Video S1). At most recent follow-up at a telephone clinic (due to COVID-19 restrictions), 3 years post-operatively, the patient reported feeling well with no further symptoms.