A six-year and 8-month old boy (height: 98 cm, weight: 13.4 kg) with Ebstein’s anomaly and intellectual disabilities; who had undergone the Glenn surgery at 10 days old to connect his superior vena cava to the pulmonary artery, and the Fontan surgery at 4 years old to connect his inferior vena cava to the pulmonary artery; began to experience sudden vomiting, a loss of consciousness, and facial spasm on August 8. He was taken by ambulance to a special medical institute at a children’s hospital, where he was immediately admitted into the intensive care unit.
The patient was previously diagnosed with rampant caries at the age of 5, and received conservative dental treatments for his 16 teeth with AP under general anesthesia because of high risk of IE, followed by regular checkups once every 3 months. At the regular dental checkup 3 months prior, his left lower deciduous central and lateral incisors were rigid without any mobility, although it was noted that the permanent successors existed under the gingiva behind these teeth. No dental problems were found except for fair to poor oral hygiene. The Plaque Index Silness and loe of the patient was 1.8 in average. It was reported that the patient began to frequently touch his left lower deciduous central and lateral incisors and he had self-extracted those teeth 2 weeks prior to the appearance of the reported symptoms. A week before his hospital admission, he complained of pain in his right ear and developed a continuous fever (> 38.0 °C). However, his parents did not consult his attending cardiologist because they had perceived these symptoms to resemble those of a common cold. In this time, they were not informed about the risk of IE associated with dental events or procedures.
Both magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomographic (CT) scans of the brain were performed on admission and showed a ring-shaped abscess of 18 mm in diameter in the transitional area of the right temporal lobe . Echocardiography showed an incomplete tricuspid atresia with moderate regurgitation--predisposing heart conditions and minor echo criteria for the diagnosis of IE, but no oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, verrucous endocardial lesion, or thrombus in the heart--positive echo criteria of IE . An electrocardiogram showed complete right bundle branch block and right axis deviation. A chest X-ray showed right ventricular hypertrophy (CTR = 58%).
As an initial therapy, the patient received 1) cefotaxime (200 mg/kg/day) and meropenem (120 mg/kg/day) intravenously from August 8 to16. However, in a brain scan on August 13, the abscess was found to have enlarged to 21 mm in diameter. In response, the attending doctor administered 2) rocephin (200 mg/kg/day) and meropenem (120 mg/kg/day) from August 17 to 21. On August 22, a third brain scan measured the size of the abscess to be 29 mm and showed that wall thickness of the abscess and the surrounding edema became more prominent with continuous spasm. Subsequently, since the size of the abscess was still increasing and exceeding 2.5 cm while on antibiotics for 2 weeks, the doctor administered 3) panipenem/betamipron (95 mg/kg/day) from August 22 to 23, and a brain surgeon performed surgical drainage - craniotomy followed by approaching the brain mass and draining the pus out of the abscess by using CT-guidance to enhance the efficacy of antibiotic therapy and reduce raised intracranial pressure on August 23, when the drugs effect reached its maximum. To find out the causes of insufficient effects from previously administrated antibiotics on a growing abscess, we obtained materials from the abscess. A Gram stain of them revealed gram-positive coccus, and blood and abscess culture tests detected intraoral bacteria of the Streptococcus milleri group. Based on the detection of these bacteria and possible involvement of the Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, the doctor then administered 4) vancomycin (45 mg/kg/day) and rocephin (100 mg/kg/day) from August 23 to 29. Thereafter, the patient recovered steadily and began carbamazepine, an antiepileptic medication, to avoid post-operative epilepsy. Finally, he was discharged from the hospital after 2 months of treatment.
At a regular checkup after the reported incident, we informed the patient’s mother about the necessity of early extracting deciduous teeth with AP in her child, as oppose to waiting for their natural loss, to avoid self-extraction of his teeth before root resorption without AP. Afterward, the upper left and right deciduous central incisors and lateral incisors were extracted on January 31 and March 7 in the next year, respectively, under the use of AP with amoxicillin. We repeatedly disinfected sockets and checked for the appropriate healing process for 2 weeks after extractions. Although the rest of the deciduous teeth were extracted in the same way before their natural loss, no aberrant symptoms were observed during the course of that treatment.