A 67-year-old woman presented with severe paroxysmal cramp-like pain on the right side, including the head and both upper and lower extremities. The pain started 5 years ago, and there was no obvious cues that preceded or elicited the episodes. The pain was initially mild and occasional, but gradually intensified to an unbearable degree with an average of 10–15 daily episodes, each lasting for 5–10 mins. The pain had profound impact on daily life: the patient was practically confined to a wheelchair due to muscle stiffness. She was profoundly anxious and depressive, and attempted a few unsuccessful suicides.
The patient had a “hemorrhagic stroke” 10 years ago that resulted in hemiplegia on the right side. Both the right arm and legs were completely paralyzed, but voluntary movements gradually recovered. She was able to walk alone slowly using a cane and manage an independent life. Five years after the stroke, cramp-like pain emerged. Despite of treatments with NSAIDs, tramadol, duloxetine and gabapentin, the pain gradually increased in intensity and episode frequency. Motor cortical stimulation and deep brain stimulation were offered but refused.
Upon assessment using a 10-point visual analogue scale, the pain intensity was 7–10. The Barthel activity of daily living score was 40 (the 100 maximum indicates full functioning) . Hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS) was 12 for anxiety and 14 for depression. The patient reported stiffness throughout the right side of the body, and heavy sweating and on the right side of the face. Thermosensation in the right arm and leg, particularly to cold stimuli, was impaired. Muscle tone was significantly increased, with intact but diminished deep tendon reflex. Cranial CT and MRI were consistent with lesions to the left dorsal thalamus and medial temporal lobe . Extensive hemosiderosis was apparent, indicating hemorrhagic stroke. She had hypertension for 10 years, but blood pressure was well controlled.
Stellate ganglion block was performed, as described previously. Briefly, 2-mL 2% lidocaine was injected between the internal carotid artery and the longus colli at the C7 level under ultrasound guidance ., The block was repeated once every day, and the pain subsided rapidly in both intensity and frequency along with the advancement of daily treatment. On the seventh day after treatment initiation, the patient no longer had pain episode. Thermosensation normalized, and she was able to walk for 200 m on her own. A physical workup showed reduced muscle tension and normalized deep tension reflex. Stiffness persisted, but at a reduced degree that could be readily managed with gabapentin at small doses. At the last follow-up 9 months later, the patient was free from pain and only took gabapentin on-demand occasionally. A repeat cranial CT was unremarkable. ADL score increased to 80. HADS score was 6 for anxiety and 8 for depression.