A 78-year-old Caucasian man, with a history of coronary artery disease, presented with symptoms of acute congestive heart failure (CHF) including dyspnea at rest, orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
The patient had a history of a transurethral prostatectomy (TURP) one month before admission. A week after the TURP, he developed a fever of 38.5°C that was considered a manifestation of a post-operative urinary tract infection and was treated empirically with oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily. The fever did not respond and treatment changed to oral amoxicillin/clavulanic 1 g twice daily and intramuscular netilmicin, 300 mg once daily. The fever resolved and no other clinical manifestations developed until the day of admission to our hospital. Regarding his past medical history, he was a non-smoker, he had no known allergies and he did not mention any recent travels.
On admission, he was afebrile. His blood pressure was 120/55 mmHg, his heart rate 105/minute and his SaO2 was 92% on ambient air. The remaining physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds at both lung bases and inspiratory crackles at the lower pulmonary fields bilaterally, a 4/6 diastolic heart murmur at the lower left parasternal area and a 4/6 systolic heart murmur at the right upper parasternal area. Laboratory studies revealed a leukocyte count 8350/μL, hematocrit 36.8%, platelet count 270,000/μL and C-reactive protein (CRP) 1.0 mg/dL (normal range <0.5 mg/dL). A chest radiogram showed bilateral perihilar alveolar edema with a "butterfly" appearance and bilateral pleural effusions . A transesophageal, two-dimensional Doppler echocardiogram showed a tricuspid aortic valve with a mobile vegetation of 9 mm in length on the right cusp and the presence of severe aortic valve regurgitation with possible perforation of the left cusp. Moderate mitral valve regurgitation was present as well, whereas the ejection fraction was 55%.
Following emergent treatment of CHF, all symptoms and physical signs were completely resolved. Additionally, a new chest radiogram showed significant improvement of the aforementioned radiographic findings . Six sets of blood cultures from three separate body sites, drawn over 24 hours, were negative for a common bacterial pathogen. Considering the patient's previous history of TURP, and the previous admission of an antimicrobial regimen, empirical treatment for IE due to possible resistant enterococci was initiated including ampicillin 12 g daily, gentamicin 80 mg thrice daily and daptomycin (8 mg/kg) once daily. The patient responded positively to the empirical treatment until day 10, when he developed a new onset fever up to 38.5°C, accompanied by chills and diaphoresis. Physical examination revealed new onset crackles, predominantly at the left upper and medial pulmonary fields. The patient also showed significant hypoxemia with arterial blood gases analyses revealing a pH of 7.44, an oxygen saturation of 88%, a partial pressure of oxygen of 58 mmHg and a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 38 mmHg, while breathing on ambient air. Laboratory studies revealed a leukocyte count of 9970/μL, with 78.3% neutrophils and 2.3% eosinophils. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 79 mm/h and CRP was 16.1 mg/dL. A chest x-ray was immediately performed demonstrating bilateral non-cavitating, reticulo-nodular infiltrates. All blood cultures were negative. The patient was treated with supplemental oxygen to maintain an oxygen saturation >92% and an additional empirical antimicrobial regimen for suspected health care acquired pneumonia (HCAP) was initiated (intravenous moxifloxacin 400 mg once daily and meropenem 3 g thrice daily). Inhaled corticosteroids and bronchodilators were also administrated. The high resolution chest computed tomography (chest HRCT) disclosed patchy areas of consolidation with ground-glass peripheral opacities and bilateral pleural effusions . Urine examination for S. pneumoniae and Legionella antigen was negative. Serology for Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Bartonella spp, Coxiella burnetii, Brucella and Cytomegalovirus was negative. The serological screening was negative for auto-immune markers (anti-nuclear antibodies, cytoplasmic and perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and anti- double-stranded DNA antibodies) as well. Despite the treatment, there was no clinical improvement. A thoracocentesis with a collection of pleuritic fluid for analysis was performed and the latter revealed a transudate with 6700 nucleated cells (70% lymphocytes, 15% eosinophils, 15% neutrophils). In addition, cultures for acid fast-bacilli and adenosine deaminase activity test of the pleuritic fluid were negative. To further investigate the nature of the aforementioned clinical syndrome a bronchoscopy with BAL was carried out, which disclosed 480 nucleated cells/μL (55% macrophages, 27.5% eosinophils, 12.2% neutrophils and 5.3% lymphocytes). Additional cultures for acid fast-bacilli, fungal and parasitic infections were also negative. Given the above findings the diagnosis of EP was made, daptomycin (as a probable cause of EP) was replaced by linezolid and moxifloxacin with meropenem were discontinued. Twenty-four hours after the daptomycin withdrawal the fever resolved completely. During the following seven days a significant improvement of the clinical and radiographic findings occurred, whereas CRP was within the normal range. One month later, a follow up chest-HRCT was normal . The Naranjo causality scale yielded a score of 7 suggesting a probable adverse reaction due to daptomycin .