A 61-year-old Japanese man who had a 1-month history of progressive dyspnea was referred to our hospital in April 2011. He had undergone a total thyroidectomy in 2001 for well-differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma that showed no evidence of anaplastic transformation. He had then been treated with radioactive iodine-131 (131I) until 2003 for multiple lung nodules that were diagnosed as metastases of thyroid carcinoma. A chest X-ray obtained upon his admission to our hospital revealed a massive left-sided pleural effusion . Multiple lung nodules had increased in size very slowly as visualized by computed tomography since 2003 . Serum thyroglobulin and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide were elevated (93.2ng/mL and 75.2pg/mL, respectively), whereas other tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9), sialyl Lewis X and neuron-specific enolase, were all negative. A transbronchial biopsy of one of the lung nodules in the left upper lobe was attempted, but the biopsy instrument could not be properly inserted to the target lesion. Examination of the left pleural effusion by thoracentesis revealed bloody exudate (total protein 4.6g/dL, albumin 2.8g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 191U/L) with an increase in thyroglobulin (198.9ng/mL). CEA, CA19-9 and adenosine deaminase were negative in the pleural fluid. The pleural fluid cytology was positive for adenocarcinoma . A cell block made from the effusion also showed evidence of adenocarcinoma, which included papillary cell clusters with peripherally located irregular nuclei and cord-like structures, and the tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) but negative for surfactant apoprotein A and thyroglobulin on immunohistochemistry. At that time, the origin of the malignant pleural effusion was considered not to be from papillary thyroid carcinoma but from primary lung adenocarcinoma, because of the pathological findings of the malignant pleural effusion and the appearance of a massive pleural effusion despite the very slow progressive nature of the lung nodules. The patient could not undergo any systemic chemotherapy, because his general condition worsened due to pneumonia and hemoptysis, and he died in October 2011.
During the autopsy, multiple nodules were found in both lungs, and some of the tumors in the left lung directly invaded the pericardium and the pleura. Furthermore, metastatic lesions were found in the peritoneum, liver, pancreas, spleen, both adrenal glands, para-aortic lymph nodes and bone marrow. The histologic examination revealed that the lung nodules in both lungs partly contained typical papillary thyroid carcinoma morphology with a papillary pattern, ground-glass nuclei and nuclear inclusions. However, the largest part of the tumors showed a pleomorphic and undifferentiated component, without follicular structures, that was negative for thyroglobulin. These two different histological areas showed transitional zones between them . The differentiated tumor cells consisted of thyroglobulin-positive and thyroglobulin-negative components , and the undifferentiated tumor cells were negative for thyroglobulin . TTF-1 was partially positive in both differentiated and undifferentiated areas , which was compatible with the pleural effusion specimens. Taken together, these findings suggested anaplastic transformation of papillary thyroid carcinoma in multiple lung metastases.