A 16-year old boy presented to the pediatric emergency department with a 1 week history of rhinitis and general malaise and reduced appetite, and mild watery diarrhea with abdominal pain for the last 4 days. On the day of admission he had developed fever, vomited once, and complained of bilateral lower limb pain. His father was also ill with fever and diarrhea. Both had been at a camping site in Germany 1 week previously. A third person (grandfather) did not fall ill.
The boy is generally in good health. He is known to have alpha thalassemia (heterozygote) and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD). He suffered from malaria in May 2006 and August 2014 after vacations in Kenya, his country of origin. Currently, he did not take any regular medication. There was no significant travel history in the preceding 6 months.
On presentation he was unwell, core body temperature measured 39 °C. His heart rate was 111/beats per min, his blood pressure was 124/63 mmHg. He was tender in his right and left iliac fossae with rebound tenderness noted on the right. The remaining physical examination was unremarkable apart from bilateral tender thighs.
Peripheral blood white cell count (WCC) was 8.65 × 109/l, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 34 mg/l (<10 mg/l) and Procalcitonin level was 0.929 ng/ml, (<0.1 ng/ml). Liver and renal parameters were unremarkable. Creatinine kinase was 272 U/l (<270 U/l). Blood cultures were taken and he was admitted to the ward for intravenous rehydration with a presumed diagnosis of viral gastroenteritis. One day after admission, he remained unwell with high fever and crampy abdominal pain. Appendicitis was considered but this was ruled out following surgical assessment. A second set of blood cultures was taken. His CRP increased to 175 mg/l and WCC decreased (min. 3.08 × 109/l). On day 3 of admission, the second set of blood cultures yielded Gram-positive rods. A rapid identification using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry directly from the positive blood culture vials revealed Listeria monocytogenes (time to positivity 20 h and 36 min.; see microbiology results below for details). Further diagnostic tests (stool cultures for Shigella, Salmonella and Campylobacter and PCR for Adeno- and Rotavirus) were all negative. Due to the MALDI-TOF results, treatment with Amoxicillin i.v (25 mg/kg qid) and Amikacin (15 mg/kg qd) was initiated and the patient recovered rapidly within three days without any sequelae. Amoxicillin i.v. was continued for a total of 10 days and Amikacin was discontinued after 5 days.