A 64-year-old woman with a history of Stage IV diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), activated B-cell (non-germinal center) subtype diagnosed 1 year prior. She received six cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone chemo-immunotherapy, achieving a complete response. Three months later, the patient had recurrence of disease after follow-up positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging showed an interval increase in the size of a right retroperitoneal lymph node as well as a new osseous lesion in the left iliac bone. The patient received 2 cycles of salvage chemo-immunotherapy with second-line rituximab, gemcitabine, carboplatin, and dexamethasone complicated by delirium with cycle 1. Restaging PET/CT, however, demonstrated interval increase in the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the osseous lesion, from 3.7 to 7.6. The lesion was later confirmed to be an atypical CD20+ lymphoid infiltrate on biopsy with unremarkable cytogenetics (46, XX).
Given the relapsed/refractory nature of her DLBCL, the patient presented to our academic center for evaluation of CAR T-cell therapy with commercial axi-cel. She had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 1 and required a walker for ambulation support. Baseline PET/CT redemonstrated a left iliac lesion with an SUVmax of 5.45 as well as a new large retroperitoneal mass involving the great vessels located at the level of the kidneys measuring 6.4 cm × 5.4 cm with an SUVmax of 37. Bridging therapy with a 4-day course of high-dose dexamethasone was completed following apheresis 2 weeks prior to infusion. After undergoing a 3-day course of lymphodepleting chemotherapy with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide, she received axi-cel at a dose of 2 × 106 cells/kg on day 0. The patient received prophylactic corticosteroids, dexamethasone 10 mg PO daily, on day 0, +1, and +2. Ferritin was noted to be elevated at 1,381 ng/mL prior to infusion on day −1. C-reactive peptide (CRP) was elevated at 17.2 mg/L. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was also high at 240 U/L. On day +2 post-infusion, the patient developed grade 2 CRS characterized by low-grade fever and hypotension. She was noted to have grade 1 ICANS with an immune effector cell-associated encephalopathy (ICE) score of 9, characterized by mild confusion on exam with errors on a neurocognitive functional screening assessment. The patient subsequently received 400 mg tocilizumab and 10 mg dexamethasone per institutional protocol. As she was neutropenic and febrile, prophylactic cefepime and fluconazole were started. CRP was noted to be uptrending to 169.4 mg/L. Day +4 was complicated by overnight fevers with a maximum temperature of 102.7 Fahrenheit (F) and mild hypotension consistent with grade 2 CRS. Later that afternoon, she began speaking word salad and was noted to have ICANS 2/ICE 5. She received 400 mg tocilizumab and 1 g methylprednisolone per protocol prior to being transferred to the medical intensive care unit where she underwent neurological workup and stroke evaluation. CT head and magnetic resonance brain revealed no intracranial abnormalities or findings suggesting the presence of ICANS or metastatic disease. Electroencephalogram demonstrated abnormal background slowing consistently with mild encephalopathy without seizure activity. Seizure prophylaxis with levetiracetam 750 mg twice daily starting day 0 was continued. Lumbar puncture fluid analysis showed xanthochromia, and gram stain demonstrated no evidence of organisms or white blood cells. LDH and ferritin were uptrending to 350 U/L and 3,870 ng/L, respectively. Interleukin (IL) panel, measured in pg/mL, was notable for elevated levels of the following: IL-2R at 6.8, IL-5 at 218.8, IL-6 at 2,008.3, IL-8 at 8, IL-10 at 155.4, and IL-13 at 22.1. Interferon-gamma was also elevated at 261.2 pg/mL. On day +5, the patient displayed expressive aphasia and was unable to swallow medications, requiring Dobhoff tube placement. At that time, ICANS grade was 3 and ICE score 0. On day +6, while CRS resolved, grade 3 ICANS remained unresponsive to initial steroid treatment, prompting an increase in methylprednisolone dosing to 1 g twice daily. The patient became progressively more alert over the next 4 days; however, she continued to experience ICANS grade 3 with ICE score of 0, as she was unable to speak or follow commands. During this time period, ferritin and LDH were noted to be downtrending from peak levels but remained persistently elevated above reference range.
On day +11, the severity of neurological symptoms grew acutely worse; the patient had no purposeful movements and was completely mute, consistent with grade 4 ICANS. Neurological decompensation was preceded by grade 2 CRS in the setting of tachycardia, tachypnea, and development of a fever; she received a third dose of 400 mg tocilizumab. Ferritin and LDH had increased to levels comparable to those observed at the onset of neurotoxicity. ICANS was downgraded to grade 2 on day +13, characterized by a significant improvement in neurological symptoms with the patient becoming more interactive and responsive to commands. Methylprednisolone tapering from 1,000 mg twice daily back to 1,000 mg daily was begun given improved neurological function. She transitioned out of the intensive care unit to the general medicine floor on day +14, where she continued to regain neurological function over the next 4 days with ICE scores ranging from 4 to 7, corresponding to grade 2 ICANS.
On day +17, approximately 2 weeks after the initial onset of severe neurotoxicity, the patient again developed grade 3 ICANS and was unable to respond to commands. CRS was grade 0 at the onset of the exacerbation. LDH levels were again noted to be uptrending to levels previously observed during prior ICANS exacerbations; however, ferritin levels remained stable and CRP was within normal limits. Methylprednisolone dosing was subsequently increased back to 1 g twice daily. Neurological function slowly improved over the next 8 days, prompting the reduction of methylprednisolone dosing back to 1,000 mg daily on day +21 and initiation of steroid tapering on day +25. Neurological symptoms resolved with ICANS 0/ICE 10 on day +40, and the patient was tapered off steroids on day +41, 39 days after the initial development of fever and neurotoxicity.
Hospital admission was further complicated by the identification of pulmonary nodules on CT chest, later found to be fungal pneumonia following bronchoscopy, and subsequently treated with amphotericin B. Transbronchial biopsy found no evidence of lymphoma involvement. She also developed and required treatment for aspiration pneumonia, CMV viremia, pseudomonal urinary tract infection, and hypogammaglobulinemia. She was discharged on day +87 to a rehabilitation facility given severe deconditioning associated with her treatment complications and duration of stay. Restaging PET/CT 4 months after infusion demonstrated good disease response without evidence of recurrence. Subsequent restaging PET/CT performed 10 months after infusion, however, identified a soft tissue osseous lesion concerning for progression of disease that was later confirmed as relapsed lymphoma on biopsy. Given that the patient experienced recurrent infections requiring hospitalization, she was transitioned to supportive care and passed away shortly thereafter.