A 44-year-old woman presented to the Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery of our hospital complaining of upper epigastric pain.
Patient’s symptoms started 2 months ago, usually between meals. Acid burps or acid belching can occasionally occur. Antacids usually resolve her symptoms. Gastroscopy and biopsy were performed 10 days ago, and gastroscopy revealed a stage A1 gastric ulcer with bleeding. In addition, biopsy showed abnormal cell proliferation and infiltration between the inherent glands of the gastric mucosa, which indicated a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . A contrast-enhanced abdomen CT scan showed local thickening of the gastric wall along the greater curvature of the gastric body, enlarged small lymph nodes around the stomach, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes enlarged in the mesentery.
The patient underwent laparoscopic radical gastrectomy (total gastrectomy Roux-en-Y anastomotic regional lymph node dissection) + jejunostomy + cholecystectomy + splenic hilar lymph node dissection. Side-to-side anastomosis between the oesophagus and jejunum was performed. She developed a persistent fever after surgery, which meant she started having a fever on t postoperative day 1 and was unable to reduce it to a normal temperature on her own.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient had no personal or family history related to gastric cancer and anastomotic fistula.
Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the upper abdomen without rebound pain. She developed a persistent fever after surgery, which cannot be completely cured by physical cooling and the use of antibiotics .
A severe leukocytosis 25.69 × 109/L appeared on postoperative day 1, with predominant neutrophils (90.20%), which indicated a possible bacterial infection. A similar situation persisted until postoperative day 4, which was the third day after Cefoperazone Sodium and Sulbactam Sodium was given to the patient. Since then, blood analysis has consistently revealed a mild leukocytosis. Ciprofloxacin was applied on postoperative day 15, after which the infection indicators dropped to normal.
On postoperative day 4, CT showed dilatation of the esophagus, duodenum, and jejunum with effusion. A small amount of ascites was found around the spleen, and pleural effusion was observed. On postoperative day 6, after the patient received oral methylthioninium chloride, there was no blue fluid draining from the tube. The CT and oral methylthioninium chloride results suggest that the anastomosis appears to be well closed . However, despite the use of various anti-inflammatory treatments over the following few days, the patient's symptoms were not relieved. Therefore, CT was performed again on the postoperative day 13, and showed that the anastomotic site at the lower end of the oesophagus was thickened and blurred, and the right parastinastinal cystoid air cavity was connected to the anastomotic site .
Gastrografin swallow on postoperative day 13 was used to confirm the diagnosis of anastomotic fistula .
Sputum culture was performed on postoperative day 9. The Ralstonia mannitolilytica infection was reported on postoperative day 14, which was sensitive for Ciprofloxacin.