A previously healthy 19-year-old man presented with a 6-week history of word-finding difficulty and a 3-week history of headaches, nausea, and vomiting, but he was otherwise neurologically intact. Diagnostic T1-weighted imaging with contrast revealed a heterogeneously enhancing lesion in the left frontal lobe with significant mass effect and surrounding vasogenic edema, initially concerning for an astrocytoma or oligodendroglioma . Given the concerns for possible language center and supplemental motor strip involvement, a functional MRI (fMRI) that included diffusion tensor tractography was performed. An awake craniotomy was not performed, as sufficient distance between the language activation center and the tumor edge was noted on preoperative fMRI. Informed consent was obtained for participation in an Institutional Review Board-approved protocol investigating the use of preoperative as well as perfusion iMRI in diagnosis and treatment.
MR perfusion was performed in addition to standard preoperative and intraoperative imaging sequences, including T1-, T2-, and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), fluid-attenuated inverse resonance imaging (FLAIR), gradient and spin echo imaging (GSE), and contrast-enhanced imaging as described earlier. Images were acquired on a Siemens TIM Trio 3T (Siemens, Washington DC) or IMRIS 3T (IMRIS, Minnetonka, MN) scanner. MR perfusion images (TR 3.07, TE 1.01, 2-mm slices, 256-mm field of view, 75% field of view phase) were analyzed using Olea Sphere (Olea Medical Solution, ). An abnormal ring-enhancing pattern on MR perfusion was identified along with high peripheral CBV and CBF values, suggestive of a high-grade lesion.
The patient underwent a stereotactic left frontal craniotomy and tumor resection with neuromonitoring and iMRI. Conventional intraoperative studies (T1 with and without contrast, T2, FLAIR, DWI/ADC, stereotactic T1) demonstrated gross total resection ; however, a 1-cm2 hyperperfused area of tissue in the posterior aspect of the resection margin was identified. Although the findings on conventional iMRI were suggestive of residual tumor, perfusion iMRI solidified our concern for residual tumor. Several areas that demonstrated increased perfusion (CBV, CBF) of the ring-enhanced lateral, posterior, and deep margins of the resection cavity on preoperative MR perfusion imaging were biopsied intraoperatively. Initial intraoperative pathological analysis and all post-iMRI resections were determined to be a high-grade tumor. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, with a return to baseline mild word-finding difficulty, and the patient was discharged home.
The final pathological results of the original tumor and biopsy of lateral, posterior, and deep resection cavity margins were consistent with RELA-fusion positive anaplastic ependymoma . Areas that had biopsies taken after iMRI were also positive for tumor. Two distinct areas of tumor were identified—solid and papillary components. The solid component more closely correlated with hyperperfusion biopsy sites on perfusion iMRI. Immunohistochemistry revealed the tumor to be positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), epithelial membrane antigen, and synaptophysin; the tumor was negative for pancytokeratins AE1/AE3 and isocitrate dehydrogenase I (IDH-1). The MIB index was as high as 60% within solid portions of the tumor. There was no BRAF-V600E mutation detected by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequencing assay. Given the high-risk features noted on histopathologic examination (i.e., high MIB-I and tumor predominantly composed of sheets of poorly differentiated cells), the patient was referred for adjuvant chemoradiation therapy. A RELA-fusion was detected on subsequent PCR analysis.