A 53-yr-old male with T3N2M1 non-small cell left upper lobe lung cancer with bilateral brain metastases diagnosed one-month prior was referred for management of dyspnea and hemoptysis. The patient had noted a dramatic increase in dyspnea over the prior 3 days. Past medical history was unremarkable and he had a negative smoking history.
Physical exam revealed reduced breath sounds in the left lower zone. Chest x-ray demonstrated a left hilar mass with loss of volume and post obstructive pneumonia in the left lower lobe . Axial Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest also revealed multiple segmental and subsegmental pulmonary emboli and the patient was admitted for anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin). The CT study also confirmed total occlusion of the left mainstem bronchus by a tumor invading from the left hilum .
After two days of anticoagulation, rigid bronchoscopy was performed using an Efer-Dumon rigid bronchoscope. Normal vocal cords, trachea, carina and right bronchial tree were confirmed. A large endobronchial lesion with complete occlusion of the left mainstem bronchus was identified . After an unsuccessful attempt to pass the lesion using a pediatric video bronchoscope, debulking was attempted using a combination of polypectomy snare and electrocautery. There was still 100% obstruction of the airway from the residual tumor and therefore the ERBE argon plasma electrocoagulator® (APC) was utilized to devitalize the tissue. The devitalized tissue was then debulked using the Straightshot® microdebrider with rotating tip and the bevel of the rigid bronchoscope. The length of the microdebrider is 45 cm and outer diameter is 4 mm. The rotating tip is controlled by a fly-wheel on the hand-piece, which allows for better maneuverability and is angled at 12 degrees providing better visualization. The blade was serrated and an oscillator mode was used at 1000–1200 RPMs. In this manner the left main stem was recanalized and the channel was opened into the left lower lobe bronchus. Hemostasis was achieved using a combination of suction and APC with less than 20cc blood loss. Visual examination revealed that there was some degree of extrinsic compression in the left lower lobe bronchus as well; however, the superior segment bronchus and the basal segmental bronchi were noted to be patent. Post procedure residual obstruction in the left main stem bronchus was estimated at less than 20%. Since the left upper lobe had been completely replaced by tumor, a guidewire was then placed into the left lower lobe bronchus and a 4 cm × 14 mm covered nitinol self-expandable metal stent was placed over the guidewire under direct vision into the left lower lobe bronchus. The stent was deployed under direct vision and adjusted in terms of its position using rat-tooth forceps. At the end of optimal positioning, the distal aspect of the stent was noted to be just inside the left lower lobe basal segmental bronchus with the superior segment being ventilated through the uncovered portion of the stent. The proximal aspect of the stent was noted in the left main stem bronchus well above the proximal extent of the tumor . Follow-up chest x-ray revealed aeration of the left lower lobe with resolution of dyspnea and hemoptysis.