A 12-year-old adolescent boy was lost to follow-up after a cardiac surgery done at the age of 3 months. Intraoperative findings described the presence of a thick-walled ascending aorta, napkin ring-like coarctation at the distal ascending aorta, a small aortic arch, and distinct coarctation at ductal insertion. A large pulmonary homograft patch was used to augment ascending aorta, through the aortic arch, all the way to the descending aorta. It remained unclear whether the homograft was fixed with glutaraldehyde. Recently, the patient presented with complaints of mild fatigue and occasional headache. The family history was not significant. His blood pressure was 147/93 mmHg. Auscultation revealed a 3–6 ejection systolic murmur at the left sternal border. The electrocardiogram was consistent with left ventricular hypertrophy by voltage criteria in V5 and V6. Echocardiography revealed moderate left ventricular hypertrophy, a small secundum atrial septal defect, normal Doppler interrogations across all the valves, difficult visualization of the ascending aorta, and peak instantaneous pressure gradient of 49 mmHg across it. The aortic valve was normal. There were no Marfanoid features.
In view of increasing gradients across the aortic arch and the inability to visualize the aortic arch due to suboptimal images, the patient warranted further investigations. Initially, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed and showed irregular intra-luminal mass in the distal ascending aorta measuring approximately 38 × 24 mm, resulting in significant obstruction with blood flow turbulence. This mass was hypointense on SSFP images with a differential diagnosis of thrombus vs. calcification. Subsequently, a cardiac computerized tomography (CT) scan was performed to further delineate the extent of this mass. The CT scan including digital 3D reconstruction showed an intraluminal mass in the distal ascending aorta that is irregular in shape, attached to the anterior medial wall of the distal ascending aorta extending beyond the first branch from the arch, heavily calcified, and measuring 37 × 26 mm in size . There was a significant reduction in the ascending aorta lumen. Interestingly, the aortic arch, including branches and the descending aorta, was very tortuous . This tortuosity of great vessels raised suspicion of arterial tortuosity syndrome.
Due to the presence of severe aortic obstruction and calcification, the decision was made to perform urgent surgery. Interestingly, the serum calcium levels and renal profile were normal. However, due to the complexity, a 3D model of the arch and aorta printed. The 3D-printed model helped in the planning of the suitable placement of the cross clamp and selection of aortic cannulation site for safe surgical correction. The 3D digital virtual model was reconstructed from CT images. The 3D slicer software was used to segment the CT volume into a surface model and export it to a 3D STL model. The 3D model was then 3D printed using the Stratasys J750 Poly Jet 3D printer (Stratasys, Eden Prairie, MN, USA). Digital materials made of a mixture of TangoPlus (a soft rubber-like material) and VeroPureWhite (a rigid opaque material) were used to mimic the texture of the aorta and the calcification lesion, respectively. The FLX9740-DM with a shore-A value of 40 and FLX9750-DM with a shore-A value of 50 were used for the aorta and calcification, respectively (Shore value-hardness scale for materials 0-100, FLX-tensile and elongation strength of 3-D model). An example of the printed model is shown in Fig. c. To aid the surgery, a “digital resection” was planned, as shown in Fig. d.
During surgery, a re-do sternotomy was performed. There were extensive adhesions between the heart and the surrounding tissue in the lungs that were dissected successfully. The calcified ascending aorta was severely adhered to the upper part of the sternum. The innominate artery was cannulated for antegrade perfusion. In order to perfuse the distal aorta, we also had to cannulate the left femoral artery, and then both were connected to the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit under systemic heparinization. In fact, it is an example of an extra-anatomical bypass. The elongation, tortuosity, and clustering of great artery origins were evident on inspection. The superior vena cava and inferior vena cava were also cannulated. After establishing full cardiopulmonary bypass, the three areas were cross-camped. First, proximal to the diseased area on the ascending aorta distal to the cardioplegia delivery site. The second clamp was placed at the origin of great vessels (the bovine trunk), and the third clamp was placed distal to the calcified segment on the proximal descending aorta. Subsequently, the custodial cardioplegia was delivered through the aortic root. The placement of the aortic cross clamps was based on various factors, such as findings from inspection, palpation, and information obtained during 3-D modeling and CT angiography. The aim was to maintain perfusion of the head, neck, and lower body, avoid injury to the diseased area, obtain a bloodless field for surgery, and avoid embolism. The right atriotomy was then performed to close the atrial septal defect directly. The systemic hypothermia (20 °C) was achieved. We then excised the calcified segment that involved the distal ascending aorta under the surface of the arch and a little bit of the proximal descending thoracic aorta . All diseased areas, including thickened wall, were excised, and irrigation with normal saline was done to prevent any embolism. Finally, a woven double velour vascular graft (24 mm Hemashield Platinum, M/s Intervascular, France) was used to perform end-to-end anastomosis to replace the abnormal aortic segment . The de-airing was performed, and the patient could be weaned from the cardiopulmonary bypass, after rewarming. The tissue histopathology of excised segment confirmed calcification, necrosis and medial thickening with fibrotic changes.
The postoperative period was uneventful, and recovery was satisfactory. The patient was discharged home two weeks after surgery on antihypertensive medications. The echocardiography at discharge and 6-months later revealed a satisfactory repair with no residual lesions.