A 72-year-old female was admitted for left-sided weakness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain disclosed multifocal acute infarcts of right insular and peri-insular regions, right temporal cortex and ipsilateral postcentral gyrus, and right middle cerebral arterial supply. Vital signs were stable, and electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation without rapid ventricular response. The patient unmonitored at the time had undergone percutaneous mitral valvotomy for rheumatic mitral stenosis 7 years earlier at another institute. But, she has not been to the hospital since then and has not taken any medication, including anticoagulants.
Transthoracic echocardiography performed on admission showed normal left ventricular function, with negligible mitral regurgitation, mild mitral stenosis. It revealed a fixed, broad-based 1.5-cm mass with a smooth, rounded surface was identified at the junction of right atrium (RA) and inferior vena cava (IVC). This lesion was not mentioned in the previous examination. A low-density, well-defined ovoid mass was also visible by computed tomography (CT) scan. The radiographic interpretation consequently was solid mass of right atrium, arising from interatrial septum. High signal intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images, with little or no enhancement on cardiac MRI, suggested a benign cardiac tumor . Thrombus in the left atrial appendage was not observed in all tests including echocardiography, CT and MRI.
We decided to remove the right atrial mass, and performed median sternotomy. Under total circulatory arrest, RA was opened, focusing on the location pinpointed in images. The mass was soft, round, and grossly cystic. Once excised along with adjacent atrial septum, fresh thrombus was found inside what proved to be a septal aneurysm of left atrium (LA). In other words, the base of the mass bore a connection to LA and was filled with hemorrhagic clot .
Interatrial septal repair took place directly thereafter (cardiopulmonary bypass, 207 min; aortic cross-clamping, 28 min; total circulatory arrest, 15 min; rectal temperature, 20 °C). No additional procedures were warranted. The patient was discharged 12 days postoperatively, without complications, and the 2 years since have been uneventful. Final pathology review confirmed a cystic mural thrombus (2 × 1.5 × 1.3 cm), clinically simulating a mass of right atrium.