A ruptured drainage tube was removed from a patient after lumbar spine surgery using spinal endoscopy.
A 53-year-old male patient underwent open lumbar spine surgery to correct spondylolisthesis between the 5th lumbar and 1st sacral vertebral bodies. The Meyerding classification was degree I . The operation went smoothly. Prior to closure, two negative pressure ball drainage tubes were inserted with outlets on either side of the incision and intradermal suture was used to minimize scar formation. No post-operative infection was present in the incision. Post-operative X-ray reexamination was performed .
The chief surgeon planned to remove the drain without anesthesia but it resisted removal before rupturing. A color Doppler ultrasound examination failed to reveal the broken tube but a CT inspection confirmed its presence in the incision. An approximately 2 cm length was located beneath the fascia near the middle lower incision about 2 cm below the skin’s surface .
The patient was reluctant to agree to removal of the piece of tube if re-opening of the wound was involved and preferred a minimally invasive approach.
Therefore, spinal endoscopy was performed under local anesthesia. The procedure required an incision of less than 2 cm in length, below the original incision and did not necessitate detachment of the fascia layer and the suture. The 2 cm broken drainage tube with sutures running through the double wall could be visualized. It was broken up into small pieces for gradual removal until no residual drainage debris could be visualized . Two stitches were used to suture the incision.
The broken drainage tube was fully removed without increasing the length of the original incision or removing the original sutures. Stitches were removed on 12th day after surgery. No infection or abnormal discomfort developed and the incision healed in two weeks. At 3 months postoperative follow-up, the incision had healed well. X-ray imaging showed a satisfactory location of the internal fixation device and fusion of the 5th lumbar and the 1st sacral vertebral bodies .