A healthy 30-year-old gravida 1, para 1 woman was diagnosed with PMD at 15 weeks of gestation with prenatal fetal ultrasound (US); her pregnancy was otherwise uneventful. At 32 weeks and 5 days of gestation, emergency cesarean section was performed for impending placental abruption. A baby girl was born with a birth weight of 1450 g and Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The delivered placenta was enlarged (23.6 × 23.5 × 6.5 cm) and heavy (1209 g), and the maternal surface had multiple cystic villi . Microscopically, the placenta included hydropic stem villi containing dilated vessels surrounded by loose mesenchymal tissue that were admixed with normal villi . Trophoblast proliferation was not observed. These findings are consistent with those of PMD. A hemangioma-like aggregation of abnormal blood vessels was observed . The baby girl was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit because of transient tachypnea and very low birth weight. Abdominal US showed that she had multiple 2-cm-sized cystic tumors in both the right and left lobes of the liver (no obvious solid tumors were identified). The infant had no external malformations. She was discharged at 50 days of age, without any complications.
At 2 months of age, she was referred to our institution for evaluation and management of liver tumors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed coexisting multifocal cystic and solid components in both hepatic lobes . The cystic components, 2–4 cm in diameter, showed high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and low signal intensity on T1-weighted images. The solid components, sized several millimeters to 1 cm in diameter, had high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, and even lower signal intensity than cystic lesions on T1-weighted images. Since the lesions were considered benign tumors, such as HMH and IHH, she underwent a regular follow-up as an outpatient. At 9 months, she was hospitalized for progressive abdominal distention and poor oral intake. AFP was slightly elevated for her age (350.9 ng/ml). MRI showed marked enlargement of both cystic and solid components of the liver tumors, which now occupied the abdominal cavity . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed early peripheral enhancement with delayed progression to the center of the solid components. These findings further supported the previous suspicions that the cystic and solid components were HMH and IHH, respectively.
The largest cyst was punctured percutaneously and aspirated to relieve abdominal distention, and oral propranolol (2 mg/kg/day) was started to promote regression of the hemangioma component. Her clinical condition temporarily improved and the volume of some hemangioma components was reduced, however; the propranolol effect was limited, and the cystic lesion returned to its original size. Laparotomy was performed at age 10 months. During the procedure, the two largest cystic tumors, located in the right and left hepatic lobes, respectively, were excised along with their adjacent small solid tumors. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and propranolol treatment was continued until 1 year of age. At the age of 4 years, the patient was doing well, and follow-up MRI showed no HMH regrowth and a trend to decreasing IHH volume.
The left lobe cyst measured 115 × 105 × 70 mm, and the right lobe cyst was 100 × 62 × 48 mm. On the cut section, both lesions contained spongy, white, and solid components with multicystic spaces that were incompletely separated by loose, fibrous septa and filled with mucinous material . Microscopically, the spongy white tissue showed a loose mesenchymal component with myxoid material, scattered fibroblasts, and no overt atypical epithelial elements of heterologous differentiation . These findings are suggestive of HMH. In addition, brownish nodular lesions were observed in the non-cystic area of the left lobe. These showed proliferation of capillaries and small vessels, the lining cells of which were positive for CD34 and GLUT-1 . These findings are consistent with IHH. The boundary between the HMH and IHH was ambiguous . Methylation analysis with pyrosequencing using genomic DNA from HMH, IHH, and normal liver tissue revealed a normal methylation status in nine differentially methylated regions (H19, PEG1, PEG10, Kv, IG, MEG3, SNRPN, ZAC1, GNAS A/B), which are involved in the development of known imprinting disorders; therefore androgenetic/biparental mosaicism (ABM) is not involved in these tumors and the normal liver tissue .