In 2008, a 59-year-old female suffered a non-traumatic retroperitoneal haematoma. She was not on exogenous anticoagulation at the time and no aetiology of bleeding was discovered. She subsequently developed a left iliofemoral deep venous thrombosis (DVT). It was believed that the intra-abdominal haematoma resulted in compression of the left iliac vein but this was never definitely proven as outside hospital records were not able to be obtained. There was no evidence of May-Thurner syndrome on previous imaging per hospital records. A Bard G2 retrievable IVC filter (formerly C. R. Bard, Inc.) was placed while hypercoagulable work-up was ongoing, which ultimately was unrevealing. Adequate follow-up for potential removal did not occur. In 2020, the patient presented for routine medical evaluation with her primary care physician who advised computed tomography (CT) calcium score imaging as part of cardiovascular risk assessment. She denied any cardiovascular symptoms and was tolerating activities of daily living without complication. Cardiopulmonary examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm without evidence of underlying hypertrophy, conduction disease, or ischaemia. Family history was without premature coronary artery disease, and there was no history of sudden cardiac death endorsed. Her cholesterol panel revealed a low-density lipoprotein of 103 mg/dL and a total cholesterol of 184 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) calcium score imaging as part of cardiovascular risk assessment was obtained by her primary care physician to determine if statin medication would be indicated for primary prevention. A linear hyperdensity in the right ventricle (RV) was incidentally revealed on the CT scan, concerning for embolization of an IVC filter fragment. The patient was asymptomatic. A follow-up contrast enhanced, ECG-gated cardiac CTA was performed in conjunction with a CT, venous phase, of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Arterial phase contrast was triggered by bolus tracking with a 200 Hounsfield unit threshold in the ascending aorta. A metallic linear density in the RV papillary muscle, new in comparison to a 2014 CT abdomen/pelvis for renal lithiasis evaluation, was demonstrated (see ). The patient was also found to have a metallic linear density in the anteromedial right middle lobe. CT images were reconstructed using syngo.via (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) and vitrea workstation (version: 6.6.3; Vital, Toshiba Medical Systems) to further characterize the fragment within the myocardium . 3D volume rendered imaging allowed visualization of the intracardiac embolized strut, the pulmonary strut, and the fracture IVC filter all in the same image . In review of prior imaging, 12 struts of the IVC filter were visible on a virtual colonoscopy in 2009. Subsequent images obtained in 2014 and 2020 revealed 11 and 10 struts, respectively (see ), evidence for two distinct strut fracture embolization events. There was no thrombus adherent to the fractured IVC filter in the IVC. Echocardiography was performed and demonstrated preserved ejection fraction, no pericardial effusion, and normal tricuspid valvular function and pulmonary pressure, but the IVC fragment in the RV papillary muscle from cardiac CT was not directly visualized by echocardiography due to being thin, small metal. Heart team consultation discussed the risks and benefits with the patient and family of removing part or all of the filter due to risk of continued embolization and thrombus vs. no intervention. After shared decision making, the patient consented to remove the filter but leave the embolized RV and lung fragment in place, given the apparent chronicity of the RV and lung embolization per review of prior imaging. The most significant risk was deemed a recurrent embolization or thrombus formation in the suprarenal IVC, heart, or pulmonary arterial circulation.
The procedure was performed in the hybrid operating suite under general anaesthesia. The pararenal IVC was accessed from the right internal jugular vein in standard fashion. A flush venogram was performed to demonstrate patency of the IVC and the absence of thrombus within the filter. The access was then upsized to a 45 cm × 16 Fr Cook Check-Flo Performer introducer sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN), which was positioned several cm cranial to the hook of the filter. The hook was engaged by a Cook wire loop snare, and the sheath was advanced over the filter. The entire system was then removed and the access site controlled with a single suture. Intraoperative inspection of the filter demonstrated intact removal of the residual 10 struts (see ). The patient tolerated the procedure with no immediate complication and was discharged home following a brief period of recovery.