The patient in this case was informed regarding the study and written consent was obtained for the publication of this case report.
A 64-year-old woman presented with intractable left anterior chest pain. Two years prior to the consultation, transforaminal interbody fusion and posterior spinal fusion at L5-S1 had been performed. Pain developed 4 months prior, while playing golf, characterized as a sudden stabbing type of pain; it persisted and worsened even with small movements of the arm. The intensity of pain was rated as 7–10/10 on the numerical rating scale (NRS). At that time, she consulted a private orthopedic surgeon and underwent radiological examination, which revealed no significant findings. She was administered trigger point injections and intercostal nerve blocks, which did not improve the pain. The patient was referred to a tertiary general hospital for further evaluation, as the pain persisted.
Two months earlier, she had consulted a thoracic surgeon, cardiologist, pulmonologist, and gastroenterologist. The patient underwent various examinations, such as cardiac enzyme level determination, EKG, echocardiography, coronary angiography, simple radiologic studies of the chest and bony thorax, lung high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and bone scan; however, there were no significant findings .
The patient had difficulties and severe limitations in her daily life activities due to continuous and intractable pain; thus, she was transferred to our pain clinic for further evaluation and management. Physical examination revealed two painful areas on the left anterior chest (T3, T5), which were non-tender and there was no redness or swelling that indicated an infection. The pain was aggravated by flexion and extension, but there was no increased intensity or relief associated with change in position and respiration. On US examination, a linear transducer (4–18 MHz, eL18-4 Linear Probe, EPIQ 5, Philips, USA) was placed over the two painful areas, and a small pleural effusion was found .
The US probe was placed transversely on the areas in which the patient felt the pain. After confirming focal pleural effusion, a 23-gauge 5 cm needle was inserted using the in-plane technique from the lateral to the medial side of the left anterior chest at a point approximately 1 cm from the probe. US-guided intralesional injection at the left T3 and T5 anterior chest was administered. A mixture of 0.75% ropivacaine hydrochloride (5.5 ml), triamcinolone acetonide (20 mg), and hyaluronidase (1,500 IU), total 6 mL was injected . Pain was reduced from 8–9/10 to 0/10 based on NRS immediately after injection, and no pain was reported for approximately 1 week on telephone follow-up. Naproxen (1,000 mg/D) was prescribed to control pain and inflammation.
At the one-month follow-up, the pain was found to have reduced from 7/10 to 1–2/10 based on the NRS. An US-guided intralesional injection at the left T3 and T5 anterior chest was re-administered per the patient’s request. Two months after the first dose of intralesional injections, the patient was pain-free and had no impairment in daily life activities; thus, further follow-up was advised only if pain recurred.