An 82-year-old female patient with a history of hypertension visited a local hospital after experiencing chest pains at rest during the night. As a result of suspected angina, coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography was performed, revealing an intact coronary artery; however, an apical aneurysm of the left ventricle was detected . Transthoracic echocardiography showed dyskinetic wall motion consistent with the left ventricle aneurysm. Based on the CT findings and clinical history of the patient, a vasospastic angina was suspected. The patient was started on a calcium-channel blocker, which relieved the symptoms effectively. The left ventricle apical aneurysm was caused by a previous myocardial infarction due to vasospastic angina. Therefore, we planned to conduct a surgical intervention for the aneurysm via MICS procedure.
The patient was placed in a supine position with both arms raised . General anesthesia was induced by a standard technique with a double-lumen tube for unilateral ventilation. Peripheral extracorporeal circulation was established via the right femoral artery and vein. An aortic root vent cannula and aortic clamp were inserted via the right 3rd intercostal space after creating a small incision. The aneurysm was exposed via a small incision of the left 6th intercostal space. When the left ventricle was filled with blood, an area of dyskinetic movement was detected, which was confirmed as an aneurysm on epicardial echocardiography. There was no adhesion or scarring from the old myocardial infarction. The aneurysm was 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm in size. Cardiac arrest was achieved by administrating antegrade cardioplegia, and the aneurysm was resected. The left ventricle wall was closed using felt-pledgetted 3–0 polypropylene mattress suture . Operation time was 184 min.
The postoperative course was uneventful without any complications, and she was discharged after 14 days. Postoperative CT images revealed successful resection of the left ventricle aneurysm (LVA) . Pathological examination demonstrated that the cardiac muscle had little fibrotic and hypertrophic changes, and there was no evidence of secondary cardiomyopathy and cardiac infarction. Finally, the aneurysm was diagnosed as an idiopathic LVA.