A 35-year-old woman with gravidity 2 and parity 1 was referred to our hospital at 21 weeks of gestation because of Fontan circulation. This was a suspected PAS case with a low-lying placenta that overrode the previous cesarean uterine scar. The patient underwent Blalock-Taussig shunt surgery at 0 and 2 years of age because of a single right ventricle and pulmonary atresia. She also underwent Fontan palliation at age 7 . Her previous cesarean delivery under general anesthesia for preterm labor with breech positioning at 28 weeks of gestation was complicated by post-operative pulmonary edema requiring a prolonged hospital stay. After her first pregnancy, she maintained a baseline of New York Heart Association Functional Classification I. Echocardiography findings remained stable, with almost normal right ventricle contractility and mild atrioventricular valve regurgitation. Her hemoglobin and brain natriuretic peptide levels (BNP) were 15 − 16 g/dl and 20 − 35 pg/ml, respectively.
Her height and weight at presentation were 154 cm and 49 kg, respectively. Her blood pressure, heart rate, and percutaneous arterial oxygen saturation were 89/56 mmHg, 60 beats/min, and 91% (room air), respectively. She was on carvedilol 1.25 mg/day and not on thromboprophylaxis due to a history of subchorionic hematoma. Echocardiography showed a right ventricular fractional area change of 38% and mild aortic and atrioventricular regurgitation. The diameter of the inferior vena cava was 10 mm, and fenestration flow was 1.5 m/s. Her hemoglobin level was 12.0 g/dl, and BNP was 22 pg/ml. A cesarean hysterectomy with infrarenal IABO under general anesthesia was planned. Both neuraxial anesthesia followed by conversion to general anesthesia at hemorrhage and general anesthesia were considered. The anesthetic method was chosen in accordance with the patient’s preference and the ability to use transesophageal echocardiography (TEE).
She presented with 430 ml of vaginal bleeding at 26 6/7 weeks gestational age. Red blood cells (280 ml) were transfused, and an emergency cesarean hysterectomy was performed. Standard monitors were placed in the operating room. An arterial line was inserted into the left radial artery, and arterial pressure-based cardiac index (apCI), stroke volume (apSV), and stroke volume variation (SVV) were monitored (FloTrac Sensor™; Edwards Lifesciences, Tokyo). Remifentanil 0.1 μg/kg/min, midazolam 5 mg, and fentanyl 150 μg were administered in titration, and tracheal intubation was performed with rocuronium 50 mg. Two 18-gauge peripheral venous lines were placed. A central venous catheter was placed via the right internal jugular vein, and the central venous pressure (CVP) was monitored. An intra-aortic balloon tip was placed distal to the renal artery. Anesthesia was maintained with 1.5% sevoflurane, continuous remifentanil 0.2 − 0.3 μg/kg/min, and intermittent boluses of fentanyl and rocuronium during the surgery. The inspiratory oxygen concentration was 67% throughout the surgery.
Before delivery, apSV, SVV, and CVP were approximately 70 ml, 5 − 10%, and 15 mmHg, respectively. ApSV started to decrease immediately post-delivery , and a rapid infusion of crystalloids was initiated. Transvaginal bleeding was noted 5 min after the delivery, and a rapid blood transfusion was thus administered. Since apSV further decreased to less than 50 ml, suggesting preload depletion, IABO was initiated, and the bleeding decreased instantly. Neither apSV nor CVP fell, irrespective of the increase in SVV, suggesting that the preload was not reduced during IABO. After the uterus was excised, the balloon was deflated. The IABO duration was 15 min.
The total blood loss was 2000 ml; accordingly, 1400 ml of crystalloids, 840 ml of red blood cells, and 480 ml of fresh frozen plasma were infused. Oxytocin was not administered during the surgery. The Apgar scores of the neonate at 1/5 min were 1/5, respectively. The child was intubated and transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit. The mother was extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. On post-operative day 5, she developed pulmonary edema, with a rise in BNP to 482 pg/ml, which improved with furosemide. She was discharged on post-operative day 17. Further, pathology confirmed the diagnosis of placenta increta.