A 68-year-old male presented to an outside hospital with sudden onset left-sided chest and back pain accompanied by left leg numbness and weakness. His symptoms started suddenly after strenuous physical activity. The patient was taking warfarin by alternating daily doses (1.5 mg and 5 mg) for atrial fibrillation. On admission, he had left leg plegia (motor power 0/5) and reduced sensation to touch from T4 level bilaterally. Coagulation panel showed elevated international normalized ratio (INR) of 4.25 (normal range: 0.9–1.2), prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time of 40.9 (normal range: 28–38), and reduced prothrombin time (Stago Prothrombin Assay) activity 11% (normal range: 70–130%). The patient was admitted for diagnostic work-up and was continued on warfarin. Noncontrast head computed tomography (CT) was within normal limits. Three days after admission, the patient's neurological function deteriorated and he developed right leg paresis and bladder retention. These symptoms prompted noncontrast spinal CT that demonstrated nonhomogenous hyperdense intradural mass lesion extending from T2 to T6 levels [Figure and ]. The patient was transferred to the neurosurgery department for further management.
Upon admission to our department the patient had grade C myelitis based on the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) Classification from T4 level. He had left leg plegia (power 0/5) and right leg paresis (power 0–1/5 hip/knee flexors/extensors and 2/5 plantar flexors/extensors). Based on the Autonomic Standards Assessment Form, the patients’ general autonomic function assessment was normal, and he had loss of urinary, anal sphincter, and erectile functions. Spinal MRI showed heterogeneous mass lesion extending from T3 to T6 levels on the left side of the spinal canal. The lesion was hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences and heterogeneous intensity on T1-weighted sequences, which was suggestive of acute-to-subacute subdural blood clot, with dislocation of the spinal cord by the hematoma and signs of myelopathy [Figure –]. The patient was administered 2000 International Units of human prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) for coagulopathy and underwent emergent surgery that was performed 3 days after his initial symptoms and within 24 hours of neurological deterioration. Left side hemilaminectomy extending from T3 to T6 levels was performed. The dural sac was tense and nonpulsatile with bluish discoloration. The dura was opened longitudinally. The clot was 5–6 mm thick and was located in the left posterolateral portion of the dural sac, partially organized, gently adhesive to the spinal cord, and encasing thoracic nerve roots. The clot was gently dissected from the spinal cord and nerve rootlets using dissector, suction, and bipolar cautery. Clot remnants were rinsed from the subdural space with isotonic saline. Pulsation of the spinal cord was evident after the clot was removed. Bleeding source was not identified. After complete hemostasis, the dura was closed in water-tight fashion. Drainage was left in the epidural space and the wound was approximated in layers.
Postoperative period was uneventful. Warfarin was replaced with fraxiparin and reinstituted on postoperative day 7. MRI at day 1 after the surgery demonstrated completely removed hematoma. There was T2-weighted hyperintense signal in the central portion of the spinal cord suggestive of myelopathy and edema extending from T1 to T8 levels, as well as nonhomogenous hypointense areas on T2-weighted sequences extending from T1 to T6 levels [Figure –]. Epidural drainage was removed on day 2. At discharge to the inpatient rehabilitation unit 2 weeks after the surgery, the patient reported improved sensations and right leg strength (power 3/5 hip/knee flexors/extensors and 1/5 plantar flexors/extensors) with remaining left leg plegia and altered urinary and bowel functions.
Three months after the surgery, leg motor strength (power: left leg 2/5 and right leg 5/5 plantar flexors/extensors) and bladder function were improved. The patient was able to stand with support and was ambulatory with wheelchair. He had reduced sensation to touch below the T8 level. MRI was suggestive of myelopathy extending from T3 to T6 levels with deviation of the spinal cord to the left [Figure –].