The 30-year-old Han Chinese female patient was admitted to our hospital due to symptoms of fatigue and recurrent high-grade fever (> 39 °C) with a 4-month duration. She had presented with cutaneous lymphoproliferative disorders mimicking hydroa vacciniforme since the age of three and was diagnosed with CAEBV at Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital more than 9 months earlier. She experienced a spontaneous abortion 4 months ago. One month before her hospital visit, the patient underwent splenectomy at Nanjing for uncontrolled splenomegaly, and her postoperative pathology diagnosis suggested hypersplenism and EBV infection. She was noted to have oedematous swelling of the cheeks, eyelids and lips, and coexistent skin lesions, liver damage, pancytopenia with white blood cell (WBC) count of 1.90 × 109/L, hypofibrinogenemia, plasma EBV-DNA 3.26 × 103copies/L, EBV-DNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 5.93 × 104 copies/L, ferritin 1090.7 μg/L, interleukin-6 (IL-6) level of 74.45 pg/mL and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) level of 2083 U/mL. Her bone marrow examinations failed to identify any abnormal lymphocytes or haemophagocytosis. Peripheral blood cell sorting and EBV-DNA PCR suggested predominant EBV infection with 4.68 × 105 copies per 2 × 105 T lymphocytes and 1.17 × 105 copies per 2 × 105 NK cells. NK cell killing activity decreased to 6.50% (normally ≥15.11%) , and the expression levels of activated CD107a (for assessing NK cell degranulation) decreased to 33.24% (normally ≥40%) . Exome sequencing demonstrated the presence of novel digenic heterozygous STXBP2 (c.592A > C) and LYST (c.830A > T) mutations as well as some variants of unknown significance with HLH . Two-generation pedigree analysis using Sanger sequencing showed that the mutations were inherited from her parents, and NK cell function tests for her parents were conducted as well . We noticed that her mother had an NK cell dysfunction which was even more severe than that of the patient herself, while her father’s NK cell functions were all normal. It still remains unclear why the patient’s mother did not experience any clinical symptoms all the way through, and we formulated our assumption in Discussion and Conclusions section. Because seven of the eight criteria of HLH-2004 were met , the patient was finally identified to have secondary HLH. X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP) is a secondary disease caused by immunodeficiency-mediated EBV infection. Individuals with XLP-1 are uniquely sensitive to diseases caused by EBV, which otherwise runs a fairly benign course in most healthy individuals. HLH represents 60% of all the disease clinical features while the age of onset is within the range of 0.5–40 years old . The symptoms of HLH secondary to XLP is very similar to our case. However, the patient in our case cannot be diagnosed with XLP since we found that she and her parents had no SH2DIA or XLP1 mutations via WES and Sanger sequencing tests.
Following diagnosis, the patient was treated with persistent small dose of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg·d− 1). We were able to manage the disease in the beginning, with a decreased ferritin level of 5951 μg/L, IL-6 level of 17.78 pg/mL and normal body temperature. However, her condition was out of control one month later with the appearance of recurrent high-grade fever, rising levels of inflammatory factors, macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) and capillary leak syndrome (CLS), and we switched her therapy to the HLH-2004 protocol with etoposide and dexamethasone. DEP regimens (liposomal doxorubicin, etoposide and methylprednisolone) were also provided when HLH relapsed for the second time . Ferritin levels peaked at 3222.2 μg/L and subsequently began to decline. Currently, the HLH of this patient has been well-controlled for a month and she is currently waiting for haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
For Whole Exome Sequencing (WES), DNA samples were isolated from peripheral blood. The genomic library of the proband was recovered for exome enrichment with Agilent Sure Select Human Exon v7 and was sequenced by Illumina HiSeq2500 with an average 300x coverage. The Broad Institute’s Genome Analysis Toolkit was applied during the data analysis. Reads were aligned with the Illumina Chastity Filter and the Burrows Wheeler Aligner. Variants were identified by the GATK UnifiedGenotyper module. For quality control measures, coverage per base was 351x, and Q30 percentage was 92.71%. For filtering strategy: First, generated variants were locally annotated with Annovar software under Linux system. Next, only mutations affecting amino acid sequence were filtered for further analysis (including missense, nonsense, frameshift/non-frameshift insertion/deletion, splice-site mutation and other complex mutations). Afterwards, variants with frequency in Han population no less than 0.01 were filtered out. Then variants failed to pass quality control (reads < 20, quality< 30, or variants with significant strand bias) were filtered out. The mutated genes were filtered out based on classification of primary immunodeficiencies compiled by the Primary Immunodeficiency Expert Committee (PID EC) of the International Union of Immunological Societies (IUIS) [, ], and further tested by Sanger sequencing. Splice site variants were taken into consideration in this filter strategy while promoter regions were not. WES study was not performed on the proband’s parents. Only potential pathogenic mutations in Primary Immunodeficiency (PID) associated genes of the proband were identified in the proband’s parents using Sanger sequencing.