The patient was a 73-year-old male (height, 169 cm; weight, 71 kg) with chronic constrictive pericarditis. He underwent radical pericardiectomy and was postoperatively transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) under propofol sedation with tracheal intubation. Postoperative observation was conducted under continuous intravenous infusion of propofol (1 mg/kg/h), fentanyl (20 μg/h), and dexmedetomidine (0.4 μg/kg/h) while maintaining hemodynamic stability. His ventilator settings on synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (pressure control) [SIMV(PC)] + pressure support ventilation (PSV) were as follows: a driving pressure of 15 cmH2O, support pressure of 15 cmH2O, respiratory rate (RR) of 12 breaths/min, fraction of inspiratory oxygen (FIO2) of 40%, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH2O, and flow-trigger sensitivity of 1 L/min. After confirming hemodynamic stability, we decreased driving pressure and support pressure to 10 cmH2O before starting a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). Then, his spontaneous breaths were triggered 5 breaths/min and tidal volume was more than 700 mL when spontaneous breaths were triggered. Although RR was low due to relative deep sedation, the patient’s other status fulfilled the criteria for starting a SBT. In addition, we thought that if a SBT was started, his PaCO2 became higher and his RR would increase. We conducted a SBT with a PSV of 5 cmH2O, PEEP of 5 cmH2O, FIO2 of 40%, and a flow-trigger sensitivity of 1 L/min, and discontinued the continuous intravenous infusion of propofol. Subsequently, his RR increased to more than 60 breaths/min and tidal volume decreased to less than 100 mL ; this SBT was considered a failure and the prior SIMV(PC) +PSV ventilator settings were restored. The next morning, SBT was reperformed, and the result was the same as the day before. This time, however, we noticed that his heart rate (HR) and RR were exactly the same , at 60/min, and suspected ventilator auto-triggering caused by cardiogenic oscillations. To examine this hypothesis, we decreased flow-trigger sensitivity to 2 L/min during, but the patient’s respiratory pattern was unchanged. Next, we changed the ventilator mode from flow triggering of 1 L/min to pressure triggering of −2 cmH2O. After that, his RR became 6 breaths/min and his tidal volume greater than 600 mL . Upon discontinuation of the anesthetic drugs, the patient promptly emerged from anesthesia and was uneventfully extubated. Following extubation, his RR was about 12 breaths/min and he could breathe deeply. The subsequent postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 15. We obtained a written informed consent from the patient for publication of this case report.