An 81-year-old fit and healthy gentleman presented with severe right-sided hip pain on 22 January 2015. He had an uncemented right metal-on-metal hip replacement carried out in 2008 (see ). At presentation he denied any relevant past medical history. He was not on any regular medications. He drinks 5–10 units of alcohol a week and does not smoke. Two days prior to his admission, he had a prolonged dental root canal treatment for a pulp infection at his dental surgery without antibiotic prophylaxis. His oral health was otherwise good. No cultures were taken at the time to confirm the presence or absence of Granulicatella adiacens in the oral cavity.
On physical examination the only pertinent physical findings were that he had a temperature of 38.5 °C with a swollen and erythematous right hip joint. His blood results on admission showed C-reactive protein (CRP) 12.9 mg l−1, white blood cells 17.6×109 l−1, and neutrophils 16.11×109 l−1. A blood culture taken on the day of admission did not grow any organism. An ultrasound-guided aspirate of his right hip (see ) revealed thick purulent fluid. Empirically benzylpenicillin (1 g every 6 h) and flucloxacillin (2 g every 6 h) were started. The direct Gram stain showed many pus cells and Gram-positive cocci in chains. The isolate did not grow on blood and chocolate agar, but did grow on anaerobic plates and was identified as Granulicatella adiacens by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) (Bruker) with a score value of 2.185. Antibiotic sensitivities were analysed by the disc diffusion method according to the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (BSAC) guidelines and yielded the following sensitivities: erythromycin (resistant), vancomycin (sensitive) and penicillin (sensitive). There was no co-infection with Staphylococcus aureus.
On the fourth day of admission, an open washout and debridement of the right hip was undertaken. Pus was noted within the joint with some tracking at the metal–bone interface of the stem anteriorly and proximally. However, the stem was very well fixed with no loosening. Two tissue specimens were sent for culture and no organism was isolated after a long incubation. As the organism was isolated from only the initial aspirate specimen, the antibiotics were changed to a regimen with wide coverage: intravenous vancomycin (500 mg every 12 h) and piperacillin with tazobactam (4.5 g every 8 h), and oral fucidic acid (500 mg every 8 h).
The inflammatory markers showed a steady decline and the patient improved symptomatically. He was then sent home and prescribed six weeks of outpatient antimicrobial therapy (OPAT) but he was re-admitted after a month for an urticarial rash due to an adverse drug reaction. In addition, he also had several temperature spikes and therefore underwent a second surgical exploration and washout the following day and another five days later. Intra-operatively the soft tissues and joint showed no evidence of infection, no organism was seen on Gram stain and no microorganism was isolated from the tissue samples on both occasions. Considering the adverse drug reaction, the antibiotic regimen was changed to daptomycin (60 mg once daily) and meropenem (2 g every 8 h) and used to complete his six-week course of IV antibiotics. His second time hospitalization lasted a period of 10 days in total.
The patient made a good recovery with a resolving rash, a C-reactive protein of 18 mg l−1, a normal white cell count, and a fully healed wound. He was referred to a regional Bone Infection Unit for consideration of a two-stage revision hip replacement. Seven weeks following his second hospital discharge and prior to his revision surgery, he was admitted with cough, shortness of breath and raised inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 312 mg l−1, white cell count 22×109 l−1). He was diagnosed with severe community-acquired pneumonia and succumbed to the infection three days later. The pathogen that caused the community pneumonia was not identified.