A Caucasian 6-year-old boy with no relevant medical history went to the emergency department after suffering trauma in his left knee after fell off his bicycle. He complained of pain in the left knee and clinical examination showed functional disability of the joint and hematic joint effusion. In the performed X-ray , no osteoarticular injury was diagnosed and a pattern of massive joint effusion was found. Arthrocentesis with drainage of hematic fluid was performed and the joint was immobilized with cast for conservative treatment.
After removing the immobilization, the initial evolution was positive with no pain on mobilization or joint effusion.
A few months later, he went again to the emergency department due to new left knee trauma after pivot-type rotation and worsening of the pain. He admitted that symptoms had become persistent after the first knee trauma and he had complained of pain and some limitation on knee extension. On examination, he had pain in the mobilization of the left Knee, especially in knee extension which was not entire.
The performed X-ray revealed avulsion fracture of the anterior tibial spines . The fracture was classified as modified Meyers and Mckeever Type II. Taking into account, the age of the patient and the apparent positioning of the bone fragment in relation to the bed led to the decision of conservative treatment with cast immobilization with weekly follow-up and serial imaging control. In X-ray performed 6 weeks later, an evolution to non-union of the anterior tibial spine was noticed. Besides, joint instability was detected by Lachman test and pivot shift test. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knee confirmed the non-union of the avulsion fracture and excluded lesion of the ACL or the meniscus. A surgical treatment with reinsertion of the tibial spines was decided. At arthroscopy, non-union of tibial spines was confirmed, with elephant paw bone fragment with loss of its right to domicile. Based on these findings, conversion to open surgery was chosen for bed reshaping and anatomical reinsertion of the bone fragment in view of adequate ACL tension.
The patient was prepared to open reduction. A paramedian arthrotomy was performed. The fracture was identified and debridement, cruentation, and fixation of the bone fragment to the tibia with a 3 cm screw were done . The patient had favorable post-operative evolution with fracture consolidation seen on X-ray , preserved mobility (symmetrical to contralateral), no instability of the joint, and no limitation in daily and school activities. Four years after the initial surgery, a second procedure was performed for the removal of the screw .
Although the screw had penetrated the physis , there was no repercussion in the growth of the affected limb as can be seen in the serial extra long X-ray performed on follow-up . Besides, the MRI of knee performed 6 years after the surgery showed consolidation of the fracture and integrity of the anterior crucial ligament .