A 45-year-old female has been suffering from perioral chorea, dysphagia, dysarthria, vocalization, and involuntary upper limb movements during the last 4 months. Her orofacial chorea was characterized by clumsy, non-coordinated mandibular movement, uncontrolled frequent lip biting and occasional grimacing activities. These symptoms worsened during stress and disappeared during sleep. The patient had a history of induced abortion 4 months ago. The patient had frequent oral ulcers when she was overworked, which healed in a few days without any systematic treatment. The subject was born to non-consanguineous parents. The family history did not show similar conditions, and there was no history of drug exposure that would have caused extrapyramidal dysfunction symptoms.
A neurological physical examination showed chorea, head drops, tongue–lip biting, orofaciolingual dyskinesias, slurred speech with vague words, and mild drooling. There were sporadic ulcers on the buccal mucosa and several cracks on the lips. When sitting unsupported, sudden involuntary forward flexions of the trunk were observed. The muscle strength of the extremities was normal, and the muscle tension was reduced. Tendon reflexes were reduced, and sensory response and autonomic nerve function were normal. There was no Kayser–Fleischer (K-F) ring in both corneas. The advanced cognitive function was hardly impaired, and a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 28/30.
On blood, urine, and stool examinations, liver function, renal function, humoral immune function, tumor markers, lupus anticoagulant, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, coagulation function, rheumatoid factor, glycosylated hemoglobin, serum B12 levels, folic acid levels, serum copper, ceruloplasmin, and autoantibody were normal. Electrocardiography, echocardiography, abdominal ultrasonography, and chest radiograph were normal. Abnormal cell findings were as follows: spinous red blood cells accounted for 15.0%; blood biochemistries were as follows: 61.11 g/L total protein (normal: 65–85 g/L), 36.51 g/L albumin (normal: 40–55 g/L), 280 U/L creatine kinase (normal: 40–200 U/L), 917 mg/L lipoprotein (normal: 0–300 mg/L), 10.96 g/L apolipoprotein A (normal: 1–1.6 g/L), and 1.16 g / L apolipoprotein B (normal: 0.6–1.1 g/L). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans showed moderate anterior horn dilation of the lateral ventricles and bilateral atrophy of the caudate nucleus in the brain . EEG showed mild abnormalities, including occipital area dominated by 9–10 Hz medium and high amplitude alpha rhythm, scattered short-range 18–20 Hz beta activity in each area, and scattered 5–7 Hz medium amplitude theta wave in the forehead . On genetic testing, a hemizygotic mutation was found in the exon 13–44 of the VPS13A gene: c.4063C > T (cytosine > thymine) ; a heterozygous deletion variant in the exons 13–44 of the VPS13A gene .
Based on the patient’s medical history, clinical manifestations, neurological examinations, cranial MRI, and genetic test, the patient was diagnosed with ChAc. The patient was prescribed idebenone, vitamin B1, vitamin E, mecobalamin, tiapride and clonazepam. Idebenone 30 mg, vitamin B1 10 mg, vitamin E 100 mg and mecobalamin 0.5 mg were given orally 3 times a day for 2 months to relieve the symptoms. Tiapride 100 mg was orally administered 3 times a day until the follow-up time. Clonazepam was started at an initial dose of 0.5 mg taken three times a day. After the first 3 days of therapy, she was treated with clonazepam in doses of 1 mg morning and evening and 0.5 mg in the noon for one month during which time she had no attacks, followed by a maintenance dose of 0.5 mg three times per day until the follow-up time. During the follow-up period, her condition gradually improved. The frequency and amplitude of involuntary movements of limbs were alleviated compared with the initial manifestation. Tongue biting movements and slurred speech dramatically improved than before and no support was required to sit up normally.