A 51-year-old female presented with pain in her right knee joint in March 2022 to an outside institution. The pain was insidious in onset and gradually progressive. The pain was aggravated with motion and relieved with medications and rest. It was associated with a local rise of temperature. At that point in time, it was diagnosed to be a case of synovitis and treated with empirical antibiotics and painkillers. The pain did not reduce even after the medications.
She presented with the same symptoms again followed by fever after 1 week. The symptoms did not subside after the treatment. She underwent an MRI that showed a suspected meniscus tear with a suspected anterior cruciate ligament degeneration and synovitis. Fluid was noted in the joint capsule. No other lesions or nodes were noted. She underwent an arthroscopic procedure at an outside institution for drainage of the synovial fluid under antibiotic coverage. However, the sample was not sent for histopathology.
The symptoms were persistent and the patient complained of severe pain in the right knee, along with swelling around the knee joint and high-grade fever of around 103°F within 3 weeks. Mobility was severely restricted. The general condition of the patient started to deteriorate. There was generalized weakness, poor appetite, and unintentional weight loss. She was advised matrix therapy for the pain but it did not help. She underwent another arthroscopic procedure within 6 weeks of the first one and the tissue was sent for histopathology. The report was negative for any malignancy and Koch’s disease as well. Routine treatment for infections and steroids were started.
She underwent an MRI of the right knee that revealed a polypoidal soft-tissue thickening within the entire knee joint which was mildly enhancing on the post-contrast images. Multiple linear T2 hyperintense signals were seen traversing the fibular head and styloid process which were suggestive of fracture lines with marrow edema in the adjacent bone.
2 weeks following the MRI, the symptoms aggravated. In addition, the patient had malaise and complete loss of mobility of the joint due to the pain. She had lost around 5 kgs in 1 month. An 18FDG-PET CT scan was conducted that revealed an FDG avid large peripheral enhancing soft-tissue thickening and collection noted along the right knee joint with a standardized uptake value of 52.4. Mild cortical erosion of the medial condyle of the right femur was noted. Mild juxta-articular osteopenia was observed which was indicative of the known septic arthritis or could be pigmented villonodular synovitis. FDG avid prominent right popliteal node was noted. Metabolically active enlarged right external iliac and inguinal nodal lesions were seen as likely reactive. On clinical examination, the nodes were not palpable and no other distant lymphadenopathy was noted.
She underwent an open surgery of the knee joint for debulking of the lesion 1 week after the imaging and sampling of the suspicious popliteal nodes. Samples from the surgery were sent for histopathology which came positive for a CD30+ and ALK-positive hematolymphoid malignancy. She was diagnosed with Stage II ALK+ ALCL of the knee joint.
She was taken up for treatment that was based on the NCCN treatment guidelines for ALK-positive ALCL. She received 6 cycles of a multiagent chemotherapy regimen consisting of brentuximab vedotin, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone. A PET-CT scan was done for interim restaging after the chemotherapy that showed a near-complete resolution (with a standardized uptake value of 3.4) of the lesion in the knee joint.
This was followed by involved-site radiotherapy (ISRT) with a cumulative dose of 45 Gy in 25 fractions (36 Gy in 20 fractions to the initial volume before the chemotherapy followed by a boost of 9 Gy in 5 fractions to the residual lesion post-chemotherapy). Follow-up showed complete resolution of the symptoms. The latest PET scan 1 year since the treatment began showed resolution of the lesion.