A small boy aged 17 months (body weight, 10 kg; height, 88 cm; ethnicity, Chinese) was admitted to the Infection Department of our hospital for persistent fever lasting 8 days. Neither the boy nor his family had a significant history of conditions such as cancer, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and autoimmune diseases. However, the mother had a history of gestational diabetes, hypothyroidism and anemia during pregnancy, which improved after 2 months of active treatment.
After 4 days of anti-infective treatment, the child still had a high fever and presented with lethargy, abdominal distention, oliguria and vomiting. The auxiliary examination suggested that multiple organs were involved and multiple serous cavity effusion was present. The child was transferred to our department and more relevant examinations were applied. He developed a high fever, polyserositis (pelvic, pleural, peritoneal and pericardial effusion), anemia (hemoglobin (Hb) 70 g/L), hyperferritinemia (1149.4 ng/ml), hypertriglyceridemia (4.65 mmol/L), obvious elevated soluble CD25 (5783.3 pg/ml; reference range: 400–2500 pg/ml), mildly increased IL-6 (10.3 pg/ml; reference range: 0–2.2 pg/ml) and IL-10 (12.8 pg/ml; reference range: 0–2.3 pg/ml). The proportion of CD3-CD56+ cells was 1.2% (reference range: 3.3–32.3% in lymphocyte). Killer cell immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptor (KIR) expression and function in NK cells was normal. EBV shell and early antigen IgG antibody were positive, with low affinity of capsid antigen. High EBV DNA loads in peripheral blood and serum (6.69 × 104 copies/ml and < 5.0 × 102 copies/ml, respectively) suggested a diagnosis of EBV-HLH based on the HLH-2004 diagnostic criteria. Bone marrow biopsy was negative for hemophagocytes. Hemolysis tests and ADAMTS13 activity were normal. Other pathogen detection tests such as blood culture, sputum culture, T-SPOT, and mycoplasma antibody tests were negative. Color Doppler echocardiography indicated coronary artery dilatation with mild pericardial effusion and valvular regurgitation . The progressive increase in serum creatinine and decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR = 9 ml/min/1.73m2 according to the Schwartz equation), combined with oliguria, persistent proteinuria and hematuria suggested acute kidney disease (AKI). Due to the young age of the child, it was difficult to collect 24-h urine; therefore, 24-h urine protein quantification was not performed. Comprehensive genetic analysis (full exhome sequencing) of peripheral blood-derived DNA revealed that the patient carried a hemizygous variant of XIAP (NG_ 007264.1, NM_ 001167, NP_001158.2). The maternal missense variant c.116G > C in exon 2 leads to an amino acid change (p.G39A), which has never been reported previously and is absent from controls (1000 Genomes, ExAC, gnomAD, and CNGB). SIFT program predicts that the variant is damaging (score 0.012 < 0.05), which might affect normal functions of the protein . According to the standard of American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) , variant c.116G > C is classified as Variant of Uncertain Significance (VUS) of XIAP. However, the patient in our study presented with typical clinical phenotypes of EBV-HLH. In addition, we didn’t have identified any other mutations that were associated with this disease of the patient. Thus, we predicted that the variant c.116G > C of XIAP should be responsible for EBV-HLH.
After 1 month of a treatment regimen including intravenous immunoglobulin (2 g/kg), methylprednisolone pulse (MP; 20 mg/kg.d × 3d, 8 mg/kg.d and then gradually reduced), antibiotics, antiviral drugs (acyclovir and ganciclovir sequentially), rituximab (0.1 g), aspirin, and urokinase in addition to supportive therapy, the patient’s clinical manifestations and laboratory indexes were obviously improved except for coronary artery dilatation, persistent proteinuria (2 + − 3+) and hematuria. Renal biopsy was then performed . Under light microscopy, the glomeruli showed mild mesangial hyperplasia combined with vacuolar degeneration and atrophy of epithelial cells in some renal tubules, and dilatation of the tubular lumen. Extended extracellular matrix with scattered infiltration of lymphocytes and slight fibrosis suggested chronic renal tubulointerstitial inflammation. Immunofluorescence analysis showed focal deposition of IgM in glomerular mesangium and capillary loops. Under electron microscopy, the glomerular capillary basement membrane was thin (160–280 nm), with segmental fusion of epithelial podocytes, and no electron dense deposition. The patient’s treatment was continued with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and 5 days later, his urine protein test was negative, although hematuria continued. After 3 months, color Doppler echocardiography showed no obvious dilation of the coronary artery. After 6 months, the hematuria was in remission and the child had a good prognosis in the regular 8 month follow-up.