A 51-year-old man was referred to our hospital with persistent chest pain for the last 2 h. He was a chronic smoker and had dyslipidaemia and a family history of acute myocardial infarction. He had never experienced any chest pain or palpitations. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed a junctional rhythm at 30 bpm with ST depression on the precordial leads . Bedside echocardiography revealed severe hypokinesis at the posterior left ventricular wall was also noted, and the left ventricular ejection fraction was 51%. In addition, the serum level of troponin was elevated to 1.44 ng/mL, confirming the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.
Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) revealed an occluded dominant left circumflex coronary artery (LCX) with atherosclerosis . A drug-eluting stent was deployed at the occluded site, resulting in sufficient blood flow to the distal side of the lesions, as evidenced by the Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction score. The atrial branch from the distal side of the LCX was jailed by the stent and occluded . During the remedy, a temporary pacemaker was inserted because of junctional bradycardia. After the remedy, his chest pain had resolved, and ECG still showed a junctional rhythm, so we finished the intervention. On the next day, bedside echocardiography revealed that a hypokinesis at the posterior left ventricular wall was improved. The serum creatinine kinase was elevated to 6831 mg/dL at its peak.
The day after the coronary intervention, sinus rhythm recovered to 70 bpm, and premature atrial contraction (PAC) was documented frequently. AT occurred on the 7th day after the admission . Anticoagulant drug was started. After exclusion of atrial thrombus by transesophageal echocardiography, the patient underwent cardioversion and returned to sinus rhythm. He discharged on 14th day.
After discharge, the AT recurred with palpitations and exertional dyspnoea after one month. The anti-arrhythmia drugs including bisoprolol, verapamil and bepridil were ineffective, and his palpitations worsened.
We decided to perform a catheter ablation 6 months after discharge. All anti-arrhythmia drugs were stopped before the catheter ablation. An electro-anatomical map revealed typical atrial flutter. Low-voltage areas and many fragmented potential (FP) areas were observed in the posterior wall of the right atrium (RA) . During linear ablation between the inferior vena cava and tricuspid valve, the AT terminated and returned to sinus rhythm. Subsequently, multiple-focus PACs originating from the FP area in the RA posterior wall were documented . We performed ablation in the area, and the PACs almost disappeared. CAG revealed that the atrial branch jailed by the stent was naturally reperfused, and the artery was perfused to the FP area ( and , ). We completed this session with non-inducibility of any AT by rapid stimulation. The patient was discharged with sinus rhythm and without any complications. He had an uneventful course for 6 months.