A 72-year-old female patient having no prior comorbidities presented to us with recurrent episodes of dizziness both on exertion as well as at rest. The electrocardiogram showed a complete heart block with narrow QRS complexes (QRS duration 110 ms) and an escape rate of 40 beats per minute. A presumptive diagnosis of “sclero-degenerative complete heart block” was made. There was no history suggestive of acute coronary syndrome or stable coronary heart disease. Electrocardiogram did not reveal significant ST–T wave changes and the echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular function without structural heart disease. Her serum electrolytes and renal function parameters were within the normal range.
A temporary pacemaker was inserted through the right femoral venous route and she was subsequently planned for permanent single-chamber pacemaker implantation. A Dual-chamber pacemaker, although ideal, was refused by the patient due to financial reasons. As part of the hospital protocol, an intravenous contrast (iohexol; 5 ml diluted in 5 ml normal saline) injection was given through the left brachial vein to delineate the venous anatomy and drainage of left upper limb veins, which showed good-sized axillary and subclavian veins draining into the left brachiocephalic vein and then into superior vena cava . We made the skin incision in the left infraclavicular fossa and prepared the subcutaneous pocket for device placement. Then, we proceeded to an axillary venous puncture with 16 G needle using the Seldinger technique. However, the axillary vein could not be cannulated despite multiple attempts. To find out the cause, we gave another contrast injection in the left brachial vein which revealed severe spasm of axillary and subclavian veins . Then, axillary vein puncture was attempted after 15 min of giving two sequential boluses of intravenous nitroglycerin (200 mcg followed by 400 mcg) with a gap of 5 min, still, the axillary vein could not be cannulated. A venogram was not done on the right side to avoid the risk of venous spasm and the axillary vein was cannulated using anatomical landmarks, and the pacemaker was successfully implanted in the right infraclavicular pocket . Active fixation lead was screwed in right ventricular septum and the device was placed in a right infraclavicular pocket; the VVIR mode for pacing was selected. Skin incisions on both sides of the chest were closed in layers.
After this, the post-procedural period was uneventful. Pacemaker interrogation revealed normal pacing parameters. The next day, the ultrasonogram of the left upper limb was performed which revealed normal flow through the left axillary and subclavian veins without any evidence of local hematoma. Sutures were removed on the tenth day of the procedure. One week later, the patient was followed up in the outpatient department. There was no swelling at the local site or in any of the upper limbs. The patient remained well on follow-up after 3 months.