In September 2021, an 83-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with intermittent abdominal pain and distention accompanied by cessation of passage of flatus and stool for 3 days. The concurrent medical problems included type 2 diabetes mellitus and pulmonary emphysema for more than 30 years. More significantly, he underwent left radical nephrectomy for ccRCC (pT3aN0M0, Fuhrman Grade 3) 5 years previously. The scheduled four cycles of adjuvant therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib were discontinued because of patient intolerance. Computed tomography (CT) and serum tumor marker levels showed favorable local control and no signs of distant progression during intensive surveillance. The last follow-up visit was just 6 months before this admission.
On admission, he was afebrile with negative result of coronavirus disease 2019 testing. The blood pressure was 123/84 mmHg, and the heart rate was 105 beats per minute. Physical examination revealed pallor, mild dehydration, abdominal distention, and metallic bowel sounds, without rebound tenderness and palpable abdominal mass. Blood tests indicated iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin, 9.8 g/dL; reference range, 13.0 – 17.5 g/dL) and an elevated percentage of neutrophils (87%; reference range, 40 – 75%). CT of the chest and abdomen with intravenous contrast demonstrated small bowel obstruction due to intussusception of the distal ileum containing an approximately 4 × 4 cm intraluminal soft-tissue mass with moderate enhancement . No lung, bone, or liver metastasis or local relapse of RCC was visible on radiologic examination.
Complying with the multidisciplinary team’s decision, the patient underwent an urgent exploratory laparotomy. After the reduction of intestinal invagination, a solitary ileal neoplasm was found to be the lead point of the intussusception . Hence, segmental resection of the ileum was performed together with primary functional end-to-end anastomosis. Gross examination of the surgical specimen indicated a 4 × 3 × 3-cm taupe cauliflower-like, pedunculated tumor protruding into the ileum .
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred back to the gastrointestinal surgical ward after spending 1 day in the surgical intensive care unit. Under the guidance of the enhanced recovery after surgery protocol, the patient’s convalescence was unremarkable, with oral feeding beginning on postoperative day (POD) 3 and discharge on POD 6. The patient received no additional treatment due to his venerable age and underlying diseases. To date, the 1-year follow-up has been uneventful. The timeline with relevant data from the episode of care is shown in .
Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed compact nests of tumor cells with clear cytoplasm separated by delicate vasculature . The diagnosis of the ileal metastasis from ccRCC was established via the following immunohistochemical results: PAX-8 (+), CD10 (+), EMA (+), CK7 (-), CAIX (+), FH (+), SDHB (+), TFE3 (-), and Ki-67 (+, 30%) . A total of 9 mesenteric lymph nodes were identified without tumor involvement. Additionally, genetic testing was declined by the patient’s family members.