A 33-year-old woman presented with an elastic, non-tender mass over the right parotid area for 6 months. The patient had no significant past medical or surgical history. Physical examination showed a 3-cm round, palpable, immobile mass over the right parotid area. The overlying skin showed no sign of inflammation. There was no facial paralysis or cervical lymph node enlargement. Computed tomography of the head and neck with contrast revealed a 3.7 × 2.7 cm round mass over the right parotid gland with heterogeneous enhancement. There were some subcentimeter non-specific lymph nodes over bilateral level Ib and II. Preoperative fine needle aspiration (FNA) was performed and the smears were moderately hypercellular, with small to large cohesive tissue fragments, as well as scattered single cells in the background . Both the tumor clusters and single cells showed epithelioid morphology with an increased nuclear to cytoplasmic(N:C) ratio, round to oval nuclei, moderate nuclear pleomorphism and a lack of nucleoli . These atypical epithelioid cells were embedded in myxomatous and fibillary matrix with eosinophilic/light purple cytoplasm.No mitotic figures were found and there was no necrosis in the background. A diagnosis of salivary gland neoplasm of uncertain malignant potential (SUMP) was rendered. Right partial parotidectomy was then performed smoothly using an intraoperative neuromonitoring system without damage to facial nerve.
Gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a well-circumscribed, unencapsulated, gray-brown soft tissue mass, measuring 3.5 × 2.1 × 2.0 cm. On cross-section, the tumor was homogenous and tan-brown with occasional small hemorrhagic cysts. In addition, a nodular expansion with indistinct fibrous capsule was found within the tumor, reminiscent of the “nodule-in-nodule” appearance of hepatocellular carcinoma. Microscopically, the tumor had a peripheral low-grade area and a central high-grade area. The low-grade area was predominantly composed of spindle cells with varying cellularity and focal reticular pattern, interspersed with sclerotic stroma, rounded vessels and infiltration of the adjacent tissue. The tumor cells had bland, round to short spindle cell morphology, with minimal cytoplasm and vesicular chromatin. The central hypercellular area was sharply demarcated by thin fibrous septa and comprised enlarged epithelioid tumor cells with moderate nuclear atypia arranged in a sheet-like pattern with hemangiopericytoma(HPC)-like hyalinizing vessels. Nuclear pleomorphism with hyperchromasia, a high N:C ratio, clumped chromatin, irregular nuclear membrane, and inconspicuous small nucleoli were observed in the high-grade component. There was an abrupt transition between these two components . The mitotic rate was up to 5 per10 HPFs, and atypical mitosis was observed . Angiolymphatic permeation and infiltrative growth were also present. The resection margins of the tumor involved both the low- and high-grade areas.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for CD34, STAT-6 and FLI-1, but negative for pan-cytokeratin, CAM5.2, p63, S100 protein, CD31, SMA, and calponin. ERG and Ki67 immunostaining showed an accentuated nuclear staining pattern in the central dedifferentiated area. The Ki-67 labeling index was around 20% in the hypercellular area, and 3% in the loose short spindle cell area. There was no overexpression of p53 or p16.This patient received adjuvant radiation therapy with 70Gy to the right parotid area due to a microscopically positive resection margin (R1) and has been followed-up for 11 months, with no signs of recurrence or distant metastasis.