A-64 year old female patient presented initially with dysuria for one month. She was suffering from hypertension controlled on different types of antihypertensive drugs with no attacks of headache, palpitation and sweating. She underwent diagnostic cystoscopy which revealed hyperemic velvety area at the bladder. Transurethral Resection of Bladder Tumor (TURBT) was done and pathology was carcinoma in situ. Patient received full course of vesical installation of BCG for 1 year (Six doses weekly as induction and nine doses monthly as maintenance treatment). No obvious complications were noticed during installation period. Follow up cystoscopies, urine cytology and radiology were free during BCG installation. However, patient developed sever irritative LUTS, in time of intravesical installation and post installation with poor improvement on anticholinergics. So, a decision was taken by bladder 100 IU BTX injection aiming to decrease symptoms bother. Bladder was inspected and biopsy was taken 2 weeks before injection with evidence of chronic cystitis. Follow up revealed improvement of suprapubic pain and LUTS. She had not attend for follow up for one year when she developed recurrent attacks of hematuria with developing attacks of headache, palpitation and sweating with no history of syncopal attacks during micturition. Outpatient cystoscopy showed nodular lesion at the trigone near left ureteric orifice with smooth outline (I). MRI for clinical staging revealed presence of diffuse thickening of the bladder base with bilateral external iliac lymphadenopathy and normal both ovaries (II and III). In addition, complementary bone scan was also done and was free. During resection hypertensive episodes reaching 220/120 mmHg were recorded. Pathology was high grade muscle invasive UC with neuroendocrine differentiation. Patient was planned for open radical cystectomy and ileal loop conduit. Notable bouts of hypertension on manipulation of the bladder were recorded intraoperatively. Patient passed smooth postoperative course stopped drugs of hypertension and discharged safely. Microscopic pathology came to be high grade UC muscle invasive of the bladder with neuroendocrine differentiation with positive staining for Pancytokeratin, Chromogranin and Synaptophysin and negative 15 lymph nodes. Also, incidentally primary left ovarian neuroendocrine tumor discovered with intensely staining for Chromogranin, Synaptophysin with negative Pancytokeratin/epithelial markers .Two weeks following the surgery, the patient was tested with a 24-h urinary metanephrins and was within normal limits. Six month later patient underwent MRI and bone scan for follow up and was free with no evidence of local or distant recurrence with no history of headache or palpitation with still stoppage of antihypertensive drugs.