A 54-year-old former male smoker was diagnosed with Clear Cell RCC, cT4N0M0 (A) & (B), and radical left nephrectomy was performed in February 2019. The histopathological result showed a WHO/ISUP grade II pT4 with infiltration into the adrenal gland. (C) & (D) Infiltration into other adjacent structures was not shown with clear surgical margins, and no regional lymph nodes were involved. Furthermore, after three months (May 2020), based on the histopathological result, a metastatic lesion of Clear Cell RCC was reported as a skin nodule on his left chest and abdomen (A). Systemic therapy was first declined, and the patient gave informed consent for this publication for educational purposes. Furthermore, after three months, PET-scan confirmed multiple nodules on the 9th and 10th segment of the right lung (B) a mass on 5th anterior right costae (B) and a skin nodule on left upper abdomen (C) then the patient agreed to take 2 × 400 mg pazopanib. Ulceration develops unexpectedly after one month during the skin excisional biopsy (A). Erythema surrounding the edge of the scar was observed first, then exudative ulceration appeared. In addition, the patient was instructed to wash the wound twice daily with saline solution, povidone‑iodine, and then cover the wound with a waterproof bandage. Systemic treatment with pazopanib was postponed, and four days after, the ulceration began to shrink. No pus was reported (B). On day 8th, the wound diameter was reduced, with no erythema, and the wound was dry (C).
One year after stopping the systemic therapy, a mass was observed on his 5th anterior right ribs. A second PET scan was performed, multiple nodules on the 9th, 10th segment of the right lung completely disappeared (B). Both mass on the 5th anterior right costae (B) and a skin nodule on the upper left abdomen increased in size (C). On this basis, the patient was offered and agreed to continue 1 × 400 mg pazopanib. Furthermore, a monthly check-up was scheduled, a decrease in mass on the anterior right costae was observed by the patient after a month of TKI treatment. However, patient choose to stop the medication.