A 51-year-old male was referred to our hospital with dysphagia and recurrent upper abdominal discomfort. Apart from arterial hypertension, no significant medical history was reported. Endoscopy detected an ulcerous lesion dorsal at the GEJ , however, biopsies did not prove malignant disease. Deep biopsies lead to the histopathological diagnosis of a GIST in the GEJ. High-resolution multislice computerized tomography (CT) showed a solid tumor measuring 7.6 cm extending from the distal esophagus to the gastric cardia and fundus with extension into of the left diaphragmatic muscular column and the splenic hilus . Surgery with curative intent at this stage would have required a multivisceral resection by an abdomino-thoracic approach, including resection of the left diaphragmatic muscle as well as splenectomy. After thorough discussion of the treatment options, the patient consented to try to downstage the tumor first by neoadjuvant treatment with imatinib mesylate followed by surgery after three to six months.
Liver metastases were excluded by ultrasound and abdominal CT as were lung metastases by conventional chest x-ray and CT of the thorax. Before starting with drug treatment the patient underwent functional staging with 18F-FDG-PET demonstrating an increased tumor metabolism without signs of distant tumor spread. Imatinib mesylate at 400 mg per day was given orally. The patient suffered from mild diarrhoea and nausea during the treatment. The side effects were controlled by loperamide and metoclopramide. Follow-up 18FDG-PET examination two months after the beginning of the treatment showed a steep decline of 18FDG-uptake at the area of the tumor which by visual analysis of the PET could no longer be detected. This result documented response to treatment with imatinib mesylate which was continued for another four months. Follow-up CT at six months revealed a regression of the tumor diameter from 7.6 cm to 4.8 cm. The tumor margin showed a wash-out phenomenon with loss of contrast enhancement and no clear delineation . Resection of the residual tumor was felt to be possible now with preservation of the distal stomach and the spleen.
Intraoperatively the tumor was found to be located dorsal of the GEJ. The diaphragm was incised and after mobilisation of the greater and lesser curvature and opening of the lesser sac, the tumor could be mobilized easily from the pancreas as well as from the splenic hilus. Through mobilisation of the distal esophagus the tumor was resected en-block by linear stapler technique together with the gastric fundus and cardia using the retroperitoneal fat and parts of the left column of the diaphragm for covering the residual mass and as resection margin. The postoperative specimen showed residues of the ulcerous lesion . For reconstruction of the food passage an isoperistaltic jejunal segment was inserted.
Histopathological examination of the resection specimen confirmed a GIST with extensive regressive changes. The tumor originated from the submucosal layers and extended to the subserosa with a remaining diameter of 2.5 cm . Tumor cells were still positive for c-Kit, but the proliferation rate measured with Ki-67 expression was less than 10%. Oral and aboral resection margins were free of tumor cells as were eight perigastric lymph nodes. Molecular pathology of exon mutation analysis could not find a mutation in exons 9 and 11 of c-Kit nor in exon 18 of PDGF receptor alpha. Thus the case was classified as 'wildtype'.
The postoperative course was uneventful, the patient recovered quickly. He was allowed regular food intake from day four onward could be discharged from hospital at the 10th postoperative day. After recovery the patient continued antiproliverative therapy with imatinib mesylate at 400 mg per day. One and a half years later he is in an excellent physical condition and free from disease. The patient reports no restriction in the oral food uptake nor regurgitation or sourness. CT imaging and abdominal ultrasound did not show recurrent or metastatic tumor growth .