A 44 -year-old previously healthy female was admitted with a history of generalized body weakness, malaise, exertional shortness of breath for one-week and episodic nonspecific headache for last one-month duration. There was no fever, urinary, bowel, respiratory symptoms or visual disturbances. Despite blood transfusion during her second pregnancy due to low Haemoglobin, her both pregnancies were uneventful. There were no suggestive features of autoimmune diseases or no bleeding manifestations. She had no significant past medical history or family history.
On hospital admission, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15 and she was severely pale with mild tinge of icterus. No generalize lymphadenopathy or petechial rashes. Abdominal examination revealed mild hepatomegaly without splenomegaly. Other than cotton wool appearance in the right fundus , rest of the neurological examination (including left fundus , visual acuity, visual field and pupillary reaction) was uneventful. Her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg and pulse rate was 80/min. Respiratory examination was unremarkable. Random blood sugar was 123 mg/dl.
Her results of investigations showed WBC 7.84 × 103/μL, Hb 6.7 mg/dl, platelet 23 × 103 / μL, MCV 98.3 fL, RDW 21.7%, blood picture suggestive of Micro angiopathic hemolytic anemia, retic count 13%, DAT negative, LDH 817 U/L, serum creatinine 56.6 μmol/L, CRP < 5 mg/L, urine HCG negative, AST 34 U/L, Indirect bilirubin 29 μmol/L, INR 0.96, APTT 27 s, Fibrinogen 2.5 μmol/L, Thrombin time16.3 s, CPK 102 U/L, ESR 12, USS abdomen grade II fatty liver only, CXR and 2D Echo normal. ANA, VDRL, retroviral and other viral studies were negative.
According to the above investigation findings, she was found to have severe thrombocytopenia and micro angiopathic hemolytic anemia, which are the two key diagnosis criteria of TTP. With the other supportive investigations, the diagnosis was made as TTP.
She was managed with urgent TPE and intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 3 days initially and then converted to oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day. Her platelet count was markedly improved, and it was more than 150,000 after 3rd cycle of plasma exchange. She was given blood transfusion and her symptoms were improved. She was discharged with oral prednisolone and followed up at hematology clinic.