A 64-year-old woman was admitted to the local hospital due to seizure with transient loss of consciousness. She complained of headache and mild cognitive impairment for the past 1 year. Cranial computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging revealed markedly dilatation of the left cavernous sinus (CS), sphenoparietal sinus, and cortical veins along left cerebral hemisphere. There was some venous wall calcification [-]. Her medical history showed an accident by a fall from a height of about 4 m followed by loss of consciousness and suffered subsequently from the right hemiparesis 25 years ago. She was treated by physiotherapy and admitted in the local hospital for 1 month. Two years after an accident, she developed left proptosis and underwent ligation of ipsilateral neck vessels from another tertiary hospital. Her proptosis completely resolved and she had no symptoms until the past 1 year. The patient was transferred to our institute for further investigation and proper treatment. Physical examination revealed the previous surgical scar at the left side of her neck . Visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. She had no proptosis. On neurological examination, the patient had upper motor neuron facial weakness, nominal dysphasia, dyslexia, dyscalculia, and right-sided weakness (muscle strength 4/5) and numbness.
Cerebral angiography was performed before treatment. The left common carotid artery injection showed no existence of the external carotid artery, severe stenosis of the proximal ICA, and long segment of multiple small vascular channels, probably representing the revascularization of the left occluded ICA through vasa vasorum, at C3 to C4 vertebral level. There was a direct high-flow fistula between the cavernous segment of the left ICA and the CS with retrograde venous drainage into markedly dilated left sphenoparietal sinus, superficial middle cerebral vein, superior sagittal sinus through the vein of Trolard, and the left transverse sinus through the vein of Labbé . The fistula was also supplied by the contralateral ICA through the anterior communicating artery (ACoA) and vertebrobasilar system through posterior communicating artery (PCoA). In addition, 3D reconstruction and maximum intensity projection reformatted images of angiographic CT of the left CCA clearly illustrated multiple small serpiginous vessels, hypertrophied vasa vasorum, projecting over expected course of the ICA with antegrade filling of the distal ICA .
The patient underwent balloon occlusion test before treatment and could tolerate the vessel occlusion. Under general anesthesia and heparinization, transarterial detachable balloon embolization was attempted but the detachable balloon catheter could not be advanced into the fistula through ACoA from the right ICA, and PCoA from the VA. Then, the microcatheter was navigated into the fistula through ACoA from the right ICA. The largest GDC coil was attempted to place into the fistula, but the retrograde shunt into the fistula was so great that the coils mass was unable and kept migrating into the large venous pouch. Subsequently, the microcatheter was advanced further into the petrous segment of the left ICA proximal to the fistula which was occluded with Axium Detachable coils (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA). Then, transarterial coil embolization was attempted at left supraclinoid ICA, but it was failed. The decision was made to proceed with surgery by clipping of the left supraclinoid ICA distal to the fistula.
On the following day, the patient underwent the left frontotemporal craniotomy. Anterior clinoidectomy was subsequently performed because it was difficult to place the clip on the ICA due to the large arterialized venous pouch. The clinoidal segment of the left ICA was clipped by the fenestrated clip encircling the left optic nerve. In addition, the left ophthalmic artery was clipped by another clip. Postoperative course of the patient was uneventful.
One month after surgery, cerebral angiography was obtained and revealed the remaining of severe stenosis of the proximal ICA with associated vasa vasorum and reduction in shunt flow and size of the dilated draining vein along the left cerebral hemisphere. In addition, the fistula received additional supply from the contralateral ICA and left VA. Prowler Plus microcatheter (Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA) was used over the Agility Steerable guidewire (0.016 soft, Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA) was successfully advanced into the fistula through the small recanalized limen of the left ICA. Embolization was performed with multiple fibered interlocking detachable coils (Interlock-35, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA). Post embolization angiography showed nearly obliteration of the fistula. Post embolization course of the patient was uneventful. Follow-up cerebral angiography, obtained 1 year after the second embolization, confirmed no recurrence of the fistula . The patient had recovered completely from neurological deficits and had few episodes of seizure requiring the continuation of antiepileptic drug.