Patient 1: A 13 year old girl was seen by her primary care physician because she was feeling cold and tired. She had a total T4 of 14.2 nmol/L and a TSH of 468 mIU/L. Endocrinology was not consulted because the mother refused to have her started on treatment until the tests were repeated, which was done 6 weeks later. At this time, her T4 had increased to 86.4 nmol/L and her TSH had decreased to 17.8 mIU/L. The author was then consulted and the mother insisted she had not taken any thyroid hormone. As the thyroid tests had improved considerably, it was decided to hold off on treatment until they were repeated. It is of note that the non-identical twin sister had also been diagnosed with hypothyroidism 7 months earlier when she had a goiter but no obvious symptoms of hypothyroidism, a free T4 of 0.65 pmol/L and a TSH of 915 mIU/L.
When seen 2 months after initial testing, the patient reported that her energy level had improved, and her exam was normal except for a small goiter. There was no history of exposure to high levels of iodide or any goitrogen. She now had a normal free T4 of 15.5 pmol/L, a somewhat low TSH of 0.21 mIU/L, and positive thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibodies. She was seen back 7 months later at which time her total T4 was 73.5 nmol/L, TSH had increased to 4.3 mIU/L, and the gland was no longer obviously enlarged. At follow-up 9 ½ months later, she had no reported symptoms of hypothyroidism but her gland had enlarged and her low T4 of <6.5 nmol/L with TSH 262 mIU/L indicated that she was again hypothyroid. The patient and mother insisted that she had not taken any of her sister’s l-thyroxine during the 1.5 years she was euthyroid.
Since one sister’s severe hypothyroidism had resolved, the mother requested that her non-identical twin sister be given a trial off thyroid hormone after she had been on treatment for 18 months. After 1 month, the free T4 was low at 5.2 pmol/L (11.6-20.6), TSH 77 mIU/L, and TPO antibodies were 528 units/ml. Compared to her initial tests, this indicated only a partial recovery of thyroid function, so she was restarted on l-thyroxine.