The patient is a 10-year-old male who initially presented to the emergency room after suffering a right knee injury playing football. He described a noncontact, twisting and pivoting mechanism and felt a “pop” with pain. Afterwards the patient was unable to bear weight. He was neurovascularly intact with a significant effusion and decreased range of motion noted in the ER. Imaging demonstrated an osteochondral defect at the weightbearing lateral femoral condyle measuring 0.9 cm medial to lateral with a depth of 0.4 cm . The patient was referred in an urgent basis to the sports medicine department, where he was seen within 3 days. An MRI of the right knee was ordered and was referred to an orthopaedic surgeon after the results were obtained . Surgery to address the osteochondral fracture of the lateral condyle of the femur was performed within 3 weeks of the initial injury.
The patient was positioned supine on the table with the right leg flexed and a bolster placed under the heel. A tourniquet was placed on the upper right thigh. Arthroscopy was performed through the usual anteromedial and anterolateral portals. Initially, the hemarthrosis was evacuated and a diagnostic arthroscopy was performed. The cruciates and menisci were found to be intact. The lateral femoral condyle chondral fragment was mobile, and we were able to completely free it from surrounding tissue and debrided the anterior and middle aspects free of clots and intervening soft tissue using a freer and shaver . We then were able to flex the knee to 120 degrees, which reduced the fracture well and positioned the anterior aspect of the fracture fragment in line with the portal sites . We made adjustments in the reduction with a freer and then used a 1.62 mm K wire placed only into the fracture fragment as a joystick to both reduce and then buried the K wire into the underlying bony condyle to secure the fragment. A second similarly sized K wire was placed in the midbody of the fragment to maintain reduction. We drilled, tapped, and then placed a 3 mm × 23 mm Arthrex bio compression screw through the lateral portal into the more anterior aspect of the fragment . We then made a third, more distal parapatellar portal to allow for direct access and placement of a 3 mm × 26 mm Arthrex bio compression screw into the midbody of the fragment . Both screws had excellent bite and they were recessed under the level of the chondral surface. The K wires were removed, and the knee put through a full range of motion, which demonstrated preserved reduction and fixation of the fragment .
The patient was allowed to be toe-touch weightbearing for balancing purposes for 4 weeks. During this period, he had knee range-of-motion (ROM) 0-30 degrees to allow for ground clearance using crutches. After 4 weeks he was advanced to partial weight bearing and his knee ROM increased to 0-90 degrees. The patient was involved with physical therapy starting 1 week after surgery with an initial focus on ROM within the previously delineated boundaries. At 6 weeks X-Rays (XR) were taken, which demonstrated early healing, full weight bearing resumed and the patient also began nonimpact strengthening physical therapy exercises. After 6 weeks the patient began riding a bicycle and swim-based therapy. The patient was also seen at 3- and 6-month timepoints, where he continued to increase his activity and his XR demonstrated continued healing and osseous ingrowth into the chondral fracture area. At 6 months the patient was cleared to return to all activities after images were obtained and he had cleared physical therapy . An MRI was obtained at roughly 1 year to assess chondral healing .