In July 2019, a 42-year-old woman with unremarkable medical history referred to medical attention after the onset of recurrent abdominal pain. An ultrasound and CT scan revealed a tumor in the distal bile duct, associated with satellite pathological lymph nodes and three liver nodules measuring up to 37 mm in diameter . Based on the evidence of initial obstructive jaundice, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed for biliary stenting, with subsequent bilirubin normalization. Following, an endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy of the ampullary mass yielded a diagnosis of stage IV (metastatic), intestinal-type adenocarcinoma of the ampulla . Baseline serum CA19.9 and CEA were 629 U/ml (reference range 0–35) and 11.9 ng/ml (reference range 0–5), respectively.
Next generation sequencing (NGS) of the tumor tissue was obtained through the FoundationOne CDx 324-genes panel. Among the alterations retrieved , the NGS analysis revealed pathogenic mutations of BRCA2 (W1692fs*3 with a variant allele frequency (VAF) of 44%) and FANCA (Q13FS*31 with 3% VAF).
After ruling out dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPYD) deficiency, the patient received a first cycle of FOLFOX treatment. Ahead of the second planned cycle, an afebrile grade (G) 4 neutropenia occurred. Following neutrophil normalization, the patient restarted the scheduled treatment receiving three further FOLFOX cycles with peg-filgrastim prophylaxis. However, ahead of the scheduled fifth cycle an afebrile G4 neutropenia and a concomitant G4 thrombocytopenia were documented. Given this enhanced hematological toxicity, the finding of somatic FANCA mutation, and the young age of the patient, Fanconi’s anemia was excluded by a negative diepoxybutane test.
A CT scan evaluation after 4 cycles of chemotherapy showed a major partial response (PR > 50%) with complete regression of two liver metastases, while the serum CA19.9 level dropped to 40.8 U/ml .
A genetic counseling was undertaken and the BRCA2 W1692fs*3 was confirmed germline; accordingly, the patient’s relatives were screened .
In light of the severe chemotherapy-induced myelotoxicity, the patient’s young age, technical resectability of the residual tumor burden, and the entity of the disease remission, radical resection of the primary tumor, locoregional lymph nodes, and liver sites of metastases was recommended by multidisciplinary team discussion. On December 4, 2019, the patient underwent a duodeno-cefalo-pancreatectomy and the anatomic resection of both liver segments II and VIII. The pathology report demonstrated a negative-margin (R0) resection of a ypT3b ypN1 ypM1 (liver) AC. A post-operative CT scan showed no evidence of disease .
In October 2020, after a 10-month follow-up period with regular CT scans and bio-humoral monitoring, an isolated retroperitoneal nodal tumor recurrence was detected nearby the superior mesenteric vessels. Thus, considering prior myelotoxicity and the expected enhanced sensitivity to radiotherapy in BRCA2 mutant cancer, the patient underwent a long-course definitive imaging-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) for a total dose of 53.75 Gy in 25 fractions leading to a complete remission.
Following the identification of the BRCA2 germline mutation and given the sustained absence of AC relapse, the patient went on a dedicated screening schedule, and in October 2021, she underwent prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy. As in December 2022, after 3 years from tumor surgical resection, the disease is still radiologically and biochemically undetectable .