Stage IV (T4N2M0) undifferentiated large cell lung carcinoma was diagnosed in a 64-year-old Greek man. He was a smoker with a smoking history of 60 pack-years. Twenty-two years earlier, he had been diagnosed with a seminoma of the left testicle, for which he had been treated with surgical resection and adjuvant regional radiotherapy.
A bronchial biopsy, which diagnosed the lung cancer, ruled out a metastasis from the seminoma. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mass in the left upper lobe, lymphadenopathy in the left hilum and the mediastinum, and two small nodules in the right lower lobe.
A brain CT scan showed an edematous area with no contrast enhancement in the left temporal lobe, but the patient, who had no neurological symptoms and had a normal neurological clinical examination, refused further investigation using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). An abdominal CT scan and a bone scan were negative for metastases.
The patient was started on intravenous chemotherapy with a combination of carboplatin, etoposide and epirubicin every 28 days, and after three cycles of therapy he was re-evaluated using CT. The chest CT showed a 50% reduction in the mass in the left upper lobe and in the size of the hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. There was no change in the nodules in the right lower lobe, or in the appearance of the abdominal or brain CT scans.
Twenty days after the fourth cycle of chemotherapy, the patient was admitted to a neurological clinic because of the onset of self-limiting complex partial seizures, including motionless stare and facial twitching, with no signs of secondary generalization. His relatives stated that, during the previous 2 weeks, the patient had developed neurological symptoms of short-term memory loss and temporary confusion, and behavioral changes including anxiety and depression. He was started on anticonvulsants (Levetiracetam 1500 mg twice daily and alprazolam 1 mg once daily) and soon after underwent a brain MRI, which showed findings of cerebral gliomatosis .
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the brain also revealed findings of cerebral gliomatosis . Clinical and laboratory examinations were not indicative of metabolic, infectious, vascular, drug-induced or chemotherapy-related disease. Serum examination was negative for 'anti-Hu' antibodies. A stereotactic brain biopsy was performed and the pathology specimen revealed brain tissue with areas of lymphocyte infiltration and gliosis, with no evidence of tumor cells .
Based on the clinical picture, the patient's history of lung cancer, the MRI findings and the results of the brain biopsy, we concluded that our patient had a 'definite' diagnosis of PLE.
The patient continued the anti-epileptic treatment, was started on oral corticosteroids and had two more cycles of chemotherapy, and during this period, he had one more admission for self-limiting simple partial seizures. His neurological status was characterized by occasional self-limiting episodes of short-term memory loss and a temporary confusional state.
After the 6th cycle, the chest CT showed relapse of the disease in the chest.