A 34-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our hospital with complaints of abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant and pain in his right shoulder. The pain was not associated with nausea or vomiting, and there was no history of fever or jaundice.
His medical history included an open ductus venosus and an Abernethy malformation complicated by the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure 48mmHg), which had been diagnosed three years before and treated successfully with the endothelin receptor antagonist bosentan. At the time of presentation, he was in New York Heart Association functional class I. Physical examination displayed no signs of icterus, and cardiac examination revealed a hyperkinetic cardiac impulse outside the midclavicular line and a loud second heart sound. He had a soft abdomen without organomegaly. His laboratory test showed a hemoglobin level of 9.2mmol/L, an elevated liver enzyme profile with aspartate aminotransferase 46U/L, alanine aminotransferase 50U/L and bilirubin 32μmol/L. α-Fetoprotein (AFP) concentration was normal (3μg/L) as was hepatic synthetic function.
Computed tomography (CT) displayed the presence of a tumor, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for characterization of the lesion. The lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images in the venous phase, and arterial enhancement and washout were demonstrated, as is typical for a HCC . The presence of a shunt of 2 cm between the left extrahepatic portal vein and the inferior vena cava was confirmed . Preoperatively, workup included several tests, such as lung capacity (lung function test), cardiac function (electrocardiogram) and hepatic synthetic function (laboratory tests). If the results of these tests were normal, the patient would be eligible for surgery. In the preoperative workup, no biopsy of the tumor neither a biopsy of the normal liver parenchyma was found necessary. Because of his pulmonary hypertension, he was categorized as an American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class 3 patient. There were no other contraindications for surgery, and the patient underwent a successful right hemihepatectomy and surgical discontinuation of the portocaval shunt. Postoperatively, his pulmonary hypertension increased, and he needed oxygen for five days, after which his condition recovered. Furthermore, a small biloma was diagnosed, which was treated by percutaneous drainage.
Histological examination of the resected specimen revealed features of grade II fibrosis . A tumor with a diameter of 16cm was characterized as HCC with the presence of microvascular invasion. A tumor-free surgical resection of 5mm was recorded.
The follow-up of the patient consisted of a routine serum tumor marker AFP determination and contrast-enhanced CT or MRI at six months intervals starting three to six months after surgery. After nearly two years of follow-up, the patient is doing well and is free of HCC recurrence. His cardiac output is normalized, and his pulmonary hypertension is stable.