A 51-year-old African American woman presented to the internal medicine clinic with 2-week duration of right posterior medial thigh swelling and pain. She had a 20-year history of type 2 diabetes with diabetic retinopathy and diabetic nephropathy stage 4. She had no fever or trauma. On physical examination her right thigh had a focal swelling and tenderness mostly to the posterior medial aspect of the thigh. Her dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis pulses were palpable bilaterally. Her strength and sensation were intact. Deep venous thrombosis was ruled out with duplex ultrasound at emergency department 4 days prior to presentation. Her laboratory results showed hemoglobin A1C 9%, white blood cell count (WBC) 4.2 × 103/μl (4–10 × 103/μl), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 120 mm/hour (0–10 mm/hour), high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) 68.51 mg/L (0–5 mg/L), and serum creatinine 2.4 mg/dL (0.51–1.18 mg/dL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right thigh showed patchy muscular enhancement, most confluent in the biceps femoris . The imaging was concerning for subacute myonecrosis versus asymmetric inflammatory myopathy versus chronic compartment syndrome. She underwent open biopsy of the right thigh, which showed marked variation in myofiber diameter with frequent small rounded myofibers, endomysial fibrosis, and increased internal nuclei . There were numerous necrotic myofibers, basophilic myofibers with large nuclei and prominent nucleoli consistent with regenerating fibers, and endomysial and perivascular aggregates of T lymphocytes . Immunostudy for CD68 shows numerous perivascular and endomysial macrophages, as well as macrophages invading myofibers (myophagocytosis) . Pathological diagnosis was myofiber necrosis. She was then seen by rheumatology. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), aldolase, creatinine kinase (CK), and myositis panel, which includes Jo-1 Ab, PL-7 Ab, PL-12 Ab, EJ Ab, OJ Ab, SRP Ab, Mi-2 Alpha Ab, Mi-2 Beta Ab, MDA5 Ab, TIF1 Gamma Ab, and NXP-2 Ab, were unremarkable. An electromyography (EMG) showed myopathic changes of the right vastus lateralis, consistent with focal myositis. This EMG sufficiently ruled out diabetic amyotrophy, as she did not experience muscle weakness, nor did she have evidence of patchy involvement of sensory, motor, and autonomic nerves. On the basis of her history and diagnostic findings, clinical diagnosis of diabetic myonecrosis was made.
Patient was on low-dose aspirin, chronically. With her underlying chronic kidney disease, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs were not given. Due to lack of spontaneous regression, 2 months after her initial presentation, she was placed on prednisone 20 mg daily for 1 month. Her symptoms gradually resolved.
However, about 1 year after her initial presentation, she returned to the clinic with the complaint of persistent right calf pain. Due to concern of recurrence of her diabetic myonecrosis, MRI was done, which showed unilateral muscular edema involving right calf with the greatest degree of involvement within medial soleus . At that time, her hemoglobin A1C was noted to be 8.6%. The patient was diagnosed with having a recurrence of diabetes myonecrosis. Oral prednisone was restarted. Her symptoms resolved within 1 month. It has been over one year since her second course of treatment. She has not had any further recurrence. Patient voiced satisfaction about the treatment she received for her diabetic myonecrosis. She noticed no immediate side effect with steroid use.