A 32-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital because of progressive cerebellar ataxia and involuntary head tremors.
When the patient was 14-years-old, she began exhibiting an unsteady gait which worsened to become wide-based and staggering. She also developed slurring of speech and clumsiness of the hands. At 18 years of age, she began having involuntary dystonic head tremors as well.
She had no specific intestinal lesions indicative of malabsorption. Past medical history was unremarkable.
Her parents are cousins. There is no family history of similar neurological disorders.
Neurological examination revealed normal cognitive state, dysarthria, overt head tremor, bilateral dysmetria on nose-finger and heel-shin tests and a wide-based ataxic gait with inability to walk in tandem. Kayser-Fleischer Rings were absent; vision and hearing ability were normal. Motor and sensory examinations yielded normal results apart from areflexia. Romberg’s sign and bilateral Babinski sign were positive; Pes cavus deformity noted. Obvious overt head dystonic tremor, bilateral dysmetria on finger-to- nose and heel-to-shin tests and wide-based gait with inability to walk in tandem. Scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia (SARA) score was 11 [gait 2, stance 2, sitting 0, speech 1, finger chase 1.0 (left 1, right 1), nose-finger test 2.0 (left 2, right 2), fast alternating hand movements 1.0 (left 1, right 1), and heel-shin slide 2.0 (left 2, right 2)].
Routine blood tests, including liver function, autoimmune antibodies, thyroid function, blood smear for acanthocytosis and plasma levels of vitamins (B1, B2, B6, B9, B12, A, D, E), copper and ceruloplasmin were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid was normal including inflammatory, immunological and infectious indices. Electromyography, nerve conduction velocity and brainstem auditory evoked potential were all normal. Initial DNA analyses using capillary electrophoresis of polymerase chain reaction products excluded Friedrich’s ataxia, spinocerebellar ataxia (1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 17) and dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy. The plasma level of total vitamin E detected via high performance liquid chromatography was 0.59 µg/mL (normal: 10.8 ± 3.3 mg/L).
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no obvious atrophy of brainstem and cerebellum .
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral leukocytes of the patient and all available family members who gave written informed consent, according to the standard protocol approved by the China-Japan Friendship Hospital. DNA of the proband was subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES) using the Ion Torrent AmpliSeq Exome RDY kit (BGI Tech, Hong Kong). Variant call files were analyzed with Ingenuity Variant Analysis (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA, United States) using an autosomal recessive model. Clean reads were aligned on the human assembly GRCh37 by Burrow-Wheeler aligner. Small insertions/deletions and single nucleotide variants were called by genomic analysis toolkit and annotated by ANNOVAR. Several filtration steps to obtain putative pathogenic variants were processed. The functional effects of protein variants were predicted by Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant (SIFT), PolyPhen2 and MutationTaster. Disease association databases (e.g., HGMD, OMIM and ClinVar) and genetic variation databases (e.g., 1000 Genomes Project, ESP6500 and ExAC) were used in the filtering process as well. Potential pathogenic variants were validated by conventional Sanger sequencing and her family members were included for segregation analysis. We used the transcript sequence (OMIM*600415, NM_000370.3) of the TTPA gene and discovered homozygous variants(c.473C>T, p.Phe185Ser) in the proband. Sanger sequencing confirmed this result and revealed that her parents and the younger sister are heterozygous carriers for 473C>T . This mutation was predicted to be harmful (SIFT: tolerated, Polyphen2: possibly damaging, MutationTaster: disease causing). The 158-phenylalanine residue affected by the mutation were highly conserved in evolution .