A 13-year-old boy presented with severe scoliosis, characterized by a convexity to the right and significant rotation. He had a previous placement of sub-cutaneous titanium rods extending from T3-4 to L1-2 at 10 years of age after failure of bracing. His pulmonary function test (PFT) revealed a scooped flow-volume curve with a fixed moderate-to-severe obstructive respiratory defect and evidence of air trapping . The PFT was performed prior to bronchoscopy at 13 years of age as a routine investigation in all patients at the authors' institution. Overnight pulse oximetry was normal. His pre-operative blood gas was normal with no CO2 retention. He had no history of asthma.
Previous medical history revealed a birth weight of 2.4 kg and an uneventful infancy. Brace treatment with a thoraco-lumbar-sacral-orthosis was started at 5 years of age, but failed to prevent progression of the curve. He had a laminectomy and release of a tethered spinal cord when he was 10 years of age. Spinal rods without fusion were placed when he was 11 years of age. At that time, his degree of scoliosis, as measured by the Cobb's angle, was 68°, with a 15° rotation. He had a chronic cough, respiratory distress with upper respiratory viral illnesses, and frequent episodes of atelectasis and recurrent pneumonias involving the right middle and lower lobes. His serial chest radiographs demonstrated collapse of the right lower lobe, hyperinflation and a scoliosis deformity. He was on salbutamol nebulizer as needed, budesonide nebulization when he developed viral illnesses, and antibiotics with episodes of pneumonia. There was no evidence of pulmonary hypertension based on clinical examination, so an echocardiography was not performed.
Physical examination revealed scoliosis and decreased air entry to the right hemithorax. Flexible bronchoscopy before surgery demonstrated a compression of the right lower and middle lobe bronchi with a slit-like appearance . This was due to torsion of the bronchus intermedius just distal to the right upper lobe bronchus. He had a distraction of his spinal rod instrumentation to partially correct the scoliosis, which improved his Cobb's angle to 38°. The postoperative course in the intensive care unit was uneventful and he was transferred to the ward 2 days later. He spent 10 days on the ward receiving analgesia and chest physiotherapy. No stents were placed and the orthopedic surgeon believed that de-torsion would occur after correction of the scoliosis.