A 14-year-old girl with scoliosis following cardiac surgery for CHD early in life presented to our hospital for hemoptysis treatment. She had congenital heart malformations, including bilateral right ventricular origin of the aorta and an atrial septal defect, and had undergone open-heart surgery at the age of 1 year. During the surgery, median sternotomy was performed to reach the heart, although neither the ribs nor the vertebral bodies were affected. She had no other congenital diseases. At 12 years of age, she was first noted to have scoliosis with a main thoracic curve Cobb angle of 22 degrees and commenced brace treatment . At the age of 13, however, her main thoracic curve Cobb angle had progressed to 46 degrees and she suffered from hemoptysis, for which coil embolization was performed . On presentation 9 months later, her height was 143.7 cm, her weight was 27.6 kg, her BMI was 13.5 kg/m2, and she had not had her first menstruation. Her Risser grade was 0 and she exhibited closure of the triradiate cartilage.
Preoperatively, her main thoracic curve was T5-L1 with a Cobb angle of 57 degrees . Simple magnetic resonance imaging of the chest revealed a right-to-left difference in pulmonary blood flow ratio of 10:1. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed that the left pulmonary vein was being compressed by the deviated descending aorta . Echocardiography indicated no atrioventricular valve regurgitation or systolic or diastolic capacity abnormalities in either ventricle. Cardiac catheterization revealed that pulmonary artery wedge pressure, which has been reported to correlate with pulmonary venous pressure, was higher on the left side (23 mmHg) than on the right side (17 mmHg), suggesting that her hemoptysis was caused by pulmonary congestion from stenosis of the left pulmonary vein (hemoglobin [Hb]: 10.5 g/dL).
Based on the above results, her left pulmonary vein stenosis was presumed to have resulted from compression of the left pulmonary vein by the descending aorta from lateral deviation and right anterior rotation of the vertebrae due to the progression of scoliosis on contrast-enhanced CT since the age of 10 years . Our hospital policy was to prioritize corrective scoliosis surgery to release the vein compression.
The patient first received coil embolization 9 months prior to posterior spinal fusion from T5 to L2 using the vertebral coplanar alignment technique with spinous process preservation. After screw insertion, corrective force was first applied to the convex, non-stenotic vessel side to correct the scoliosis and rotational deformity simultaneously. Operation time was 238 min and blood loss was 150 mL. Her main thoracic curve Cobb angle improved to 8 degrees (72% correction rate) and thoracic kyphosis angle was ameliorated from 15 degrees to 30 degrees . Regarding spinal rotation, vertebral body rotation angle was slightly decreased from 10.5 degrees to 10.0 degrees at the apical T8 vertebra . Contrast-enhanced CT on the sixth postoperative day showed a midline and posterior shift of the vertebral bodies relative to the sternum as compared with preoperative images, suggesting that the aorta was exerting less pressure on the left pulmonary vein . The patient could walk continuously for 70 m on the third postoperative day and climb stairs on the seventh postoperative day, with no detectable shortness of breath or other symptoms indicating pulmonary congestion. On postoperative day 13, echocardiography confirmed an enlarged left pulmonary vein diameter from 4 mm preoperatively to 7 mm after surgery . She returned home on postoperative day 14 (Hb: 11.1 g/dL), with no hemoptysis recurrence in the 6 months since discharge.
This is a case report. The institutional ethics review board of authors’ facility has confirmed that no ethical approval is required. Consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for participation in this study.