A 74-year-old woman whose sellar AC was diagnosed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) a year ago was admitted to our hospital with complaints of bitemporal hemianopia and diminished visual acuity in the past 2 months. Her medical history revealed that she had chronic arterial hypertension. Sellar AC was diagnosed based on the clinical history and presentation and neurologic, endocrinologic, and ophthalmologic examinations, including visual acuity and visual field examination, and additional imaging findings.
The pituitary function was assessed using standard hormonal tests, such as the levels of thyroid-stimulating hormones and thyroxine (free-T3 and free-T4), growth hormones and insulin-like growth factor-1, plasma adrenocorticotropic hormones and serum cortisol, prolactin, luteinizing hormones, and follicular-stimulating hormones. The patient’s basal serum anterior pituitary hormone levels were within normal limits.
Visual function assessment involved measuring visual acuity using standard visual field testing. Visual field tests revealed bitemporal hemianopia and diminished visual acuity.
The radiologic diagnosis of a sellar AC is provided essentially by an MRI scan. MRI identified a well-defined, homogeneous, cystic sellar lesion with suprasellar extension and thin walls. The pituitary gland and stalk appeared stretched over the borders of the cyst and compressed against the dorsum sellae. No calcifications or solid areas were identified. On the MRI, a cystic lesion with dimensions of 30 × 15 × 17 mm and cystic mass content appeared isointense to the CSF. The optic chiasm (OCh) was compressed .
An endoscopic endonasal approach is considered the first-line treatment for this lesion. The necessary tools for performing surgery are: 4 mm in diameter, 18 cm in length, with 0°, 30°, and 70° rigid endoscopes (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany), which are held by a floor-standing pneumatic holder (Uniarm [Mitaka Kohki, Tokyo, Japan]). They are designed to move smoothly and steadily.
Under general anesthesia the patient was placed supine position with head raised 20° and fixed on a circle pillow. Extended endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal approach with the navigational guidance was performed to the cystic sellar lesion.
After applying the nasal decongestant, the Ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgeon started the operation from the left nostril. A submucosal-transseptal approach was performed. A mucosal incision was made near the mucosal junction, the nasal septum resected, the anterior wall of the sphenoid sinus opened, the septum removed, and the left sphenoid sinus mucosa turned downward. After accessing the sella, the neurosurgeon started the next step of the procedure with the assistance of the ENT surgeon and guiding endoscope. The septum was drilled, and the sella turcica, sellar tuberculum, and planum sphenoidale were drilled out after confirming the navigation. The upper part of the optic canal was carefully drilled out with a 3 mm drill. After a wide sphenoidotomy and sellar bone opening, a vertical dural incision was made, dural leaves lateralized to the sides using two Prolene 6.0 sutures, and then the AC was confirmed [-] A clear, nonmucinous fluid similar in color to CSF was drained out at the moment of the incision, using suction and irrigation.
When the walls of the AC were opened, the pituitary gland, pituitary stalk, and OCh were visualized. The anterior communicating artery (Acom), right anterior cerebral artery (A1), and OCh were also clearly observed [ and b]. The wall of the cyst on the side of sella turcica was further incised and excised totally. The cyst wall specimen was sent for pathology. The arachnoid membrane in front of the right A1 was also opened . The subarachnoid space in the cystic wall was fenestrated using bipolar coagulation and sharp scissors. This step was performed carefully to avoid injuring the Acom and A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery behind the arachnoid membrane.
Next, the thinned lamina terminalis was identified. This membrane was coagulated by bipolar and fenestrated using cautery and scissors. Then, the cavity of the third ventricle was inspected, and the massa intermedia, foramen of Monro, and choroid plexus, as well as thalamic veins, were visualized [ and ]. CSF circulation was restored.
After confirming a good passage of CSF through the fenestration, the dura was closed. For closure, abdominal fat was taken and sutured continuously with 6-0 Prolene to the edges of the dura. We used another piece of compressed fat above the incision line as an onlay-graft. Then, the bony septum was divided into three pieces and laid on the fat graft and the sphenoid sinus mucosa and the upper right septal mucosa were overlaid to reconstruct the bony defect finally fixed with a dural sealant [-].
The patient underwent endoscopic endonasal surgery, and the lesion was decompressed and fenestrated. Postoperative patient’s condition was without complications. Her visual disturbances were markedly improved and a pathological examination of the walls confirmed the diagnosis of an AC. No new endocrine abnormalities, CSF leak, meningitis, or neurological symptoms occurred. Follow-up (FU) MRI revealed a reduced size of the mass . During the postoperative FU period (24 months), there was no further recurrence.