The 23-year-old woman with the body mass index (BMI) of 35.7 kg/m2 was evaluated for LSG. Her past medical history was significant for bilateral knee osteoarthritis and had taken over-the-counter pain relievers for a long time with suboptimal effects. The blood tests from her primary care physician denoted prediabetes, borderline hypercholesterolemia, and mild elevations of the liver function tests (glycated hemoglobin 6.4%, total cholesterol 220 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 39 U/L, and alanine aminotransferase 64 U/L). Preoperative workups, including contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan and abdominal sonography, further reported a moderate fatty liver. She had also attempted to lose weight through different methods, including hypocaloric diet and exercise, for many years but without success. Therefore, the patient was indicated for and underwent LSG .
The LSG was performed using a 36-Fr bougie as a stent, and the staple line was oversewn to prevent postoperative leak and hemorrhage. A 7-mm silicone closed wound vacuum (CWV) drain system was placed intraoperatively along the staple line with its tip at the left esophagogastric junction (EGJ). The course of hospitalization was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day (POD) 4.
However, the patient presented with mild fever, upper abdominal pain, and purulent discharge from the CWV drain on POD7. The CT scan showed a minor leak at left EGJ . After risks and benefits of surgical exploration for leak repair in this situation were provided to the patient, non-operative management with broad-spectrum antibiotics, nasogastric tube decompression, and external drainage via the previously inserted CWV drain was adopted . Meanwhile, considering the prolonged duration of nil per os and to provide an adequate nutritional support, total parenteral nutrition (TPN) was given based on the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition clinical guidelines for hospitalized adult patients with obesity . The nutritional weight calculation was performed as follows: “nutritional weight = ideal body weight (BW) + 0.25 ∗ (actual BW – ideal BW)” . The estimated energy expenditure was 25 kcal/kg/day, and the calorie composition of TPN solution was customized with 48% glucose, 18% amino acid, and 34% fat emulsion. Supplementation of multivitamins and mixtures of trace elements (including zinc, copper, manganese, chromium, and iodine) was given daily if not otherwise contraindicated. Complete blood count, serum electrolytes, liver and renal functions were monitored weekly. On POD40, endoscopic examination with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (Histoacryl®, B. Braun) and ethiodized oil (Lipiodol®, Guerbet) injection in a 1:1 mixture was performed because of the persistent minor leak with daily drainage amount < 3 ml [, ]. But, unfortunately, an oral contrast enhanced CT scan on POD48 still showed an unresolved leak with a more enlarged pseudocavity .
In this situation, other alternative managements, including surgical exploration, esophageal stent, over-the-scope clip (OTSC), through-the-scope clip (TTSC), and percutaneous fistula tract embolization (PFTE), were explained in detail and provided to the patient. After careful consideration and discussion, the patient selected and received PFTE on POD63. A guidewire was inserted through the CWV drain, and then a 40-cm 5-Fr KMP catheter (COOK® Medical) was introduced after the removal of CWV drain. After the pseudocavity and fistula tract were well illustrated under fluoroscopy, the glue (33%, Histoacryl®: Lipiodol® = 1: 2) was slowly and continuously injected followed by gradual withdrawal of the catheter [, ]. The follow-up oral contrast enhanced CT scan on POD68 showed the pseudocavity was sealed with glue and there was no more leak . The patient resumed oral intake since POD75 and was discharged on POD86. She had a BMI of 27 and no clinical signs of gastric leak or recurrence of the fistula in the most recent follow-up on POD183.