A 60-year-old male presented with acute onset of bilateral blurred vision, pain, and redness 3 days after receiving a first dose of Moderna mRNA-1273 vaccine. He was diagnosed with primary myelofibrosis and underwent allogeneic HSCT in 2014. Grade IV acute GVHD and subsequent chronic GVHD, which manifested mainly as skin and ocular lesions were diagnosed. The disease activity of GVHD became stable after treatment with systemic corticosteroids and immunosuppressants. All corticosteroids and immunosuppressants have been discontinued since 2019. Since then, his ocular condition has become stable. Moderate corneal opacity and band keratopathy in the right eye were noted; severe corneal opacity and pannus were noted in the left eye, with baseline intraocular pressure of approximately 18 to 20 mmHg in both eyes, a visual acuity of 20/100 in the right eye and hand motion in the left eye. The patient was treated for keratoconjunctivitis sicca with artificial tears. In addition, no previous attack of uveitis was recorded.
At presentation, his uncorrected visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye and hand movements in the left eye. Ocular examination showed erythema of the eyelids, telangiectasia of the lid margin, conjunctival hyperemia, superficial punctate keratopathy, prominent anterior chamber non-granulomatous inflammation (cells 4+), posterior synechiae in both eyes, and hypopyon in the left eye . New central corneal perforation with iris incarceration of his left eye was documented. The posterior segment was obscured by the severe posterior synechiae and corneal perforation. The Schirmer test revealed decreased tear secretion of 2 mm in the right eye and 3 mm in the left eye within 5 min. The tear break-up times were 1 and 2 s in the right and left eyes, respectively. Ocular surface staining by fluorescein showed grade 3 in bilateral eyes according to the Oxford grading system. Ultrasonography showed a clear vitreous cavity in both eyes. Physical examination revealed new erythematous skin eruptions over his back . He did not report gastrointestinal symptoms.
Blood analysis reported thrombocytopenia, and a slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Human leucocyte antigen (HLA) B27 typing, rheumatoid factor and syphilis serologic tests were negative. Aqueous samples for polymerase chain reaction of herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, and cytomegalovirus were negative.
Treatment with topical 1% prednisolone acetate every 2 h and 1% atropine twice daily to the bilateral eyes, and oral doxycycline 2 times daily were initiated. Lubricants of gel (polyacrylic acid) and ointment (paraffin-based) were applied for dry eye. Additionally, conservative treatment was adopted for the management of the corneal perforation in the left eye. This included the administration of the aforementioned lubricants and topical levofloxacin four times daily. At follow-up 4 weeks later, oral prednisolone 10 mg three times daily and 0.05% topical cyclosporine twice daily were started because of only minimal improvement of the symptoms and signs, and the dosage was tapered gradually according to the clinical condition. In addition, the corneal perforation in the left eye healed with plug-like material formation after 8 weeks of conservative treatment, as well as improvement of dry eye with decreased superficial punctate keratopathy. Intravitreal corticosteroid injection was recommended, but the patient was concerned about the invasive procedure and initially refused. Therefore, to manage the anterior uveitis, a subtenon injection of triamcinolone was performed twice to bilateral eyes, with a dosage of 16 mg (0.4 ml) administered per injection for each eye, which resulted in partial resolution of the anterior chamber inflammation (to cell 1+); however, it rebounded 4 weeks later (to cell 3 + in the right eye and cell trace in the left eye). The patient still refused intravitreal injection; the frequency of topical 1% prednisolone acetate was increased to every hour, and oral prednisolone 10 mg daily was administered over the following 2 months so that the dosage was adjusted based on the ocular condition. Due to progressive blurred vision and persistent anterior uveitis, the patient ultimately had an intravitreal injection of dexamethasone sodium phosphate (0.5 mg) in the right eye, which was administered 6 months after the onset of the initial symptoms. The conjunctival hyperemia and anterior chamber inflammation subsided after only one intravitreal injection. The anterior chamber remained silent, and the topical prednisolone acetate was gradually tapered to once daily. Under relatively stable conditions with a silent anterior chamber, extracapsular cataract extraction was performed 5 months after the intravitreal injection, and penetrating keratoplasty was subsequently performed 9 months after intravitreal injection on the right eye. The last follow-up was conducted 10 months after the intravitreal injection, revealing a visual acuity of 20/200 in the right eye and hand movements in the left eye.