A 41-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of depression presented to the emergency department (ED) of a referring hospital shortly after taking 80 tablets of sustained release verapamil 240 mg (19.2 g). At the ED, she was treated with multiple doses of activated charcoal, fluids and calcium, and was subsequently transferred to our intensive care unit six hours post-ingestion. Her vital signs on admission were normal (see Table for timeline of our patient's clinical decline and recovery). An initial exam was unremarkable; our patient was easily aroused, alert and oriented, and appeared well. Serum chemistry, complete blood count and liver function tests were normal except for a mildly elevated serum calcium of 10.8 mg/dL and a hematocrit of 36.5%. A urine drug screen was negative, and acetaminophen and salicylate levels were undetectable. Her initial electrocardiogram (ECG) at the referring ED showed normal sinus rhythm, left ventricular hypertrophy, and poor R wave progression. At the time of transfer, the ECG revealed sinus bradycardia and inverted T waves in the anterior precordial leads. Telemetry monitoring demonstrated occasional premature ventricular contractions and apparent U waves. The Oregon Poison Center was consulted at this time, and no specific antidotes were initiated given the patient's clinical appearance. In particular, whole bowel irrigation was not recommended.
Eight hours after admission, at 14 hours post-ingestion, our patient's systolic blood pressure dropped to 80-90 mmHg and her heart rate to 50-60 beats per minute (bpm). An ECG showed third degree AV block. Clinically, our patient became lethargic, her oxygen saturation dropped while on a nasal cannula and she was placed on a 100% non-rebreather. Rapid calcium administration, fluids and dopamine were given with no response; isoproterenol produced a small increase in heart rate. A central venous catheter was placed, and norepinephrine and epinephrine infusions were started. Despite these interventions, our patient's clinical condition continued to worsen. She underwent endotracheal intubation and a temporary transvenous pacemaker was placed to maintain her heart rate. HIE therapy was initiated with 10% dextrose and insulin infusions, with the insulin initially dosed at 40 units/hr with no bolus. Glucagon infusion was started at this time as well. Empiric vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam were added due to leukocytosis of 17,400/mm3. Calcium chloride infusion was continued throughout this time to maintain an elevated ionized calcium level.
By the next morning, our patient's blood pressure had been stabilized with norepinephrine, epinephrine and vasopressin infusions, and her pulse was maintained by transvenous pacing. Insulin infusion was briefly increased to 60 units/hr before settling at 30 units/hr. She developed simultaneous anion and non-anion gap metabolic acidoses and was started on a bicarbonate infusion. Her chest X-ray and physical exam were consistent with significant volume overload from her multiple infusions and resuscitation, and a furosemide infusion was started. Her central venous pressure at this time ranged from 22 to 46 mmHg. On hospital day three, she developed a thrombosis of her right radial artery at the site of an arterial catheter and was started on intravenous heparin. Her previous urine culture grew > 100,000 colonies of Staphyloccoccus with a white count climbing to 31,700/mm3 and fever to 40°C; broad spectrum antibiotics were continued. Our patient subsequently developed refractory hypoxemia and was switched to airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) with supplemental nitric oxide and cisatracurium, with improvement in her oxygenation. She developed anuric renal failure and was started on CVVH. As a result of the initial resuscitation and these interventions, she received a total of 40.7 L of fluid. Despite these therapies, our patient's condition continued to decline. At the nadir of her clinical course, she had no underlying heart rhythm without pacemaker support and required 0.75 μg/kg/hr of norepinephrine, 0.04 μg/kg/hr of epinephrine, and 0.05 units/min of vasopressin to maintain a perfusing mean arterial pressure.
A literature review suggested the use of lipid therapy as a possible antidote, and on hospital day four our patient was started on an intralipid infusion with a 100 ml bolus of 20% followed by continuous infusion at 0.5 ml/kg/hr. Three hours after the infusion was started, the norepinephrine dose was decreased by more than 50% to 0.3 μg/kg/hr. After a further 48 hours, vasopressin had been stopped and her vasopressor requirement had dropped to 0.01 μg/kg/hr of epinephrine and 0.05 μg/kg/hr of norepinephrine. On hospital day six, our patient regained a junctional heart rhythm with a heart rate of 65-70 bpm and transvenous pacing was discontinued. Her respiratory status had also improved significantly enough to stop APRV, nitric oxide and cisatracurium. On day seven, she was weaned off vasopressors and changed to pressure support ventilation. Her renal function improved, urine output increased, and CVVH was discontinued. At this point, it was felt that she had overcome the acute effects of verapamil overdose, and her calcium, HIE therapy and intravenous lipids were discontinued. Her blood pressure normalized and her heart rhythm was sinus tachycardia with a rate into the 110s. A total of 4,200 mL of intralipid was administered over the initial seven days in the intensive care unit.
Our patient's recovery was complicated by leukocytosis and tachycardia that persisted even after her blood pressure and renal failure had improved. She had a distended abdomen, but was able to communicate and follow simple commands while intubated and did not complain of significant abdominal discomfort. A computed tomography scan of her abdomen revealed pneumatosis intestinalis, and our patient underwent a same-day, urgent subtotal colectomy and colostomy for ischemic colitis. She slowly improved and was discharged from the intensive care unit on 33 days after ingesting the tablets. She was discharged from the hospital on post-ingestion day 55 to a skilled nursing facility. At discharge she was alert and oriented with intact verbal function, was able to walk with standby assistance, and was eager to be discharged. At the time of publication she has completed extensive physical rehabilitation and will soon be returning home to be with her family.