A 3-year-old female Great Dane was referred for acute onset behavioral changes (aggression and disorientation) of 2 weeks duration, and seizures from 24 hours prior to presentation. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities in body temperature, body condition score, heart rate, pulse quality, or cardiopulmonary auscultation. All lymph nodes were considered of normal size and no pain was elicited upon manipulation of the orbital, aural, or cranial musculature. Neither was there any history of dermatological or traumatic lesions in the eye, ear, or mouth. The neurological examination revealed the patient to be obtunded with decreased postural reactions and menace response worse in the left side. Neuroanatomic lesion localization was considered focal in the right prosencephalon with a possible increase in intracranial pressure. Hematological and serum biochemical analysis showed no abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed using a low-field magnet (Airis Mate; Hitachi, Tokio, Japan). The study revealed a left-sided single frontal intra-axial lesion affecting gray and white matter adjacent to the internal capsule at the level of the optic canal . The lesion presented signal homogeneity characterized by hyperintensity on T2W and FLAIR sequences and hypointensity in T1W sequences with peripheral enhancement after intravenous contrast administration . The lesion had a round shape with the greatest diameter of 2.84 cm. This enhancement was also recognized in the surrounding meninges following the brain surface following sulci. A small linear tract observed was directed dorsally from the lesion through the corona radiata . The lesion was associated with extensive perilesional vasogenic edema that worsened the mass effect characterized by a midline shift. The orbital and medial pterygoid muscles also showed an intense enhancement . The wing of the presphenoid bone was thinner than the contralateral bone . A CT scan (Astelion 16, Toshiba, Tokio, Japan) was performed after MRI that allowed the identification of osteolysis in the presphenoid bone immediately dorsal to the orbital fissure . CT scan also revealed a hypoattenuating intra-axial lesion located in the left frontoparietal lobe together with diffuse hypoattenuation of tissues adjacent to the left optic nerve and the left pterygoid muscle. Finally, CSF analysis showed no abnormalities. On the basis of advanced radiological findings, the main differential diagnosis was an intracranial abscess due to the extension of the extracranial septic process through presphenoid bone. Because of rapid neurologic deterioration and suspected increased intracranial pressure, surgical excision was planned. A modified left rostrotentorial craniectomy was performed. Temporalis muscle and fascia were retracted, extending the incision cranially through the temporal line. Once the frontal and presphenoid bones were exposed an area of osteolysis was observed in the wing of the presphenoid bone immediately dorsal to the orbital fissure. The craniectomy (approximately 3 cm diameter) was centered on the osseous defect. A mucopurulent discharge presented immediately after the incision of the dura mater. A sample was collected for its microbiological study. The surgical site was flushed with sterile saline revealing the tip of a grass awn which was extracted from the brain parenchyma together with a small amount of purulent fluid . After extensive flushing, the meninges were left open to allow drainage and the incision was closed as per routinely. Postoperative CT showed the correct location of the craniectomy and resolution of the abscess which was substituted by gaseous content but remained inside and on the dorsal surface of the frontal lobe . Immediate postoperative therapy consisted of amoxicillin + clavulanic acid (Synulox 500, Zoetis Spain SL) 22 mg/kg PO, q8h; marbofloxacin (Marbocyl P80, Vetoquinol SA) 5 mg/kg PO, q24h; metronidazole (Flagyl 250, Sanofi-aventis SA) 15 mg/kg PO, q12h; prednisone (Prednisona Kern Pharma 30mg, Kern Pharma) 0.5 mg/kg PO, q12h; tramadol (Tramadol retard Combix 100 mg, Laboratorios Combix S.L.U) 2 mg/kg PO, q8h; famotidine (Famotidina Normon 40 mg; Laboratorios Normon SA) 0.7 mg/kg PO, q24h; and phenobarbital (Phenoleptil 100 mg, Le Vet BV) 2.5 mg/kg PO, q12h. Cultured samples were positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa sensitive to ciprofloxacin, imipenem, and amikacin among other antibiotics. Based on these results, antibiotic therapy was changed to ciprofloxacin (Ciprofloxacino 500, Laboratorios Normon SA) 10 mg/kg PO, q12h and metronidazole 15 mg/kg PO, q12h for 2 months. Prednisone, tramadol, and famotidine were withdrawn and phenobarbital was maintained at 2.5 mg/kg q12h. Six-month post-operative revision magnetic resonance revealed no signs suggesting the existence of an inflammatory process . In the area where the abscess had been located, a fluid-filled cavity suggesting being CSF was observed. One year follow-up revealed the patient had seizures every 3 months with neurological examination remaining normal. The patient died 2 years later of unrelated causes.