A 44-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our department in March 2002 with thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis. The same signs had appeared 2 years before in another hospital, without a definitive diagnosis. At admission, he had a platelet count of 123,000/mm3 and a white blood cell count of 8750/mm3. Physical and neurological examinations did not reveal any physical symptoms.
The patient’s clinical history revealed a spontaneous right lung collapse in 1987 (treated by drainage for 1 week) and an abdominal cardiac valve defect with gastroesophageal reflux since 1989. Liver and spleen hemangioma were detected by abdominal ultrasound. A bone marrow biopsy showed 70 % cellularity, with approximately half of the cell population comprising well-differentiated histiocytes. The cell cytoplasm was distended and closely packed with fine granules staining blue with a May-Grünwald-Giemsa preparation, and centrally located nuclei in some cells were displaced toward the periphery in others. These features were consistent with sea-blue histiocytes.
During follow-up, the patient’s initial hemoglobin (Hb) concentration and platelet count were 15.4 g/dl and 154,000/mm3, respectively, and his plasma chitotriosidase activity was 2150 nmol/h/ml. In May 2002, a fluorometric assay showed a β-glucosidase activity of 0.30 nmol/h/mg (range 1.7–4.3 nmol/h/mg), which is compatible with GD. This diagnosis was confirmed by molecular genetic testing, showing homozygous N370S mutations. At this point, the patient’s spleen volume (calculated on the basis of polar diameter) was 12.5 cm3. In addition, bone mineral density (BMD) measurement by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry revealed severe osteoporosis (T-score greater than −2.5).
In April 2003, several months after admission, ERT with imiglucerase (Cerezyme®; Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, USA) was started with a dosage of 60 IU/kg of body weight every other week. Approximately 1 year later (March 2004), the patient underwent upper-right lobectomy with mediastinal lymphadenectomy for treatment of lung cancer (clear-cell adenocarcinoma). In follow-up approximately 2.5 years later (December 2005), a clear improvement in BMD (T-score −1 and less than or equal to −2.5) and a substantial (> 70 %) decrease in plasma chitotriosidase to 616 nmol/h/ml were observed. The patient’s standard hematological parameters remained stable (Hb 15.4 g/dl, platelet count 126,000/mm3). In July 2004, a cutaneous allergic reaction appeared on the patient’s abdomen and shoulder during the ninth infusion of imiglucerase, which led to stoppage of the infusion and subsequent treatment with methylprednisolone 20 mg. Similar adverse reactions occurred at the 10th and 11th infusions. Thereafter the patient was prepared 30 minutes before starting ERT with intravenous chlorpheniramine maleate 5 mg to prevent allergic manifestations. No further infusion reactions occurred up to the 20th administration, at which point the patient developed urticarial, pruritus, diarrhea, and chest discomfort.
The patient became unwilling to continue with any intravenous ERT because of his recurrent allergic manifestations, which were poorly prevented by antihistamine therapy. However, he later agreed to switch to oral therapy with miglustat (Zavesca®, Actelion Pharmaceuticals), which was started at a dosage of 100 mg twice daily and titrated up to 100 mg three times daily over a short period according to the manufacturer’s instructions . He has since remained on miglustat therapy with good compliance and has not reported any adverse events. His core hematological parameters and further BMD findings have remained stable throughout follow-up . His spleen volume decreased from 12.0 cm3 at miglustat initiation to 11.1 cm3 in December 2015, after a total of 12 years of ERT and SRT. The patient has never had hepatosplenomegaly, and his liver and renal parameters were always normal before, during, and after ERT. To date, no bisphosphonate therapy for osteoporosis has ever been applied. Last follow-up was in December 2015.