A 59-year-old man arrived at a rural hospital in Colombia in November, 2020 after sustaining a scorpion bite on the left foot and was treated accordantly. The patient developed edema and swelling on the left side of the neck; he was treated for cervical suppurative adenitis with surgery and antibiotics.
During the post op follow up 1 month later, a CT scan of the neck was obtained reflecting incidental findings of a mass in the right PPS followed by a CT-guided biopsy. The pathology report indicated epithelial/myoepithelial neoplasia compatible with pleomorphic adenoma . With these findings, the patient was referred to the Head and Neck Surgery Department of the National Cancer Institute in Bogotá-Colombia for treatment.
A new neck CT scan was taken upon arrival revealing a 40 × 29 mm rounded mass located in the prestyloid space . Flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy ruled out nasopharyngeal extension.
After a thorough review of the biopsy by an oncologic pathologist, a medical board meeting was held at which it was concluded to be a benign pleomorphic adenoma; it was decided to perform robot-assisted transoral resection in July 2021.
Under general anesthesia and after nasotracheal intubation, the da Vinci robotic® (Intuitive Surgical, INC., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) system was docked above the patient's head. Then, a Crowe-Davis mouth gag, 8 mm HD telescopic camera 0° and 5 mm EndoWrist® instruments were placed. The surgical assistant located at the head of the table performed suction, retraction, and the operating physician sat at the surgeon's console. After conventional right tonsillectomy, a transfixion medial incision was made between the anterior and posterior tonsil pillars, being the superior constrictor muscle the upper edge; the PPS was acceded, and the tumor was identified . A Brainlab neuro navigator and a Hitachi ultrasound endoscopic transducer were used to identify the neovascular structures of the PPS. Complete tumor resection was achieved without capsule spill, and no complications at the end of the procedure . The patient was extubated and transferred to the general ward: oral intake was resumed after 5 days, and he was discharged without postoperative complications.
Surgical pathology demonstrated a minimally invasive carcinoma, 2.8 × 1.7 × 0.4 cm ex-pleomorphic adenoma with a malignant component of high-grade epithelial/myoepithelial carcinoma and salivary duct carcinoma. Microscopic examination showed the presence of necrosis and mitotic activity of at least 7 mitoses in 10 high-power fields. No lymphovascular invasion or perineural invasion was observed; the resection edges were negative, with neoplastic infiltration of the lesion capsule with 1 linear mm of tumor invasion . Immunohistochemical results were positive for ck7, p63, CEA, EMA, p40, and androgens. A Ki67 cell proliferation index of 30% was also found . Further imaging was negative for metastases in all instances (Brain, thoracic, and abdominal CT scans).
Due to the high-risk tumor reported, he underwent adjuvant IMRT technique external radiotherapy with 1.8 Gy to 54 Gy per fraction in low-risk volume (tumor bed and bilateral elective drainage) and simultaneous integrated reinforcement in a 2.2 to 66 Gy per fraction in high-risk volume (tumor bed) ending in November 2021. A follow up image was taken 8 weeks later, without tumor persistence . The patient was scheduled for routine follow ups every 3 months; on his second follow up he remained without swallowing dysfunction nor pain; the follow up CT was interpreted as disease-free .