A 32-year-old Indian male presented with pain and swelling over his ulnar aspect of the left distal forearm for 20 days. Patient had history of trauma due to fall from bike 20 days back following which he developed pain and swelling over left distal forearm. Conservative management with B/E slab and analgesics was given in a private clinic. There was no history of any constitutional signs or symptoms. The family, occupational, and histories were not significant. The general physical and systemic examinations were normal.
On local examination, there was an oval swelling of 3 × 2 cm in the left distal end of the ulna over dorsomedial aspect. The skin over the swelling was normal with no overlying scar, sinus, or prominent veins. There was no local rise of temperature. The swelling was tender and consistency was firm. There was no adherence to the overlying skin but the swelling was fixed to the underlying bone. Active and passive range of motion of the left wrist joint was diminished compared with the contralateral side. There was no distal neurovascular deficit.
Plain radiograph of wrist showed a lytic lesion involving left distal ulna with expansion and ballooning of cortex with pathological fracture without any periosteal reaction. Computed tomograms showed expansile osteolytic lesion seen in lower end of ulna measuring approximately 30 × 21 × 26 mm size with patchy cortical breach extending up to articular surface of the wrist .
A diagnosis of GCT was made clinically. Biopsy was done to confirm the diagnosis.
Patient was treated with en bloc resection with reconstruction of distal ulna with fibular graft and DRUJ stabilization with palmaris longus graft and k-wire.
Through a 12 cm longitudinal incision made over dorsomedial aspect of distal ulna, en bloc resection of distal ulna of 8 cm with 2 cm safe margin was done . Proximal fibular cortical graft from ipsilateral side was taken and fixed to distal ulna stump with a 7-hole DCP. Palmaris longus tendon was harvested and used as a tendon graft for the reconstruction of the triangular fibro cartilage complex (TFCC) and DRUJ as described by Adams and Berger in the treatment of chronic DRUJ instability. This construct was stabilized with a k-wire across the fibular graft and distal radius . An above elbow cast with a window for dressing of the incision site was given and limb elevation was advised. Suture removal was done after POD 12 with removal of cast after 4 weeks and follow-up was taken at 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year. Following removal of the cast, physiotherapy was started. He started gradually regaining his strength and movements following physiotherapy. After 1 year, sound union of the graft was noted with good functional range of movements at wrist and forearm with excellent hand grip and no evidence of carpal instability or recurrence of the tumor (-).