A 59-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with the chief complaint of hematochezia and malaise. On the day of admission and 10 days earlier, he had produced a fresh bloody stool. He had undergone open surgery with a bifurcated graft for an AAA 20 months earlier. The course was uneventful, with no remarkable findings on computed tomography (CT) at 6 and 18 months postoperatively. An abdominal examination at our hospital revealed nothing remarkable and no tenderness. His blood pressure was 122/75 mmHg; heart rate, 86/minute; body temperature, 36.6 °C; breathing, 16 per minute; and hemoglobin level, 9.0 g/dL.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and total colonoscopy revealed only colon diverticula and no bleeding. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed gas within the aneurysm sac and adhesion between the graft and intestinal tract in three areas: the ileum had attached to the anastomosis between the left branch of the graft and left common iliac artery ; the jejunum to the middle of the graft body; and the duodenum to the anastomosis between the aorta and the proximal graft. Enterococcus faecium was isolated from blood culture, suggesting communication between the intestinal tract and aorta at the attached sites, possibly due to infection of the graft. His vital signs were stable, so surgery was scheduled to take place after antibiotic treatment. After admission, he produced another fresh bloody stool, but bleeding ceased immediately. At 18 days after the second fresh bloody stool, however, he suddenly went into a state of shock, with massive fresh bloody stool and hematemesis, followed by cardiac arrest. Despite intensive cardiopulmonary resuscitation, he died from hemorrhagic shock.
An autopsy performed with written consent from the family revealed an ulcerative fistula in the distal ileum that adhered to the anastomosis between the left branch of the graft and the left common iliac artery , with a small hole at the aortic anastomosis . Arterial structure was destroyed at the anastomotic site. There was fibrous thickening of the arterial wall and the external elastic lamina had disappeared. The serosa of the small intestine and adventitia of the artery were firmly adhered . There was no marked sign of infection, such as inflammatory cells or phagocytosis, even around the fistula.