We have obtained written informed consent from the patient for publication of this case report.
The patient was an 88-year-old man with a height of 156 cm and a body weight of 48 kg. His medical history included hypertension and hyperlipidemia. He had undergone aortic valve replacement with a biological valve (Crown PRT®; Sorin Group, Burnaby, Canada) for aortic regurgitation (AR) associated with annulo-aortic ectasia 4 years previously. The sinus of Valsalva diameter had increased from 55 to 62 mm in 6 months based on computed tomography during follow-up for annulo-aortic ectasia ; therefore, he was scheduled to undergo the Bentall procedure via a repeat sternotomy.
At the time of admission, a transthoracic echocardiography revealed mild AR with an LV ejection fraction of 63% and LV end-diastolic diameter of 41 mm. Coronary angiography did not demonstrate significant stenosis, and an electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm. Laboratory blood test results were within normal ranges, except for a creatinine level of 1.21 mg/dL.
On arrival in the operating room, standard monitors were placed, and the left radial artery was cannulated for arterial blood pressure monitoring. General anesthesia was induced with 2 mg of midazolam, 500 μg of fentanyl, and 50 mg of rocuronium, and anesthesia was maintained with propofol, fentanyl, and rocuronium. After tracheal intubation, a central venous catheter was placed via the right internal jugular vein. TEE showed sinus of Valsalva enlargement and mild AR.
Following a standard re-sternotomy, the adhesions between the sternum and the aortic artery were exfoliated to expose the surgical field. In preparation for cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), arterial and venous cannulas were inserted in the right femoral artery and vein, respectively. After initiation of CPB, the LV vent (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted via the RSPV. The LV vent was inserted by surgical palpation on the first attempt without difficulty. Insertion of the vent was confirmed by observing the presence of ventricular arrhythmias and regurgitation of high-pressure pulsatile blood flow from the LV vent. The LV vent was shown on the mid-esophageal four-chamber view to be inserted into the LV cavity through the mitral valve; however, the tip of the LV vent was not visualized.
After systemic cooling was initiated, the ascending aorta was cross-clamped, and pure crystalloid cardioplegic solution (Miotecter®; Mochida Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was administered in an antegrade direction through the aortic root cannula, which had been placed proximal to the cross-clamped aorta. The plan was to administer 1500 mL of initial cardioplegia at a rate of 250–400 mL/min.
After starting cardioplegia, a large amount of clear fluid was drained from the LV vent; however, we could not detect AR by TEE. The cardioplegia flow and LV vent suction rates were increased. Despite delivery of two-thirds of the planned cardioplegia dose, an electrocardiogram did not result in complete cardiac arrest. Furthermore, TEE examination revealed that the tip of the LV vent had been misplaced into the aortic root across the aortic valve . An electrocardiogram showed ventricular fibrillation; thus, the ascending aorta was incised, and additional cardioplegia was selectively delivered to the coronary ostia, resulting in cardiac arrest. During this process, the LV vent at the aortic root was withdrawn under direct vision to the LV cavity . Then, 750 mL of blood cardioplegia (1:1 mixture of blood and crystalloid cardioplegic solution) was infused every 30 min at a rate of 200 mL/min in a selective antegrade fashion.
The Bentall procedure was performed without complication, and the patient was weaned off CPB without difficulty. The duration of the operation, CPB, and aortic cross-clamping time was 402, 224, and 156 min, respectively. After surgery, the patient was managed in the intensive care unit with tracheal intubation. The trachea was extubated on postoperative day 4. No postoperative complications were noted.