The patient, an 8-year-8-month-old Japanese girl, first manifested bilateral eyelid edema at 8 years 0 months and facial erythema 2 months later. At 8 years 4 months, she had dry cough and papules with erythema on the dorsal side of the interphalangeal joints of both hands. Her facial erythema gradually worsened and did not improve with topical steroids. She was referred to our department at 8 years and 8 months because of positive antinuclear antibodies and a chest computed tomography (CT) scan showing ground-glass opacity under the visceral pleura . At the first visit to our department, she had a typical heliotrope rash and Gottron’s papules , with no fever or weight loss. Her childhood myositis assessment scale (CMAS) score was normal (51/52) and there was no clinical evidence of myositis, muscle weakness, or myalgia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), including T2 weighted image (T2WI) and short TI inversion recovery (STIR), of the lower extremities showed normal findings without any muscle edema or myositis. An electrocardiogram and an echocardiogram showed no abnormalities. She had mild dry cough, without signs of respiratory distress, including decreased oxygen saturation. Laboratory tests showed no elevation of inflammatory markers . Although her serum creatine kinase (CK) level was normal (91 IU/L, upper limit of normal < 163), her aldolase level was slightly elevated (9.9 U/L, upper limit of normal < 6.1). Serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) level was mildly elevated, serum ferritin level was normal. Anti-P155/140 (transcriptional intermediary factor-1: TIF1), anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), anti-Mi-2, and anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARS) including anti-Jo1autoantibodies were all negative in the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays commercially available in Japan. And also anti-nuclear matrix protein 2 (NXP2) (MJ) autoantibody was negative in the immunoprecipitation- Western Blotting. Serum anti-SAE autoantibodies were detected using immunoprecipitation—western blotting [, ]. The details of the methods are shown in .
The patient met the 2017 American college of rheumatology/European league against rheumatism classification criteria for adult and juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and was diagnosed with juvenile amyopathic DM complicated by ILD. She received two courses of methylprednisolone pulse therapy followed by oral corticosteroid (20 mg/day, 0.7 mg/kg/day) and cyclosporin A (150 mg/day, 5 mg/kg/day) administration. We gradually reduced the corticosteroid dose as her skin rash improved after treatment initiation. There were no new muscle symptoms, dysphagia, calcinosis, arthralgia, joint contractors, lipodystrophy, lipoatrophy, or periungual capillary changes during the follow-up period. There was no exacerbation of abnormal findings on chest CT scan at 18 months from initial treatment, and no increase in serum KL-6 levels during follow-up. There was no flare of disease by the age of 10 years and 7 months, which was 24 months after treatment initiation. The patient continues to be prescribed oral corticosteroid (4 mg/day, 0.1 mg/kg/day) and cyclosporin A (50 mg/day, 1.25 mg/kg/day) at 24 months after treatment initiation.