A 23-year-old female presented in the Orthopedic Outpatient department with chief complaints of pain in right groin region for 9 months and swelling for last one month. The pain was continuous, insidious in onset, dull aching in nature, mild-to-moderate in intensity which increased on exertion and relieved with rest and medication. The patient had no history of fever, weight loss or any other constitutional symptoms. There was no history of TB or any contact with TB. There was no history of any trauma and gynecological or surgical procedures.
On examination, an ill-defined fluctuant swelling was present over the right labium. The overlying skin was erythematous with a local rise of temperature. There was severe tenderness over the swelling. The palpation did not reveal any inguinal lymphadenopathy and there was no distal neurovascular deficit. The movements at the hip joint were normal. Hematological investigations showed elevated ESR (22 mm in 1st h) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (36 mg/dl). The Montoux test was positive with (38 × 45 mm) of induration. The radiograph of the pelvis revealed a destructive lesion in the right pubis extending into the superior pubic rami with periosteal reaction suggestive of chronic osteomyelitis . The patient was further investigated with Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) which revealed oblong multiloculated multi-septate thick walled collection measuring 11.5 (TR) × 5.0(AP) × 5.1 (CC) involving right adductor longus, brevis, obturator externus muscles with focal bony destruction along right superior pubic rami . Anteriorly, one of the loculi measuring 2.8 × 2.5 × 2.1 cm was seen extending into the subcutaneous plane anterior to the right pubic symphysis. There was mild fluid in the right hip joint.
Subsequently, under all aseptic precaution, labial swelling was aspirated with 16 G needle which revealed frank pus . It was then sent for microbiological investigations including Gram stain, AFB stain, culture and sensitive for aerobic and Mycobacterium tuberculosis and gene expert for TB. The AFB staining, Bactec Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube culture and gene expert for M. tuberculosis came out to be positive.
Hence, the final diagnosis of tubercular osteomyelitis of pubis with labial abscess was made and the patient was started on multidrug Anti-tubercular chemotherapy comprising of Rifampicin, Isoniazid, Ethambutol, and Pyrazinamide for 2 months as intensive phase and then Rifampicin, Isoniazid, Ethambutol for the next 16 months as continuous phase. The patient started improving clinically after two months of treatment with subsidence of pain and swelling and improvement of her daily activities. At 18 months, patient had no pain and swelling in the local area, the hematological (Hemogram, ESR, CRP) parameters were normal and radiological investigations (X-ray, MRI) revealed healing of the lesion (, ). The ATT treatment was stopped and supportive treatment and physiotherapy was advised. At 2 years follow up, patient is asymptomatic and is able to do all her daily activities. She didn’t have any urinary complaints and was not sexually active.