A 43-year-old woman presented with dizziness for 3 months along with worsening dysarthria and ataxia for 1 month. Apart from severe cerebellar ataxia, she also complained of depression for 2 months, as well as memory loss and blurred vision for 2 weeks. Physical examination showed speech dysarthria and bilateral horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus that was more obviously towards the right. Finger-nose and heel-shin tests revealed severe ataxia, which had rendered the patient bedridden. Laboratory findings, including complete blood cell count and biochemical, metabolic, infectious, immunologic, and serologic tests, were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid and conventional brain MRI examination were unremarkable. The patient had a Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) score of 27 and a Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) total score of 21. She experienced impairment of short-term memory (2/5), visuospatial functions (1/5), and attention (4/6). The Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) and Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMA) revealed mild anxiety (15) and moderate depression (23). Anti-Tr antibodies were detected in both her serum (1:10) and cerebrospinal fluid (1:10). Due to the strong association of anti-Tr with malignancy, whole-body contrast computed tomography, ultrasounds of thyroid, breast, and reproductive organs, and bone marrow aspiration were performed for further investigation. However, no malignant changes were found. A diagnosis of anti-Tr positive autoimmune cerebellar ataxia in the absence of malignancy was established and the patient received immune therapy successively. Patient therapy consisted of steroid pulse therapy (5 days of 1 g/d intravenous methylprednisolone sodium succinate, and then 60 mg/d prednisone) followed by intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg per day for 5 days). After intravenous therapy, the patient was discharged from the hospital and underwent rehabilitation at home with continual prednisone treatment that was decreased weekly by 5 mg. Patient symptoms and treatment were shown in Fig. A.
Upon her re-admission 1 month later, the patient’s major complaint was worsening of the ataxia and an increased cognitive-emotional deficit. In recent years, increasing evidence for a role for the cerebellum in emotion and cognition has emerged [–] and the patient was identified as having cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome . The default mode network (DMN) has become the primary and most popular target of resting state networks and is thought to be involved in advanced cognitive functions and emotion [–]. Recent fMRI studies have linked activity to cognition and explored how FC is altered in several diseases. The disrupted connectivity within the DMN and remote interregional connectivity related to hubs of DMN have been widely reported in terms of changes related to cognitive deficits. The posterior cingulate cortex (PCC)/precuneus is a pivotal hub in the DMN and also has been linked to many cognitive-emotional disorders [, , ]. Therefore, to further assess the structural and functional abnormalities and reveal the mechanism underlying the cognitive-emotional deficit in this patient, VBM, PCC and cerebellum seed-based FC analysis were performed at the whole-brain level in addition to PET-CT. Acquisition sequences of sMRI and fMRI were seen in .
VBM analysis showed bilateral reductions in cerebellar volume, especially in the posterior lobe and uvula of cerebellum and the middle of the left temporal lobe in comparison with 6 sex- and age-matched healthy subjects (6 females, 43 ± 2 years; p < 0.05; Fig. B). Seed-based FC assessment identified reduced connectivity between the PCC/precuneus and left frontal lobe compared to the control group (p < 0.05; Fig. C). PET-CT revealed bilateral hypometabolism of the cerebellum and relative hypermetabolism of the cerebellar vermis and bilateral frontal lobe , but no malignant changes . An intravenous of injection of cyclophosphamide was offered at 0.4 g/d for 3 days, followed by Tacrolimus as a long-term immunosuppressive treatment. Unfortunately, the patient failed to improve.
At one-year follow up, the patient repeated the whole-body contrast PET-CT, ultrasounds of thyroid, breasts, and reproductive organs, and bone marrow biopsy with no evidence of malignancy. At this time, her symptoms have not improved.