A 34-year-old homosexual male with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related KS presented with chylothoraces due to obstruction of his thoracic duct by KS. He had extensive cutaneous lesions on the face, forehead, upper torso, mid-abdomen, left arm and left flank. He had been initially diagnosed with AIDS when he presented with vomiting and bloody diarrhea, and was found via endoscopy to have KS involving the colon. HIV serology was positive and his CD4 T-lymphocyte count at diagnosis was 30 cells/mm3. He was subsequently found via bronchoscopy to have pulmonary KS.
Pleuroperitoneal shunt placement and thoracic duct ligation were performed for management of chylothoraces. Since placement of the shunt, he developed ascites with subcutaneous extravassation of lymph that was associated with xanthogranulomatous bile lakes . He received diuretic therapy and medium-chain triglyceride dietary supplementation with only temporary improvement of his ascites. He was requiring paracentesis every 4–6 weeks for resolution of respiratory distress.
He received highly active antiretroviral therapy (stavudine, lamivudine and nelfinavir) and his HIV viral load became undetectable. His KS was treated initially with liposomal daunorubicin and then paclitaxel. He was then switched to SU5416 (an angiogenesis inhibitor) to which he had a temporary response. He was placed on palliative paclitaxel and died of progressive KS about 18 months later.
His pleural and lung biopsies showed dilated pleuropulmonary lymphatics with interstitial pulmonary extravassation of lymph. The biopsy revealed a multifocal increase in spindle-shaped cells with neo-angiogenesis originating from dilated lymphatics, associated with scattered lymphocytes and hemosiderin-laden macrophages, resembling early stage KS .
Immunohistochemistry was performed using HHV8 associated Latent Nuclear Antigen-1 (LNA-1; Advanced Biotechnologies, Columbia, MD) monoclonal antibody, as well as dual-color immunostaining with the vascular endothelial marker CD34 (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) and lymphatic specific endothelial marker D2-40 (Signet, Dedham, MA). Spindle-shaped and endothelial cells in these early KS-appearing regions were strongly HHV8 positive and immunoreactive for both D2-40 and CD34 . Non-lesional lymphatics were HHV8 negative and only D2-40 positive. Native blood vessel endothelium was HHV8 and D2-40 negative, and only CD34 positive.