A 29-year-old woman (height, 155 cm; weight, 56 kg) at 36 weeks and 5 days of gestation presented due to severe back and abdominal pain and the absence of fetal movement. The patient had a medical history of Sjögren syndrome and hypertension. On arrival, although ultrasound (US) did not reveal uterine rupture or placental abruption, fetal heart rate (HR) was 80 beats/min, indicating bradycardia. Fetal status was non-reassuring due to the fact that bradycardia had developed, so the decision was made to immediately perform emergency cesarean section (C/S), and we selected general anesthesia as the fastest method of induction. Surgery was started 16 min after arrival. Preoperative blood testing showed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 10.3 g/dL. When the patient entered the operating room, blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg and heart rate was 90 beats/min. Thiopental (250 mg) was used for induction, and anesthesia was maintained using oxygen, nitrous oxide, and sevoflurane. After delivery, maintenance was performed using oxygen, air, propofol 200–300 mg/h, and remifentanil 0.2 μg/kg/min. The fetus was delivered 3 min after skin incision, followed by the placenta 2 min later. Placental abruption was considered unlikely, since no hematoma was observed in the placenta during the operation. A large hematoma was identified in the left retroperitoneum while ensuring hemostasis. Blood testing after delivery of the fetus revealed severe anemia (Hb, 4.7 g/dL). Although the mother was given 6 U of red blood cells and 4 U of fresh frozen plasma, Hb remained at 6.6 g/dL. So, after skin closure, while receiving intravenous (IV) fluids, transfusion, and vasopressors, the patient was sent for computed tomography (CT) angiography to search for the origin of bleeding under maintenance of general anesthesia.
Contrast-enhanced CT was performed to identify bleeding points, and contrast leakage was identified in the left kidney . Renal artery angiography after CT imaging revealed contrast leakage from an intrarenal aneurysm in the left upper renal artery. Other points of leakage were unclear, but part of the kidney parenchyma showed a loss of contrast perfusion. Coil embolization was performed for the first leakage site, at the intrarenal bifurcation. Considering the results of the previous CT, embolization was performed with gelatin sponge for the second site .
After admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), no signs of hemorrhage were seen and the patient remained stable. Her trachea was extubated 2 h later, and she was discharged from the ICU on postoperative day (POD) 1. The mother continued to have a fever of 38 °C for 2 weeks, and infection from retroperitoneal hematoma was suspected, although blood culture yielded negative results. Sulbactam and ampicillin were administered. Hospitalization was extended for another few days to ensure everyday life did not cause re-expansion of the hematoma. She was discharged from hospital on POD 22. Back pain persisted for 2 weeks postoperatively, but was relieved using a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. No renal dysfunction was seen after performing TAE. Blood pressure was well-controlled at the time of discharge, and the hematoma was shrinking on CT. Angiography to search for additional aneurysms was scheduled for 6 months after discharge.
The female neonate was born with a weight of 2414 g and a height of 45 cm. No spontaneous breathing was present at birth, HR was < 100 beats/min, and umbilical arterial blood gas analysis showed acidemia (pH, 6.887). Mask ventilation increased HR and improved skin color. After starting to cry and breathe spontaneously, the baby was sent to the neonatal ICU on free-flow O2 with fraction of inspiratory oxygen at 40%. Apgar score was 2 at 1 min after birth and 9 at both 5 and 10 min after birth. Oxygen was stopped the next day, and the newborn remained stable. She received phototherapy for neonatal jaundice at 3 days old. Then she moved to the growing care unit at 4 days old, and she was able to be discharged from the hospital.