A 33-year-old previously healthy woman presented after a sudden loss of consciousness and reported seizure. Upon arrival to the hospital, she complained of a moderate headache with severe neck pain with a Hunt Hess Score of 2. CT imaging demonstrated subarachnoid hemorrhage from a right posterior communicating artery aneurysm. Importantly, no vasospasm was seen in the CTA from admission . She had an external ventricular drain (EVD) placed and underwent a craniotomy for clipping on post-bleed day 1. Post operatively, she was intact and monitored in the neurointensive care unit. Post-operative angiogram showed no evidence of flow-occluding spasm .
Her hospital course was complicated by severe vasospasm of the right anterior and middle cerebral artery. On post-bleed day 5, she began to experience visual auras and complain of blurry vision. Transcranial Doppler velocities were notably increased. She underwent endovascular intervention and administration of intra-arterial (IA) verapamil resulting in improved neurologic function. Triple-H therapy was initiated and her symptoms improved despite persistently elevated right transcranial doppler (TCD) velocities. On post bleed day 15, after 10 days of blood pressure augmentation to goal systolic blood pressures of 180 mmHg, she had an acute change in neurologic exam with a mixed aphasia and disorientation. Blood pressure was increased to a goal of 200 mmHg with no significant improvement. That same day, she experienced a complex partial seizure that progressed to a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. A repeat CTA demonstrated persistent right MCA spasm. An angiogram was performed , which showed vasospasm of the right ICA, MCA, and ACA, which was treated with IA verapamil. EEG did not demonstrate any subclinical seizure activity.
When her aphasia failed to resolve, an MRI of her brain was performed which showed left parieto-occipital vasogenic edema suggestive of PRES . Hemodilution and hypervolemic therapy were discontinued. Her blood pressure parameters were relaxed to systolic blood pressure goals of 140–160 mmHg. Given the right-sided vasospasm and the left-sided PRES, the decision was made to administer intrathecal nicardipine through her EVD. She received 2 mg of nicardipine every 8 h for five doses. Her aphasia and confusion began to improve over the next few days. Vasopressors were discontinued and blood pressure goals relaxed. She was transferred out to the floor on day 26 and discharged to an acute rehab on day 28 with no focal neurological deficits. She followed up in the outpatient clinic after 2 months and was neurologically intact with intermittent headaches. She had no further seizures. A year after discharge, she remained neurologically intact and a CTA demonstrated complete resolution of her PRES-associated cerebral edema as well as no recurrence of her aneurysm or vasospasm .