A five-year-old boy of Turkish ethnicity was referred to our hospital because of the spontaneous appearance of hematomas on both his upper and lower limbs and on his back over the preceding few weeks. His parents were healthy, unrelated, and he had no siblings. No family history for genetic diseases was reported. He was born out of normal pregnancy and delivery, with a birth weight of 4.1 kg; had normal peri-natal course and regular weight gain. He was barely breastfed and cow's milk was introduced from his first month. There were no previous hospital admissions. He did not have any major illnesses except for a few upper respiratory infections which were successfully treated with medication. In addition to these, he had experienced occasional, mild, non-troublesome cough that had never required treatment. His abdomen was always distended and his mother reported three to four loose stools per day in the last five months.
A general physical examination on admission revealed skin paleness, but no jaundice, and remarkable multiple bruises on both his legs and right arm and a single large hematoma in the lumbar region of his back. An examination of his abdomen showed marked abdominal distension, with no hepatosplenomegaly and no palpable mass or ascites. His height was on the third percentile, his weight was within the 25th percentile for his age. His body mass index was 16.5 (within the 50th percentile for his age).
A laboratory analysis was suggestive of iron deficiency anemia, with hemoglobin level 97 g/L, serum iron 2.8 μmol/L, hypoproteinemia (50 g/L protein), hypoalbuminemia (23 g/L albumin), elevated serum aspartate transaminase (AST) (129 U/L), and elevated alanine transaminase (ALT) (159 U/L). A coagulation screening profile showed normal platelets number and bleeding time, but a prolonged prothrombin time (PT) of 63s (normal range 12 to 15s), and prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 105s (normal 34s). Possible primary liver disease was excluded, with negative antibodies for viral hepatitis A, B and C, as well as negative antibodies for autoimmune hepatitis type I and II. Ceruloplasmin and α1-antitrypsin were within normal limits for his age. A liver biopsy was not performed because of the severe coagulation impairment. A rapid screening test for tissue transglutaminase IgA antibodies was positive, with quantitative measurements of 903.3IU/mL (normal range 20IU/mL). Antigliadin IgA was 1822IU/mL (normal range < 25IU/mL) and antigliadin IgG was 922.6IU/mL (normal range <25IU/mL). Histologic assessment of the intestine revealed villous atrophy, cryptal elongation and hyperplasia plus increased intra-epithelial lymphocytes and mononuclear cells infiltration into the lamina propria. HLA typing was positive for HLA-DQ2 (DQB1*02 homozygous). A sweat test was preformed on two separate occasions and came back positive, with chloride concentration measuring 118 mmol/L and 67 mmol/L. A chest radiography showed hyperinflation with increased retrosternal air space and reduced transparency in his lower lung lobes, especially expressed on the right side. The molecular work up was negative for the most frequent mutations of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) (only 11 are available in our center). Our patient was diagnosed to have both CD and CF. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid and pancreatic enzymes, antibiotics and oral iron supplementation was initiated and a gluten-free diet was recommended.
During the hospital stay plasma transfusion and Vitamin K substitution was administered to normalize the coagulation tests, as well as albumin supplementation. The PT and aPTT returned to normal values and remained normal throughout the rest of his hospitalization. Our patient was followed-up two months after the treatment, during which he was on a gluten-free diet and oral iron supplementation. The child looked healthy and had gained weight; his stools became less frequent with normal consistency. No recurrent bleeding or hematomas were detected. His liver enzymes, serum protein and albumin values were normal. Coagulation tests were normal without additional vitamin K supplementation. A sweat test was performed again, and was positive with chloride concentration of 72 mmol/L.