A 71-year-old Japanese man visited a hospital due to general weakness, persistent fever, and difficulty in drinking water and swallowing 3 days before the visit. The patient had a history of chronic heart failure and atrial fibrillation. Laboratory test results revealed elevated levels of hepatobiliary enzymes [aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 609 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 488 U/L; γ-GTP, 407 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 1219 IU/L; total bilirubin, 6.3 mg/dL], a normal white blood cell (WBC) count of 6200/mm3, a C-reactive protein level of 32.93 mg/dL, and coagulation abnormalities [prothrombin time (PT), 36.0 seconds; percentage of prothrombin (PT%), 17.6%; prothrombin time–international normalized ratio (PT–INR), 3.94; and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 52.0 seconds]. The patient’s laboratory test results are presented in Table . MELD score was 32. He was diagnosed with acute hepatitis and admitted. He was kept on bed rest and started on intravenous fluids. The following day, his blood test results showed a significant increase in the levels of hepatobiliary enzymes (AST, 915 U/L; ALT, 570 U/L; γ-GTP, 407 U/L; LDH 1365 IU/L; and total bilirubin, 9.4 mg/dL). In addition, the platelet count decreased to 8.5 × 104/μL, and the PT% increased to 23.7%. Acute liver failure was considered, and he was transferred to our hospital and admitted to the intensive care unit. Plain chest and abdominal computed tomography showed hepatomegaly with diffuse low attenuation, edematous thickening of the gallbladder, and splenomegaly , which suggested acute hepatitis. Hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody results were negative. He had no history of drinking alcohol, and there was no recent ingestion of raw food or initiation of new medications. Hence, the possible cause of liver dysfunction was unclear. A liver transplant was considered and discussed with a transplant facility; however, due to his age, a transplant was not feasible. It was determined that early intervention should instead be performed. We initiated steroid pulse therapy with 1000 mg/day of methylprednisolone. To treat hyperammonemia, lactulose, rifaximin, and probiotics were started. Additionally, he had pneumonia and was started on ampicillin/sulbactam . Plasma exchange (PE) and hemodiafiltration (HDF) were initiated on the second day of hospitalization. In HDF, 450 mL of dialysate was supplied per minute and 250 mL was used as replacement fluid per minute. However, his ammonia level gradually worsened, and his level of consciousness deteriorated. The oxygen demand increased due to hepatopulmonary syndrome. A nasal high-flow cannula was attached; however, his respiratory condition and consciousness further worsened. On hospitalization day 3, the patient underwent intubation and mechanical ventilation. Although liver failure did not improve, PE and HDF were continued. Additionally, Staphylococcus epidermidis was detected in the blood culture in all four bottles collected taken at the time of admission, and a diagnosis of bacteremia was made. On hospitalization day 5, a skin rash appeared on his face, which suggested HSV infection . At this time, anti-HSV IgM antibody was detected from blood specimens collected at the time of hospitalization. Although we were unable to perform a liver biopsy because of marked coagulation abnormalities, no other factors that could have caused liver damage were observed, and we diagnosed the condition as HSV hepatitis. Acyclovir (ACV) was then initiated, and 1000 mg/day of mPSL was administered for 5 days, followed by 60 mg/day of prednisolone as post-therapy. After initiating ACV, blood test results showed that his coagulation parameters, ammonia levels, and bilirubin levels had improved. Hence, PE and HDF were discontinued on hospitalization day 6. Furthermore, his level of consciousness improved, and he was weaned from mechanical ventilation; however, fever and elevated inflammatory markers persisted. Acute liver failure eventually resolved. However, levels of hepatobiliary enzymes increased, and drug-induced liver injury of the bile congestion type due to ACV was suspected; hence, ACV was discontinued. We replaced ACV with oral amenavir on hospital day 9; however, his condition further deteriorated, and he died on the same day. As consent for a pathological autopsy could not be obtained, histological analysis of the liver could not be performed .