A 63-year-old man who had undergone CAPD for 11 years was admitted to the emergency room due to general weakness, fever, and abdominal pain with hazy dialysate. He was an East Asian male, an office worker, who was 1 meter and 70 centimeters tall weighing 67.0 kg. His CAPD regimen consisted of a, 4 times a day, conventional 1.5% glucose anhydrous based dialysis solution containing lactate. The patient had been anuric for several years. Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents nor intravenous iron replacement had not been prescribed during the last month. However, he had been constantly receiving oral iron replacement. Two days before admission, he ate a sliced raw skate (thornback ray), and abdominal pain and diarrhea developed on the next day. The underlying cause of his end-stage renal disease (ESRD) was chronic glomerulonephritis, and there was no history of liver disease, diabetes mellitus, or steroid use. On admission, his body temperature was 39.5 °C, blood pressure 116/62 mmHg, and pulse rate 99 beats/min. There was direct and rebound tenderness on the whole abdomen. No definite skin lesions were discovered on any part of his body at initial evaluation, and the exit site of the peritoneal dialysis catheter was clean. Serum laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count 1930/μL, hemoglobin level 8.0 g/dL, aspartate/alanine transaminase levels 37/72 IU/L, serum iron level 36.0 μg/dL, transferrin saturation 22.0%, ferritin level 745.6 μg/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) level 109 mg/L, and procalcitonin level 65.89 ng/mL. Peritoneal fluid analysis revealed that WBC count was 3400/μL with 80.1% of PMN cells. The laboratory results are summarized in Table . Peripheral blood and peritoneal fluid cultures were performed, and the patient was empirically treated with initial loading doses of intraperitoneal cefazolin 1000 mg and tobramycin 60 mg followed by maintenance doses of cefazolin 250 mg per each PD (peritoneal dialysis) and tobramycin 30 mg once a day. On the hospital day 2, his body temperature remained elevated at 38.3 °C, and his blood pressure decreased to 78/60 mmHg. The follow-up laboratory test results showed that plasma sodium level was 130 mmol/L, potassium level 6.2 mmol/L, chloride level 91 mmol/L, bicarbonate level 14.4 mmol/L, and arterial blood pH 7.351. In addition, multiple vesicles with annular erythema and peripheral edema appeared on both lower extremities. Even after appropriate fluid supplementation, the patient remained in persistent shock, and the inotropic agent dose was increased to maintain the patient’s blood pressure. The patient was consequently transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring, and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated. At the time of ICU admission, the patient’s SOFA (Sequential Organ Failure Assessment) score was 12, APACHE-II (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation-II) score was 25, and SAPS-II (Simplified Acute Physiology Score-II) score was 53. Continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration was prescribed for CRRT. Treatment was delivered by a Prisma Flex machine using a ST100 (surface area, 1.0 m2) filter set, which contain a polyacrylonitrile AN 69 membrane (Gambro). Blood flow rate was started at 100 mL/minute and gradually increased to 150 mL/minute. Effluent volume was set to achieve a clearance of 40 mL/kg/hour. Replacement and dialysate volumes were set using the 1:1 balanced-predilution method. On the hospital day 3, the preliminary result of the initial peritoneal fluid culture reported Vibrio vulnificus as the most likely causative pathogen. Considering the preliminary culture study report, systemic intravenous ceftriaxone (2000 mg twice a day) and oral doxycycline (100 mg twice a day) were initiated, and the intraperitoneal antibiotics were immediately changed to ciprofloxacin (200 mg per each PD). With the change of antibiotics, hemoperfusion with polymyxin B immobilized fiber (Toraymyxin PMX-20R, Toray Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was concomitantly initiated, since gram-negative bacterial infection seemed to be the cause of the patient’s hemodynamic instability. In addition to CRRT, 2 hours of hemoperfusion was applied daily for two consecutive days. Approximately 3 h after hemoperfusion commencement, the patient’s electrolyte imbalance and metabolic acidosis were ameliorated, and his blood pressure stabilized, allowing a decrease in the dose of the inotropic agents without compromising his hemodynamic stability. Although the skin lesions on both lower extremities showed slight signs of aggravation, the patient did not exhibit any signs of compartment syndrome, such as motor weakness, altered sensation, or pulselessness. Based on these findings, the orthopedic surgeons decided that it was not necessary to have the patient undergo emergent fasciotomy. Therefore, only sterile dressings on the wet wounds were carried out daily during the ICU stay. The final reports of the bacterial cultures performed at the time of admission confirmed the growth of Vibrio vulnificus from both the peritoneal fluid and the peripheral blood with sensitivity to cefotaxime, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, and tetracycline. On hospital day 5, the WBC count in the peritoneal fluid decreased to 57/μL with 3% of PMN cells, and the CRP level decreased from 451.3 to 301.7 mg/L. CRRT was discontinued on the hospital day 6, and the patient was sent to the general ward on the day after CRRT discontinuation. Treatment with antibiotics, including intravenous ceftriaxone and oral doxycycline, was continued for two more weeks. Peritoneal dialysis was continued until hospital day 11 on which the PD catheter was removed. The patient recovered without significant complications and was discharged on the 46th day of hospitalization. The time sequence of key events is presented in Fig. .