Dyspnea upon exertion and chronic cough with wheezing for 2 years.
A 49-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for dyspnea upon exertion and chronic cough with wheezing for 2 years. The above symptoms worsened with white mucus sputum for the past one week with no complaints of fever, chest tightness, chest pain, or hemoptysis.
The patient was previously diagnosed with asthma and treated with inhaled glucocorticoids for 2 mo.
There was no history of tobacco use, and the patient denied having a personal or family history of other diseases.
In the physical examination, lip cyanosis, three depression signs (suprasternal fossa, supraclavicular fossa, and intercostal space), and expiratory and inspiratory wheezing were observed, and the sound of her lungs was decreased with crackles, but she did not have lymphadenopathy or weight loss. Furthermore, we could hear stridor in the trachea and neck.
Routine blood tests showed an elevated white blood cell count (14.70 × 109 cells/L; range, 3.5-9.5 × 109 cells/L), absolute neutrophil count (11.36 × 109 cells/L; range, 1.8-6.3 × 109 cells/L), and neutrophil percentage (77.3%; range, 40%-75%); the serum potassium level was found to be decreased in the blood biochemistry results (2.78 mmol/L; range, 3.5-5.5 mmol/L). The tumor markers were normal. The arterial blood gas test suggested respiratory acidosis combined with metabolic alkalosis.
Pneumonia was detected from the chest X-ray, with no other abnormalities. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest showed a sign of pulmonary infection, and computed tomographic virtual bronchoscopy (CTVB) showed a well-defined, soft-tissue density lesion measuring 2.4 cm × 2.1 cm in the lower trachea, located 2 cm above the carina . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed that the surface of the mass was smooth and vasodilatory, and nearly 90% of the tracheal lumen was obstructed, so the bronchoscope failed to pass through .
Histopathological analysis revealed that the tumor was composed of epithelial and myxoid mesenchymal elements and was characterized by the presence of ductal structures that appeared to contain double-layered cells in a mucoid or hyaline stroma. Notably, there was no sign of necrosis or mitosis . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells did not express thyroid transcription factor-1 and cytokeratin 7 (CK 7), but were positive for CK, CK 5/6, p63, and the S-100 protein, with low expression of Ki-67 (10%). Moreover, the basement membrane was immunoreactive for AB/ para-aminosailcylic acid. After immunohistochemical staining, the definite diagnosis was determined to be PA of the trachea.