A 46-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with a 1-week history of fever and sore throat. His past medical history included hypereosinophilic syndrome diagnosed at age 45 years. An extensive workup failed to disclose any underlying diseases. The patient had been receiving oral prednisolone (8 mg/day) and azathioprine (100 mg/day) regularly for approximately nine months, and his hematological status was stable. He denied any recent travel, illicit drug use or exposure to arthropods. He is married and reported monogamous sexual activity with his wife.
On initial presentation, his temperature was 39 °C, his blood pressure was 145/103 mmHg, his pulse rate was 111 beats per minute and regular, his respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and his percutaneous oxygen saturation was 99% on ambient air. Physical examination revealed throat congestion, bilaterally enlarged tonsils with exudates, tender cervical lymphadenopathy in the left posterior triangle, and mild epigastric tenderness. An examination of the genital area revealed no abnormal findings such as an ulcer or blisters, and the remainder of the examination was unremarkable.
The laboratory data at admission demonstrated bicytopenia (white blood cell count: 1400 /μL; platelet count: 13.4 × 104 /μL), elevated liver enzyme levels (aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 1558 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 1007 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 2688 U/L; alkaline phosphatase: 265 U/L; total bilirubin: 0.9 mg/dL), and hyperferritinemia (11,480 ng/ml; normal range: 3.6–114.0 ng/ml). Serologic tests for hepatitis A, B, and C viruses and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative. Serum antibodies confirmed past infection by the Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and varicella zoster virus. Computed tomography demonstrated prominent hepatosplenomegaly and multiple low-density areas in the liver. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multiple vitiligo lesions in the esophagus. A bone marrow smear showed hypocellular marrow with histiocytes (3.0%) and hemophagocytosis . HLH was diagnosed based on the diagnostic criteria for HLH . Given that the presenting symptom of pharyngotonsillitis is an initial manifestation, we suspected that the HLH was caused by an infectious etiology. There was no evidence of either bacterial or fungal infection in the blood and urine cultures or serological examinations. The patient received meropenem (1 g every 8 h) and intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (1 g/day) on hospital days 1–3.
On day 5, despite initial improvement of the fever and sore throat, multiple, new, small bullae developed on the patient’s face, trunk, and extremities , and the liver enzyme level remained elevated (AST: 935 U/L; ALT: 959 U/L; LDH: 2140 U/L). Additional testing showed positivity for HSV-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G. Disseminated HSV infection was suspected, and intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 h) and methylprednisolone pulse therapy were administered again on days 5–7. A subsequent direct antigen test of a bullae sample was positive for HSV-2, and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBSCs) detected HSV-2 DNA. Moreover, tonsillar and esophageal biopsies revealed viral inclusion bodies. Immunohistochemical staining and quantitative real-time PCR from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues confirmed the presence of HSV-2 but not HSV-1 . The methods for immunohistochemical staining and quantitative real-time PCR to test for HSV-1, − 2 , and β-actin were described previously. Based on these results, disseminated HSV-2 infection with multiple bullae, tonsillitis, and esophagitis was diagnosed. Hepatic involvement was also suspected. It is worth noting that the patient denied any past history of oral or genital HSV infection. A lumbar puncture was not performed due to the lack of neurological deficits or symptoms.
The patient improved steadily on a two-week course of intravenous acyclovir. His hematological status and liver function normalized, and his cutaneous skin lesions resolved. He was discharged on day 22 in good general health and continued to receive oral valacyclovir for viral suppression due to his immunosuppressed status. Prednisolone was tapered gradually to 12.5 mg on discharge. No recurrence has been observed 7 months after the treatment.