A 27-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 0) visited a local clinic for delivery at 39 weeks’ gestation. At admission, the patient’s heart rate was 70 beats/minute, blood pressure was 120/78 mmHg, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% in room air. Initial laboratory analysis demonstrated unremarkable results for platelet count, hemoglobin level, routine coagulation, and liver and renal function tests. Apart from gestational diabetes, fatty liver, and polyhydramnios, the patient had no known previous specific disease. She had regular uterine contractions after inducing labor with dinoprostone suppositories. However, she suddenly complained of abdominal pain and difficulty in breathing, followed by convulsions and loss of consciousness. Eclampsia was suspected and she was intravenously administered with magnesium sulfate. Ventilation with a mask was difficult as the oxygen saturation had reduced. The patient’s heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation gradually decreased. Accordingly, because of fatal heart rate decrease and no improvement in the patient’s vital signs, an emergency cesarean section was performed under general anesthesia and blood samples were collected for laboratory tests. Before delivery, the surgeon found no hemoperitoneum, but the nurse noted continuous bleeding from venipunctures. Ephedrine administration with tracheal intubation resulted in gradual improvement in vital signs of the patient. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen and sevoflurane at approximately 1.5–2.5 vol%. Intraoperative mechanical ventilation was set to a volume control ventilation mode with a tidal volume of 450 mL, peak airway pressure of 25 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 16 beats/minute. A live fetus was delivered within 5 min. The 1-min and 5-min Apgar scores of the neonate were 4 and 6, respectively. The neonate was endotracheally intubated and transferred to the neonatal ICU.
Immediately following delivery, the patient experienced cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed. After an epinephrine injection and defibrillation, the patient's sinus rhythm was recovered. After the uterus was closed, hepatic laceration in Section VII of the right liver with active bleeding was found during abdominal exploration. Vascular surgeons were immediately called for help for vascular and liver suture, and ICS (Haemonetics, cell saver, Elite,USA) was performed with two tubes for attracting blood at the same time. About 225 mL of salvaged blood was automatically washed with 1500 mL of NaCl (0.9%) (including 37.5 U/mL of heparin). The ratio of blood to heparin was about 1:7. The washing speed was 500 mL/min, and the salvaged blood was infused back through leukocyte depletion filters (Kangfu, China), which were replaced approximately every 600 mL to ensure the infusion speed and safety. Part of the salvaged blood was promptly transfused back to the patient. During hepatic surgery, surgeons observed bleeding without clotting and blood test results showed a serious decline in coagulation function with no decrease in hemoglobin levels (blood was collected at the beginning of the operation; Table , Fig. ). Loss of consciousness, hypotension, hypoxia, cardiac arrest, and serious coagulopathy led to the diagnosis of AFE. Accordingly, emergency mass transfusion was initiated to correct the coagulation disorders and bleeding. Furthermore, calcium gluconate, bicarbonate, hydrocortisone, granisetron, ephedrine, phenylephrine, omeprazole, insulin, and furosemide were intraoperatively administered to the patient. The hemodynamics of the patient were then stable. The operation lasted for 347 min; blood loss was approximately 14,075 mL, including 5450 mL of autologous blood that underwent ICS. A large proportion of blood products were transfused (as shown in Table ), including 30 units of RBCs, 10 g fibrinogen concentrate, 3250 mL fresh frozen plasma, 800 units of prothrombin complex, 5 units of platelets, 31 units of cryoprecipitate, and 2899 mL of blood was transfused back to the patient after ICS. The bleeding stopped after the coagulopathy was corrected and the liver laceration was repaired. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the ICU. At 60- and 90-day follow-ups, there were no complaints of discomfort or abnormal laboratory test results for the mother or the baby.