A 75-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with increasing chest pain and dyspnea upon exertion. The chest pain developed 4 weeks previously when he was climbing stairs, and this was relieved by several minutes rest. He also reported that 2 day preceding hospitalization, the pain was triggered by minimum exertion, appearing even at rest. His chest pain was characterized by a squeezing pattern and this was located in the substernal area and it radiated to his left arm. He had no history of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, smoking and drinking, and there was no history of ischemic heart disease in his family.
Eight years ago he was diagnosed of chronic ITP, but didn’t take any treatment. His platelet counts through the years had always been above 60 × 109/L. This earlier diagnosis of ITP was based on the observation of moderate thrombocytopenia and antiplatelet antibodies, with bone marrow findings consistent with the diagnosis. Five years ago primary PCI was performed in the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery using a drug-eluting stent (DES) because of acute anterior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction at other hospital. At the time of the first PCI, his platelet count had been around 90 × 109/L. He received 300 mg of clopidogrel and 300 mg of aspirin along with 5000 units of heparin bolus before PCI. He was discharged on aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg orally daily for 1 year, and he never had bleeding before.
On physical examination, his blood pressure was 135/70 mmHg. His heart rate was regular at 76 beats/min. The chest was clear to auscultation and percussion bilaterally. There was no heart murmur. Findings of abdominal and neurological examinations were unremarkable, and lower extremities were without edema. A 12-lead ECG recorded on admission in the patient showed normal sinus rhythm and biphasic or inverted T waves in leads V1–3 . Blood examination revealed a platelet count of 18 × 109/L, mean platelet volume 13.6 fl (normal range: 6.5–11.0), troponin I level of 0.55 ng/mL (reference, <0.1), creatine kinase of 105 IU/L (normal range: 38─171), total cholesterol of 4.47 mmol/l, low density lipoprotein-cholesterol of 1.88 mmol/l, high density lipoprotein-cholesterol of 1.40 mmol/l, triglyceride of 1.29 mmol/l and fasting blood-glucose of 5.2 mmol/l. Blood coagulation tests showed a prothrombin time of 12.4 s (normal range: 12–15), an international normalized ratio of 0.97 (normal range: 0.85–1.15) and an activated partial thromboplastin time of 35.0 s (normal: 30–45 s). Brain natriuretic peptide and chest X-ray were normal. A transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a normal left ventricular end-diastolic internal diameter of 50 mm with a slightly decreased left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.50. Diagnosis of ACS (acute non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction) was made. The GRACE (Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events) risk score of the patient was 143. The patient was administered high doses of intravenous nitroglycerin and oral metrolol and atorvastatin. Ten units of platelets were transfused after the patient was assessed by a hematologist, and the platelet count elevated to 87 × 109/L in the second day, and the patient was given 300 mg of aspirin and 300 mg of clopidogrel, prepared for a coronary artery angiography. Bolus injection of 3000 units unfractionated heparin was done at the beginning of the coronary angiography, and the activated clotting time (ACT) was monitored for the dose of heparin required, and then additional 3000 units were added during the PCI procedure, but GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors were not used. Coronary angiography was carried out via the radial artery, and revealed a 95 % in-stent restenosis in the middle part of left anterior descending artery (LAD; Fig. ). No other lesions were detected. The lesion in the left anterior descending artery was treated using a cutting balloon (Boston Scientific) with no complications . Heparin was not administered any more after the PCI, but combined anti-platelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg daily) was performed as usual. The ECG showed the T wave abnormalities in V1-3 were resolved after PCI . The patient was discharged asymptomatically at 3 days after PCI. Neither bleeding nor ischemic events were noted during hospitalization.
A week after discharge the platelet count was declined to 27 × 109/L, and aspirin and clopidogrel were stopped in outpatient clinic. Oral methylprednisolone was begun at 1 mg/kg per day and tapered over the subsequent 6 weeks. The platelet count gradually recovered to 200 × 109/L after receiving 1 week of methylprednisolone. He continued the treatment with aspirin 100 mg/day, and clopidogrel 75 mg/day for one month without any further problems.
Four months later, the patient was readmitted due to exertional chest pain he had felt for 1 month, even though he took all the medications (aspirin, clopidogrel, metrolol, atorvastatin and oral methylprednisolone) prescribed every day. On admission, the platelet count was 124 × 109/L, ECG showed normal sinus rhythm and ST segment depression in leads V2–5, and troponin I was mildly elevated (0.26 ng/ml; reference, <0.1). Diagnosis of unstable angina was made. Coronary angiography showed a 99 % restenosis at the site of the previous lesion and a 40 % stenosis in the proximal left circumflex artery (LCX; Fig. ). We used unfractionated heparin, a dose of 100 U/kg, aspirin 300mg and clopidogrel 600 mg were administrated. An activated clotting time of 358 s was achieved. A 3.5∗28 mm sirolimus eluted stent was deployed in the LAD with optimal angiographic result and Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow 3 in the LAD . There were no bleedings during or after the procedure, and at discharge the platelet count was 203 × 109/L.
He was then discharged on aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin and oral methylprednisolone. Clopidogrel was discontinued 1 year after the procedure. During 18-month follow-up, the patient remained clinically free of symptoms without any ischemia events or bleeding complications. Coronary angiography showed stent patency at 11 months’ follow-up . The platelet count remained stable.