A 77-year-old female living in a rural area of southern Germany developed, in spring 2020, initially flu-like symptoms with nausea and vomiting lasting for 3 days (without fever or reported headache), that deteriorated to additional word-finding difficulties, gait ataxia, global disorientation, diffuse confusion, and diffuse cognitive slowness in the next 2 days. She was admitted to the hospital 5 days after symptom onset. Her previous neurological status was normal and fully active for her age. Previous medications included L-thyroxin substitution due to thyroidectomy and anti-Xa anticoagulation due to atrial fibrillation and antihypertensives. Retrospectively, only in light of the final diagnosis, the patient’s family recalled a possible wild-animal attack on the patient’s domestic chickens a few days before the onset of symptoms as a potential origin of infection.
On examination upon admission (day 0), the patient was non-febrile, disoriented with cognitive slowness, diffuse confusion with severe attention deficits and reduced alertness, reduced concentration and execution capacities, mild apraxia, mild word-finding deficits, and diffuse cerebellar symptoms (mild gait-ataxia and dysmetria, saccadic eye pursuit). Meningeal signs were negative at presentation. The rest of physical examination was unremarkable. The acute brain CT scan (with CT angiography) was normal. The chest CT scan was also unremarkable. On day 2 after admission, a contrasted MRI scan of the brain showed preexisting microangiopathic alterations, without signs of encephalitis or an acute vascular event. Hematologic testing and blood chemistry at presentation revealed neutrophilic leukocytosis (up to 11,900/μL, 82% neutrophils) along with severe presenting euvolemic hyponatremia (121 mmoL/L). Renal function was normal, peripheral edemas were absent, and no evidence of poor perfusion was present. The electroencephalogram (EEG) on day 2 showed a theta-slowing without any sign of epileptic activity or triphasic waves. The initial lumbar puncture (day 2) found a clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with 8 cells/μL (mononucleosis), elevated total protein (62 mg/dL), CSF lactate of 3.0 mmoL/L (range < 2.4 mmoL/L), normal glucose and signs of mild blood–brain-barrier (BBB)-leakage without intrathecal IgG production (based on the Reiber diagram), cumulatively indicative of a mild non-bacterial inflammatory process. A viral encephalitis was suspected, and a corresponding CSF- and serum-diagnostic panel was ordered , which was negative for common bacterial or viral encephalitis (CSF PCR for HSV1/2, VZV, CMV, EBV, and serology for neuroborreliosis and endemic febrile seasonal meningoencephalitis [FSME]) and paraneoplastic antibodies.
A therapy with acyclovir, levetiracetam, and high-dose methylprednisolone was empirically initiated until the availability of the CSF results, yet without any treatment success. Hyponatremia was slowly corrected with oral substitution and fluid restriction. On day 3, the patient further deteriorated, with fever, meningism, reduced level of consciousness (somnolence), aggravated gait-ataxia, saccadic movement disorder, deterioration of cognitive functions, epileptic seizures, global aphasia, and signs of latent right pyramidal lesion (subtle pronator drift and positive Babinski sign). Due to further development of tachypnea and respiratory instability, she was prophylactically admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). At that stage, the clinical and laboratory data supported a rapidly progressive severe (meningo-) encephalitis of yet unknown etiology , that manifested as a diffuse cortical process with additional diencephalic, brainstem, and cerebellar insult.
On day 5, the patient became comatose and was intubated for ventilator support. All repeatedly performed chest- and brain-CT scans remained unremarkable. The contrasted brain MRI scan on day 12 revealed a discretely increased signal in the insula on the FLAIR sequence and discrete punctuate gadolinium enhancement in the frontal and temporal lobes without corresponding correlates in FLAIR sequences. This signal was “atypical” for other causes of viral encephalitis (, ). The patient remained comatose despite complete cessation of any analgosedation and was tracheotomized. Autonomic instability manifested as alternating hypertensive and hypotensive phases on a relative hypertensive background with a normal heart rate. A developed hypothermia required active warming for several days. Progressively and fastly, the patient lost cranial nerve functions and brainstem reflexes (pupillary, corneal, ciliar, and pharyngeal/laryngeal brainstem reflexes) by day 18, with complete dependence on invasive mechanical ventilation.
Her EEG continued to deteriorate, showing a generalized theta-delta rhythm with spontaneous burst suppression on day 21 , indicating severe encephalopathy. Due to irresponsiveness to prior treatments, a quadruple anti-tuberculosis antibiotic regime was also empirically initiated but also proved ineffective. A second round of intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g /d, for 5 days) was also ineffective.
An extensive serum- and CSF-diagnostic panel for differential diagnosis of encephalitis was repeated with additional diagnostic lumbar punctures on days 6, 20, and 33 (, , ). CSF showed a progressive lymphocytosis (increase of CSF cells at 13, 40, and 110, respectively, with >70% lymphocytes), progressive increase of total protein levels (49.7, 113, and 142 mg/dL for days 6, 20, and 33 respectively), lactate increase (3.1, 5.3, and 6.1 mmol/L respectively), increased IgG intrathecal production (53, 99, and 315 mg/dL), and constantly normal glucose. Pathologically increased CXCL13 on day 6 indicated an unspecific intrathecal B cell-related immune activation. Cumulatively, any potential local and endemic viral or bacterial causes known at that timepoint were excluded through the repeated CSF and serum diagnostic (PCR or IgM/IgG serology in serum and/or CSF). Specifically, CSF samples were PCR-negative for HSV1 and HSV2-, VZV-, CMV-, Picorna viruses (enterovirus, echo-viruses, and Coxsackie viruses), EBV-DNA and tuberculosis; serologically negative for an acute infection of rickettsies, toxoplasma, Listeria, HIV, JC-virus, rabies, HSV-6, HTLV-I/II, rotavirus, norovirus, Coxsackie, and febrile seasonal meningoencephalitis (FSME); a treponema pallidum infection was serologically (TPHA-test) excluded. SARS-CoV2 infection was repeatedly excluded via saliva and CSF PCR tests. Mumps and measles serology revealed an old infection, an acute one was excluded with PCR in CSF. Evaluation for non-infectious causes was unrevealing, including paraneoplastic markers and anti-neuronal antibodies, autoimmune etiologies, vasculitis, acute demyelinating pathology, degenerative processes (e.g., sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jacob disease), or an epileptic cause of the symptoms (e.g., a possible non-convulsive status epilepticus or epileptic discharges with postictal phenotype). NSE, oligoclonal bands, tau-protein in CSF, and b-amyloid-42/40 ratio were normal. The rare causes of severe encephalitis in Central Europe (Japanese encephalitis, dengue encephalitis, or West Nile encephalitis) were clinically, radiologically, or epidemiologically also excluded .
On day 27, we verified the loss of brainstem respiratory center function (apnea) in our comatose patient. A contrasted MRI brain scan performed on day 28 did not correlate with the severity of her clinical status, showing only a subtle expansion of increased FLAIR signal compared to previous scans, some new punctual or diffuse gadolinium enhancement, and a diffuse increase of T2* signal in basal ganglia probably attributed to normal aging. Eventually, the EEG on day 41 showed a complete absence of electroencephalographic activity. A further continuation of critical care treatment was deemed to be futile, and after discussions with her family, the patient died 42 days after admission.
The family provided informed consent for a diagnostic autopsy. A BoDV-1 infection with induced non-purulent, lymphocytic sclerosing panencephalomyelitis was diagnosed as the cause of the fatal encephalitis, both by routine immunohistopathology (we used an antibody against the phosphoprotein (P) antigen , kindly provided by Dr. D. Rubbenstroth, at a dilution of 1:3000) and real-time PCR, as previously established (, ). The sclerosing aspect is represented by the strong glial, primarily astrocytic activation with enlarged hypertrophic astrocytes in both brain and spinal cord . “Joest–Degen bodies” [i.e., distinct eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions, considered typical in BoDV-1 infection ] were also found in brain and spinal cord . The sequence analysis of the virus genome, using methodology previously established (, ), identified it within cluster 1A, phylogenetic similar to those isolated from the southeast area of Bavaria in other cases. BoDV-1 antigens and severe related pathology were detected in multiple areas in the brain, such as neocortical (e.g., frontal and occipital cortexes), hippocampus, subcortical (putamen and basal ganglia), cerebellar (nuclei and cortex), brainstem nuclei (e.g., pons nuclei, substantia nigra, and locus coeruleus) and neurohypophysial areas, as well upper cervical spinal cord (see ), explaining the clinical presentation of the patient.