An 84-year-old woman was found to have an abnormal shadow on a chest X-ray during postoperative follow-up for colon cancer (Figure ), and was referred to our department in December of 2012. She was a never-smoker. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 17-mm irregularly shaped tumor in the right segment 9 (Figure A). Positron emission tomography (PET) showed neither abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the tumor nor evidence of metastatic foci elsewhere in the body (Figure B). Blood chemistry data were unremarkable, and all tumor markers were within normal limits. She was otherwise in good health.A review of previous chest CT images demonstrated that there had been a nodular lesion at the same site two years before, which had grown relatively rapidly during the year prior to the current presentation (Figure A). The nodule measured 3 mm, 5 mm and 17 mm in maximum diameter on chest CT, two years ago, one year ago and in October 2012, respectively. Considering its clear tendency to increase in size, a primary lung cancer was suspected. CT-guided needle biopsy revealed that, histologically, the tumor had central fibrovascular cores, and there was hyperplasia of goblet cells and columnar ciliated or nonciliated epithelium (Figure A). Because no structural atypia or cytological atypia corresponding to adenocarcinoma was detected, a glandular papilloma was initially suspected. Tumor cells were thyroid transcription factor-1 positive, cytokeratin-7 positive, and cytokeratin-20 negative on immunostaining, indicating metastasis of colon cancer to be unlikely. This case was judged to be an appropriate candidate for surgery, as it is known that the biopsy specimens did not allow the possibility of malignancy to be definitely ruled out and as the tumor, even if benign, had growth toward the hilar region. Therefore, a right basilar segmentectomy was performed.
Macroscopically, a whitish mucous nodule measuring 17 mm in diameter with a yellowish endobronchiolar tumor approximately 5 mm in diameter in the center was observed (Figure B). Histopathologically, the tumor consisted of fibrovascular papillary cores lined by benign glandular epithelium. Consistent with the biopsy findings, there was no atypia corresponding to adenocarcinoma; glandular papilloma was thus diagnosed (Figure C-D). There was abundant mucus retention within the surrounding alveolar region. Mitoses and necrosis were absent, and the bronchial margins were free of tumor cells. In situ hybridization for human papilloma virus DNA was not performed in this case because there had been no reports of malignant transformation of glandular papillomas so far.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. At present, 12 months after lung surgery, she remains recurrence free.