We report the case of an 18-year-old Sri Lankan Moor woman from the Central Province of Sri Lanka who presented to the Teaching Hospital, Peradeniya with a history of high spiking fevers of 1 month’s duration. She was treated twice by her general practitioner with courses of orally administered co-amoxiclav and azithromycin to which she did not respond. She complained of daily high fevers with drenching sweating. She had severe anorexia and lost 8 kg over the period of 1 month. She had symmetrical inflammatory-type small and large joint arthralgia with morning stiffness for more than 1 hour. She had noticed her neck glands swell during this period. She denied having sore throat, rash, red eyes, or chronic cough. She had no alteration in her bowel habits. On further questioning, she confirmed no prior contact with a known or suspected case of tuberculosis. She was from a middle class Sri Lankan family and a school girl daily travelling from home. She had not had a sexual partner.
On examination she was febrile with a temperature of 37.78 °C (100 °F). She had moderate pallor with no icterus. She had left-side cervical lymph node enlargement with the largest node measuring 2.5 × 1.5 cm in the posterior triangle. Her lymph nodes were discrete, tender, and rubbery in consistency. She had mild ankle edema. Her cardiovascular and respiratory systems were unremarkable. Her abdomen was soft and non-tender with no clinically detectable organomegaly.
Her complete blood count was significant for hemoglobin of 7.4 g/dL with mean corpuscular volume of 74 fL. Her white cell count was 13 × 106/ml with a normal platelet count. A peripheral smear showed normocytic normochromic anemia with marked rouleaux formation. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 144 mm in first hour with a C-reactive protein of 60 mg/L. Her renal functions were within range with no protein or cells in urine. Her transaminases were within the normal limits. She had marginally low serum albumin of 35 g/L. A chest radiograph and X-ray of hers hands were unremarkable.
She was empirically started on a broad-spectrum antibiotic after septic screen including urine and blood cultures which were negative subsequently. However, the fact that she had persistent fever spikes warranted further investigations. An ultrasound of her neck confirmed lymphadenopathy and lymph node architecture was preserved. There was no ultrasonic evidence of organomegaly or para-aortic lymphadenopathy. A two-dimensional echocardiogram was normal. Her LDH level was 1254 u/L. Serum ferritin was > 1200 mg/mL. Anti-nuclear factor (ANA) and rheumatoid factor were negative. A peripheral smear for malarial parasite was negative. A Mantoux test was negative.
Two provisional diagnoses were made: considering fever with B symptoms, lymphadenopathy, and high LDH, a provisional diagnosis of lymphoma was made; and considering her fever, elevated blood counts (major criteria), lymphadenopathy (minor criteria) along with an elevated ferritin level, a provisional diagnosis of AOSD was made.
A cervical lymph node biopsy revealed partially effaced architecture and areas of necrosis, infiltrated with nuclear dust; surrounding tissue shows mononuclear cells . Histopathological findings were compatible with necrotizing lymphadenitis more in keeping with Kikuchi’s lymphadenitis. Prior to starting steroids she underwent a bone biopsy and subsequently it was found to be a normal marrow.
She was started on orally administered prednisolone 30 mg daily. She was fever free 24 hours after starting steroids and had a marked sense of clinical wellbeing. Currently she is followed up in the medical clinic. At 1 month her ESR had come down to 40 mm in first hour and she was asymptomatic with reduction in the size of cervical lymph nodes. Now she is on tapering off doses of prednisolone.