A 55-year-old Asian male presented to a local hospital in February 2019 with a 1-week history of cough and expectoration. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group - Performance Status (ECOG-PS) score was 1. The patient had a history of smoking for 30 years, 730 packs per year with no special medical, family, or psycho-social history. The primary physical examination showed that the right lung breathing sound of the patient was slightly weakened compared to the contralateral side, and the remaining examinations were negative. Thoracic contrast-enhanced CT showed a mass of approximately 7.5 cm × 3.9 cm in the center of the right lung with corresponding bronchial obstruction and obstructive inflammation encircling the vessels of the right lung, highly suggestive of bronchogenic carcinoma. At the same time, the right hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes were enlarged. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy biopsy showed middle right lung branch small cell lung cancer . A thorough basic imaging examination, including bone ECT, brain MRI, and abdominal CT, ruled out metastatic lesions. Initial diagnosis: Small cell carcinoma of the right lung in cT4N2M0, IIIB (American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Version 8 staging criteria) .
The patient received two cycles of first-line intravenous chemotherapy with the EP regimen: 500 mg Etoposide (60 mg/m2, d1-5 every 21 days) +100 mg Nedaplatin (80 mg/m2, d1 every 21 days). The patient’s cough and expectoration resolved rapidly after treatment. Chest CT showed a marked reduction of the pulmonary lesion . However, bone ECT showed additional metastasis in the fourth thoracic vertebra (T4) . Given the asymptomatic bone metastasis and marked reduction of the lung lesion, he was administered a 2-cycle chemotherapy with the original EP regimen combined with the anti-PD-1 inhibitor Sintilimab (200mg) at the local hospital.
The patient came to our hospital on May 28, 2019, for follow-up diagnosis and treatment. On examination, the lesions in the pulmonary and mediastinal lymph nodes were markedly reduced and had almost disappeared . Based on the criteria for efficacy evaluation (Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) v1.1) for solid tumors, we assessed the overall efficacy as partial response (PR), and we recommended chest irradiation.
From June 05 to July 10, 2019, the patient received a total dose of 36Gy/18F T4 vertebral body and 50Gy/25F thoracic involving field radiotherapy using 6MV-X-ray IMRT . The organs at risk were within limits, well below the dose limit (for example, lung V5 = 52.0%, lung V20 = 22.0%, lung V30 = 11.7%, and lung Dmean = 11.5Gy) . However, one month after the radiation therapy, the patient developed Grade II radiation pneumonitis according to the toxicity criteria for common adverse events (Version 4.0) . The patient’s symptoms were significantly alleviated after oral administration of prednisone acetate tablets and other treatments. There was no subsequent recurrence of radiation pneumonitis and no hormone-related complications.
Two months after the chest radiotherapy, on re-examination, we found stable pulmonary and regional lymph node lesions, but the brain MRI (September 17, 2019) showed new enhanced nodules in the right occipital lobe (1.1 cm × 0.8 cm × 0.9 cm) and right frontal lobe (0.5 cm maximum diameter) suggesting brain metastatic lesions . We revised the diagnosis to right lung small cell carcinoma, ycT4N2M1c, stage IVB (AJCC stage 8) with bone and brain metastases, and we evaluated the progressive disease (PD) efficacy.
At this point, the patient’s lung lesions had narrowed steadily, with two asymptomatic brain metastases, and he had recently recovered from the radiation pneumonitis. He was treated with whole-brain radiotherapy followed by targeted therapy with synchronous oral administration of Anlotinib. Whole brain irradiation (WBI) was performed using the TOMO radiotherapy technique along with a sequential boost to lesions, while protecting the key functional areas of the hippocampus (whole brain dose: 30Gy/10F, and the local dose for tumor lesions: 45Gy/15F) . Anlotinib was prescribed as per the standards (12 mg daily orally for 14 consecutive days, repeated every 3 weeks).
After whole-brain radiotherapy, the patient showed complete recovery from radiation pneumonia , and immunotherapy was restarted. Anti-angiogenic targeted therapy, that is, Anlotinib combined with anti-PD-L1 Atezolizumab as maintenance therapy, was continued for a long time. There was no Anlotinib-related adverse event, such as hypertension or proteinuria, or no immune-related adverse reaction during this period, and the disease was assessed as stable with periodic imaging evaluation once every three months.
In September 2020, that is, 12 months after brain radiotherapy, the brain MRI examination showed an enlargement of the original right occipital lobe lesion (0.3cm→1.5cm) without any symptoms. After one month of follow-up, the lesion continued to grow (1.5cm→1.9cm). At that point, the extracranial lesions remained stable. Local progression of the intracranial lesions was considered clinically in combination with the medical history and with reference to MRI imaging findings. The patient refused surgery and opted for further radiation treatment of the brain lesion.
From September 9 to September 11, 2020, we administered EDGE accelerator stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) with 6 mV X-rays at a total dose of 27Gy/3F for the patient’s right occipital brain metastasis . The metastasis was controlled for one month after SRT treatment and did not continue to grow. However, after 4 months of treatment with SRT, the aforementioned lesion began to gradually increase . At that time, we could not completely rule out intracranial progression and considered possible radiological brain injury. On June 2, 2021, the patient underwent partial surgery for this brain lesion, which was finally confirmed as radiation necrosis .
In October 2022, our patient stopped anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy after a full 3-year course of immunotherapy and was then continued on the single drug Anlotinib for maintenance with fine tolerance. At the last follow-up visit on 10 February 2023, overall survival (OS) from the time of first diagnosis of SCLC to present was 48 months and OS from the time of confirmation of brain metastases to present was 41 months . To date, excellent tumor control had been achieved and the patient had a high quality of life.