A 69-year-old caucasian male with a history of cubital neuropathy and mild hypoacusia was diagnosed with T4N2M0 squamous cell carcinoma of the supraglottic larynx invading the thyroid and hyoid cartilages as well as the base of the tongue. He underwent total glosso-laryngectomy, tracheostomy and cervical lymphadenectomy. Treatment was pursued with adjuvant therapy including cisplatin 100 mg/m2 IV q 3 weeks for 3 cycles and concurrent radiotherapy (66Gy). Recurrence with multiple pulmonary nodular lesions occurred within six months after the end of adjuvant therapy. Three months later the patient initiated therapy with pembrolizumab 200 mg IV q 3 weeks within a clinical trial. During treatment, the patient developed an asymptomatic primary hypothyroidism (TSH = 6.87 mUI/L normal value between (0.30–5.50), T3 = 4.1 pmol/L (3.5–6.0) and T4 = 9.3 pmol/L (10.0–23.0)). Serum antithyroid peroxidase antibodies were not requested at the time of diagnosis. Because he had a normal baseline thyroid function, a diagnosis of hypothyroidism secondary to pembrolizumab was made and levothyroxine 50 mcg per day was initiated. The patient did not develop other immune related toxicity to pembrolizumab.
After 14 cycles, complete metastatic disease regression was documented in the right inferior pulmonary lobe, hilar, anterior mediastinal and pretracheal lymph nodes and in the right upper lobe micronodules and a left pulmonary micronodule was stable. At a follow-up appointment before cycle 15th, the patient experienced dysphagia. The physical examination demonstrated only small ulcers of the oral cavity. A treatment with sucralfate and magic mouthwash was given together with a 7-day course of valacyclovir based on a suspicion of herpetic involvement in a patient with a positive HSV-2 serology. Two weeks later, the patient was admitted to the hospital with a history of progressive dysphagia. He complained of oropharyngeal ulcers limiting swallowing that evolved to dysphagia to liquids and solids in the last 5 days as well as weight loss of 6 kg. The physical examination showed multiple painful oral cavity and oropharyngeal ulcers with diffuse erythema without any sign of oral thrush, any lacy white plaques (Wickham’s striae) or reticular white plaques .
Initial blood tests at admission showed, hemoglobin 142 g/L, white cell count 7.7 × 109/L (neutrophils 5.87 × 109/L, lymphocytopenia 0.66 × 109/L, eosinophils 0.05 × 109/L) and platelets at 283 × 109/L. All bacterial, viral and mycotic cultures were negative. IgG and IgM serology for CMV and EBV were also negative. Gastroscopy was performed and demonstrated severe ulcerating esophagitis with an appearance of esophagitis dissecans superficialis in the distal esophagus. Discrete hemorrhagic lesions were also present throughout the entire esophagus . The biopsy showed ulcerated esophagitis associated with granulation tissue with absence of infectious features or malignant neoplasia . Immunohistochemistry studies including, anti-CMV, anti-HSV 1 and 2 were negative.
Immune mucositis and esophagitis was considered the most likely clinical diagnosis and pembolizumab was temporarily discontinued. Intravenous methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/day was initiated concurrently with the diagnostic evaluation and continued for 4 days. Marked improvement in symptoms was evident within 48 h. Treatment was thereafter switched to oral prednisone at 100 mg daily for 3 days with tapering planned over 2 months. Optimal analgesia, pantoprazole 40 mg twice daily and topical lidocaine were also given as supportive treatment. The patient reported complete relief of dysphagia at 2 weeks after hospital discharge. During the fourth week of taper, a grade 1 mucositis recurred at a dose of 20 mg of prednisone. Prednisone was re-escalated to 2 mg/kg/day. The patient tolerated a slow tapering of the prednisone thereafter without clinical evidence of recurrence. A follow up gastroscopy performed at 3 months showed incomplete mucosal healing. However, the patient remained with dysphagia that required a gastrostomy. Pembrolizumab was not restarted and the patient’s response was maintained for 8 months after pembrolizumab discontinuation, at which time a neck recurrence was documented. Prednisone was used over a period of 6 months.