A 21-year old morbidly obese caucasian female patient was referred to our bariatric center for surgical treatment. Patient history revealed she had undergone a laparoscopic fenestration of an ovarian cyst 7 years prior without complications. The body mass index (BMI) at the time of consultation was 36.8 kg/m2 (84 kg, 151 cm). Standardized diagnostic workup included a pulmonary and cardiologic check-up, and an ultrasound of the gallbladder and liver, which revealed a mild liver steatosis and no further anomalies. A gastroscopy, which had been performed 6 months earlier because of dyspepsia, showed a small (1 cm) axial hiatal hernia with grade A reflux esophagitis and negative biopsies for Helicobacter pylori . After consulting the patient and discussing the case in our interdisciplinary bariatric team, the decision was made to perform a laparoscopic RYGB procedure . The patient provided informed consent. At the time of surgery, diagnostic laparoscopy showed a larger than expected hiatal hernia with transposition of the gastroesophageal junction 3–4 cm into the thoracic cavity. Thus, after repositioning the stomach into the abdominal cavity, a posterior cruroraphy with braided nonabsorbable single sutures was performed. Next, a laparoscopic RYGB with antecolic Roux-en-Y limb [alimentary limb (AL)] was performed. No further irregularities were encountered during surgery. The gastro-enterostomy was hand-sewn with a running suture using monofilament absorbable synthetic sutures, and a linear stapler was used to perform the jejuno-jejunostomy. Monofilament nonabsorbable polypropylene sutures were used for closure of all mesenteric defects (jejuno-mesenterial and Petersen’s space) with single stiches. The upper gastrointestinal X-ray series performed routinely on the first postoperative day showed regular postoperative results with no leakage or signs of obstruction. Thus, a diet consisting of liquids and mushy foods was started. On the same day the patient complained of mild abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant and reduced appetite. The patient did not have symptoms of nausea or vomiting. The cardiopulmonary parameters and body temperature were always normal. On the fourth postoperative day the patient complained of sudden nausea, increasing abdominal pain and fullness. The abdomen was distended, and an emergency computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained. The CT scan showed an obstruction of the transverse colon with a sudden change of caliber dorso-caudally to the stomach proximally to the jejuno-jejunostomy, and distension of right transverse and ascending colon including cecum . A fluid-filled small bowel and remnant stomach were seen as signs of intestinal congestion, while the gastric pouch, the gastro-enterostomy and the jejuno-jejunostomy displayed regularly. Consequently, the patient was taken into the operating theater for an emergency laparoscopy. Because of massive abdominal distension resulting in too little space for pneumoperitoneum, conversion to laparotomy had to be made. Exploration showed compression of the transverse colon by the antecolic AL and subsequent massive distension of the ascending and right transverse colon. Through opening of the closed Petersen’s space and mesenteric mobilization of the AL, the pressure on the transverse colon was released. Because of the massively distended colon and compromised colonic wall with threatening perforation, a decompressing colotomy was performed. Three serosal tears in the ascending colon, caused by the massive distension, were sutured. As per local protocol in early postoperative bowel obstruction after RYGB surgery, a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube was placed in the remnant stomach to ensure lasting decompression and provide monitoring. Subsequently, the abdominal fascia was closed, and a subcutaneous negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT) device was installed to ease the tension on the abdominal fascia as per local protocol. Postoperatively, an antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and metronidazole was administered. Oral intake was limited to small amounts of clear fluid, and parenteral nutrition was initiated. One day after revisional surgery, the patient experienced tachycardia, and pulse oximetry showed peripheral oxygen saturation levels of 80% despite nasal oxygen substitution. In the subsequent thoracic CT scan, no signs of pulmonary embolism were found, while bilateral pleural effusions were seen, and therapy with diuretics was administered. Because of persistent leukocytosis and high C-reactive protein count on the seventh day after the initial operation, 3 days after the revisional surgery, a second-look laparotomy was performed. A minor leakage at the gastric entry point of the PEG tube was seen, while calibers of the colon, remnant stomach and small bowel were normal. The leakage was corrected, the abdominal fascia was closed and a subcutaneous NPWT installed. Five days later, secondary closure of the laparotomy wound was achieved and the further postoperative course was uneventful. Antibiotic therapy and parenteral nutrition were eventually stopped, and the PEG tube closed off as full oral intake was possible. Twenty-two days postoperatively and 18 days after revisional surgery for obstruction, the patient was discharged in good condition.
Three weeks after discharge during a scheduled follow-up in the outpatient clinic, the PEG tube was removed and the patient had no complaints. Weight loss of 15 kg was documented at that time. Six months postoperatively the patient was again seen in the outpatient clinic, where she complained of postprandial abdominal pain and intermittent odynophagia. An ultrasound of the gallbladder and a gastroscopy showed no signs of gallstones and gastric or anastomotic ulcer, respectively, and symptomatic therapy was started. One-year follow-up showed a weight rebound to 80 kg (BMI 35.1 kg/m2) and lasting nonspecific abdominal pain. A gastrogastric fistula between the gastric pouch and the remnant stomach as possible cause for the rebound was excluded via upper gastrointestinal (GI) series and a gastroscopy. At the time of writing this report, therapy with a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonist is being started in addition to existing dietary measures and exercise, and the patient remains in regular follow-up.