The patient was a 39-year-old male with a 10-year history of heavy alcohol use, i.e., daily use of 500-750mls of spirits. During these 10 years, he had experienced a loss of control over alcohol use, he used alcohol despite experiencing harmful health consequences such as acute pancreatitis and gastritis, and he often experienced withdrawal symptoms upon abstinence. He had a long-standing history of cigarette smoking that largely accompanied alcohol use. Since 2019, cigarette smoking had intensified and he used about 10 sticks per day. He had been admitted to a substance use in-patient facility 6 times between 2010 and 2021 , but always reverted to pre-treatment patterns of alcohol and tobacco use within one to four months after discharge. In between periods of in-patient treatment, the patient had been admitted multiple times with alcohol withdrawal delirium often accompanied by serious medical complications such as pancreatitis, alcoholic hepatitis, or upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Following in-patient treatment out-patient follow-up was inconsistent, partly because services that offer out-patient SUD care are scarce in Kenya.
The patient was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2009 and had experienced numerous depressive and manic episodes since then. Adherence to mood stabilizers was erratic. For this patient, it was generally difficult to determine whether mood symptoms triggered alcohol use or vice versa.
The patient had a family history of heavy alcohol use i.e. two out of seven of his siblings. In addition, his mother and one male sibling had a history of mental illness (depression and psychotic disorder respectively). The patient was married to one wife and had two children. His pattern of alcohol use had considerably interfered with his functioning at work, his career progression, and his family life.
The decision to use IV ketamine off-label for this patient was based on the following reasons: i) The patient had severe alcohol use disorder with significant social and occupational dysfunction and available evidence suggested the efficacy of IV ketamine for severe alcohol use disorder [–]. ii) Several attempts at treatment had been made using a combination of medication and psychotherapy with minimal improvement. All available evidence-based treatment options had been tried i.e. naltrexone (oral and implant), cognitive behavioral therapy, and alcoholic anonymous; iii) The team believed that the potential benefits to the patient, i.e. reduced alcohol consumption, reduced craving, and improvements to the quality of life outweighed the minimal risk of apnea, and raised blood pressure associated with the use of low dose ketamine.
We administered IV ketamine to the patient on 17th November 2021, three months after his 6-month rehabilitation program ended (see Table ). Before the infusion, the patient was admitted to our hospital. At the time of admission, he was experiencing alcohol withdrawal symptoms and was in a manic episode. The patient underwent treatment for alcohol withdrawal with parenteral diazepam and thiamine. He additionally received nicotine replacement therapy, olanzapine 10 mg per day, and valproate 1 g per day for mood stabilization. He achieved resolution of manic and alcohol withdrawal symptoms after 12 days and was deemed ready for the ketamine infusion.
In administering ketamine, we adhered to the protocol that had been prepared by the multi-disciplinary team above . First, we sought and obtained approvals from hospital management, the Hospital Ethics Committee, the Drug and Therapeutics Committee, and the National Pharmacy and Poison Board. Next, we conducted a psycho-education session with both the wife and the patient. During the session, we shared with them information on the treatment and responded to any questions they had. We then assessed for decisional capacity using the Mini-Mental State Examination. The patient had a score of 29 and was determined to have adequate capacity to consent. We sought and obtained written informed consent from the patient and obtained the concurrence of the patient's wife.
We conducted all the necessary investigations per our protocol. The liver function tests i.e. aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bilirubin, and total protein were within normal levels. Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) levels were marginally elevated at 75.0U/L (normal range 10.0–66.0U/L). All parameters in the complete blood count and renal function tests were within normal. A urine drug toxicology test was negative, an Electrocardiogram (EKG) was normal, and a head computed tomography (CT scan) showed brain atrophy.
The Alcohol Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST) scores were 36 for alcohol and 32 for tobacco and this was indicative of high-risk alcohol and tobacco use. We further assessed for disability using the World Health Organization- Disability Assessment Schedule (WHO-DAS) version 2.0. The findings of that assessment have been summarized in Table below.
The patient received a single infusion of low-dose IV ketamine as follows: 10 mg bolus followed by a 50 mg slow-drip in saline infusion over 50 min per protocol. During infusion, we continuously conducted monitoring for cardiac functions (EKG), blood pressure, oxygen saturation levels monitoring, the level of consciousness, and the occurrence of psychiatric symptoms. We did not observe any adverse effects (respiratory, cardiac, neurologic, or psychiatric symptoms) during infusion and the vital signs remained within normal.
Ketamine was administered by an anesthetist in the high-dependency unit where there was availability of facilities for monitoring and supporting respiration in the event of respiratory depression requiring airway intervention.
Following the infusion, the patient remained in the hospital for 48 h. During this time, he was monitored for any adverse events related to ketamine use, and for the re-emergence of mood or psychotic symptoms. We additionally conducted a session of cognitive behavioral therapy after the infusion. No adverse events were noted in the 48 h after infusion and the patient was discharged home. One week after the infusion, the patient relapsed to prior patterns of alcohol and tobacco use.