A 48-year-old female was sent to the emergency department of our hospital with the chief complaint of sudden occurrence of dyspnea. The patient experienced sudden respiratory distress when she was lifting heavy cargo during farm work. She also complained orthopnea with pink bubble sputum cough. The patient was 155 cm in height and weighed 48 kg. Her heart rate was 103 per minute, and blood pressure was 99/63 mm Hg. Physical examination revealed a 4/6 systolic murmur in cardiac apex. Electrocardiogram demonstrated depression of ST segments at multiple leads: I, II, aVL, and V3 to V6. Meanwhile, blood test showed no troponin elevation. Acute pulmonary congestion was detected by chest X-ray. Echocardiogram found a prolapsed posterior leaflet of the mitral valve with massive regurgitation, with an ejection fraction (EF) of 68% and a normal sized left ventricle. The patient denied of similar symptoms in her past history.
Therefore, she was preliminarily diagnosed of acute left heart failure caused by mitral regurgitation and scheduled for valve repair surgery. Routine coronary angiography was performed to exclude coexisting coronary artery disease. However, the left main coronary trunk could not be catheterized. Meanwhile, collateral vessels could be seen flowing from right coronary artery (RCA) to fill the left coronary system . The patient was then suspected of left main coronary atresia or complete occlusion. She received CT coronary angiography for further diagnosis, which confirmed absence of left coronary ostium, with abnormally small LAD and left circumflex arteries (LCX), both filled by collateral vessels arising from RCA.
During operation, the patient's mitral chordae of the posterior leaflet was found ruptured, with dysplasia of papillary muscle . Then, a successful mitral valvuloplasty was first performed. Although with worry that the small caliber left coronary system may not be a suitable target for surgical revascularization, we performed CABG with left internal mammary artery anastomosed to proximal LAD anyway. Graft flow was satisfactory, with a flow value of 28 mL/min and pulsatile index of 1.2. By direct inspection through aortotomy, no LMCA trunk nor left aortic sinus could be identified. Therefore, the diagnosis of left main coronary atresia was confirmed.
The patient recovered uneventfully and discharged 7 days after operation. Three months later, she came back for follow-up visit and received routine examination together with CT angiography. Her heart function was normal as revealed by echocardiography, and coronary angiography showed a patent LIMA-LAD graft with a small LAD .