The patient was a 40-year-old man (height, 178 cm; weight, 74 kg; and handedness, right-handed). He had no history of diseases that could cause bone fragility or any history of malignant tumors. He played baseball only a few times a year for recreational purposes. He had a gradual onset of pain in his left hip joint after throwing a ball as a baseball pitcher. When he consulted a neighborhood doctor, X-ray images did not show any obvious anomalies. However, the pain persisted even after a month. Therefore, he was referred to our department. The range of passive motion of the hip joint was as follows: right flexion, 120°; left flexion, 100°; right abduction, 30°; left abduction, 30°; right adduction, 15°; left adduction, 15°; right internal rotation, 10°; left internal rotation, 10°; right external rotation, 40°; and left external rotation, 40°. He experienced pain during deep flexion of the left hip joint. However, the results of Patrick test and FADIR test were both negative. In addition, X-ray images did not show obvious anomalies. Three weeks after his first visit to our department, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lesser trochanter of the femur showed low-intensity signals on T1-weighted images and high-intensity signals on T2-weighted images . No obvious hip labral tear was observed. Therefore, he was diagnosed with a hemorrhage and edematous changes due to bone bruise of the lesser trochanter and was planned to be followed up. Three days after the MRI, he stumbled when trying to get into a car and his left hip joint pain worsened; he was brought to our hospital as an emergency case. He had difficulty walking due to severe pain. His left hip joint was slightly flexed and difficult to extend. X-ray image and a computed tomography scan revealed an avulsion fracture of the lesser trochanter of the left femur. He was admitted to our hospital and placed on bed rest. He underwent gadolinium-enhanced MRI and technetium scintigraphy for detecting neoplastic lesions. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI showed an increase in edematous changes; however, the contrast effects were mild. Technetium scintigraphy showed focal uptake in the site of the lesser trochanter of the femur; however, there was no abnormal uptake in other bones. Furthermore, blood biochemistry was unremarkable. Therefore, his condition was diagnosed as a stress avulsion fracture of the lesser trochanter of the femur. In addition, he received conservative treatment, because the displacement was relatively mild (18 mm). After 2 weeks of non-weight-bearing on the left lower extremity, partial (1/2) weight-bearing was permitted. At week 4 and beyond, full weight-bearing was permitted; no further fracture displacement occurred. The patient returned to active sports after 12 weeks. At his final follow-up, 1 year after the onset of pain , we observed non-union of the lesser trochanteric fracture. However, he experienced no pain and had no signs of a limited range of motion in his left hip joint. In addition, he had no problem with his daily activities and sports.