In January 2022, a 54-year-old female patient presented with a 9 months history of severe orthostatic intolerance since her first COVID-19 vaccination with the mRNA vaccine mRNA-1273 (Spikevax, Moderna). A few days after vaccination, she developed headache, dizziness, heart rate increase in an upright position, documented by her smartwatch, and orthostatic intolerance. Due to symptom severity, the self-employed physiotherapist, who had previously been very active in sports and regularly did endurance and resistance exercise training, now spent most of the day in a supine or sitting position and was unable to work. Past medical history included dietary controlled coeliac disease only. The patient did not take regular medication and had no allergies. No previous episodes of orthostatic intolerance were noted and previous vaccination against polio, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis, and tick-borne encephalitis were all well-tolerated. The family history was negative for connective tissue disease and hypermobility syndrome.
At presentation, the patient was on metoprolol extended release 25 mg once daily, cautiously prescribed by the general practitioner, which only slightly decreased orthostatic symptoms. Yet, the best symptom improvement was achieved by previous regular physiotherapy-guided exercise including aerobic and resistance exercise preferentially in sitting and supine positions as well as orthostatic training. Vital signs and clinical examination were unremarkable. Blood pressure was 153/89 mmHg, heart rate was 99 bpm and oxygen saturation was 98% while breathing ambient air. She had no jugular venous distension, no lower leg oedema, cardiac auscultation revealed no murmurs, and lung auscultation was unremarkable. Body-mass index was 20.4 kg/m2. Twelve-lead surface ECG showed sinus rhythm without conduction delays and normal repolarisation pattern . Head-up tilt testing resulted in severe orthostatic symptoms, including light-headedness, nausea, and syncope and was paralleled by heart rate increase from ∼95 bpm to 168 bpm in sinus rhythm without orthostatic hypotension, findings consistent with the definition of POTS . Blood count and basic laboratory values (creatinine, electrolytes, transaminases, bilirubin, HbA1c, C-reactive protein, thyroid stimulating hormone) were within normal range. High-sensitivity troponin T, creatine kinase, and ferritin were normal. Plasma metanephrine, normetanephrine, and 3-methoxytyramine were low ruling out pheochromocytoma. Eight a.m. cortisol level was not significantly elevated. Immunoglobulins, lymphocyte subpopulations, complement C3c and C4, anti-nuclear and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmatic antibodies, neopterin, cytokine profile (interleukin-1 β, soluble interleukin-2 receptor, interleukin-6, tumour necrosis factor α) were normal and did not suggest systemic autoimmune disease or chronic inflammation. A genomic analysis covering a large channelopathy panel (see , ) did not identify pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or variants of uncertain significance for inherited arrhythmia syndromes. Finally, the serologic analysis showed an adequate immune response to COVID-19 mRNA vaccination (immunoglobulin G subunit 1 index 25.8 and immunoglobulin G receptor binding domain index 36.4) without signs of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection (immunoglobulin M and immunoglobulin G nucleocapsid index negative).
A 48-h Holter-ECG found episodes of sinus tachycardia and was otherwise unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography and cardiac stress MRI did not reveal structural or functional heart disease and no myocardial ischaemia. Clinical neurologic examination was not suggestive for peripheral polyneuropathy and brain magnetic resonance imaging did not detect cerebral brain lesions. Due to headache in an upright position, cerebrospinal fluid hypotension was ruled out by lumbar puncture [cerebrospinal fluid opening pressure 17 cmH2O (normal range 10–25 cmH2O)]. During the hospital stay metoprolol extended release was substituted by ivabradine 2.5 mg twice daily, which resulted in increased orthostatic intolerance; ivabradine was stopped and instead metoprolol extended release was up titrated to a maximal tolerated dose of 25 mg twice daily. In addition, a multidisciplinary approach with regular physiotherapy was implemented and non-pharmacological approaches such as sufficient water and salt intake, compression stockings, strict avoidance of deconditioning, and regular aerobic exercise were recommended. Nine days after discharge, the patient was able to keep a sitting position for 20 min, a standing position for 3 min, and walk 300 m with breaks in between. On follow-up, 5 months after discharge and 14 months after vaccination, the patient was on metoprolol extended release 25 mg twice daily and midodrine 2.3 mg once daily. Midodrine was started shortly before follow-up but stopped again after 3–4 weeks due to a lack of symptom improvement. Rehabilitation programmes resulted in partial symptom improvement and the patient was able to ride a recumbent bike for up to 1 h. After a SARS-CoV-2 infection 2 months before follow up she experienced a symptom relapse and despite slight symptom improvement, she was still unable to attend work and dependant on assistance for activities of daily living. On her own initiative, the patient arranged the determination of auto-antibodies against adrenergic and muscarinic receptors. Anti-apha1 and anti-alpha-2 adrenergic antibodies as well as anti-muscarinic receptor 2, 3, 4, and 5 antibodies were elevated. The patient did not receive a second COVID-19 vaccination.