A 7 year-old girl was admitted to the Neurology Department with severe headache, vomiting, muscle weakness and balance disorders. She had no history of previous disease and her psychomotor development was normal. However, 2–3 months before admission, the child’s behaviour showed problems with concentration. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed the existence of a large cystic tumour with peripheral calcifications expanding from the sella to the third ventricle area and acute hydrocephalus .
Magnetic resonance imaging identified a large solid pathological area with fluid accumulation in the sellar and suprasellar region .
Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a tumour expanding from the sella to the third ventricle, most likely an adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma with concomitant acute occlusive hydrocephalus. The recommended treatment included a right-sided pterional craniotomy with extensive resection of the tumour.
A deterioration in the patent’s status necessitated immediate surgery with resection of the tumour. A pterional craniotomy was performed on the right side under general anaesthesia with the patient in a supine position. After reaching the base of the brain and evacuation of fluid from basal cisterns, the tumour’s wall was cut, and a thick yellowish fluid was drained. The tumour was separated from the right optic nerve, right ICA, optic chiasm and left optic nerve. Instead of the pituitary stalk, two thin bands were found, extending from the third ventricle and running towards the sella turcica on both sides of the tumour. After separating the tumour from those bands, it was incised slightly above the sellar diaphragm, dissected from the third ventricle wall, along the lamina terminalis, and removed. After achieving haemostasis, the dura mater was sutured and fixed to the bone and a cranioplasty was performed. A suction drain was then placed, soft tissues were closed in layers and protected with a dressing. Pathomorphological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a craniopharyngioma G1-WHO testing positively for AE1/AE2 (stratified epithelium), GFAP (reactive gliosis), MIB-1 (with a few epithelial and inflammatory cells) and CD 68 (multiple macrophages, including polynuclear ones).
The girl was stable, conscious with good intervention and showed no paresis. She received prophylactic vancomycin, meropenem and fluconazole, fluids for improving water-electrolyte balance, substitution therapy with thyroid and adrenal hormones, and the treatment of diabetes insipidus. The first 6 days after the surgery were without complications. Neurological examination showed no signs of focal damage to the central nervous system. Due to multi-hormonal pituitary insufficiency, substitution therapy was introduced with L-thyroxine, hydrocortisone and desmopressin, adjusting the doses to serum endogenous hormones.
On the seventh day after surgery, the patient’s status rapidly deteriorated. She reported a severe headache and had a fever. The patient became sleepy and apathetic. She periodically loss consciousness and had recurrent seizures lasting approximately 15 s. A neurological examination revealed stiffening of the neck, positive Kernig’s and Babinski signs on the right side, and convergent strabismus in the left eye.
The result of a head CT did not suggest the need for repeat surgery. A lumbar puncture was performed. CSF was fully transparent with 18 cells per μl (normal range: 0–5), 60% of neutrophils and 38% of lymphocytes, a positive Pandy’s reaction, a negative Nonne-Apelt reaction, 154.0 mg/dl of protein (normal range: 15–45), a normal concentration of glucose (79 mg%, normal range: 50–80), 2.7 mmol/l of lactic acid (normal range: 0.5–2.2). A latex test and aerobic and anaerobic cultures of CSF yielded negative results. The patient tested negatively for anti-CMV, anti-EBV, anti-HSV, anti-poxvirus and anti-Borrelia burgdorferi IgM antibodies. The results of other tests, including aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the blood (collected at peak fever) and urine, were also negative. A microbiological examination of throat and nasal swabs revealed a presence of physiological microflora: Neisseria spp. and Streptococcus viridans.
Because of a lack of an etiological factor for bacterial or viral meningitis, the patient was diagnosed with aseptic (chemical) meningitis. Antibiotic therapy treatment included vancomycin, ceftriaxone, fluconazole, acyclovir, and nystatin and was maintained for 14 days. An antiepileptic agent, valproic acid, was administered since both clinical presentation and ictal electroencephalographic findings suggested epilepsy. Hormonal treatment was continued. The patient was fed enterally via a catheter with a semiliquid low-sodium diet.
Increasing intracranial pressure required the placement of external drainage on day 11 after tumour resection. On day 14 post-surgery, the external drainage was removed following a CT scan of the head which showed the ventricular system without features of hydrocephalus. After removal of the drain, the patient was in good general status and was verbally responsive. Neurological examination showed the presence of meningeal symptoms and slight strabismus in the left eye, decreased muscle tone and diminished asymmetrical tendineae reflexes in the upper extremities, with a predominance of the left side, and a decrease in muscle tone with areflexia and a positive Babinski sign on the right side in the lower extremities.
A follow-up MRI scan was carried out on day 152 after surgery. The images were compared with those obtained before treatment. Turbo spin echo diffusion-weighted images and dark fluid sequences with T1- and T2-weighted images in sagittal, coronal and transverse views were obtained prior to and after intravenous injection of a paramagnetic. Status after surgical resection of the craniopharyngioma with possible small remnant of solid part of the tumour in sella is represented in Fig. .
The patient underwent systematic rehabilitation and monitoring of the treatment for multi-hormonal pituitary insufficiency. Six months after the procedure she still needed substitutional hormone therapy, anti-epileptic treatment and ophthalmic and psychological counselling. A systematic improvement in the patient’s condition was noticeable. Currently, the patient is in good neurological condition without focal damage to the central nervous system. Hormone substitution continues.