A 35-year-old woman presented to the Provincial Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital (Changsha, China) in March 2017 because of irregular vaginal bleeding for more than 1 year and presence of a lower abdominal mass for 4 mo.
The patient was nulliparous and overweight (body mass index = 28.1), with a 15-year history of primary infertility. Her age at menarche was 12-years-old, and the menstrual period lasted for 10 d. She got married at 20-years-old, and had been married for more than 15 years to date. Several characteristics were observed, including nulliparity, limited sexual activity (intercourse 1-2 times a year) in recent years, and irregular vaginal bleeding for 2 years without a pathological report. In April 2017, the patient found a palpable lower abdominal mass in the supine position, but there was no tenderness in the local area. By February 2018, the mass had increased in size, with the patient experiencing occasional lower abdominal pain and discomfort.
The patient denied a history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, and other infectious diseases, as well as chronic hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, and other chronic diseases.
The patient was born in Guizhou Province, China. She did not have a history of smoking or drinking. Her occupation was housewife and the working conditions of such were general. She denied contact with toxic chemicals, poisons, or radioactive substances. She had married at the age of 20 and they were separated at the time of her case management. She reported her experience of sexual frequency in recent years as approximately every half year. She also reported not using contraception and never having been pregnant.
Findings from the gynecological examination revealed an enlarged uterus, similar to the uterus size in the fourth month of pregnancy, and the uterine wall was relatively hard.
Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 7.7 × 109/L, neutrophils of 62.93%, hemoglobin level of 100 g/L, platelet count of 375 × 1012/L, and beta human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) level of 1.91 IU/L.
Transvaginal sonography (TVS) and MRI were performed to evaluate the intrauterine cavity. A lump of 10 cm in diameter with a partial honeycomb-like appearance was observed . MRI revealed abnormal signal focus and intensity in the intrauterine cavity. Considering the very large size of the abnormal signal (81 mm × 82 mm × 91 mm), the pathological finding was first classified as a hydatidiform mole .