A 9-year-old female of Caucasian descent with a history of SWS was referred to our retina clinic for possible macular changes in her left eye. Her past ocular history included glaucoma in the left eye which was managed with a Baerveldt drainage implant placed 4 years prior. At the time of the exam, no vision changes or pain were noted. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. IOP measured by Tonopen was 16 mm Hg in the right eye and 14 mm Hg in the left eye. Slit lamp examination showed a well-positioned Baerveldt shunt in the left eye with trace pupillary peaking but otherwise no abnormalities. Fundus photographs of the left eye demonstrated fine pigmentary changes in the macula (shown in ), and optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the left eye showed significant choroidal thickening (shown in b). Although fluorescein angiography seemed to reveal no pathologic findings (shown in c), indocyanine green angiography showed focal hyperfluorescent pooling in the macula, demonstrating a “wash out” phenomenon (shown in d). These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of CH.
Two years later, the patient returned to the clinic with decreased vision in the left eye with a BCVA of 20/150. Fundus photographs of the left eye showed worsening pigmentary changes in the macula (shown in a) and OCT of the left eye revealed new subretinal fluid (SRF) which had been first noted by the patient’s ophthalmologist abroad 5 months prior (shown in b). Fundus autofluorescence demonstrated central hypo-autofluorescence with a hyper-autofluorescent ring around the macula that extended to the inferior retina (shown in c). B-scan ultrasonography showed an echo-dense lesion contiguous to the disc approximately 3.5 mm in maximum thickness and 14 mm in diameter with high to medium internal reflectivity (shown in d).
The decision was made to treat with verteporfin PDT. Verteporfin infusion (Visudyne®, Bausch & Lomb, Canada) was administered intravenously over 10 min at a pre-calculated dosage of 6 mg/cm2 followed by a five-minute waiting period before application of 689-nm infrared laser light with fluence 50 J/cm2 at intensity of 600 mW/cm2 for 83 s. Five consecutive overlapping 5.5 mm spots were applied over the hemangioma using a Wide Field Mainster lens (Ocular Instruments Inc., Bellevue, WA, USA). At 6-week post-procedure, BCVA had improved to 20/40 in the left eye (from 20/150 on the day of the procedure), and on the dilated fundus exam, the macula was flat with no evidence of SRF. At the 1-year follow-up appointment, BCVA had improved to 20/25, and OCT showed a dramatic decrease in choroidal thickness and flattening of elevated posterior pole curvature with no recurrence of SRF (shown in a). However, hypopigmentation was evident in the entire treatment area with subretinal pigment clumps most noticeable in the areas with 3 overlapping exposures of PDT (shown in b).