A 67-year-old male patient was admitted to China-Japan Union hospital for persistent chest pain two days before admission in Aug. 2020. The patient’s chest pain started 2 days previously with no inducement, and was gradually alleviated 30 min after oral nitroglycerin intake. Over the next two days before he was referred to hospital, he had onsets of angina in the early mornings. The patient was diagnosed with CML 6 years previously. The patient was initially treated with imatinib, which was then changed to nilotinib (300 mg bid) in Dec 2019. A cytogenetic and molecular response was achieved in Mar 2020. The patient had no history of hypertension or diabetes, but had a 45-pack-year smoking history. No abnormalities were found during physical examinations.
Cardiac injury biomarkers showed significantly increased levels of troponin I (4.4 ng/ml; normal range 0–0.05), myoglobin (181 mg/L; normal range 0–107), and CK-MB (49.0 U/L; normal range 0–4.3). D-dimer and NT-proBNP levels were slightly increased. LDL-C level was 3.41 mmol/L, and blood sugar level was normal. Other laboratory tests were within the normal range (Detailed information see Table ).
Electrocardiography (ECG) upon admission showed pathological Q waves and slightly elevated ST segments in Leads III and aVF. T wave inversions were also found in precordial leads . ECG showed inferior wall hypokinesis and normal cardiac function (EF 60%). Holter monitoring for 24 h showed no ventricular arrhythmias (VAs). Color doppler ultrasound of carotid and subclavian arteries were normal. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed and showed approximately 30%-40% stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending artery (pLAD) and the proximal obtuse marginal artery (pOM) . There was only mild to moderate stenosis (30–40%) in the anticipated culprit vessel right coronary artery (RCA; Fig. D, ). Since there had been frequent onsets of angina in the early mornings, and also no significant or suspicious lesions were found during CAG, coronary spasm was considered the etiology. An ergonovine provocation test was performed to confirm the diagnosis of CAS. After intracoronary administration of ergonovine (0.04 mg), the middle and distal segments of RCA showed diffuse coronary spasm compared to the baseline CAG of RCA . 5 min after ergonovine was administered, CAG showed near subtotal occlusion in middle and distal RCA. Continuous ECG monitoring showed more prominent ST elevations in inferior wall leads . The patient also had chest discomfort after ergonovine administration, which later developed into chest pain at 5 min. The ECG showed dynamic changes, which were all rapidly relieved after intracoronary administration of nitroglycerin .
According to the medical history, the CAG findings, and the ergonovine provocation test, the patient was diagnosed with Nilotinib related MINOCA, Killip class I, CAS syndrome, and CML.
Lifestyle changes were recommended including the cessation of smoking. Stenting was not recommended as there was no severe stenosis and after ergonovine administration diffuse spasm were observed. Intensified anti-spasmodics were recommended for long-term management with Isoket ampoule injection (10 mg/h IV) and Diltiazem Sustained Release Tablets (90 mg bid). Statins were also prescribed to maintain the stability of the plaque and to protect the endothelial function. After hematologist consultation, the nilotinib dose was adjusted to 150 mg bid.
The chest pain was completely relieved by the above treatments. The only adjustment to the treatment schedule occurred five days later with the replacement of the Isoket ampoule injection with Isoladine 50 mg once daily (QD). The patient was discharged one week after the procedure. Follow-ups were conducted every three months, and after six months there was still good recovery with no onsets of angina. Also during follow-ups, no peripheral artery rapid progression or new cerebrovascular disease were found.