A 70-year-old male presented with 18 months of indolent right shoulder pain attributed to a slow growing mass. Medical history was notable for prostate cancer treated with prostatectomy and 50-pack-years of smoking. On exam, there was a prominent mass anteriorly over the right shoulder that was immobile, indurated, and nontender. There were no overlying skin changes. Shoulder range of motion was limited to 110o of forward flexion, 90o of abduction, 60o of external rotation, and internal rotation to L5 compared to the contralateral side (180o, 170o, 60o, and T12, respectively). Motor and sensory function was intact. Radiographs demonstrated an ossified mass arising from the surface of the proximal humeral meta-diaphysis with cortical scalloping (, ). MRI revealed a lobulated soft tissue mass with T1 and T2 heterogeneous signal enhancement around the proximal humerus, cortical scalloping, and areas of linear dense calcification (-).
Workup proceeded with a percutaneous core needle biopsy of the right proximal humerus. Fourteen samples were obtained and all exhibited a cartilaginous appearance. Histopathology diagnosed intermediate-grade chondrosarcoma of periosteal origin . Tumor staging was carried out with a chest CT and whole-body bone scan, which revealed no evidence of metastasis (, ). The patient consented for wide resection of the right proximal humerus and reverse total shoulder endoprosthetic reconstruction.
A standard extended deltopectoral approach was used . The previous core needle biopsy site was ellipsed. Vessels feeding the tumor were ligated. The distal musculotendinous junction of the biceps muscle was resected leaving tendon with the tumor. All segments of the deltoid muscle were spared. The rotator cuff muscles were resected leaving a 1 cm margin of healthy tendon on the resected humeral head. Neurolysis of the axillary and musculocutaneous nerves was performed. The pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, and teres major muscles were resected from the medial aspect of the humerus leaving a 1 cm margin of healthy tendon on the resected bone. Dissection was carried out distally and the humerus was resected 12 cm from the glenohumeral joint line. Neurolysis of the radial nerve was performed. The resected proximal humerus measured 12x2.5x2.5 cm and peri-humeral mass 8x7.5x6.9 cm. . Tissues were sent for frozen sectioning and confirmed tumor-free margins.
Reverse total shoulder endoprosthetic reconstruction was performed(Comprehensive Reverse Shoulder System, Zimmer-Biomet). The glenoid was predrilled and the base plate was affixed with 1 center screw and 4 peripheral screws slightly inferior on the glenoid to avoid scapular notching and shoulder impingement. The glenosphere was sized and engaged with the baseplate by Morse taper. The humeral shaft was reamed and press-fit components were secured . The rotator cuff tendons were sutured to the prosthetic neck and the deltoid tendon was myodesed. The pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, and teres major tendons were sutured through the prosthetic portals (, ). A standard multilayered closure was performed. Radiographs demonstrated satisfactory prosthetic positioning (-).
Postoperatively, the patient remained in a shoulder immobilizer for 6 weeks before starting physical therapy. Tumor surveillance was planned with shoulder and chest X-rays every 3 months until 2 years postoperatively, biannually for the next 3 years until 5 years postoperatively, and annually thereafter. At 1 year postoperatively, the patient was doing well with acceptable shoulder range of motion: 70o of forward flexion, 80o of abduction, 30o of external rotation, and internal rotation to S1. At 2 years postoperatively, he sustained a fall with the arm hyperflexed resulting in glenosphere dissociation requiring revision arthroplasty (, ). Intraoperatively, the glenosphere was completely disengaged , there was minimal fretting wear and no corrosion of the Morse taper , the polyethylene was inferiorly worn , there was no scapular notching, and the humeral component and baseplate were intact . Decision was made to increase the prosthetic constraint to account for soft-tissue attenuation by upsizing both the glenosphere and humeral tray (, -).
The patient is currently 3 years postoperatively from the index surgery and 1 year postoperatively from revision arthroplasty. There has been no clinical or radiographic evidence of tumor burden or hardware complication. Shoulder range of motion is limited to 70o of forward flexion, 60o of abduction, 30o of external rotation, and internal rotation to S1.