An eighteen-year old female was referred to Saint John of Jerusalem Eye Hospital Group uveitis ophthalmology clinic for a specialist consultation regarding bilateral recurrent iridocyclitis. Her long medical history dated back to when she was just 1 year of age when she developed diffuse polyarthritis, mainly targeting both wrists and ankles. Her parents took her to the pediatric rheumatologist who diagnosed her with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and treated her mainly with prednisone and methotrexate. During the following years, and because of the lack of compliance to her medications, her arthritis was not well controlled. Therefore, she suffered from intermittent arthritis mainly affecting her wrists and hand joints which were associated with pain and swelling with spontaneous remissions. At the age of 7 years, she started having problems with her eyes; however, she had poor follow up for her condition. She presented multiple times to her local ophthalmologist with recurrent attacks of redness in her eyes and until just 1 year prior to presenting to us, when she was 16 years of age, she was diagnosed with bilateral anterior uveitis.
The ophthalmologist who referred the patient reported her complaint of redness and blurred vision in both eyes since 2 months and on slit lamp examination she had right eye vitreous snowballs and a hazy view along with the presence of anterior chamber inflammatory cells in both eyes but more in the right eye. She also had a history of dry eyes and was on lubricating eye drops.
On presentation to our clinic the patient was on oral prednisolone 5 mg/day, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/day and omega 3 since 1 month. On slit lamp examination, keratic precipitates and inflammatory cells in the anterior chambers of eyes (+ 3 in the right eye and + 2 in the left eye) were found. Her fundus exam showed vitritis and snowballs bilaterally as well. In addition to the ocular findings, she had painless fixed flexion deformity of the proximal interphalangeal joints of the fourth and fifth fingers in both hands, known as camptodactyly . Moreover, the patient’s sister, aged 19 years old, had bilateral intermediate uvietis and camptodactyly of hands and feet . Also both eyes of their father had signs of old posterior uveitis; his left eye showed posterior synechiae 360°, a mature cataract, and old KPs, and he also had camptodactyly of both hands and feet .
Based on the findings, the patient was diagnosed with recurrent bilateral intermediate uveitis and continued treatment with an increased dose of oral prednisolone (10 mg/day) as well as methorexate and she was given atropine eye drops for 1 week and steroid eye drops which was tapered gradually on each following visit. Subcutaneous Adalimumab (40 mg every 2 weeks) was added shortly after that. Moreover, she was advised to follow up with her pediatric rheumatologist for better control of her arthritis.
Multiple lab tests were ordered and the results were as follows: her complete blood count, kidney and liver function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C- reactive protein were within normal range. Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANAs) were negative and titers for rheumatoid factor (RF) were within normal range. Serologic testing for Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAG) and anti-hepatitis C virus (Anti- HCV) antibodies were negative. She also did the mantoux test (PPD) which was nonreactive. A chest x-ray and a CT scan showed scattered bronchiectasis in both lungs. Pulmonary function test and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) blood levels were also ordered to rule out sarcoidosis and both of them were normal.
In view of the rheumatological presentation and the ophthalmological findings of intermediate uveitis, along with all of the mentioned laboratory tests being normal, it was clear that this patient may in fact not have JIA. The diagnosis was leaning more toward some sort of syndrome. Moreover, due to the fact that not only our patient had these clinical manifestations but also other members of her family, this made us think of a genetic entity. Therefore the next step was to do genetic analysis for the patient and her family via whole exome sequencing which revealed a heterozygous gain-of-function missense mutation in the NOD2 gene (p.R334Q), and therefore Blau syndrome was diagnosed .
After that, an echocardiogram was done to rule out any cardiac involvement (pericarditis) which was free. Also an ocular optical coherence tomograpghy (OCT) was performed which only showed vitreous changes . She continued on the same medications with oral prednisolone (10 mg/day) and subcutaneous Adalimumab (40 mg every 2 weeks) as maintenance drugs. She responded good to the treatment and is currently doing well except for mild flare ups which were controlled with steroid eye drops.