A 58-year-old man presented with urinary retention and renal failure. Blood tests showed PSA levels of 38.07 ng/mL, sCr levels of 3.94 mg/dL, and eGFR of 13.5 mL/min. Abdominal computed tomography scans revealed bilateral hydronephrosis due to lower urinary obstruction due to prostate enlargement; however, claustrophobia prevented the patient from undergoing magnetic resonance imaging scanning. As his bilateral hydronephrosis persisted and renal function did not improve dramatically even after urethral catheter placement, bladder and ureteral invasion by advanced prostate cancer was strongly suspected . Prostate biopsy revealed a Gleason score of 5 + 5 adenocarcinoma. We diagnosed LAPC with bilateral hydronephrosis due to bladder and ureteral invasion and planned multimodal therapy, consisting of neoadjuvant HT, radical cystoprostatectomy, and adjuvant RT. Percutaneous bilateral nephrostomy was performed, and neoadjuvant HT was initiated. As upper urinary tract infection occurred every time the nephrostomy catheter exchange, RARC with ICIC which had been approved by the ethical committee of our institution was performed 4 months after the start of HT when PSA levels decreased to below 0.03 ng/mL.
The surgery was performed using the da Vinci Xi Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), with pelvic lymph node dissection of the bilateral obturator, internal to external and common iliac regions, and radical cystoprostatectomy followed by the construction of ICIC. The total console time was 326 min (60 min for lymph node dissection, 69 min for radical cystoprostatectomy, and 142 min for ICIC), and the estimated blood loss was 400 mL. No perioperative complications nor urinary tract infection occurred after urinary diversion, even after nephrostomy catheters were removed.
Histopathology revealed Gleason 5 + 5 adenocarcinoma of the prostate with seminal vesicle, bladder neck, and left lower ureteral invasion without positive surgical margins, but positive lymph node involvement of the bilateral obturator and right iliac regions (8/17), diagnosed as LAPC, EPE1, RM0, ly1, v0, pn1, sv1, ypT4N1.
One month after the surgery, renal function has improved with sCr levels of 1.86 mg/dL and eGFR levels of 30.7 mL/min, and the patient underwent adjuvant RT into total pelvic cavity, given the evidence of positive lymph node metastasis. Seven months after the surgery, the patient has maintained PSA levels <0.03 ng/mL and testosterone levels 57 ng/dL without recurrence or metastasis without any additional HT .