A 70-year-old Korean male patient was admitted to our institution with a medical history of mycobacterium infection and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He underwent repeated CT scans because of a solitary pulmonary nodule that was incidentally detected. A recent CT scan showed a 1.2cm sized, irregularly shaped nodule that was located adjacent to the right inferior pulmonary vein in the medial basal segment of the right lower lobe that had been increasing in size during the previous six months. A CT-guided needle biopsy was requested by a pulmonologist. After written informed consent was obtained, the biopsy was performed in the radiology department under CT guidance.Our patient was placed in a prone position and the lesion was localized with a CT scan. An 18-gauge coaxial needle (ACN Automatic Cutting Needle, Medical Device Technologies, Gainesville, Florida, United States) was inserted transthoracically during a single inspiratory breath-hold, and a core specimen was obtained using a biopsy gun . Our patient was entirely cooperative during the procedure, refraining from coughing or deep breathing. After the removal of the needle, a post-procedural CT showed intraluminal free air in the ascending aorta as well as a small amount of parenchymal hemorrhaging along the needle path. He complained of a mild electrical current sensation in both lower extremities, but there was no neurological deficit revealed by physical examination, such as weakness or changes in sensory perception. The radiology operator did not recognize the intraluminal free air in the aorta because of the small amounts. Approximately three hours after returning to the ward, he complained of numbness and muscle weakness in both lower extremities, as well as voiding difficulty. The brain and spine magnetic resonance images (MRI) showed a right cerebellar and spinal cord infarction at the T8-10 levels . 100% oxygen was immediately administered via a facemask. He was stabilized and then transferred to a regional hospital for hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Following treatment, his neurological deficit and voiding difficulty were fully recovered after one month. A histopathological analysis revealed that he had small cell lung cancer.