A 53-year-old man with the comorbidities of hypertension and chronic renal insufficiency was referred to our center with the complaint of chest and back ache for 1 h. Electrocardiogram suggested the acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction in emergency room, then, coronary angiography was applied and found no coronary stenosis. Finally, he was diagnosed with ARSA, KD and TAIMH with the presence of pericardial effusion and a penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer (PAU, Fig. c, d) located in descending aorta by computed tomography angiogram (CTA). Meantime, there was a vascular ring including left aortic arch, right aberrant subclavian artery and right ligamentum. The patient’s condition was stabilized by medical. Because of TAIMH and the pericardial effusion it induced, we recommended surgery firstly, but he refused surgery for the high risk of traditional vascular replacement with his worsening renal function. On the basis of the assumption that the TAIMH was induced by the PAU in this case and could be treated by excluding the PAU, thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) was performed 5 days after admission with the consent of the patient. We covered the PAU located in descending aorta and preserved the ARSA to reduce the risk of right arm malperfusion and stroke. The procedure was under general anesthesia and the blood pressure and heart rate were kept steady in this period. We implanted the stent via femoral incision and the proximal landing zone of the graft was just distal to the ostium of the ARSA. The stent we used was Relay (Bolton Medical, Sunrise, FL, USA) with the size of 36 mm*150 mm and oversize of 10%. The patient continued receiving medication to lower systolic blood pressure ≤ 130 mmHg and heart rate ≤ 70 beats/min after TEVAR and no complication occurred, but it showed that the maximal ascending aortic diameter (MAAD) and the maximal ascending aortic hematoma thickness (MAHT) increased, from 59.1 mm to 62.3 mm and 9.3 mm to 17.4 mm respectively, meanwhile, the pericardial effusion and pleural effusion progressed and a localized aortic arch dissection occurred at the first CTA review 2 weeks after TEVAR . Although further treatment should be offered, the patient was only willing to undertake medical treatment and refused the surgery or reintervention. After discharge, the patient was prescribed anti-hypertensive drugs and examined by CTA 3 months after TEVAR and it showed that the MAAD decreased to 50.1 mm with the MAHT; the pericardial effusion and the pleural effusion nearly disappeared and the aortic arch dissection stabilized . At the last follow up 5.5 years after TEVAR, the patient was alive without progression of the disease.