A 37 year old female patient presented in ENT outpatient department with chief complaints of tumoral mass in lower jaw since 3 years and decreased mouth opening since 1 year. The swelling was gradually progressive in nature with an area of skin ulceration of approximately around 4x4 cm at the inferior aspect of the swelling with bleeding and foul smelling debris within. On examination swelling was 16x14 cm in size, irregular shape fixed to the jaw, extending from left pre-auricular region to right pre-auricular region and vertically around 16 cm long.
On palpation, the inspection findings were confirmed, the swelling was immobile, hard in consistency and slightly tender. The neck mobility was restricted because of its enormous size but the jaw mobility was not restricted and the mouth opening of the patient was two finger breadths. The skin overlying the ulcerated area was adherent while the rest was non adherent without infiltration but showed dilated veins. In the intra-oral examination the swelling extended intra-orally obliterating both the buccogingival and tonsilo-lingual sulcus from right ramus to left ramus but bilateral temporomandibular joints were spared.
There was no ulceration of the intraoral mucosa. There was grade 2 loosening of teeth.Tongue was free of the lesion. There was no significant palpable lymphadenopathy .
Computed Tomography (CT) scans revealed a large relatively well defined soft tissue density lesion with amorphous, ring and arch like calcifications seen in relation to mandibular bone with erosion and destruction of its body, alveolar margin and bilateral rami.
The soft tissue component measured 15x12x10 cm in size. The lesion was involving the right masticator space with the infiltration of the right masseter.
Infiltration into the left masticator space was also noted with the involvement of the left masseter muscle. Encroachment and compression of the sublingual space was also seen .
Microscopic examination of the incisional biopsy revealed chondrocytes and lacunae in lobular patterns with pleomorphic and hyperchromatic nuclei. Mitosis was seen. A prominent cellular spindle cell proliferation was seen with minimal areas of chondroid. A high grade III CS was confirmed. The general workup of the patient revealed no distant metastasis. The surgical resection was executed based on the size and aggressiveness of lesion. The prognosis and management was explained to the patient and after taking consent, a mandibulectomy with wide margins of the lesion leaving bilateral condyloid processes of the mandible was done .
The reconstruction of the mandible was done with free vascularised fibula flap based on peroneal artery and it`s perforators. The arterio-venous anastomosis was done with the facial vessels. Titanium plates with screws were used for giving shape to the fibula as a jaw bone. The patient was tracheostomised at the end of the procedure, successfully extubated and shifted to ICU uneventfully .
The pathological specimen sent post operatively, showed chondroid tissue along with myxoid tissue. The chondroid tissue at periphery show presence of sheets of tumour cells separated by thick fibrous collagenous stroma. The cells are ovoid to spindly, hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei with prominent nucleoli in some. Mitotic activity also increased at places along with small areas of necrosis (.).
The bony and soft tissue surgical margins were free of tumour. Immuno-histochemistry revealed strong expression of KI-67, thus confirming the diagnosis of high grade CS. The patient was discharged uneventfully on a tracheostomy tube on 18thpost operative day, and was further advised for radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The patient was receiving further treatment when she met with a road accident and died.