A 60-year-old female has a history of multiple head traumas as a young adult, without documented skull fracture, resulting from multiple falls while horseback riding. Her past history includes type two diabetes controlled with lifestyle modification and breast cancer in 2002 treated with surgical resection (2002) and chemoradiation (2003). She first presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Her physical exam was notable for a palpable hard protuberance on her right frontal calvarium. An EEG showed intermittent low-amplitude polymorphic delta slowing over the right anterior head region, without clear epileptiform discharges, and she was treated with levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis. Her neurological exam remained normal, and she did not have any subsequent seizures.
Imaging studies of her head were performed. The computed tomography (CT) of her head demonstrated a 3.7 cm × 3.4 cm × 1.5 cm lytic lesion of the right frontal calvarial bone with the erosion of the inner table . The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain suggested herniation of the right frontal lobe parenchyma into the bony defect .
Due to the history of seizure activity and the expansile nature of the bony mass, the patient underwent surgical resection. A right frontotemporal craniotomy for resection of the right frontal calvarial lesion was performed. Upon inspection of the skull prior to the craniotomy, the lesion was evident by marked cystic thinning of the frontal bone. As the bone flap was elevated, brain tissue was noted to have herniated into the calvarial lesion . Bipolar electrocautery was used to coagulate and divide the herniated portion of the brain from the right frontal lobe, and the specimen was sent for frozen and permanent pathology. The bone flap was inspected on the surgical table , and the inner table was removed prior to the replacement of the bone flap and closure.
Frozen and permanent sections were taken of both the herniated brain tissue and bone lesion. The frozen sections demonstrated no definitive pathology with herniated cerebral cortex as well as a bone with fibrous tissue. The permanent sections, stained with hematoxylin and eosin , confirmed the frozen findings and also demonstrated gliosis of the cerebral cortex with thickening of the leptomeninges within the defect in the skull.