A 45-year-old Caucasian woman received docetaxel-doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide chemotherapy after surgical resection of an invasive ductal breast carcinoma in clinical stage IIb.
According to the medical history of the patient, she had no pre-existing ocular diseases, and based on her statement her ocular symptoms started following the beginning of the treatment. She presented at our department 12 weeks after initiation of chemotherapy. By that time she already received 4 series of TAC treatment (docetaxel 75 mg/m2, doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 q3w).
Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.3 and 0.2. Anterior segments showed no pathologies, intraocular pressure was normal.
Dilated fundus examination revealed cystoid macular edema (CME) around the fovea on both eyes , which was also confirmed by optical coherence tomography (OCT) . Large cystic spaces were observed in the outer nuclear layer and small cystic spaces in the inner nuclear layer on both eyes. Photoreceptor inner/outer segment (IS/OS) junction was discontinuous but relatively intact underneath the fovea and absent outside this area. Retinal thickness was increased in the center of the macula according to the edema and subnormal outside the perifoveal area. There was no evidence of vitreo-retinal interface, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) or sub-RPE abnormalities on the images.
Additionally, as an unexpected finding bone spicule-like pigmented deposits could be seen at the periphery, characteristic for retinitis pigmentosa (RP) . Scotopic electroretinogram was almost completely extinguished and visual field showed concentric constriction to 5° on both eyes, confirming the presumed diagnosis.
Fluorescein angiography probably would not have had an effect on differential diagnosis as no leakage was expected based on the literature of CME induced by either RP or taxane-based chemotherapy [-]. Kuznetcova et al. suggest that the mechanisms of developing CME by certain etiologies, e.g. inflammatory diseases and taxane treatment may be different. In CME cases induced by inflammation the tight junctions are affected and they become potential leaking points. Taxane treatment causes dysfunction in the cytoskeleton of the retinal pigment epithelium, the choroid - pigment epithelium border is unaffected and therefore leakage is not to be expected. Besides lacking differential diagnostic value, results of the angiography would not have had any therapeutic consequences either. Taking these facts to consideration and judging the general clinical state of the patient fluorescein angiography was not performed.
At this point, following a consultation with the patient’s oncologist and detailed discussion with the patient, chemotherapy was stopped. Five weeks after the discontinuation of chemotherapy and additional topical nepafenac treatment the visual acuity of the patient improved significantly. After 4 months of follow-up BCVA was 1.0 on both eyes. Retinal thickness in the perifoveal area also decreased gradually with the resolution of intraretinal cysts on OCT scans . Visual acuity and retinal thickness remained stable after discontinuation of the topical therapy.