A 73-year-old Asian woman with an underlying anxiety disorder, functional headache, and hypertension was prescribed escitalopram and lorazepam when she presented with progressively worsening headaches to her primary care doctor. Her symptoms did not improve with the medications, and she was unable to eat well and required bed rest. She was transported to our hospital 4 days later after developing chest and back pain with altered consciousness. She was a housekeeper, had no allergies, and had no alcohol or tobacco smoking history. On arrival, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 3/15 (E1V1M1); both pupils were approximately 4 mm in diameter and reactive. Her blood pressure was too low to be measured, her carotid artery pulse was palpable, her heart rate was 112 beats/minute, and her respiratory rate was 30 breaths/minute. Her conjunctiva was pale. An auscultation of breath sounds did not reveal upper and lower airway obstructions and was within normal limits. Her abdomen was soft and flat without tenderness. She had no skin abnormalities (such as rash). Both legs had no edema. Echocardiography on arrival was performed as point of care ultrasound and revealed a hypercontractile left ventricle with an eliminated left ventricular cavity and a collapsed inferior vena cava without right ventricular dilation. There was no pericardial effusion or obvious large regurgitant jet observed on color Doppler. In response, we immediately inserted a peripheral venous catheter and began introducing fluid resuscitation; however, she developed PEA. Conventional CPR according to the adult advanced cardiovascular life support guidelines (including adrenaline) was initiated and a return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) occurred. However, her blood pressure was unstable and PEA returned, prompting repeated CPR with immediate administration of fluids and three adrenaline injections. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was initiated for refractory PEA. Whole-body contrast-enhanced computed tomography was unremarkable, and the admission laboratory results were also unremarkable, except for anemia . Her hemoglobin level decreased from 7.1 g/dL to 3.5 g/dL 1 hour later without obvious signs of gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Therefore, 8 units of packed red blood cells were transfused for 1 day, after which her hemodynamic status stabilized. She was in a coma without sedatives; thus, targeted temperature management at 34 °C was initiated on admission to an intensive care unit. Echocardiography in the intensive care unit showed a thickened interventricular septum (which was 12.8 mm), prolonged anterior mitral valve, and contact between the bodies of the anterior and posterior mitral valves, suggesting that the left ventricular obstruction could have potentially occurred through this redundant anterior mitral valve. VA-ECMO was terminated on day 3, and after stabilizing her hemodynamics, transthoracic echocardiography showed a sigmoid septum with normal left ventricular function (ejection fraction, 75%) . On day 26, dobutamine-infused (30 μg/kg per minute) Doppler echocardiography revealed a significant outflow gradient (236 mmHg) accompanied with chest pain and intermittent systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve; continuous monitoring during Doppler echocardiography showed a Brockenbrough–Braunwald sign , which is a fall of arterial blood pressure after premature ventricular contraction; these findings confirmed a diagnosis of latent LVOTO due to a sigmoid septum. The significant LVOTO was not dependent on SAM but might have occurred due to the greatly thickened interventricular septum. As a result, carvedilol was initiated with gradual increment up to 10 mg/day on day 35. In addition, verapamil (120 mg/day) was administered on day 29. A follow-up dobutamine-infused Doppler echocardiography on day 40 showed a reduction of the outflow gradient to 14 mmHg, indicating a successful medical therapy.
The worsening anemia that was identified at admission was suspected to be hemolytic anemia (HA) based on results of the blood test. The results of the laboratory examination, including total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, reticulocyte count, and haptoglobin, and a direct Coombs test on day 1 are presented in Table . Her drug lymphocyte stimulation test was positive, and agglutination occurred when her serum reacted with lorazepam. Therefore, lorazepam-induced immunological HA was diagnosed. Her anemia improved following discontinuation of lorazepam. Her hemoglobin level was 11.9 g/dL on day 64, and she was eventually discharged on day 68 without any sequelae.