A 60-year-old male patient visited our hospital on July 30, 2018, with the manifestations of abdominal pain, bloody mucopurulent diarrhea for 10 years, and aggravated symptoms for 3 mo.
The patient presented to the clinic at our institution (visit 1). Patient’s symptoms started 10 years ago, and aggravated for 3 mo. Ten years earlier, the patient started to have lower-left abdominal pain without obvious inducement with increased frequency of defecation (4-5 times a day), and the stool consisted of a moderate amount of mucus and a small amount of blood. The patient then visited Shanghai East Hospital for treatment and was diagnosed with UC. The patient was given sulfasalazine [1.5 g ter in die (tid)], but the symptoms were not significantly relieved after 1 mo. Later (specific time unknown), the patient visited the Renji Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University for treatment. He was treated with mesalazine (Etiasa; 1 g tid), and the symptoms slightly improved. The medication was discontinued in March 2015 due to drug-induced liver injury, after which the medication was not taken regularly, and symptoms were intermittent. In 2017, the patient visited the Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine of the Renji Hospital and oral administration of Chinese herbal decoction (specific drug unknown) was prescribed. The medication was discontinued by the patient after the clinical symptoms slightly stabilized, and then the disease relapsed. The patient continued to use the same decoction, but the efficacy was poor.
The patient had no previous medical history.
None.
The patient’s temperature was 36.7 °C, heart rate was 86 beats/min, respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 111/60 mmHg.
In March 2018, the patient had aggravated abdominal pain, the frequency of defecation was increased, and bloody mucopurulent stool occurred. The patient was back to the Renji Hospital and electronic colonoscopy showed mucosal edema and hyperemia in the hepatic flexure of the ascending colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum; part of the transverse colon mucosa was normal. Biopsy results showed mild chronic colitis with activity in the hepatic flexure of the colon, occasional cryptitis, and local elongation and distortion (polypoid) of crypts. Moderate chronic colitis (full-thickness inflammation) with activity and architectural changes in the crypts were visible in the sigmoid colon. Intestinal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple diffuse thickenings of the intestinal wall in the sigmoid colon, splenic flexure of the colon, transverse colon, and hepatic flexure of the colon, as well as increased peripheral small vessels. The patient was diagnosed with active UC.
The patient was prescribed a TCM decoction (specific drug unknown) and mesalazine (Salofalk), but he refused to take mesalazine, and only took the TCM decoction due to previous drug-induced liver injury. After three months of treatment with this Chinese herbal decoction (July 30, 2018), the related laboratory test results [white blood cell count (WBC), red blood cell count (RBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP)] suggested that the disease condition was improved compared with before treatment (March 1, 2008), but the patient's clinical symptoms were not significantly relieved. On July 30, 2018, the patient visited our hospital presenting with lower left quadrant abdominal pain and diarrhea, the frequency of stool was 4-6 times a day, the stool was watery with a moderate amount of mucus and little blood, and the patient did not have fever or other discomfort. He also had no familial history of inflammatory bowel disease. Abdominal examination showed deep tenderness in the lower left quadrant, without palpable mass or draining fistula. The patient had a pale complexion, and there had been no significant weight loss since the onset. The patient had low spirit, poor appetite, fair sleep, and normal urination. The tongue was reddish, the coating of the tongue was white and greasy, and the pulse was weak.
Related laboratory tests (July 30, 2018) showed the following results: WBC: 12.42×109/L; RBC: 5.35× 1012/L; Hemoglobin (HGB): 164 g/L; Platelets (PLT): 300× 109/L; Hematocrit (HCT): 0.466 L/L; ESR: 10 mm/h; CRP (C-reactive proteins): 3.77 mg/L; and normal liver and kidney function .
Clinical assessment on July 30, 2018 showed the following: Score of the patient’s clinical symptoms (including the frequency, severity, and duration of abdominal pain; the frequency of diarrhea and stool characteristics; the amount of mucous stool and stool with pus and blood; the severity of abdominal distension and tenesmus; the percent reduction in food consumption; and symptoms of chills in the limbs and soreness in the waist and knees): 21 points; total score on the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire(IBDQ), including systemic symptoms, intestinal symptoms, social competence, and emotional competence: 110 points; Mayo activity index (including diarrhea, hematochezia and mucosal manifestations): 6 points; Baron endoscopy score: 2 points; Visual Analog Scale(VAS) Score of abdominal pain: 21 points; and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS): HADS-A is 21 points, HADS-D is 15 points .