An otherwise healthy 45 kg 12-year-old Hispanic female with a past medical history significant for idiopathic progressive thoracic scoliosis with double curve of the thoracic spine presented for T2–T12 posterior spinal fusion in December 2020. She had no previous hyperthyroid symptoms and no family history of any thyroid disorders or autoimmune conditions. She had no prior surgical history.
On the day of the procedure, the patient’s vital signs as follows were significant for tachycardia and hypertension during the preanesthesia evaluation: temperature 36.5 °C, pulse 169 bpm, respiratory rate 22 breaths/min, and blood pressure 143/89 mmHg. Her heart rate continued to elevate to the 180s. Although she initially appeared calm, she reported that she was very nervous and cried upon questioning. She also had a fine tremor, which in combination with her tachycardia was attributed to severe anxiety. She was given midazolam, and her heart rate improved to low 160s.
The patient was induced with sevoflurane and 50% nitrous oxide via mask, then given fentanyl (50 mcg), rocuronium (30 mg), propofol bolus (100 mg), and intubated with a 6-mm internal diameter cuffed endotracheal tube. At the start of the case, she was given cefazolin (1500 mg) and dexamethasone (4 mg), and a nasogastric tube was placed. After induction her anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and propofol, and remifentanil infusion and fentanyl boluses were given for intraoperative pain management. Tranexamic acid infusion was started for intraoperative bleeding prophylaxis. Sugammadex (100 mg) was used to reverse neuromuscular blockade for neuromonitoring. An initial arterial blood gas (ABG) at the start of surgery showed a pH of 7.3, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) 40 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) 362 mmHg, base excess of − 2, and bicarbonate (HCO3−) 23 mEq/L on 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2).
Despite adequate depth of anesthesia and analgesia according to neuromonitoring, the patient remained tachycardic to the 160s with pulse remaining above 110 bpm throughout the case. She was hypertensive for most of the case with systolic blood pressures ranging from 100s to 140s mmHg and diastolic blood pressures ranging from 40s to 70s mmHg. About 3.5 h after induction, her temperature exceeded 38 °C. The IV warmer was turned off and the Bair Hugger blanket was turned to ambient air to cool the patient. The patient reached a max temperature of 38.4 °C. Because her fever did not rapidly progress and decreased after withholding warming measures and PaCO2 was stable on subsequent ABGs, malignant hyperthermia was unlikely, so dantrolene was not administered. Despite the patient’s tachycardia and hypertension, she was considered stable enough for the continuation of surgery, which was completed without complications. The patient received midazolam (2 mg), ondansetron (4 mg), and morphine (2 mg) prior to emergence from anesthesia. The patient was extubated in the operating room without any complications.
The patient was then transferred to the PICU with tachycardia and mild hypertension: temperature 36.9 °C, pulse 140 bpm, respiratory rate 28 breaths/min, and blood pressure 128/64 mmHg. A complete blood count and electrolyte panel drawn immediately after surgery were within normal limits. A thyroid panel was significant for undetectable thyroid stimulation hormone (TSH), high free thyroxine (T4) (4.46 ng/dL), high triiodothyronine (T3) (3.16 ng/mL), and high free T3 (13.6 pg/mL) and was consistent with thyroid storm. An electrocardiogram did not indicate any underlying cardiovascular dysfunction such as atrial fibrillation or heart failure. Propylthiouracil, iodine, hydrocortisone, and esmolol infusion were initiated. Endocrinology was consulted, and the patient was diagnosed with Graves’ disease. She was transitioned from propylthiouracil to methimazole and from esmolol to propranolol. She was discharged on postoperative day 3 on methimazole and propranolol.
The patient eventually underwent total thyroidectomy. Her sister was also subsequently diagnosed with Graves’ disease, suggesting the presentation of Graves’ disease may be due to genetic factors.