A 64-year-old male with refractory anemia with multilineage dysplasia and ringed sideroblasts, was admitted with low grade fever, fatigue and insomnia of three months duration. He was initially diagnosed with MDS five years ago, having a single cytogenetic abnormality of trisomy 19. He was treated with recombinant human erythropoietin and pyridoxine. One year prior to admission he underwent a splenectomy for hypersplenism. Afterwards his hematological parameters improved and he was only occasionally transfused with packed red cells. On admission physical examination revealed low-grade fever (37.5°C) and pallor of the skin. He had normochromic normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (79,000/μL) and a normal white blood count (9,800/μL) with dysplastic neutrophils and mild lymphopenia (1,400/μL). Biochemistry was normal, ESR was 44 mm/h and CRP was 0.75 mg/dl. Chest radiography, urine and blood cultures for common bacteria were negative. A bone marrow aspirate was performed, which revealed a hypercellular bone marrow with multilineage dysplasia, 24% ringed sideroblasts, 2% blasts and no additional cytogenetic abnormalities. Bone marrow trephine biopsy showed areas of hypercellularity without the presence of epithelioid cell granulomas or areas of necrosis. The aspirate was further cultured for mycobacteria. It was inoculated into MB/Bact Blood Culture Bottles for BacT/Alert 3D (bioMerieux, Durham, NC, USA) and Lowenstein-Jensen (LJ) slants (bioMerieux, Marcy l' Etoile, France) and incubated at 37°C. The acid-fast staining of the specimen was positive. The liquid culture turned positive eight days later. The isolate was identified as a member of the M. tuberculosis complex with gene probes [AccuProbe (GenProbe, San-Diego, USA)] and further differentiated as M. tuberculosis with biochemical analysis. Mycobacterial sputum cultures were negative. The chest computed tomography (CT) scan was normal. Drug susceptibilities were determined with the proportions method. The isolate was susceptible to all anti-tuberculosis drugs tested. The patient received a 4-drug regimen (isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide) for six months, followed by isoniazid and rifampicin for another three months. He defervesced shortly after the onset of treatment.