A healthy and athletic 62-year-old right-handed male with no previous history of shoulder pain sustained a direct fall on his right side during a skiing accident. He developed an immediate loss of active range of motion. A fracture was ruled out on standard radiographs, and the patient was referred two months later to a specialized shoulder clinic. On clinical examination, anterior active elevation was limited to 100 degrees, whereas passive motion was complete. Posterosuperior rotator cuff testing was deficient . Magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) revealed a complete lesion of the supraspinatus tendon at the musculotendinous junction with associated muscular edema .
The lesion did not fill the usual and undermentioned radiological Fosbury flop criteria but had a unique pattern; the lesion corresponded to a musculotendinous junction lesion of the rotator cuff that flopped on itself and healed on the anterior humerus and coracoid process .
The medial muscular stump had a grade 3 retraction according to Patte and a grade 1 fatty infiltration according to Goutallier, supporting the traumatic nature of the lesion. An arthroscopy was performed three months after the trauma and confirmed the MRA aspect of the supraspinatus tendon lesion .
A release was done but unfortunately it was impossible to reattach the tendon on the muscle. Therefore, a simple debridement and a tenotomy of the long head of the biceps were performed. The patient was allowed to move his shoulder freely the day after the surgery. The patient recovered active motion in elevation three months after the surgery. At one-year follow-up, the pain decreased by 6 points from 8 points at baseline to 2 points on the pain visual analog scale, active anterior elevation improved to 150 degrees (versus 160 degrees on the other side), active external rotation was 50 degrees and symmetric, and internal rotation was slightly limited to L1 versus T10 for the other side. The constant and the SSV scores improved from 21 and 20 points preoperatively to 74 and 80 at one year, respectively.