A 3-year-old boy was admitted to our clinic after he had experienced paroxysmal loss of consciousness for > 1 year.
The patient exhibited loss of consciousness, global lack of muscle tone and presence of cyanotic lips during seizures, and spontaneous remission after 2-3 min. Since the onset of the seizures, he had exhibited poor mentation, additional crying, ingestion of a semiliquid diet, reduced appetite, and worsened sleep. Convulsion episodes had continued during treatment with sodium valproate 9 mL twice daily (ineffective) and topiramate 75 mg twice daily (effective but poor control). Oxazepine was added on January 5, 2021. No seizures were observed, but a rash appeared 4 week later and sleep increased. Oxazepine was discontinued on February 25, 2021, and the rash abated. Perampanel, two tablets once daily, was added on February 26, 2021. However, the patient continued to experience seizures that manifested as sudden rapid head drop (myoclonus), sometimes accompanied by lip smacking, slow shaking of both upper extremities, and sudden freezing. These seizures often occurred after excitement and diminished after 1 min. At the time of admission, the patient was receiving sodium valproate 12 mL twice daily, topiramate 25 mg twice daily, and perampanel 8 mg once daily.
The patient had no abnormal birth history. He had a history of poor growth milestones (e.g., he began to roll over slowly and could not sit unassisted at the age of 9 months) and had been diagnosed with developmental delay. At the time of admission, he could not sit unassisted, could not recognize people, could not speak, and exhibited unconscious pronunciation.
The patient’s parents were healthy, non-blood relatives. The patient was the only child in his family, and neither parent had other offspring. There was no obvious family history of developmental delay or seizures.
Physical examination findings were temperature 37.3 °C, pulse 102 beats/min, respiration 24 breaths /min, and weight 17.7 kg. The patient exhibited a clear mind, poor spirit, frequent crying, limited development, moderate nutrition, pharyngeal congestion, coarse breath sounds in both lungs, and slightly elevated muscle tension.
Laboratory findings were within normal limits.
Genetic analysis: Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood that had been collected from the patient and his parents. Candidate mutation sites were examined by Sanger sequencing. Complex heterozygous mutations were found in the patient’s ADSL gene: The splicing mutation c.154-3C>G (present in his father; Figure -) and the missense mutation c.71C>T (p. Pro24Leu) (present in his mother; Figure -).
The bioinformatics software programs PSIPRED V4.0 and RaptorX were used to predict the secondary and tertiary structures, respectively, of mutant and wild-type ADSL proteins. The missense mutation c.71C>T causes an amino acid change from proline to leucine (p. Pro24Leu), possibly leading to a change in polarity . The splicing mutation c.154-3C>G was predicted to be pathogenic, according to the SD-Score Algorithm .
Magnetic resonance imaging in July 2020 showed bilateral external frontal temporal space widening and abnormal signals around the posterior horns of both lateral ventricles, suggestive of myelin hypoplasia; follow-up examination showed similar findings .
Electroencephalography: Electroencephalography performed in July 2020 revealed an abnormal electroencephalogram with slightly more medium-high amplitude in the left and right frontal regions, a few full-conduction irregular medium-high amplitude spikes, sharp slow waves, and a slow background rhythm. In July 2021, video electroencephalography revealed highly rhythmical patterns during most of the waking period and the entire sleep period. On the basis of irregular slow waves with full diffusion of 2-7 Hz, the patient exhibited multifocal slow waves, spiky slow waves, and polyspinous slow waves, with left and right asymmetry, asynchronous anterior and posterior findings, pronounced anterior activity, and an obvious sleep period .