An 85-year-old female was referred to our clinic for low back pain radiating predominantly into the right leg. The pain started gradually one year prior to her initial visit and was affecting her right leg with standing and walking for 30 feet. She failed conservative therapies including physical therapy, home exercises, pain medications and epidural steroid injections.
A magnetic resonance imaging scan was performed. The most pertinent findings were at the right L4-L5 level where ligament flavum hypertrophy (7.3 mm diameter), facet hypertrophy and disc bulging produced severe right foraminal narrowing . There was also foraminal narrowing on the left and some central stenosis. However, given that the symptoms were only related to the foraminal narrowing on the right, our strategy was to treat the patient and not the MRI, and to do this with a safe and minimally invasive approach.
The right leg pain numbness and dysesthesia were the most disabling symptoms. Her visual analog score (VAS) was 8/10 for the right leg and 6/10 for the back. The Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) was 44.4 and the Zurich claudication questionnaire (ZCQ) showed a score of 2.35. She was presented with the option of an open decompressive laminectomy, but she opted for the less invasive hydro decompression technique. At that time the MILD procedure was not available due to lack of insurance coverage. She was fully informed that the use of the equipment was off-label and subsequently she was informed of all potential complications related to this new procedure. As this was an off-label use of a device that was already FDA approved for spinal decompression, we did not present it before an institutional review board.
MAC anesthesia was utilized. The patient received 1 GM of Cefazolin preoperatively for prophylaxis. An epidurogram was performed with 3 mL of Iodohexol180 (Omnipaque, GE Healthcare) via an 18 gauge Tuohy needle at the L4-5 level showing evidence of lumbar spinal stenosis. After this a 17 gauge modified epidural needle was inserted posterior to the right S1 foramen and advanced under fluoroscopy lateral to the midline until the tip of the needle rested on the superior surface of the right L5 superior lamina. A guide wire was inserted via the epidural needle which was subsequently removed. After that a cannula and a dilator were placed through a small incision over the guide wire, following which the dilator and the guide wire were removed leaving the cannula in place. Finally the SpineJet resector was inserted into the cannula and advanced to the superior lamina of L5, making contact with the posterior fibers of the ligamentum flavum. For safety reasons an oblique contralateral view was maintained all the time to assure that the resector did not go beyond the posterior aspect of the ligamentum flavum or violate the epidural space. The proper depth of the resector was appreciated based on the epidurogram which allowed us to have a clear demarcation of the epidural space. Small amounts of Iodohexol180 (Omnipaque, GE Healthcare) were injected during the procedure via the adjacent 18 gauge Tuohy needle in order to maintain a good grasp of the epidural borders. It is important to avoid directing the dissecting jet opening in a perpendicular plane to the epidural space as this can produce dural tears. Hydro resection was performed for a total of 90 seconds. At the end of the procedure an epidurogram was again performed showing improved flow at the L4-5 epidural space .