A 62-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with chest discomfort ongoing for 2 weeks. She had chronic renal failure secondary to malignant hypertension. She had been undergoing dialysis for 27 years. Her symptoms worsened when she took a deep breath, and she had experienced palpitations for a few hours before her arrival. At the time of her visit, her blood pressure was 85/54 mmHg, pulse rate was 150 ppm, and SpO2 was 95% (room air). An electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated atrial fibrillation, which spontaneously converted to sinus rhythm within 1 h. Subsequently, the palpitations disappeared and the blood pressure increased to 100/62 mmHg. The sinus rhythm on the ECG showed a slight degree of ST elevation in the broad leads, especially in leads I, II, and aVF . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed that the left ventricular wall motion, thickness, and size were within normal range. No valve dysfunction was observed. Diffuse mild pericardial fluid was seen. The maximum thickness of the fluid was 6 mm at the anterior right ventricle; however, no findings suggestive of heart chamber collapse were evident (, Videos S1A and B).
A blood test showed creatine kinase and creatine kinase-MB levels in the normal range. The C-reactive peptide and high-sensitivity Troponin I levels were elevated (5.2 mg/dL and 86 ng/mL, respectively). Plain and contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) was performed . No findings indicated either aortic dissection or pulmonary embolism. The CT value of pericardial effusion was 35–74 HU, which indicated the bloody effusion. However, no contrast agent was observed in the pericardium. We diagnosed the patient with pericarditis and hospitalized her for treatment and observation for her pericardial effusion. Her inflammatory marker levels became normal, and the ST changes disappeared after several days with no medications. She had no chest pain and the creatinine kinase level was within normal range during the hospitalization. Her blood pressure during hospitalization was 120–140/80–90 mmHg. On Day 9 after hospitalization, the effusion increased (12 mm at the anterior right ventricle) and caused a mild diastolic collapse of right atrium; however, her haemodynamics remained stable. On Day 11, the pericardial effusion decreased significantly when compared with that on admission (5 mm at the anterior right ventricle).
On Day 13, after haemodialysis, she again experienced precordial discomfort and she had a sudden cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) on the bed. The cardiac rhythm was pulseless electrical activity. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was quickly initiated and a return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. A markedly increased pericardial effusion and chamber collapse which caused a cardiac tamponade were observed on the TTE. The systolic blood pressure was 60 mmHg. We performed pericardial drainage, and 300 mL of bloody fluid was drained. A blood test showed the troponin I level was 59.5 pg/mL. The emergency coronary angiography showed no significant abnormality of coronary artery forms. Mild stenosis was observed in the right coronary artery and the left circumflex artery (LCX). The middle part of the left anterior descending artery and the diagonal branch had severe stenosis with calcification. No coronary flow limitation was observed; however, the extravasation of contrast into the epicardium was seen from the branch of the LCX (Ellis classification: Type III) ( and , Video S2A). The patient was diagnosed with SCAR. The ruptured vessel was small, so we thought that the coil embolization would work for stopping the bleeding. The extravasation of contrast agent disappeared after inserting three coils ( and , Video S2B).
Despite the steadiness of the patient’s haemodynamics after the coil embolization, she went into an irreversible coma. It took 21 min to return to spontaneous circulation from CPA. A head CT performed 6 days after the CPA showed an unclearness of the corticomedullary junction, which suggested cerebral hypoxia. Electroencephalography performed 5 days after the CPA indicated a continuous low voltage and semi-rhythmic delta activity, which suggested diffuse encephalopathy.
At 20 days after the CPA, she died from pneumonia. An autopsy revealed no specific findings in the coronary artery, such as aneurysm or dissection. Pathologically, intimal hypertrophy and medial thinning, which are common in atherosclerosis, were observed at the point of rupture. A rupture of the internal elastic layer was observed; however, no necrosis or inflammation was evident .