A 47-year-old male brought into the hospital by a local law enforcement agency for evaluation of inability to care for himself. Patient was initially apprehended after a brief scuffle and exposure to pepper spray by the deputies for resisting arrest. He was charged with possession and use of methamphetamine and was transferred to a local detention center. Upon evaluation by the detention medical staff, the patient was only alert and oriented to self, unable to engage in meaningful conversation, and unable to ambulate without assistance. As a result, the patient was placed on an involuntary 72-hour hold for grave disability and transferred to the local hospital for medical and psychiatric evaluation.
On arrival at the behavioral health unit of the hospital, he was not oriented to person, place, or time. He was repeatedly mumbling numbers, possibly a phone number, without clear context. He was unable to ambulate independently and was poorly responsive to conversation, with moderate response to painful stimuli. His initial vitals included blood pressure of 181/129 millimeter of mercury (mmHg), heart rate of 98 beats per minute, temporal temperature of 36.5 °C (97.7 °F), respiratory rate of 34 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 100% in the room air. Bedside serum glucose was also checked and found to be within normal limits. Because of the complexity of his presentation on arrival, he was immediately wheeled to the main emergency department (ED) for further medical evaluation.
In the main ED, his physical examination was remarkable for ill-appearance, disorientation, tachycardia, respiratory distress, and musculoskeletal weakness. Patient had old and new abrasions bilaterally on his upper and lower extremities. A deformity was noted on his right wrist. His past medical history in the electronic health records was significant for rhabdomyolysis, history of methamphetamine use disorder. Shortly after arrival at the ED, his mental status deteriorated, the patient was noted to have frothy white secretions from his mouth and poor gag reflex. He was subsequently intubated for airway protection and placed on a ventilator.
The laboratory analyses were significant for leukocytosis of 18,800 cells per microliter, blood urea nitrogen of 36 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), creatine kinase of 6,998 units per liter, creatinine of 2.28 mg/dL and urine drug screen was positive for methamphetamine . The liver function tests were slightly abnormal; however this is consistent with this patient’s known history of concurrent alcohol use. Ammonia level was found to be 71 micrograms per deciliter (ug/Dl) which is within normal limits (20–80 ug/Dl). In addition, the patient underwent a computerized tomography (CT) scan of his brain without contrast that showed mild age-related atrophy but failed to show any acute abnormalities. .
Subsequently, patient was admitted to the hospital with diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis, respiratory failure, and acute kidney injury. He was treated with intravenous lactated Ringer at 150 milliliters per hour continuously. Concurrently, he was psychologically stabilized with Abilify 5 mg daily. After two days on the ventilator support and sedation, He was extubated, and his physiological/mental status improved. Further consultation regarding his substance use disorder along with his social status was initiated and the patient was discharged to supportive outpatient care without further incident.
Since this admission one year ago, this patient has been seen in the hospital and behavioral health unit four more times. Currently, there is poor control of his psychiatric conditions due to continuous use of methamphetamine, lack of follow-up for medical and psychiatric care, and lack of social support. Each admission showed laboratory and diagnostic imaging results consistent with his initial presentation including normal ammonia levels and slightly elevated liver function tests.