A 48-year-old White male presented to our clinic with a chief complaint of vague and intermittent pain at the ulnar aspect of the fifth metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint of the right hand. With a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, heart rate of 86 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 21 breaths per minute, and temperature of 37.2 °C, vital signs were normal. His past medical history was not remarkable, and he had no familial history of related diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. He had no recollection of trauma to his hand. The patient’s physical examination revealed mild tenderness to palpation over the ulnar collateral ligament, without appreciable swelling, erythema, ecchymosis, wound, or scar. Range of motion and strength testing were within normal limits. Besides a borderline first-hour erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 22 mm/hour (normal range 0–20 mm/hour), his lab data was not remarkable. Complete blood count (CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), urine analysis, and rheumatologic work-ups showed no abnormality. Radiographic evaluation showed a calcified lesion adjoining the ulnar collateral ligament at the fifth MCP joint, indicating possible chronic inflammation . Initially, with a possible diagnosis of chronic calcified peroarthritis and inflammation of the ulnar collateral ligament of the fifth MCP joint, medical management was chosen. Acetaminophen tablet 500 mg three times per day and indometacin tablet 75 mg two times per day were prescribed. Yet, the patient’s symptoms did not diminish with medical therapy.
Given the uncertainty regarding overall diagnostic accuracy, the patient was recommended for surgical intervention for further management of the underlying pathology. During the surgical exploration, a glass foreign body encapsulated in fibrotic tissue was identified, eroding into the underlying bone of the fifth MCP joint . Upon further history-taking postoperatively, the patient recalled sustaining an unreported glass laceration to the volar right hand nearly 10 years prior, for which he did not seek medical attention given the lack of symptoms at the time. Apparently, the injury had left no visible scar. He was discharged the same day with no problem regarding the surgery.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course with complete symptom resolution at 6-week follow-up . Furthermore, the patient had no complaint regarding his surgery and had no complication in his finger function at 6-month follow-up.