A 73-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension and prior cholecystectomy presented to the emergency room with acute onset of abdominal pain of 1-day duration. She described right lower quadrant abdominal pain that was constant and worsening since it started. She reported no prior occurrence. There were no alleviating or exacerbating factors. Her symptoms were preceded by five days of constipation refractory to stool softeners. She was briefly febrile four days prior to admission. Surgical history disclosed laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 2010 complicated with a perforated gallbladder. After being discharged following the surgery, she noted having had recurring fevers for ten days and experienced no other symptoms.
On initial assessment, her exam revealed an elderly woman, who was alert, well-oriented, and in mild distress. She had an oral temperature of 99°F, a heart rate of 89 bpm, blood pressure of 142/63 mmHG, and a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute. Her abdominal exam revealed a soft, non-distended stomach with moderate tenderness at the medial right lower quadrant abdomen. There was no guarding or rebound, and she had normal bowel sounds.
Initial labs showed an elevated WBC at 15.2 K/mcl, hemoglobin at 13.3 g/dL and a high platelet count of 552 K/mcl. The patient had normal values for the following: sodium at 135 mEq/L, potassium at 3.8 mEq/L, BUN at 16 mg/dL and creatinine at 0.92 mg/dL. A CT of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast showed hepatomegaly along with a 12.4 × 4.8 × 3.6 cm fluid collection within the right lateral abdominal wall with two radiopaque structures resembling gallstones . The abscess extended superiorly to the level of Morison's pouch and inferiorly to the right iliac wing .
The patient was admitted and started on intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam. Dr. Joseph Hartigan, who has over 20 years of experience in laparscopic surgery, performed a laparoscopic drainage of the abscess and removal of the gallstones. The origin of the abscess was found near the umbilicus and tracked cephalad up towards the liver. A 15 Blake drain was placed into the abscess cavity and left in place for four days. A phlegmon of approximately 100 cc's of purulent fluid was drained and cultures grew out E. Coli. The patient recovered well and was discharged on the 3rd postoperative day. The abscess formed by the gallstones was determined to be the cause of the abdominal pain in this case. The drain was removed during the follow-up appointment two weeks after the surgery. There were no complications. The patient was intrigued in the discovery and thankful for the outcome.