A 28 year old woman presented with neck and right upper extremity pain accompanied by dyspnea of two years duration. Chest X- ray revealed mediastinal widening . Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed an anterior mediastinal mass invading in pericardium without extramediastinal extension. An initial clinical impression of a mediastinal germ cell tumor was considered but serum tumor markers such as alpha-feto protein (AFP), Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA-125 were normal. CA19-9 level was 2420 U/ml (normal: 0.37U/ml). A mediastinal biopsy was done and showed histologic features of adenocarcinoma. Endoscopy, colonoscopy, abdominopelvicsonography and imaging studies were negative for primary origin. The patient underwent mid-sternotomy. The mass was resected. The patient received chemotherapy (GEMOX) and radiotherapy with two recurrences in 2 years follow up. She is doing well and free of tumor after 6 months.
The mediastinal biopsy showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with a desmoplastic and necrotic stroma . Scattered small mucinous lakes were noted in the stroma. The stroma also showed foci of calcification and occasional psammoma bodies. Intracytoplasmic and stromal positive reactions were seen on mucicarmin stain. The excised tumor showed similar morphological and immunohistochemical characteristics. In one of the sections, a unilocunar large cyst with columnar epithelium, in vicinity of the tumor was also identified . Small foci of remnant of thymic tissue were identified. Immunohistochemical (IHC) study showed positivity for CK, EMA, CK20 , CDX-2 , CK7, CD5 , villin, HMWK(focal) and MOC31 but ER, PR, TTF-1, GCDFP-15, P63, CD30, PLAP, chromogranin, calretinin and CD117 were all negative. Commercial sources, clones, and working dilutions of antibodies used in the study are listed in Table . Extensive histologic and immunohistochemical study of the whole specimen showed no evidence of teratomatous or germ cell elements.
Array CGH on this case was performed using the Human Genome Microarray 180A platform (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA). The experimental procedures were performed according to the protocols provided by the manufacturers. Slides were scanned with the G2565CA Microarray Scanner (Agilent) at a scan resolution of 5 μm. Signal intensities from the generated images were measured and evaluated with Feature Extraction 10.10.11 and Agilent Genomic Standard Workbench Edition 6.5.0.58 (AGW6.5) software (Agilent) applying the Aberration Detection Method-2 (ADM-2) algorithm with a threshold of 6.0. It showed a complex karyotype with multiple gains and losses. Part of the HLA-DR5 locus in chromosomal region 6p21.32 seemed to be homozygously deleted .
“Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.”