A 43-year-old woman presented to the emergency department for recurrent falls and confusion. The patient had a significant surgical history including:
Congenital bicuspid aortic valve complicated by aortic root dilatation and regurgitation, status post-aortic valve replacement with St. Jude 23-mm valve and tricuspid annuloplasty in 2011.
In 2021, left ventricular hypertrophy and severe aortic stenosis led to a second aortic valve replacement with an On-X valve complicated by an ARVF and TR.
Right heart catheterization (2 June 2021) showed elevated right heart filling pressures, elevated left heart filling pressures, an ARVF, and dilated right ventricle with normal systolic function.
Two months prior, the patient had presented with confusion and falls. She was noted to have asterixis. Serum ammonia was found to be elevated. She was treated with lactulose until resolution of her symptoms and discharged on it. At that time, her ARVF was not considered as a cause of her encephalopathy. A previous admission called for outpatient management of her ARVF by interventional cardiology. However, there was no mention of her fistula as the cause of her falls and encephalopathy. The cause of her encephalopathy was presumed to be multifactorial. As a result, there were no plans made to correct the aforementioned cardiac abnormalities during that admission. She experienced a progressive worsening in her somnolence despite compliance with the previously efficacious lactulose dose. Unfortunately, the patient ran out of lactulose and was hospitalized rapidly due to severe encephalopathy.
The patient’s contributing past history included bipolar and post-traumatic stress disorders requiring the centrally acting medications in . Remaining history was non-contributory.
Vitals were within normal limits. Admission exam was significant for obesity, slowed mentation, slurred speech, regular rate, and rhythm with a III/VI holosystolic murmur at upper right sternal border with radiation to carotids, mechanical S2 with near-obliteration of S1, bilateral asterixis, and ecchymosis on the chest. Her exam was negative for jugular venous distension, organomegaly, laboured respirations, or peripheral edema.
Given her findings and history of outpatient treatment with lactulose, ammonia levels were measured and markedly elevated at 122 mcmol/L on admittance . Further investigation showed elevated transaminases and serum bilirubin.
Liver ultrasound showed ‘dilated hepatic veins and bidirectional flow in the main portal vein may relate to cardiac disease’ (, , ).
Computerized tomography (CT) abdomen/pelvis revealed evidence of congestive hepatopathy with hepatic steatosis and hepatomegaly .
Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms confirmed the presence of an ARVF and TR as noted in the patient’s history (see , ). Additionally, it revealed dilation of the right heart chambers and an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%. The CT angiography of the chest confirmed presence of the fistula, peri-membranous VSD, and small pseudoaneurysm .
Our differential for the patient included congestive hepatopathy due to elevated right atrial pressures, cirrhotic hyperammonemia, a urease-producing urinary tract infection, medication-induced hyperammonemia in setting of polypharmacy, or possible errors in the urea cycle.
Hepatology assessed the liver through ultrasound and CT imaging. Although they did not rule out the possibility of hepatic fibrosis from NAFLD or chronic congestion, they did not deem further investigation with biopsy or elastography appropriate at that time. Biopsy would not affect management as therapy was already directed toward lowering right atrial pressure. Urinalysis was conducted twice throughout her hospital course and was negative for nitrites and bacteria. A defect in any of the six enzymes required to complete the urea cycle can result in increased levels of ammonia. Urine tests for organic acids were unrevealing. The patient had an extensive list of medications . However, drug-induced hyperammonemia was decided to be unlikely as only oxcarbazepine, and topiramate shows very rare instances of hyperammonemia. Only a few cases are reported for each drug. These cases are most often seen in combination with other psychotropic or antiseizure medications, which our patient did not take. For example, cases of topiramate-induced hyperammonemia can be a result of co-administration with valproic acid. Our patient did not take valproic acid. Liver enzymes revealed an elevated alkaline phosphatase with intact transaminases. These findings suggested a congestive process further supported by the ultrasound findings and elevated right atrial pressure, well above the baseline of >12 mmHg needed to result in hepatic congestion. The presence of the fistula, VSD, and TR were sufficient to explain the cause.
She started inpatient treatment with lactulose titrated for 4–5 daily bowel movements. Five days into her hospitalization, she began rifaximin 550 mg twice daily. With treatment, her encephalopathy and asterixis began to improve. Her initial struggle with reporting her name and location waned. The patient began answering all questions correctly with increased speed and confidence. Her asterixis eventually resolved.
Interventional cardiology was consulted to consider repair after cardiovascular surgery raised concerns about repeat surgery. She was taken by the former for successful percutaneous plugging of her ARVF with a 10-mm AmplatzerTM Vascular Plug II. She continued to have severe TR, but the remainder of her hospital course was unremarkable. She was discharged one day after repair. Upon discharge, minimal changes were made to the outpatient medications recorded in . In addition to continuing her previous dose of lactulose (20-g packet daily), she was prescribed rifaximin 550 mg oral, twice daily. As the patient was placed on a heparin drip leading up to her procedure, she was bridged back to her prior warfarin dose (10 mg daily) before leaving. Lastly, her torsemide dose was increased from 20 to 40 mg.
Five days post-discharge, she felt well with improvement in weight from increased urine output. Echocardiogram performed six weeks after surgery did not show significant changes from prior to surgery but showed no flow through the fistula. Five months after surgery, she reports improved energy. Her mental status remains stable at her baseline and well above her status upon admission. She has been off lactulose for months and is being considered for wean from rifaximin as of this writing (eight months after surgery).