A 52-year-old male patient was admitted for weakness and numbness involving the bilateral lower limbs for 18 mo, and disorder of defecation and erectile dysfunction for 6 mo. For the last 3 mo, these symptoms started to worsen.
The patient started to present disorders of bilateral lower limbs in January 2016, and defecation and erectile dysfunction in January 2017. Subsequently, he received magnetic resonance imaging examination at a local hospital, which suggested an intramedullary mass located at the level of T9-T10. However, he did not take any cure. In April 2017, the clinical symptoms began to worsen. Therefore, the patient was admitted to our department on July 13, 2017 for further treatment.
The patient underwent an appendectomy in 1984, and had suffered from diabetes for 7 years and hypertension for 2 years. He had been taking nimodipine, metformin, and gliclazide to control the blood pressure and blood glucose levels under the supervision of local doctors.
Neither he nor anyone in his family had a history of primary intramedullary melanocytoma.
Neurologic examination presented that the myodynamia of the right lower limb was grade 3 and left lower limb was grade 4. Besides, the superficial and deep sense in the right lower limb was clearly worse than that of the left lower limb and these dysfunctions in distal lower limbs were more severe than those of proximal lower limbs as well. Moreover, achilles tendon reflex and patellar tendon reflex were brisk with absence of ankle and patellar clonus. Babinski sign was positive in the right lower limb. Anal reflex revealed a mild decrease and the Romberg sign was positive.
Total protein was slightly low (63.2 g/L). Triglyceride (1.75 mmol/L) and low density lipoprotein (3.47 mmol/L) were a little high. Color doppler ultrasound of the stomach and pelvis indicated a single gallbladder polyp (3 mm × 3 mm) and gallstone (5 mm × 4 mm), and benign prostate hyperplasia with multiple calcifications. The routine blood, urine, and stool tests were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, cardiac color Doppler ultrasound, pulmonary ventilation function, and blood glucose were also normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an intramedullary tumor located at the T9-T10 level with oval borders and a size of 5.5 cm × 1.2 cm × 1.2 cm. The mass was slightly hyperintense on T1-weighted images (T1WI) and hypointense on T2-weighted images (T2WI) . Contrast-enhanced MRI of the tumor showed mildly inhomogeneous enhancement after gadolinium administration . The secondary lesions like syringomyelia induced by the intramedullary tumor were hypointense on T1WI and hyperintense on T2WI with mild enhancement after gadolinium management at the T5-T8 level .