A 71-year-old man, who did not complain of any physical pain, decided to consult our hospital's hepatology department owing to outpatient laboratory data and ultrasonography results that suggested slight liver dysfunction and an upper abdominal tumor, respectively. The patient's medical history included appendectomy at the age of 16 years, right thigh fracture at the age of 22 years, and hyperlipidemia since he was 60 years old. Laboratory data showed aspartate aminotransferase, alanine transaminase, and alkaline phosphatase levels of 28, 43, and 469 IU/L, respectively. However, following abdominal ultrasonography (AUS) , computed tomography (CT) , and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, a 4.5 cm submucosal tumor at the lesser curvature of the stomach was highly suspected. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an elevated, nonepithelial lesion with a smooth surface in the lesser curvature of the stomach . AUS revealed a leaf-shaped tumor with a mosaic pattern and a heterogeneous parenchyma. Moreover, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed that the same tumor seemed to be continuous with the fourth layer, and contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the heterogeneous parenchyma was located between the head portion of the pancreas and the left liver lobe. The size of the tumor was approximately 49 × 29 mm. The tumor mass appeared to protrude from the stomach wall . AUS and CT did not indicate liver tumor, lymph node swelling, and peritoneal dissemination. The preoperative diagnosis was submucosal tumor, a suspected GIST of the stomach.
Laparoscopic partial resection of the stomach was subsequently performed. Although the tumor was located at the lesser curvature of the stomach, its origin could not be determined by surgical findings alone. As the lesser omentum and fat around the tumor were exfoliated, the tumor appeared to be continuous with only a portion of the stomach wall. The tumor, as well as a portion of the stomach, was completely resected, including the stomach wall believed to be continuous with the tumor . The procedure time was 65 min with no blood loss. Length of stay was 8 days after operation. No complication was detected.
A diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma was established. Histopathologic examination of the tumor revealed a multinodular but smooth outer surface and foci of fleshy and pale cream-yellow areas underneath . Pathological findings showed that the tumor was not continuous with the stomach serosa . Moreover, microscopic examination revealed long intersecting fascicles of spindle cells (hematoxylin and eosin staining), confirming the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor was negative for c-kit , CD34 , S-100 , and DOG1 and positive for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) , desmin , HHF-35, h-caldesmon, and calponin. High Ki-67 (MIB-1) expression (55.4%) and mitotic rate (39/50HPF) were also observed.
After providing informed consent that there are no established drugs as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy, and at 6 months and 1 year after surgery, no signs of recurrence were detected by CT.