A 29-year-old female presented to our department in October 2016. The patient experienced intermittent retrosternal pressing pain at rest or during physical activities that lasted a few minutes to half an hour. Medical history showed this patient had a fever at 5 years old (missing medical records). In 2004, the patient presented to a local Secondary hospital with retrosternal chest pain after physical activities. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed, and the result showed two aneurysmal dilatations in the proximal segment of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery, one aneurysmal dilatation in the mid-segment of the right coronary artery (RCA), and 100% occlusion at the end of left circumflex artery posterior descending branch (LCXp; due to the length of time and the limitations of the local hospital, imaging data was missing at the time). The patient had no prior risk factors for atherosclerosis. The patient was diagnosed with CAA and was treated with oral aspirin (0.3 g tid for the first 5 days, 0.1 g tid for the following 3 weeks and 0.1 g qd thereafter) for 6 months. According to the patient and her family, the patient's symptoms are in remission. Due to the limitation of the local hospital's diagnosis and treatment capacity, no follow-up and treatment were performed.
During this visit, the patient reported intermittent retrosternal compression pain at rest or during exercise lasting for several minutes to half an hour. CAG was performed, and the results showed a sizeable aneurysmal dilatation in the LAD with 95% localized stenosis, 100% occlusion of the LCXp, and a sizeable aneurysmal dilatation of the RCA with 90% localized stenosis . Abdominal ultrasound was also performed, and the result showed localized expansion of the hepatic artery with a maximum width of ~1.5 cm, which was considered as a hepatic arterial aneurysm. Peripheral blood vessel ultrasound showed no abnormality. The lab test results found that patient's blood glucose levels and blood lipid levels were in the normal ranges. All levels of indicators of autoimmune-related diseases, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, immunoglobulin, complement, antinuclear antibody, were in the normal ranges. The patient was diagnosed with CAAs with severe stenosis and multiple AAAs. Because a ruptured aneurysm can cause life-threatening bleeding, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) was carried out. Two giant coronary aneurysms were seen during surgery . The pathological examination of the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) confirmed minor lesions of endovascular inflammation in the LIMA and fibroproliferative degeneration around the vessel wall . Combined with the patient's previous medical history, the aneurysm may be induced by Kawasaki disease (KD). Oral aspirin (0.1g qd) and atorvastatin (20 mg qn) were prescribed, and the patient did not report any chest pain after the treatment. Four months after the CABG, coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed that CABG was done and LIMA-LAD graft patented, local aneurysmal dilatation of the RCAm with eccentric stenosis, LADp-m with 60% localized stenosis and partial aneurysmal dilatation. The lumens of LCX and OM were small.
After discharge, the patient followed the doctor's advice and insisted on treatment. However, in March 2018, the patient presented with abrupt-onset abdominal pain in the left upper quadrant. CTA revealed multiple aneurysms in the abdominal cavity involving the splenic artery, common hepatic artery, hepatic artery, gastroduodenal artery, and superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. The largest one was 3.6 cm × 3.7 cm × 3.7 cm, and it was located in the splenic artery . Abdominal angiography showed aneurysmal-like structures in the hepatic artery, splenic artery, and gastroduodenal artery , but no spillover of contrast medium was noted. We wanted to perform an interventional therapy, but the patient's family refused. Then the patient died suddenly after 3 days. The abdominal ultrasound examination showed effusion in the abdominal cavity, which was considered to be caused by a ruptured aneurysm.