An 80-year-old Japanese man hospitalized due to acute exacerbation stemming from asthma and COPD overlap presented with left-side pneumothorax caused by respiratory tract infection. Subsequently, a chest drain tube was inserted; however, a tumor suspicious for lung cancer was present at the entrance of the left upper lobe bronchus. The lung could not be sufficiently expanded, and an air leak was present. We performed pleurodesis twice (first: 200 mL of autologous blood and 4 g of talc; second: 200 mL of autologous blood), but the air leak persisted. Since surgical treatments were considered high risk for this patient due to poor lung function, we decided to treat by bronchial occlusion with EWS. Under bronchoscopy, a tumor was observed with a smooth surface at the entrance of the upper left lobe . A balloon occlusion test was performed using a balloon catheter (Edwards Lifesciences Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA) with a diameter of 4 Fr and an inflated balloon diameter of 9 mm, to determine the affected bronchi. After the entire left lower lobe bronchus was occluded by the balloon, the air leak ceased. Subsequently, bronchography was performed to identify the affected bronchi at the subsegmental bronchial level. The catheter was inserted into the subsegmental bronchus, and a contrast medium (iopamidol 5 mL and saline 15 mL) was injected from the tip. The contrast medium was injected from the left B8a and left B8b bronchi . Fluoroscopy confirmed contrast leakage from the left B8b bronchus into the thoracic cavity, and we suspected major leakage at the bronchi leading from the left B8b and the left B6 bronchi . We then successfully inserted a medium-sized EWS into the left B8b bronchus. Subsequently, we attempted to insert a large-sized EWS into the left B6 bronchus, but the fitting was difficult. Thus, we cut the end of the EWS to size and inserted it into the left B6a bronchus. After EWS insertions, the air leak clearly decreased. Finally, occluding the left B6 and left B8 bronchi by balloon catheter, we confirmed a slight but further decrease in air leakage. Therefore, we judged the remaining air leak to be minor. After bronchial occlusion, we performed pleurodesis twice (first: Picibanil (OK-432) 5 KE; Chugai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan, minocycline 300 mg; second: 50% glucose solution and 120 mL of autologous blood), and the air leak ceased completely. The chest drain tube was successfully removed. Several days later, he was diagnosed with pyothorax. The empyema cavity was confined to a small area, and it was difficult to puncture. Therefore, we treated with antibiotics (tazobactam-piperacillin 4.5 g 4 times a day). After 4 weeks of antibiotics therapy, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital.