A 59-year-old Chinese man complained of intermittent upper abdominal pain for 1 month, which worsened when he was hungry, and relieved after eating, accompanied by intermittent bowel movements, and no discomfort such as nausea or vomiting. The patient was in good health before, and the special family history of tumor was that his younger brother had liver cancer. Serum tumor biomarker examination revealed his CA125 increased to 66.3u/ml, and the normal level was 0-35.2 u/ml. Gastric laparoscopic examination revealed a type-IIc tumor in the gastric body with a diameter of 3 cm, and biopsy of the lesion revealed signet ring cell carcinoma. Subsequently, the patient underwent total gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection.
Routine histological examination was conducted and formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded full-thickness specimens of the tumor were collected and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE stain). Primary antibodies against p40 (2R-8), p53 (Do-7), MLH1 (GM002), MSH2 (RED2), MSH6 (EP49), PMS2 (EP51) (Gene Tech, Shanghai, China), p63 (UMAB4/4A4), EGFR (EP22), CK7 (EP16) ,CK5/6 (OTI1C7) (ZSGB-Bio, Beijing, China),and HER2 (VENTANA anti-HER2/neu 4B5, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) were purchased as ready-made working solution, and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed on autostainer (BOND-III, Leica Biosystems, Ltd., Newcastle, UK) or VENTANA benchmark ultra (Roche Diagnostics, USA) with specified second antibody and visualization system. AB-PAS staining was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BenchMark Special Stains, Roche Diagnostics, USA). For detection of EBV-encoded RNA, the EBER 1 Probe was used (Leica, Newcastle, UK). In situ hybridization analysis was performed using autostainers (BOND-III, Leica Biosystems, Ltd., Newcastle, UK). The expression of programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) was analyzed using the PD-L1 antibody (clone 22C3) on the Dako Automated Link 48 platform (Dako, Carpenteria, CA) with proper controls. All sections were observed through LEICA DM3000 LED (Leica Microsystems, UK). Electronic slices were obtained using P250 FLASH Scanning System (3D HISTECH, Ltd, China) and characteristic images were captured by the CaseViewer software (3D HISTECH, Ltd, China).
The endoscopic feature of the tumor was shown in Fig. A. Gross examination of the tumor showed that the tumor invaded the submucosa, so the tumor and the surrounding 2 cm gastric wall were continuously collected according to the sampling method of early gastric cancer. Histological examination revealed that the tumor was composed of a mixture of SCC (accounting for approximately 40%), poorly differentiated AC with intramucosal signet ring cell carcinoma (accounting for approximately 30%) and GCLS (accounting for approximately 30%) . The AC component had two morphologies. One was signet ring cell carcinoma, which was mainly located in the mucosal layer and was detected in the previous biopsy. The other was poorly differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with focal glandular formation . SCC was arranged in nests, and the cells were polygonal with relatively rich eosinophilic cytoplasm. An intercellular bridge was noted, and obvious keratinization was detected focally . Lymphocyte infiltration was found between or around the AC and SCC, but not as much as in GCLS. GCLS was characterized by irregular trabeculae, sheets, poorly differentiated tubules or single polygonal cells embedded within abundant lymphocytes . All components invaded into the submucosa layer, and the deepest part of the invasion was about 5 mm from the mucosal muscularis. AB-PAS-positive mucus was noted in the signet ring cell carcinoma and poorly differentiated tubular AC , but not in SCC and GCLS. Immunohistochemically, p40, p63 and cytokeratin CK5/6 were diffusely positive in SCC , but were negative in AC and GCLS . CK7 was negative in all components, and mismatch repair proteins such as MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6 remained intact. In situ hybridization detected EBER-positive neoplastic cells in all components . SCC, like AC and GCLS, showed diffuse positivity for EBER. EGFR was strongly positive in SCC, but weak to moderately expressed in AC and GCLS . Immunohistochemical score for HER2 expression was 1 + and p53 staining was patchy positive in all three components . Combined positive score (CPS) for PD-L1 expression was 15 (CPS = 15), because of positive expression on lymphocytes. Metastasis was found in one lymph node of group 4sa (1/54). The metastatic cells were in clusters without obvious glandular structure. They were negative for p40, p63 and CK7. AB-PAS staining showed positivity in individual cells, which indicated that the metastatic component was poorly differentiated AC.
Accordingly, a diagnosis of early EBV associated gastric ASC with concurrent GCLS (pT1bN1) was made. The patient took a single-drug S1 periodically for half a year after the surgery. The dosage was 60 mg/time, twice a day. The patient has been disease free during 8 months of medical follow-up.