A 90-year-old male presented with a tender left chest wall mass and complete heart block. He complained of pain upon palpation of the mass . Two years prior to presentation, the patient underwent a transfemoral aortic valve replacement and was subsequently dependent on a temporary pacemaker. Because the patient was dependent on a temporary pacemaker, a dual chamber pacemaker was placed 2 days after the aortic valve had been placed. A day after the dual chamber pacemaker had been placed, the ventricular screw-in pacing lead became non-functional and a new, temporary ventricular lead had to be placed. A chest radiograph revealed that the original, non-functional ventricular lead appeared to have perforated the myocardium. This non-functioning ventricular lead was left in place for fear that its removal would result in bleeding and cardiac tamponade. A CT scan showed that the original, non-functional ventricular lead which had perforated the right ventricle and was left in place, burrowed through the pericardial space, and produced a hematoma in the subcutaneous tissue of the left chest wall over the last 2 years .
The patient was prepped and draped for a possible median sternotomy and the heart–lung machine was placed on standby. A 10-cm oblique incision was made centered over the chest wall mass. The pectoralis muscle was divided, and the hematoma was evacuated . The tip of the original, non-functional lead that was left in place was found to have eroded through the fourth rib . A segment of the fourth rib was removed . After the rib was removed, the non-functional pacing lead could be seen protruding through the wall of the exposed right ventricle. The area of the heart around the perforation was dissected free and two 3-0 pledgetted sutures were used to close the defect. The pacing lead was pulled and transected; about 6 cm of lead was excised. The remaining lead was capped and allowed to retract back into the right ventricle during the surgery. The defect in the ventricle was plugged with the previously placed prolene mattress sutures. The chest wound was closed in layers. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged to home 1 week after the operation.