A 14-years-old boy presented with fever, vom-iting, diarrhea, signs of dehydration, loss of appetite, severe weakness, arthromyalgias diffused to the entire body, headache and pharyngodynia since a week. Physi-cal examination revealed pharyngitis with cervical lymphadenopathy, pain in left iliac region during the palpation of the abdomen and hepatosplenomegaly. Three days before his pediatrician prescribed antibiotic therapy for throat inflammation.
Blood tests showed neutrophilic leukocytosis (white cells 16.140/mm3 with 84% of neutrophils) and an important increase of C-reactive protein (35.58 mg/dl, normal value <0.01 mg/dl) and creatine phosphokinase (476 U/l, normal value <50 U/l). Procalcitonin was only mildly increased (0.84 ng/ml, normal value <0.50 ng/ml). Sinus rhythm with diffuse repolarization abnormalities were evident on the electrocardiogram. Chest X-rays was completely normal.
To correct the dehydration the patient was admitted in our unit.
During the first day of admission the boy presented epigastric pain, profuse sweating, paleness and mild bradycardia with normal blood pressure level for age. On electrocardiogram a diffuse ST elevation was present, troponin was consistently high (28.36 ng/ml, normal range 0-0.4 ng/ml) and echocardiography revealed a slight layer of pericardial effusion without reduction of ejection fraction (EF 60%) but with a mild contractile dysfunction of posterobasal segments of the ventricular septum. The boy was developing a perimyocarditis in the context of an acute gastrointestinal infection. To prevent complications of perimyocarditis and onset of malignant arrhythmias, the patients was admitted to the intensive care unit for 48 hours. During this time his clinical conditions were stable and the level of troponin on the second day after the admission showed a dramatic reduction (7.37 ng/ml, NR 0-0.4 ng/ml).
Features of perimyocarditis reversed within 72 hours and clinical situation was stabilized but the boy still presented twice-a-day high spiking fever, weakness and arthromyalgias increasing in severity. Abdominal ultrasounds confirmed the enlargement of liver and spleen; on blood tests CPK was increased (576 U/L), the same were CRP (39.42 mg/dl) and white cells count (18670/mm3), ESR was high (80 mm/h), ferritin raised (285.3 ng/ml, normal range 7-140 ng/ml), anemia developed (Hb 11.7 g/dl, normal range for age 12-15.2 g/dl). Pharyngeal swabs for viruses (Adenovirus, Influenza virus type A/B, Parainfluenza virus type 1/2/3/4, Rhinovirus A/B/C, RSV type A/B, Bocavirus, Coronavirus 229E, Coronavirus NL63, Coronavirus OC43, Metapneumovirus, Enterovirus) and bacteria (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila, Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis) were negative, serological tests showed positive IgG for EBV and CMV associated to negative IgM and negative IgM and IgG for: Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Borrelia burgdoferi, Bartonella, Brucella spp, Salmonella typhi/paratyphi, Parvovirus B19, Adenovirus, TORCH complex, HIV. For Enterovirus also IgA were measured and were negative. Tuberculosis tests were negative (PCR for DNA research on sputum and Mantoux test negative, QuantiFERON indeterminate). Blood cultures (for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and fungi) did not grow any organism, stool culture (Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter) were negative. Antistreptolysin O titer was negative. Therefore, the main infectious agents were excluded. Screening for autoantibodies was negative: antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double stranded DNA antibodies (anti ds-DNA), anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) titers were within normal limits. In the suspicion of rheumatic condition, serum amyloid A was measured and the level was raised (586 mg/dl, normal range 1-3 mg/dl).
The persistence of fever, the presence of general-ized lymph nodes enlargement, severe arthromyalgias, hepatosplenomegaly, the recent perimyocarditis, and finally the appearance of an evanescent and itchy pink rash on his trunk in presence of elevation of blood markers of systemic inflammation, allowed us to make the diagnosis of systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (soJIA) characterized by perimyocarditis as first sign of onset.
Pulse intravenously methylprednisolone was then administered for three days and after that oral corticosteroid therapy with prednisone was started. Because fever and arthritis were persistent, after six days a second try with high-doses steroid bolus was made. Abdominal ultrasounds showed the resolution of splenomegaly with spleen of normal size, but he-patomegaly was still present. Cardiological follow-up showed the resolution of myocarditis, troponin value was negative, but the slight layer of pericardial effusion was persistent. In four days fever and arthromyalgias appeared again, with a prevalent involvement of knees. The blood tests showed increased value of white cells (34.750/mmc, neutrophils 92%), CRP (7.37 mg/dl), ESR (35 mm/h), ferritin (757 ng/ml). In consideration of the persistent systemic inflammation despite the corticosteroid treatment, we decided to enhance the therapy by adding anakinra, a biological drug. The day after the start of the second-line therapy fever vanished permanently, in five days inflammation index returned to normal values, only a mild pain to both knees persisted. The echocardiography per-formed after one week showed the disappearance of the pericardial effusion.
During the subsequent follow-up, the boy showed a good compliance to the therapy. The glucocorticoids daily dose was progressively reduced and the patient continued his treatment with anakinra with good control of symptoms. After two and a half months cardiac MRI was performed to assess any damage: morphology and volume of left ventricle were preserved, the ejection fraction was 63%. The study of segmentary kinetics of the left ventricle documented the presence of mild hypokinesia of the mid-lateral wall. The delayed enhancement showed minute hyperintense areas into the distal portion of the mid-lateral wall of the left ventricle as scar fibrosis after myocarditis.