A 77-year-old woman with prediabetes presented to her primary care doctor for a routine preventative care visit with a new presentation of left-sided axillary lymphadenopathy. She had a screening mammogram performed and a breast ultrasound that showed a 5 mm left breast nodule and left axillary adenopathy up to 3.2 cm. Given concern for breast cancer, she underwent a core needle biopsy of the left axillary node and was diagnosed with classical Hodgkin's lymphoma (cHL) with immunostaining showing large atypical cells that were CD30+, CD15+ (subset), CD20+ (strong), and PAX5+. No flow cytometric analysis was performed. The local pathologist read the specimen as most likely representing a cHL, although the pathologist considered alternatively that the specimen could represent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) of the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) subtype.
She was referred to a medical oncologist with no B symptoms and an unremarkable physical exam except for diminished hearing in the left ear and left axillary adenopathy. Her labs were notable for hemoglobin 11.9 g/dL, leukocytes 7,600/μL, absolute neutrophil count 5,400/μL, absolute lymphocyte count 1,500/μL, platelets 261,000/μL, albumin 4.6 g/dL, and LDH 198 U/L (upper limit of normal 243 U/L). She underwent staging with a PET/CT scan and bone marrow biopsy of the right posterior superior iliac crest. The bone marrow morphology showed normocellular marrow (30%) with maturing trilineage hematopoiesis and no evidence of cHL. The flow cytometric analysis also showed no evidence of a B- or T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder. The PET/CT scan from the skull base to the midthigh revealed hypermetabolic adenopathy within the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis with the largest area of bulky adenopathy in the left axilla (largest measuring 3.3 × 1.7 cm with SUV 14.5) and a left subpectoral adenopathy (measuring 2.9 × 1.0 cm with SUV 12.3). There was no focal hypermetabolic activity within the liver or spleen. However, there was involvement of a few left paraaortic retroperitoneal lymph nodes and inguinal lymph nodes below the diaphragm. She was therefore staged as stage IIIA.
The patient was sent for a second opinion at a tertiary care referral center to confirm the diagnosis and advised on treatment options. The second opinion oncologist recommended excisional biopsy of the left axillary node for diagnostic clarity. This lymph node biopsy was read by the local pathologist as cHL against a background of extensive nonnecrotizing granulomatous inflammation. The H&E sections demonstrated a lymph node with effaced architecture and nonnecrotizing granulomatous inflammation and scattered large atypical binucleated cells with prominent central nuclei, reminiscent of Reed-Sternberg cells seen in cHL. The background was lymphoplasmacytic with histiocytic infiltrate. On the immunohistochemical studies, the large atypical cells were CD15+, CD30+, CD20+ (bright), PAX5+, MUM1+ and CD3-, CD10-, CD45-, and BCL2-. The flow cytometric analysis showed no immunophenotypic evidence of a B-cell or T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder.
However, a second opinion by the pathology group at the tertiary care referral center rendered a diagnosis of B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between DLBCL and cHL, also referred to as grey zone lymphoma (GZL) . While the morphology of the atypical lymphocytes and presence of CD30+ expression were suggestive of cHL, the strong expression of multiple B-cell markers (CD20+, PAX5+, and OCT2+) was not typical . Furthermore, in situ hybridization EBV mRNA (EBER-ISH) was positive in many large cells. This case was discussed at an interdisciplinary conference at the tertiary referral care center, and a final diagnosis of GZL was made. Prior to beginning an anthracycline-based treatment regimen, she underwent cardiac echocardiography which revealed a normal ejection fraction of 60-65% with no valvular disease.
She remained at the referral center for treatment of her stage IIIA CD20+/CD30+ GZL and underwent 6 cycles of R-BV-CHP (rituximab, brentuximab vedotin, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone) therapy not as part of a clinical trial, with restaging PET scan after cycle 3 which showed complete response (CR). After completing the total course of 6 cycles of R-BV-CHP, she underwent an end-of-treatment PET scan consistent with CR. She had no significant side effects from her treatment. Since June 2018, the patient remains in complete remission and retains an excellent performance status.