A 42-year-old male patient from Fu County, Shaanxi Province, an endemic area for KBD, developed bilateral hip pain about 4 years ago and was treated with pharmacological pain relief, but with poor results. In the past 1 year, the patient complained of increased pain with activity limitation, which seriously affected daily life. The x-ray examination revealed bilateral aseptic necrosis of the femoral head (Ficat Type IV), and the patient had a history of KBD for more than 20 years without treatment. Specialized examination showed that both the left and right hip joints were inversion deformity with limitation of activity and pressure pain at the midpoint of the groin on both sides, and bilateral hip joint mobility was limited to different degrees in each direction . The right and left feet were crossed . But blood flow and neurological reflexes were still normal in both lower limbs.
Procedure: After lumbar anesthesia, the patient was placed in the left lateral position. The surgery was performed by a posterior lateral approach (PLA). The skin, subcutaneous tissue and iliotibial bundle were incised layer by layer, the anterior edge of the gluteus maximus was incised along with the anterior edge of the gluteus maximus. The gluteus medius and gluteus minimus were incised at about 1 centimeter from the attachment of the greater trochanter. The hip joint was internally rotated and retracted. The posterior capsule of hip joint was exposed and incised with a “+” shaped incision.
The Homan pulling hook was inserted into the iliopsoas muscle stop of the lesser trochanter and pulled away. After adequate exposure of the femoral head and neck, the femoral head was found to be hypertrophied with top collapse and loss of articular cartilage.The femoral head was removed by osteotomy with a pendulum saw approximately 1.5 cm above the rotor line. After cleaning the acetabular contents, the acetabular prosthesis (52/32 mm) as well as the ceramic liner (36/44) was trial-molded and fitted. The femoral end was exposed by extreme internal rotation of the right lower extremity. After opening the marrow with a marrow opener, the femoral stalk prosthesis (2#) with ceramic ball head (36-M) was trial-molded and installed. The surgical incision was flushed and repositioned by traction and external rotation. The hip joint was moved by flexion and extension, stabilized without dislocation, and the surgical incision was closed layer by layer. Subsequently, the patient was placed in the right lateral position, and the left hip was treated in the same way. The acetabular prosthesis (52/32 mm), the ceramic liner (36/44) and the femoral stem prosthesis (1#) were installed after trial molding. Intraoperative anesthesia was satisfactory, bleeding volume was about 200 ml, no blood transfusion was given.
The patient stopped antibiotic treatment on the postoperative day-2, and all inflammatory indicators showed normal and started appropriate exercise, and the pain score decreased significantly. On the postoperative Day-7, the main exercises were ankle pump, hip flexion and knee flexion, and functional exercises of the hip joint with the use of assistive devices. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the postoperative day-10 and continued to be followed up. At one month after surgery, x-ray radiographs revealed normal alignment and the position of the hip protheses on both sides without no signs of loosening. From the preoperative period to the last follow-up, the patient's bilateral hip mobility and functional scores improved significantly ( and ), and no adverse events such as hip pain, prosthesis loosening or dislocation were found at the final follow-up. However, the patient's hip function scores began to plateau or even decline from the third year after surgery (Harris score:99;OHS score:45), and by the last follow-up hip scores were 97 and 45 respectively. Meanwhile, the patient's WOMAC score at the final follow-up was higher than in the third year after surgery .