A 21 years old female patient, of body mass 47 kg and BMI 17.7, came to our emergency department due to paroxysmal abdominal pain for 4 days. The pain was intermittent, moderate to severe, cramping in the epigastric area. She also had diarrhoea 2 days ago and hadn’t had any bowel movements ever since. A similar episode occurred 2 months ago which subsided spontaneously over few days. However, the pain she had this time was so severe that medical treatments she received in urgent clinic, at another hospital, couldn’t provide relief. Upon arriving at the emergency room of our hospital, her vital signs were 37.2 °C, heart rate 98 bpm, respiratory rate 18 bpm, blood pressure 126/92 mmHg. Physical examination revealed a moderately distended abdomen, tenderness in the epigastric area without rebound, positive shifting dullness, and hypoactive bowel sounds. Laboratory tests found white blood cells count was 17.2*10^9/L, neutrophils 88.7% and D-dimer 11.7 mg/L. Abdominal CT scan showed dilatation of proximal small intestine with thickened walls and air-fluid levels and accumulation of massive abdominal ascites. There was no sign of occlusion or filling defect in the superior mesenteric artery and vein, or their distal branches . She denies any past medical history or on any medications. She is sexually active and had her immunization up to date. Due to the worsening nature of her pain after conservative treatments, acute abdomen was suspected, and a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed to exclude any surgical emergencies. During the surgery, 2500 mL of yellowish ascites were drained . Multiple adhesive bands were seen between the liver and the diaphragm, and in the pelvic cavity . Part of omentum was adhered to the right side of the pelvic floor, which was lysed. Inspection of the whole length of small intestine showed dilation and thickened walls of the jejunum, 50 cm in length . The ileum was normal, and no obstruction point was found. The colour and peristalsis of the intestines were normal. The patient was diagnosed as idiopathic peritonitis and pseudo-ileus intra-operatively. The characteristics of the drained ascites was shown in Table . Supportive treatments as well as antibiotics, including cefoperazone and metronidazole, were given immediately after the surgery as Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome was also suspected. However, on the morning of postoperative day (POD) 1, another 2950 mL of ascites were found in the drainage tube. The patient was haemodynamically unstable. Aggressive resuscitation was initiated. The family of the patient later revealed that 6 months ago she had multiple erythema on her palms and cheek, which were purpuric like changes and subsided after herbal medicine. The lupus mesenteric vasculitis (LMV) was then suspected. The lupus tests together with other diagnostic tests were carried out. Their results were shown in Tables and . She was positive for anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-Smith, anti-u1-snRNP, anti-Ro, anti-dsDNA antibodies and low in complements C3 and C4. The patient was diagnosed with systematic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with lupus mesenteric vasculitis. She was treated with 80 mg IV methylprednisolone per day and 0.2 g of oral hydroxychloroquine twice a day with rapid improvement of abdominal symptoms. She resumed normal diet few days after her ascites diminished and was discharged on POD 12. On follow-up, the patient continued her treatments at the rheumatology department and had no surgical associated complications.