A 43-year-old Japanese man presented with a soft tissue mass in his right thigh during June 2015, which he originally noticed in January 2015. He did not have any relevant personal or family history, and a physical examination revealed a hard and elastic mass (approximate size 30 cm) that did not exhibit redness, inflammation, or a pulse. His blood test results were normal, and radiography revealed a large soft tissue mass without calcification, periosteal reaction, or infiltration into his femur . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass with an isointense signal on T1-weighted images and a high-intensity signal on T2-weighted images, with gadolinium enhancement on the side edge of the partition structure . Computed tomography (CT) also revealed no tumor calcification or obvious infiltration into his femur . Based on these findings, we considered a possible diagnosis of a malignant myxoid soft tissue tumor, such as myxoid liposarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, or metastatic carcinomas, including myoepithelial tumor and neuroendocrine tumor, and performed an incisional biopsy to make a definitive diagnosis. The pathological findings revealed a lobulated tumor with a myxoid matrix and atypical spindle-shaped cells that created an eosinophilic cord-like structure . We also observed that the tumor was positive for S-100 which is mainly present in neurons, chondrocytes, adipocytes, and pigment cells, and negative for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and pan keratin (AE1/AE3). The percentage of Ki-67 was 10 % in the hot spot area . Thus, based on the histology results, the site of occurrence, and our patient’s age, we considered a differential diagnosis of myxoid liposarcoma, which is composed of uniform round-to-oval cells and lipoblasts in a prominent myxoid matrix with delicate arborizing vasculature. However, the tumor in the present case did not contain the characteristic lipoblasts and capillary vasculature. Thus, we also considered the possibility of an EMC, despite its rare nature, as this diagnosis agreed with our patient’s age, site of occurrence, and myxoid pathology. Therefore, we performed fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to differentiate between EMC and myxoid liposarcoma. This evaluation identified the EWSR1-NR4A3 gene fusion, which convinced us that he had an EMC . We also performed systemic positron emission tomography-CT, which did not identify any obvious metastases . The tumor was classified as TNM stage IIb, and we performed extensive resection of his tumor and femur with a 3 cm margin, as the tumor was in contact with his femur. His femur was treated using liquid nitrogen, and reconstructed using autogenous fibula and internal plate fixation . Our patient was free from recurrence and metastases at the 1-year follow-up.