A 68-year-old man complained of fever and cervical pain and visited the emergency department. He had several comorbidities and his medical history included polycystic kidney disease, end-stage renal failure treated by regular hemodialysis, chronic heart failure with low ejection fraction, cardioverter defibrillator implantation, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, hypothyroidism, and chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy treated with steroids. Due to many risk factors, he was suspected of having either bacteremia resulting from an infection acquired during vascular access, or meningitis due to cervical pain. He was admitted for secondary sepsis because a blood test indicated elevated inflammatory marker levels: white blood cell count, 11,800/µL; C-reactive protein, 16.6 mg/dL; and procalcitonin, 28.7 ng/mL. No heart murmur was audible, and subsequent computed tomography on admission revealed no suspected sources of infection. Therefore, we administered meropenem and vancomycin empirically. Blood culture on admission led to the identification of methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. Based on the culture result, we replaced meropenem with cefazolin on day 4. Echocardiography after admission did not yield definitive findings (namely, vegetation) for infective endocarditis. The patient recovered following antibiotic therapy, as indicated by a white blood cell count of 6500/µL and a C-reactive protein level of 1.7 mg/dL; his subsequent blood culture results were negative. However, 12 days after admission, the patient complained of sudden chest discomfort, and subsequently, his systolic blood pressure dropped to 60 mmHg. Emergency coronary angiography (CAG), performed due to the patient’s troponin I level of 2900 ng/mL, indicated the presence of a fistula originating from the RCA and perforating the RV at segment 2 . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed abnormal flow into the RV . After the patient’s vital signs were temporarily stabilized via volume addition, enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a rupture of the RCA and a fistula in the RV caused by the pseudoaneurysm around the RCA . The patient became unstable; hence, emergency surgery was performed.
After median sternotomy, extremely severe adhesions of the entire heart surface and the pericardium were evident, with minimal pericardial effusion . First, coronary artery bypass to the posterior descending branch at segment 4 was performed via the saphenous vein while the patient was on cardiopulmonary bypass. Next, the ruptured RCA and perforated RV were repaired by ligation of the RCA with endarterectomy due to severe calcification and by suturing with a pledget at the perforation site . Identification of the RCA by inspection was difficult due to the surrounding inflammatory alterations. Therefore, superficial sonography of the heart and palpation of coronary arterial calcification guided the surgery. Although the patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass, intra-aortic balloon pump insertion was required to treat the persisting cardiogenic shock. The pathological examination of the resected RCA wall, using periodic acid-Schiff, Gram, and Grocott’s stains, revealed no bacteria.
Inotropic support was gradually weaned postoperatively. Enhanced CT on postoperative day 5 did not reveal any complications regarding the cardiac surgery and the patency of the graft; however, paralytic ileus was in development. The patient’s condition worsened, and he developed sepsis from intestinal translocation (complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulation) on postoperative day 6. Therefore, the antibiotic agent was switched from cefazolin to meropenem, vancomycin, and micafungin to treat the sepsis. Unfortunately, the patient died within 17 h of sepsis development, despite the intensive care administered (including continuous hemofiltration, a blood transfusion, and inotropic agents).