A 35-year-old Caucasian parous woman presented to the clinic with symptoms of spontaneous and periodic bleeding from the umbilicus for four months. The bleeding would start two days before her menses and continue for the entire duration of her period. It was accompanied by pain and swelling in the umbilical area.
The patient had regular, heavy and painless menstrual periods and did not wish for any treatment for such. She had two previous spontaneous vaginal deliveries and had no history of abdominal pain, dyspareunia or infertility. She was not using any form of hormonal contraception. Her medical history was not significant and she never had any abdominal surgeries.
Clinical examination revealed that the patient had a 2 cm × 2 cm firm nodule at the umbilicus, which appeared to be covered by a reddish brown discharge. Suspecting that she had an infection, the patient was swabbed and given a five-day course of oral broad-spectrum antibiotics. She showed up on check up two months later with no relief of symptoms. She then underwent an ultrasound scan that showed a 15-mm thin-walled cyst, approximately 5 mm below the skin surface. The key clinical feature that led to the correct diagnostic hypothesis of umbilical endometriosis was the temporal association of the bleeding with her menstrual period.
The patient was offered both medical and surgical management and she opted to have depot injections of Zoladex (AstraZeneca UK, Goserelin acetate, 3.6 mg subcutaneously, monthly). The swelling continued to persist in spite of three doses of Zoladex, and the patient then requested surgical excision. The risk of recurrence and scar endometriosis were explained to her.
The patient successfully underwent excision of the nodule with accompanying umbilical reconstruction. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of endometriosis and revealed the presence of endometriotic glands with mucinous type metaplasia and extravasation of the mucinous secretion into the adjacent stroma . No epithelial atypia was seen and the excision appeared complete. The patient was seen six weeks after the surgery and found to be asymptomatic with a normal umbilicus. Before being discharged, the patient was again reminded of the risk of recurrence.