A 29-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department after a history of falling down. The patient was in her usual state of health when she slipped on a wet floor at work 2 weeks prior to admission. She didn’t develop any symptoms immediately after the event; she continued her work and arrived home without any complaints. On the morning of the second day after falling, the patient started complaining of general weakness, malaise, and dizziness. Then she felt weakness and an inability to move her right hand.
Symptoms worsened over the next few hours as she lay at home and tried to sleep. By the afternoon, when she woke up, she couldn’t get out of bed. After she returned to consciousness, she felt bilateral upper and lower limb weakness and numbness. The condition started with left lower limb pain and weakness, gradually increasing and then shifting to the right lower limb, then ascending to her abdomen and chest, and then to her distal upper limbs.
The next day, the patient sought medical advice at our hospital. On examination, the patient’s vital signs were normal; she was immobile in bed, conscious, oriented, and alert to place, time, and person with a normal resting heart rate and no murmur. The abdomen was soft and lax. The patient has intact sensation all over the body with hyperaesthesia. The muscle power of all limbs was 0/5, and reflexes were absent. There’s no skin rash or lower limb oedema.
Laboratory investigation showed no evidence of infectious, autoimmune, inflammatory, or neoplastic causes . A brain MRI revealed normal brain parenchyma and symmetrical cortical sulci in the absence of any indication of a space-occupying lesion. A long segment of abnormally high T2 signal was detected on a spinal MRI, measuring up to 8 cm in length. The segment involved the spinal cord, at least from (C3 to D1), and had a whole central grey matter of the cord involvement in the cross-section. This was linked to a high diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and low apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) signal, which is consistent with cord ischaemia. There are no obvious enhancement components. To corroborate the diagnosis, an MRI scan of the cervical spine with contrast was also performed.
The majority of the transverse spinal cord had a hyper-intense T2 signal between C2 and T1, which suggests a significant spinal cord infarction or inflammation. Furthermore, the signal is weaker at the C4–C5 and C5–C6 intervertebral discs. And there was no T1 post-contrast abnormal enhancement. These findings may point towards possible fibrocartilaginous embolism .
Next, a brain and neck computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed. It proved that both the vertebral and common carotid arteries (CCA) originated normally. No filling defect or atherosclerotic alterations, normal bilateral internal and external carotid arteries, and normal bifurcation of both CCAs. It was concluded that there is no indication of significant vascular damage because no aneurysmal changes were observed. This verified the fibrocartilaginous embolism diagnosis.
During hospitalization the patient received pulse steroids (Solumedrol) for 3 days, the patient’s sensation improved, and she became conscious and oriented with quadriplegia and urinary incontinence. Later on, for the last eight months, the patient has undergone physical therapy. She continues to receive physiotherapy sessions to enhance her quality of life, and she can now walk with the assistance of crutches.