A 48-d-old Chinese boy presented with fever and diarrhea for one month.
A 48-d-old boy presented with recurrent fever and diarrhea 5 d after birth. In the following month, the child developed repeated fever, diarrhea, and a body temperature fluctuating between 37.1 °C and 38.4 °C. The fever was irregular, and the diagnosis could not be confirmed after 3 hospitalizations at the local hospital. To further confirm the diagnosis, the child was admitted to our hospital for treatment, and the admission symptoms included clear consciousness, general spirit, fever, diarrhea, no dehydration, sunken nose bridge, dry skin, normal diet, normal sleep, and normal urination.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient’s parents deny any family history.
The patient’s temperature was 38.1 °C, pulse 140 beats/min, respiratory rate 35 breaths/min, blood pressure 70/40 mmHg, and weight 5 kg. No abnormalities were found in other system examinations.
Blood test analysis showed an electrolyte imbalance: K, 5.5 mmol/L; Na, 149.5 mmol/L; Cl, 112.6 mmol/L; Ca, 2.61 mmol/L; and P, 1.98 mmol/L. Urinalysis showed that the specific gravity of urine was less than 1.005. Routine blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, routine stool examination, 10 items regarding prenatal and postnatal care, 6 items regarding immunity, tuberculosis antibody test, Epstein-Barr virus nucleic acid quantitative detection, cytomegalovirus nucleic acid quantitative detection, infectious disease screening, genetic testing, glucose monitoring test and other results were normal.
Color Doppler ultrasound of the superficial lymph node, lung, heart, gastrointestinal tract, liver, gallbladder, spleen, abdominal lymph node and kidney revealed normal findings.
An AVPR2 gene mutation, c.283 (exon2) C>T (p.P95S), was identified. This mutation was a hemizygous mutation in the 2nd exon of the AVPR2 gene. The C nucleotide at position 283 became a T nucleotide, which led to an amino acid change. The amino acid at position 95 was mutated from proline to serine [p.Pro95Ser (p.P95S)]. This mutation was a missense mutation and a novel mutation locus in the AVPR2 gene. The mother of the proband is a carrier of this gene mutation, and the father harbors no abnormal mutations in this gene. The specific genetic test results and family pedigree are shown in Figures and . The test results showed that the proband had a hemizygous mutation, which was consistent with X chromosome recessive inheritance. Because the child had intractable diarrhea and a possible pathogenic variant of diarrhea could not be excluded, we tested related genes. No abnormalities in JAK3 (severe combined immunodeficiency, autosomal recessive, T-B+NK-), ZAP70 (selective T-cell deficiency) or PLEC (epidermolysis bullosa and pyloric atresia) were noted in the genetic testing.