A 54-year-old man, with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, poorly controlled chronic hypertension, and chronic kidney disease on hemodialysis, was evaluated for a one-month history of a painful, non-mobile, subcutaneous nodule within the inferior and medial aspect of his right breast. The patient also complained of general pruritus but no malaise, joint pain or muscle pain. Body temperature, respiration, and pulse were normal. His blood pressure was elevated at 182/94 mm Hg. His body height, body weight, and body mass index were 165 cm, 52 kg, and 19.1, respectively.
On physical examination, a firm, superficial, erythematous nodule measuring approximately 1 × 2 cm was noted within the lower, inner quadrant of the right breast. There was no nipple discharge, history of trauma, or cancer history. Given the possibility of breast carcinoma, the patient was admitted for further evaluation. Upon admission, initial laboratory results revealed: BUN, 40 mg/dl; creatinine, 28.63 mg/dl, C-reactive protein, 7.04 mg/L; hemoglobin, 6.3 g/dl; and a white blood count, 6700 /ml, with a left shift.
Chest X-ray upon admission showed increased patchy infiltrates bilaterally and a non-contrast chest CT was performed for further evaluation. The chest CT revealed diffuse patchy airspace consolidation and patchy pulmonary alveolar infiltrates with fine interstitial thickening over both lung fields, most severe within the left upper lobe and right lower lobe . The primary diagnosis was atypical pneumonia. Differential diagnosis included asymmetric pulmonary edema and multifocal bronchoalveolar carcinoma.
Sputum culture, sputum cytology, serum mycoplasma antibody, and legionella antibody were performed. Azithromycin and augmentin were begun for possible atypical pneumonia. Sputum cytology was negative for malignant cells. Sputum culture, however, revealed Klebsiella pneumoniae and Klebsiella oxytoca (without tubercle bacillus). Appropriate antibiotic therapy was continued and repeat serial chest X-rays, performed during his hospital stay, showed resolution of the alveolar infiltrates, bilaterally.
Incidentally noted on chest CT was a small oval nodular lesion measuring approximately 1.0 cm × 0.6 cm over the inferior and medial aspect of the right breast with infiltration within the subcutaneous adipose tissue . As the nature of the breast nodule was unclear, a breast ultrasound (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI) was recommended for further evaluation. Breast sonography revealed an oval, heterogeneous, predominantly hypoechoic nodule within the right breast measuring 1.35 cm × 0.39 cm in size between 3 and 4 o’clock, 2 cm from the nipple, with a faint echogenic interface, partially indistinct margin, and increased blood flow signals on color Doppler . Skin thickening and additional hypoechoic satellite nodules were noted in the surrounding area . As this presentation was felt to be unusual in a male breast, breast malignancy was suspected. As the patient refused mammography or MRI, a sono-guided biopsy of the lesion was performed using an 18-gauge core biopsy needle . Pathology from four strips tissue revealed fibroadipose tissue and hemorrhage with inflammatory cell infiltration. As the pathology was considered indeterminant, an excisional biopsy of the mass was performed. Pathology from the excisional biopsy confirmed breast panniculitis, consisting of fibroadipose tissue with prominent inflammation and fibrotic change in a vague perivascular pattern . Hemorrhage and hemosiderin deposition were also present. Histologic section further revealed a vasculitis involving medium size arteries and small vessels without giant cells or granuloma formation .
Mycoplasma antibody titer, legionella antibody titer, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), autoimmune markers, carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 15–3, prostatic specific antigen, immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin A, human immunodeficiency virus antibody titer, hepatitis C antibody titer, and hepatitis B surface antigen titer were all negative. A non-contrast head CT was also negative, performed as part of a headache work-up. Renal sonogram revealed increased cortical echogenicity of both kidneys compatible with chronic renal parenchymal disease. No definite renal infarctions were identified.
The lesion within the right breast resolved after excisional biopsy without further treatment. As the diagnosis was compatible with an isolated breast panniculitis with vasculitis (BPWV), the patient did not receive systemic corticosteroids or anti-inflammatory therapy during admission or after discharge and his breast symptoms did not recur during the subsequent 5 years of clinical follow-up.