A 34-year-old male was incidentally found to have bilateral papilledema on a routine ophthalmological exam. His past medical history was significant for two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures with negative work-up on imaging, for which he was on anti-convulsant medication. To further evaluate his papilledema, he was sent to the emergency department of a nearby hospital for further evaluation where a non-contrast CT showed a 3.7-cm hypo-dense mass in the right temporal lobe associated with 6 mm of leftward midline shift. A brain MRI re-demonstrated a non-enhancing lesion in the right temporal lobe with significant peri-tumoral edema that extended superiorly into the right fronto-parietal lobes and across the corpus callosum . There was no evidence of additional disease within the infra-tentorial compartment, including the cerebellum . Subsequently, the patient underwent subtotal resection of the temporal lesion with final pathology demonstrating a WHO III anaplastic astrocytoma with intact 1p/19q chromosomal arms and positive for the IDH1 (R132H) mutation, based on immunohistochemical staining . The tumor exhibited a moderate mitotic index of 5 % .
After surgery, the patient was referred to the neuro-oncology branch of our institution for further management of his condition. Two months after the surgery, the whole tumor bed was radiated over 30 fractions to a total of 60 Gy but given the large volume of the radiation field, concurrent temozolomide was deferred to reduce risk of radiation-induced necrosis. Over the next year, he received 12 cycles of adjuvant temozolomide, which he tolerated well. Serial MRIs demonstrated attenuation of fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal abnormality, and clinically, the patient was doing very well and remained free of neurological symptoms.
Over the next year and a half, routine surveillance imaging obtained at approximate 6-month intervals showed local disease control and absence of distant recurrence. However, on an MRI taken 22 months after initial surgery, a new enhancing nodule was found in the right cerebellum with local edema . The patient also co-incidentally described a 1-month history of imbalance particularly upon changing positions from sitting to standing. This lesion was felt to likely represent recurrent tumor although trans-tentorial spread would have been uncommon. Delayed radiation necrosis was also a possibility, given that upon review of radiation records, the affected area in the cerebellum had received 54–57 Gy. To guide in treatment decision-making, a definitive diagnosis was sought in the form of surgical resection of this lesion. Final pathological review of the specimen demonstrated an IDH1 (R132H)-mutated WHO III anaplastic astrocytoma . These findings were consistent with those from the patient’s first resection and were indicative of recurrent tumor. However, the mitotic index was markedly elevated at 40 % compared to 5 % from the first surgery. As such, alternative chemotherapy was pursued, and the patient at the time of the reporting of this case was under treatment with procarbazine and CCNU.
Gliomas arising within the cerebellum are rare and reportedly make up 0.4–3.4 % of all gliomas, the majority of which present as grade IV glioblastoma . However, cerebellar gliomas secondary to spread from a supratentorial tumor are exceedingly uncommon and, among previous case reports, have been limited to a single study by van Nifterik et al. . The authors described a 31-year-old male who initially underwent subtotal resection of a left frontal glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), followed by external-beam radiotherapy (42 Gy in 3-Gy daily fractions) and single-fraction stereotactic boost (15 Gy) to the residual mass. Twenty months after surgery, he demonstrated tumor recurrence involving the center of the cerebellum, which was diagnosed as recurrent GBM after surgical resection. Genetic analyses of both tumors revealed identical loss of heterozygosity at TP53 along with absence of PTEN loss and EGFR amplification. IDH mutation status was not performed in this study given that the discovery of IDH mutations in gliomagenesis was published 3 years after this report. As such, our patient represents the second case of a supratentorial glioma recurring trans-tentorially and involving the cerebellum. Furthermore, unlike the report by van Nifterik et al. , our patient’s tumor exhibited WHO III grading, suggesting that trans-tentorial spread may not be a characteristic limited to the biology of WHO IV gliomas, alone.
It is unclear whether the improved prognosis associated with IDH mutations is due to an enhanced sensitivity to chemo- and radiotherapies or to less aggressive intrinsic biological behaviors. In support of the former possibility, two large-scale studies demonstrated that IDH mutations conferred higher response rates to temozolomide and combination procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine therapy in low-grade gliomas and oligodendrogliomas, respectively [, ]. However, other studies in similar patient cohorts have failed to reproduce these findings [, ]. Likewise, in support of attenuated biology, IDH-mutated tumors may be more amenable to surgical resection , potentially due to favorable MRI characteristics, including reduced contrast enhancement, unilateral growth patterns, and sharper tumor margins . When analyzing patterns of recurrence as a correlate of intrinsic biologic behavior, recent evidence also suggests that IDH mutations may predict a more benign clinical course. Recently, Shibahara et al. demonstrated that IDH wild-type WHO III anaplastic astrocytomas had significantly higher rates of distant recurrence along with increased expression of glioma stem cell markers compared to their IDH-mutated histological counterparts . Out of 86 total patients, 15 exhibited distant recurrence, among which only 3 were IDH-mutated, none of which involved trans-tentorial spread like our patient. The authors concluded that IDH wild-type WHO III gliomas may behave more aggressively, more similarly to WHO IV glioblastomas. In regard to our patient, despite first-line treatment with temozolomide and radiation after initial tumor resection, our patient developed disease recurrence in a relatively short period of time and had distant recurrence. As such, the fact that our patient’s tumor was both treatment-refractory and behaved invasively suggests further factors contributed to its unusual clinical course. As no standard of care currently exists for initial treatment of WHO III astrocytic gliomas , we must consider the possibility that temozolomide treatment induced mutagenic changes, which led to heightened tumor aggression. This is supported by findings from Johnson et al., who demonstrated that treatment of low-grade gliomas with temozolomide could promote a hypermutated phenotype at recurrence and malignant progression into WHO IV glioblastoma . Further investigation of our patient’s tumor is warranted to identify additional features that contributed to its unusual clinical course.