A 34-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on June 12, 2017, due to right facial numbness with diplopia, which had been present for 1 month. He progressively felt right facial numbness develop for no reason, and several days later, diplopia was present; no hearing loss, blurry vision, epistaxis, or fever occurred. He had a history of hepatitis B (HBV) infection, but no history of any other diseases. Upon neurological examination, right trigeminal, and abducens nerve paralysis was found; all other cranial nerves were intact. The general examination was normal. Other than the presence of a HBV infection, the results of the initial laboratory examination were normal, including the blood cell counts (CBC), routine urinalysis, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), and tumor markers. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a right middle fossa mass with obvious and uniform enhancement; no cysts or calcifications were found, and no obvious brain edema was present . The patient was diagnosed with a right middle fossa neoplasm; schwannomas and meningiomas were considered.
He received a right craniotomy with neoplasm resection via an infratemporal approach. The bulk of the tumor was ashen, with ill-defined borders; the tumor was subtotally removed. He developed fever after surgery, and his symptoms did not improve until methylprednisolone was given. Malignant NK/T cell lymphoma was diagnosed via a pathological examination, but his situation deteriorated with fever, bilateral hearing loss and impaired kidney function. Upon hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, diffuse pleomorphic tumor cells were observed infiltrating the vessels and ganglia, along with a large number of necrotic cells. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that NK/T cell markers, including CD3ε, CD56, granzyme B, and T cell-restricted intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1), were positive, but B cell markers, such as CD20, were negative .
The patient was transferred to the hematology department for further assessment and treatment, his Epstein–Barr (EB) virus test was positive, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) demonstrated a malignant lymphoma involving multiple extranodal organs, including the head, lung, pericardium, kidney, and bone . According to the Ann Arbor system, he was stage III/IV; he received 3 cycles of chemotherapy with dexamethasone, methotrexate (MTX), L-asparaginase, gemcitabine, and oxaliplatin. Although tumor invasion was temporarily blocked, severe neutropenia and infection made a 4th chemotherapy treatment impossible and resulted in his death after 6 months of illness.