A 5-year-old girl with history of mackerel allergy, atopic dermatitis and chronic constipation, had a 3-month history of epigastralgia and vomiting, which occurred repeatedly, every 2 weeks. A pediatrician performed physical and laboratory examinations when she had no symptoms; however, no abnormal findings were recognized. Four months later, she was transferred to our institution for a detailed workup because of recurrent epigastralgia.
On abdominal examination, a small palpable mass was identified in the upper abdomen. A blood analysis revealed the following: white blood cell count, 10,100 /μl; hemoglobin, 13.2 g/dl; and C-reactive protein, 0.66 mg/dl. The patient’s liver enzyme levels were within the normal ranges. On abdominal ultrasonography with color Doppler imaging, an 11.8 × 13.6 mm nonvascular lesion with mixed echogenicity was detected near the round ligament of the liver . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) confirmed a 14 × 16 × 20 mm mass with low attenuation surrounded by a hyperdense line with disproportionate fat stranding on the right side of the round ligament of the liver . There was no ascites or hemorrhage in the abdominal cavity. These findings suggested an abscess of the round ligament of the liver. Her symptoms were improving; thus, we prescribed oral antibiotics and planned to perform elective laparoscopic exploration followed by resection. After her last admission to the hospital, she had no symptoms for approximately 2 months until she underwent surgery. The target lesion was small and was detected preoperatively. We therefore decided to perform two-site laparoscopic surgery .
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the broard base position. The umbilicus was opened through a 1.5 cm longitudinal incision, and a wound retractor (LAP PROTECTOR Mini-mini; Hakko Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) was applied. Two 5-mm trocars (scope and operator’s right hand, respectively) were inserted through multichannel port device (E・Z access; Hakko Co. Ltd) to attach to the wound retractor and pneumoperitoneum was established (8 mm Hg, 5 L/min CO2 insufflation). In addition, a 3-mm trocar (operator’s left hand) was inserted at the right lateral abdomen under a laparoscopic view (30° rigid scope, KARLSTORZ, Tuttlingen, Germany). Observation of the abdominal cavity revealed adhesion between the omentum and the round ligament of the liver . Macroscopic observation revealed no apparent mass lesions. We performed adhesiolysis of the omentum from the round ligament of the liver using a vessel sealing system (LigaSure™ Maryland; Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) . After ligation of the round ligament of the liver attached to the liver site using a loop suture (ENDOLOOP® Ligature; Johnson & Johnson, NJ, USA) , we resected the round ligament of the liver with the surrounding tissue using a vessel sealing system (Additional file : Video). The resected specimen was extracted through the umbilical wound. The postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged from hospital 3 days after surgery and remained asymptomatic for approximately half a year.
The resected specimen is shown in Fig. a. Microscopically, 6 mm of granulomatous tissue was observed around the round ligament. The collection of multinucleated giant cells and histiocytes, hemosiderin deposition and an area of coagulative necrosis with lymphocyte infiltration were also detected . Necrotic liver tissue in the area of necrosis was detected by silver impregnation staining . We concluded that the resected tissue was an ALL with ischemic change.