A 30-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with chronic cough and had a workup in the internal medicine department. She had a past history of hyperlipidemia. A chest computed tomography scan showed a cystic lesion attached to the body of her pancreas, and a diagnosis of cystic pancreatic tumor was made. Blood tests showed neither inflammation nor anemia. Her serum amylase, lipase, aminotransferase, and bilirubin levels were within normal limits. Tumor markers including CEA, CA19-9, and AFP were not elevated. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of her abdomen showed a 5 cm tumor . The lesion was attached to and compressing the body of the pancreas, the left gastric artery, the body of the stomach, and the abdominal part of the esophagus superiorly. The wall of the mass was thin and not enhanced. Magnetic resonance images showed a multilocular tumor. Neither an internal nodule nor septations were noted. There was no abnormality in the pancreatic duct, and the main pancreatic duct was not in communication with the lesion. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed that the cyst content had iso- and hypoechoic density with a thin wall and no mural nodules. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy was not performed. Differential diagnosis included a mucinous cystic neoplasm, a pancreatic cyst, or a retroperitoneal cystic lymphangioma. She was thus referred to the surgical department for evaluation. At this stage, we could not determine whether a pancreatectomy was necessary, thus we proceeded with a diagnostic laparoscopy.
The surgery was performed 1 month after the first visit to our hospital. Under general anesthesia, the operation was started laparoscopically with five ports (5 mm × 3 and 12 mm × 2). The tumor was within the lesser sac, which was incised and a window created. Because the left lateral segment of the liver was large and obscured the surgical view, we added a 5-mm port to elevate the lateral segment. The tumor was located in the retroperitoneal space and was attached to the body of the pancreas. We began the dissection of the tumor from the opposite side of the pancreas using laparoscopic coagulation shears (LCS, Harmonic ACE®; Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH, USA) and scissors. Branch vessels from the left gastric artery and vein were divided and the compressed left gastric vessels were preserved. The dissection was done easily and bluntly. We dissected the tumor from the pancreas gently using a lymph node dissection technique similar to that in gastric cancer, and were able to separate the mass from the pancreas. Eventually, the tumor was connected only to retroperitoneal lymphatic tissue around the celiac axis. At this stage it became clear that this was a case of cystic lymphangioma; as such, we finished the operation with cystectomy only. The specimen was extracted using a plastic bag (Endo-pouch®; Ethicon Endo-Surgery). An additional movie file shows this image in more detail (see Additional file ). The postoperative course was uneventful and our patient was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. As the postoperative follow-up, our patient received an abdominal computed tomography examination at 3 months after surgery and then every 6 months. Our patient had no signs of recurrence for a 2-year period after the surgery.
A histopathological examination showed that the cyst was lined by flattened endothelium. Immunostaining was positive for CD31, D2-40, AE1/AE3, and SMA. Other markers including CD34 and calretinin were negative. The diagnosis was made of a retroperitoneal cystic lymphangioma .