A 72-year-old Caucasian female presented to our facility with complains of new-onset substernal chest pain and shortness of breath. Other relevant medical history included active tobacco use and family history of premature coronary artery disease. On presentation, the patient was haemodynamically stable and physical examination including cardiovascular auscultation was unremarkable. Lab studies revealed leucocytosis 16 500 cells per cubic millimetre of blood (4000–11 000 cells/mm3), normal serum chemistry, and elevated cardiac troponin I greater than 40 ng/mL (normal less than 0.04 ng/mL). Repeat electrocardiograms (EKG) eventually displayed ST-segment elevation in the leads II, III, and avF with concomitant ST-depression in reciprocal leads I and avL . The patient was immediately transferred to the cardiac catheterization lab where she underwent coronary angiogram. After an initial failed attempt to first cannulate the left coronary ostium to evaluate for concomitant left anterior descending (LAD) and circumflex disease with the suspected culprit being the RCA based on EKG, the right coronary ostium was engaged instead, which revealed a large caliber RCA descending through the coronary sulcus to the crux, before bifurcating into the posterior descending artery and posterolateral artery. Contrast injection into the RCA also showed the anomalous origin of the LMCA stemming from the proximal segment of the RCA. The distal segment of the RCA showed 99% ulcerated lesion just prior to bifurcation, which was predilated and a 3.0 × 18 mm Xience Sierra drug-eluding stent was deployed with no residual stenosis. The aberrant LMCA reached the left side of the heart anterior to the pulmonary artery and trifurcated into a small caliber LAD, ramus intermedius (RI), and hypoplastic left circumflex arteries . There was less than 25% stenosis near the origin of the LAD and stable 50% atherosclerotic narrowing at the origin of diagonal branches. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) performed post-procedure showed an ejection fraction (EF) between 40% and 45%, inferior and inferolateral wall hypokinesis and no valvular abnormalities . A coronary CTA confirmed the findings of coronary angiogram and a potential malignant course of anomalous LMCA was ruled out . Further hospital stay remained uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on guideline-directed medical therapy with a beta-blocker, statin, and dual antiplatelet agents. At 1-month follow-up visit, the patient remained asymptomatic and a repeat TTE showed no new findings.