A 56-year-old woman presented to the ophthalmology clinic with a main complaint of acute onset right eye pain with extra-ocular movement. She also reported right eye periorbital swelling, redness, upper right lid drooping, and bilateral tearing. She received her first zoledronic acid infusion for osteoporosis 24 h prior to presentation. Her significant past medical history included chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, Sjogren’s syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus. The patient had been on cyclosporine 75 mg (1 mg/kg) daily and monthly belimumab 120 mg/1.5 ml for her rheumatologic conditions for 3 years prior to presentation.
On ophthalmic exam, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/25–2 in the right eye, and 20/25–3 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 13 mmHg in the left eye. On external exam of the right eye, there was mild upper lid edema, erythema, ptosis, and − 1 adduction defect. The slit lamp exam was remarkable for conjunctival chemosis without anterior chamber cell or flare. The posterior segment exam was remarkable for posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) . The left eye exam was significant for PVD . 24–2 visual field testing attempted but was not reliable due to frequent fixation loss secondary to eye pain. A contrast enhanced MRI was obtained which showed: 1) ill-defined right orbital soft tissue thickening, 2) enhancement in the retro-orbital intraconal space with extension along the retro-orbital scleral contour and surrounding the anterior optic nerve sheath . Orbital inflammation secondary to SLE was considered as part of the differential based on the patient’s rheumatologic history. However, based on the clinical presentation, MRI findings, and timing of symptoms with regards to the zoledronic acid infusion, orbital inflammation secondary to bisphosphonate therapy was suspected. The patient was started on oral prednisone 50 mg daily with rapid improvement in symptoms. After 1 week, patient reported full resolution of symptoms and was started on a slow weekly taper of prednisone.