A 67-year-old Japanese man was admitted to Munakata Suikokai General Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan, in December 2016 for angina and was subsequently diagnosed with atypical angina. He was treated with a Ca blocker (benidipine hydrochloride) and nitric acid without percutaneous coronary angiography. The urinary protein level before admission to the hospital was (±) by dipstick test, and the serum albumin level was 3.7 g/dL. His leg edema was rapidly worsening before admission to the hospital. In April 2017, he presented to the Kurume University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan, because of emesis, abdominal pain, and facial edema due to hypoalbuminemia. The patient’s leg edema rapidly appeared 1 week before admission, suggesting the rapid onset of nephrotic syndrome. Typical FD findings, such as angiokeratoma, acroparesthesia, hypohidrosis, and corneal opacities, were absent. His mother had died from uterine body cancer at 50 years of age. Typical renal and heart disease or symptoms of FD in his brothers and maternal family members were not detected in family history. On examination, his blood pressure, pulse rate, height, and weight were 103/63 mmHg, 62 bpm (regular sinus rhythm), 167 cm, and 63 kg, respectively. Table shows the patient’s laboratory data. His serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels were 1.10 and 27.4 mg/dL, respectively. Urinalysis demonstrated 3+ protein as well as oval fat bodies, wide and fat casts, and mulberry cells. His urinary protein and albumin levels were 11.13 g/gCr and 1.63 g/dL, respectively. He was then diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome. After hospitalization, his creatinine level continued to increase to a peak of 2.7 mg/dL, and his urine output decreased. Because of the rapid progression of nephrotic syndrome and renal dysfunction, oral prednisolone was immediately initiated at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day. In addition, cyclosporine A (CyA) was prescribed at a dose of 100 mg/day as an additional immunosuppressive therapy. The massive proteinuria dramatically improved, and his serum creatinine and albumin levels returned to baseline (0.6 mg/dL and 4 g/dL, respectively). Percutaneous renal biopsy was performed 4 days after admission. Fifteen glomeruli were evaluated using light microscopy, and segmental sclerosis , vacuolization, and foamy changes in podocytes were observed . These foamy changes were also observed in the tubular epithelial cells, although to a much lesser extent than in the podocytes. These foamy cells were also found in the urine, which are known as mulberry bodies . No vascular involvement was observed. Immunohistochemistry showed no specific deposition of immunoglobulin or complement factors (data not shown). Electron microscopy revealed abundant lamellar bodies in the podocyte cytoplasm with widespread foot process fusion . These findings were compatible with renal FD. White blood cell (WBC) α-gal activity was 1 nmol/h/mg protein (normal range, 20–80 nmol/h/mg protein), and the plasma lyso-GB-3 level was 7.4 nmol/L (normal range, 0.14–0.75 nmol/L). We performed gene analysis, and the M296I mutation was detected, which is well known as a late-onset variant of FD . Over the next 12 months, prednisolone and CyA were slowly tapered, and enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) (agalsidase-β, 1 mg/kg, 57 mg every 2 weeks) was initiated intravenously. His proteinuria became undetectable, and he showed sustained nephrotic syndrome remission (0.15 g/gCr) . There were no adverse events related to immunotherapy or ERT during the follow-up period.