A 54-year-old male with history of obesity, type II diabetes, and medically treated hypertension, presented in year 2000 with facial pain. One month prior to presentation, he was involved in a car accident with no obvious trauma to the neck. He suffered from neck pain shortly after, but was never seen by a physician. At presentation, the patient described a sensation of sharp, unilateral pain in the right-sided sensory distribution area of TG, lasting from 1 second to 3 minutes . Attack frequency was 4–5 per day, in intervals of 15 minutes to 4 hours. Triggers included ipsilateral touching of the skin or hair. This pattern continued for up to 3 weeks, interrupted by 14 days of pain remission.
Neurological examination was normal, apart from reported hypoesthesia in the right-sided V2. TN was suspected and the patient was started on oxcarbazepine 900 mg daily. This initially eliminated the pain but caused cognitive side effects. Gabapentin was then tried, but discontinued due to skin exanthema. Two years after onset, the patient experienced an acute exacerbation of the facial pain with an increase in attack intensity and frequency. Indomethacin treatment was initiated, which successfully reduced the intensity but not the attack frequency. A private practicing neurologist diagnosed the patient with atypical facial pain. Over the next 2 years, the symptoms progressed further. There were fewer remitting periods, the pain intensity grew, and trigger factors now also included tooth brushing, chewing, shaving, exposure to windy weather and drinking cold beverages. Several antiepileptic drugs were tried without significant effect on the symptoms.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and MR angiography performed 4 years after onset showed a loop on the basilar artery at the level of pons. Due to a possible correlation between neurovascular contact and presentation of neuralgia, MVD surgery was suggested, but the patient declined.
9 years after onset the patient was referred to the Danish Headache Center and Department of Neurology, Glostrup Hospital, Copenhagen. At this time he presented with two different facial pains. The first pain was right-sided, supraorbital, radiating towards the ipsilateral ear and teeth, lasting 5 to 10 minutes, with a frequency of 5–6 per day. Trigger factors included speaking, eating and tooth brushing; there were no associated autonomic symptoms. The second pain was sharp and intense, in the right eye, followed by conjunctival injection and rhinorrhea, lasting 60 to 90 minutes with a frequency of 5–6 attacks per day. Based on past and present history the patient was diagnosed with both TN and CH, and started on verapamil 480 mg daily later increased to 720 mg. This treatment continued for a year, reducing the symptoms greatly. Oxygen was also tried, but with no substantial effect.
10 years after onset the patient was hospitalized due to further worsening of the condition, with rapidly increasing attack frequency. He complained of episodes of intense facial pain, described as constant, stabbing, electrical shocks around the right eye, radiating towards the ipsilateral teeth, and associated with prominent ipsilateral autonomic features including conjunctival injection, lacrimation, periorbital edema, miosis, ptosis, rhinorrhea and facial redness. Attacks occurred as paroxysms of pain that lasted 10 to 15 minutes, with a frequency of 25 attacks per day. Trigger factors persisted as earlier. The condition was interpreted as TN with autonomic symptoms and the patient was tried on phenytoin loading, with immediate effect. Daily treatment with phenytoin 400 mg and carbamazepine 800 mg was initiated. After a few days the patient reported symptom relapse. He was then tried on indomethacin 200 mg daily, with no effect.
A new MRI confirmed a loop on the basilar artery, dislocating the TG in lateral direction, resulting in neurovascular contact between artery and nerve . The patient was immediately referred to surgery and underwent MVD. Upon surgery, the neurosurgeon reported as follows: “The trigeminal nerve is located behind a large petrosal sinus, which is coagulated and divided. This provides overview of the trigeminal nerve, where the basilar artery is seen to indent the anterior side of the nerve. A small branch of the basilar artery is seen to depart from behind the trigeminal nerve, however without causing any direct neurovascular contact. The nerve is separated from the artery, and a piece of felt/Teflon is placed in between”.
At clinical controls performed 2 weeks, 3 months, 10 months, 2 and 4 years post surgery, the patient reported complete pain remission, with no need for prophylactic therapy. His quality of life had increased significantly.