The girl aged 6 months and 26 days feeding exclusively with breast milk was admitted to the Department of Neonate and Infant Pathology Medical University in Lublin due to symptoms of psychomotor development regression and increased somnolence with onset approximately 2 months earlier. The infant was born of second pregnancy complicated with maternal hyperthyroidism, with normal birth parameters (gestation age 40 weeks, birth weight 3010 g, length 50 cm, Apgar score: 10). Neurological examination at admission indicated severe somnolence and abnormal muscle tone which was diminished in trunk, neck and lower extremities. In the upper extremities muscle tone was increased with fine muscle tremor. Deep reflexes were quite vivid and symmetrical. Verbal and visual contact with the infant was possible but significantly limited. According to the mother, the infant was active only for about 30 min a day, slept for approximately 20 h a day and the activity during the remaining 3–4 h was significantly reduced. The mother reported that the child was developing normally and appropriately for her age group until the age of 5 months. She used to be very active, able to change position from prone to supine and vice versa. In the prone position she used to extend the lower extremities, raised her head and forearms and was able to stabilise her head when pulled up to a sitting position. While sitting, she was able to maintain balance with minimum external support, reached towards objects but was unable to hold an object in each hand simultaneously. She responded to smile, started to babble, produced a number of sounds including shouts of joy and turned her head towards a person who called her name.
At the admission to the hospital certain diagnostic procedures were done to reveal reasons of infant’s condition. Laboratory test results indicated megaloblastic anemia red blood cells count (RBC) – 2.95 × 106/μL norms:3,7–6.00 × 106/μL, hematocrit - 26.8%, norms: 33.0–40.0%, hemoglobin level 9.2 g/dL norms:10.5–13.5 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of red blood cell - 90 fl norms: 74–89 fl, mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) 31.2 pg. norms:24–30 pg. Thyroid hormone level was within normal limits (TSH – 1.785 mU/L, FT3–6.01 pmol/L, FT4–16.35 pmol/L) and other biochemical blood test results did not identify significant abnormalities. Toxoplasma gondi and Cytomegaly virus infections antibody level were excluded, as well. Neurological results and CBC prompted further tests for folic acid level (result 16.32 ng/mL, reference range above 5.38 ng/mL) and B12 serum level (result 75 pg/mL; reference range 211–911 pg/mL). Due to the low cobalamin blood level in infant, diagnosis was extended to rule out Addison – Biermer disease and gastric anti-parietal cell antibodies level was assessed (APCA) – the result of the test was negative. Screening for metabolic diseases by tandem MS was also negative. Organic acid urine level tested showed increased methylmalonic acid concentration (4460 mg/g of creatinine; reference range up to 50 mg/g. Performed EEG was within normal limits, cranial MRI showed slightly dilated cerebro-spinal fluid spaces in the temporal and frontal regions.
Following hospital admission, psychological examination using the Brunet – Lezine Scale (psychomotor development in early childhood) was conducted in order to evaluate the infant’s developmental status in the following areas: P – posture and locomotion, C – visual-motor coordination, L – language and S – social and emotional interactions plus overall assessment [–]. The scale allows to determine both the child’s developmental age (DA) separately in each of the areas, to define the developmental profile and to calculate partial and total developmental quotient (DQ). DQs level between 85 and 115 indicate an average developmental level and are defined as normal limits. A score of 84–70 is considered borderline and indicates developmental status below average. Quotient below 70 means retardation of definite psychomotor area or total development.
The total psychomotor development level of the patient at admission to hospital and prior to vitamin B12 therapy was significantly retarded as compared to her actual age (her calendar age was 6 months and 26 days but the evaluated developmental age was 3 months and 20 days; DQ = 54). Visual-motor coordination (C) development was evaluated at 2 months and 20 days, the infant was not able to pursuit moving objects with her eyes, the range of eye movements was 90 degrees (reference value is 180), she did not try to reach towards objects did not seem interested in the environment (DQ = 39). Posture and locomotion development (P) was retarded (suitable for 4 months and 10 days), the girl was unable to sit on her own, required strong support when seated and her muscle tone was reduced (DQ = 63). Social and emotional interactions (S) were at the level of a 4 months old as the infant did not react with facial expressions to interactions (IR = 58). Speach and language development (L) was rated as low as 2 months and 10 days since the infant produced only few consonants (DQ = 34, see Table ).
Since the infant was fed exclusively with breast milk, the mother B12 serum level was verified and the result was slightly below the lower limit e.g.189 pg/mL. The mother was not on any exclusive diet and consumed animal products. Diagnostic tests in mother did not detect anemia, CBC result was normal (RBC 4.49 × 106/μL, hematocrit 43.1%, hemoglobin 14.5 g/dL), but mean cellular volume (MCV) and mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) was elevated, that is: 95.9 fl and 32.3 pg respectively. In the mother’s medical history there was no information of any gastro-intestinal disease. The mother underwent extended diagnostic tests with detected APCA, which were positive and led to the diagnosis of latent Addison-Biermer disease. The mother receives vitamin B12 supplementation (200 μg intramusculary once a month through the rest of her life) and normal B12 blood levels are maintained.
Based on the anamnesis and laboratory results e.g. low vitamin B12 level and significantly increased methylmalonic acid urine level, the infant was diagnosed with cobalamin deficiency. Substitution treatment was start immediately: vitamin B12 intramuscular injections 50 μg twice a week, in total 5 doses during 2,5 weeks were administered The infant’s condition improved significantly during cobalamin supplementation. She became much more active, stayed awake longer, started reaching out for toys and smiling, and her eye contact has improved. Milk formulas were introduced and the patient’s diet was extended as per the age. Treatment evaluation conducted 6 weeks later showed further progression of psychomotor development, also somnolence and abnormal muscle tone in the extremities were eliminated. Blood count confirmed normal RBC parameters. Control vitamin B12 level was 501 pg/mL.
Psychological evaluation at the age of 16 months (calendar age) i.e. after 10 months following vitamin B12 treatment showed psychomotor retardation with results slightly below normal (approx. at the level of 13 months; DQ = 77). Posture and locomotion (P): the child was able to stand unsupported, started to take first steps but still required being held by both hands, bent down to pick up toys while standing, crawled upstairs, climbed low furniture (DQ = 75, equivalent to the age of 12 months). Visual-motor coordination development (C) was equivalent to the age of 13 months 24 days (lower normal limit), she developed pincer grip, was able to hold an object in each hand and reached for another one. She was able to manipulate objects, checked their properties but was unable to fit shapes (circle, triangle, square) into a puzzle box, spontaneously doodled without demonstration (DQ = 86). Language skills (L): vocabulary consisted of 3 words, which was at the level of a 12 months old infant (DQ = 75). Social and emotional interactions (S) were developed at the level of a 12 month old, the infant was very cheerful and trustful, responded to smile, sought interactions, understood bans, handed over objects when asked and shown, repeated activities when she was smiled at (DQ = 75, see Table ).
During 10 months after treatment vitamin B12 level was 622 pg/mL and remained stable throughout the follow up period.