A 9-year-old Saudi girl was presented to our hospital with a fever of 38.5 °C, cough, and shortness of breath. Her oxygen saturation was 88% on room air; her blood pressure was normal for her age (110/75 mmHg); and she had no tachycardia (80 beats/minute). She had had abdominal pain for 2 days that was not responding to analgesics. She had been diagnosed with SCA at the age of 2 years. Both her parents are consanguineous and have the sickle cell trait, whereas all her siblings are sickle cell-negative on the basis of routine screening. The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, or other conditions of medical concern; no history of previous surgeries; and no history of drug allergies. Her developmental history was compatible with her age, and her vaccinations were up-to-date. She was followed regularly at our pediatric hematology clinic and receiving regular hydroxyurea and folic acid supplements.
On examination, the patient had no organomegaly; her ear, nose, and throat examination was unremarkable; and her initial neurologic examination was unremarkable with normal motor power, sensations, and reflexes. Subsequently, she was admitted to the hospital and diagnosed with acute chest syndrome on the basis of her clinical manifestations and bilateral lung infiltrates seen on chest x-rays. Her concomitant abdominal pain was attributed to vaso-occlusive crisis. She was started on full supportive care, including antibiotics, analgesics, intravenous fluids, and oxygen supplementation, and she was given packed red blood cells once with minimal improvement. She underwent exchange transfusion because of progressive respiratory distress and increased oxygen requirement.
During her stay at the pediatric intensive care unit and after 5 days of exchange transfusion, the patient’s respiratory distress and radiologic evidence of acute chest syndrome resolved; however, she developed systemic hypertension and was started on antihypertensive medications with slight improvement. Echocardiography showed mild mitral regurgitation with dilation of the left ventricle, and Doppler ultrasound showed patent hepatic and renal vasculature. The results of her blood workup were within normal ranges, apart from creatinine, which was slightly elevated .
Four days later, the child had marked elevation of her blood pressure that was followed by seizures and sudden loss of vision. On examination, she was drowsy, had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 10 on a scale of 15, and was responding to verbal stimuli. Her neurologic examination showed squinting of the right eye to the right side, and her pupils were equal and reactive to light. She was unable to recognize any objects. She had no signs of meningeal irritation, and results of her motor and sensory examinations were normal. Examination of her chest revealed that it was clear, and her liver was palpable 4 cm below the costal margin. Review of her other systems was unremarkable.
Urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient’s brain showed an ill-defined, nonenhanced area of abnormal hyperintense signaling on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) T2-weighted (T2W) images and isointensity on T1-weighted (T1W) images with restricted diffusion. A low apparent diffusion coefficient value was seen involving the cortex of the right occipitoparietal lobe and a tiny area of the same signal intensity within the right thalamic region suggestive of recent infarctions. The imaging studies also showed multiple ill-defined, nonenhanced patches of abnormal hyperintense signaling on FLAIR images, as well as isointense signaling on T1W images with no restriction of diffusion seen involving the cortex of the occipitoparietal region bilaterally, suggesting posterior reversible hypertensive encephalopathy. The patient’s electroencephalogram was reported as normal. She was kept on full supportive measures, including antihypertensive and antiepileptic medications as well as antibiotics, in addition to intravenous fluids to improve renal function.
Further investigations were done to rule out a renal cause of hypertension. This included measurement of renin and aldosterone levels, which were normal. Her anti-streptolysin O titer was high at 490 IU/ml (normal range 0–200 IU/ml), and her C3 level was significantly low at 0.22 g/L (normal range 0.9–1.8 g/L). Urine analysis revealed 25–50 red blood cells .
The child started to improve gradually over a 1-week period with full restoration of vision and adequate seizure control. Her general condition improved markedly, with an unremarkable systemic examination just within 10 days of her abrupt clinical deterioration.
Our impression was that our patient had PRES secondary to postinfectious glomerulonephritis. Recent brain infarctions can follow a severe attack of acute chest syndrome and vaso-occlusive crisis. Our patient is currently on a regular blood transfusion program as a secondary prevention of stroke. Brain MRI was repeated 2 months after presentation, and it showed that the previously mentioned scattered high T2W and high FLAIR signal intensity of the cortex and subcortical white matter with restricted diffusion were almost completely resolved. The results of repeat anti-streptolysin O titer, C3 level, and urine analysis were completely normal. Our patient is currently in good condition with no neurologic manifestations, and she attends regular monthly follow-up visits at our hematology clinic.