A 65-year-old never-smoker woman weighing 62 kg presented to our hospital in July 2009 with persistent severe mid-back pain. Bone scan on July 6, 2009 showed increased 99mTc-labeled methylene diphosphonate uptake at the thoracic 12 level and the third right rib, in addition to the hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPOA) of bilateral femurs and tibias, which were compatible with bone metastases. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge lobulated lung mass measuring up to 6.87 cm in the right lower lobe, with a daughter nodule in the same lung lobe (, upper panel, leftmost). Right pleural malignant effusion was apparent. The original lung biopsy showed atypical glands with lepidic and acinar architecture and enlarged and hyperchromatic nuclei . A diagnosis of moderately differentiated pulmonary ADC, cT4 N2 M1b Stage IV, was made. EGFR analysis performed using targeted exon sequencing identified the deletion of codon 746–750 in exon 19, resulting in the deletion of the amino acids ELREA . The first-line use of gefitinib was not authorized under the national health insurance program in this country until June 2011, whereas second-line gefitinib after failing prior chemotherapy was allowed since November 2007. From July 20 until September 21, 2009, three cycles of full-dose paclitaxel + cisplatin were administered and then discontinued because of grade III sensory neuropathy by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). For the 4th cycle of chemotherapy, the regimen was switched to gemcitabine + cisplatin. Follow-up chest CT showed partial remission. Three cycles of paclitaxel + cisplatin and two cycles of gemcitabine + cisplatin were administered. Gradual improvement of the sensory neuropathy down to CTCAE grade I was noted. The patient then started receiving gefitinib as second-line therapy on November 2, 2009, a treatment that currently ongoing. With persistent disease despite a partial remission, we prescribed gefitinib for tumor control. In addition, from October 19, 2009 to September 5, 2011, up to 25 cycles of 4-weekly pamidronate were administered aiming to mitigate the risk of any skeletal events. When bone metastases were stabilized, we delivered a course of radiotherapy with radical intent for the lung tumor as for locally advanced lung cancer. From December 29, 2010 to February 16, 2011, a course of palliative radiotherapy with intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) (66 Gy/33 fractions/50 days) was administered to the RLL lung tumor. Chest CT on July 7, 2012 revealed complete regression of the lung ADC with fibrotic changes.
However, the patient developed bilateral leg weakness resulting from spinal cord compression in April 2013 (, upper series, rightmost panel). She underwent emergent laminectomy of thoracic-11-lumbar-1 and curettage of thoracic-12 vertebra on April 15, 2013. Lung and metastatic bone lesion biopsies revealed small tumor cells forming a sheet-like growth pattern with scant cytoplasm, finely granular chromatin, nuclear molding, necrosis, and frequent mitosis. Immunohistochemical staining showed positivity for neuroendocrine markers, including synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56. The original primary lung biopsy was retrieved for retrospective review and showed only adenocarcinoma with no evidence of combined histologies. Two additional pathologists independently confirmed the final pathological diagnosis of SCCT . A course of IMRT with 30 Gy/10 fractions/13 days was administered to the T-11 to L1 spinal metastases from April 25 to May 7, 2013. From May 6 to July 11, 2013, four cycles of etoposide–cisplatin regimens were completed. Complete remission occurred with no tumor activity, normal lactate dehydrogenase level, and improving performance status. Prophylactic cranial irradiation was performed with IMRT (25 Gy/10 fractions/12 days) from August 12 to August 23, 2013.
On March 26, 2014, a subcentimeter nodule was noted in the right upper lung lobe (, lower panel, second left). Thoracoscopic wedge resection was performed, which revealed SCLC relapse. We considered recurrent cancer as a failure to the first-line etoposide–cisplatin; hence, we prescribed topotecan as the second-line treatment for recurrent SCLC. From April 21 to August 8, 2014, six weekly cycles of single-agent topotecan at 4 mg/m2 were administered. EGFR mutation analysis using matrix-assisted-laser-desorption-ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) for SCLC identified the same deletion in exon 19 . The patient continued to receive treatment with gefitinib. The justification for continuing gefitinib was the presence of the activating EGFR mutation in the transformed histology cancer. On August 8, 2018, the patient met with a traffic accident that resulted in a right pelvic bone fracture and left distal radial bone fracture. She developed lumbar-3 benign compression fracture + L4-5 spinal stenosis, for which L3 vertebroplasty and L4–5 decompression laminectomy were performed on April 30, 2018. She recovered nicely thereafter. The patient currently to receive treatment with gefitinib was with tolerable adverse reactions such as mild intermittent diarrhea (CTCAE grade I), acne-form rash (grade I), and paronychia (grade I). We assessed the evolution of the HPOA through serial images of whole-body bone scans using technetium-99m with methylene diphosphonate, which were performed on July 7, 2009, March 5, 2013, April 2, 2018, and July 18, 2018, respectively. The increased methylene diphosphonate uptake at the bilateral femurs and tibias was compatible with the HPOA, also known as Pierre Marie–Bamberger syndrome . The serial whole-body bone scans demonstrated stabilized disease with neither cortical destruction nor pathological fractures over the years. As compared with the initial scan images, there was no new lesion during follow-up. illustrates a series of CT scans at regular follow-ups after the induction treatment for SCCT over the years. As of February 22, 2021, she has an excellent performance status and can take care of her grandchildren at home.