A 32-year-old woman of European descent was in week 32 of her first, uncomplicated pregnancy when a subtle change in personality including a neglect of her daily duties was noticed. One week later, while on a holiday in Austria, she developed an unsteadiness of gait and slurred speech and was admitted to the hospital. Clinical examination revealed dysarthria and a hemispasticity with positive Babinski sign on the left side. While neuropsychologically still adequate on the evening of admission, she became severely confused and disoriented overnight. She did not complain of headaches at any time. Cranial MRI showed multiple small T2-intense lesions in both supra- and infratentorial locations, some of which exhibited diffusion restriction. Several lesions were found in the corpus callosum. CSF examination demonstrated a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis (13 cells/ μl) and a markedly elevated protein concentration (1,800 mg/l) in the absence of oligoclonal bands. Otherwise, routine laboratory tests were normal. She delivered her child by emergency caesarean section and received antiviral therapy until negative results of virus PCR arrived. An extensive serological diagnostic did not yield evidence of viral, bacterial or protozoal infection. A diagnosis of MS was made, and a pulse of IVMP was given (5×500 mg). Several days after completion of IVMP therapy an exanthema appeared on the trunk and extremities, which was diagnosed as LR by a consultant dermatologist. A therapy with oral prednisolone was initiated, under which the exanthema resolved quickly and neurological symptoms improved gradually.
Due to a misunderstanding, medication was not continued upon discharge from hospital. Two days later, having returned to Germany, the patient again became severely confused and apathetic and was admitted to our clinic. On neurological examination, she had an ataxic stance and gait, dysmetria, dysarthria and bilaterally hyperactive tendon reflexes. MRI demonstrated several small T2-intense lesions, some of which showed contrast enhancement and others diffusion restriction . Some lesions were located in the centre of the corpus callosum or connected to its roof . Overall, the corpus callosum appeared atrophic . Since cerebral vasculitis was considered a differential diagnosis, a digital subtraction angiography was performed, but was unremarkable. Laboratory tests for anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-thyroid, anti-neuronal and paraneoplastic antibodies, viral hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus were all negative. There was also no evidence of antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulant or inherited thrombophilia. On admission, a bluish, net-like exanthema on the trunk and legs was noticed and diagnosed as LR. Biopsy conformation was attempted, but when a punch biopsy was performed two days after the start of another IVMP pulse (5×500 mg), the skin changes had almost vanished and the biopsy showed normal dermis. A therapy with oral prednisolone was re-initiated, and cognitive deficits and gait disorder gradually improved.
Six weeks later (when prednisolone had been tapered to 40 mg/d) the patient was readmitted to our clinic. She reported a slow worsening of her gait over the past two weeks, and two days before admission she had noticed an obscuration in her left visual hemifield. Clinical examination revealed an additional proximal weakness of the right leg and bilateral hypacusis. Ophthalmologic examination demonstrated extensive ischemic damage to both retinae with corresponding visual field deficits . Audiometry showed bilateral asymmetric low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss. At this point SS was diagnosed based on the presence of the clinical triad of encephalopathy, visual disturbances and hearing loss, in conjunction with typical MRI findings (snowball lesions, callosal atrophy), CSF and fundoscopic studies. Further ophthalmologic investigations such as fluoresceine angiography (FAG) and optical coherence tomography were nor performed at this stage.
SS was diagnosed and immunosuppressive treatment initiated. This included another IVMP pulse (5×500 mg) followed by oral prednisolone (4 weeks 60 mg/d; 2 weeks 50 mg/d; 2 weeks 40 mg/d; 2 weeks 30 mg/d; 3 weeks 20 mg/d; 3 weeks 15 mg/d; 3 weeks 10 mg/d; 4 weeks 5 mg/d; 4 weeks 2.5 mg/d). IVIG were given at monthly intervals at a dose of 2 g/kg over five consecutive days for six months. In addition, a long-term therapy with MM (2000 mg/d) and MTX (15 mg weekly s.c.) was initiated. Under this regime no further relapse occurred. One year after disease onset the patient was well. Her gait and cognitive performance had markedly improved. MRI and FAG showed no evidence of disease activity.