Reporting on a 56-year-old male patient at KRL Hospital Islamabad with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension. He developed COVID-19 infection four months ago and was treated with heavy doses of I/V steroids. In his post treatment phase, he started having vague facial pains, discomfort and tooth loosening for which he endured multiple tooth extractions involving the superior and inferior alveolar arches.
On examination no cervical lymphadenopathy was noted. The patient was then inspected with OPG and a CT scan of his face. The Consultant Radiologist reported having an erosive pattern of maxillary lysis with irregular marginal sclerosis and dense bone in the center of the lytic area giving a sequestrum like appearance. No associated soft tissue mass or aggressive bone destruction noted. The CT report indicated the appearances indicative of chronic osteomyelitis.
Keeping in view the absence of lymphadenopathy and the other CT features of the disease kept the possibility of a malignant process less likely. MRI with contrast was also done showing intense marginal enhancement of the eroded maxilla with a central signal void sequestrum further endorsed the CT findings.
Bone and soft tissue samples were sent for histopathologic evaluation after the patient underwent surgical debridement, and the results showed necrotic bone with mixed inflammatory infiltrate and granulation tissue, as well as actinomycete colonies permeating the bone tissue and containing colonies of actinomycotic organism. Club-shaped filaments are formed by the rosette-shaped colonies with basophilic strands on the periphery and eosinophilic club endings. An actinomycotic osteomyelitis diagnosis was established.
In the subsequent follow-up appointments, the patient is responding well to antimicrobial drugs and is exhibiting signs of improvement.
Our Case Report is in compliant with SCARE 2020 Guidelines . A complete SCARE 2020 checklist has been provided as a supplementary file. Our study has been registered on Research Registry with the following UIN: researchregistry8109 .