A young male aged 22 years presented to the hospital with a slow-growing, lump in the posterior neck region for the past 3 months, which was painful and accompanied with a discharging sinus and associated with weight loss, fever, and anorexia.
His vitals, general physical evaluation, as well as systemic evaluation including a clinical examination of the chest, abdomen, and lymph nodes were all normal. Local examination revealed well-defined swelling of five cm by 6 cm size on midline of back of neck. The swelling was smooth, tender to touch, and fluctuant with overlying draining sinus. No neurological deficit, sensory, or motor was noted. Blood investigations showed raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (55 mm/h) and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (24 mg/L). The plain cervical radiograph showed destruction of the C5 spinous process without any involvement of vertebral body or disk space . This finding was confirmed on computed tomography (CT) cervical spine that showed complete erosion of C5 spinous process . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed destruction with altered marrow signal intensity involving the spinous process of C5 vertebra, along with overlying multilobulated rim enhancing collection in adjoining paraspinal soft tissue . Otherwise, the cervical spine and spinal cord had normal structure and alignment. The chest PA radiograph was also reported as normal.
With a suspected provisional diagnosis of cervical abscess due to infection, and after informed consent, incision and drainage of cervical abscess was done under aseptic condition. Approximately 20 mL thick pus was drained followed by local instillation of streptomycin, excision of sinus, and closure. We sent the pus sample for Gram staining, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining, culture sensitivity, CB-NAAT (Gene Xpert/Real-Time PCR), AFB culture, and fungal culture. AFB staining was positive and MTB was detected on gene expert test which was Rifampicin sensitive. Histopathological examination of excised tissue revealed granulomatous inflammation with plasma cell, lymphocytes, epithelioid cells, and caseous necrosis, which were specific for tuberculosis. ATT was started as per index tuberculosis (TB) guideline. During intensive phase, four drugs, that is, isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide were prescribed for 2 months and three drugs isoniazid, rifampicin, and ethambutol were given for the continuation phase for 10 months. Cervical orthosis (Philadelphia collar) was applied for support and to restrict the mobility. The patient responded well to the treatment with improvement in constitutional symptoms. The patient was then followed up at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months. Serial decline in ESR and CRP was noted. On consecutive X-rays, it was observed that destroyed spinous process had begun to gradually reform at 6 months and fully formed by the end of 12 months .