A 68-year-old Japanese male presented to our department with an exophytic mass on the right side of the maxillary gingiva that appeared 6 months earlier and had rapidly increased in size. He reported that, although he had upper and lower dentures made by a local dentist approximately 3 years ago, he gave up wearing the upper denture after approximately 6 months because it gradually became ill-fitting. His medical history included high blood pressure and hyperuricemia with orally administered regular medications. He smoked 20 cigarettes per day for more than 35 years and drank 500 mL of beer per day on average for more than 35 years.
Intraoral inspection revealed an elastic hard, seemingly well-defined, nonhemorrhagic, and almost pedunculated exophytic mass, approximately 60 mm in maximal diameter, extending medially from the hard palate, posteriorly to the retromolar trigone, and laterally to the buccal mucosa, which surrounded the right maxillary gingiva, including the right upper molars (teeth 16 and 17) . The lesion was painless, and its surface appeared superficially multilobulated and slightly roughened, with some erosions and shallow ulcerations. More than half of the permanent teeth were missing in both the upper and lower jaws, resulting in only five healthy teeth (parts of the maxillary incisors, and the mandibular incisors and cuspids) . Cervical palpation found lymphadenopathy of approximately 15 mm in size in the right submandibular region.
An orthopantomogram revealed that, except for the aforementioned healthy teeth, all the remaining molars and premolars, including the molars surrounded by the right upper gingival mass, had severe alveolar bone resorption, indicating that the patient had severe chronic periodontitis . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed extensive bone destruction on the lateral side of the right maxillary alveolus along the medial side of the mass lesion, together with small calcifications anteriorly within the mass . Multiple enlarged lymph nodes, nearly 20 mm in diameter, were also found in the level I–II region of the right side of the neck . Positron emission tomography with CT (PET/CT) revealed noticeable fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation (maximum standardized uptake value [SUVmax] 14.81) in the area consistent with the right maxillary gingival mass containing chronic periodontitis , whereas the right cervical level I–II lymph nodes showed only a relatively mild increase in FDG accumulation .
Initial biopsy was performed from the palatal and buccal sides of the surface of the mass, both of which showed “granulation tissue associated with marked inflammatory cell infiltration.” Because the imaging findings suggested a high probability of malignancy, a second biopsy was performed deeper into the lesion; however, the histology showed “severe chronic inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrous connective tissue hyperplasia with some bone tissue involvement,” again with no malignancy. Although pancytokeratin immunostaining was performed, no atypical epithelial cells were observed. At this stage, we additionally considered the possibility of reactive hyperplastic lesions [, ] on the gingiva as a differential diagnosis; however, the possibility of malignancy could not be excluded as a pretreatment diagnosis in light of the above-mentioned findings.
Since surgical resection appeared indispensable regardless of the exact diagnosis, the patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia as a treatment that also served as a definitive diagnosis. Prior to surgery, the aforementioned inactive teeth with severe chronic periodontitis, except for the right maxillary molars contiguous with the lesion, were extracted by a dentist. During surgery, first of all, the two remaining right upper molars and one premolar surrounded by the gingival mass were extracted . Then, several small specimens of the mass were excised from the tissue around the extraction socket corresponding to the deepest portion of the lesion and subjected to intraoperative frozen histological examination. Like the preoperative histological findings, all biopsied specimens showed “inflammatory granulation tissue with fibrosis and small calcification” without any malignancy, leading to a provisional diagnosis of ruling out the possibility of malignancy. Accordingly, we decided to perform a procedure similar to partial maxillectomy for benign lesions with minimal resection margins and omitted neck dissection.
As resection proceeded, the base of the pedunculated mass was found to be almost confined to the gingival mucosal surface, with the surrounding mucosa remaining normal. After removing the main mass, sufficient detachment and elevation of the surrounding normal mucosa from the periosteum were followed by thorough curettage of the remaining granulation tissues around the resection margin . The alveolar bone was sufficiently shaved until a healthy bone margin was exposed, with additional scraping of the sharp edges. Although the bone defect in the maxillary sinus floor extended to approximately 10 mm, the sinus mucosa was preserved without perforation. After meticulous hemostasis, the wound surface was covered by a polyglycolic acid sheet (NEOVEIL NanoⓇ D10, Gunze Medical, Japan) with fibrin glue and then with a sheet of chitin (poly-N-acetylglucosamine)-coated gauze. An immediate surgical obturator (ISO), premade by the dentist, was placed immediately after surgery . The excised mass was partially lobulated and measured approximately 60 × 36 × 17 mm .
The histology of the excised mass consisted primarily of a fibrous component with myxoid degeneration and sparse proliferation of atypical fibroblast-like spindle-shaped cells , partly comprising cementum-like ossification and calcification . No atypia was observed, even in the superficial squamous epithelium . Immunostaining revealed mild positivity for SMA in the spindle-shaped cells, whereas S100, desmin, and CD34 were negative. Pancytokeratin staining, for which a positive is suggestive of odontogenic epithelium, was also negative. Based on these histological findings, a final diagnosis of POF was made.
The surgical wound healed uneventfully with granulation and reepithelialization, thereby maintaining the shape of the alveolar ridge. Three months after surgery, the patient regained the ability to consume a regular diet with the help of dentures remade by the dentist. No relapse or other complications were observed at the 10-month postoperative follow-up .