A 59-year-old Caucasian man with a history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and diabetes mellitus type 2 diagnosed 1 year before without diabetic retinopathy or nephropathy presented to the emergency department with diffuse vesicular rash characteristic of varicella, diarrhea, and dehydration. Three days before he had experienced fever, 1 day later diffuse pruritic rash and hacking with decreasing fever. There had been positive chickenpox signs in his daughter and granddaughter a couple of weeks earlier. Their infections had resulted in no complications. After oral administration of azithromycin by his general practitioner, he had started vomiting and developed diarrhea. Diarrhea had developed 1 day before he presented to the emergency department with the frequency of three stools/day and had lasted for 1 day. The stool had been liquid without traces of blood. On initial evaluation he was in sinus rhythm and pale. His scalp, face, torso, and extremities were covered with diffuse vesicular rash, and he was without fever or palpable abdomen organomegaly. He was admitted to the hospital with the diagnosis of VZV infection. At admission he was awake and alert with spontaneous respirations 24/min, blood pressure 130/70 mm Hg, and heart rate 100 beats per minute. Lung auscultation revealed basal crepitations; heart sounds were rhythmic and quiet with no murmurs. His lower extremities were cold, with symmetric distal pulses, and showed mild perimalleolar edema. Blood cultures, complete blood count, biochemistry, and urinalysis were ordered, and he was also prescribed intravenous acyclovir.
The laboratory data during hospitalization are showed in Table . Cultures of urine and stool were negative. Chest X-ray showed only mild pulmonary congestion. Urine output was 1,500 mL on the day of admission and 500 mL on the second day. At that time a diagnosis of AKF was made, and the patient began continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration lasting 24 h. Initial bedside abdominal sonography showed kidneys of normal size and no evidence of obstruction or other abnormalities and hyperechogenic liver of normal size.
Additional laboratory studies were done to rule out streptococcal infection. Throat cultures, antistreptolysin-O titers, and blood cultures were all negative. The patient was started on enoxaparin (40 mg) subcutaneously, and intravenous acyclovir was continued at a 750 mg dose. On the third hospital day the patient felt better, had preserved diuresis with urine output > 5 L which lasted for the next 2 days, and did not required more dialysis. Blood pressure values were normal during the hospitalization. Serum urea and creatinine values started to fall with the normalization of potassium levels. Intravenous acyclovir was administered for 2 more days without enoxaparin and with only symptomatic therapy. Kidney biopsy was performed without any complications, and two kidney cylinders were sent for analysis. Histological analysis revealed ten glomeruli without any significant pathological changes and immunofluorescence revealed two glomeruli with medium IgG deposits on glomerular basement membrane and traces of C3, kappa, and lambda light chain deposits on glomerular basement membrane. Electron microscopy confirmed the diagnosis of acute tubular necrosis (ATN) . During the next 8 days, the patient's renal function slowly returned to normal with preserved diuresis during the whole period. Control bedside abdominal sonography showed the same kidney size and no abnormalities as in the initial one. He was discharged after a total of 12 days of hospitalization on a regimen of furosemide (40 mg every other day) and urapidil (2 × 60 mg daily).
The patient was seen in the clinic 2 and 4 months after discharge; he was feeling well. Blood pressure values were slightly elevated, he was without edemas or respiratory symptoms, had gained 5 kg, and had an average diuresis of 4,000 mL. Serum urea and creatinine were completely normal (6.4–5.4 mmol/L and 121–103 μmol/L) with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 69 mL/min and 24-h urine proteins of 0.06 g/dU. Given his complete recovery, the diagnosis of AKF due to acute VZV infection was confirmed.