A 53-year-old woman presented to our institution complaining of abdominal pain. Her personal history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a palpable mass lesion in the pelvic region. The results of laboratory investigations revealed increased CA125 levels (176.56 U/ml) (normal value: < 35 U/ml). Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans suggested a malignant lesion located in the left ovary, showing the presence a large, complex mass with cystic solid components and necrotic areas. Hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection and omentectomy were performed to establish stage of development of this neoplasm.
On macroscopic examination, a left salpingo-oophorectomy specimen revealed an intact 15x10x5 cm ovarian mass. A cut section showed gray white solid fleshy areas, interspersed with areas of necrosis, hemorrhage, and cystic spaces filled with thick fluid . Cystic spaces were entirely submitted for histological evaluation.
For accurate microscopic examination of solid areas, we used a sampling, suggested by other investigators for diagnosis of mucinous borderline and malignant tumors of the ovary . In line with this protocol, sampling of our tumor could be considered as optimal, because was examined one section per 1 cm of the maximum diameter .
Microscopic examination revealed that the cystic spaces, which were entirely submitted for histological evaluation, showed no epithelial lining and that they corresponded to edematous and hemorrhagic areas due to the torsion of mass. In fact, the wall of these spaces contained macrophages filled with hemosiderin . The thick fluid observed macroscopically in these spaces was not mucous material, but it corresponded to fibrin, with pink network aspect .
The solid component of the neoplasm contained large foci of coagulative tumor cell necrosis and predominantly spindle cells, with moderate cytoplasm, arranged in fascicles or a storiform pattern, mimicking mesenchymal malignancy .
In other smaller areas, the spindle neoplastic elements showed more abundant cytoplasm with epithelial-like appearance. The nuclei were atypical and vesicular, with evident nucleoli. Mitoses were frequent and sometimes atypical .
In numerous sections examined, no benign or malignant epithelial structures, nor histological elements, such as giant cells or pleomorphic cells were observed.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to establish true nature of tumor differentiating epithelial from mesenchymal, neuroendocrine neoplasms, melanoma and uterine Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Tumor (PEComa), sex cord tumors and (Gastrointestinal Stromal tumor) GIST.
On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells showed strong and diffuse reactivity to Vimentin , CAM5.2 and focal positivity to cocktail of keratins and EMA . Immunoreactivity was negative when staining for other antibodies such as Ca 125, desmin, smooth muscle actin, S100, caldesmon, CD34, calretinin, alpha-inhibin, CD10, myoglobin, S100 protein, HMB45, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and c-kit.
Although a carcinomatous component was not recognized at microscopic examination, the epithelial nature of the tumor was established because of strong and diffuse reactivity to CAM 5.2 and focal positivity to EMA and cocktail of keratins.
Specimen of pelvic lymph node dissection did not reveal presence of metastases.
Abdominal ultrasound, chest X-ray, total computed tomography, or bone scan were unremarkable.
Therefore, the final diagnosis was primary ovarian sarcomatoid carcinoma of pT1a N0 M0 stage of development at the diagnosis.
The patient received six cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin-Taxol.
After one year from diagnosis, surgery and chemotherapy, the patient is free of disease.