We describe here the case of a 75-year-old woman who had undergone high-dose external bean radiotherapy (70 Gy) in 2007 for a nasopharingeal carcinoma; she, subsequently, developed a progressive dysphagia with cough and repeated episodes of pneumonia, associated with weakness of her upper right limb. The patient with a history of repeated inhalations documented by FEES was referred to our center to perform OPES, because of worsening of dysphagia and cough.
The scintigraphic study was carried out with the patient in orthostatic position, her face being turned by about 80° in front of a dual-head, large-field-of view gamma camera (Infinia Hawkeye, GE Healthcare), equipped with a low-energy, high-resolution parallel-hole collimator; the energy window was set at 140 KeV peak (±10%).
The patient was given a single 5 ml bolus of water labeled with 37 MBq of 99mTc-nanocolloids (Nanocoll, GE, Milan, Italy). Dynamic acquisition was recorded with 8 images/s (0.125 s/frame) for 1 min, using a 64 × 64 matrix and zoom 1. At the end of dynamic acquisition, a static image was acquired to search for tracheobronchial aspirate. The field of view of the gamma camera included the oral cavity down to the epigastric area. The functional semi-quantitative parameters analyzed were: Oral, pharyngeal and esophageal transit times, oro-pharyngeal and esophageal retention indices, the percentage of tracheo-bronchial aspirate.
OPES showed massive tracheo-bronchial inhalation, with retention of the radioactive bolus in both lungs; both oral and pharyngeal transit times were prolonged and the oro-pharyngeal retention index was increased. The static view of neck-chest demonstrated significant trachea-bronchial aspiration . In order to better characterize the massive aspiration, the study was completed with a neck-thorax single-photon emission computerized tomography/computerized tomography (SPECT/CT) acquisition, with the following parameters: 360° rotation (180° each head) in the step-and-shoot mode (60 frames, 20 s/frame, matrix of 128 × 128 and zoom factor 1.00). The CT study was performed with a 128 × 128 matrix, zoom 1, 25 mA and 140 KeV, acquiring 120 views (1/3°, 360°).
The fused SPECT/CT images spatially outlined the pulmonary aspiration and showed the elevation of the left diaphragm as a consequence of inhalation .
Based on clinical considerations and on results of FEES and OPES, the patient underwent positioning of a cuffed tracheostomy tube, with subsequent improvement of symptoms. A control OPES performed 7 days after such procedure showed absence of inhalation in the tracheo-bronchial tract, associated, however, with the presence of slightest aspiration in the right bronchus visualized only in the delayed acquisition after 60 min .
The patient was then submitted to speech rehabilitation therapy for 1-month, with stimulation exercises of laringeal sensitivity and breathe-deglutition coordination.
At the end of rehabilitation therapy, the patient developed mucosal ulceration due to a cuffed tracheostomy tube and was then submitted to positioning a standard tracheostomy tube (not cuffed). OPES performed 1-week later showed again massive tracheobronchial aspiration .
The impossibility of providing the patient with an adequate diet, associated with the high risk of aspiration, has brought to the choice of a total laryngectomy for functional purposes.
A new OPES performed subsequently did not detect any tracheobronchial aspiration .