A 45-year-old woman presented to the outpatient department of our hospital complaining of hoarseness and a cough with sputum.
Since December 2018, the patient had had cough and sputum without obvious inducement, a small amount of white phlegm, no fever, no chest tightness, no shortness of breath and no headache.
Her past medical history was unremarkable.
No specific personal history of disease was recorded.
Her mental state was good. She had a hoarse voice. Superficial lymph nodes were not affected, heart and lung auscultation were normal, liver and spleen were not enlarged and neither lower limbs had edema.
Routine blood examination, liver and kidney function and electrolyte test indicators were, normal and carcinoembryonic antigen was 17.6 ng/mL (reference value < 5 ng/mL). Blood gases were normal. Laryngoscopy suggested vocal cord paralysis.
Lungs were examined by computed tomography (CT) (mediastinal window) on March 12, 2019. A soft tissue mass shadow was found in the left lower hilum of the lung; the boundary of the shadow was not clear, and it measured about 27.5mm × 26.8 mm; and the three-stage CT value was about 56/68/81 Hu. Multiple swollen lymph nodes were found in the left supraclavicular area and mediastinum, and the largest was about 11.6 mm × 27.2 mm and was located beside the aortic arch. A small amount of liquid density shadow was seen in the left thoracic cavity. CT examination (pulmonary window) revealed a mass shadow in the left lower lung dorsal segment, with coarse margin, pleural traction and dorsal bronchial occlusion. Multiple small nodules < 10 mm were found in both lungs, with clear boundaries; ground-glass nodules, 17.2 mm × 18.2 mm, were found in the right upper lung, some of which were high density. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head was normal, and abdominal CT was normal.
To determine potential therapeutic methods, with the patient’s consent, tissue samples from lung bronchoscopy and whole blood as a control were subjected to next-generation sequencing using by a 757-gene panel (Yucebio, Shenzhen, China). Compound variation of EGFR gene (exon 21 L858R/V834L) was detected in both tissue and circulating tumor deoxyribonucleic acid samples . Immunohistochemistry showed that EGFR expression in tumor tissue was positive, and programmed death-ligand 1 expression was < 1% (total cholesterol < 1%) .