A 41-year-old female presented at the Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Disease Center Komagome Hospital (Tokyo, Japan), with chest pain. She had no previous medical history or a family history of heart disease. Serum levels of the tumor markers CEA, NSE, CA 19-9, and SCC were not elevated. A computed tomography scan revealed an anterior mediastinal tumor extending to the sternum, pericardium, mediastinal pleura, left upper lobe of the lung, and left brachiocephalic vein. Histopathologic examination of a computed tomography-guided biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma of the thymus . She underwent surgical resection of the thymus and the tumor-invaded surrounding organs, followed by reconstruction with a rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap. The pathological diagnosis of the resected tumor confirmed thymic squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed after preoperative biopsy. Subsequently, the patient underwent postoperative chemoradiotherapy consisting of 60 Gy irradiation in 2 Gy fractions and one cycle of concurrent cytotoxic chemotherapy (150 mg of cisplatin on day 1 and 150 mg etoposide/m2 on days 1, 3, and 5). One year later, she presented with pain in her right foot joint. Magnetic resonance imaging showed round lesions in the distal part of the right tibia and the talus . These lesions were approximately 12 mm in diameter, with rims of low signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging and enhancement following contrast administration. The diagnosis was therefore bone metastases. The initial plan was irradiation of the metastatic sites with 30 Gy, delivered in 2 Gy fractions, but because of persistent ankle pain, the patient was treated with a boosted dose of 50 Gy total irradiation, delivered in 2 Gy fractions. Bone scintigraphy performed 8 years after radiation therapy showed that the bone lesions had diminished in size , and that there was no remnant of the tumor. In more than 15 years since the resection of the patient’s primary tumor, there have been no further symptoms, evidence of other metastases, or local recurrence.