A 48-year-old man without a significant past medical history was found to have an incidental upper abdominal tumor by abdominal ultrasonography at an annual health check. All laboratory examinations, including hemoglobin, albumin, pancreas enzyme, were within normal ranges. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) concentration was slightly elevated as 4.6 ng/mL (< 2.5) without any smoking history. The carbohydrate antigen (CA19-9) concentration was within the normal range as 18 U/mL (< 37), as was DUPAN-2 (< 150 U/mL).
Ultrasonography showed two heterogeneous echogenic round contiguous masses, 5 cm in size each, at the region of the pancreatic head . Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) confirmed these findings , which were in-homogeneously enhanced, and invading into the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) . Colonoscopy demonstrated a red, raised wheal with a minute ulcer in the transverse colon, indicating submucosal invasion of an extramural tumor . Endoscopic biopsies revealed inflammation with no malignancy. Angiograms showed a hyper-vascular tumor fed by the right branch of the middle colic artery . The SMV was poorly visualized and narrowed. The tumor was not fed from any pancreatic or duodenal arteries. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no abnormality, including the papilla of Vater. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreaticogram (MRCP) showed no abnormality in the pancreaticobiliary duct.
The mass was diagnosed as a malignant submucosal tumor originating from mesenchymal cells in the mesentery of the transverse colon, which directly invaded the duodenum or pancreatic head based on CT and colonoscopy findings although endoscopic biopsies could not get the malignancy. The patient underwent exploration towards curative-intent surgery and found to have a tumor mainly located in the mesentery of the transverse colon, which invaded both the uncinate process of the pancreas and the transverse colon. To achieve en bloc R0 resection, a combined PD, right hemicolectomy, and segmental cylindrical resection of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) with lymph node dissection were performed and reconstruction was done with Billroth-I (Imanaga) reconstructive technique involving the gastric remnant, pancreatic duct, and biliary tree in that order.
The resected tumor measured 9 × 7 × 6 cm. The cut section of the specimen showed a yellowish-white color with central necrosis. The tumor was mainly located in the wall of the transverse colon and colonic mesentery. Histological examination revealed that a large part of the tumor was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and pleomorphic sarcomatous tumor cells were seen in the part of hemorrhagic necrosis, where the transition of carcinomatous to sarcomatous tumor cells was observed . The carcinoma component was exposed in the ulcer base of the colon . Immunohistochemically, the carcinomatous component was positive for CK7 , CK20, EMA, CDX2, AFP, and partly positive for vimentin. On the other hand, the spindle-shaped pleomorphic sarcomatous component was strongly positive for vimentin and negative for CK7, CK20, EMA, CDX2, AFP, KIT, CD34, desmin, and S-100 protein. Based on, the histologic findings, and the immunohistochemistry results, the tumor was diagnosed as carcinosarcoma of the colon. Invasion of carcinosarcoma to the pancreas, duodenum, and SMV was not identified and just fibrous adhesion. Furthermore, there was no lymph node metastasis.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with six cycles of 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin therapy based on the chemotherapy regimen for colon cancer. The patient has survived 18 years to the date after surgery with no recurrence.