A 72-year-old white German man presented with a 5-month history of a growing lip mass. A review of his medical history revealed that he had arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, peripheral arterial disease, and a one pack-daily cigarette smoking history. Four years earlier, he underwent a resection for prostate carcinoma.
A clinical examination revealed no abnormalities other than a firm mass on the right side of his lower lip , without palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. Because squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip was suspected, he was scheduled for contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his head and neck area. The MRI showed next to a tumorous contrast-affine process of approximately 1.2 cm in diameter on his right lower lip, a 3×2 cm2 polycyclic arranged mucosal thickening with cystic and solid contrast affine shares at the antral laterocaudal area of his right maxillary sinus, extending from his right lateral nasal wall to maxillary sinus floor. There was no evidence of bony erosion or other cervicofacial lesions. Under general anesthesia, he received the following procedures: an excisional biopsy at the lip lesion with 5 mm safety margins and bilateral sentinel lymph node biopsy, and antral polypectomy with medial maxillectomy via a unilateral LeFort I osteotomy approach with preservation of his pterygoid plate. Histological examination of the hematoxylin-eosin specimens demonstrated well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the lip (not shown). The antral lesion was a tumor composed of hyperplastic squamous epithelium protruding into the stroma (surface epithelial cells grew downward into the underlying supportive tissue), thus producing a grossly convoluted cerebriform appearance.
He was hospitalized for 2 weeks (12 days) after the surgery and did well postoperatively. Two weeks later, he regained a well-formed maxilla without any restrictions. Eleven months after our therapy, a cutaneous malignant melanoma on his right upper arm was diagnosed (Breslow index 1.9 mm, Clark level IV) and he underwent a tumor resection and axillary sentinel lymph node biopsy in the clinic for dermatology of the University of Leipzig. He has remained disease-free for 25 months following the first surgery and surveillance was continued in our tumor clinic. This case substantiates our procedure of radical resection.
Our patient presented with an asymptomatic IP of his maxillary sinus accidentally found with squamous cell carcinoma of his lower lip. This case required particular attention because a carcinoma could have been associated with the IP. A relatively aggressive approach for IP was, therefore, applied at the same time as the cancer surgery.