A 37-year-old man sustained trauma after a road traffic accident. He had a closed, mid-shaft fracture of the tibia and fibula and posterior dislocation of the right hip with posterior wall and column fracture of the acetabulum. He was treated for tibia fracture with intramedullary nailing. Hip fracture dislocation was not diagnosed at that time. He was advised to avoid bearing weight at the site of the tibial fracture for one and a half months. When the patient started bearing weight, he complained of pain and was referred for a pelvis x-ray. His preoperative Harris hip score was 27. X-ray revealed fracture dislocation of the hip. In 3D computed tomography, the femoral head was lying superior and medial to the acetabulum, and it was in the posterior to coronal plane of the acetabulum. The superolateral half of the femoral head was destroyed. The acetabulum was found to be defective superiorly, medially, and posteriorly. The posterosuperior wall and column were separated and attached to the native acetabulum with a thin bone intact, except for a small defect in the inferior aspect of its medial wall. Attempts at closed reduction were unsuccessful, and no further intervention was performed.
The patient was positioned right laterally, and a posterolateral incision was made. Dislocation of the head was difficult. Glassman’s trochanteric slide with continuous vastus lateralization and gluteus medius was undertaken. The head was removed after an in situ neck cut. The remnant of the head was preserved for grafting. The acetabular margins were exposed and cleared. There was a posterosuperior defect. The posterior wall was malunited, leaving behind a medial defect, which was partially uncontained posteriorly. According to the AAOS classification, this was both a segmental and a cavitary defect (Type 3).
Breaking the united acetabulum wall superiorly and posteriorly would have meant converting the partially contained defect into a completely uncontained area. Therefore, reconstruction was planned using two strut grafts and impaction of morcellized graft pieces. The following were the steps of the acetabular reconstruction:
Auto graft of the head and allograft head were kept over the posterosuperior defect area, making their posterior surface exactly congruent to the native acetabulum. Both grafts were secured with k-wires passed perpendicularly to the medial wall.
Reaming started over the graft and native acetabulum, keeping the direction in the desired orientation of the acetabular cup. The reamed slurry was preserved, and the center of the femoral head was about a half centimeter higher, a huge defect that would have required more than two structural grafts, meaning a greater period of incorporation and healing.
The acetabular shell (Duraloc, Depuy Johnson and JohnsonTM) was press fitted. Two screws were passed from the shell posteriorly and superiorly through the grafts to hold in the native acetabular wall. The grafts were then secured.
The allograft pieces were impacted hard to crevices of the graft and wall and around the shell circumferentially. Reamed slurry was also poured, and polythene liner was implanted.
K-wires were removed from the graft. 2.5 mm drill bits were used to drill holes over the same k- wire tracts. Two 4 mm cancellous screws were passed through the graft to hold the acetabular wall.
The stem was inserted, and the reduction was performed. The hip was stable with a good range of movement. The trochanteric slide was secured with a stainless steel wire. Capsular and rotators were reattached to the posterior greater trochanter through drill holes. The operated leg was one centimeter shorter than the normal limb. This was because the center of the hip was one centimeter higher than the normal side.
Range of movement exercises started postoperatively, with non-weight bearing for one month. Toe-touch weight bearing started after one month. By the end of three months, the patient was allowed complete weight bearing. Clinical and radiological assessments were performed at six month intervals.