A 19-year-old African American woman sustained a gunshot wound to her neck. On initial evaluation, approximately 20 minutes after injury, she was alert, oriented, speaking full sentences and was complaining of pain to her neck. An examination revealed a gunshot wound to her right neck just lateral to the sternal head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and just superior to the clavicle. The wound was non-bleeding and air was escaping. No other wounds were noted. Initial vital signs were heart rate 118, blood pressure 144/85mmHg, respiratory rate 20 breaths/minute, pulse oximetry 100% on 15L non-rebreather, breath sounds were present bilaterally, and there was no evidence of subcutaneous emphysema. A chest X-ray showed a bullet overlying her medial right midlung field and superimposing the right hilum, and also smaller fragments in the right apex, as well as pneumomediastinum (Figure ). She was intubated for airway protection. Computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast showed significant pneumomediastinum extending to her skull base, a bullet lodged within the right bronchus intermedius, and a luminal irregularity of the distal trachea. There was no evidence of vascular injury on CT (Figure ).She was taken to the operating room. Flexible FOB was performed. The bullet was visualized within the right bronchus intermedius (Figure A). Retrieval of the bullet was attempted with a combination of biopsy forceps and a Dormia basket. The bullet could be moved but not extracted using biopsy forceps. Next a Dormia basket was advanced passed the bullet, opened, and closed around the bullet (Figure B-C, Figure ). The basket with bullet ensnared and endotracheal tube were removed together. She was reintubated once the bullet was confirmed to have been retrieved. Postretrieval bronchoscopy was performed and a tracheal injury was visualized on the posterior trachea. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy was preformed which did not reveal any injury to her esophagus.
Next, a neck exploration via a collar incision was performed. The trajectory of the bullet was between her common carotid artery and right subclavian artery. Injury to the cervical portion of her posterolateral trachea and membranous disruption of proximal intrathoracic trachea was identified. Primary repair of the tracheal injury was performed. She tolerated the procedure well, and was transported to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) intubated postoperation. She was extubated 2 days after surgery and was subsequently discharged home without complications.