We report the case of a seventy four year old man who presented to the Emergency Department complaining of back pain of two months duration. This was a dull mid- thoracic back pain with radiation to the chest and upper abdomen. It was initially intermittent associated with exertion, but now was increasing in frequency and severity to the extent that it was interfering with his daily living activities. There was no history of trauma. His family history was unremarkable.
His only significant past medical history was that of hypercholesterolaemia for which he was prescribed a statin by his general practitioner. He underwent surgery for varicose veins in his right leg 7 years previously. His regular medications also included aspirin. He had no known drug allergies and smoked 10 cigarettes per day. He was a retired farmer who lived with his wife and was in good physical condition from an anaesthetic point of view (ASA grade I). On examination of his back the overlying skin was unremarkable although a mild thoracic kyphosis was present. Physical examination revealed conspicuous tenderness and percussion pain in the thoracic region. The straight leg raising test was negative on both sides. His neurological system was intact on examination. Systemic examination was also unremarkable.
Laboratory studies including total blood count, sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, electrolyte values, and alkaline phosphate levels were within the normal ranges. Chest radiography showed widening of the right paratracheal stripe, of concern for lymphadenopathy. There were also calcified left hilar lymph nodes. Plain radiographs of the thoracic spine showed mid thoracic kyphosis with loss of distinction of the posterior cortices of T7 and T8.
An MRI of the cervical and thoracic spine was carried out [,]. This showed an infiltrative process involving the vertebral bodies of T6 and T7, associated with expansion and some destruction. There was extensive demineralisation and destruction of the vertebral body of T6. The process extended inferiorly into the vertebral body of T7, and appeared to cross the disc space. The process also involved the superior and inferior articular facets on the left side at T5. Computerized tomography images further characterised the extent of the dysplastic process. Reconstructed images revealed the infiltrative process in further views . This process extended into the pedicles bilaterally and was associated with some compromise of the foramina at T6 and T7. There was no definite nerve root compression identified and no other focal bony abnormalities were seen. Significant multilevel degenerative disc disease was seen in the cervical spine, associated with reversal of normal cervical lordosis resulting in significant multilevel spinal canal stenosis, and some evidence of signal changes in the cord, although focal cord compression was not seen. The findings of an aggressive destructive process were highly suspicious for a malignant process, although the presence of a sclerotic edge suggested an indolent aspect to the process.
The following day this patient underwent T2-T9 stabilization and bone grafting. Pedicle screws were inserted proximally into T3 and T4 pedicles bilaterally , and distally into three levels at T7/T8/T9 . Spinous processes of T2-T9 were excised. Autologous bone graft was harvested from left iliac crest and used as an onlay graft. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, managed with analgesia and physiotherapy to assist with mobilisation. He was discharged home day four post-operatively.
Multiple biopsies of bony tissue were sent for histological examination. Histology revealed multiple pieces of woven bone with prominent periosteal fibroblastic reaction and areas showing new bone formation with medullary space fibrosis. In addition, there were focal areas showing irregularly oriented osteoid without osteoblastic rimming but surrounded by fibroblastic proliferation [,]. The overall features were most suggestive of reparative changes rather than a neoplastic process with some features which could be in keeping with fibrous dysplasia in the appropriate clinical settings. The patient had an unremarkable post-operative follow-up. He continuous to be asymptomatic with no evidence of recurrence on serial imaging [,].