A 66-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to infection of the pacemaker pocket for one month.
The patient was diagnosed with sick sinus syndrome for which she received a dual-chamber pacemaker 10 years ago. One month prior to admission, after carrying a heavy burden, she found redness and swelling at the pocket site, which gradually ulcerated. The local hospital gave her an antiinfection treatment of cephalosporin for a week, but the outcome was not positive. Therefore, she was transferred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient had a history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and chronic gastric ulcer. She underwent a meningioma resection 7 years earlier and cataract surgery in both eyes 8 years earlier. The patient had no history of hepatitis or tuberculosis.
The patient had no significant past history or family history.
The patient's blood pressure and blood glucose were well controlled by medication. Her body temperature was normal three days before the operation.
Except for swelling and ulceration at the pocket site, other physical examination results were normal. There were no abnormalities in the laboratory examination, electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, or preoperative echocardiogram. Multiple blood cultures were negative before the preventative use of vancomycin 0.5 g/q8h.
After excluding the contraindication of operation, the left leads were extracted successfully, and a temporary pacemaker was implanted on the other side. Intraoperative angiography revealed patency of the bilateral subclavian veins . The results of the pacemaker pocket tissue and lead culture showed the presence of Staphylococcus epidermidis, which is sensitive to vancomycin. Vancomycin was used continuously after the operation. The next day after the operation, the patient complained of pain radiating from the left chest to the mandible, with a pain score of 6. She began to present intermittent fever accompanied by sweating. Therefore, blood cultures were performed at that time; however, the results were negative. The serum concentration of vancomycin was up to standard. Three days after the operation, the patient felt that the pain in the left chest was alleviated, but increased pain in the left neck and throat accompanied by an irregular cough (dry cough, no sputum) appeared. Physical examination showed neck tenderness, normal tonsils, and a normal uvula. A few days later, the patient still had an intermittent low fever with sweating. Laboratory examination showed that routine blood and procalcitonin levels were normal, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 44 mm/h, and the hypersensitive C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 45.6 mg/L. The operation incision and temporary pacemaker placement site were observed to be dry and clean without redness, burning, effusion, or pus. Seven days after the extraction, the patient felt relieved of pain in the left chest and neck and said that the pain was confined to the mandible. A submandibular mass was found through palpation. Routine blood tests, blood biochemical indexes, and procalcitonin levels were normal. Her ESR was 65 mm/h, hypersensitive CRP was 57.4 mg/L, plasma D-dimers was 9.58 mg/L, and fibrinogen was 5.6 g/L.
Color Doppler ultrasound showed left internal jugular vein thrombosis. Occlusion of the left common jugular vein, internal and external jugular veins, and subclavian vein was further demonstrated by computed tomography venography (CTV) . The patient refused the intravenous or subcutaneous use of anticoagulants; therefore, rivaroxaban was given.