A 45-year-old man with persistent left abdominal pain for 1 week was admitted to the emergency department. He denied any chronic illness history and regular physical check-ups. For 3 days prior to admission, the patient felt fatigue and had numbness in his left leg below the ankle. The smoking history of the patient was more than 20 years with three to four cigarettes per day, and his history of drinking was more than 10 years with 1,000 ml of beer per day. His weight was 80 kg (BMI 24.07 kg/m2), and his abdominal girth was 106 cm. The blood pressure of the patient on admission was 150/108 mmHg, with a pulse rate of 91 beats per minute and a pulse oxygen level of 99% (indoor air). Physical assessment revealed pressing pain in the middle of the left abdomen with no rebound pain as well as muscle tension, percussion pain in the left kidney area, and weak fluctuation of the bipedal dorsal artery pulse.
Laboratory tests provided the following results: a white blood cell (WBC) count of 7.68 × 109/L (normal range 3.5–9.5 × 109/L); a platelet (PLT) count of 397 × 109/L (normal range 125–350 × 109/L); hemochrome (HGB) of 154 g/L; and a weak positive fecal occult blood (OB) test, which turned negative after subsequent reexamination. The myocardial enzyme markers (creatine kinase isoenzyme index and troponin I or T) and NT-proBNP levels were within the normal range. Renal function showed mild impairment, with a creatinine (Cr) level of 105.0 μmol/L (normal range 41–111 μmol/L) and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 60.54 ml/min/1.73 m2. The D-dimer level was slightly elevated with a value of 1.80 mg/L (normal range 0–1.5 mg/L). The patient also had high blood sugar (Glu) and elevated blood lipids. The serum lipid profile of the patient was as follows: total cholesterol level (CHOL) of 8.13 mmol/L (normal range 3.9–5.2 mmol/L); triglyceride (TG) level of 2.10 mmol/L (normal range 0.57–1.7 mmol/L); and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) level of 4.97 mmol/L (normal range 2.34–3.12 mmol/L). At admission, the blood sugar and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels of the patient were 23.33 mmol/L (normal range 3.92–6.16 mmol/L) and 11.70% (normal range 4.27–6.07), respectively, and an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) confirmed diabetes mellitus. Fundus examination showed vitreous hemorrhage on the right eye, macular edema on the left eye, and skin pigmentation on both lower limbs , which indicated long-term diabetic lesions with retinopathy and dermopathy. Laboratory tests for hypercoagulability (proteins C and S) were performed with normal results.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and the pelvis of the patient revealed splenic infarction and splenic artery thrombosis , as well as left renal artery embolization , bilateral renal infarction , and superior mesenteric artery thrombosis . Ultrasonography of the lower limb artery revealed the bilateral popliteal artery and left posterior tibial artery thrombosis . In a patient with multiple peripheral thromboembolic events, cardiogenic thrombosis should be taken into consideration. Furthermore, echocardiography showed abnormal ventricular wall motion with LVT (size of 1.13 × 1.77 cm and area of 1.72 cm2) at the apex to the inferior part . Wall motion was observed in the middle segment of the ventricular septum and anterior wall. Hypokinesis to akinesis in LV motion was observed lateral of the basal to apical segments of the LV inferior wall, with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) decrease of 48%.
The following electrocardiogram (ECG) findings were observed: sinus rhythm; Q waves in the II, III, and augmented vector foot (aVF) leads; the Q waves of the inspiratory phase became shallow but still existed; poor R-wave progression in chest leads; and T-wave inversion in leads V2 to V5 .
The patient was treated with low-molecular-weight heparin and warfarin, with a target international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.8–2.5. Invasive procedures could not be performed due to the presence of LVT. To evaluate coronary artery and myocardial necrosis, a coronary CT scan, myocardial magnetic resonance, and radionuclide imaging were performed. The coronary CT scan showed that the proximal anterior descending artery had severe calcification and stenosis . Subsequent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of an apical aneurysm with mobile thrombus at the apex and transmural MI on the apical septal and inferior walls . Resting myocardial radionuclides showed transmural MI in the apical segment of the left ventricle and apical septal segments [approximately 7% of the left ventricular (LV) wall], and blood perfusion was decreased in the inferior wall of the left ventricle .
The patient was also treated with aspirin (100 mg/day), clopidogrel (75 mg/day), and proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) to prevent gastrointestinal bleeding events. After 2 weeks of antithrombotic treatment with warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel, follow-up echocardiography revealed that the thrombus had almost disappeared. Because the coronary angiography suggested triple vessel disease, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) was conducted, and two drug-eluting stents were placed in the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) .
After PCI, antithrombotic therapy with warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel was essential for the patient. A repeat echocardiogram revealed that the LV apical thrombus disappeared, and an enhanced CT scan showed peripheral embolism of multiple organs with no further aggravation compared to the previous scan. Diabetes was controlled with a combination of diet and insulin, acarbose, and dapagliflozin. The patient was discharged after a normal physical exam and was prescribed warfarin (3 mg/day), aspirin (100 mg/day), and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) for anticoagulation. With regular outpatient follow-ups, echocardiography showed no thrombus in the LV. Moreover, the patient was prescribed warfarin for 3 months and dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) for 1 year.