A 63-year-old woman known with aortic replacement/graft for coarctation of the aorta done 30-year ago and mitral valve replacement for mitral valve replacement done 6-month ago was admitted to our hospital. She presented with a 2-day history of nausea and persistent abdominal pain. On physical examination abdominal tenderness and impaired bowel sounds were noted. In blood tests, C-reactive protein (CRP) and D-dimer increased above the upper limit (12.78 mg/dL [0.00–0.03 mg/dL] and 1.5 μg/mL [0.0–0.9 mg/mL], respectively). The rest of the laboratory tests which including complete blood counts and chemistry panels done on admission were unremarkable. An abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed embolism in the stem of first jejunum branch of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) with disruption of the distal blood flow, and inflammatory changes in soft tissues around the SMA . Contrast enhancement of the bowel wall was normal. An abdominal angiography showed that nutrient branches from the SMA to the ileocecal and ascending colons were completely disrupted, and the collateral blood flow from the inferior mesenteric artery maintained blood supply to the intestinal walls . Though we screened the possible causes of arteritis or thrombosis, the tests including IgG4, antiphospholipid antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, treponemal antibody, and serological test for syphilis were all negative. We observed her on drip infusion for bowel resting and acetaminophen for pain control. On the 7th day, her abdominal symptoms were relieved. She was afebrile during the hospitalization. She could eat meals without any problems and was discharged on the 10th day.
She was re-admitted a month later now presenting with hemoptysis. The blood tests again showed elevated CRP and D-dimer above the upper limit (3.26 mg/dL [0.00–0.03 mg/dL] and 2.8 μg/mL [0.0–0.9 mg/dL], respectively). A contrast-enhanced CT showed a cylindrical-shaped area lacking contrast enhancement inside the descending aortic graft and enhanced pseudo aneurysm around the distal end of the graft . That pseudo aneurysm formed fistula to pulmonary vein and trachea which was considered for the cause of the hemoptysis. We also found an enlarged pseudo aneurysm at the part of the SMA that was obstructed one month before . These findings were strongly suggestive of the graft infection and vegetation growth. Since the pseudo aneurysm in the SMA was thought to be associated with infectious embolisms from the graft in the descending aorta, we started intravenous infusion of empiric antibiotics with ampicillin/sulbactam and daptomycin. Two sets of blood culture before the introduction of antibiotics were negative. On the day of admission and on the 4th day, we conducted coil embolization therapies to the SMA aneurysm twice to prevent enlargement and rupture. For the pseudo aneurysm in the descending aorta, we performed an additional zone 4 TEVAR. A transesophageal echocardiography during the operation showed a moving flap along the graft. During perioperative care, serum β-D glucan (βDG) values, which we examined because empiric anti-bacterial agents were ineffective, were found to be approximately 80 pg/mL [< 20 mg/dL]. Unexpectedly, two sets of blood culture specimens collected from the peripheral veins and intra aneurysm did not develop any pathogens. However, based on the high bDG values, we empirically administered micafungin, then switched to voriconazole due to an allergic skin rash. βDG values decreased to approximately 20 pg/mL after the anti-fungal therapy, and she was discharged. She was then followed up in outpatient with an oral anti-fungal drug: 100 mg per day of fluconazole (FLCZ).
Seven and half months after the last admission, her abdominal pain recurred. An enhanced-CT on admission showed a newly developed aneurysm in the splenic artery and partial defects of staining suggesting splenic ischemia. She had been continued an oral anti-fungal drug since the last admission. We switched from an oral anti-fungal drug to intravenous infusion. We started the infusion with 400 mg per day of voriconazole (VRCZ) for the first four days, but had to change to 50 mg per day of micafungin (MCFG) and 150 mg per day of amphotericin B (AMPH) because of drug-induced hyponatremia. The patient’s condition improved and her inflammatory marker decreased over the course of the anti-fungal therapy . For the splenic arterial aneurysm, we conducted a coil embolization. The repeated blood culture tests did not detect any pathogens, whereas the repeated βDG value increased up to 115.1 pg/mL and Aspergillus galactomannan (GM) antigen test was positive. Thus, we thought that Aspergillus species were the most suspicious pathogens. Additional [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography / computed tomography ([18F]FDG PET/CT) showed accumulation of FDG in the distal end of the descending aortic graft , the root of subclavian artery , and the main trunk of a spleen artery . These accumulations indicated probable infections. Furthermore, a CT scan confirmed splenic infarctions . To remove these infected lesions, her grafts in the aortic arch and total descending aorta were surgically replaced. After establishment of an artificial heart–lung system via median sternotomy, we added a fifth-intercostal incision. We isolated the infected graft from the surrounding tissues carefully due to severe adhesion, then the graft was totally removed and a new graft was inserted (Ante-Flo 1Branch 22 mm®, Terumo, Japan). We could not detect any microbe in culture study of extracted graft. Six months after discharge, she is doing well under continuous oral anti-fungal therapy.