A 53-year-old woman was diagnosed with vitiligo in September 2017 and was treated with oral Qubaibabuqi tablets (15 tablets three times daily; Xinjiang Yinduolan Uyghur Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Urumqi, China), 10 mg of prednisone acetate tablets (Xinhua Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Zibo, China) once daily, and narrowband-ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) phototherapy (Sigma household narrowband-ultraviolet phototherapy instrument [SS-01B] pocket portable; Shanghai Sigma High Technology Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China) every other day. The prednisone acetate tablets were self-discontinued 3 months later; however, she continued to take Qubaibabuqi tablets orally and NB-UVB phototherapy was undertaken at home. The patient seldom saw her physician, and bought Qubaibabuqi tablets from a pharmacy over the next 7 months. The patient presented to our clinic on March 27, 2018. She complained of weakness, nausea, and vomiting for 3 days. She was admitted to the Gastroenterology Department.
Physical examination revealed severe, diffuse yellow staining of the skin and sclera, and bilateral lower extremity edema. Patches of vitiligo involved the left frontal region, left chest, and right lower abdomen. The skin lesion in the left frontal region was nearly normal, and the color of the surrounding skin lesions on the left chest and right lower abdomen were black due to therapy. She had no history of cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, or autoimmune diseases. She was otherwise healthy and denied taking any medications other than Qubaibabuqi tablets. A liver biopsy after hospitalization showed acute cholestatic hepatitis. Additional laboratory analyses revealed the following: normal routine blood tests; alanine aminotransferase (804.40 U/L; normal 7–40 U/L); aspartate aminotransferase (896.30 U/L; normal 13–35 U/L); total bilirubin (335.20 μmol/L; normal 5.00–24.00 μmol/L); direct bilirubin (233.00 μmol/L; normal 0.24–7.10 μmol/L); and indirect bilirubin (102.20 μmol/L; normal 2.80–23.80 μmol/L), negative HIV and syphilis antibodies; normal hepatitis A, B, and C serology and negative Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, and human cytomegalovirus. Causality assessment using the updated Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences scale showed 10 points (a probable causality) for Fructus Psoraleae contained in Qubaibabuqi tablets. Based on these data, the patient was diagnosed with drug-induced hepatitis.
After admission, the patient was given a high carbohydrate, low fat, and moderate protein diet, and actively maintained a balance of water, electrolytes, and pH, and corrected hypoproteinemia. Measures to prevent infection and provide oral care were adopted. She actively used medications (Magnesium Isoglycyrrhizinate Injection, Ornithine Aspartate Injection and Ademetionine 1, 4-Butanedisulfonate for Injection, and so on.) to protect liver function and treat hepatic coma. Due to poor treatment efficacy, the patient’s condition was aggravated and she was treated with an artificial liver support system besides the routine medicinal therapy. Although the patient was given active treatment, her condition continued to deteriorate. Her spirit gradually changed from sobriety to wandering, and then coma. Some symptoms indicated that her life was in danger, and these symptoms included fetor hepaticus, flapping tremor, multiple patches of flaky ecchymoses, elevated liver enzymes, and a coagulopathy. She died 5 days later due to acute liver failure and multiple organ dysfunction. This serious adverse event has been reported to the China Food and Drug Administration through the National Adverse Drug Reaction Surveillance System (No. 3701011011107321800095).