A 51-year-old Caucasian woman, a professional musician, was referred to our one-stop breast clinic with a two-week history of left breast swelling and tenderness that started prior to her most recent menstrual period. She menstruated regularly and had no previous history of breast disease, and her grandmother had been diagnosed with breast cancer at age 78 years. She had an eight-year-old daughter who was breast-fed for two years and was a nonsmoker with no significant medical history. Preceding presentation there was no history of foreign travel, she was not taking any medications, and she had experienced no trauma to the breast.
The clinical examination revealed redness, induration, and swelling in the upper half of the breast extending to the nipple. There was no nipple discharge, lymphadenopathy, or pyrexia. Her mammogram was normal (M1), and ultrasound revealed nonspecific inflammatory changes with no focal lesions (U3). The clinical impression was of mastitis, but the picture was not typical of periductal mastitis, which is more common in younger women and smokers, nor was it typical of lactational mastitis in breast-feeding women.
A core biopsy demonstrated chronic mastitis (B2) that showed mixed inflammatory lobulitis with fat necrosis and fibrosis, but no vasculitis. No microcalcification, ductal carcinoma in situ, or invasive malignancy was identified. Her blood tests (full blood count, renal function, liver function, thyroid function, and blood glucose) were all within normal limits.
She was treated initially with oral flucloxacillin 500 mg four times daily and then switched to co-amoxiclav 625 mg three times daily. After the core biopsy, her breast appearance deteriorated, with worsening swelling, induration, cellulitis, and discharging sinus despite two-week oral antibiotic treatment. Fluid from the sinus was cultured, and there was no bacterial growth or any evidence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The microbiologist at our clinic recommended intravenous antibiotic therapy; however, because of the patient's professional and social commitments, it was not practical for her to be admitted as an inpatient. She was commenced on a higher dose of oral flucloxacillin, 1 g three times daily.
Three weeks after her initial presentation a deep collection became apparent, with pointing on the skin surface. Repeat ultrasound of the left breast confirmed two loculated collections. She was not keen on undergoing any surgical intervention, so outpatient incision and drainage were performed. Specimens were sent for routine bacteriology, acid-fast bacteria stain, Gram stain, and fungal stains and culture. Her pus culture was found to be sterile on routine bacterial culture, so the possibility of an atypical infection such as mycobacterium process was considered and she was started on intravenous flucloxacillin 500 mg four times daily and oral rifampicin 300 mg twice daily.
After another two weeks of treatment, the cellulitis in her left breast had improved, but the breast remained swollen, with multiple sinuses near the nipple. Further ultrasound of the left breast demonstrated multiloculated abscesses. Five weeks after her initial presentation, the patient underwent surgical incision and drainage through the inframammary crease with placement of a small drain to allow gravity-dependent drainage. Repeat histology showed granulomata formation and chronic mastitis with no evidence of malignancy. The initial differential diagnosis included nocardia or Actinomyces infection. Subsequent submitted specimens identified Mycobacterium fortuitum complex as the causative agent.
After eight weeks of antibiotic therapy with doxycyline 100 mg twice daily and ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily, her breast improved clinically. The patient had no further recurrence of the infection and was discharged from our outpatient clinic six months later.