A 23-year-old female presented via emergency medical services (EMS) for slurred speech, irregular behavior, and vision changes. Initial vitals were blood pressure 122/78 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 58 beats per minute (min), respiratory rate of 14 breaths per min, oxygen saturation of 98% on room air, and rectal temperature of 35.8 C. She was opening her eyes to pain, yelling incomprehensibly, and experiencing localized pain for a Glasgow Coma Scale of 9. Per EMS report, she had been in her usual state of health 10 hours previously after driving herself home from visiting her newborn in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). She was found at home by her spouse speaking unintelligibly and appeared lethargic.
Initial EMS scene assessment noted dilated pupils bilaterally, confused speech, and somnolence with a complaint of scotomas. History obtained from family revealed a remote history of seizures currently not requiring an antiepileptic. She had also delivered four days prior at 34 weeks and four days gestation due to preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM). Family history was noncontributory. Remarkable findings on ED exam include clammy, pale skin, 6-millimeter bilateral reactive pupils, and appropriate reflexes, but she was uncooperative with full neurological exam. Electrocardiogram displayed sinus bradycardia in a nonischemic pattern.
Laboratory studies revealed aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 86 units per liter (U/L) (reference range: 8–36 U/L); alanine transaminase (ALT) 97 U/L (4–36 U/L); alkaline phosphatase 209 U/L (20–130 U/L); albumin 2.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (34–54 g/dL); total protein 5.4 g/dL (6.0–8.3 g/dL); blood urea nitrogen 4.0 milligrams (mg)/dL (6–20 mg/dL); and bilirubin 0.30 mg/dL (0.1–1.2 mg/dL). Serum lactic acid was 2.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.5–2.2 mmol/L); international normalized ratio (INR) was 2.2; haptoglobin 98 mg/dL (30–200 mg/dL); and ammonia level was 158 micromoles (μmol)/L (11–32 μmol/L). A urine drug screen was negative. Serum samples contained undetectable ethanol, salicylate, and acetaminophen levels. Imaging ordered included a non-contrast computed topography (CT) head and a contrast CT of the abdomen and pelvis that displayed no acute intracranial or intra-abdominal processes. Abdominal ultrasound revealed nonspecific fatty changes in the liver. Due to rapidly declining mentation with inability to protect her airway she was intubated and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) on empiric antibiotics.
In the ICU, lactulose therapy was started for hepatic encephalopathy secondary to suspected fatty liver of pregnancy. She was continued on broad spectrum antibiotics and antivirals for encephalitis coverage until completion of an unremarkable brain magnetic resonance imaging, extubation, and mental status improvement on ICU day two. Serum ammonia continued to rise to 400 μmol/L despite lactulose therapy and steadily improving neurological status over the following days. Gastroenterology consultation suggested the possibility of a UCD and recommended serum and urine amino acid testing.
On admission day seven, urine amino acid results showed elevated citrulline at 17,677 μmol/g creatine (μmol/g cr) (Ref: 1.0–27.4 umol/g cr). On hospital day eight, genetic testing revealed two separate mutations of the ASS1 gene encoding argininosuccinate synthetase, confirming the diagnosis of CTLN1. Management was switched from lactulose therapy to sodium phenylbutyrate and arginine. Despite downtrending ammonia levels, liver function tests (LFT) continued to climb to a peak of ALT 1,868 U/L and AST of 1745 U/L on day nine, prompting transfer to a transplant center. At the transplant center, the patient remained asymptomatic and LFTs downtrended until she was eventually discharged on sodium phenylacetate-sodium benzoate, a strict low-protein diet, and recommendation to avoid future pregnancy.