The 81-year-old Caucasian male with no significant past medical history presented to our emergency department with epigastric pain for a few months. Physical examination and electrocardiogram were unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left ventricle (LV) dimensions and function (estimated ejection fraction 60–65%), a mildly dilated right ventricle (RV) with low-normal systolic function, and mild mitral regurgitation. There was a large, multi-lobular well-circumscribed mass arising from the right atrium (RA) wall laterally, just below the tricuspid annulus, measuring 23 mm × 45 mm . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), showed normal LV and RV function and three round masses in the RA, attached to its wall, measuring 11 mm × 9 mm, 33 mm × 29 mm, and 14 mm × 9 mm, respectively . There was also a round, highly mobile mass on a narrow stalk in the RV outflow tract (RVOT) below the pulmonary valve, attached to the posterior RVOT wall, measuring 23 mm × 17 mm . Additionally, there was a large, intrapericardial mass anterior to the pulmonary artery and the aorta, which appeared to be connected to the mass inside the RVOT. These masses were all heterogeneous on T1- and T2-weighted MRI imaging compared to the myocardium, with enhancement on perfusion scan. Collectively, these findings were highly suggestive of malignancy, although no apparent primary malignancy was identified on history or physical examination. After discussion, the Heart team decided to perform percutaneous endomyocardial biopsy which was inconclusive, hence the patient underwent an open heart biopsy that revealed a diffuse proliferation of large B-lymphoid cells expressing CD20, BCL6, BCL2, MYC and with a high Ki67 proliferation rate by immunohistochemistry , and showing rearrangement of MYC, not BCL2 or BCL6 by FISH, consistent with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with MYC rearrangement. A whole body 18F fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography–computed tomography (FDG PET–CT) scan showed an intensely FDG-avid globular right atrial tumour with additional metabolic components in RV and RVOT. In addition, a nodule in the left upper lobe of the lung and a liver lesion on PET were suspicious of metastases (, left). While the patient was waiting for the result of the biopsy, he started to complain of dyspnoea and a CT angiography showed a segmental pulmonary embolus for which he was started on dalteparin. Following tumour board review, the patient was started on R-CHOP plus prophylactic intrathecal chemotherapy. He tolerated the chemotherapy very well. Repeated PET–CT scans (, right) 6 months post-therapy showed complete remission with no evidence of FDG-avid lymphoma.