An asymptomatic 71-year-old woman was diagnosed with a left supratentorial and infratentorial dermoid cyst on screening magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and admitted to our hospital. She had a past history of atrial fibrillation, tympanoplasty for tympanitis, and total ovariohysterectomy. Removal of the supratentorial and infratentorial cyst was performed via a left transzygomatic approach. The tumor was almost totally resected with no sequelae; the supratentorial and infratentorial compartments remained. Because the patient had a preoperative history of atrial fibrillation, postoperative warfarin therapy was administered to prevent embolism. The patient was followed-up by the outpatient service and developed no recurrence or any abnormal imaging signals in the residual cavity . Although the patient had no history of head injury, a screening computed tomography (CT) scan performed 3.5 years postoperatively as part of annual follow-up revealed a density change within the supratentorial and infratentorial regions. At that point, we decided to perform periodic follow-ups once monthly because the patient was asymptomatic, and the hematoma did not appear to be compressing the brain stem. Four months after the start of follow-up, the patient was transferred to the emergency department because of cerebellar ataxia, vomiting, and deterioration of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale score: E3V4M6) with no paresis. A CT scan revealed enlargement of the hematoma in the posterior fossa and compression of the brain stem . Two hematomas, one in the supratentorial region and one in the infratentorial region, were greatly compressing the brain, and seemed to be separate lesions. It was difficult to judge on CT whether there was communication between the two hematoma cavities. Because the patient's symptoms were considered to have resulted from compression of the brain stem and cerebellum, we urgently performed hematoma removal under general anesthesia via suboccipital craniotomy with a 6-cm linear incision behind the mastoid process along the hairline for the posterior fossa CSDH. Burr-hole irrigation was performed via a linear incision for the supratentorial CSDH. The tension in the posterior fossa was high, and the outer membrane was seen under the dura mater . We resected the outer membrane of the CSDH as completely as possible and copiously irrigated the hematoma cavity. The fluid in both the supratentorial and infratentorial portions was the same reddish brown. After adequate irrigation of both fields, we confirmed communication between the supratentorial and infratentorial spaces. Closed-system subdural drainage catheters were inserted in both cavities until the day after the operation. Postoperative CT scans of the head revealed disappearance of the CSDH in both the supratentorial and infratentorial spaces [Figure and ]. Signal change was also confirmed on postoperative MRI . The patient's symptoms gradually subsided, and she was discharged to her home with no neurological deficits on postoperative day 12. Apixaban was prescribed as anticoagulation therapy upon discharge. No recurrence was detected on CT scan 1 month postoperatively. At 1 year, CSDH had not recurred.