A 75-year-old man was admitted to our hospital emergently with a presumptive diagnosis of suppurative endophthalmitis after bilateral cataract surgery in another hospital. The perioperative history of the cataract surgery was reviewed. This patient had bilateral blurred vision for 2 years. No anterior inflammation was reported preoperatively. The fundus “could not be observed by ophthalmoscopy.” Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed epimacular membrane and local serous neuroepithelial detachment in the left eye ; ultrasound revealed bilateral vitreous opacity. After uneventful phacoemulsification and IOL implantation in both eyes, visual acuity (VA) values were 0.2 (right) and 0.3 (left). No keratic precipitates (KP) or aqueous flare was noted, but mild opacity in vitreous was observed. Postoperative antibiotics and steroid drops were prescribed for 1 month. Five weeks after the first surgery (the right eye), he suffered sharp vision loss, hand motion (HM), in the right eye with severe panuveitis and was diagnosed with endophthalmitis. After a week of intravenous levofloxacin and cefazolin plus ofloxacin and steroid drops, the VA recovered to 0.15 with little anterior chamber reaction. Two months later, the left eye underwent a similar pattern. Again, the condition was diagnosed and treated in a similar manner. Remission was obtained 1 week later. After recurrent inflammatory episodes in both eyes over a 6-month period, he presented at our emergency department. The VA was HM in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) values were 6 mmHg in the right eye and 4 mmHg in the left eye. Both eyes exhibited deep ocular redness, corneal edema, a few cells and non-granulomatous KP, 2 mm hypopyon, aqueous flare (++), and iris neovascularization . The fundus was not visible due to vitreous inflammation. Ultrasound examination revealed bilateral vitreous opacity. According to his history, intravenous ceftazidime and vancomycin plus ofloxacin and steroid drops were administered. However, after 2 days, inflammation remained severe and unchanged.
Based on the uncontrolled inflammatory reaction, invasive treatments, including intracameral or intravitreal injections, and even vitrectomy, were considered. We then learned from the patient’s daughter that he suffered from recurrent moderately painful oral, perineal, and gastrointestinal ulcers for many years, which were relieved by long-term corticosteroid treatment. The daughter and the patient denied ocular complaints in the years prior to his surgery. Due to the possibility of autoimmune uveitis, which might be induced by ocular surgery, invasive operations such as anterior chamber paracentesis or vitreous tap were delayed to avoid further reactive inflammation and possible iatrogenic infection. A panel of immunology tests and an etiological examination were conducted and revealed no significant abnormality. However, based on the typical oral and perineal signs and the ocular attack, a diagnosis of Behcet’s disease was made. Oral prednisone, thalidomide and cyclophosphamide were attempted before any invasive treatment. After 5 days, the inflammation was markedly reduced . The inflammation was invisible at his last visit 2 weeks later, after which he returned to his hometown and did not return for further evaluation.