A 44-year-old male presented to the department of urology with a 4 mo history of mild flank pain.
The patient had received abdominal magnetic resonance imaging, which revealed a focal lesion with infiltrative margin involving the left renal parenchyma, renal pelvis, and renal vein and extending to the inferior vena cava (IVC) . According to his history of stage IVB hepatic cell carcinoma (HCC), metastasis from previous HCC could not be excluded. Therefore, the origin of the tumor may come from clear cell type of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) or metastasize from previous HCC. There were two reasons which made us consider the tumor may be derived from clear cell type of RCC. First, HCC and RCC share similar MRI image features. Both of them have intracellular lipid that results in decreased signal on out-of-phase image as compared with in-phase images through the MRI. Second, the kidney is uncommon as a site for distant metastases of HCC. However, there was no pathology report before surgery. Because of the abundant blood flow to the kidneys, preoperative biopsy may be complicated by massive bleeding. After discussing the benefits and complications with the patient, the patient declined preoperative biopsy and opted for direct surgery. Preoperative electrocardiography and chest radiography revealed no obvious dysfunction or lesion. Spirometry demonstrated early obstructive ventilatory defects with FEV1/FVC of 76% and FEV1 of 3.63 L (FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity). The functional capacity is quantified in five metabolic equivalents of task. A sudden decrease in end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) was found during surgery.
The patient had hypertension, which was poorly controlled due to irregular medication use. He had a history of hepatectomy and lung resection under general anesthesia due to HCC with lung metastasis. The TNM stage of the patient's HCC was T1N0M1, stage IVB, and the Child-Pugh classification was A. The prothrombin time (PT) was 10.0 s with an INR of 0.98, and the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was 26.8 s. Both PT and aPTT were within the normal limits.
There were no allergy history and no smoking or drinking history. No relevant family medical history was present.
The airway was examined by a certified anesthesiologist and evaluated as Mallampati class II, thyromental distance < 6 cm, inter-incisor gap of 5 cm, and full neck extension. Clear and equal bilateral breath sounds was confirmed by direct auscultation with a stethoscope.
Preoperative blood and biochemical tests showed no abnormal data. During the surgery, however, an increasing gradient of ETCO2 to arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) was found by intraoperative arterial gas analysis. The results were as follows: PaCO2, 47.5 mmHg; arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2), 133 mmHg; and arterial oxygen saturation, 100%. In addition, his preoperative laboratory test values were within normal range.
A sudden decrease in ETCO2 from 33 mmHg to 18 mmHg was found. In addition to the decrease in ETCO2, oscillation of the plateau phase (phase III) of the capnography was also observed . After ETCO2 decrease, the SpO2 suddenly decreased from 98% to 92%. There was a tumor thrombus found at the IVC in the middle-esophageal bicaval view of transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) .