A 70-year-old female had been symptomatic with a persistent non-productive cough and recurrent chest infections for 10 years. At presentation to clinic a CT thorax showed right middle lobe bronchiectasis. She was a life-long non-smoker with no childhood history of respiratory disease and normal baseline investigations for immune deficiency. Clinical stability was achieved with long term Azithromycin and regular airway clearance. Staphyloccocus aureus (S.aureus) was cultured intermittently from sputum samples with repeatedly negative mycobacterial cultures. A repeat CT 6 years after her initial scan demonstrated progression of disease with bi-apical scarring, right middle lobe atelectasis, right upper lobe cylindrical bronchiectasis and reticulo-nodular densities in both lower lobes. Nebulised Tobramycin was trialled to suppress S.aureus and stabilise radiological appearances but stopped after 15 months due to worsening cough.
M. abscessus was first isolated from her sputum in November 2013; sub-speciated into M.a. abscessus. Commencement of therapy was under consideration when, 3 months from first isolation of M.abscessus, paraesthesia developed in her hands and feet with associated small joint arthropathy. A subtle purpuric rash was evident on the lower limbs. Nerve conduction studies confirmed an axonal loss sensorimotor neuropathy. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Ratio was elevated at 49 mm/hr, Perinuclear Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (P-ANCA) titre was highly positive at 80 AI and Myeloperoxidase- ANCA (MPO-ANCA) was > 8 AI with Proteinase-3–ANCA (PR3-ANCA) < 0.2 AI. Renal function and urine microscopy were normal. A diagnosis of microscopic polyangiitis was made. Treatment with Cyclophosphamide and high dose Prednisolone was commenced with full resolution of her paraesthesia.
Within 4 months of first isolation, all sputum samples (n = 4) were culture positive and 66% of those samples were smear positive for M. abscessus. C-Reactive Protein was elevated at 86.2 mg/l. A repeat CT thorax showed extensive bronchiectasis with underlying collapse in the right upper and lower lobes. There was extensive tree-in-bud change within the right lower lobe, scattered pulmonary nodules and small areas of ground glass shadowing in both lungs. Deteriorating radiological appearances and commencement of active immunosuppression prompted urgent initiation of M. abscessus treatment.
Induction phase treatment comprised intravenous (IV) Cefoxitin and Amikacin with oral Clarithromycin and Minocycline and was tolerated for 2 weeks. Long-term nebulised Amikacin was commenced, along with oral Moxifloxacin, Minocycline and Clarithromycin.
A month later she attended the Emergency Department (ED) with rupture of her right Achilles tendon secondary to Moxifloxacin. This was stopped immediately and replaced with Linezolid. Despite dose reduction this was discontinued due to intolerable nausea, diarrhoea and angular stomatitis. She remained on oral Minocycline, Clarithromycin and nebulised Amikacin. Cyclophosphamide was changed to Azathioprine as long-term immunosuppression, but this was poorly tolerated due to nausea. Significant alopecia then developed; attributed to Minocycline, which was also discontinued. Nebulised Meropenem was therefore added to maintain triple antibiotic therapy.
On review 17 months after initiation of treatment her pulmonary disease appeared more stable. A regime of nebulised Meropenem, nebulised Amikacin and oral Clarithromycin was tolerated. Smear and culture negativity was maintained for a further 12 months on this regime. P-ANCA and MPO-ANCA titres remained within normal limits during this period.
Twenty months after starting treatment, cultures again became positive for M.abscessus. A month after culture positivity returned, she presented to the ED with visual loss secondary to a right branch retinal vein occlusion. MPO-ANCA had again become highly positive at > 8 AI and P-ANCA titre was 160 AI. Due to active vasculitis with impending visual loss from associated hypercoagulability and thromboembolism higher dose immunosuppression was required. She commenced Rituximab and Methylprednisolone infusions weekly for 4 weeks, followed by 6 monthly Rituximab. Clinical response was achieved with CD19 count reducing from 46% to 0%. Within the following 12 months sputum samples became smear positive again. High resolution CT chest demonstrated extensive airspace opacification, ill-defined nodularity and tree in bud change. Further assessment of immunological function was carried out, including vaccination response, respiratory oxidative burst, Mannan Binding Lectin, IgG subsets, complement levels, alternative and innate signalling pathways. Specific testing of interferon pathways demonstrated a very low interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) level, with low production of Interleukin-17 (IL-17) but no autoantibodies to IFN-γ.
No other organisms, including S.aureus have been detected by standard sputum culture since 2012. Four years from first isolation she remained M.abscessus smear and culture positive. Clarithromycin resistance was now detectable necessitating its cessation. A further 3 weeks of IV Amikacin, Cefoxitin and Tigecycline was commenced. Long-term treatment continued with nebulised Meropenem and Amikacin.
A third oral agent would optimise long-term therapy but intolerances, resistance and risk of visual loss prevent the use of almost all suitable oral agents. Clofazimine was not commenced due to risk of further visual loss. A trial of oral Co-trimoxazole resulted in intolerable nausea and had to be stopped. As no third oral agent could be used, pulsed IV antibiotics have been introduced. The optimal duration between IV courses is unknown and is currently based on recurrence of smear positivity or deteriorating symptoms. The first repeat IV antibiotic course maintained smear negativity for 6 months. Recurrence of smear positivity and associated clinical deterioration have required further IV courses .