A 2-month-old girl was transferred to our hospital with a history of bronchiolitis followed by sustained stridor. The infant had developed respiratory distress 20 days after birth and had been hospitalized for treatment on three occasions. Although laryngoscopy, a cardiac echogram, and brain magnetic resonance imaging were performed to evaluate her dyspnea and stridor, there was no obvious finding in any of these examinations.
The infant was born after 40 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 3.48 kg. She was born with a cutaneous hemangioma involving the right cheek, perioral, and mandibular areas. However, there was no history of respiratory distress or stridor at the time of birth. She had fed well, without difficulties.
On physical examination, a coarse respiratory sound with inspiratory stridor and subcostal retractions were noted at a respiratory rate of 37/minute. The oxygen saturation on room air by pulse oximetry was 100%. There was no abnormal finding on the plain chest radiograph.
On admission, bronchoscopy was performed under general anesthesia (IV ketamine, 2 mg/kg of body weight) by an experienced pediatric pulmonologist using a pediatric flexible bronchoscope with an outer diameter of 2.8 mm (Olympus BF 3C20). There was marked resistance as the bronchoscope entered the subglottic area. Bronchoscopy revealed a swollen vocal cord and narrowed subglottic space with superficial erosions, but no definite causative lesion.
Three days later, 3D-CT/bronchoscopy (SOMATOM Sensation 64; Siemens Medical Solutions, Germany) was performed with the patient under sedation (oral chloral hydrate, 0.5 mL/kg). We administered 2 mL/kg of a contrast agent (sodium meglumine ioxithalamate, Telebrix®; Guerbet, Aulnay-sous-Bois, France) intravenously at a rate of 0.5 - 1 mL/second via a mechanical injector (Injektron CT2; Medtron, Saarbrücken, Germany). The protocol included a scout film of the chest, a single-phase enhanced axial scan of the chest, and 3D volume-rendered (VR) imaging of the airways. Other multidetector (MD) CT parameters included a slice thickness of 3 mm, collimation of 2 mm, pitch of 1.2, gantry rotation time of 0.5 s, fixed tube voltage of 80 kVp, and automatic tube current modulation (CARE Dose 4D; Siemens) with a reference tube level of 100 mAs. The effective radiation dose was 0.65 mSv. A high-resolution algorithm was used to reconstruct external 3D volume rendering of the airways. About 20 horizontally rotated images were captured and sent to our PACS system to be reviewed.
The axial CT image revealed well-enhancing wall thickening of the subglottic airway (lateral and posterior walls). The coronal reconstituted image was used to evaluate the length of the hemangioma. There was resultant airway narrowing. The 3D VR image suggested segmental non-visualization of the subglottic airway, with near-complete or complete obstruction of the trachea .
The patient was started on oral prednisolone 10 mg/day, and her irritability, respiratory symptoms, and auscultation were monitored. She had an excellent response to prednisolone. On the third day of treatment, she was discharged on a reduced dose of prednisolone, 7.5 mg/day.
On day 17, the prednisolone was tapered to 5.0 mg/day, but shortly after the prednisolone was decreased, she developed episodes of progressive respiratory distress, which necessitated increasing the dose to 10 mg/day. On day 35, follow-up 3D-CT/bronchoscopy was performed to evaluate frequent chest wall retractions and irritability with poor weight gain. The axial and coronal images showed mild improvement of the thickness, length, and degree of enhancement of hemangioma of the subglottic airway. The 3D VR image showed a shorter length of non-visualized trachea, suggesting slight regression of the hemangioma. Subsequent bronchoscopy revealed mild improvement of the narrowing in the subglottic area and less resistance while entering the area .
The improved respiratory symptoms combined with CT-based evidence of an involuting subglottic hemangioma confirmed the effectiveness of clinical regimen. After treating our patient for 3 months with prednisolone, nebulized budesonide, and oral propranolol, the infant showed marked regression of her respiratory distress.