A 74-year-old woman presented to our hospital complaining of right upper abdominal pain. Although she had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia, they were well controlled with medications. Enhanced computed tomography revealed multiple nodules with contrast enhancement in both lobes of her liver, including a nodule up to 10 cm in the right lobe (shown in a, b). Hepatitis viral tests including hepatitis B virus antigen and hepatitis C antibody showed negative, and the patient had no history of alcohol consumption. Her liver reserve function was preserved as Child-Pugh score 5, grade A, and her serum alpha-fetoprotein and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin levels were elevated to 12,200 ng/mL and 9,463 AU/L, respectively. We diagnosed unresectable HCC and administered Atez+Bev as an outpatient.
Five days after 3 courses of Atez+Bev treatment, she showed anorexia and general fatigue. She was admitted to our hospital because her symptoms continued. She presented with fever and dysarthria, a body temperature of 38.1°C, disturbed consciousness Glasgow Coma Scale 14 (GCS, E4V4M6) but no neck stiffness. Her blood pressure elevated slightly to 154/112 mm Hg. Blood examinations were unremarkable, including blood count, electrolytes, ammonium level, and organ function, except for slight inflammatory change (C-reactive protein, 0.89 mg/dL). A urine test showed no sign of urinary tract infection. A computed tomography scan revealed the HCC had shrunk to 9 cm, but the reason for fever was not evident, excluding pneumonitis, cholangitis, and enterocolitis (shown in a, b). A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination performed to evaluate disturbance of consciousness the day after admission showed slightly increased cell count (6/mm3) and protein level (49 mg/dL) and normal glucose level (72 mg/dL). CSF cytology was negative for malignancy. Contrast-enhanced fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging revealed contrast enhancement along the cerebral sulcus (shown in a). Based on her clinical presentation, CSF data, and MRI findings, she was diagnosed with aseptic meningitis probably caused by atezolizumab.
Prednisolone (80 mg, 1.2 mg/kg) was started and on the following day her consciousness level and fever improved (GCS E4V5M6). Prednisolone dose was tapered from 80 to 40 mg by 20 mg reductions interspaced by 5 days. The contrast effect along the cerebral sulcus had disappeared from fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging by 8 days after commencing prednisolone treatment (shown in b). The patient was discharged on day 14 of hospitalization, and steroid dose was tapered weekly. Although the tumor seemed to respond to Atez+Bev treatment, treatment was discontinued due to the adverse event. When the prednisolone dose was less than 10 mg, the patient was treated with lenvatinib plus transcatheter arterial chemoembolization. The steroid was tapered off by 13 weeks. She has been then treated with molecular targeted agents sequentially more than 15 months as an outpatient. Recurrence of neurological involvement and neurological symptoms was not observed 12 months after completing steroid treatment.