A 43-year-old Caucasian Italian man was admitted to our hospital presenting with fever, mucoid diarrhea and abdominal cramps for the past 20 days. Associated symptoms included malaise and a 5 kg weight loss during this time. During the previous week he had taken paromomycin along with bacitracin and neomycin, with no clinical improvement.
He had been diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease 15 years previously, which was treated with chemotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplant. Three years ago he had experienced a relapse, which was treated with chemotherapy alone. Since then a residual panhypoglobulinemia had been recorded in our patient. He reported extensive travel to many countries around the world, but not during the last year. He was taking no medications and had no known drug allergies.
On admission he was unwell with fever (38.5°C), hypotension (90/60 mmHg) and signs of dehydration. His lungs were clear and cardiac evaluation was normal. He had abdominal tenderness but there was no organomegaly or masses on palpation. Chest radiograph, abdomen ultrasound and electrocardiogram results showed no abnormalities.
Blood cultures and stool cultures for Salmonella spp., Shigella spp, Campylobacter spp. and Yersinia spp. were sent to our laboratory. Fecal examinations revealed presence of fecal occult blood (+++) and many leukocytes. Investigation for parasites and immunofluorescence for Giardia were negative. Biochemical analysis showed a normal white blood cell count (4.3 × 103 cells/mm3) but revealed very low levels of immunoglobulins: IgG 91 mg/dL (range 800 to 1500 mg/dL), IgA 4 mg/dL (range 90 to 450 mg/dL) and IgM 1 mg/dL (range 60 to 350 mg/dL). Transaminases, renal function and coagulation studies were normal. Inflammatory markers, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein, were elevated. Blood culture results were negative and supportive therapy with intravenous fluids was started.
On the sixth day of admission, Gram-negative bacilli were isolated from stool cultures and the bioMérieux VITEK® 2 system was used to identify the S. enterica ssp. arizonae. Phenotyping of this Salmonella isolate was also performed by the API 20E system (bioMèrieux), confirming the subspecies.
The bacterium was susceptible to all the tested antibiotics . Therefore antimicrobial therapy with oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg every 12 hours) was started, after which there was a rapid improvement in our patient's clinical condition, with complete defervescence and cessation of the diarrhea.
Due to the severe humoral immunodeficiency in our patient, ciprofloxacin was continued for a total of 28 days. Our rationale was the evidence in the literature that suggests possible later relapse if short antibiotic treatment courses are used . He continued to improve and fecal cultures taken one week and two weeks after the discontinuation of antibiotic therapy were negative.