A 23-year-old man presented to the hematology department, having suffered from a headache and low-grade fever for 2 d.
The patient was admitted to a local hospital due to the above symptoms in July 2017. He was found to have a bodily temperature fluctuating around 36.8 °C. Hematological analysis showed a high PLT count of 1503 × 109/L. Subsequently, the patient visited our hematology department for further investigation.
The patient underwent right axillary lipoma resection in 2012 and had no history of thrombosis or bleeding and no significant weight loss. He also had no risk factors for coronary artery disease.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors or thrombocytosis.
Upon examination, the patient looked well, with no signs of jaundice or cyanosis. His blood pressure, temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation were 129/70 mmHg, 37.3 °C, 85 beats per minute, 20 breaths per minute, and 100% in ambient air, respectively. No bleeding spots or ecchymosis was observed, and the peripheral superficial lymph nodes were not enlarged. Additionally, no pressure pain was observed in the sternum. The liver was not palpable and the spleen was palpable 2 cm below the ribs, with medium quality and no pressure pain. There was no edema in either lower limb.
Initial investigations showed a hemoglobin level, white blood cell count, PLT count, and neutrophil count of 140 g/L, 18.38 × 10/uL, 2064 × 10/µL, and 13.82 × 10/µL, respectively. A normal blood sedimentation rate of 4 mm/h and normal C-reactive protein concentration of 1.22 mg/L were observed. Additionally, the patient tested negative for serum TB antibodies, T-lymphocyte subsets, immunoglobulins, and HIV. The TB-infected T-cell spot assay A result was 97 SFCs/2.5*PBMC, and the TB-infected T-cell spot assay B result was 53 SFCs/2.5*PBMC. The prothrombin time was 14.1 s.
Bone marrow imaging: (1) Good sampling, smear, and staining, granular (++) oil (−); (2) Bone marrow proliferation was evidently active. Granulocytes accounted for 72%, while red lineage accounted for 13.5%. Granulocytes were red with a lineage ratio of 5.3:1; and (3) Increased granulocyte ratio, eosinophils were clearly observed, decreased red lineage ratio, and no obvious abnormalities in morphology were observed. Approximately 47 megakaryocytes were observed on the glass slide, and PLTs were mostly distributed in piles and patches . Blood examination revealed an increased white blood cell count, increased granulocyte ratio, no significant abnormalities in granulocyte and mature red blood cell morphology, and no nucleated red blood cells in a count of 100 white blood cells. PLTs were distributed in piles and observed more frequently. Bone marrow biopsy pathological diagnosis of the right posterior superior iliac spine bone marrow tissue showed a small amount of bone marrow tissue, a hematopoietic area of about 70%, a large size, multifoliation, and the presence of other various lineages of cells, which was consistent with megakaryocytosis . Immunohistochemical staining: CD42b (+++), CD71 (+), MPO (+), CD34 (–), CD3 (±), and CD20 (±). Characteristic staining: Reticular fibers (+) and Masson (–). Bone marrow tested negative for the BCR-ABL fusion, JAK2 V617F, JAK2 (exon 12), MPL, and CALR genes. The results of MPN/AML/MDS-leukemia mutation gene screening (34 genes: ASXL1, BCOR, BCORL1, CALR, CBL, CSF3R, DNMT3A, ETV6 EZH2, IDH1, IDH2, JAK2, KRAS, MPL, NRAS, PIGA, RUNX1, SETBP1, SF3B1, SH2B3, SRSF2, TET2, TP53, U2AF1, ZRSR2, CEBPA, and FLT3) were negative. Clinical bioinformatics analysis (GeneCan®, Beijing Jinyou Qikang Technology Co. Ltd.) initially identified 100 molecules that were highly correlated with a possible disease .
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest suggested a submural soft tissue density shadow in the left lower chest wall, a flocculent hyper density shadow in the upper lobe of both lungs, a small nodular shadow in the upper lobe of the right lung, and multiple cord shadows in the left lung. Abdominal ultrasonography showed that the spleen was 130 mm × 68 mm, and the width of the splenic vein was 8.9 mm. The liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and both kidneys showed no significant abnormalities. Vascular ultrasonography of the lower extremity suggested cloudy echogenicity in the lumen of the bilateral intermuscular veins of the lower leg, and no significant abnormalities were observed in the bilateral femoral and bilateral popliteal veins.