An otherwise healthy 30-year-old female elementary school teacher and rice farmer from Namun village (19.6552435·° N, 103.5781784·° E), Kham District, Xiengkhuang Province, northeast Laos, presented to Mahosot Hospital in October 2011 with tumefaction, pain and multiple draining sinuses on her left foot. The lesion had started 5 years previously, initially with an uncomfortable feeling and itching on the left plantar surface that over a few days became indurated and developed a spontaneously draining sinus. She remembered no specific injury to her foot. Over the next five years, the lesion slowly and painlessly progressed, with swelling and multiple draining sinuses. Ten days before admission she developed acute swelling of the foot with severe pain associated with multiple sinuses and discharge from the foot that prevented her from walking. Foot X-ray done at a local hospital showed signs of osteolysis of the left metatarsal bones. With a diagnosis of chronic osteomyelitis of the left foot she was treated with oral cloxacillin for a few days, but when branching Gram positive rods were demonstrated on a Gram stain of an aspirate from the lesion at the provincial hospital she was transferred to Mahosot Hospital. On examination, she was orientated, afebrile with normal vital signs, and physical examination was unremarkable except for a massive tumour-like lesion of the left foot with multiple sinuses on the dorsal and plantar surfaces. The overlying skin was moderately erythematous and was tender and painful on palpation with evidence of a sero-sanguinous discharge containing no obvious grains . There was no regional lymphadenopathy or lymphangitis present. Admission laboratory investigation (normal ranges in parentheses) revealed a total white blood cell count of 6.1 × 109/L (6.0-8.0 × 109/L), 68% neutrophils (45-70%), haematocrit 28% (37-47%), haemoglobin 75 g/L (120–160 g/L), mean corpuscular volume 59 fL (80-95fL), platelets 449 × 109/L (150-300 × 109/L), creatinine 72 μmol/L (53-120 μmol/L), urea 4.3 mmol/L (5.3-16 mmol/L), aspartate transaminase 50 U/L (0–37 U/L), alanine transaminase 34 U/L (0–45 U/L) and blood glucose 4.2 mmol/L (4.1- 6.4 mmol/L). A radiograph of the left foot confirmed partial osteolysis of the metatarsal bones . Four 3 mm diameter tissue biopsies were taken from her left foot under local anaesthesia. Smears from these samples underwent microscopy after Gram stain, Ziehl-Neelsen stain and the 20% potassium hydroxide technique. The samples were cultured aerobically on blood, chocolate, MacConkey, Sabouraud and Ashdown’s agars and were submitted for mycobacterial culture and histopathology. The Gram stain revealed scanty branching filamentous Gram positive bacteria , which grew after 5 days’ incubation on chocolate and blood agar. She was presumptively diagnosed as suffering from actinomycetoma and started on amikacin (15 mg/kg/day) combined with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (7/35 mg/kg/day), both in two daily doses. One biopsy sample, which had been immediately frozen at −80°C, and the organism were both identified by 16S rRNA amplification and sequencing as Actinomadura madurae by the Health Protection Agency (HPA), UK . Broth dilution MICs for the organism, performed by the HPA, gave the following results (mg/l): amikacin ≤ 0.25 (S), gentamicin 2 (S), tobramycin ≤ 0.25 (S), amoxicillin/clavulanate 4 (S), cefotaxime 4, ceftriaxone 0.25 (S), imipenem ≤ 0.125 (S), meropenem 0.5 (S), co-trimoxazole 0.032 (S), clarithromycin 4 (I), ciprofloxacin ≤ 0.25 (S), moxifloxacin ≤ 0.25 (S) and doxycycline ≤ 0.25 (S). After 21 days of intravenous amikacin and oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, the patient’s left foot showed some evidence of healing with decreasing pain, swelling and discharge without any side effects from treatment. She was transferred for further treatment at a district hospital close to her home. On the basis of published recommendations, amikacin was given for sequential cycles of 3 weeks with 2 week breaks, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was continued throughout: creatinine and hearing were monitored weekly without abnormalities [,]. After 5 cycles of treatment there had been a marked reduction in swelling , considerable symptomatic improvement, and the patient was able to walk and to return to teaching. The patient continued on oral co-trimoxazole alone until a total of 12 months of treatment had been completed, at which stage she had no pain at rest and there were no sinuses or discharge from the foot, although there was still considerable residual bony abnormality evident radiologically .
Our patient represents a fairly typical, albeit severe, case of actinomycetoma caused by A. madurae, with involvement of the underlying bone. Bone involvement is common in advanced stages of the disease (an incidence of 73% was reported in one series), leading to deformity and disability of the affected area .
Even a classic clinical presentation and typical colours of grains in mycetoma does not reliably distinguish actinomycetoma from implantation mycosis, so laboratory investigations, including microscopy, histology and extended cultures are indicated. Other investigations including fine needle aspiration cytology, imaging (X-ray, magnetic resonance and ultrasound), sero-diagnosis (counter-immunoelectrophoresis and ELISA) and molecular detection and identification may also be useful [,]. Although the evidence base is poor, without clinical trials, combined treatment with multiple antibiotics is usually recommended in order to prevent drug resistance and eradicate any residual infection. Reported cure rates vary widely ranging from 60% to 90%. Sulphonamides and sulphonamide combinations are recommended as the first line treatment. Aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, rifampicin, ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin-clavulanate have also been used successfully. The combination of amikacin and co-trimoxazole, the former given in cycles, has produced excellent clinical results, especially in those at risk of pulmonary spread or vertebral involvement . Five to ten cycles may be needed to achieve cure. Furthermore, surgery may be considered for small lesions, infections that fail to respond to antibiotics and to help medical treatment by reduction of the infective load or deal with life-threatening lesions [,,,].
This is the first case of mycetoma reported from Laos. Cases have been reported infrequently from Southeast Asia, the majority of which has a prolonged rainy season unlike the arid regions usually associated with mycetoma. Mycetoma has, however, been reported from Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, Indonesia, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam. Table shows cases identified by searching PubMed using the terms ‘Mycetoma’ AND ‘Southeast Asia’ or ‘Mycetoma’ AND the names of individual countries (‘Lao’, ‘Thai’, ‘Cambodia’, ‘Burma’, ‘Myanmar’, ‘Malaysia’, ‘Singapore’, ‘Indo’, ‘Philip’, ‘Timor’, ‘Brunei’, ‘Vietnam’). The true incidence in the region, however, is unknown.