A 28-year-old gentleman with end-stage non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy was listed for HTx as Status 3 per United Network for Organ Sharing criteria and supported with continuous dobutamine infusion as a bridge to HTx. Pertinent history includes recurrent pulmonary embolism. He presented to the hospital with New York Heart Association Class III dyspnoea. An echocardiogram showed severe left ventricular (LV) dilation (end-diastolic diameter 7 cm), severe biventricular systolic dysfunction, and moderate mitral regurgitation. Systemic arterial blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, rhythm was sinus tachycardia (128 beat/min), and invasive haemodynamics showed a cardiac index of 1.8 L/min/m2, right atrial pressure of 13 mmHg, pulmonary artery mean pressure 33 mmHg, and wedge pressure 27 mmHg. The medical review board recommended IABP support as a bridge to HTx. A left axillary artery 50 mL IABP (patient height 178 cm) was inserted to facilitate physical and nutritional rehabilitation. Insertion was uncomplicated via the standard 8 Fr sheath. The patient was anticoagulated with systemic heparin and was maintained on dobutamine 5 µg/kg/min and ivabradine with improvement in symptoms. After 48 h, there was a sudden device failure due to shaft kink, and it was emergently replaced over an Abbott Hi-Torque Flex-T 0.018″ 200 cm workhorse guidewire under fluoroscopy. On Hospital Day 21, there was a loss of augmentation with abnormal sounds appreciated by the patient. Blood was visualized in the helium tube, indicating balloon rupture. The device was replaced over the wire again with a similar IABP unit without complications. Arterial injury was ruled out via Duplex ultrasound. On Hospital Day 23, the third IABP showed poor waveforms and loss of augmentation and catheter restriction alarms, suggesting recurrent IABP kink.
The differential diagnoses for recurrent IABP shaft kink were the inability to follow arm restrictions, arterial access track with acute angulation, or left subclavian artery branching angle being too acute, leading to recurrent device compression.
All of the devices and sheaths were examined, and the kinking point seemed to occur in the proximal IABP shaft past the exit point from the sheath. All three prior IABP devices were 50 mL in size. As such, it was felt that the axillary artery anatomy in this patient is preclusive of stable IABP function. Alternative support platforms were discussed with the patient, who strongly wished to avoid more invasive systems such as Impella.
The patient was brought to the catheterization laboratory for removal of the non-functioning left axillary IABP and placement of IABP via the right femoral artery. Right femoral arterial access was obtained via the standard, modified Seldinger technique under ultrasound guidance using a micropuncture kit. External iliac and common femoral run-off angiography was performed to define vascular anatomy and confirm ideal arteriotomy. An 8 × 40 mm balloon was inserted via femoral access and positioned in the left subclavian artery in case of a need to tamponade the axillary arteriotomy after removal of the IABP. Axillary artery angiography was performed to rule out vascular injury and showed a non-occlusive thrombus at the arteriotomy site . Over a similar 0.018 mm guidewire, the sheath and IABP were removed en bloc, and a Perclose device was utilized to obtain haemostasis of the left subclavian artery. A 50 mL IABP was inserted via the right femoral artery using a sheathless technique, and the access site was covered by 3M Ioban antimicrobial dressing. Follow-up upper-extremity arterial Doppler showed mild flow limitation, and no clinical ischaemic event occurred. The patient continued to respond well haemodynamically; however, due to patient and donor pool characteristics, HTx was delayed.
On Hospital Day 32, our multidisciplinary care team, including physicians, physical therapists, and nurses, started ambulating the patient on femoral IABP support. During each session, the patient was transferred to a tilt table in the supine position and secured using safety straps at the level of the abdomen and knees. The patient was then transitioned to standing by rotating to 30, 45, and 60 degrees in a stepwise fashion, stopping to assess vital signs and IABP function. The patient then used a rolling walker to ambulate, not flexing the hips >30 degrees. The tilt table remained readily available during the ambulation sessions. Walking distance progressively increased to 3500 ft in a single session without any incidents .
After 4 weeks, the patient was offered durable mechanical support as a bridge to HTx, but he elected to continue waiting on IABP support, understanding the risks and benefits. He successfully underwent orthotopic HTx on Hospital Day 125. Intraoperatively, the femoral IABP was removed, and haemostasis was achieved via a Perclose device followed by 5 min of manual pressure. No haematoma was noted, and ipsilateral dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arterial pulses were present.