The patient was a 56-year old female, who sustained several injuries during a fall from 6 m (third floor). Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) on admission was 6–7/15. Injury Severity Scale (ISS) score was 34 [Table ]. She was intubated, stabilized and admitted. The initial diagnostic evaluation was performed according to Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) guidelines and included Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST), chest x-ray and pelvic antero-posterior (AP) x-rays, CT-trauma scan and femoral x-rays. Trauma workup revealed diffuse intracerebral contusion, a small parieto-occipital subarachnoid hemorrhage on the right, bilateral mediastinum and lung contusion, maxillary-orbital and temporal bone fractures, the radiological examination revealed a femoral shaft fracture on the left. No other femoral fractures were detected upon X-ray examination [Fig. ]. CT coronal and axial views of the pelvis (3 mm thickness) and of the proximal femur did not show clear evidence of fracture [Fig. ]. Initial treatment, on the day of admission, consisted of closed reduction and external fixation of the femoral shaft. During surgical treatment of the maxillary fractures on post-injury day 1, it was noted that the left lower extremity was shortened and externally rotated. Plain films of the left hip, femur, and knee demonstrated a displaced femoral neck facture and an ipsilateral patellar fracture [Fig. ]. On post-injury day 3, the left femoral shaft and neck fracture was treated with a cephalomedullary nail on a standard traction table by closed reduction. Anatomic reduction and stable fixation of the femur fractures were ascertained intra-operatively by fluoroscopic control, revealing a tip-apex-distance of 10 mm and a central position of the lag screw. The patella fracture was treated with a standard figure-of-8 tension band wire [Fig. ]. Post-operative radiographic control confirmed the satisfactory reduction and stabilization of the left femoral neck and shaft fracture as well as of the ipsilateral patella fracture [Fig. ]. The post-operative course was uneventful. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation center four weeks after admission and had a physiotherapy exercise protocol with weight bearing on the left lower extremity up to max 10–15 kg (kg) for 6 weeks post-operatively. Full weight-bearing was allowed after 12 weeks. Sport activities were restricted for 6 months. At post-operative weeks 9 and 16, the patient complained of pain in the left groin and shaft, and radiographs demonstrated callous formation in the left femoral shaft. X-rays at post-operative week 28 demonstrated lag-screw cut-out with displacement of the femoral neck fracture [Fig. ]. The patient was offered surgical revision but she refused at this time. One year after injury, the patient agreed to revision surgery and on week 52 (1 year) post-injury she underwent removal of the cephalomedullary implant and placement of a bipolar hemiarthroplasty after being offered a total hip replacement, which she refused. Post-operative clinical and radiological controls were unremarkable [Fig. ]. Post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation center two weeks after the surgery.