A 12-year-old female patient visited us due to pain in her left pelvis and hip joint for 6 months. The pain was dull and aching, and the patient walked with a slight limp. Other than this, there was radiating pain, and there was no numbness to the lower limb. Examinations showed that there was no local swelling of the left hemipelvis but slight pressure pain. The hip joint with a passive range of motion was normal. An anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis showed expansile osteolytic lesions throughout the left iliac bone right up to the roof of the acetabulum . A computed tomography (CT) confirmed the lesion to be expansile and with global ballooning of the ileac bone . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done, which showed well-defined multi-lobulated cystic lesions with clear boundaries (12 × 10 × 5 cm) in the left iliac bone with multiple fluid-fluid surfaces suggestive of an ABC . A three-phase bone scan revealed solitary heterogeneous uptake in the left iliac bone in the delayed phase, which on SPECT-CT showed a multilocular expansile cystic lesion with internal separation and a thin rim of the cortex without periosteal reaction hinting ABC. An initial biopsy revealed bony trabecula, spindle cells, hemosiderin-laden macrophages, and fluid-filled cavities confirming ABC. The patient was counseled for surgery.
A window (1.5 × 5 cm) was made on the left iliac crest, and it was seen to be filled up with blood . A long curettage was used to palpate the inner side, which was hollow with few intervening septa but easily reached the hard bone of the roof of the acetabulum . There was no bony breech. A long cautery was used to cauterize the inner surface of the iliac bone as far as it could reach, which was augmented by chemical sclerotherapy using 70% ethanol. Artificial allograft (2 femoral heads) was mixed with bone graft substitute commercially available “G-bone” (a mixture of hydroxyapatite, tricalcium phosphate, calcium carbonate, and calcium phosphate- by Surgiwear, India). It was packed and confirmed on the fluoroscopic views . The tissue was sent for biopsy. Histological examinations revealed fibrous walls and septa containing blood components, inflammatory cells, and osteoclasts sparsely scattered around cystic spaces filled with blood suggestive of ABC . The patient was strictly non-weight bearing for 3 weeks and then started to mobilize on a wheelchair afterward. At 6 weeks, she started partial weight-bearing with household ambulation. 3-month post-surgery, she was allowed full weight bearing. Her serial X-ray at follow-up showed gradual integration of bone grafts and substitutes . There was local recurrence at the 1-year follow-up, and she could walk without pain.