A 30-year-old woman was presented to a glaucoma clinic due to uncontrolled IOP. She had undergone bilateral LASIK 10 years previously, and had been treated with oral and topical steroids as well as albendazole for 10 months for uveitis associated with ocular toxocariasis in the left eye. Sub-Tenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg) had also been performed 5 months previously.
At the first visit, her visual acuity was 20/200 and the IOP was 30 mmHg in the left eye measured by Goldmann applanation tonometry (GAT). Slit-lamp examination revealed Grade 1 posterior subcapsular opacity, and fundus examination showed glaucomatous change in the optic nerve head. Inflammatory cells were not detected in either the anterior or posterior chamber. Despite maximally tolerable medical treatment, the IOP subsequently increased up to 32 mmHg, and her visual acuity worsened to 20/500 with ongoing glaucomatous optic nerve damage and progression of posterior subcapsular opacity. Phacotrabeculectomy with topically applied mitomycin-C (0.04%) was then performed.
The IOP was 3 mmHg by GAT on the first postoperative day but increased up to 21 mmHg on the following day. Her visual acuity was hand movement and could not be corrected. A diffuse corneal edema with a cloudy flap interface was noted in a slit-lamp examination. At 1 week postoperatively, the IOP had decreased to 14 mmHg after the application of brimonidine (0.2%)/timolol (0.5%) twice daily, but the corneal edema did not resolve. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) scanning revealed a diffuse and thin fluid pocket in the corneal interface region . After using an argon laser to perform suture-lysis of the scleral flap on the following day, the IOP decreased to 9 mmHg and the visual acuity improved to 20/150. Resolution of the interface fluid was noted by SD-OCT . Central corneal thicknesses were 553.5μm preoperatively and 576.6μm at 14 days postoperatively. Eight months postoperatively, the IOP was maintained at 8 mmHg without using topical IOP-lowering agents, the cornea was clear without any interface haze by detailed slit-lamp examination, and the corrected visual acuity was 20/100.