A 57-year-old male (height 166 cm, weight 92 kg, body mass index 33.4 kg/m2) received total aortic arch replacement for acute type A aortic dissection. His past medical histories included right nephrectomy for right kidney cancer and hypertension. The aortic replacement was performed under general anesthesia, which was induced with propofol (target-controlled infusion [TCI] 6.0 μg/mL), fentanyl 0.5 mg, and rocuronium 100 mg. Thereafter, a cuffed tracheal tube with an inner diameter of 8.0 mm was orally intubated and fixed at 22 cm at the corner of the mouth. There were no particular problems, including tooth damage during tracheal intubation. Anesthesia was maintained with propofol (TCI 2.0–2.2 μg/mL, total 4860 mg), remifentanil, fentanyl (total 2.5 mg), and rocuronium. The operative time was 532 min, and the anesthesia time was 638 min.
After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with artificial respiration, and dexmedetomidine 0.43 μg/kg/h and fentanyl 30 μg/h were administered for sedation and analgesia. On the first postoperative day (POD 1), an extreme elevation of creatine kinase (CK, 3,730 U/L) and a 39 °C fever of uncertain etiology were observed. We suspected propofol infusion syndrome (PRIS), malignant hyperthermia (MH), neuroleptic malignant syndrome, drug-induced rhabdomyolysis, and/or serotonin syndrome; therefore, we ceased administration of any potentially related drugs (propofol, piperacillin/tazobactam, fentanyl) and started administration of midazolam and dexmedetomidine instead. Although the CK value peaked at 45,288 U/L on POD 7 after gradual increase from POD 1, it was decreased after POD 8 due to the dantrolene 40 mg administrated on POD 7. In addition, a decrease in renal function (estimated glomerular filtration rate: 17.6 mL/min/1.73 m2) was observed postoperatively; thus, continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) was performed from POD 2. Moreover, mechanical ventilation had been continued because of poor oxygenation due to pneumonia since surgery. We did not perform tracheostomy because of the high possibility of mediastinitis due to the protruding sternal wires and possible difficulty of hemostasis by anticoagulants for CHDF, in spite of long-term mechanical ventilation.
A chest X-ray on POD 34 revealed an abnormal shadow near the larynx . Review of previous X-ray showed the same shadow in the hypopharynx on POD 19, although it was not identified immediately after arrival in the ICU. A loss of a front tooth was found on POD 22; however, a foreign substance was not confirmed in the oral cavity or on the abdominal X-ray, and the patient was placed under observation. A simple computed tomography (CT) scan on POD 34 showed a shadow with metal artifacts, indicating a crown bridge, outside of the tracheal tube, inside the trachea, and just under the glottis . Upper esophageal gastrointestinal endoscopy performed on POD 34 also revealed tooth fragments in the stomach. The pharynx and larynx were examined at bedside using McGRATHTMMAC video laryngoscope (Medtronic, MN, USA); however, no foreign matter was found. Observation from the inside of the tracheal tube using the bronchial fiber revealed a foreign body in the trachea just below the glottis, outside (ventral side) the tracheal tube. We therefore considered that the removal of the foreign body in a well-equipped environment would be more suitable than in the ICU and that the foreign body would not cause airway obstruction immediately.
Removal of the airway foreign body was performed in the operating room on POD 35. Preoperative ventilator settings were pressure support (PS) mode, an inspiratory oxygen concentration of 60%, a PS of 8 cmH2O, a positive end expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, and an arterial oxygen partial pressure of 274 mmHg. His consciousness level was E4VtM5 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. The CHDF and administration of heparin were interrupted 90 min before entering the operating room. For the procedure, three anesthesiologists, one thoracic surgeon (bronchoscopy operator), one cardiac surgeon (attending physician), and three nurses were convened, and a difficult airway management (DAM) cart was prepared in the operating room.
The patient entered the operating room while maintaining spontaneous breathing. After administration of atropine 0.5 mg, continuous administration of dexmedetomidine 0.22–0.89 μg/kg/h was started under standard monitoring as well as neuromuscular monitoring. In addition, ketamine 10 mg was administered seven times in total while observing the capnogram and the patient’s condition. Then, his respiratory rate became 12 breath/min, and he was sedated (Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale score of − 2 to − 3). A total of 5 mL of 4% lidocaine was sprayed into the pharynx and larynx for local anesthesia via a Jackson’s spray. With the trachea intubated, the larynx was visualized using a blade size 4 of McGRATHTMMAC, and a bronchial fiber (OLYMPUS BF TYPE 1T260, tip outer diameter 5.9 mm, Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the oral cavity to observe the larynx. No foreign body was confirmed in the pharynx and larynx; however, when the bronchial fiber was inserted into the glottis from the gap between the glottis and the cuff of the tracheal tube, a part of the foreign body appeared and disappeared between the arytenoid cartilage and the vocal cord according to the patient’s breathing . Although we could not confirm the whole image of the foreign body, we were able to confirm that it was mobile. At this point, hiccups, cough, and/or gag reflex occurred and it became difficult to secure a field of view with the fiber. We judged that the foreign body could be removed via an oral approach using the bronchial fiber while maintaining intubation. Thus, rocuronium was administered to eliminate spontaneous breathing and body movement, and mechanical ventilation was started. After that, grasping forceps were inserted via the bronchial fiber, and the foreign body was pulled up to the pharynx. Then, it was removed using Magill forceps . Following the administration of sugammadex 200 mg, the patient’s respiratory condition returned to the preoperative level, and he was returned to the ICU. The surgery time was 35 min, the anesthesia time was 51 min, the lowest percutaneous oxygen saturation during the procedure was 93%, and there was no bleeding associated with the removal procedure.