A 75-year-old male presented with knee pain that had not improved despite 5 years of medication. Plain radiography revealed osteoarthritis of Kellgren-Lawrence grade 4 . The patient had hypertension and diabetes mellitus for which he was prescribed valsartan, linagliptin, simvastatin, metformin, amlodipine, and glimepiride. Laboratory tests yielded no specific findings. He had no history of allergy. There was a history of surgery for a medial malleolus fracture under spinal anesthesia several years ago and there were no specific problems at the time. Under spinal anesthesia, TKA of the left knee was performed with placement of a Stryker posteriorly stabilized prosthesis. Three days postoperatively, blisters developed near the buttocks and thighs . Under suspicion of irritant contact dermatitis, antihistamines (Twolion, Xyzal) were prescribed and methylprednisolone aceponate 0.1% (w/w) ointment (Advantan) applied in a dressing. On day 6 after surgery, erythema developed around the periphery of the operative site and, on day 10 after surgery, blisters developed in the same region , persisted on the buttocks and thighs, and spread to the right forearm. A buttock blister was biopsied. The basement membrane was strongly positive for IgG, with some IgA and complement 3; we thus diagnosed BP. In order to suppress blister formation and prevent spreading to other areas, through consultation with a dermatologist, commencing on day 14 after surgery, prednisolone 10 mg was administered twice daily and maintained for 2 weeks. The symptoms improved 3 weeks after surgery and healed by 4 months .
After 1 year, TKA of the right knee was performed under spinal anesthesia because pain persisted despite medication. He remained on the medications described above; a pre-surgery blood test was normal. On day 2 after surgery, as before, blisters developed on the buttocks . An immediate biopsy revealed BP. Commencing on day 3 after surgery, prednisolone 10 mg was administered twice daily and maintained for 2 weeks. On day 10 after surgery, the blisters on the buttocks improved and none were observed at the surgical site. All symptoms had disappeared by 2.5 months after surgery .