A 19-year-old Asian woman was referred to the department of neurology for the management of recurrent seizures. She had been having recurrent episodes of a loss of consciousness. On detailed enquiry she revealed that these episodes were present immediately on changing to an upright posture from a lying position. She would lose consciousness, become pale, and fall to the ground. She would then experience tonic posturing of the limbs lasting for a few seconds. She would immediately regain consciousness in the supine position, with no postictal drowsiness. There were several similar episodes a day, and this had persisted for the last three months. Her symptoms persisted even after treatment with phenytoin, phenobarbitone, and sodium valproate, with no decrease in the frequency of episodes. She also complained of fatigue, malaise, myalgia, giddiness, fever, decreased appetite and weight loss over the preceding three months. Her medical history was not significant. There was no previous or family history of tuberculosis.
Physical examination revealed a thin built, frail and anxious patient. She was afebrile. Her radial pulses were very feeble while lower limb pulses felt normal. Her bilateral carotid pulses were also feeble. Upper limb blood pressure (BP) was measured (with difficulty) as being 72/58 mmHg in both upper limbs in a supine position. Standing BP was 50/48 mmHg in the upper limbs, suggestive of orthostatic hypotension. Lower limb blood pressures were130/70 mmHg bilaterally. The results of cardiac examination were normal. Her higher mental functions and fundi were normal. There was no cranial nerve, motor or sensory deficit.
Blood test results indicated anemia with hemoglobin of 9 gm/dlL, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 42 mm/hour and a total leukocyte count of 13,400 cells/mm3. Her C-reactive protein level was elevated at 26 mg/L. Tests for plasma sugars, liver function tests, renal function tests, HIV/hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg) antibodies, hepatitis C virus antibodies, and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test results (protoplasmic-staining anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA), cytoplasmic staining ANCA (c-ANCA) and Hbs Ag) were all negative. Her chest X-ray, electrocardiography, echocardiography and electroencephalography findings were normal. A color Doppler of the carotid vessels showed right and left common carotid arteries showing diffuse wall thickening and streaky flow in the lumen. The left subclavian origin showed no flow . Bilateral brachial, radial and ulnar arteries showed low velocity monophasic flow. Renal Doppler results showed normal renal vessels. The abdominal aorta was not imaged. A magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) study of the carotid and vertebral vessels was performed with a 0.35 Tesla Siemens Magnetom C device (Siemens, Mumbai, India). Maximum intensity projection and coronal reconstruction images from two-dimensional 'time of flight' MRA showed no flow in the brachiocephalic artery beyond the origin. Origin of left subclavian artery did not show a flow signal. The left common carotid artery showed streaky flow. Multiple collateral vessels were seen. The vertebral arteries were normally visualized.
An axial reconstruction image showed diffuse wall thickening of arteries with luminal narrowing.
Our patient was diagnosed as having TA, fulfilling four of the six criteria for diagnosis: development of symptoms or findings related to TA at age ≤40 years, decreased pulsation of one or both brachial arteries, arteriographic narrowing or occlusion of the primary branches of the aorta, and a difference of >10 mmHg in systolic blood pressure between arms . The results of laboratory investigations for anemia, elevated ESR and C-reactive protein were suggestive of active disease. She was hospitalized and prescribed complete bed rest. Prednisolone (40 mg/day) along with antacids were given. Our patient started feeling better after a week and was therefore gradually mobilized. She did have episodes of giddiness, but there was no loss of consciousness or tonic posturing of limbs. She was discharged after two weeks. After a year, at follow-up she had made a clinical improvement with no constitutional symptoms or syncopal seizures but her radial pulses remained feeble. There was no evidence of postural hypotension.