A 29-year-old male patient was transferred to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) from another hospital, because of shock and multiple organ failure after a complicated pericardial biopsy. Seven months before, after a syncopal episode, he had been diagnosed with cardiac tamponade diagnosed by a transthoracic echocardiogram (TEE). Subxiphoidal drainage of 700 ml hemorrhagic fluid was performed resulting in hemodynamic stabilization. Cytologic examination of the fluid was negative for malignancy. Pericarditis was diagnosed caused by chlamydia; azithromycin and anti-inflammatory drugs were administered. For the next four months the patient was relatively well except for complain of easy fatigue. From that point on, he gradually presented dyspnea on exertion, along with pain in the back and spinal column. He also had two syncopal episodes. A new TTE showed recurrence of the pericardial effusion. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan disclosed a confluent mass of the heart with myocardial and pericardial infiltration. Thoracotomy and biopsy was then decided. Trauma of the cardiac cavity occurred intraoperatively, followed by hypovolemic shock and two episodes of cardiac arrest. Subsequently, he was transferred to our tertiary hospital for further cardiosurgical treatment.
On admission, the patient was mechanically ventilated, hemodynamically unstable requiring vasoactive drugs, with a temperature of 39°C. Main abnormal laboratory findings were: serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 555 U/l, glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) 800 U/l, bilirubin 25 mg/dl, creatinine 7 mg/dl, urea 330 mg/dl, aPTT 140 sec, and INR 3.4. A continuous veno-venous hemofiltration was immediately started. Right catheterization revealed equalization of diastolic pressures. Chest CT scan revealed an irregular heterogenous mass of the right atrium with ill defined margins, infiltrating the myocardium and pericardium on the outer wall of the atrium, the inter-atricular septum, and also a pericardial effusion . An urgent operation was then performed. Unfortunately, the patient died during surgery due to uncontrolled hemorrhage.
At autopsy, an irregular shaped, reddish brown tissue was found, 13 × 12 × 4 cm in size, covering the exterior surface of the heart . On opening the cardiac cavities a superficial spreading of the neoplasm to the right atrium was noted. Right ventricle, left cavities and valves presented no alterations. Microscopically, the tumor showed immunomorphological characteristics of a well-differentiated angiosarcoma . Neoplastic cells expressed endothelial markers positive for CD31, CD34 antibodies, and factor VII . Proliferation index Ki-67 assessed was 15%. Testing for HHV-8 virus was negative.