This case report describes a case of a 79-year-old Japanese female who underwent thoracoscopic upper left lobectomy with lymph node dissection (pT2aN1M0, stage IIB) for left upper lobe lung cancer. Before the lung cancer surgery, head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to screen for brain metastasis. An incidental 37 mm × 16 mm extraparenchymal mass was found in the left frontal region, which was diagnosed as convexity meningioma on imaging . There were no intracranial metastases. Follow-up MRI 6 months later identified a lesion (46 mm × 28 mm) showing ring enhancement with peritumoral edema adjacent to the left frontal convexity meningioma . A metastatic brain tumor was suspected, and the patient was admitted to our department for surgery. The patient was alert and had no neurological deficit preoperatively. On chest computed tomography (CT), there was no local recurrence of cancer in the left upper lobe. However, a 15-mm nodule was found in the right lung, suggesting metastasis. The surgery was performed with a frontotemporal craniotomy under general anesthesia. When the dura was inverted, a meningioma was found attached to it, and a metastatic brain tumor with a cystic component was found adjacent to the meningioma. They were removed en bloc, including the dura . The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 13th postoperative day. No radiochemotherapy was given because the patient refused. Pathological findings were that the site of the meningioma consisted of cells with round nuclei and weakly acidophilic or pale vacuoles, forming a substantial vesicle with intervening small blood vessels. Additionally, calcification and whorl were observed . Immunohistochemical staining showed partial positivity for S-100 and negativity for cytokeratin (CK), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and p40. The MIB-1 index was less than 1% . Pathologically, it was diagnosed as World Health Organization (WHO) grade I meningioma. In metastatic brain tumors, atypical cells with enlarged nuclei and basophilic sporangia formed irregular foci, which in this case were accompanied by necrosis. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for p40 and CK and negative for EMA, GFAP, and S-100. The pathological findings were in accordance with previous lung cancer findings, and the MIB-1 index was 65% . At the boundary between the two tumors, a metastatic brain tumor partially infiltrated into the meningioma tissue .