A 53-year-old female with medical history of Stage III adenosquamous cervical carcinoma which was diagnosed 20 months before presentation, with pulmonary involvement on Pembrolizumab, generalized anxiety disorder, and depression, presents to the emergency room with behavioral changes, difficulty with writing, and leg shaking. On examination, the patient had normal and stable vital signs and was neurologically intact with no deficits. A computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained which demonstrated vasogenic edema the bilateral frontal lobes with involvement of the corpus callosum, and evidence of an ill-defined mass centered in the corpus callosum above the anterior horns of the lateral ventricles .
The patient was given intravenous dexamethasone and admitted for further work up and neurosurgical intervention. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain with contrast was obtained which showed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass in the corpus callosum body with extension in the cingulate gyrus and involving the lateral ventricles. The mass included some areas of diffusion restriction. There was extensive bifrontal vasogenic edema with no evidence of hemorrhage A CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast was completed to evaluate for other metastatic lesions, and it revealed a few pulmonary nodules and new pathologically enlarged right hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy likely metastatic disease. An MRI of the spine with contrast to evaluate for further lesions in the neuro axis did not reveal any other lesions.
Due to the appearance of a typical butterfly glioma on imaging, the patient underwent a stereotactic biopsy to obtain a specimen for histopathological analysis. The stereotactic biopsy was obtained, and on frozen section was noted to contain hypercellular and gliotic brain tissue. Due to sampling and small specimen size, the treatment team proceeded with a right-sided craniotomy for open biopsy and partial resection to obtain more specimens for analysis. The specimen from the open biopsy demonstrated an epithelioid neoplasm in a background of necrosis, with tumor cells showing pleomorphism, nuclear atypia, glycogenization, and abundant mitotic figures. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for estrogen, p16 Protein, and P40. The histopathology and immunohistochemistry were consistent with a metastatic lesion from the patient’s known cervical adenosquamous carcinoma . The patient recovered well from the surgery, a CT scan showed expected postoperative changes , and she was discharged in stable condition and was treated subsequently with external beam radiation to the whole brain. Due to persistent disease on follow-up MRI , she additionally received stereotactic radiation treatment, and at 3-month follow-up, she remains intact and continues to receive radiation treatment.