A 1-year-old boy with a 1-year history of heart murmur was referred to our hospital in December 2021. The child was asymptomatic at birth, but a heart murmur was noted at a routine physical examination shortly after birth. Echocardiography showed severe pulmonary artery stenosis and mild SVAS. The child showed exercise intolerance and weight growth restriction with age. Instead, he had no other special clinical symptoms such as syncope, shortness of breath, or cyanosis. On physical examination, a grade 3/6 systolic murmur was heard at the left sternal border. An abdominal examination revealed a right inguinal hernia. The remainder of the physical examination is normal.
In addition, his gross motor, fine motor, personal-social skills, and language skills were commensurate with those of normal peers. Family history revealed that his father and older sister had mild SVAS without clinical symptoms. What’s more, the pulmonary artery flow velocity of his older sister was faster than normal, but it could not meet the diagnostic criteria of pulmonary artery stenosis.
Echocardiographic examination was performed after admission to the hospital, which showed severe pulmonary artery stenosis (pressure gradients (PG) between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery = 75mmHg), and the thickening and stenosis of the aortic wall at the sinotubular junction (diameter = 6.8 mm, normal range 9 ~ 13.5 mm). Cardiac computed tomographic angiography (CCTA) showed the proximal branch of pulmonary artery stenosis (shown in Fig. A), and the stenosis of the aorta at the sinotubular junction (shown in Fig. B). Cardiac catheterization was performed and indicated mild sinotubular junction stenosis with a pressure gradient of 15mmHg (shown in Fig. A), the branch pulmonary artery stenosis (PG = 84mmHg) (shown in Fig. B).
Peripheral blood genomic DNA from the patient, his older sister, and his parents was used for whole-exome sequencing (WES). A novel nonsense variant c.757 C > T (p.Gln253Ter) in ELN was identified in the proband (shown in Fig. ), which was not previously reported in the database of the Human Gene Mutation Database, ClinVar variation Database, or previous literature. His father and older sister were verified as ELN heterozygous. This variant was located in exon 15, which changed glutamic acid to a premature termination codon, leading to a truncated protein. American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines and standards describe this variant as probably pathogenic.
After completing all the tests mentioned above, we found that the ELN gene causes mild SVAS and severe branch pulmonary artery stenosis in this patient. Due to severe branch pulmonary artery stenosis, the reconstruction of the branch pulmonary artery with autologous pericardium was performed. In 8 days following the operation, the patient was discharged from the hospital without experiencing any discomfort. Moreover, the right inguinal hernia repair was performed 3 months postoperatively. Reexamination of echocardiography was performed at 1-month, 3-month, and 6 months after surgery, which indicated the pulmonary artery flow velocity was lower than 2 m/s. meanwhile, the child gained weight with age and had no special clinical symptoms such as exercise intolerance, syncope, shortness of breath, or cyanosis.