A 23-year old male returned to Singapore from a 3 months study trip to rural Ghana. The patient was an Asian student at a tertiary institution in Singapore who had never taken treatment or prophylaxis for malaria despite spending his childhood and early adulthood living and travelling in malaria endemic areas of South East Asia. The patient was empirically treated with artemether–lumefantrine (AL) obtained from a village chemist on the third day of an illness typical for malaria, though no confirmatory laboratory tests were performed. With ongoing symptoms on the 9th day of illness, P. falciparum infection was documented at a private medical clinic in Accra, with a written report suggesting that 0.8% of red cells were parasitized (original slides unavailable for review). A further treatment course of oral AL was prescribed and completed. From the 5th day of illness until presentation at NUH hospital on day 14, 5 days after the second course of AL, the patient complained of intermittent passage of dark red urine .
Upon admission to hospital the patient was in a stable condition with no respiratory or haemodynamic compromise. Mild scleral icterus was noted. The cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were normal. The spleen was palpable one finger breadth beneath the costal margin. No fever was observed upon initial assessment. Although clinically well and afebrile the patient required multiple blood transfusions and episodic macroscopic haemoglobinuria persisted for several days. Fever was observed on a single occasion upon initiation of transfusion with a unit of packed red cells.
Laboratory values are shown in Table . Investigations were in keeping with intra-vascular haemolysis with anaemia and haemoglobinuria. Further evaluation revealed a slightly high reticulocyte count with a low reticulocyte index indicating a suboptimal marrow response to anaemia. The direct Coomb’s reaction was only weakly positive for anti-C3b/d implicating a plausible complement mediated red cell lysis, however it was regarded as non-specific and would not have explained the haemolysis. The Donath–Landsteiner test (to assess for paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria) was negative and Heinz bodies were absent on repeated peripheral blood smears. G6PD levels were normal. The Mycoplasma antibody titre was 1:160. This was felt to be a false positive reaction in the absence of cold agglutinins or a typical syndrome consistent with Mycoplasma infection. Serologic investigations for HIV infection and leptospirosis were negative. Multiple thick and thin films made from venous and capillary blood samples were prepared and found negative for P. falciparum using standard procedures . The Binax Now® Malaria test was positive through day 15 of illness . With ongoing clinical symptoms and recurrent episodes of haemoglobinuria on day 18 of illness, molecular testing was performed. The DNA sample was extracted using the EZ1® Advanced and the EZ1® DNA Blood Extraction Kit (Qiagen®) from whole blood collected on EDTA, following the manufacturers’ recommendations and stored at − 30 °C until use. A PCR performed with the artus Malaria RG PCR Kit (QIAgen®) returned a positive result for Plasmodium but remained inconclusive regarding the species identification.
As part on the Malaria Surveillance programme the case was notified to the Ministry of Health (MOH) and an aliquot of DNA and residual blood sample were sent for Plasmodium species specific PCR confirmation to the Malaria Reference Centre-National Public Health Laboratory (MRC-NPHL) along with the blood film for verification.
Upon reception the blood films were protected by a cover slip mounted with Eukitt® mounting medium and dried before reading. The smears were entirely screened at low magnification (400×) and then examined beyond standard procedure by expert microscopist at high magnification (1000×) using an Olympus CX31 microscope and confirmed negative.
The DNA sample was subjected to the standard Plasmodium detection and species identification by PCR used for routine Malaria surveillance as described previously by Chavatte et al. . Briefly, the protocol includes two steps targeting the 18S ribosomal RNA gene (18S rRNA): a rapid screening by fast real-time PCR (rt-PCR) adapted from the protocol developed by Safeuki et al. run on the StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems®) and a classical test performed by nested-PCR (nt-PCR) assays as developed by Snounou and Singh and Imwong et al. run on a Veriti® Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems®). Products of the nt-PCRs were visualized after electrophoresis using the QIAxcel® Advanced System (QIAgen®) equipped with DNA Fast Analysis Kit (QIAgen®). Both PCR methods were congruent and detected the presence of Plasmodium DNA and identified the species as P. falciparum. Sequence of the 18S rRNA gene amplified at the first step of the nt-PCR was obtained as confirmatory results and deposited in GenBank under the accession number (MF155937).
Genotyping assays based on the P. falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 and 2 (Pfmsp1 and Pfmsp2) were performed according to the Fledger and Snounou protocol . Products of the genotyping PCRs were visualized after electrophoresis using the QIAxcel® Advanced System (QIAgen®) equipped with DNA High Resolution Kit (QIAgen®) and showed a single strain infection with K1 and FC27 subtypes for Pfmsp1 and Pfmsp2 genes respectively. Sequence of the Pfmsp2 target was obtained as confirmatory results and deposited in GenBank under the accession number (MF155938).
Additional PCRs were performed to test several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with common anti-malarial drug resistance as well as the sequencing of the Kelch 13 gene. The details on the genes tested with specific codons, methods and results are presented in Additional file . Sequences obtained for these tests have been deposited in GenBank under the accession numbers: MF155939 to MF155944 (Additional file ).
Total RNA purification was performed using the RNeasy® Plus Mini Kit (QIAgen®) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified RNA was first tested by pan-Plasmodium 18S rRNA RT-PCR according to Hanron et al. protocol . Then gametocyte-specific detection was performed on two mRNA targets exclusively expressed in the gametocyte stage: Pfs25, a commonly used unspliced marker and Pf3D7_0630000, a recently identified spliced markers, according to Hanron et al. protocols . Negative, positive and stage–specific controls were included in all RT-PCRs. All reactions were performed in singleplex with each sample run with and without reverse-transcription step to assess possible amplification of co-purified gDNA, using SuperScript® III One-Step RT-PCR System with Platinum®
Taq High fidelity (Inivitrogen™). All RT-PCRs were run on Veriti® Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems®). Products of the RT-PCRs were visualized after capillary electrophoresis using the QIAxcel® Advanced System (QIAgen®) equipped with DNA High Resolution Kit (QIAgen®). From the reported case, the results of these tests confirmed the presence Plasmodium and the absence of gametocyte (Additional file ).
The patient had improved significantly by the time the results were notified to the treating clinician. Taking into consideration all these results, the patient’s improvement and after extensive discussion and consideration the patient was not re-treated for falciparum malaria and was discharged after a 10 days hospital admission. At clinic he remained afebrile and well with normalization of haematologic parameters . A follow-up PCR on day 42 was negative. Anti-P. falciparum antibodies were not measured.