A 52-year-old female patient presented with gradually progressive numbness and weakness in her extremities for 6 months. No obvious history of injury was reported. Physical examination evaluated the weakness of the extremities (grades 4–5 strength), especially for the bilateral handgrip muscle (grades 3–5 strength). The deep tendon reflexes in all extremities were suspected to be positive. X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan revealed obvious anterior atlantoaxial dislocation (ADD), which was reducible on extensive view . The left side of the posterior arch was revealed as the site of defect on CT 3-dimensional imaging .
During the surgery, the patient was placed in a prone position under general anesthesia, the neck was slightly extended with a Mayfield head holder. It was confirmed that the ADD was satisfactorily reduced under fluoroscopy. According to the C1–2 pedicle screw fixation technique reported by Resnick and Benzel , bilateral polyaxial screws were placed freehand into the C1 and C2 pedicles and connected by 2 separated titanium rods. Decortication was accomplished by a high-speed burr into the right side of C1 and C2 lamina, and an autologous bone graft was performed.
Immediately after the operation, the neurological symptom significantly improved. The patient complained of restricted cervical rotation and suboccipital neuralgia which was exacerbated by rotation with an intensity of 7 on a visual analog scale (VAS) ranging from 0 to 10 at postoperative day 5. While a satisfactory reduction was detected in the postoperative CT, violation of the left atlantooccipital joint was observed in the left C1 screw . Nimesulide (daily dosage of 0.2 g) and bracing were recommended immediately. At the 2 month follow-up, both the neurological improvement and reduction were maintained. The VAS of suboccipital neuralgia is 3 and decreased to 1 at 6 months postoperative. Bony fusion of the left atlantooccipital joint was confirmed by CT scan at 6 months postoperative . The patient complained that the suboccipital neuralgia was tolerable without the assistance of braces or medications for pain. At the 18 month follow-up, only stiffness of head flexion and rotation was observed without suboccipital neuralgia.