A 44-year-old otherwise healthy man presented to our department complaining of disturbing floaters in his right eye for more than 2 years. On examination, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in both eyes (OU) with myopic correction bilaterally of − 1 diopter. Anterior segment and fundus examination were unremarkable apart from some degree of vitreous degeneration more pronounced in the right than in the left. No PVD was detected in OU. After detailed explanation of the possible risks and benefits of vitrectomy a 6-month period of observation was advised, after which surgery was carried out because of persistence of symptoms. A 25-gauge transconjunctival sutureless pars plana vitrectomy (surgeon G.B.) was performed using the Alcon Constellation system (Alcon Laboratories Inc., Fort Worth, TX). After core vitrectomy, PVD was induced with aspiration from the cutter after injection of a small amount of triamcinolone acetonide to visualize the vitreous cortex. Careful peripheral vitrectomy with vitreous base shaving was achieved with scleral indentation. The vitreous cavity was filled with balanced salt solution at the end of the procedure.
Upon examination 1 month after surgery, a small full-thickness macular hole was detected in the right eye along with wrinkling of the retinal surface. BCVA was diminished to 20/80 . As a result of persistence of the macular hole, a second vitrectomy was performed 3 weeks later, with peeling of both an epiretinal membrane (ERM) and the internal limiting membrane. The vitreous cavity was filled with a mixture of air and 20% sulfur hexafluoride. Postoperatively, the patient was asked to maintain a reading position for 6 h per day for 3 days and not to sleep on his back for a week. One month afterwards, after complete disappearance of the air/gas mixture bubble, the macular hole was closed with partial restoration of BCVA up to 20/25. Consent for the publication for this case report and any additional related information was taken from the patient involved in the study.