The patient, a 64-year-old man, was admitted to the hospital’s general surgery department with right upper abdominal pain for 3 days with chills and fever. The patient was suffering from pain in the right upper abdomen with nausea and vomiting, accompanied by chills and fever, yellow eyes and urine, a maximum body temperature of 39 °C, moderate yellowing of the skin, and mucous membranes all over the body. The breath sounds of both lungs were thick, and no obvious dry and wet rales. Diagnosed as common bile duct stones with acute cholecystitis, septic shock, obstructive jaundice, hepatitis, and bronchiectasis with infection. Under general anesthesia in the emergency department, the operation was successful with choledochotomy stone drainage, T-tube drainage, and cholecystectomy. Due to the patient’s older age, poor general condition, hemodynamically unstable, and septic shock before surgery, he was transferred to the intensive care unit that night to strengthen monitoring and treatment. Blood test results on admission .
To ameliorate the anemia and improve the blood coagulation function, the patient was infused with 2U de-suspended red blood cells and 200 mL of frozen plasma. The patient’s symptoms improved after the blood transfusion.
The next day, the patient’s body temperature is 37.4 °C, a little white sputum. A little bloody liquid was drained from the drainage bag connected to the right abdominal drainage tube, a little dark green bile was drained from the drainage bag connected to the T tube, and the common bile bacterial culture was added for drug sensitivity detection. Routine blood results showed an increase in white blood cells from 11.89 (109/L) to 22.17 (109/L), a rise in ultrasensitive C-reactive protein (CRP) from 91.4 mg/L to 159.32 mg/L, and an elevation in the percentage of neutrophils from 93.3 to 94.2%. Because the patient’s infectious index was very high and progressively increased with the number of days of hospitalization. The biliary tract infection was very heavy, complicated by septic shock and liver function injury. Imipenem cilastatin (1 g intravenous drop Q8h) was given to strengthen anti-infection treatment.
The patient’s body temperature did not decrease on the 3rd day. He coughed up more white mucus. More bloody fluid and brown bile flowed out of the drainage tube and continued to be sent for common bacterial culture of bile and bilateral double-bottle blood culture of venous whole blood. The result of the bile culture submitted before this time was ESBL (Extended-spectrum β lactamase) negative for Escherichia coli.
The doctor lowered the anti-infective drug gradient based on the susceptibility results and changed imipenem cilastatin to cefoperazone/sulbactam 2 g intravenous drop Q8h. Blood routine results showed an increase in white blood cells to 12.35 (109/L). The patient’s hypersensitivity CRP, procalcitonin, and other infectious indicators have decreased. The patient’s general condition was well and he was transferred back to general surgery. The temperature changes during the week are shown in Fig. .
Patient’s blood culture report on the 7th day of admission was identified as E. tarda by adsorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, which was sensitive to conventional drugs. The patient’s infection symptoms were well controlled, he could eat semi-liquid food, without obvious abdominal distension and discomfort, and the second stool was normal. With the T-tube in place, about 600 mL of golden yellow bile was drawn out every day and he was discharged .