We present a case involving an 81-year-old female, who was hospitalized in September 2022 due to the gradual development of a non-tender cervical swelling on her right side over the preceding two months. There were no accompanying symptoms of weight loss, fever, or night sweats. The patient had stopped smoking tobacco while occasionally consuming alcohol. There was no evidence of an autoimmune condition or a viral infection. Notable comorbidities were hypertensive cardiopathy with moderately impaired ejection fraction and coronary arteriosclerosis. During the physical examination, a discernible, firm, and mobile tumefaction was observed in the right cervical region. The remaining physical examination was unremarkable. Sonography revealed an inhomogeneous tissue at the site of the swelling . In the peripheral blood a significant increase of lymphocytes 5.69 x109/L was noted, while lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were within the reference range . Flow cytometric peripheral blood immunophenotyping showed the expansion of a mature clonal B-cell population, with restriction of the membrane immunoglobulin light-chain kappa (76% of total B-cells, absolute count 0.8 x109/L). Immunoglobulin subtypes were within the reference range and no abnormal paraprotein was found via serum protein electrophoresis . In line with the result from flow cytometric immunophenotyping, an augmentation of the free immunoglobulin light-chain kappa was measured in the serum . A fine needle puncture of the swelling visualized a mixed lymphocytic infiltrate (data not shown).
We conducted an 18F-fluorodeoxy-glucose (FDG)–positron-emission tomography and computer tomography (PET-CT) scan to investigate the possibility of additional pathological lesions in the patient. The scan visualized hypermetabolism in the right submandibular gland and an adjacent lymph node (2.6 x 3.3cm, SUVmax 14.9, .
To gain insight into the cellular origin of the rapidly growing hypermetabolic lesions, an extirpation of the cervical lymph node and a fine-needle biopsy of the submandibular gland was performed two days after the PET-CT scan. The biopsy revealed an infiltration by medium-sized, monomorphic, and blastic CD20+ B-cells with basophilic cytoplasm accompanied by a significant number of mitotic figures . The proliferation rate was very high (ki-67/MIB 95%, ) and tingible body macrophages were interspersed . The B-cells displayed an immunophenotype characteristic of mature germinal-center B-cells, including high membrane IgM expression with kappa light-chain restriction. Additionally, the cells stained positive for CD79A, CD10, CD38, BCL6 and weakly positive for PAX5. BCL2, LMO2 and TdT were negative within B-cells, whereas c-MYC positivity was abundant . B-cell infection by EBV was negative . The pattern pointed to the differential diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma .
In October 2022, a bone marrow investigation revealed only 10% infiltration by CD20+ small lymphoid cells . These small B-cells were low proliferative . The flow cytometric characterization showed a CLL immunophenotype (CD19+ CD20dim CD5+ CD23+ CD200+ CD79b- FMC7- IgMdim), thus a Matutes score of 5, which allowed the diagnosis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia-type monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (CLL-type MBL) .
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using break-apart probes was performed, revealing a c-MYC translocation (without concomitant BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangement) in the submandibular gland but not in the SLL/CLL population. No additional translocations, such as t(11;14) or t(14;18), were detected. Thereby cytogenetically confirming the diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma.
Given the Burkitt lymphoma’s rapid development, a molecular analysis was conducted to investigate the clonal relationship between the Burkitt lymphoma present in the submandibular gland and the SLL/CLL present in the bone marrow. Remarkably, the malignant B-cells found in the submandibular gland and the bone marrow exhibited an identical monoclonal rearrangement of 108bp length in the framework region (FR3 region) of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus , however an additional peak was noted in the Burkitt lymphoma sample . To further address the question of clonal relatedness and evolution, we performed high-throughput sequencing of the FR3-region of the immunoglobulin heavy (IGH) and light chains (IGK and IGL). IGH sequencing partially confirmed the results obtained suing fragment analysis: the SLL/CLL B-cells and the Burkitt lymphoma cells shared the same top rearrangement, with a frequency of 80.1% in the SLL/CLL sample and 40.5% in the Burkitt lymphoma sample (; , IGHV3-11). Nonetheless, the Burkitt lymphoma cells showed a second dominant rearrangement (39.5%), which was not present in the SLL/CLL cells (; , IGHV4-34). The two rearrangements did not share CDR3 sequence similarity and they did not utilize the same VJ-genes . The result of the immunoglobulin light chains sequencing showed somewhat dissimilar results: the top rearrangement in the CLL/SLL sample (71.8%, IGKV1-39), was still present in the Burkitt lymphoma sample with 8.9% . There was instead another dominant rearrangement in the Burkitt lymphoma sample (79.6%, , IGKV2-30), that was not detectable in the SLL/CLL sample. Analysis were in accordance to previously published methods (–).
Considering the histopathological, flow cytometric and radiographic findings a Burkitt lymphoma stage I was diagnosed on the background of an indolent CLL-type MBL. This finding suggested an atypical Richter transformation.
Considering the aggressive nature of the transformed lymphoma and the biologically younger patient, an interdisciplinary tumor board recommended an intensive treatment regimen of six cycles DA-EPOCH-R (dose adjusted etoposide prednisone vincristine cyclophosphamide doxorubicin rituximab), starting at a level -1 dose (augmented till dose 2, vincristine 50%). The treatment was well tolerated and the patient responded well clinically.
After administrating six cycles of DA-EPOCH-R treatment, two re-staging PET/CT were conducted, visualizing a complete remission of the previously identified lesions. Regular flow cytometric evaluation of peripheral blood, could not visualize minimal residual disease. As of the twelve-month mark from the initiation of treatment, there are no clinical or laboratory-based signs indicating a relapse.