A 71-year-old Caucasian female was referred to us with findings of abnormal biliary imaging.
Seventeen months ago, she presented to another hospital with two weeks of fatigue and abdominal pain. She had mild transaminitis with normal bilirubin levels . An ultrasound showed abnormal thickening of the common bile duct (CBD), pericholecystic fluid, and gallbladder sludge without wall thickening. HIDA scan demonstrated delayed gallbladder filling, with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) significant for mid common hepatic duct (CHD) narrowing, distal CBD tapering with no filling defect, and CBD dilation to 8mm. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed mild chronic gastritis. With persistent symptoms and worsening liver function tests (LFTs) over the next two weeks, patient underwent a cholecystectomy. Surgical pathology was significant for acalculous chronic cholecystitis, with the presence of prominent eosinophilic infiltration.
Post-cholecystectomy, the patient’s LFTs remained elevated. Repeat MRCP was concerning for biliary dilation, focal narrowing and tapering at the ampulla, and no filling defects . Due to abnormal imaging, patient presented to our institution for an EUS.
The patient was previously diagnosed with hypothyroidism.
The patient’s temperature was 36.7°C, heart rate was 75, blood pressure was 119/73. The clinical abdominal examination revealed non-tender, soft, with evidence of laparoscopy incision (healed with no tenderness or drainage).
Blood analysis revealed transaminitis with aspartate aminotransferase 151 U/L and alanine aminotransferase 222 U/L, with elevated alkaline phosphatase 765 U/L and normal bilirubin 0.3 mg/dL. Patient also had mild peripheral eosinophilia with 11.4 % eosinophils.
EUS showed extrahepatic biliary dilation, irregular and diffusely thickened bile duct walls, and no focal mass .
Therefore, benign pathologies such as primary sclerosing cholangitis and IgG4-associated cholangitis, were also pursued. However, laboratory results showed normal IgG4 levels and autoimmune markers (myeloperoxidase antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, HIV antibody and anti-mitochondrial antibody).
To address the biliary stricture and rule out malignancy, the patient underwent an ERCP, demonstrating CHD narrowing and a distal CBD stricture with extra and intrahepatic dilation . A plastic biliary stent was placed, and biliary brushings/biopsies were obtained. Pathology showed scant stroma with mild eosinophilic infiltrate of 4 eosinophils per high power field (eos/hpf) without malignancy. On repeat ERCP, cholangiogram demonstrated no distal bile duct stricture . Cholangioscopy identified frond-like ductal lesions in the mid-CBD, and multiple biopsies were obtained. Pathology demonstrated reactive biliary epithelium associated with a mixed infiltrate of neutrophils and eosinophils (up to 9 eos/hpf) .
Due to the unusual clinical features of this case and mild prominence of eosinophils in the biliary specimens, a second review of the previous pathology specimens was performed. The patient’s gallbladder was notable for a prominent diffuse, eosinophilic infiltrate (211 eos/hpf) . Gastric biopsies also showed a focal prominence of eosinophils. Further retrospective review showed peripheral eosinophilia .
Karen Matsukuma, MD, PhD, Assistant Professor, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California–Davis.
The histopathologic evidence of eosinophilic infiltrate in the gallbladder and bile duct specimens in the setting of known peripheral eosinophilia is suggestive of eosinophilic cholangitis.