A 32-year-old male with exertional dyspnoea New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II and persistent AF was admitted to the local hospital for the pulmonary vein isolation (PVI). Baseline medication therapy was with digoxin (0.125 mg/day), bisoprolol (5.0 mg/day), and rivaroxaban (20 mg/day). The baseline therapy was administered during 6 months before hospitalization but without substantial improvements in rate control or HF symptoms. Because of persistent tachycardia, which significantly aggravated the severity of HF symptoms, it was decided to conduct an AF ablation. Blood pressure was 110/65 mmHg; heart rate was irregular at 70–125 b.p.m., with the signs of neck vein distention and peripheral oedema (lower leg oedema). Heart sounds were muffled and the systolic murmur was heard in the second intercostal space at the left sternal border and the apex. Electrocardiogram showed sustained AF which was confirmed by a subsequent Holter monitoring. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated spherical deformation (dilatation) of left ventricle (LV) with a thickened, truncated, and akinetic LV apex. Left ventricular contractility and systolic function were moderately reduced (ejection fraction, EF 32%). The right ventricle (RV) appeared elongated and was wrapped around the distal part of the LV. Right ventricular systolic function was diminished (fractional area change 29%). Doppler recordings showed signs of elevated LV filling pressure (E/e’=18) and moderate pulmonary hypertension (PHT). Table lists the main echocardiographic two-dimensional, three-dimensional, and Doppler parameters at the baseline and during the follow-up examinations. Figure shows the TTE images recorded at baseline.
The CMR helped further with visualization of the apical part of the heart and demonstrated the features that characterized ILVAH such as: (i) shortening and spherical remodelling of the LV with impaired contractile function; (ii) invagination of fatty tissue (up to 5 mm) into the myocardium of the defective LV apex; (iii) the anteroapical LV origin of a papillary muscle network; and (iv) an elongated RV wrapping around the deficient apex. In addition, non-compacted endomyocardial layer was described in the mid-cavity of anterior and lateral walls of the LV.
After admission to the hospital, the patient received additionally ACE inhibitor (perindopril 4 mg/day) and diuretic (eplerenone 25 mg/day). Based on the clinical and imaging data and because of a high risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in symptomatic HF patients with reduced EF, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was placed which followed by the PVI procedure. First, we implanted a dual-chamber ICD with fixation of the endocardial ventricular defibrillation electrode in the apical part of the RV and the atrial electrode in the right atrial appendage with appropriate biventricular pacemakers sensing. Already after ICD implantation, the patient demonstrated improvement in HF symptoms and exercise tolerance. This was accompanied by an enhancement of left and right ventricular systolic function as assessed by echocardiography . Subsequently, two months after ICD implantation the PVI procedure was performed using the three-dimensional-mapping system (CARTO-3). Sinus rhythm is restored by electric pulse therapy 270 J.
After a 6-month follow-up, the clinical condition of the patient was further improved with a good exercise capacity (NYHA Class I) and stable sinus rhythm under cordarone 200 mg/day, eplerenone 25 mg/day, rivaroxaban 20 mg/day, and perindopril 4 mg/day. Although TTE at 6-month still demonstrated the spherical remodelling of the LV, we observed further improvement in contractile and systolic function of both ventricles . Of note, left atrial and right atrial volumes unchanged over the follow-up period and moderate tricuspid regurgitation and PHT were observed .
After a 1-year follow-up, the clinical condition of the patient and TTE findings remained stable and similar to the 6-month observations. However, after the 15 months of follow-up, the patient presented with complaints of palpitations and chest discomfort. Using the Care Link system, a paroxysm of AF was documented with a subsequent restoration of sinus rhythm through the application of a 23 J electrical shock . One day later a paroxysm of VT (280 b.p.m.) was detected, sinus rhythm was successfully restored by antitachycardia pacing .
At 22 months, the patient presented again with a chest discomfort. The Care Link system recorded a paroxysm of the AF with heart rate falling into VT zone and a single unsuccessful attempt of rhythm restoration . Sinus rhythm was restored spontaneously the next day.
After a 2-year follow-up, the clinical condition of the patient remained stable and the echocardiographic parameters did not change substantially as compared to a 1-year follow-up .