A 56-year-old Asian woman visited our clinic. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20, and the IOP in the problem eye (the left) was 13 mmHg. Slit-lamp examination showed impending Ex-PRESS shunt extrusion or exposure. The internal opening was tilted to the corneal endothelium obliquely in the anterior chamber, and the external plate was prominent in the subconjunctival space . The color of the bleb was pale, and its shape was diffuse and shallow, though there was no microcyst.
The patient had been followed up on for senile cataract and open-angle glaucoma, with maximal medical therapy. Seven (7) months previously, IOP in both eyes was uncontrolled, ranging from 25 to 28 mmHg. The spherical error was −9.5 diopters(D) and axial length (AXL) was 26.98 mm in the right eye. The spherical error was −5.0D and AXL was 27.06 mm in the left eye. BCVA was 20/200 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye, due to nuclear cataracts. This had necessitated combined surgery (cataract + Ex-PRESS shunt implantation) in our hospital. A 3 × 3 mm scleral flap of half thickness was made at superotemporal area. Then, phacoemulsification and lens implantation was performed through a 2.2 mm corneal incision site located in the temporal area. The tract was made with a 25-gauge needle in one-third of the medial area of the blue-gray transition zone, under a preformed scleral flap. The Ex-PRESS shunt (P200; Alcon Laboratories Inc., Fort Worth, TX) was then pushed into the anterior chamber. After surgery, right-eye visual acuity, IOP, bleb shape and Ex-PRESS shunt positioning were all satisfactory. In the left eye, however, the spur of the Ex-PRESS shunt was not firmly fixed in the trabecular meshwork, and the shunt had been implanted obliquely. These left-eye problems were thought to have been caused by low scleral rigidity resulting from high myopia and insufficient maintenance of the anterior chamber, which presumably had rendered scleral resistance inadequate during Ex-PRESS shunt implantation. We decided to observe carefully without surgical intervention, because the external plate of the shunt was covered well by scleral flap and there was no extrusion sign.
Seven (7) months postoperatively, we observed an impending extrusion sign that the external plate was prominent in the subconjunctival space, though it was covered by the scleral flap. Because Ex-PRESS shunt exposure can necessitate shunt removal or additional operation for IOP control, surgery was performed prior to any exposure. A limbus-based conjunctival incision was made followed by careful dissection of the adhesions between the subconjunctival and Tenon tissue. A subsequent incision was made along the previous scleral-flap wound with a super sharp blade, and then the scleral flap was opened carefully until the Ex-PRESS shunt was visible. After dissection of adhesions between the external plate of the EX-PRESS shunt and the surrounding tissue was performed, the shunt was grasped with forceps. However, as the shunt was fixed stronger than expected and, thus, was not easily removable by forceps, we decided against removal and opted for adjustment of its position instead. To make sufficient space for easy adjustment, an incision with the super sharp blade was made from the external-plate-inserted site, in both lateral directions, into the anterior chamber parallel to the iris plane. Then, the shunt was inserted perpendicularly to the limbus, parallel to the iris plane, and well pushed in anterior chamber by forceps for firm fixation of the spur. The internal opening was parallel to the iris, and the external plate was tight on the sclera . When sclera was palpated with a sponge, aqueous outflow was observed without shunt displacement. After checking repeatedly, the scleral flap was closed with 4 simple sutures. Mitomycin C (MMC) 0.04% was applied for 4 min, followed by irrigation. The MMC was applied as far as possible from the distal margin of the scleral flap, so as to minimize the possibility of MMC penetration into the anterior chamber. Finally, the conjunctival incision was sutured. Postoperatively, IOP was maintained between 10 and 12 mmHg and the bleb was limited to the diffuse, prominent form. The Ex-PRESS shunt was sustained with good positioning .