A 44 year old woman from Pakistan presented to our service with chronic kidney disease of unknown aetiology. She was asymptomatic and had been told by her local hospital that she had chronic kidney disease five years earlier. She had gestational diabetes during pregnancy with her son and had recently been diagnosed with type two diabetes, with no complications, and started on repaglinide. She had hypothyroidism and was on thyroxine replacement therapy for 10 years but no other previous medical history. Her other medications consisted of sodium bicarbonate 600 mg twice daily, repaglinide 0.5 mg twice daily and allopurinol 150 mg daily. She took no over the counter or herbal medicines.
The patient’s 52 year old brother was found to have biopsy proven karyomegalic interstitial nephritis and had progressed to end stage renal disease but had not been genotyped; his biopsy had no features of amyloidosis. In addition another older brother and sister were noted to have normal kidney function as did her son. Her parents were first cousins and her mother had diabetes and hypertension; her father died from prostate carcinoma aged 73.
Clinical examination of all systems was unremarkable with a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg and heart rate of 72 beats per minute.
Urinalysis showed no blood or protein, microscopy revealed no leucocytes, urine protein creatinine ratio was 17 mg/mmol (NR 0–30) and no bence jones protein was detected. Haemoglobin was 110 g/L with normal white blood cells, and platelets. Creatinine was 223 μmol/l, a MDRD estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 22 ml/min/1.732 with a normal sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphate, bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase; parathyroid hormone was elevated at 8.4 pmol/L. Creatinine five years earlier was 121 μmol/l with an eGFR of 45 ml/min/1.73m2. Immunological screen was negative, in particular autoantibodies (ANA, ANCA, anti-dsDNA, ENA)were negative, complement C3 and C4 were in the normal range and immunoglobulins showed a mildly elevated IgG at 16.5 g/L (NR 7–16), but normal IgA and IgM levels and protein electrophoresis showed a polyclonal increase in gammaglobulins. Serum free light chains were kappa 33.4 mg/L and lamda 19.7 mg/l, with a ratio of 1.7 in keeping with renal impairment.
Ultrasound demonstrated 8.5 cm unobstructed kidneys with increased echogenicity of the parenchyma.
Sequence analysis using the Blueprint Genetics FAN1 single gene test identified a homozygous single base pair deletion c.1899del, p.(Cys633Trpfs*9) in the FAN1 gene (transcript number: NM_014967.4). This was confirmed with bi-directional Sanger sequencing and performed in a CLIA-certified laboratory accredited by the College of American Pathologists.
Renal biopsy demonstrated 28 glomeruli of which seven were globally sclerosed, with some glomeruli displaying congophilic material in the mesangial areas. In the interstitium there was approximately 10% chronic interstitial fibrosis and surrounding areas of light interstitial inflammatory cell infiltrate. There was marked irregularity of the tubules, with tubular cell nuclear pleomorphism and prominent nucleoli . In addition to the mesangium, there were small foci of interstitial amyloid on the congo-red stain with demonstrated apple green birefringence under polarised light . There was no immunoglobulin or complement deposition, and staining for serum amyloid A, kappa and lambda light chains was negative. Immunostaining for LECT2 was positive . On electron microscopy there were no electron dense deposits but there were randomly orientated and non-branching fibrils 7–11 nm in size found in the glomerular basement membranes and mesangial areas .
Serum amyloid P scintigraphy showed a moderate amyloid load in the spleen and adrenal glands with equivocal renal uptake . Her echocardiogram demonstrated no features of cardiac amyloid.
A diagnosis of KIN secondary to a novel homozygous single base pair deletion c.1899del in the FAN1 gene with concurrent ALECT2 was made, and the patient is currently being managed supportively for her chronic kidney disease. Her brother is set to undergo live donor transplantation from his wife.