A 35-year-old male diagnosed with malignant lymphoma of the small intestine was treated with surgery and chemoradiotherapy. Subsequently, he had a complete response after autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT). Eight years after PBSCT, he was diagnosed with treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia and underwent allogeneic HSCT stem cell from a fully human leukocyte antigen–matched sibling. He received cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation for conditioning. Short-course methotrexate and cyclosporine A (CSA) were used for GVHD prophylaxis. A month after HSCT, he developed interstitial pneumonia due to acute GVHD. He had lichenoid lesions in the oral mucosa, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and bronchiolitis obliterans three months after HSCT. Oral biopsies revealed the diagnosis chronic GVHD and showed acanthosis of the oral epithelium. He was treated with CSA and prednisone. Two years after HSCT, he presented with an erosive mass in the upper gingiva and adherent white patches in the lower gingiva . The diagnosis of oral SCC in the upper gingiva and low grade dysplasia in the lower gingiva was confirmed by biopsy. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) that was routinely performed for oral malignancy patients in our hospital revealed high grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the esophagus . The malignant and premalignant lesions of oral cavity were surgically removed by partial maxillectomy and CO2 laser abration. Two month after the operation, high grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the esophagus was treated with endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). Two years after the operation, the patient could not be followed-up in our hospital, because his lung function worsened due to chronic GVHD.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed using antibodies against p16 (Epitomics, Burlingame, USA), p53 and Bcl-2 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). The procedure was done according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Well-characterized samples of nonmalignant, premalignant and malignant mucosa for immunohistochemistry were selected from the biopsy specimens.
The basal and suprabasal cells’ nuclei of the acanthotic, dysplastic and malignant lesions were positive for p53 (data not shown). The lymphocytes below the epithelium and around SCC but not tumor cells were positive for Bcl-2 (data not shown). The tumor cells of malignant and premalignant lesions of the oral cavity and esophagus but not acanthosis were positive for p16 .