An 82-year-old woman presented with a 4-mo history of a painless mass in the right parotid gland.
The painless mass in the right parotid gland had rapidly grown over the previous 4 mo. The symptoms were not relieved after anti-inflammatory treatment for 7 d.
The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension.
The patient’s medical history and family history were unremarkable.
Physical examination showed a 3 cm diameter mass in the right parotid region, with localized reddish skin, clear boundaries, medium texture, mild tenderness, moderate mobility, no fluctuation, and no facial paralysis. No obvious bulge was found on the parapharyngeal wall, and secretions from the parotid duct were clear.
Laboratory tests showed the following results. Urine analysis showed urine occult blood (BLD) (+ -); liver and kidney functions were normal; preoperative routine electrocardiography (ECG) and dynamic ECG suggested sinus bradycardia; and other auxiliary examination results were unremarkable.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the neck and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the parotid gland demonstrated an approximately 28 mm × 21 mm irregular mass shadow at the lower pole of the right parotid gland, with unclear boundaries, obvious inhomogeneous enhancement, and thickened and enhanced adjacent skin. A malignant tumor in the right parotid gland and involvement of the adjacent skin were suspected. Multiple lymph node shadows in the right parotid gland and the right II, V regions were consistent with possible lymph node metastases.
A generally greyish-red, 5 cm × 4 cm × 4 cm specimen of parotid tissue, which had a 3.5 cm × 1 cm segment of skin tissue attached and an underlying 3 cm × 2 cm × 1.5 cm, grayish-yellow nodule , was sent for postoperative pathological examination. Microscopic examination showed nest-like tumor cell growth that infiltrated the surrounding striated muscle tissue. Tumor cell cytoplasm was bright and transparent, and some cells were eosinophilic. A large number of interstitial lymphocytes were found, and lymphoid follicles were formed in some regions. Immunohistochemistry results demonstrated that the tumor cells were p40+, CK7-, CK5/6+, p63+, CD117-, MUC5AC-, CEA+ (a small number of cells), EMA+, CK19+, Dog-1-, SMA-, S-100-, AR-, HER2-0, ER-, PR-, GCDFP-15-, and calponin-. In situ hybridization indicated that the tumor cells were EBER- and HER2-. The combined results of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) morphology, immunohistochemistry, and EBER in situ hybridization were highly consistent with sebaceous lymphadenocarcinoma. The remaining cervical tissue was cleared, and metastases were found in regions 2 (1/6) and 5 (1/4) of the detected lymph nodes .