A male of a 38-year-old presented to us with pain complaints and swelling in his right elbow and forearm for the past 1 year. Pain was insidious in onset, moderate in intensity, non-radiating, gradually progressive in nature, aggravated by movement, partially relieved with rest. Initially, the swelling was localized to elbow joint extending to forearm on the past few months. No history of weight loss was there and any history of trauma but was associated with episodes of fever. On examination, the patient appeared malnourished, locally massive swelling extending from elbow to distal forearm was seen. Swelling was circumferential around the elbow joint, distally it was localized to anterolateral aspect of forearm. It was tense, with prominent veins, and was tender around the elbow but non-tender around forearm. It was soft and cystic in consistency, compressible, with positive fluctuation. Movements around elbow joints were limited . Distal neurovascular status was intact. Blood picture revealed raised lymphocyte count with raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Radiologically, X-ray of elbow joint showed arthritic changes along with multiple ill-defined no sclerotic lytic lesion involving humeral condyles, olecranon process of ulna, and radial head along with large soft-tissue shadow . MRI was suggestive of large collection along the anterolateral aspect of the right forearm which was mainly restricted to subcutaneous plane . Incision and drainage of the swelling was done under GA. Intraoperatively, the swelling was filled with purulent exudates of around 1 L in volume . The microbiological and histopathological examination of the synovial and necrotic tissue showed caseating granulomas with cells is as Langhans giant consistent with tuberculosis. Postoperatively, the patient was put on antitubercular drugs which included four agent drug treatment using isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol (AKT-4). On follow-up at 4 weeks and 3 months, thereafter the swelling did not recur . At present, he is improving with no recurrence of swelling.