A 33-year-old black-African female, G1P0M1 with no co-morbidities, presented to a level 2 hospital with a one-week history of obstipation, vomiting and abdominal distension associated with abdominal pain. The pain radiated to the umbilicus and suprapubic regions. She had a history of having had a MVA performed for an incomplete miscarriage, 63 day prior to the start of her symptoms. She had no previous history of abdominal surgery, and no external hernias were found. She was then referred to our facility, a level 3 hospital for further review and management.
On assessment, she was alert but generally wasted, with no evidence of dehydration. She was normotensive with a blood pressure of 125/75 mmHg but had a tachycardia of 127 bpm. Her abdomen was distended with peritonitis and bowel sounds were absent. Her rectum was empty with an impression of a mass anteriorly. Arterial blood gas showed a pH of 7.516 and HCO3− of 31.8 mmol/L (see ). Her white cell count (WCC) and CRP were elevated at 26.64 × 10(9)/L and 233 mg/L respectively. The patient was initially resuscitated with intravenous fluids and electrolyte abnormalities were corrected before she was sent for radiological investigations.
Plain erect abdominal radiograph showed dilated loops of small bowel with multiple air-fluid levels. Contrast enhanced CT of the abdomen showed features of SBO with a transition point in the pelvis. Her uterus was large, bulky and inhomogeneous with endometrial enhancement. The CT scan also showed endometrial free fluid with poor myometrial enhancement . The dilated loops of small bowel had pneumatosis intestinalis . Both the superior mesenteric artery and vein were normal. Differential diagnoses were pelvic inflammatory disease with adhesions, ileo-caecal tuberculosis or internal herniation of small bowel.
The patient was taken to theatre for an exploratory laparotomy which revealed a 30 cm long segment of necrotic small bowel, 15 cm from the ligament of Treitz. There was jejunal herniation into the uterine cavity . There was faecal contamination. The necrotic bowel was resected and the gynaecology team repaired the uterine defect. It was unsafe to do an anastomosis due to abdominal sepsis. The necrotic bowel was resected and a double barrel jejunostomy was fashioned.
The challenge with this patient was that the segment of bowel involved was very proximal which led to a high output proximal stoma. She received total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and her stoma losses were replaced. The stoma was then reversed 6 weeks after the surgery, and the patient was able to return to her usual activities.