A 15-day-old Japanese boy was referred to our hospital with right hydronephrosis, which was detected on ultrasonography during the gestational period. The patient was afebrile and had normal vital signs. Urine examination showed normal results.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed complete ureteral duplication on the right side and a dilated upper pole ureter . VCUG did not reveal any evidence of VUR or urethral obstruction. DRF, assessed using a DMSA scan, was 53.1% for the right kidney, of which 20.4% was related to the upper pole moiety . Urethral cystoscopy revealed a right lower pole ureteral orifice and left ureteral orifice, while retrograde pyelography revealed that the dilated ectopic upper pole ureter was opening into the prostatic urethra . Since the patient had two consecutive episodes of febrile UTIs for which we suspected the ectopic upper pole ureter to be the predisposing factor, a transvesicoscopic UR was performed at the age of 2 years and 5 months.
The patient was placed in the supine position with the legs separated. A 5-mm camera port and two 5-mm working ports were placed into the bladder under cystoscopic guidance using the methods reported by Yeung et al. A 20-cm-long 5-F catheter was inserted into the right lower pole ureter and fixed with 5-0 absorbable sutures as a stent to facilitate subsequent ureteral mobilization and dissection . When mobilization of the lower pole ureter was continued into the extravesical space , we could detect the dilated ectopic upper pole ureter immediately posterior to the lower pole ureter through the hiatus . After we carefully pulled out the ectopic upper pole ureter following ureteral dissection , we cut it off using a monopolar hook to achieve hemostasis at the cut ureteral end . Once an adequate length of both ureters was obtained, the muscular defect in the ureteral hiatus was repaired using 4-0 absorbable sutures to prevent CO2 leakage from the bladder . The diameter of the dilated ectopic upper pole ureter was 10 mm; therefore, it was plicated using the Starr technique with 5-0 absorbable sutures by inserting a 10-F catheter into the ureter, and the diameter of the ureter was reduced to 6 mm . After we created the site of the new ureteral orifice (above the left ureteral orifice) and a 3-cm-long submucosal tunnel, both the ectopic upper pole and lower pole ureters were drawn gently together through the tunnel. Subsequently, ureteroneocystostomy was performed with intracorporeal suturing using interrupted 5-0 absorbable sutures . Only a 4-F catheter was inserted into the right upper pole ureter, and a drain was not used. The port sites were closed using 3-0 absorbable sutures. Postoperative VCUG revealed no VUR and DRF of the upper pole moiety assessed by a DMSA scan did not decrease. Four years later, the patient does not have urinary incontinence or voiding problems, and there is no recurrence of right hydronephrosis, dilated ureter, or febrile UTIs.