An 18-month-old Saudi female was referred from a local hospital in Najran (a city in southwestern Saudi Arabia) for recurrent hypoglycemic attacks. Prenatal history was unremarkable, except that the mother developed gestational diabetes mellitus. She is a product of full-term cesarean section with a low birth weight of 1 kg and respiratory distress, which required a NICU admission for 2 months. She was developing normally until the age of 9 months when she started to have multiple seizure episodes. The seizures were generalized tonic–clonic with upwards eye rolling and absence of fever, lasting 2–3 min each. The patient has a 6-year-old brother, known to have an epilepsy disorder.
Four months later, the mother started to notice that her daughter is lazy and sleeping for a long time. She experienced her first episode of hypoglycemia in the form of lethargy, drowsiness, and irritability. So, she sought medical advice at their local hospital, where they admitted the patient for observation and discharged her home two days later on dietary recommendations only. As per the mother, her daughter did not improve, in fact, she deteriorated with another episode of seizure and decreased level of consciousness. She was then admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) with a blood sugar level of 30 mg/dl and managed with in vitro fertilisation (IVF) only, then she was referred to our hospital (King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre) in Riyadh for further investigation and management of her recurrent hypoglycemic attacks as a case of PHHI.
Upon arrival at our hospital, the patient was hypoglycemic requiring high dextrose concentrations that reached up to D25%, along with frequent high doses of octreotide and glucagon. The referral notes showed high insulin and low glucose levels with absent C-peptide values. This was confirmed with our blood workup, which showed serum glucose of 4 mmol/L, insulin level of 3744 pmol/L, and low C-peptide values. Multiple samples were taken on different occasions for her frequent hypoglycemia thereafter and showed the same results of low glucose, high insulin, and very low C-peptide levels . Physical examination revealed an obvious swelling on the upper and lateral aspect of her right thigh muscle with needle insertion marks, as well as needle marks on her deltoids bilaterally. In addition, the nurse noticed that the child is calm and not crying every time they prick her with the needle.
During admission, we noticed multiple red flags from the history. Furthermore, the mother was insisting on a pancreatectomy rather than going for a positron emission tomography (PET) scan. Finally, and most importantly, all hypoglycemic attacks occurred while the mother was around.
All other investigations were unremarkable, which pushed the diagnosis away from being a normal hyperinsulinemic case and raised the suspicion of an exogenous cause for the hypoglycemia.
While in the PICU, the decision was made by the PICU team, along with the primary team and the child safety team, to keep the patient under close observation with no accompanying family members. During that time, she did not develop any additional hypoglycemic attacks . Also, induction of hypoglycemia was demonstrated, and it took her 18 hours to become hypoglycemic with normal critical sample values . Therefore, she was discharged from the PICU to the general ward after 5 days observation period.
The Social Protection Services was informed, and two social workers came to the hospital to investigate the situation. The mother was confronted after that; she made an extensive confession and reported that she had given her daughter insulin injections for more than 6 months (before and during hospital admission) to induce the symptoms. A social inquiry noted that the intention behind her actions was to get the attention of her ex-husband after their recent divorce. Furthermore, both parents live in Najran, the father works while the mother receives monthly support from social affairs. There was no reported history of chronic diseases or psychiatric disorders in either parent.
Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with a caregiver-fabricated illness (CFI), which was, in this case, hypoglycemia, and she was discharged in good health with her maternal grandmother after 19 days of hospital stay under supervision from the Social Protection Services. The father was informed and he agreed to the arrangement.