The patient was a 61-year-old Japanese woman, who was admitted to our hospital for breast cancer surgery. She had a medical history of stroke and regularly took aspirin. Her height was 163 cm and her body weight was 47 kg. She had no history of allergies, no relevant social history, no muscle disorders, no family history of MH, and no abnormal findings on preoperative examination.
General anesthesia was introduced by intravenous injection of propofol (target-controlled infusion: TCI 4.5 µg/mL), remifentanil (0.35 µg/kg/min), and rocuronium (40 mg). After intubation, anesthesia was maintained by propofol (TCI 2.5 µg/mL) and remifentanil with bispectral index monitoring, and mastectomy and muscle flap reconstruction surgery was performed. The surgery itself was completed without any major problems. Operation time was 560 minutes, and anesthesia time was 811 minutes. Figure shows the time course of anesthetic management in the operating room and during her stay in the intensive care unit (ICU).
The time course for core body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, EtCO2, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), creatinine phosphokinase (CPK), and Larach score, which is used for the clinical grading of MH , is shown in Fig. . During the operation until the time of ICU admission, we also administered alprostadil alfadex to control the patient’s blood pressure and to maintain blood perfusion for the muscle flap reconstruction.
After the operation and during recovery from anesthesia, the patient showed weak spontaneous respiration and recovery of muscle power, and responded to our instructions but was still slightly drowsy. We observed her for about 15 minutes; however, her recovery was not sufficient. Therefore, we finally decided to administer sugammadex (300 mg) and doxapram (40 mg) to antagonize the effects of the muscle relaxant and anesthetic agents. The patient subsequently showed good recovery of consciousness and respiration. We extubated the patient, and 15 minutes later, shivering and masseter spasm were observed, as well as increases in blood pressure and body temperature (maximum: 39.7 °C) and EtCO2 (maximum: 59 mmHg). To measure ETCO2, we put a capnometer on the patient’s mouth and sealed it using an oxygen mask. We also approximated partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) from blood artery gas measurements. At the same time, her consciousness level became drowsy again (GCS: E3V3M5). Blood gas analysis (FiO2, 1.0) demonstrated the following: pH 7.279, paCO2 59 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) 37.8 mmHg, bicarbonate anion (HCO3−) 26.8 mmol/L, base excess (BE) 0.8, hemoglobin (Hb) 11.8 g/dL, hematocrit (Hct) 36.4%, sodium ion (Na+) 146 mmol/L, potassium (K) 3.9 mmol/L, chloride anion (Cl−) 113 mmol/L, calcium ion (Ca2+) 1.24 mmol/L, glucose (Glu) 124 mg/dL, and lactate (Lac) 1.8 mmol/L. We suspected postoperative MH and started continuous body cooling, and the administration of cold potassium-free fluid (total: 1750 mL) and dantrolene (3.6 mg/kg; total: 180 mg) to prevent the loss of urine and reduce the body temperature to within the target range of 37–38 °C 40 minutes after the extubation, and by 90 minutes after the extubation, we succeeded in reducing the body temperature to approximately 38.1 °C. We then stopped the administration of dantrolene. The patient’s hypertension did not resolve upon the administration of antihypertensive drugs, but her consciousness level became clear (Glasgow Coma Scale [GCS]: E4V5M6).
The patient was transferred to the ICU for continuous cooling and observation. Continuous infusion of a calcium channel blocker was started. The patient’s maximum creatine phosphokinase (CPK) level was 470 U/L. No consciousness disorder, hypotension, increased serum potassium, metabolic acidosis, cola urine, or acute kidney or liver injury was observed during her ICU stay. The patient was discharged to the general ward on postoperative day 1 (POD1) without any complications.
Muscle biopsy (Calcium-induced calcium release [CICR] measurement test) was performed after the patient’s discharge, providing a definitive diagnosis of MH. As there are only two facilities in Japan at which CICR measurements can be performed, we were unable to perform the measurements immediately at the time. However, genetic analyses for mutations in the ryanodine receptor (RYR1) and voltage-dependent Ca channel (dihydropyridine receptor [DHPR]) genes were not performed.