A 60-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of stage 5 chronic kidney disease presented with complaints of heaviness and pain in the medial aspect of left thigh, worsening over seven days. She denied any fever, chills or rigors. Past medical history was remarkable for coronary artery disease, hypertension, well controlled Type II diabetes mellitus diagnosed nine years ago, (hemoglobin A1C of 5.6, six months prior to presentation) and chronic kidney disease stage 5 (glomerular filtration rate: 12 ml/min/1.73 m2). Her medications included pioglitazone, furosemide, atenolol, lovastatin, lisinopril, isosorbide mononitrate and metolazone. Physical exam revealed some tenderness on the left thigh region but no edema or erythema. She had palpable pulses bilaterally. Rest of the physical exam was within normal limits. A doppler ultrasound performed on bilateral lower extremities was negative for deep vein thrombosis. Laboratory data revealed a white blood cell count 13.1 thousand/mm3, hemoglobin 8.6 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen 52 mmol/l, creatinine 4.7 mmol/l (baseline creatinine around 5.0 mmol/l), calcium 10.4 mmol/l, albumin 2.2 gm/dl, phosphorus 8 mmol/l and a parathyroid hormone (PTH) level of 2138 pg/dl (with a level of 1381 pg/dL 6 months prior) On the fifth day of hospitalization, she started developing peridermal necrotic areas along with erythema and tenderness in her thigh . She was initially started on vancomycin as the lesions were suspected to be secondary to local cellulitis. However the absence of fever and the presence of a markedly raised PTH levels along with the clinical picture of widespread necrosis with erythema made calciphylaxis a possibility. X-ray of left thigh was then obtained demonstrating extensive vascular calcifications thus making calciphylaxis highly likely on our list of differential diagnosis. We did not perform biopsy of the plaques as biopsy of a calciphylactic tissue is known to precipitate ulceration and subsequent infection [,]. Patient was started on chronic renal replacement therapy and pain control and discharged home to be followed up as an outpatient. She presented back to the hospital because of worsening left thigh ulceration and related pain. Subtotal parathyroidectomy was then performed on this hospitalization because of very high concentration of parathyroid hormone. After parathyoidectomy, patient's calcium phosphorus product decreased from 80 to 30. Serum calcium and phosphorus had decreased to 8.2 mg/dl and 3.7 mg/dl respectively. On out patient follow up her serum intact parathyroid hormone level decreased to19 pg/ml over a 2 month period. Her skin lesions continued to progress and she complained of significant pain related to these lesions. We then performed a thorough literature review regarding various treatment options available for calciphylaxis and had detailed discussion with the patient regarding the same. Decision was made to try sodium thiosulfate. She was administered sodium thiosulfate therapy 3 times weekly (25 g intravenously over 30 to 60 minutes) following each hemodialysis session. Over the next 2 weeks patient had significant improvement in her pain symptoms and marked decrease in analgesic demand. She was then transferred to a nursing home with continued use of sodium thiosulfate along with each hemodialysis session. After 3 weeks patient was readmitted to the hospital with worsening skin lesions extending to involve her abdomen, buttocks and calf region in bilateral lower extremities. Patient was continued on sodium thiosulfate for 4 more weeks but her skin lesions continued to progress and deteriorate. Various other management options were again discussed with the patient and the decision was reached to keep her comfortable and her management was transferred to hospice care