The patient was a 63-year-old male who presented to our clinic with left axillary pain and significant shoulder movement limitation. His symptoms started 15 years ago and did not subside despite using several pain killers. Initially, his pain was vague and sensed over the entire left shoulder. However, after 7 years, his pain changed in nature to a paroxysmal and lancinating one localized to the left axilla. He did not state any history of trauma. He had undergone radiologic and cardiologic work-ups several times without achieving a definite diagnosis. From 6 years ago, he noticed an axillary lump, assuming it to be an insignificant lesion unrelated to his chief complaint. According to the patient, the mass was sensitive to cold temperature and obliged him to wear warm clothes. As the mass size became larger and the pain was exacerbated, he became worried and came to our clinic for further evaluation.
Upon physical examination, his lump was revealed to be a fixed and painful mass located at the patient's left chest wall (in the mid-axillary line). No enlarged axillary lymph nodes were detected. His left shoulder's passive motion was in full range, but his active range of motion, especially active forward elevation, was limited.
The chest X-ray and shoulder X-ray of our patient were insignificant. His left shoulder magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 5-cm (in the largest diameter) left axillary soft tissue mass at the mid-axillary line. The tumor was deep to the fascia and over the posterolateral chest wall extending from third to fifth ribs with no visible rib cage involvement [Fig. ].
Our differential diagnoses were schwannoma, hemangioma, glomus tumor, lipoma, and their malignant counterparts. Thus, we decided to perform an open biopsy. The histopathology report was in favor of a GT. At the next step, the excision of the mass was planned. We approached the tumor through the mid-axillary longitudinal incision. The previous incision for biopsy was included in the surgical approach. During the operation, the lesion was observed to be an encapsulated mass situated between the scapular body and chest wall. There was no gross adhesion between the tumor and the surrounding tissues. Therefore, it was separated by blunt dissection. After ligating its main vascular pedicle, the mass was excised completely and sent for histopathologic assessment.
Macroscopically the lesion had an irregular red–purple tissue and sized 5 × 4 × 2 cm [Fig. ].
Microscopic examination showed vascular structures surrounded by clusters of glomus cells with no significant nuclear atypia or mitosis. These features could be suggestive of glomangioma, a variant of GT [Fig. ].
The tumor cells were positive for SMA and CD34 and negative for desmin and cytokeratin on immunohistochemical study [Fig. ].
The pain and sensitivity to cold disappeared immediately after the surgery. We followed the patient 1-month post-surgery and every 3 months afterward. At the final follow-up, 19 months after surgery, no recurrence was detected. The patient was satisfied and had no pain and sensitivity to coldness.