A 71-year-old woman was admitted to our emergency department after experiencing jaundice for half a month and was admitted to the hepatological surgery department in the first stage on February 7, 2023. She was admitted to the emergency department again 3 wk after receiving surgery for cardiac arrest on March 2, 2023.
First stage: In the previous 2 wk prior to her first admission to the hospital, the patient found that her skin and sclera turned yellow, accompanied by chills, but without fever. Obstructive jaundice was considered and treated with medication. However, the treatment did not work, and her jaundice worsened. Therefore, she was admitted to our hospital.
Second stage: Three weeks later, the patient returned to the hepatobiliary surgery department for follow-up. The patient entered cardiac arrest and was admitted to the emergency department.
The patient had a history of gallstones and choledocholithiasis.
The patient had no remarkable personal or family history.
The physical examination revealed a temperature of 37.1°C, pulse of 56 beats per minute, respiration rate of 23 breaths per minute, and blood pressure measured at 163/99 mmHg. Her skin and sclera were yellow, her abdomen was soft, with no tenderness or rebound pain, and Murphy’s sign was negative.
The results of a routine blood test were as follows: White blood cell count 4.67 × 109 /L; hemoglobin 153 g/L; and platelet count 127 × 109 /L. The biochemical test results were as follows: Alanine aminotransferase 309.4 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase 313.1 U/L; total bilirubin 193.9 μmol/L; direct bilirubin 162.4 μmol/L; albumin 32.2 g/L; cholinesterase 4739 U/L; blood urea nitrogen 4.4 mmol/L; creatinine 48 μmol/L; lactate dehydrogenase 419 U/L. Tumor markers were assessed as follows: Carbohydrate antigen-153 26.5 U/mL; alpha-fetoprotein 100.57 ng/mL; carbohydrate antigen-125 77.2 U/mL. Coagulation function results were as follows: Prothrombin time 14.3 s; prothrombin activity 59.2%; activated partial thromboplastin time 35 s; fibrinogen 1.07 g/L; D-dimer 1.19 mg/L; fibrinogen degradation products 3.59 mg/L. The myocardial enzyme series values were within normal limits.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed gallstones with cholecystitis, and there were stones in the common bile duct. The common bile duct was mildly dilated. The spleen was also enlarged.
After the patient entered cardiac arrest and was admitted to emergency, imaging examinations were as follows: Acute cerebrovascular lesions were not identified via head computed tomography(CT); chest CT indicated inflammation in the lower lobe of the right lung; abdominal CT showed no dilation of bile ducts inside or outside the liver, abnormal density, or splenomegaly.
The patient’s liver did not function normally since she was admitted to our emergency. Combined with the imaging results and elevated aminotransferases, gallstones with cholecystitis were considered. The patient underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy and common bile duct exploration. During the operation, it was revealed that the gallbladder wall was hyperemic and edematous, and the common bile duct was widened, with a diameter of approximately 12 mm. The stones in the common bile duct were removed completely, and the T-tube was drained. The average drainage from the T-tube was 305 mL per day.
However, the jaundice worsened, and elevations in direct bilirubin were observed . Other laboratory chemistry findings were as follows: Cytopenia affecting three lineages in the peripheral blood, hypertriglyceridemia, and hypofibrinogenemia. Re-examination of magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography did not indicate dilation or obstruction in the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. A series of tests, such as bone marrow morphology tests, were completed after hematologist consultation, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. Other relevant results were as follows: Ferritin 3881 μg/L; hemophagocytosis was found in the bone marrow ; and normal results for immunoglobulin, complement, antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antibodies, thyroid function, human parvovirus B19 (DNA), cytomegalovirus (nucleic acid), and Epstein–Barr virus (nucleic acid). We informed the patient's family that further diagnosis and treatment would be needed, and they intended to go to another hospital. When she returned to the hepatobiliary surgery department for follow-up, cardiac arrest occurred.