A 12-year-old boy presented to the neurology division, department of pediatrics, with episodes of seizures for the past 10 months. Seizures were generalized tonic clonic for the first 3 months, then the child developed recurrent episodes of myoclonic jerks 7–8 episodes per day with frequent falls. Six months after the onset of seizures, he developed disruptive and aggressive behavior along with poor scholastic performance. Subsequently, he developed progressive visual loss in the left eye (LE), six weeks prior to presentation. The provisional diagnosis by the pediatric neurologist was a neurodegenerative disease with myoclonic epilepsy under investigation.
On examination, the child had multiple scar marks on the forehead due to recurrent falls. He was oriented with normal speech but had poor memory and insight. The boy was referred to the Ophthalmology department for fundus evaluation. The visual acuity with a pinhole in the right eye (RE) was 6/9 and in the LE was 3/60. A left relative afferent pupillary defect was present. Only mild pallor of the right optic disc was discernible . The left optic disc was pale and the macula showed a subretinal scar with radial pigment splinters . Further inquiry revealed that he was unvaccinated and had a history of measles at two years of age in the form of exanthematous fever.
On further evaluation, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was found to be normal. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed generalized pseudo-periodic complexes . Measles ELISA-IgG antibody was positive in both the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum confirming the diagnosis of SSPE. The titer of anti-measles antibody in the serum and CSF was 1:256 and 1:16, respectively . The child was started on isoprinosine and anti-epileptic drugs. Six weeks later, the child presented again with new complaints of reduced vision in his RE. The visual acuity of the RE had decreased to 2/60. The LE maintained status quo . Ultrawide field imaging (UWFI) of the RE showed disc pallor, thinning at the macula, sclerosed vessels at the macula and inferotemporal retina along with a hemorrhage in the inferior half of the fundus . Part of the hemorrhage was bright red in color (presumably intraretinal, arrow) while part of it was dark red (subretinal, star). The ultrawide fluorescein angiogram (UWFA) of the RE revealed leak from vessels at the posterior pole and paravascular staining, capillary non-perfusion, drop out of retinal vessels (arrow) and arteriovenous loop (star) formation in the temporal periphery . The LE showed a window defect at the macula and capillary non-perfusion and staining of few nasal peripheral veins . An optical coherence tomography (OCT) inferior to the fovea of the RE showed retinal atrophy with an overlying detached internal limiting membrane . The LE revealed retinal thinning of the macula . Within one week, the inferotemporal part of the right macula showed cavitary changes in the outer retina suggesting a necrotizing outer retinitis . The subretinal hemorrhage completely resolved in the RE by 3 months leaving a moth-eaten thinned out retina, conspicuous retinal vessels, and peripheral subretinal deposits . The OCT of the RE showed a continuous thin strip of the inner retina with underlying fluid and absence of outer retinal layers along with macular atrophy . The visual acuity in the RE was 1/60 at this point of time. Unfortunately, the boy expired 30 weeks after initial presentation.