Our first patient was the 31-year-old female with a history of hypothyroidism and obesity. She had an acute form of Covid -19 in April 2020. The clinical course of COVID-19 was accompanied by loss of taste and smell, fever, and dry cough. Laboratory findings only showed elevated CRP. PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was positive while neutralizing antibodies were negative. Chest CT imaging was normal. In the spring of 2021, she received 2 doses of Pfizer vaccine. At the end of October 2021, fever, cough, back pain, dizziness, and muscle pain reappeared. ECG monitoring showed signs of arrhythmic disorder in the form of sinus bradycardia and tachycardia (35-133bpm).
shows the presence of bradycardia during an onset of headache.
Echocardiography was normal. Elevated values of ferritin (376 mg / L) and iron (34.9 mmol / l) can be seen in laboratory values. PCR on SARS-CoV-2 was positive. X-ray of the chest showed sequelae of previous infections with minimal fibrotic changes. In November 2021, a month after the onset of the disease, a patient came to our clinic as an emergency case due to an intense headache that didn’t react to strong analgesics. At the same time, anxiety along with cognitive symptoms that included mental fog and memory impairment appeared. The patient’s laboratory findings were normal, ferritin was still elevated and neutralizing antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 appeared for the first time. The patient underwent urgent brain CT and angiography imaging. Cervical and cerebral vessels had normal radiological characteristics . Brain CT imaging shows diffuse micro ischemic changes bilaterally frontoparietally, more pronounced on the left. There were several diffusely distributed micro hemorrhagic changes .
After consulting a neurologist, piracetam (800 mg) and analgesics were prescribed. Over the next 10 days, clinical symptoms improved, however, mental fog persisted.
Another 31-year-old female patient suffered from COVID-19 in the 7th month of 2020. During the 15 days of the acute phase, she had general weakness, loss of taste and smell and intense headache. Routine laboratory findings, including a lung chest x-ray were normal. She received 2 doses of Pfizer in late 2020. In October 2021, general weakness, the headache, and anosmia reappeared. Repeated PCR on SARS-CoV-2 was positive. Neutralizing antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 also appeared in December. 2 months after the initial COVID-19 infection, intense headaches, weight loss and muscle aches occur. Patient was referred to the brain CT imaging where minimal microischemic changes were seen frontoparietally to the left and supraventricularly on both sides, predominantly right .
A neurologist was consulted and piracetam was prescribed. 10 days after the treatment was finished, the patient reported that headaches are less intense and last a shorter period of time, but anxiety and insomnia are still present.