On 14 March 2020, a 62-year-old male patient with no significant medical history was admitted to intensive care for acute respiratory distress associated with cough, fever, and oxygen desaturation. Chest computed tomography (CT) was performed on admission, revealing diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacities with limited consolidations . Biological analysis showed an important inflammatory syndrome and kidney failure. Baseline laboratory values showed a slightly prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and increased D-dimer level which have both been reported in COVID-19 patients and associated with poor prognosis (Tang et al. ). We observed normal prothrombin time (PT), fibrinogen levels, and no thrombocytopenia. On the day of admission, the patient was intubated with ventilatory strategies similar to those applied in the case of severe acute respiratory distress syndrome such as high positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) and prone positioning. Empirical antibiotic treatment with cefuroxime was administered.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on a nasal swab confirmed COVID-19 diagnosis, and a bronchoalveolar lavage showed no bacterial infection. Following local guidelines, the patient was treated with hydroxychloroquine for 10 days. The patient developed renal failure that required dialysis. On day 2, refractory hypoxemia required the implantation of veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Anticoagulant therapy with unfractionated heparin (UNFH) was immediately started after implantation as recommended by the Extracorporeal Life Support Organisation guidelines. According to local protocol, APTT was used to monitor and adjust UNFH therapy.
On day 9, the patient developed life-threatening haemoptysis, and the chest x-ray showed increased condensation, particularly in the right lung. Several bronchoscopies were required to remove the recurring clots, particularly in the right main bronchus. Diffuse bleeding was seen on both sides. No heparin overdose was detected. Heparin treatment was stopped for 24 h. Viscoelastic coagulation tests (ROTEM®) were normal, while there was no effect of aerosolised tranexamic acid or intravenous desmopressin in the case of acquired Von Willebrand disease associated with ECMO therapy.
Faced with recurrent haemoptysis, bronchial artery embolisation was considered. We found no data in the medical literature on COVID 19 and bronchial artery embolization. We contacted several colleagues in France and the United States, but none had encountered this situation. Faced with this massive hemoptysis and without embolization, the patient’s death seemed inevitable.
Chest CT angiography (CTA) was performed prior to embolisation. It showed no pulmonary embolism or vascular abnormalities but the complete condensation of the right lung and three-quarter condensation of the left lung .
Through a right arterial femoral access with a 4 French (F) introducer sheath, we performed selective bronchial arteriographies using a 4F Sidewinder 1 Catheter (Cordis) and 2.7F microcatheter (Progreat, Terumo), which showed the normal appearance and calibre of the right and left bronchial arteries without active bleeding. Despite the advanced lung damage, we decided to proceed with the embolisation to control the haemoptysis. Complete bilateral embolisation was performed using calibrated particles (Embozene® 400 μm, Varian Medical Systems).
After the embolisation procedure, no recurrence of haemoptysis occurred, even after resuming anticoagulant treatment with UNFH. The chest X-ray revealed a slight improvement in the ventilation of the right lung. Unfortunately, the patient died from non-haemorrhagic shock3 days post-embolisation.