An 86-year-old male patient presented in our surgical ward 6 months after presumed, uncomplicated laparoscopic cholecystectomy performed in May 2022 due to necrotizing cholecystitis with 15 kg of weight loss, anorexia and rapid feeling of fullness since the operation. The patient denied pain or fever. Upon physical examination, the patient reported diffuse abdominal discomfort. The abdomen was described as soft with mild tenderness in the right upper abdomen. Blood tests revealed elevated C-reactive protein and white blood count. His past medical history was significant for severe tricuspid valve insufficiency, atrial fibrillation, type 2 diabetes mellitus and arterial hypertension.
Computed tomography scan (CT, ) revealed a perihepatic abscess (5.5 × 5.8 cm) with suspected connection to the pleural space and small calcareous structures. Diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. Due to a soft, vulnerable liver, small liver injuries and bleeding, open surgery was necessary to successfully and safely drain the abscess. Upon evacuation, lost gallstones were discovered and removed. Further, the diaphragm was eroded by the chronic inflammation, but the parietal pleura was intact. Follow-up x-rays revealed an increasing pleural effusion, which was considered reactive. Therefore, the placement of a chest tube in the 5th intercostal space at the midaxillary line was additionally needed and was left for 4 days. Empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy with piperacillin + tazobactam 4,000 mg/500 mg twice a day for 3 days was initiated and then switched to meropenem as a single 1,000 mg dose once every 24 h due to increasing C-reactive protein. Antibiotics were de-escalated to cefuroxime 750 mg once a day after 4 days according to the antibiogram of the detected Escherichia coli isolated from the intraoperative swab. This antibiotic regimen was followed for another 6 days.
Postoperative ICU stay was 13 days. Reintubation was necessary due to cardiac decompensation with pulmonary edema. In addition, acute to chronic kidney failure developed with need for hemodiafiltration. Cardiac recompensation was achieved using Levosimendan and Landiolol.
The patient was finally discharged after additional 33 days on a geriatric remobilization ward, where his autonomous ability and everyday skills were restored. However, chronic kidney failure with need for hemodialysis persisted. The patient died 12 months after being discharged due to acute cardiac decompensation.