A 30-year-old man with history of AD presented to the accident and emergency department of our hospital with fever and generalized skin rash. He complained of malaise and poor appetite for a week. He had a brief period of confusion on the day prior to admission. He also suffered from bronchial asthma that was well controlled with bronchodilator inhalers. There was no previous history of heart disease or rheumatic fever. He worked as an engineer in a plastic factory. He denied smoking or intravenous drug use. He had extremely dry skin with lichenifications affecting almost all areas of his body but worse on the elbows and knees for which he was applying moisturizers and 1% hydrocortisone cream. The exacerbations of eczema were treated with 2.5% hydrocortisone cream and varying dose of prednisolone tablets.
On examination, the patient was drowsy; temperature was 38°C, pulse rate 110/min and blood pressure 144/88 mm Hg. He had a generalized erythematous macular non-blanching skin rash and small purpuric haemorrhages over the palate. Systemic examination revealed a pansystolic murmur in the mitral area, splenomegaly and weakness of the right leg (power 3/5). Both plantar reflexes were extensor and sustained ankle clonus was present. There were no signs of meningeal irritation, cerebellar dysfunction or sensory deficit and fundoscopic examination was normal.
Laboratory investigations revealed haemoglobin 15.7 g/dl, WBC 14.5 × 109/l, platelets 50 × 109/l, ESR 19 mm/hour, C-reactive protein 292.9 mg/l, serum sodium 128 mmol/l, serum potassium 3.3 mmol/l, bicarbonate 27 mmol/l, blood urea 7.5 mmol/l and serum creatinine 207 μmol/l (patient's baseline – 118 μmol/l). Urine dipstick was positive for blood (++) and protein (+). Chest X-ray was normal. 12 lead ECG showed sinus tachycardia with features of left ventricular hypertrophy. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed mitral valve vegetation with severe mitral regurgitation and normal ejection fraction. CT scan of the brain was normal but MRI identified multiple areas of white matter abnormality suggestive of embolism around the periventricular area. Two sets of blood cultures grew Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to gentamicin and flucloxacillin.
The patient was commenced on intravenous gentamicin and flucloxacillin and later teicoplanin. After 48 hours he became afebrile; the rashes started to fade and his right leg weakness improved. CRP and ESR gradually reduced. Three weeks later, he had a recurrence of fever with elevation of CRP and ESR. Blood culture at that time showed no growth but his central venous line tip grew a coagulase-negative staphylococcus sensitive to rifampicin, vancomycin and netilmycin. His condition improved with removal of the central line and addition of rifampicin. The treatment was continued with teicoplanin for 6 weeks and rifampicin for 4 weeks. He was discharged 5 weeks later on treatment with ramipril and frusemide in view of significant mitral regurgitation.
Three months later, he underwent transoesophageal echocardiogram which showed perforation of the posterior mitral cusp with significant mitral regurgitation . He underwent successful mitral valve replacement 5 months following the presenting episode of infective endocarditis and was commenced on warfarin. Though he had an episode of eczema herpeticum two years following the infective endocarditis, he continues to do well.