A 79-year-old female patient presented with severe back and right-sided abdominal pain of one year duration.
The patient presented with severe lumbar and right-sided abdominal pain of one year duration, which had become increasingly severe over the preceding week. The patient did not complain of myelopathic symptoms such as heaviness or stiffness. She had no history of trauma.
The patient’s past medical history included hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and coronary heart disease. She had previously presented to two other hospitals with similar symptoms, but they advised her that she was too high risk for open surgery.
No relevant personal and family history.
Physical examination revealed lower back tenderness and percussion pain, which radiated to the intercostal region. Superficial sensation across the T12 dermatome on the right-side of the abdomen was decreased and strength in the lower extremities muscle groups was grade four. The right knee-tendon reflex and Achilles-tendon reflex could not be elicited bilaterally, but both the planter reflex and ankle clonus were negative. The patient had no abnormality in muscle tone. There is no urinary or faecal abnormalities. At baseline, the Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) and visual analogue scale (VAS) scores were 11 and 8 points, respectively. The physical and mental component summary of the 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36) were 15.5 and 34.375, respectively.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the whole spine revealed cystic lesions located adjacent to the nerve roots at the T11-L1 level. The lesion showed a low-intensity signal on T1WI and a high-intensity signal on T2WI. The cystic lesion had caused spinal nerve root compression and foraminal enlargement, without compression of the conus medullaris . MRI with gadolinium (Gd) contrast demonstrated no enhancement of the cysts. No apparent communications between the cyst and the subarachnoid space were detected on MRI. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis revealed bony erosion, foraminal enlargement, and enlargement of the spinal canal at the level of the cystic lesions .