A 61-year-old male presented to the infectious disease department of the First Hospital, Jilin University, with fever for 7 days. This patient had been diagnosed with DM 2 months prior. He was prescribed oral methylprednisolone therapy (morning dose 40 mg, night dose 24 mg, daily) without antibiotic prophylaxis after his diagnosis. He came to the hospital because he had a fever with a temperature up to 38.8 °C for 7 days. He also complained of intermittent productive cough with pale sputum associated with chest heaviness, pectoralgia and dyspnea at rest.
The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell count 11.98 × 109/L, with a neutrophil ratio of 93%; hemoglobin 133 g/L; and platelet count 139 × 109/L. Inflammatory marker levels were increased significantly: C-reactive protein (CRP) 174.1 mg/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 72 mm/h; and procalcitonin 0.05 ng/mL. Arterial blood gas analysis (with O2 5 L/min via nasal catheter) showed pH 7.51; pCO2 37 mmHg; pO2 60 mmHg; HCO3− 29.5 mmol/L; BE 6.1 mmol/L; lactate 1.9 mmol/L; and O2 saturation 93%. Blood biochemical index results showed that creatine kinase content increased to 746 U/L, creatine kinase isoenzyme content increased to 86.2 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase content increased to 682 U/L, and ɑ-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase content increased to 528 U/L. Nucleic acid detection of common respiratory pathogens (including Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, and influenza A and B) was performed, and nucleic acid detection of influenza A virus was positive. Nucleic acid detection of cytomegalovirus showed 4.5 × 104 copies/mL. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed bronchitis and inflammation in the right lung lobes, the left ligule lobe and the left lower lobe . All of the blood culture, urine culture and sputum culture results were negative. Both the 1,3-beta-D-glucan test (G test) result (15 pg/ml) and galactomannan test (GM test) result (0.33 μg/L) were negative. We also sent the sputum sample to perform Gomori-Grocott methenamine silver nitrate staining (GMS) for Pneumocystis jirovecii detection and obtained a negative result. The diagnosis of this patient included pneumonia, influenza A virus infection and cytomegalovirus infection.
Considering the treatment with methylprednisolone and the results of the tests, moxifloxacin (400 mg, QD, iv. D), piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5, Q8H, iv. D) and voriconazole (200 mg, Q12H, iv. D) were used after he was hospitalized . Oseltamivir (75 mg, Q12H, orally, for 5 days) was given after the positive result of the nucleic acid detection of influenza A virus was received. After 2 days of treatment with voriconazole, the patient developed visual hallucinations and confusion, and the antifungal treatment was changed to micafungin (50 mg, Q12H, iv. D) . Ganciclovir (0.25, Q12H, iv. D) was given to him after receiving the positive nucleic acid detection of cytomegalovirus. On the 6th day after admission to the hospital, his body temperature decreased to below 38.5 °C but did not decrease to normal levels . Meanwhile, his cough and dyspnea were obviously relieved. His arterial blood gas analysis (without an O2 nasal catheter) showed pO2 80 mmHg and O2 saturation 95%. On the 9th day after admission to the hospital, the patient underwent a second CT scan test, and the results showed that some of the inflammation was alleviated, but the inflammation in most lung lobes was worse . The G test and GM test results remained negative. Blood biochemical index results showed that the creatine kinase content decreased to 441 U/L, creatine kinase isoenzyme content decreased to 47.5 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase content increased to 505 U/L, and ɑ-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase content increased to 395 U/L. To verify pathogen-induced pneumonia, the patient underwent bronchoscopy examination with collection of BALF specimens, and these samples were sent to BGI Diagnosis Co. (Shenzhen, China) for an NGS test on the 12th day after admission to the hospital. We also sent the BALF samples to perform GMS for Pneumocystis jirovecii detection, and this time, we obtained a positive result. In addition, another portion of the BALF was sent to the laboratory for traditional culture and T-SPOT, which were reported as negative. Two days later, NGS results showed that three fungi were in the BALF, namely, Pneumocystis jirovecii, Aspergillus fumigatus and Rhizopus oryzae . The other microorganisms detected by NGS are listed in Fig. , but they were not regarded as responsible for the invasive lung infection. The antifungal therapy was changed to posaconazole (75 mg, Q12H, orally) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX, TMP 0.24/SMX 1.2, Q6H, orally, for 3 weeks). The patient improved significantly, and his body temperature decreased to normal levels 4 days after adjusting the treatment plan . Then, he was treated with ganciclovir, posaconazole and TMP/SMX at home .
The patient’s body temperature remained normal, and no significant symptoms were observed . On the 30th day, he underwent nucleic acid detection for cytomegalovirus. The result was negative, and ganciclovir was discontinued. On the 35th day, TMP/SMX was discontinued because its course of treatment was long enough. The latest lung CT scan was taken on the 86th day, and the results showed that the inflammation of the lung lobes had dissipated well. Posaconazole was eventually discontinued . Blood biochemical index results were slightly higher than the normal levels but were much better than those before treatment.