A 3-month-old, 6 kg male intact Border collie with a subclinical PDA, diagnosed via transthoracic echocardiography 3 days prior, was referred for minimally invasive closure. On presentation, the dog was alert and the physical examination revealed pink, moist mucous membranes, capillary refill time of less than 2 seconds, palpable left basilar continuous murmur, and bounding femoral pulses.
Thoracic radiographs showed left-sided cardiomegaly and pulmonary over circulation . A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe left atrial and left ventricular dilation: left atrium/aorta (LA:Ao): 2.04, reference value: <1.6, normalized left ventricular internal diastolic diameter (LVIDDN): 3.02, reference value: ≤1.7) and large PDA, with an approximate minimal ostium and ampulla diameters of 5.2 and 10.3 mm . Doppler echocardiography confirmed left-to-right flow across the PDA with a pressure gradient of 102 mmHg in systole and 41 mmHg in diastole. Mild mitral regurgitation was also noted.
We considered that the small diameter of the femoral artery at the access site (1.6 mm in systole on 2D ultrasound) would be too small to safely introduce an 8, 9, or 10 mm ACDO (ACDO sizes ranging from 150%–200% of the minimal ostium diameter, as recommended by the manufacturer). These ACDO, respectively, require a minimal inner diameter of the delivery sheath of 0.073, 0.086, and 0.099 inches, corresponding to 6, 7, or 8 French outer diameter introducers. Therefore, we attempted occlusion using a 16 mm (AVPII as previously described with an expected ratio of 1.6 between device diameter and ampulla diameter, somewhat higher than other investigators have recommended (1.2–1.5) . We decided to use a larger up-sized device because of the minimally tapering ductus morphology and the low ratio of the maximal ampulla width to the minimal PDA diameter.
The owner was informed and gave their written consent to use other off-label devices if needed.
Anesthesia was induced and maintained as previously described and perioperative intravenous amoxicillin (22 mg/kg) was administered. The dog was placed in left lateral recumbency on the fluoroscopy table, the right jugular vein was surgically isolated by a cut-down technique, and an 11 Fr, 10 cm long introducer vascular sheath (Pinnacle Peripheral Introducer Sheath, Terumo Medical Corporation, Somerset, NJ) was inserted into the jugular vein. A 4 Fr, 65 cm long diagnostic catheter (Berenstein Hockey stick tip catheter, Infiniti Medical, Huddersfield, UK) was then inserted into the jugular vein along with a preplaced straight tip hydrophilic 0.035″, 150 cm long guidewire (Terumo Radiofocus® Glidewire, Terumo Medical Corporation, Somerset, NJ). The guidewire and catheter were passed, under fluoroscopic guidance, through the right ventricle into the pulmonary artery and through the PDA in a retrograde manner until the tip of the catheter reached the descending aorta. After removing the guidewire, an angiographic study using 3 ml of iohexol (240 mg/ml), manually injected, was performed, showing the morphology of the PDA (length: 9 mm, maximal ampulla width:10.4 mm, minimal PDA diameter at the ostium: 5.4 mm). Following angiography, a standard stiffness 0.035″, 175 cm long J-tip guide wire (Medtronic Angiographic PTFE Rosen Wire, Medtronic Vascular, Danvers, MA) was advanced into the descending aorta and the diagnostic catheter was removed. A 7 Fr × 40 cm guiding sheath with a 2.54 mm inner diameter (Flexor Balkin KCFW-7.0-38-40-RB-BLKN-HC with Check-Flo Valve, Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, IN) was advanced over the guidewire into the descending aorta to serve as a delivery sheath, and the guidewire was removed together with the dilator. A 16 mm AVPII was positioned via the delivery sheath into the PDA ampulla as previously described ; however, an immediate “pull-through” into the pulmonary artery occurred before deployment . The device was retracted and removed. Given the PDA morphology and the failure to secure the AVPII, we chose a 12 mm Amplatzer™ mVSD occluder device with a disc diameter of both discs of 20 mm, device waist size of 12 mm, and a length of connecting waist of 7 mm. This choice was based on the fact that the larger AVPII device is 18 mm wide and, given the ease and immediacy of pulling through, we thought that a device less than 2 mm wider would not have guaranteed against a post-operative embolization, even if successfully implanted. Furthermore, the next-sized AVPII (18 mm) is twice as long as the mVSD (14 vs. 7 mm). We considered that larger AVPII devices could have obstructed the aorta or pulmonary artery, as has been described in children .
The device, previously screwed clockwise onto the delivery cable and introduced into its loader (SJM Amplaterz™ TorqVue™ Delivery 45° component 7 Fr. Loader and Delivery cable, AGA Medical Corporation, Plymouth, MN) was inserted into the delivery sheath and advanced carefully until the distal disc was expanded in the descending aorta near the PDA. The partially deployed mVSDO, attached delivery cable, and delivery sheath were then gently pulled back simultaneously until the distal disc engaged the ostium of the PDA and lodged in the ductal ampulla. The guiding sheath then was retracted further allowing expansion of the central component of the device within the PDA ampulla. The entire system was then retracted and subsequently, the proximal disk was expanded within the main pulmonary artery. The stability of the device was then tested with the push-pull “Minnesota wiggle” maneuver, the cessation of transductive flow and the correct positioning of the mVSD pulmonary disc were verified with transthoracic echocardiography, and the device was then deployed . During the placement of the device all the parameters (saturation, invasive blood pressure, end-tidal CO2) remained within physiological ranges. Blood pressure increased (from 96/40/58 to 120/50/73 mmHg) while heart rate decreased (from 100 to 65 bpm) after occlusion of the PDA.
An angiogram was then performed through the delivery catheter, which, in dextrophase, showed no obstruction of the pulmonary artery and, in levophase, confirmed the complete closure of the PDA.
The delivery sheath and the introducer sheath were then removed, and the jugular vein was repaired with a 4–0 monofilament polydioxanone absorbable suture (PDS* II Ethicon, Raritan, NJ). Recovery from anesthesia was uneventful and the dog was able to walk and eat 3 hours later.
Echocardiographic checks at 3 and 24 hours showed complete PDA closure, correct positioning of the mVSDO , and a clear reduction in left heart volume overload (LA: Ao decreased from 1.72 to 1.3, LVIDDN decreased from 2.49 to 2.43).
The dog was then discharged and a check-up was scheduled at 3 months. The 3-month echocardiographic examination confirmed complete occlusion of the PDA with the absence of residual shunting, correct positioning of the device, disappearance of mild mitral regurgitation, and reverse remodeling of the cardiac chambers (kg 11.9, BSA 0.54, LA:Ao 1.14, LVIDDN: 1.94).
Ethical review and approval were waived for this study because this is not an experimental study, but the clinical report of a spontaneously occurring congenital disease and detailed informed consent were obtained from the owner for the publication of the images and the clinical case.