A 34-year-old Caucasian man, cook, smoker, but with no prior medical or surgical history, presented to the Emergency Department with explicit, acute-onset, left lower thigh pain and a midline thoracic pain after sustaining a rear-end motor vehicle accident while in the front car. A total body computed tomography (CT) scan showed a left femoral shaft fracture and an isolated T6 SP fracture. Intramedullary nailing of the femur was performed the same day and conservative treatment was favored for the T6 SP fracture. Three months after the accident the patient started to complain of mild upper back pain. As time went by, left lower limb function returned to normal while the upper back pain became increasingly bothersome. The patient’s description of the pain was mechanical since it intensified with activity.
Physical examination after 6 months of follow-up revealed distinct tenderness with minimal swelling on palpation of the mid-thoracic spine. Discrete limitation of range of motion of the spine was noted and pain was present at the same level during trunk flexion or hyperextension. No neurological compromise was present. Pain management and physical therapy with spinal rehabilitation programmes were conducted with moderate benefit on symptoms through 18 months of follow-up.
More than 2 years after the SP fracture, Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) combined with Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed a pseudoarthrosis of T6 SP and no other identifiable cause of pain .
A guided steroid injection was performed, which alleviated the pain significantly for a short period. Because of persistent pain, evaluated at 8/10 on the visual analog scale (VAS), surgical resection of the T6 SP was discussed and accepted by the patient twenty-eight months after the accident. Prior to the surgery a landmark wire was placed under CT to confirm the vertebral level . Intra-operatively, after a 3 cm midline incision we removed the tip of the T6 SP.
The postoperative course was uncomplicated. The nonunion was confirmed after histological examination of the fragment, which concluded that reactive fibrocartilage was present. After 6 weeks the patient was able to return to work and his usual daily activities without any limitation. Six months after surgery he did not complain of any limitation and reported intermittent mild upper back pain ranging from 0/10 to 2/10 on the VAS. Clinical examination revealed no pain on palpation and a full, painless range of motion of the trunk.