An 80-year-old woman with a history of obesity, hypertension, and obstructive sleep apnoea requiring CPAP presented to our emergency room with pain and swelling in her right leg along with shortness of breath with exertion. Notable vital signs included a heart rate of 94 b.p.m. and blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg. Her physical exam was unremarkable. Her laboratory workup revealed elevated pro-BNP and troponin T. Electrocardiogram revealed a new incomplete right branch bundle block . A venous Doppler of her right leg identified an occlusive deep vein thrombus (DVT) extending from the proximal posterior tibial vein to the distal posterior tibial vein . Computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed extensive bilateral pulmonary embolism (PE) with a saddle thrombus in the main pulmonary artery and evidence of right ventricular strain . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a large, highly mobile thrombus in the left atrium attached to the interatrial septum (Video 1A and B). Both the right atrium and right ventricle were dilated with moderate right ventricular dysfunction. The right ventricle demonstrated a positive McConnell’s sign (a distinct regional pattern of right ventricular dysfunction, with akinesia of the middle portion of the free wall but normal motion at the apex), and pulmonary pressures were severely elevated. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) showed a large, protruding, mobile thrombus starting in the right atrium that went through a PFO into the left atrial cavity . The thrombus was 1.5 cm long in the right atrium and 6.5 cm long in the left atrium. The left atrial segment intermittently protruded through the mitral valve with the cardiac cycle (Video 1C–F).
The patient was taken for an emergency pulmonary and intracardiac embolectomy with primary closure of the PFO. An intra-operative TOE performed after the induction of anaesthesia and before initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass confirmed the presence of thrombus in transit through the PFO. However, on atriotomy, there were no thrombi found in any of the cardiac chambers. It was presumed that the thrombi had migrated through the PFO and embolized. The time from TOE to atriotomy was <90 min, making it highly unlikely for such a large thrombus to completely dissolve. On pulmonary artery exploration, multiple large thrombi were removed from the main, right, and left pulmonary arteries. Once the patient was decannulated, a post-procedure TOE was performed, which confirmed the absence of an intracardiac thrombi and successful closure of the PFO.
Her post-operative recovery was uneventful. She had no focal neurological deficits or any apparent signs of large vessel embolization. Computed tomography venography found no thrombus in the inferior vena-cava or iliac veins. An abdomenal, pelvic, and head CT did not reveal any detectable emboli. At 6-month follow-up, TTE showed normalization of both pulmonary artery pressures and right ventricular function. Her workup for DVT and PE remained negative, and so she remains on life-long anticoagulation therapy with apixaban 5 mg twice a day for unprovoked DVT and PE.