It is a case report of a 25 years old male presented to us in outpatient departments with chief complaint of discharging wounds over mid part of his left arm since six months. On the complete history taking he revealed that he had an episode of trauma one year back over his left arm due to fall on the ground and swelling develops at that time. For it he did not take any medical advice and he took few pain killers and repeated massage over his left arm. Subsequently he noticed that the swelling over his whole left arm is permanent. After six months of this incident he felt that now mid of his arm is pain full and after 2 to 3 episodes of fever pus discharge came out. Since then, on and off the pus (sometimes with chunk of bone) is coming out.
On physical examination there were multiple discharging sinuses (with the protruding bony chunk) over his lateral aspect of his mid part of the left arm with puckered and hyper pigmented skin . On palpation his left arm was thickened and tenderness was found around the arm. Range of movements over left shoulder and elbow were terminally restricted and pain full. Vital signs of patient were stable and distal neurovascular status was intact. Clinical provisional diagnosis of chronic osteomyelitis of left humerus made and his hematological examination and X-ray sought. His hematological study was near normal except the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) which was raised (Westergren’s method=35 mm/hour).
X- Ray was astonishing, entire humerus bone was normal, and there was no any osteomyelitic change in the humerus. There was a geographic appearance of myositis ossificans around the upper two third of left arm .
After consent taking, the patient got operated. Sinuses curetted out and sequestrum (infected part of myositis mass, because it was not feasible to remove the all myositis mass) removed and sent for biopsy and culture sensitivity. Now after the one year of follow-up, there is no recurrence of the myositis ossificans. And the patient is free from discharging sinuses and has resumed his work.