A 64-year-old Japanese man presented to our department due to 6-week history of a painful solid lump in the chest wall. Moreover, he experienced loss of appetite and weight reduction. However, fever, night sweat, and respiratory symptoms were not observed. The patient was a former smoker (20 pack-years) but had no history of drinking. His medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and Basedow’s disease. Moreover, he was taking medications including telmisartan, amlodipine, atorvastatin, sitagliptin, metformin, and thiamazole.
Physical examination revealed the following vital signs: temperature, 36.7 °C; blood pressure, 116/83 mmHg; heart rate, 109 beats/minute; respiratory rate, 20 cycles/minute; and oxygen saturation, 93% on room air. A large solid, nontender mass was palpated in the left anterior chest wall, and skin bruising was observed . The patient had poor oral hygiene due to periodontitis. However, his other physical examination findings were normal.
The hemogram results were as follows: leukocytosis of 13.1 × 103 cells/μL with left shift. The blood electrolyte levels and renal and liver function test results were normal. The C-reactive protein level was 178 mg/L. Hemoglobin A1c was 7.0%, and the thyroid function was normal. Blood cultures revealed no growth. Chest radiography revealed consolidation in the left middle lung . Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass-like consolidation in the left upper lobe . Consolidation caused rib erosion, and it extended directly into the anterior chest wall, deep to the pectoralis major muscle. FDG-PET scan showed increased metabolic activity (maximal standardized uptake value [SUV] of 24.6) in the mass . A primary lung tumor invading the chest wall was suspected. The patient underwent bronchoscopy with bronchial washing and transbronchial biopsy, which did not reveal endobronchial abnormalities. After the procedure, the patient developed fever, and prophylactic antibiotic (amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg/125 mg orally every 8 h for 5 days) was administered. Biopsy using a specimen collected from the lesion in the left upper lobe had unremarkable results. Culture of the bronchial washing sample was sterile. CT scan-guided transthoracic biopsy of the mass was performed. Histologic examination revealed granulomatous tissues. Because the transthoracic biopsy result was considered nondiagnostic, surgical resection was conducted for diagnostic purposes.
Surgical extirpation of the mass with left upper lobe partial resection was performed. Pathological examination revealed the presence of sulfur granules and filamentous, Gram-positive rod-shaped bacteria in the inflammatory site . Tissue cultures for bacteria, fungus, and mycobacteria were negative. After the diagnosis of actinomycosis was made, the patient was treated with amoxicillin (1000 mg orally every 8 h). He completed an 8-week course of antibiotic treatment and experienced no recurrence 2.5 years after the operation.