A 38-year-old lady presented at our OPD complaining of swelling in the right lower leg, incidentally noticed 8 years ago, gradually increasing in size over the past 6 months. It was associated with pain on walking for more than 10 m. On examination a 15 cm × 6 cm × 3 cm hard swelling continuous with the anterior border of right tibia was noted. There was no local rise of temperature or tenderness. The overlying skin was pinchable. Plain radiograph showed an eccentric, expansile, lytic lesion in the distal third of right tibia with scalloping, and antero-lateral cortical break (, , ).
MRI showed irregular eccentric expansile lesion measuring 6.5 × 2.2 × 5.8 cm in the anterior cortex of tibia with a narrow zone of transition. Extension into intramuscular and subcutaneous planes was noted. A separate lesion was noticed in the lower third of right fibular diaphysis measuring 7 × 2 mm (, ).
A Tru-cut biopsy of the lesion showed high grade spindle cell neoplasm suggestive of adamantinoma with areas of round blue cell rests. There were areas of sarcomatous changes consistent with dedifferentiation. Immunohistochemistry was positive for Ki 67-moderate (30–40%), cytokeratin, p53, and CD99. Cytogenetic analysis showed Chromosome (11;22) translocation suggestive of Ewing’s-like adamantinoma. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue showed 22q12 (EWSR1) gene rearrangement in 32% of assessed cells confirming t(11;22) (q23;q12). After a clinico-patho-radiological correlation, a diagnosis of dedifferentiated adamantinoma variant, that is, Ewing’s-like adamantinoma was confirmed (, , ).
Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy was administered – two cycles of Vincristine, Doxorubicin, and Cyclophosphamide and two cycles of Ifosfamide and Etoposide. On post-chemotherapy day 14, she underwent wide excision of right distal and middle tibia. The extent of resection was planned according to the preoperative MRI and in consultation with the surgical oncologist. About 13 cm of bone was excised followed by stabilization with Ilizarov ring fixator and cement spacer as the first step. The purpose of cement spacer was to prevent contracture of soft tissue which might hinder future bone transport, eliminate the dead space thereby reducing risk of infection and also maintain limb length. The completeness of the resection was confirmed by post-operative histopathological examination of the whole specimen which showed clear margins. Resected tumor margins had a clearance of 3 cm proximally and 2 cm distally.
The second step performed after three months involved removal of cement spacer and corticotomy between proximal and middle rings. Bone transport was done over a period of 6 months. The third step included docking of the transported fragment into the distal segment after freshening bone margins and additional corticocancellous bone grafting from ipsilateral iliac crest. Early mobilization was done with partial weight bearing and exercise regimen for knee, ankle, and toes to prevent muscle wasting and contracture. Thus, the 13 cm discrepancy in limb length was corrected. There have been no signs of recurrence on post-resection follow-up of 2 years .
After docking of the fracture site, patient developed surgical site infection which was treated with antibiotics. Full range of movement of knee and ankle was attained. Union of the docking site was confirmed clinically and radiologically at 1 year, after which the ring fixator was removed. A cast brace was applied and patient was started on unassisted weight bearing.