A 50-year-old female was admitted with a history of intermittent fever for 2 weeks. The patient also had a history of three episodes of vomiting which was non-projectile, nonbilious along with a few episodes of loose motions. There was a history of abdominal pain for 3 days. The pain was sudden onset, severe in intensity, sharp, and was associated with distension of the abdomen. There were no aggravating and relieving factors. There was no relevant history of medical and past surgical history. The patient also denied for significant family history and relevant drug history. On examination, her initial blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, her pulse rate was 74 beats/min, her respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min, and her temperature was 37 °C (99 F). Abdominal examination showed distention and tenderness associated with guarding and rigidity in the upper abdomen. Blood investigations showed a total leucocytes count of 13,000/cmm (Neutrophil 65%, lymphocyte 30%). platelets count 100,000/l and hemoglobin of 12 mg/dl. Her liver function and renal function were within the normal limit. Erect X-ray was not revealed any free gas under the right dome of the diaphragm . Abdominal ultrasonography showed distended gallbladder with thickening of gallbladder wall; there was pericholecystic fluid collection along with a collection of fluid in the upper abdomen . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed a distended gallbladder with sludge, diffuse wall thickening, and contained perforation. There were inflammatory changes in the liver around the gallbladder with a mild amount of free fluid seen in the abdomen and pelvis (a, b). The Widal test revealed positivity for Salmonella typhi. With the diagnosis of type II gallbladder perforation, percutaneous ultrasonography-guided drainage was done. About 200 ml bilious drainage was found daily from the subhepatic drain. The culture of bile revealed positivity for Salmonella typhi. Intra-venous antibiotic (ceftriaxone and gentamicin) was administered for 14 days. Subsequently, the patient was discharged with a drain in situ. The patient was followed up two weeks later. There was a significant improvement in signs and symptoms.
Two weeks later, surgery was planned. As our patient had presented with type II gallbladder perforation, we had expected massive adhesions and inflammation, therefore laparotomy was done. Intraoperatively, there was a dense adhesion around the gallbladder. A defect was noticed in the anteromedial aspect of the gallbladder when the peritoneal adhesion was removed . The common bile duct appeared to be normal. Cholecystectomy was performed and subhepatic drain was kept after through peritoneal lavage. Postoperatively, there was a minor bile leak which was managed conservatively. The drain was removed on 7th postoperative day. Subsequently, the patient was discharged the next day.