A previously healthy 8-year-old Caucasian girl living in Italy was referred to the general hospital for the occurrence of intermittent fever up to 38 °C (irrespective of antipyretics), vomit and diarrhea (without evidence of blood or mucus) within the previous 10 days. Her mother also referred lack of appetite, weight loss (3 Kg) and abdominal pain dating back to few weeks before. Her medical history revealed no travel outside the country, no definite contact with infected people and an episode of pneumonia 2 years before. No previous abdominal complaints or diarrhea were reported.
On physical examination the girl showed clear sensorium, but appeared restless. Heart rate was 110 per minute, respiratory rate was 26 per minute, blood pressure was 90/50 mmHg, oxygen saturation was 97% (room air), ear temperature was 36 °C. No signs of dehydration were noted. Examination of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems was normal. Abdomen examination revealed timpanitic distension, marked tenderness and increased abdominal wall rigidity. Liver and spleen were not enlarged. Neurologic examination was normal. Height and weight were both at 50° centile per sex and age.
Abdominal radiograph showed bowel loops dilation and some air-fluid levels in the umbilical region with no signs of gastrointestinal perforation. Abdominal ultrasound showed diffuse particulate ascites, thickened and oedematous omentum and thickening of the bowel wall (mean 6.5 mm, Ref < 5 mm). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was also performed showing: diffuse intraperitoneal fluid accumulation (perihepatic, perisplenic, paracolic, Morison’ s pouch, pelvis), mesenteric edema, thickened ileum, colonic and sigma walls with pronounced enhancement . Chest X-ray revealed accentuated bronchovascular markings. CT of the chest was reported normal.
Patient’s laboratory data are summarized in Table . On admission blood tests showed lymphopenia with normal neutrophil count, increased platelet count and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. On suspicion of possible IBD, specific therapy was started, including methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day, metronidazole 30 mg/Kg/day and ceftriaxone 55 mg/Kg/day intravenously. The patient was subsequently referred to the regional reference center. Immediately after treatment her body temperature normalized, CRP levels rapidly decreased (from 132.35 mg/L to 4.69 mg/L within three days) and platelet count normalized within 5–6 days. Lymphocytes count persisted low (800/μL). However, based on clinical and laboratory findings, the diagnosis of IBD was not considered likely. Therefore the treatment was gradually discontinued. Notably, body temperature increased again upon steroid withdrawal.
Persisting the ascites, extensive work-up was started . No signs of hepatopathy, nephropathy or heart disease were noted. A blood culture showed no presence of aerobic or anaerobic bacteria. Blood tests for common infections were negative. Despite still on steroid treatment, Mantoux tuberculin skin test (TST) tested positive (12 mm) at 72 h. TST tested negative in her parents. Interferon Gamma release assay (IGRA) was barely positive (0.39 UI/ml, reference < 0.35 UI/ml) during steroid tapering off and markedly positive (1.62 UI/ml) after steroid withdrawal. Blood tests also showed elevated Ca125 serum levels (472 U/mL).
A new chest X-ray showed accentuated bronchovascular markings with left-sided pleural effusion. A second abdomen ultrasound was also performed, showing diffuse peritoneal effusion, slight wall thickening of the last ileal loop (4 mm, Ref < 5 mm) and hyperechoic mesentery. Second-opinion radiology consultation was requested to reassess the abdominal and chest CT scan, reporting tiny calcified nodules in the Barety’s space, mesenteric lymphadenopathy and diffuse smooth thickening of the omentum with significant enhancement (omental cake-like) .
Since the underlying etiology remained unclear, gastric aspirates and ascitic fluid were collected for analysis. Three consecutive morning fasting gastric aspirates were collected. Ziehl-Nielsen (ZN) staining, culture for acid-alcohol resistant bacilli (BAAR) and Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) tested negative. Ascitic fluid analysis showed high leucocytes count (3979/ μl) and high protein concentration (> 1000 mg/dl) with low serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG, < 1.1 g/dl). Ascitic fluid cytology showed lymphocyte predominance with no atypical or bizarre cells. ZN staining, PCR and culture for Mtb tested negative. Although PCR for Mtb in ascites was negative, a presumptive diagnosis of peritoneal tuberculosis (PTB) was made, based on omental and intestinal wall thickening, ascites with lymphocyte prevalence, accentuated bronchovascular markings, ileal calcification and pleural effusion in a patient with immunological evidence of TB infection and lack of clinical response to steroid treatment. Due to the young age and the lack of known previous TB exposure, the clinical feature was interpreted as intestinal localization of primary TB infection. Thus, a four-drug regimen was started: rifampin (16 mg/kg/day), isoniazid (12 mg/kg/day), pyrazinamide (32 mg/kg/day), ethambutol (24 mg/kg/day) and continued for 12 months (2 months rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol and 10 months rifampin and isoniazid). The treatment was well tolerated and rapidly effective as the fever and vomit disappeared within 36 h. Within 48 h abdominal complaints resolved and improved general conditions together with increased appetite were noted. Blood tests (including lymphocyte count and Ca125 serum levels) gradually normalized . Dramatic response to the anti-TB treatment was considered an additional diagnostic criterion. Abdomen Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 2 months after the onset of the treatment showed complete disappearance of ascites and all of the lesions.