A 50-year-old man presented to our hospital for treatment of cholelithiasis. Chest radiography revealed mediastinal enlargement, and cholecystectomy was being considered. Therefore, thoracoabdominal CT was performed in the arterial and venous phases to assess the course of the vessels. Pre-operative thoracoabdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed an aortic root aneurysm with a maximum diameter of 60 mm . The patient was evaluated pre-operatively by cardiologists and cardiovascular surgeons. He had no chest pain or signs of heart failure and was not receiving any medical treatment. He was 180 cm tall, weighed 68.4 kg, and had thoracic deformity and scoliosis . The patient had no family history of Marfan syndrome. He had not undergone genetic testing and had no ectopia lentis but fulfilled the revised Ghent nosology for Marfan syndrome. He had aortic root aneurysm (Z-score, 8.17) and a systemic score of 11 points. Physical examination revealed a grade IV/VI to-and-fro murmur at the left sternal border (Erb’s point) without pitting oedema of the lower extremities. Pulse was 114 b.p.m. and regular. Blood pressure was 127/70 mmHg. Body temperature was 37.0°C. Respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute and oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia and right axis deviation . Chest radiography showed mild pulmonary oedema but no pleural effusions, as well as an enlarged cardiothoracic ratio . Although detailed evaluation was difficult because of pectus excavatum, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed severe AR with aortic root enlargement and left ventricular enlargement (left ventricular end-diastolic dimension, 57 mm) ( and ). The AR jet was blowing into the left ventricle without extreme deviation. No obvious aortic valve prolapse was observed. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved with an ejection fraction of 68%. There was collapse of the inferior vena cava. There were no findings suggestive of pulmonary hypertension. Blood analysis showed elevated levels of hepatic and biliary enzymes, inflammatory response markers, and N-terminal pro-B–type natriuretic peptide (2380 pg/mL; normal range ≤ 125 pg/mL).
The patient had not been receiving medical treatment but was determined to have compensated heart failure. After discussion at a multidisciplinary conference, it was decided that AR and thoracic aortic aneurysm, which were found incidentally, should be further evaluated and treated after cholecystectomy. On the ninth day after admission, after the systemic bacterial infection had resolved without any worsening heart failure, the patient was scheduled for a cholecystectomy. However, while the patient was awake and undergoing lumbar anaesthesia, he experienced a sudden worsening of heart failure triggered by an increase in blood pressure due to mental and physical stress (168/137 mmHg). The surgery was postponed because the patient had to be intubated and treated for heart failure in the intensive care unit. Five days later, when his cardiac condition had improved, he underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Post-operatively, the patient was clearly aware of unsteady gait and dyspnoea on exertion compared with the time of admission.
After confirmation of the absence of a post-operative inflammatory response, the patient underwent cardiac CT. Cardiac surgery was performed 35 days after admission. Intraoperative TEE after induction of general anaesthesia revealed that the cause of AR included both enlargement of the aortic root and prolapse of the non-coronary and right coronary cusps of the aortic valve due to detachment of the aortic valve commissure between the right coronary cusp and non-coronary cusp . Based on the TEE findings, we reviewed the contrast-enhanced CT images and confirmed dissection of the aortic valve commissure from the aortic wall, which was only visible in one slice ( and ). We confirmed the commissural detachment and absence of other aortic dissections and infectious endocarditis intraoperatively ( and ). The commissural dissection could not be identified before cardiac surgery; it was detected during a detailed intraoperative TEE assessment. Fortunately, the dissection did not extend into the ascending aorta. A modified Bentall procedure was performed as planned.
Additional histopathologic investigation of the surgical specimens revealed aortic root aneurysm and dissected commissure with cystic medial necrosis, which explained the fragility of the blood vessels . Smooth muscle actin–positive and h-caldesmon–negative smooth muscle cells were found in the aortic valve commissural detachment . These findings were consistent with the onset of the detachment being approximately 1 month prior to this operation. Based on the above findings, we concluded that AR was exacerbated by a new localized dissection associated with elevated blood pressure during lumbar anaesthesia, resulting in acute worsening of heart failure. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. No cardiovascular events had occurred during 3 years of follow-up.