Informed consent was obtained from the patient. This case report was approved by the Medical Ethical Committee of Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Capital Medical University.
A 25-year-old gravida 1 para 0 woman who conceived naturally underwent routine obstetric ultrasonography at 30 weeks’ gestation that revealed an intracranial solid-cystic tumor. The mother suffered from anemia during pregnancy. The father was healthy.
Ultrasound showed that the tumor was 2.5 × 2.3 × 2.1 cm3 in size, located in the sellar region. It was regular shape and slightly heterogeneous solid mass with a little cystic component. No color flow was present inside the tumor but the peripheral encirclement by arterial circle of Willis. The lateral ventricles and the head circumference were normal. Fetal heart Tei-index was 0.32 (normal). The evaluation of fetal Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) and umbilical artery (UA) was normal. The amniotic fluid was normal, and no other associated malformations were detected.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which was taken subsequently confirmed the result of ultrasound. Meanwhile, it also provided more detailed information on the fetal central nervous system (CNS) including fetal brain dysplasia and the possible compression of optic nerves caused by the tumor . The parents were informed that the most likely diagnosis was optical nerve glioma; however, the malignant intracranial tumor was difficult to be excluded prenatally.
The pregnant woman underwent cord blood samplings because of the congenital malformations. Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) was performed for prenatal genetic analysis used with fetal cord blood and parental blood samples after the normal chromosomal karyotype analysis was revealed. It detected a 0.72-Mb duplication at 4q35.2 in fetus which was associated with epilepsy and cardiac anomalies . It encompassed the FRG1 and FRG2 genes. In addition, the CMA also revealed a 0.13-Mb deletion at 6q26 which was located inside the PARK2 gene. The mutation in the PARK2 gene (OMIM ID: ∗602544) is known to be related to autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson disease.[ Neither the duplication nor deletion was inherited from the parents.
Ultimately, the parents chose termination of pregnancy (TOP). The abnormal imaging findings were confirmed by autopsy . The histological examination showed low-grade neuroepithelial tumor. A mixed neuronal-glial tumor was final diagnosis because 2 cell types (neuronal cells and glial cells) existed in the tumor. The diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry results.