A 45-year-old HIV-infected black man, mechanic, has sought emergency department referring progressive asthenia for two weeks, with difficulty on performing basic daily life activities, anorexia, fever and profuse sweating. During this time, he reported a weight loss of 3Kg. In the last 24 h, he had vomiting episodes preceded by nausea, in small volume, without relation to feeding. The patient denied other symptoms like headache, cough, abdominal pain and diarrhea. The HIV infection was diagnosed 8 years ago and his current antiretroviral therapy consisted of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate – lamivudine – efavirenz in a once-daily single-pill. His medical history was remarkable for poor adherence to antiretroviral therapy. His recent CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes counts were 26 (1.92%) and 509 (37.9%) cells/μL respectively and the viral load was 252,624 copies/mL (5.402 Log10). He was also using a trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole double-strength tablet for Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis. The patient had pulmonary tuberculosis 8 years ago, his AIDS-defining illness. In addition, he had several previous hospitalizations for chronic diarrhea. He used to drink distilled beverages thrice a week and denied tobacco use. The patient raised a dog and a parakeet as pets. He was born in Angicos City, rural area of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil, an endemic region for visceral leishmaniasis and Chagas disease.
On admission, vital signs were: axillary temperature 38.0 °C, blood pressure 100/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 110 bpm and respiration rate of 24 bpm. His physical examination was remarkable for cachexia (body weight of 38Kg and body mass index of 13.9Kg/m2) and a mild hepatomegaly. He was lucid and oriented. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. The neurological examination was normal. Laboratory tests showed pancytopenia: hemoglobin of 100 g/L; white blood cell counts of 2.7 × 109/L (74% neutrophils and 22% lymphocytes) and platelets count of 123 × 109/L. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 68 mm [Reference Interval (RI): 0 – 15 mm] and serum C - reactive protein level was 28.5 nmol/L (RI: < 57.1 nmol/L). The serum creatinine was 0.058 mmol/L (RI: 0.044–0.106 mmol/L) and serum urea was 3.18 mmol/L (RI: 1.66–8.32 mmol/L). The alanine and aspartate aminotransferases levels were 43 and 23 IU/L (RI: 0–37 and 0 – 42 IU/L, respectively). The alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase levels were 201 IU/L and 49 IU/L (RI: 80 – 306 IU/L and 11 – 61 IU/L, in this order). The serum albumin was 39.4 g/L (RI: 35 – 55 g/L), total bilirubin level was 8.55 μmol/L (RI: 3.42–20.52 μmol/L) and prothrombin time and activity were 13.5 s and 100% (RI: 9.5–13.5 s and ≥ 70%). The serum lactate dehydrogenase level was 477 IU/L (RI: 225 - 450 IU/L). Chest X-ray was normal. An abdominal ultrasonography showed hepatomegaly and cholelithiasis.
He has been treated for febrile neutropenia with cefepime for 7 days, without changes in clinical symptoms. Blood cultures were negative for bacteria and fungi. The serologic tests were negative for hepatitis B and C, visceral leishmaniasis and Chagas disease. Tuberculin Test was non-reactive. Venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) testing was negative too. Cryptococcal antigen testing in serum was not performed, because it is not available at our service. Histoplasma antigen testing in urine was negative. Due to pancytopenia, the patient underwent a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy. The direct examination presented a non-specific hypocellularity and was negative for fungi, mycobacteria and hemoparasites. After 5 days, bone marrow aspirate culture yielded encapsulated yeasts in budding on India ink stain, identified as Cryptococcus sp. Then, the patient underwent a lumbar puncture to investigate meningitis. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) had a clear appearance, an opening pressure of 160mmH2O, a cell count of 2 leukocytes, protein of 44 mg/dL and glucose of 55 mg/dL, and numerous encapsulated yeasts in budding were seen on India ink stain. The CSF culture yielded Cryptococcus sp. Bone marrow aspirate culture was negative for bacteria, mycobacteria and Leishmania sp.
The bone marrow biopsy revealed 30 % of hematopoietic cellularity with representation of the three cellular lineages, characterizing a hypocellular bone marrow for age. The megakaryocytes were present in increased numbers and megakaryocytes with mild dysplasia (hypolobated nuclei) were rarely observed. The myeloid series presented a preserved maturation scale with predominance of mature forms and the erythroid lineage was arranged in small islands without particularities. There were typical plasma cells scattered in hematopoietic tissue. Silver staining revealed a delicate network of reticulin fibers without fibrosis. The Masson’s trichrome staining showed no collagen fibers deposition. Giemsa, Fite-Faraco and Periodic Acid-Schiff staining were negative. In the mucicarmine staining, it was observed presence of loosely formed granuloma composed of multinucleated giant cells encompassing rounded yeast like organisms compatible with Cryptococcus sp. .
For species and genotype identification, the isolate was grown on Sabouraud dextrose agar at 37 °C for 48 h and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted by initial mechanical rupture of yeast cell in liquid nitrogen using a pestle and mortar following the extraction protocol of McCullough et al. . The URA5 gene was amplified by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) according to the method suggested by Meyer et al. . The isolate was identified as C. neoformans var. grubii (genotype VNI) .
The patient was treated with amphotericin B deoxycholate at 1 mg/Kg daily, combined with fluconazole at 800 mg daily given intravenously. After a week of treatment, the patient developed acute kidney injury stage 3, according to the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria , with increase of serum creatinine and urea levels to 0.185 mmol/L and 11.98 mmol/L, respectively. At the discretion of assistant doctor, the treatment was switched for fluconazole at 1200 mg daily during the remainder of the 14-day induction phase. The patient was conservatively managed for acute kidney injury with return of baseline serum creatinine and urea levels after five weeks. CSF cultures for fungi were negative at one and two-weeks of treatment. After that, the patient was treated with fluconazole at 800 mg daily throughout the 8-week consolidation phase.
The patient remained hospitalized throughout the induction and consolidation phases of the treatment due to socioeconomic reasons. He could not afford the costs related to the hospitalization neither his medicines, that was why the patient went to our hospital, a public health facility, besides he did not have an appropriate family support to help him recover and manage his condition. Cranial computed tomography (CT) showed cerebellar atrophy with compensatory fourth ventricle ectasia and cerebral atrophy with non-hypertensive dilation of the supratentorial ventricles and enlargement of grooves, fissures and cisterns. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a non-habitual volumetric reduction of encephalic parenchyma for age with compensatory ectasia of ventricular system; the brain parenchyma signal-intensity was preserved. The patient had no fever nor vomiting within the first week of treatment and recovered from asthenia after four weeks of treatment. After induction and consolidation phases of treatment, the hematological parameters have improved: hemoglobin level of 110 g/L; white blood cell counts of 5.9 × 109/L (65% neutrophils and 30% lymphocytes) and platelets count of 166 × 109/L. He was discharged from hospital with recommendations to keep oral fluconazole at 450 mg daily (maintenance phase) and outpatient follow-up at a regional HIV/AIDS care service.