A 53 year old male with a significant past medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia and previously treated pulmonary tuberculosis, was admitted to hospital post collapse with a five minute loss of consciousness. He then developed central compressive chest pain, shortness of breath and sweating which led to his being investigated and treated for acute coronary syndrome and pulmonary oedema.
Unrelated to the current admission, the patient was due for investigation of a left sided neck swelling. After admission, the patient had an ultrasound scan (USS) which suggested the presence of a neck abscess. This was confirmed by CT imaging. The CT showed a large 6.1 cm × 3.8 cm × 5.8 cm multiloculated collection in the left side of the neck occupying several deep neck spaces. Blood cultures taken upon admission grew Klebsiella pneumoniae in the aerobic bottle which was resistant to amoxicillin but susceptible to amoxicillin-clavulanate, ciprofloxacin, cefuroxime, ceftriaxone, gentamicin and piperacillin tazobactam. Pus from the neck abscess also grew K. pneumoniae with same antibiotic susceptibility. The isolate was sent to the Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare Associated Infections Reference Unit, Public Health England, Colindale for typing and detection of virulence genes. We do not routinely send all Klebsiella pneumonaie isolates for virulence genes but we decided to send this isolate as it was mucoid and associated with neck abscess and septicemia. The reference laboratory reported that the isolate had capsular type K20 and had regulator of mucoid phenotype (rmp)A and rmpA2 genes, suggesting the presence of a virulence plasmid. Nanopore sequencing revealed that the isolate belonged to sequence type 420 and carried a virulence plasmid of approximately 218 kb that carried the aerobactin and salmochelin siderophore clusters, rmpA, rmpA2, lead, copper, silver and tellurite resistance genes and other elements typical of virulence plasmids found in hypervirulent isolates (such as luxR, pagO and shiF). The chromosome carried the yersiniabactin siderophore cluster.
In order to achieve source control the patient underwent USS guided incision and drainage of the abscess. The patient was treated with IV ceftriaxone 2 g 24 hourly and IV metronidazole 500 mg 8 hourly for 16 days. This was followed by a two week course of oral amoxicillin-clavulanate 625 mg 8 hourly. The combined treatment led to resolution of the sepsis as evidenced by clinical improvement and the progressive fall in inflammatory markers. CRP and WBC reduced from 279.2 mg/L and 14.2 × 109/L respectively on admission to 7.2 mg/L and 7.0 × 109/L upon discharge. The patient was reviewed one month after discharge and was not found to have any residual collection or symptoms.