A 38-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a 3-week history of dysarthria and facial weakness on the left side. A few weeks before symptom onset, he had undergone surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome on the right side. Apart from increasing fatigue and continuous weight gain of almost 20 kg over the last 2 years, his medical and family history was unremarkable. His clinical examination revealed a mild lower motor neuron facial palsy on the left, uvular deviation to the left with preserved gag reflex, tongue deviation to the left, lingual dysarthria, and xerosis. His pupils and eye movements were normal, his power and sensation for all qualities including vibration sense were preserved, his reflexes were present symmetrically, and he had no ataxia. Facial fullness and edematous extremities were noted. His mucous membranes were unremarkable, but his skin was dry. His vital parameters were normal apart from an increased body mass index (31.6 kg/m2) and hypothermic tympanic temperature of 35.6 °C (blood pressure 127/79 mmHg, heart rate 70 beats/min).
His blood test results on admission showed elevated serum creatinine of 151 μmol/L (glomerular filtration rate 47 ml/min/1.7 CKD-EPI [Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration equation]) and increased creatinine phosphokinase (CK) activity (1243 U/L). Results of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and renal ultrasound were unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a normal cell count but increased protein levels of 758 mg/L and a CSF/serum albumin ratio of 10.5 × 10− 3/L (reference range < 6.7) without signs of intrathecal immunoglobulin production or oligoclonal bands. Results of serological testing were unremarkable. MRI of the brain did not show any pathologic lesions or contrast enhancement, especially within the cranial nerves. Multiple cranial neuropathy was presumed, and the patient was admitted to the department of neurology.
On the following day, routinely performed thyroid function tests detected markedly elevated levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (292.2 mIU/L), low free thyroxine levels (1.1 pmol/L), and free triiodothyronine levels below the limit of detection (< 0.4 pmol/L). A diagnosis of overt hypothyroidism was made, and levothyroxine therapy in a dose of 100 μg/d (1.0 μg/kg body weight, 1.3 μg per ideal body weight) was started after hypocortisolism was excluded. Ultrasound revealed a small thyroid gland (4.8 ml) with an inhomogeneous pattern but without signs of focal lesions. Further diagnostic workup showed a markedly reduced basal metabolic rate on indirect calorimetry (1380 kcal/d, reference 1950 kcal/d) and elevated antibodies against thyroid peroxidase (495 IU/mL, reference range < 34 IU/mL). When the patient was discharged 1 week after admission, his symptoms were unimproved. Six weeks later, the patient was seen in our outpatient clinic and reported a substantial improvement of speech quality and general well-being. On clinical examination, no residual pathologic signs were observed. The patient’s levothyroxine dosage was eventually increased to 150 μg/d, and his levels of TSH and free T4 normalized . At the following visit, 5 months after initiation of levothyroxine substitution, the patient’s facial features had changed substantially, and all his neurologic symptoms had completely resolved. A loss of 2 kg body weight was noted. The remainder of his physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory analysis showed normal levels of thyroid hormones and TSH as well as normal creatinine phosphokinase and kidney parameters. Increased total and low-density cholesterol levels at initial presentation also had normalized at the 5-month follow-up visit.