19-year-old primigravida Hispanic female with no past medical history or family history presented to the antenatal unit at 40 weeks and one day for elective induction of labor. She had an uncomplicated pregnancy, had regular antenatal follow-up visits, and was not taking any medications. On presentation, she reported no complaints. Vital signs were all within normal limits and the physical exam was significant for a gravid uterus with a size corresponding to her gestational age. Labor was induced with misoprostol followed by oxytocin infusion.
For the management of labor pain when she had reached about 3 cm of cervical dilatation, epidural analgesia was requested. Epidural puncture was performed in the L4-L5 intervertebral space with the patient in the sitting position. The patient was monitored during the procedure with non-invasive blood pressure monitoring, pulse oximetry and cardiac monitoring. The procedure was noted to be technically difficult with a noted tachycardia during the procedure, which resolved spontaneously. After successful placement, she was commenced on analgesia with Fentanyl as needed. 8 h following epidural catheter placement, she complained of severe frontal headache and neck pain. Headache and neck pain were described as 10/10 in severity, pounding in nature, non-radiating and worsened with positioning and movement of the head and neck. She denied any visual disturbances, photophobia, nausea or limb weakness. Vitals had remained within normal limits and a neurological examination at that time was unremarkable. At that time, differential diagnosis for her new onset headache and neck pain post-difficult epidural puncture included subarachnoid puncture with acute loss of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), post-dural puncture headache and pneumocephalus. Though she was experiencing headaches and neck pain, the epidural analgesia was noted to be effective for the management of labor pain and was continued. She was observed closely and reviewed frequently, during which time she had reported improvement in the severity of the headache.
Due to failure to progress in the first stage of pregnancy, she was taken to the Cesarean section without complications. She still complained of a persistent headache following the Cesarean section but reported that the headache had improved.
On postoperative day (POD) 1, a computed tomography (CT) of the head and neck was done on the advice of the anesthetic team, as the patient was still complaining of persistent positional headaches, which had been waxing and waning in intensity. CT head was significant for a small to moderate amount of pneumocephalus predominantly within the frontal horn of the lateral ventricles and, to a lesser extent, the suprasellar cistern and perimesencephalic cisterns without significant mass effect, midline shift or hydrocephalus . There was no noted intracerebral hemorrhage or infarct seen. The CT neck showed moderate air within the spinal canal predominantly within the dorsal epidural space—throughout the cervical spine and visualized in the upper thoracic spine . She was followed up regularly by the anesthetic team, with close monitoring and conservative management with analgesia as needed.
On POD 2 she reported feeling much better with improvement of the headache. She was ambulating without difficulty and without any worsening of headache and neck pain. She was subsequently discharged on POD 3 with recommendations to return for worsening headache or neck pain, vision changes, limb weakness, heavy vaginal bleeding, fever, or foul-smelling vaginal discharge.
She initially reported good relief of headaches with analgesia. However, two days following discharge, she presented with frontal headaches that gradually worsened to 10/10 severity despite analgesia with acetaminophen and oxycodone. She described the pain as radiating to her neck and bilateral arms with numbness and paresthesias to the arms bilaterally. On this presentation, she was hemodynamically stable and afebrile with normal oxygen saturations on room air. Her physical exam was significant for a well-opposed Cesarean scar without bleeding or discharge and revealed no focal motor or sensory, neurological deficits. Repeat CT head imaging at that time showed decreased small intraventricular and left perimesencephalic cistern pneumocephalus without any hydrocephalus, bleed or infarct and repeat CT neck showed decreased small dorsal cervical/upper thoracic spine epidural air when compared to the previous scan . Anesthesia and Neurosurgery were consulted. She was treated with conservative management with analgesia (this time with a combination of butalbital, acetaminophen, and caffeine), aggressive intravenous fluid hydration, rest, and caffeine during the day while active. A blood patch was not considered initially, as there were concerns that increasing pressure within the epidural space would further worsen her symptoms. Over the following two days, she gradually resolved her headaches and neck pain and was subsequently discharged home.