We report the case of an 86-year-old Japanese man. Three months prior to his admission, he was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis by a physician at a clinic and was receiving prednisolone (15 mg/day) and azathioprine (75 mg/day). He was referred to the department of gastroenterology and hepatology at our university hospital due to an exacerbation of symptoms, including diarrhea and anal pain. At the time of his consultation with our gastroenterology department, no electrolyte abnormalities were observed; a sodium (Na) of 135 mEq/L and a potassium (K) of 4.3 mEq/L were recorded.
The patient’s bowel disorder was carefully examined by endoscopic observation and a colon biopsy. As candidates for the final diagnosis, severe ulcerative colitis, entero-Behçet’s disease, and ileocecal tuberculosis were considered. However, achieving the accurate and final differential diagnosis was difficult, and metronidazole (500 mg/day) and budesonide (9 mg/day) were additionally administered. Intestinal tuberculosis could not be entirely excluded, and thus, the combination of isoniazid (300 mg/day) and pyridoxal phosphate (30 mg/day) was started. Verapamil (80 mg/day) and cibenzoline succinate (150 mg/day) had been administered by the patient’s clinic physician for his arrhythmias. The patient’s other oral medications included esomeprazole (20 mg/day), pitavastatin (2 mg/day), sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim (1 g/day), and alendronate (35 mg/week).
On the 80th hospitalized day, a decrease in the patient’s serum concentrations of K, calcium (Ca), inorganic phosphorus (iP), and magnesium (Mg) emerged and showed a worsening trend. The administration of sodium dihydrogen phosphate (1200 mg/day) as a phosphate supplementation and calcium l-aspartate (1200 mg/day) as a Ca supplementation was started from day 85. However, the multiple electrolyte disturbances worsened, and hypokalemia (2.3 mEq/L), hypocalcemia (7.3 mg/dL), and hypomagnesemia (0.9 mg/dL) were present on day 95, resulting in the patient’s consultation to our department. According to his medical history, he had experienced appendicitis at the age of 20 years, and he experienced hypertension and arrhythmia of unknown onset after surgery for transverse colon cancer at the age of 74 years.
The physical examination at the time of the patient’s consultation to our department showed significant emaciation: height 165 cm, weight 47.5 kg, and body mass index 17.5. His body temperature was 36.7 °C, blood pressure was 105/65 mmHg, and pulse rate was 77 beats/min. Muddy stools persisted from the time of admission. The patient’s hospital diet at his consultation in the nephrology department offered 1600 kcal/day and included 3106 mg/day of Na, 2220 mg/day of K, 237 mg/day of Mg, and 992 mg/day of iP.
The results of the laboratory tests at the time of consultation to our department are summarized in Table . In addition to multiple dyselectrolytemias, we observed metabolic alkalosis, proteinuria, and a remarkable elevation of the N-acetylglucosaminidase (NAG)-to-Cr ratio (NAG index) indicating renal tubulointerstitial impairment. A urine biochemical analysis showed decreased fractional excretions of K, Mg, and Ca. Conversely, the % tubular reabsorption of phosphate (%TRP) showed an increased iP excretion.
Based on the findings of a decreased renal excretion of Ca and an increased excretion of iP, we suspected a decreased intestinal absorption of vitamin D (VD), and we then measured the patient’s 25-hydroxy (OH) VD concentration. We observed a decrease in 25-OH VD (10 ng/mL, normal range ≥ 21 ng/mL) and an increase in the whole form of parathyroid hormone (PTH). Renin and the aldosterone system were also suppressed. Because a decrease in VD was demonstrated, we began the administration of vitamin-D3, the active form of VD, with 0.25 μg/day of 1,25-vitamin D3, in addition to supplementation of iP and Ca with 930 mg/day of sodium phosphate and 400 mg/day calcium chloride (CaCl2) from day 97.
The patient’s hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia were quickly ameliorated after the introduction of VD supplementation, and both the Ca and iP concentrations were normalized at 1 week after the start of the VD supplementation (day 104). Supplementation with K (40 mEq/day) by intravenous potassium chloride (KCL) administration and Mg (20 mEq/day) by magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) were started from day 97, and on day 104, the patient’s K and Mg values were in the normal ranges . Figure shows the serum and urinary excretion rates of each electrolyte until the values normalize.