A 52-year-old Japanese post-menopausal woman was referred with a left breast mass, which had rapidly increased in size. Bleeding from her chest wall started about 6 months prior to presentation. The tumor measured 10 cm in its greatest dimension. It was non-mobile, contained an oozing skin ulcer and was fixed to her chest wall . Several ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes were palpable. A skin biopsy was performed and showed a fascicular pattern of spindle cells . Immunohistochemical staining established the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed no evidence of metastases to other sites except the enlarged left axillary lymph nodes . Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on T1-weighted images showed a 78 × 58 mm tumor invading the pectoralis major muscle . The central portion of the tumor was necrotic, based on the low intensity signal on T1-weighted images and high intensity signal on T2-weighted images .
Based on the results of the European sarcoma trial, we decided to administer three cycles of doxorubicin (30 mg/m2 on day 1, day 2) plus ifosfamide (2000 mg/m2 on days 1 to 5) with mesna uroprotection (400 mg/m2 × 3 on days 1 to 5). We explained to our patient the treatment strategy and got written informed consent. She completed this regimen without major adverse effects. After neoadjuvant chemotherapy, there was no significant change in the size and enhanced pattern on MRI, even though at the completion of neoadjuvant chemotherapy the tumor became mobile.
A left mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection was performed. On gross examination, the tumor measured 9 × 7 × 6 cm. The cut surface revealed a gray-white and fleshy tumor with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis with calcification, and the tumor protruded through the skin . On histological examination, the main tumor consisted of bundles of spindle cells with well-defined bright eosinophilic cytoplasm, and pleomorphic nuclei . There were several foci of coagulative necrosis and 10% mitoses in a high-power field. There was no epithelial component similar to ordinary ductal breast cancer. Pathological assessment revealed that the axillary lymph nodes and the surgical margin were negative. On immunohistochemical examination, the neoplastic cells were positive for α-smooth muscle actin and desmin, and negative for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, and S100. The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 20% . The final diagnosis was leiomyosarcoma.
The tumor had two components including viable leiomyosarcoma and necrosis. It is hard to differentiate pre-treatment and post-treatment necrosis macroscopically. By referring to pre-neoadjuvant chemotherapy MRI scans , we were able to differentiate the necrotic areas of the tumor. The post-treatment necrosis was a result of the neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Ghost cells with faint nuclei and fibrosis were seen in areas of post-treatment necrosis and represented the tumor response . Areas of pre-treatment necrosis contained granulation tissue, severe fibrosis, and hemorrhage .
A follow-up contrast-enhanced CT scan of her chest and abdomen showed no residue or recurrence at 12 months. She is thriving and was disease free at 1.5-year follow-up.