Our patient, a 68-year old Caucasian man, was first diagnosed with HIV-1 infection in 1993. After six years on FTC, zidovudine, and ritonavir-boosted lopinavir he was switched to EVG/COBI/FTC/TDF owing to the development of dyslipidemia and a desire for treatment simplification. He also had hypertension, gout, and impaired renal function. His weight was 73kg with a body mass index of 24.7kg/m2. At the time of the therapy switch, his serum creatinine level was in the normal range (1.16mg/dL) and results from a urine analysis were normal, but his estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) via both the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) and the Cockcroft–Gault formulas was slightly reduced (66.6mL/min per 1.73m2 and 62.9mL/min per 1.73m2, respectively). Other medications he continued to take were acetyl salicylic acid 80mg, lisinopril 5mg, pravastatin 40mg, fenofibrate 267mg, and allopurinol 100mg (all once daily). Our patient’s age, comorbidities, polypharmacy, and slightly impaired renal function were possible risk factors for altered drug effects and interactions .
Two weeks after the switch, our patient developed progressive pain in both calves and thighs. The following week he experienced anorexia, nausea, and dark urine, and presented to our hospital with clinical and biochemical evidence of established rhabdomyolysis and acute tubular necrosis.
A laboratory investigation on admission revealed the following: creatine kinase (CK) >20,000U/L, creatinine 11.9mg/dL, urea 248mg/dL, and eGFR 4mL/min per 1.73m2. His electrolytes and thyroid function tests were normal. A urine analysis showed evidence of acute tubular necrosis. He tested negative for the rs4363657 single-nucleotide polymorphism located within SLCO1B1 gene. This gene encodes the organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1) that has been associated with statin-induced myopathy defined as muscle pain or weakness with elevated CK levels .
All medication was discontinued and intravenous fluid replacement was initiated. Gradually, the myalgia resolved and his renal function recuperated without the need for dialysis. Antiretroviral therapy was recommenced three weeks after admission, first with darunavir, norvir, lamivudine, and abacavir, adjusted according to his eGFR. After one week, the darunavir was changed to lopinavir because of persisting gastrointestinal complaints. On discharge, four weeks after admission, his serum creatinine was 4.8mg/dL and his eGFR was 12mL/min per 1.73m2. At last evaluation five months post-discharge, he was asymptomatic and his kidney function showed further improvement (serum creatinine of 1.51mg/dL and eGFR of 47mL/min per 1.73m2). His CD4 lymphocyte count was 810 cells/μL and he had an undetectable viral load (<20 copies/mL).