A 52-year-old nonsmoking female was admitted to our hospital due to cough and bilateral low back pain for one month. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass in the right upper lobe (4.6 × 3.2 cm) and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum 4R , mediastinum and bilateral axillary; a small nodule (1.0 × 0.6 cm) was seen in the left upper lobe; and there was a pathological fracture of the 12th thoracic (T12) vertebral body. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple intracranial space-occupying lesions , considering lung cancer with multiple metastases to the brain, bone and lymph nodes (clinical disease stage: IVb, cT2N2M1c). After the statement of informed consent, CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of the lung mass was performed. Microscopically, the tumor cells were mostly poorly differentiated with an almost spindle cell-like morphology . On immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were positive for TTF-1 and vimentin, weakly positive for PCK and EMA , and negative for P40 , SMA, S100 and desmin. Eventually, sarcomatoid carcinoma (spindle cell carcinoma) was diagnosed. The tumor proportion score (TPS) of programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression was 60% . DNA-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed the presence of the KIF5B (15)-RET (12) fusion (3.05% abundance in tissue) , which was verified by ARMS RT–PCR assay (Amoy Diagnostics, Xiamen, China) . Due to the poor performance status and severe intestinal obstructive symptoms, the patient was unable to tolerate any radiotherapy or chemotherapy. On the basis of her RET fusion status, RET tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment with pralsetinib, 125 mg three times daily, commenced on January 24th, 2022. Two months after initiation of the treatment, the examinations showed an excellent partial response, including the significant reduction of the mass (2.8 × 1.2 cm) in the right upper lobe , the marked decrease in the size of lymph nodes in the mediastinum 4R and the shrink of the metastatic lesion in the right parieto-occipital region . And the clinical symptoms were relieved. The patient remains under follow-up.