A 74-year-old male patient presented with a sub-circumferential elevated lesion around the ileocecal valve. A detailed examination revealed findings that were strongly suggestive of cancer (biopsy grade group 4). The tumor progressed to the ileum, thereby making endoscopic treatment difficult and creating the risk of stenosis. Therefore, the patient was referred to our department for surgical intervention. The patient had a height of 163 cm, weight of 52.4 kg, body mass index of 19.7 kg/m2, and type 2 diabetes mellitus as a comorbidity. He had no history of surgery or smoking. Cecal cancer (cT1N0M0 cStage I) was diagnosed, and robotic-assisted ileocecal resection was performed.
The ports were arranged as shown in Fig. . Initially, a 3-cm midline incision was made at the umbilicus, and the TOP wound retractor (XS size; TOP Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) with Free Access (Xssize; TOP Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) and a 12-mm port were attached for insufflation. Under laparoscopic visualization, three ports (12 mm, 8 mm, and 8 mm) were inserted in the lower abdomen. Then, an 8-mm port was inserted in the left subcostal region, and a 5-mm port was inserted in the left lateral abdomen. The camera was inserted through the central 12-mm port, and the surgical field was developed using laparoscopic forceps. Subsequently, the da Vinci Xi® patient cart (Intuitive Surgical Inc.) was manually rolled into position. The central 8-mm port in the lower abdomen served as the scope port, whereas the other two ports in the lower abdomen and the 8-mm port in the left subcostal region were connected to the robotic arms. The 12-mm port at the umbilicus remained unused during the console operation. Using a medial approach, the ileocecal artery and vein were tied off at the root. A colon-to-ileum anastomosis was performed through the 12-mm port using the overlap technique and SureForm® 60 blue (Intuitive Surgical Inc.). The procedure was performed without significant intraoperative complications. No drainage tubes were used. The umbilical fascia was closed using a monofilament absorbable suture, and the fascia at the 12-mm port site was closed using a braided absorbable suture. At all 8-mm and 5-mm port sites, the fascia was not closed. The total surgical time was 127 min, and bleeding was minimal. There were no changes in the patient’s position during the console operation. The histopathological diagnosis was tubular adenocarcinoma (well-differentiated type) with an adenoma without cancer cells that did not infiltrate beyond the submucosal layer or lymph node metastasis. The pathological diagnosis revealed pTisN0M0 pStage 0. On postoperative day 3, the patient presented with bloody stools; therefore, a colonoscopy was performed. Although blood was observed on the anal side mucosa at the anastomotic site, ongoing bleeding was not identified, and special intervention for hemostasis was not required. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 9 without complications. However, on postoperative day 11, the patient presented to our emergency department with abdominal pain and vomiting. A physical examination revealed a thumb-sized bulging mass with tenderness at the right lower abdominal port site. Abdominal radiography revealed the findings suggestive of intestinal obstruction , and plain abdominal computed tomography showed small bowel herniation and incarceration at the port site . After manual reduction, the patient was admitted to the hospital. Subsequently, the symptoms improved, but abdominal radiography showed limited improvement in small bowel dilatation. On postoperative day 16, the patient experienced vomiting again. Plain abdominal computed tomography showed small bowel herniation at the same location, suggesting incomplete reduction or repeat incarceration. Because of the relatively mild and gradual course of symptoms and ease of reduction under ultrasound visualization, it was determined that irreversible blood flow impairment was not present in the intestine. Under local anesthesia, a 2-cm skin incision was made, and the fascia was closed with a braided absorbable suture. Signs of hernial defect strictures and significant defects were not observed during closure. The small size of the hernial defect barely allowed the insertion of a little finger. Treatment was administered for aspiration pneumonia caused by vomiting. On postoperative day 27, the patient was discharged after experiencing good recovery.