A 31-year-old female was referred to our tertiary care hospital with progressive pancytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly and systemic inflammation.
Twelve months prior to admission, she had been evaluated for right lower quadrant abdominal pain in another hospital. At that time, the diagnostic workup revealed terminal ileitis and a generalized lymphadenopathy. The biopsy of a mesenteric and a retroperitoneal lymph node showed granulomatous / sarcoid-like lesions upon histological evaluation. Based on the suspected diagnosis of sarcoidosis, a therapy with 0.5 mg Prednisolone per kilogram of body weight was initiated.
Over the following months, the patient’s condition gradually worsened, and she was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation. On admission, she complained of recurrent fever, night sweats and abdominal pain with predominance in the upper left quadrant. Upon physical examination, the patient was found to have sinus tachycardia and left upper abdominal quadrant tenderness. Blood pressure and oxygen saturation were within normal limits. Laboratory results showed new pancytopenia (leukocytes 1.8 G/l [reference range 4.0–10.0 G/l], hemoglobin 8.5 g/dl [reference range 12.0–15.7 g/dl], thrombocytes 72 G/l [reference range 150–380 G/l]) and systemic inflammation with a C-reactive protein of 14 mg/dl (reference range < 0.5 mg/dl), and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 107 mm/h (reference range < 20 mm/h). Renal function, liver enzymes, and lactate dehydrogenase were within normal ranges, chest X ray and urine analysis showed no appreciable disease. 18FDG-PET/CT revealed progressive generalized and hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy (especially of mesenteric and retroperitoneal lymph nodes), a pronounced hypermetabolic splenomegaly, enhanced tracer uptake in the small intestine, and diffuse bone marrow hypermetabolism . Serological or molecular analyses for human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human herpesvirus 8, Salmonella typhi, Leishmania spp., Francisella tularensis and Yersinia enterocolitica were negative. Autoimmune testing, including serum ACE and sIL2R, was negative.
The patient was of Turkish descent, and was born and raised in Germany. She had no premedication or allergies at the time of first presentation, and had not suffered from any serious acute or recurrent infections in the past. Importantly, examination of the patient’s family history revealed that her brother had died from a systemic infection with M. genavense at the age of 21, with an underlying IL-12Rβ1 deficiency. Her parents were both healthy and she had no other siblings. Neither the parents nor the patient had been genetically tested until the time of admission to our hospital.
At the time of the patient`s first presentation one year prior to the diagnosis of an IL-12Rβ1 deficiency, biopsy specimen of terminal ileum and lymph nodes were sent to two independent pathology laboratories. Ziehl–Neelsen staining was negative in all specimen. In one laboratory real-time PCR for Mycobacterium spp. (M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, M. bovis BCG, M. africanum, M. microti, M. canetti, M. pinipedii; Amplisens® MTC-FRT PCR Kit) was negative, while an independent laboratory reported a positive PCR result for atypical mycobacteria (LCD-Array Kit, Chipron). However, it did not provide further species information, as the additional testing of a predefined panel of nontuberculous mycobacteria (M. avium complex, M. kansasii, M. xenopi, M. abscessus, M. gordonae, M. peregrinum, M. szulgai, M. haemophilus, M. marinum/ulcerans, M. simiae and M. smegmatis) was negative. In our workup, Ziehl–Neelsen staining of bone marrow revealed massive infiltration with acid-fast bacilli , and mycobacterial histiocytosis with displacement of hematopoietic cells was described. Pan-bacterial PCR of a bone marrow sample unveiled M. genavense, which was later confirmed by mycobacterial culture. Attempts to culture the pathogen from blood samples were not successful. With the diagnosis of disseminated infection with M. genavense and the positive family history, genetic investigations were initiated. These identified a homozygous pathogenic variant p(Cys198Arg) (c.592T > C) in the IL12RB1 gene (NM_005535, rs121434495), previously reported in attenuated IL-12Rβ1-associated immunodeficiency .
An antimycobacterial treatment with rifampin 600 mg q.d., ethambutol 1600 mg q.d. and clarithromycin 500 mg b.i.d. was initiated. After three weeks of treatment the patient developed erythema multiforme, and antimycobacterial treatment was switched to azithromycin 500 mg q.d., moxifloxacin 400 mg q.d., rifabutin 300 mg q.d., and intravenous amikacin 1000 mg q.d. The antimycobacterial treatment was combined with subcutaneous IFN-γ at 50 µg/kg body weight three times a week. The patient improved gradually over the next months. Amikacin was administered for 24 weeks and then discontinued due to tinnitus without hearing impairment upon tone audiogram. The treatment consisting of azithromycin, moxifloxacin, rifabutin and IFN-γ is ongoing at the time of submission.