A 39-year-old male patient presented for routine follow up at our endocrine clinic. He had previously been treated for a recurrent bleeding cyst in the thyroid with sclerotherapy using doxycycline. Treatment had been performed because of progressive swallowing difficulties experienced by the patient, who refused surgical options. Initial aspiration of the cyst was inconclusive (Bethesda 1) but because of recurrence of the cyst, sclerotherapy was performed. One year after treatment, a mildly painful swelling of the right thyroid lobe was noted by the endocrinologist upon physical examination. No other abnormalities were present. Thyroid-stimulating hormone level was measured at 1.26 mIU/L (normal range 0.4 to 4.0 mIU/L), free T4 at 1.6 ng/dL (normal range 0.8 to 1.8 ng/dL). Free T3 was discretely elevated, measuring 4.3 pg/L (normal range 2.3–4.1 pg/mL).
Ultrasound revealed a large suspicious lesion in the right thyroid lobe. This lesion is illustrated in Fig. . The lesion appeared solid and markedly hypoechoic with irregular borders. It measured 14 mm in craniocaudal length. In the axial plane it measured 15 mm in anteroposterior lengrth as opposed to 9 mm in laterolateral length, making this lesion taller than wide. It alsoseemed to contain some microcalcifications. Based on these criteria the lesion was graded as a TIRADS 5 lesion, necessitating a fine needle aspiration.
Upon examining the patient’s medical history, we found evidence of the aforementioned sclerotherapy with Doxycycline. The patient had undergone this procedure one year earlier to treat a benign thyroid cyst in the right thyroid lobe . Upon examination of the prior ultrasound images, this cyst (although more voluminous in nature) appeared to be localized in the same region as the suspicious lesion.
Regardless, we decided to perform a fine needle aspiration to exclude an underlying thyroid malignancy. The fine needle aspiration sample was qualitative for diagnosis. The sample showed a relatively prominent amount of aqueous to slightly thickened colloid with some groups of follicle cells, as well as the presence of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and histiocytes. The sample was graded as a Bethesda 2 result. In this light, we considered the inflammation to be reactive following sclerotherapy and decided to follow up with ultrasound. Follow up ultrasound examinations showed no enlargement of the suspicious lesion, over the course of the next 4 years the lesion would even gradually reduce in size. In Fig. we illustrate the follow-up ultrasound 4 years after the initial imaging, i.e. 5 years after sclerotherapy. On these images the lesion is found to be clearly smaller in size with a different morphology: the progressive formation of a macrocalcification and smooth borders of the lesion now more resemble a benign colloid nodule.