A 35-year-old man presented with sudden-onset decreased vision in his right eye since 5 days before. One week earlier, he had presented to the medical emergency with high grade fever and progressive weakness of all four limbs for 2 days. Based on blood investigations including a positive dengue NS1 antigen, a diagnosis of dengue fever with thrombocytopenia (platelet count 40,000/mm3) and hypokalemic acute flaccid motor paralysis was made. He was started on intravenous potassium chloride infusion. Within 8 hours, his motor power in all limbs improved significantly and serum potassium levels increased from 1.8 meq/liter at presentation, to 4.2 meq/liter by day 2 of treatment. He was discharged after one week of hospitalization, with no neurological sequelae, and presented to the ophthalmology department a few days later. There was no history of hypertension during this period.
On examination, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200 in the right and 20/20 in the left eye. Anterior segments of both eyes were unremarkable, with intraocular pressures measuring 16 mm Hg bilaterally. The pupillary reactions were normal. Fundus examination of the right eye showed a large PED occupying almost the entire macula with linear streaks of altered pigmentation on the surface . The left eye showed two PEDs . Fluorescein angiography (FA, VISUPAC and FF450 plus, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., Dublin, California, USA) demonstrated intense hyperfluorescence from pooling of dye in the PEDs [Figure and ]. Hypofluorescence was seen corresponding to the linear streaks on the surface of the PED in the right eye. In addition, another small PED was noted superotemporal to the disc in the right eye. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT, RTVue, Optovue Inc., Fremont, California, USA) confirmed the serous nature of the PEDs [Figure and ]. The massive PED in the right eye also showed a pocket of subretinal fluid at its apex and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) heaping in the area of the linear streaks.
The patient was a nonsmoker and had no history of steroid intake in any form. Blood pressure monitoring was within normal range. Repeat hemogram including platelet count, serum electrolytes, renal and liver function tests were within normal limits. A conservative approach was taken and the patient was advised to attend regular follow-up.
Three months following the acute presentation, BCVA in his right eye improved to 20/40 while that of the left eye was maintained at 20/20. Fundus examination showed the faint outline of the collapsed PED in the right eye with linear hypopigmented streaks in the vicinity of the fovea . FA showed window defects in the region previously occupied by the PED, with hypofluorescence due to the streaks. The small PED superotemporal to the disc persisted . Fundus examination in the left eye appeared unremarkable, however small window defects in the area of the PEDs were present on FA [Figure and ]. SD-OCT confirmed flattening of the PEDs in both eyes with RPE hyperplasia corresponding to the streaks in the right eye [Figure and ]. The patient was advised to maintain regular follow-up and self-check his vision using an Amsler grid.