A 36-year-old male sustained fracture of first lumbar vertebral body with displacement of bony fragment and dislocation at T12/L1 vertebral body, fracture of left ribs (second to twelfth) and left scapula, sub-capsular splenic tear, and paraplegia at Thoracic 12 level in a road traffic accident in October 2001. He underwent laparotomy; multiple lacerations to spleen at the level of the hilum both on gastric and parietal aspects were found. Attempts to salvage the spleen were unsuccessful; therefore, splenectomy was performed. He received pneumococcal and H. influenza vaccinations, and antibiotic prophylaxis. He was ventilated in the post-operative period. Tracheostomy was performed. Later, surgical fixation of dislocated first lumbar vertebra was carried out. He was discharged home in July 2002.
This patient attended outpatient clinic on 07 August 2008 with history of feeling rough and temperature. He was managing neuropathic bladder by intermittent catheterisation. With a presumptive diagnosis of urine infection, this patient was prescribed ciprofloxacin 500 mg, twice daily. Two days later, he developed headache and stomach pain. Therefore, he stopped ciprofloxacin and started taking trimethoprim instead. A spinal unit doctor reviewed this patient over telephone on 13 August 2008. This patient continued to have headache; he had no appetite, he had no energy; he had slight cough; his temperature had been up and down; his tongue was yellow. He was advised to come to spinal unit for urine and blood tests.
This patient attended spinal unit two days later. He was still getting headache; he was feeling slightly unwell. He did not have any symptom pertaining to his chest. He did not have shortness of breath or haemoptysis. A sample of urine was sent for microbiology. X-ray of kidneys and urinary bladder was taken to look for urinary calculi. This patient was advised to take amoxicillin 500 mg, three times a day. The attending doctor discussed with the patient that if microbiology report of urine showed growth of bacteria, and if the organism was resistant to amoxicillin, he would require appropriate antibiotic therapy as indicated by microbiology.
This patient was reviewed over telephone three days later. He continued to feel unwell. Therefore, he was admitted to spinal unit on the same day. Indwelling urethral catheter was inserted as a temporary measure. He was given fluids intravenously. He was prescribed amoxicillin and gentamicin intravenously. Urine microbiology showed no growth. X-ray of kidneys and urinary bladder revealed no radio opaque calculi.
Blood tests of 18 August 2008 showed C-reactive protein of 61.4 mg/L (0.0 – 10.0). Blood urea: 2.5 mmol/L. Creatinine: 88 umol/L. Total bilirubin: 12 umol/L. Alkaline phosphatase: 125 u/L (40–120). Alanine aminotrasferase: 61 u/L (5–37). Gamma glutamyl transferase: 125 u/L (0–50). International normalised ratio: 1.0. APTT ratio: 1.20 (0.84 – 1.16). Calcium: 2.20 mmol/L (2.20 – 2.60). Phosphate: 1.17 mmol/L (0.80 – 1.50). Blood culture showed no growth after 72 hours of incubation. Lactic dehydrogenase: 432 mU/L (0 – 250).
Results of full blood counts are given in Table . Marked lymphocytosis with atypical morphology was seen, which was suggestive of reactive process. Lymphocyte surface markers were requested for on 26 August 2008. But this report was received on 02 September 2008.
Computerised tomography of chest, abdomen and pelvis was performed on 21 August 2008. CT revealed a one cm left anterior axillary node, subcentimetre nodes in both axilla, multiple subcentimetre mediastinal nodes, the largest one measuring 9 mm in the pre-carina. In the abdomen, there was a 3 cm × 2 cm soft tissue mass located inferior to the left hemi-diaphragm, which most likely represented lymph nodal mass. There was a 12 mm node in the aorta-caval region; further subcentimetre nodes were seen in the celiac region around the lesser curvature, paraortic area, and the mesentery. Lymph nodes were seen in the inguinal region bilaterally measuring 9 mm in the left inguinal area. The overall picture was suggestive of lymphoma.
There was a 4 cm × 2.5 cm irregular area of low attenuation in segment 7 of the liver. In order to assess this lesion, CT with contrast was performed the next day. Computerised tomography with contrast revealed thrombus in the right main lobar branch of pulmonary artery extending into the segmental branch of the lower lobe. Thrombus was also seen in the segmental branch of right upper lobe, left lower lobe and middle lobe. No lung parenchymal lesion was seen. There was a 6 cm × 5 cm lesion in segment 7 of liver. In the arterial phase, there was peripheral enhancement ; the lesion became homogenous with the liver parenchyma in delayed phase. and increased enhancement was seen in the portal venous phase. This represented a primary liver lesion but lymphomatous metastases could not be excluded entirely. Therefore, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of abdomen was performed on 26 August 2008. MRI revealed a lobulated 5 cm × 4.7 cm lesion in segment 7 of liver, which showed high signal on T2 and fat suppressed sequences. On the post-contrast dynamic sequences, there was peripheral nodular enhancement in the arterial phase with infilling in the portal venous and delayed phases with homogenous enhancement in the late phases. These findings were in keeping with the diagnosis of haemangioma. The nodes noted on previous CT examination in the portal caval (12 mm), para-aortic (subcentimetre), and left hemidiaphragmatic nodes (3 cm) were still present. The radiologist expressed the opinion that lymphoma should be considered.
On 02 September 2008, lymphocyte cell marker showed an excess of large granular lymphocytes and activated lymphocytes. The Glandular Fever Slide Test was positive. There were changes of hyposplenism. On 05 September 2008, Paul Bunnell test was done, which was also positive. Antibiotic was omitted. He was prescribed enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg subcutaneously for pulmonary artery thrombosis. Epstein Barr VCA IgG was positive; Epstein Barr VCA IgM was positive. These results were consistent with recent Epstein Barr virus infection.
On review of the imaging studies by a senior doctor, hepatic lesion could have been diagnosed as haemangioma by the computerised tomography performed with contrast; MRI scan was perhaps not required. Further, the soft tissue mass located under left hemidiaphragm, which was initially reported as lymph nodes, represented splenunculus. The mass received blood supply from splenic artery and venous drainage was by splenic vein.