A 97-year-old woman presented to the emergency department of our hospital with an intertrochanteric fracture of the right femur, after falling from standing height. Plain radiographs revealed an AO A3.1 peritrochanteric fracture and a focal thickening of the lateral cortex of the diaphysis of the right femur . Multidetector computed tomography of pelvis and femurs demonstrated a lateral cortex thickening of the shaft without a fracture line . Radiographs of contralateral femur were negative for any pathology.
Six months earlier, she had a fifth lumbar vertebra compression fracture. Until then, she had never had a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) measurement and had never received antiresorptive therapy. Two months after the vertebral fracture, the DXA measurement revealed low bone mineral density (BMD) of the lumbar spine (0.656 gr/cm2). At that time, urea, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), blood calcium, blood phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone (PTH) were in normal range, while the level of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D3 (25-OH-Vit D3) was low (13.6 ng/ml). Her previous medical history included epilepsy, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and atrial fibrillation treated with rivaroxaban. The patient was prescribed anti-osteoporotic treatment with denosumab, vitamin D, and calcium.
A LGN was inserted but due to the excess anterolateral bowing of the femur, the nail could not be advanced distal enough, as it was diverging toward the anterior cortex; thus, a shorter than the desired nail was inserted . The fracture healed in a normal period of 4 months with callus formation . At that time, blood levels of 25-OH-Vit D3 and calcium were low (7.6 ng/ml and 7.4 mg/dl, respectively), and PTH was high (95pg/ml), while urea, creatinine, ALP, and blood phosphorus were normal. Postoperatively, denosumab was discontinued, although only one dose was applied, while vitamin D and calcium were administered in high doses until 25-OH-Vit D3 and calcium increased within normal range and PTH decreased in normal range. Two months after fracture healing and since bone turnover marker values were increased [N telopeptide of type I collagen – (NTx): 45nM BCE/mM and Total Procollagen type I N-Terminal Propeptide (Total PINP): 102ng/ml], the patient received again treatment with denosumab.
Eighteen months postoperatively, during the last follow-up, radiographically , there was complete healing of the fracture, while the patient was able to walk without pain, without the need to use a cane, and had fully returned to her daily activities.