A 60-year-old, previously healthy Sri Lankan man was referred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka, Colombo, for further evaluation of recurrent hematemesis for 6 months. Prior to this, he had four episodes of hematemesis which were all self-limiting. He had severe dyspeptic symptoms for the same duration, which was managed with antacids by his general practitioner. He denied any symptom improvement for antacids. He was admitted to a primary care hospital during the third and fourth episodes of hematemesis, where he was initially investigated. Two upper gastrointestinal endoscopies had only revealed evidence of mild erosive gastropathy at the antrum. An ultrasound scan of his abdomen was also normal. His transfer to a tertiary care hospital for further investigation was delayed for 2 months due to poor compliance. He was not anemic and the rest of his physical examination was unremarkable. A third upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was done at the tertiary care hospital because he continued to have severe dyspeptic symptoms. It detected a pulsatile mass at the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum in an otherwise normal study. Based on this information, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography of his abdomen was done, which showed a 3 × 3 × 2.5 cm SAA in the middle third of the artery, in relation to the lesser curvature of his stomach. This finding was further confirmed in a celiac axis digital subtraction assay .
He was prepared for open surgery in 2 weeks, and was given vaccines to prepare for splenectomy. Coil embolization of the aneurysm was not planned due to the non-availability of suitable size coils. One day prior to the scheduled date for surgery, he developed massive hematemesis, resulting in hemorrhagic shock. An emergency exploration was performed with concurrent resuscitation, with a massive blood transfusion. His stomach was filled with approximately 3 L of blood, necessitating anterior gastrotomy to decompress his stomach prior to exploration. The lesser sac was opened and the origin of his splenic artery was clamped. The aneurysm was found to erode into his stomach, at the lesser curvature of the antrum with dense induration . His splenic artery was ligated proximal to the aneurysm, and splenectomy was performed. An ulcer measuring 0.8 cm at the posterior wall of the antrum was noted communicating with the aneurysm sac . The ulcer was excised with a cuff of normal stomach tissue en bloc with the aneurysm.
His postoperative period was uneventful, and he was discharged on the tenth postoperative day. Histology of the resected specimen showed a true aneurysmal sac eroding into minimally inflamed gastric mucosa at the site of the mucosal breach. The surrounding gastric mucosa did not have evidence of acute or chronic inflammation. The degeneration of the media of the aneurysm wall manifested itself as dystrophic calcification . Our patient became completely asymptomatic with regard to chronic dyspepsia, following surgery.