A 56-year-old Caucasian man was admitted with acute-onset right-sided chest pain, shortness of breath, dry cough and fever. Chest X-ray findings were consistent with a right lower lobe pneumonia. Pulmonary computed tomography (CT) angiogram was negative for pulmonary embolism. After a three-day hospitalization, during which he received intravenous levofloxacin 750mg daily, he was discharged home on oral levofloxacin at 750mg daily. The patient was re-admitted four days later with worsening symptoms despite reporting compliance with antibiotic therapy. Follow-up chest imaging showed worsening right lower lobe infiltrate with new effusion. Failure to respond to levofloxacin raised concerns of multidrug-resistant bacteria. The patient was started on linezolid 600mg every 12 hours and meropenem one g every eight hours. He underwent a right-sided pleurocentesis to drain an uncomplicated exudative effusion. Blood and pleural fluid cultures were negative. The result of a human immunodeficiency virus serology test was negative. Urine legionella and histoplasma antigens were negative. After a six-day hospitalization, the patient’s condition improved and he was discharged home on intravenous ertapenem one g daily and oral linezolid 600mg every 12 hours to finish a 10-day course.
Eight days after discharge, the patient presented to the infectious disease clinic for follow up. He reported significant improvement in his respiratory symptoms and denied fever. He reported blackish discoloration of his tongue and dysgeusia. The patient was edentulous and denied brushing or regular mouthwash use. He denied drinking tea or the excessive consumption of coffee or other colored beverages. The patient was a cigarette smoker but had quit since his initial hospitalization 21 days prior. Aside from the above antibiotics, he was also taking hydrocodone and acetaminophen, five mg and 500mg, respectively, every six hours and albuterol and ipratropium bromide metered-dose inhaler every six hours.
On examination, the patient was afebrile with normal heart rate and blood pressure. There was a brownish-black discoloration of his tongue that spared the tip and the sides (Figure
). The discoloration could not be wiped by gauze. There was no discoloration of the buccal mucosa. There were no palpable cervical lymph nodes. He had no skin rash and his lung examination demonstrated significant improvement in air entry to the right lower lobe with minimal crackles.
No blood tests were done. A swab for fungal and bacterial cultures grew normal oral flora. A liquid-based cytology preparation (ThinPrep smear) of the tongue showed food fibers but no yeast cells. The patient was diagnosed with BHT. He was reassured and was asked to finish his antibiotic course. He was directed to clean his tongue with a soft toothbrush and baking soda-containing toothpaste twice daily. A follow up visit four weeks later showed complete resolution of tongue discoloration (Figure
).