A 28-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our Internal Medicine Department for anorexia lasting for 1 week. Her past medical history was notable for congenital hydrocephalus with consecutive ventriculo-peritoneal shunt, epilepsia and paraparesis. At the time of admission, symptoms were associated with a biological inflammatory response (C-reactive protein, 260 mg/L, N: 0–5), elevated serum lipase (277 UI/L, N: 13–60), aminostransferase (ASAT: 87 UI/L; ALAT: 181 UI/L, N: 0–60), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (227 UI/L, N: 0–60), alkaline phosphatase (489 UI/L, N: 30–130), and lactate dehydrogenase (376 UI/L, N < 250), along with hyperleukocytosis (12 G/L, N: 4–10 G/L) and thrombopenia (111 G/L, N: 150–400 G/L). Calcium, triglyceride, serum albumin, urea and glycemia levels were normal. Hypoxemia was noted with a PaO2 of 58 mmHg (N: 80–100) on ambient air. Modified Glasgow score for pancreatitis was 1/8 for this patient. There was no history of recent trauma, alcohol intake or drug intoxication. An abdomino-pelvic ultrasound, as well as a computed tomography (CT) scan, showed neither signs of biliary or pancreatic disease, nor gallstones, according to our senior radiologist.
Four days after admission, her condition deteriorated, with dyspnea, tachypnea, productive cough, abdominal pain, and onset of fever. C-reactive protein remained at 270 mg/L, with a rise in serum lipase (670 UI/L, N: 13–60). A chest radiograph showed diffuse alveolo-interstitial infiltrates , confirmed by chest CT scan revealing diffuse parenchymal consolidations combined with ground glass opacities . An abdominal CT scan showed an acute interstitial edematous pancreatitis without necrosis, consistent with grade C on the Balthazar score . Blood cultures, urinary antigens for serogroup 1 Legionellapneumophila and Streptococcus pneumoniae were negative, as well as serological assays for HIV, hepatitis A, B, C, D, E, Legionella pneumophila and Chlamydia psittaci. MP serological assay (immunoluminometric assay Liaison, Diasorin®) showed an elevated IgM titer (22 UA/mL), compatible with recent infection, and cold agglutinins were present.
A diagnosis of acute pancreatitis associated with diffuse interstitial pneumonia caused by an infection with MP was considered, leading to an adjustment of therapy with initiation of clarithromycin 500 mg bid. Respiratory and abdominal evolution was quickly favorable in a few days, with complete regression of dyspnea, abdominal pain and normalization of serum lipase.
In this observation, anorexia revealed a non-obstructive acute pancreatitis associated with diffuse interstitial pneumonia. Modified Glasgow score was 1/8, consistent with an acute pancreatitis without criteria of severity. We thus believe that the lung disease in our patient is unlikely to be considered as a direct complication of the acute pancreatitis. Moreover, both pancreatitis and pneumonia had a quick and favorable evolution under targeted antibiotic therapy. Despite we could not perform a MP PCR on respiratory secretions, the chronological association between the occurrence of the pancreatitis and the pneumonia, positivity of serological assay, presence of cold agglutinins, lack of other causes for acute pancreatitis and clinical response to clarithromycin are, to our point of view, strongly support considering MP as the etiological agent for both disorders.