A 24-year-old Nepalese primigravida with no remarkable personal or family medical history was admitted to our hospital with a platelet count of 97,000/µL at 12 weeks of gestation. Blood biochemistry analysis revealed elevated levels of platelet associated (PA) immunoglobulin G (IgG) at 214 ng/107 cells, while Helicobacter pylori IgG, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody, hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, and hepatitis B surface antigen were all negative. There were no findings suggestive of systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, viral infection, or liver dysfunction. The patient was diagnosed with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), and her platelet levels were monitored periodically until the end of the second trimester to assess if the platelet count will fall below 30,000/µL. At 21 weeks of gestation, her platelet count decreased to 30,000/µL. Additionally, her hemoglobin levels reduced from 12.2 g/dL at 12 weeks to 8.1 g/dL at 23 weeks and eventually to 7.6 g/dL at 27 weeks gestation. Such a decline in hemoglobin was concluded as macrocytic anemia due to a decrease in her vitamin B12 levels; however, oral administration of ferrous citrate and vitamin supplementation were ineffective. No significant abnormalities in the bone marrow were detected through bone marrow puncture. Oral administration of vitamins for anemia was stopped at 31 weeks of gestation. We started administering prednisolone, oral corticosteroid, for thrombocytopenia at 33 weeks of gestation; however, no significant change in platelet count was observed. Therefore, we started blood transfusion therapy, while continuing with 10 mg prednisolone. At the beginning of the 36th and 37th week of pregnancy, 10 units of platelets were transfused each time, which led to an increase in the platelet count from 18,000 to 40,000 and 12,000 to 27,000/µL, respectively. From the beginning of the 38th week of pregnancy, we administered high-dose immunoglobulin therapy for 5 days; however, the platelet count did not increase enough to support childbirth. Next, we administered romiplostim, a thrombopoietin receptor agonist, which had no effect on the platelet count. At a platelet count of 9000/µL, a third round of 10 units of platelet transfusion was performed, but it was ineffective in increasing the platelet count. At this stage, the anti-human leukocyte antigen (anti-HLA) antibody test was positive. To treat the anemia, 2 units of red blood cell fluids were administered, which increased the hemoglobin levels from 6.9 g/dL to 8.0 g/dL. Labor was induced in the patient on the first day of the 39th week of pregnancy. As the platelet count was only 41,000/µL, before complete dilation of the uterine ostium, 10 units of HLA-matched platelets and 20 units of concentrated platelets were transfused. A female infant weighing 2677 g was delivered vaginally. During the episiotomy suture, another 10 units of platelets were transfused. No hematoma was observed in the birth canal; however, the patient lost almost a liter of blood due to uterine atony. After delivery, the patient’s hemoglobin level was 6.5 g/dL; hence, 4 units of red blood cell fluids were transfused, and dry iron sulfate was administered orally. On the fifth day of puerperium, 15 units of HLA-matched platelets were transfused, as the platelet count was only 26,000/µL. On the sixth day of puerperium, no significant changes were observed through bone marrow puncture and spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). On the seventh day of puerperium, the platelet count and hemoglobin level recovered to 63,000/µL and 8.3 g/dL respectively, and the patient was discharged . All oral medications were discontinued on the 29th day of puerperium, when the platelet count was 44,000/µL and the hemoglobin level reached 10.2 g/dL. The patient was diagnosed with gestational thrombocytopenia on the 78th day of puerperium, since the platelet count spontaneously recovered to 101,000/µL. Additionally, mild splenomegaly was observed during the puerperium through transabdominal ultrasonography.
The infant's Apgar score was 5 points after 1 min and 7 points after 5 minutes. She had weak breathing and started convulsions 3 minutes after birth. Some other symptoms in the infant included attenuated light reflex, midline fixation of the eyeballs, respiratory depression, and wheezing. Hypertonia and purpura were observed throughout the body, and the epidermal detachment of the face and limbs was remarkable . Additionally, her platelet count was 17,000/µL, and acute subdural hematoma and hepatosplenomegaly were observed. These symptoms were refractory to therapeutic interventions such as concentrated platelets and immunoglobulins. The infant was diagnosed with Gaucher disease at 37 days of age by mass screening, and a homozygous mutation (p.L483R) was found in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene. After receiving enzyme replacement therapy at 64 and 78 days of age, she died of suffocation at 82 days of age. The β-glucosidase activity of the patient and her husband was normal, and a heterozygous mutation in the GBA gene was found in both. Therefore, we diagnosed them as carriers of Gaucher disease and provided genetic counseling for future pregnancies including prenatal diagnosis such as amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling.