A 57-year-old man presented with a protruding lesion in the cervicothoracic esophagus that was detected by an upper gastrointestinal series at a medical checkup. His medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension. His family history was relevant for thyroid cancer in his daughter. He was an inveterate drinker and smoker, drinking 1.4 standard drinks of beer per day and smoking 20 cigarettes per day for 30 years.
Blood tests showed no remarkable findings, and the levels of tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen, were all within the standard values. Esophagoscopy revealed a 30 mm Type 1 tumor in the posterior wall at 20 cm to 23 cm distal to the incisors, which was circumferentially surrounded by widespread HGM. The HGM extended from 16 to 24 cm distal to the incisors . Biopsy specimens from the tumor revealed adenocarcinoma. We applied a marking clip on the oral edge of the HGM at the time of esophagoscopy. Barium esophagography showed an irregular elevated lesion on the posterior wall of the cervicothoracic esophagus . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the neck, chest and abdomen showed enhanced wall thickening in the cervicothoracic esophagus, that displaced the trachea to the right side, although there was no obvious invasion . Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed high FDG uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 21.6 only in the primary lesion . The tumor was diagnosed clinically as T2, N0, M0, Stage IIB adenocarcinoma in the cervicothoracic esophagus [Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 8th Ed].
The patient underwent thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection and gastric tube reconstruction by the posterior mediastinal route. Intraoperative evaluation revealed that the marking clip on the oral edge of the HGM was at the esophageal orifice. Before anastomosis, we evaluated blood flow in the gastric tube by fluorescence angiography using indocyanine green, and found poor blood flow at the tip of the gastric tube. Since anastomosis at the esophageal orifice was extremely risky, we performed anastomosis at the site, where the HGM partially remained. We also confirmed the absence of malignancy in the oral margins of the resected specimen by intraoperative frozen section analysis.
The resected specimen contained an approximate 17 cm length of the esophagus. The tumor was a sharply demarcated, 43 × 40 mm elevated lesion (Type 0-I + 0-IIa). Salmon-colored mucosa circumferentially surrounded the tumor . Microscopic evaluation showed grades of HGM without atypia, intraepithelial carcinoma, and invasive well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The tumor infiltrated deep into the submucosa, but not into the muscularis propria . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor was positive for MUC5AC and MUC6, with scattered MUC2-positive cells, indicating a mixed gastrointestinal phenotype with a predominance of gastric type phenotype . On the other hand, the HGM without atypia contained gastric fundic glands with parietal cells, was negative for MUC2, and showed no intestinal metaplasia or Helicobacter pylori infection. The regional lymph nodes were negative for metastasis.
Based on these findings, we made a diagnosis of well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (Type 0-I + 0-IIa, pT1b-SM, N0, M0, pStage IB [UICC 8th Ed]. Furthermore, the pathologist determined that there was lymphatic invasion (ly1, v0) by hematoxylin–eosin staining, without immunohistostaining. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, although he was transferred to the hospital on the 25th day after surgery due to inadequate oral intake. As of today, 15 months after surgery, no signs of recurrence have been observed despite no adjuvant therapy.