A 61-year-old woman complained of epigastric discomfort for several years. She received gastroscopy that indicated a slight superficial mucosal erosion of the gastric antrum with negative Helicobacter pylori , and ultrasonography found an upper abdominal mass. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CECT) revealed the existence of a solitary nodule above the neck of the pancreas—size 29 mm × 27 mm, clear boundary, uniform density, lobulated, and slowly reinforced with contrast . The radiological findings diagnosed the lesion as benign. The patient’s discomfort improved when she took omeprazole for 2 weeks and chose to wait and see instead of undergoing biopsy or operation. A repeat CECT scan was done 3 months later, which showed a slight increase in the size of the solitary nodule (32 mm × 25 mm), with no other abnormal findings . The patient had no fever and no loss of weight. Body examination did not reveal any abnormal signs, and no enlarged superficial lymph node was detected. Laboratory analysis showed a slightly increased blood glucose and triglyceride. Tumor biomarkers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, CA 125, and CA 242) and immunological tests (β2 microglobulin, immunoglobulin G4, interleukin-2, interleukin-4, interleukin-6, interleukin-10, interferon-γ, and lymphocyte subsets) were all within the normal range.
An endoscopic ultrasonography-guided puncture was performed, and biopsy found suspicious adenocarcinoma cells unexpectedly . At the same time, a random biopsy of the two bumps with mucosa erosion near the pylorus on the anterior gastric antrum and pyloric mucosa revealed high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia, while gastroscopy showed normal appearance of the other gastric mucosae .
Treatment started with exploratory laparotomy. The whole stomach appeared soft, and no visible tumor was found. Local excision of the gastric wall was performed around the previous biopsy location, which was labeled by clips through a preoperative gastroscopy. The abdominal nodule was resected en bloc and sent for frozen section examination. Histological examination pointed out the consistent diagnosis of adenocarcinoma for both tissues. Then, a standard open distal radical gastrectomy (3 cm from the distal edge and 10 cm from the proximal edge of the lesion, including the gastric antrum mostly) and D2 lymph node dissection were performed. After the resection, the rest of the stomach was anastomosed with the duodenum.
The post-operation pathological examination of the lesions of the gastric wall (diameter, 0.3 cm) and the solitary nodule (3.5 cm) confirmed the diagnosis of highly to intermediately differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma . Tumor tissue invasion was found in the deep muscularis without intravascular carcinoma thrombus and bundle invasion. Immunohistochemical test showed positive mutS homolog (MSH) 2 and MSH6 and negative human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) 2, mutL homolog (MLH) 1, and mismatch repair system component PMS2. Interestingly, the previous “solitary nodule” was, in fact, merging five metastatic lymph nodes of the 8th group, while over 30 dissected lymph nodes of the other 11 groups were not involved. The final diagnosis was gastric antrum adenocarcinoma with lymphatic metastasis (T2N2M0, according to the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging manual ).
The patient recovered soon and then took Tegafur capsules for therapy. Regular follow-up revealed her status as disease-free with good performance 14 months after the surgery.