A 49-year-old Caucasian Australian woman was referred by her general practitioner to a specialist clinic for mood disorders in October 2007 with the request to assess and manage longstanding symptoms of depression. Her history shows psoriatic arthritis causing significant pain since age 43 and mild to moderate depressive episodes since her early 30 s. In October 2007, the patient presented with severe emotional disturbance characterised by anxiety, frustration and depression. These feelings seemed to be largely brought about by her decreased mobility as a result of severe, debilitating arthritic pain in her joints that worsened over the past 12 months prior to assessment. Due to her depression which had started in 2002, she was seen by her psychiatrist in the community, who diagnosed her with major depressive disorder (MDD).
Since the diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis in 2002 until mid-2007, the patient's arthritic symptom profile had been progressively worsening. Concomitantly, her depressive symptoms were worsening over this period of time due partly to a personal experience of loss (death of her mother).
When her arthritic disease was worsening between early 2005 and 2007, she was started on a number of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and analgesics (oxycodone, tramadol and paracetamol combined with codeine and taken regularly since 2002) as prescribed by her rheumatologist . Her intake of DMARDs was as follows: sulfasalazine (500 mg BID), hydroxychloroquine (200 mg BD) and leflunomide (20 mg QD) from November 2003 to November 2004; leflunomide (20 mg QD), adalimumab (40 mg once at night), etanercept (50 mg SC weekly) and infliximab (300 mg/infusion) from December 2004 to October 2007; and then only leflunomide (20 mg QD) since October 2007.
Due to a significant aggravation of her depressive mood, mood instability, poor sleep and a decrease in her general functioning, she was treated for MDD with paroxetine 20 mg/mane in 2002, with risperidone 0.5 mg/bd in 2007, and then with mirtazapine up to 45 mg/nocte two months before she was assessed for the first time in a mood disorder clinic in October 2007.
Based on her psychiatric assessment in October 2007, the previous diagnosis of MDD was confirmed and she was started on a new course of treatment. While staying on the same DMARD (leflunomide, 20 mg QD) from October 2007 onwards, she was commenced on courses of escitalopram 10 mg/mane (replacing paroxetine), quetiapine 50 mg/mane and 100 mg/nocte (replacing risperidone, which was previously prescribed to improve worried thought content), and continued on mirtazapine 30 mg/nocte. She was commenced on quetiapine since recent evidence suggests the effectiveness of quetiapine in major depression .
In the follow-up consultations in the mood disorder clinic it became apparent that her depressive symptoms were continuously improving, and following a month lag phase her arthritic pain decreased significantly, her mobility increased, and her CRP levels decreased. This resulted in a drastically improved depression, which eventually led to a remission after three months of treatment.
Between the commencement of the new psychotropic treatment regimen in October 2007 and the significant improvement of the depressive symptoms as described above, the arthritis specific treatment (DMARDs and analgesics) had not changed. While her CRP levels were 32 mg/L before the start of the new psychotropic treatment regimen, they dropped continuously to 13 mg/L over 10 months between October 2007 and July 2008 without changing the arthritis specific medication. Due to the significant decrease in her pain levels, depressive symptoms and CRP levels, the anti-tumor necrosis factor treatment (abatcept) discussed previously by her rheumatologist was no longer considered as a necessary treatment option. In addition, the patient did not have any significant lifestyle changes during the same period of time.
While staying on the above psychotropic medication, the patient was able to maintain a low level of arthritic pain throughout the year 2008. Despite some relatively mild intermittent increase of some of her arthritic pain and depressive symptoms, which were interpreted as relatively mild fluctuations over a 12-month period, her level of general functioning remained high.