A 50-year-old man was referred to our hospital for the assessment of an anterior mediastinal mass that was observed on a chest CT scan during a routine health checkup 3 months prior to presentation. He had no significant medical history or symptoms. On July 28, 2023, the patient underwent a plain chest CT scan at the First People’s Hospital of Liangshan Prefecture in Xichang City, which dysplayed a soft tissue mass in the anterior mediastinum, measuring approximately 2.6 cm×2.8 cm×5.4 cm . The mass exhibited some areas with patchy fat components with a well-defined border, and the lesion was suspected to be a thymoma. On August 14, 2023, the patient visited our facility for further evaluation. Plain and contrast-enhanced chest CT displayed an anterior mediastinal mass measuring 2.5 cm×2.7 cm×5.1 cm with regular borders, soft tissue density and patchy fat components, which also exhibited a slight homogeneous enhancement after intravenous contrast administration . Moreover, the patient underwent contrast-enhanced CT of the head and abdomen, which did not reveal any abnormalities. As the imagings could not confirm the diagnosis, surgery was scheduled. The patient underwent three-port video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) to completely remove the tumor. No invasion of the adjacent structures was observed during surgery. Following total lesion removal, the mass’s tissue was extracted using biopsy forceps for quick frozen pathology, which revealed SHML as the pathological diagnosis.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) indicated the giant pleomorphic tissue cells characterized by abundant cytoplasm, vacuoles, large nuclei, and irregular nucleus were distributed in the lightly stained area. In the cytoplasm of histiocytes, emperipolesis showed as some lymphocytes and a small number of plasma cells were phagocytized occasionally with patchy fat . Immunohistochemical results showed that: S-100 (+), CD68 (+), CD20 (showing B lymphocytes +), CD3 (showing T lymphocytes+), P16 (+), Pax-5 (showing B lymphocytes+), ALK(-), CD30(-), CK (-), CK19(showing B lymphocytes -), P63(-), SALL4(-), Sox-10(-), TdT(-), Langerin (-). The patient was discharged 10 days after the operation with no complication. He had been followed up for 2 months without evidence of recurrence.