A 59-year-old non-diabetic male patient without any underlying disease with clinical symptoms of cough, shortness of breath, and oxygen saturation of 76% was admitted to Razi Hospital, Qazvin, Iran. His vital signs included body temperature of 37.6 °C, blood pressure value of 140/85 (mm Hg) and oxygen saturation of 76%. Positive results of chest X-ray test (CXR), computed tomography (CT) scan of lungs and positive reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed a definite diagnosis of COVID-19 .
He was treated with remdesivir injection at a dose of 250 mg stat and then 100 mg daily. The patient was under supportive care for six days, and thereafter methylprednisolone was administered at a dose of 250 mg stat and then 125 mg for 3 days. After 10 days, the patient was discharged while he was relatively in good general condition. Four days after his discharge, the patient was re-admitted to hospital because of nasal obstruction and left side facial and orbital swelling. Table shows the laboratory findings of the patient during both COVID-19 and mucormycosis. Subsequently, the patient visited by an infectious disease specialist and due to the involvement of the left ethmoid, sphenoid, and maxillary sinuses, a CT scan was performed . In sinus endoscopic surgery, by Rhinologist, severe involvement and necrosis of the left side lateral nasal wall, floor, and septum as well as left ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses were observed and also destruction of the left orbital floor and medial wall were observed. Since clinical results confirmed the possibility of mucormycosis in the patient, treatment with IV liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg/day, according to local guidelines ) was started. In addition, the patient underwent daily paranasal sinuses debridement and irrigation with diluted amphotericin B. Biopsy of sinonasal area was made and the specimens were sent to both pathology and mycology laboratories. Examination of the results with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and direct experiment with 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) showed irregular hyphae, wide and aseptate .
In addition, the sample was inoculated on PDA (Sigma-Aldrich,UK) and was incubated for 4–5 days at 37 °C. After colony growth, non- septate hyphae, rhizoids and spore-filled sporangiophores were observed in slides prepared with LCB . The antifungal susceptibility testing was performed in 96-well plates by following the M38-A2 guidelines of the CLSI for in vitro testing. MIC values against AMB, ITC and VRC were 0.5 mg/mL, 16 mg/mL and 32 mg/mL, respectively. In the next step, DNA extraction was carried out using the glass beads and phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) method, previously described . The fungal isolate was identified by molecular analysis of ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 region using the primers for ITS1 (5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3′) and ITS4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′). The sequenced PCR product showed 100% sequence identity with R. oryzae and it was registered in the GenBank database under the assigned accession number MW317184. Sequence was aligned with using the ClustalW algorithm as implemented in Bioedit version 7 . The molecular diversity of the sample was estimated by phylogenetic analysis via MEGA7 software. In order to compare the sequences with available DNA sequences in GenBank, the nucleotide BLAST with the BLASTn algorithm was applied through CLUSTAL omega . The protocols were conducted based on the ML method using the Tamura-Nei model. The number of bootstrap replications was considered to be 1000 . Because of the progression of the disease and the involvement of the cheeks and orbit, necrotic tissues were removed. Despite all measures, the patient unfortunately expired on the seventh day of his admission due to loss of consciousness and involvement of central nervous system.