A five-year-old boy, previously healthy, presented with a two-day history of fever and experienced vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Although his fever was high, it was not associated with chills or rigors. Vomiting was frequent but not projectile, nor was the vomit bilious or mixed with blood. The diarrheal stool was watery in nature and mixed with mucus, but no blood was detected. The abdominal pain was severe and colicky in nature, located in the epigastric area with no radiation. The pain was relieved by passing stool, with no other pain-relieving factors, including pain medications. Further, the pain was aggravated by food intake. No abdominal distension, no history of drug ingestion and no recent travel.
A physical examination on admission revealed a highly febrile child with a fever reaching 40 °C, tachycardia and otherwise normal vital signs. He also showed signs that indicated moderate dehydration. His physical examination, including an abdominal examination was unremarkable.
Blood investigations revealed normal complete blood count, with normal renal function and electrolytes. Blood and urine cultures were also normal. He had low bicarbonate level of 14 mmol/L (Normal Range: 22–26 mmol/L) and the rapid antigen detection test was positive for Group A streptococcal (GAS) infection. Table 1.
The patient was admitted with the suspicion of GAS infection (tonsillitis), and his abdominal pain was attributed to mesenteric adenitis, which is usually associated with GAS infection. The patient was started on intravenous (IV) hydration and penicillin G sodium. Further, the patient did not have a sore throat at that stage, and his clinical examination did not reveal any sign of GAS tonsillitis.
On the second and third days of his hospital stay, the patient continued to have a high-grade fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, but his pain was controlled with IV paracetamol.
On the fourth day of his hospital stay, the patient’s abdominal pain worsened, and he complained of severe abdominal pain localized to the epigastric area. This pain was aggravated by food intake and relieved by IV paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. He continuously spiked a high-grade fever with worsening diarrhea that was associated with tenesmus.
The examination revealed that the child was highly febrile (temperature above 39 °C) and tachycardic with normal blood pressure. His abdominal examination revealed severe tenderness throughout the abdomen, but a detailed examination could not be performed, as the patient was in severe pain and refused to be examined. The possibilities of an intra-abdominal abscess, acute pancreatitis, surgical abdomen, and bacterial colitis were considered at that stage, and further investigations were conducted to identify any serious pathology. His WBC count remained normal for his age, with a count of 6000/ml (4500–13,500/ml) that mainly showed neutrophil predominance (62%) and immature cells (4%). His hemoglobin dropped to 9.9 g/dL (11.5 g/dL), and his platelet count remained normal. His C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was checked and was significantly elevated, with a value of 120.6 mg/L (Normal Range: 0–5 mg/L) . His renal and liver function parameters remained normal, and his bicarbonate level improved from 14 mmol/L to 19 mmol/L (22–26 mmol/L). Pancreatic enzymes were elevated, with an amylase level of 101 units/L (Normal Range: 25–101 units/L) and a lipase level of 169 IU/L (Normal Range: 3–32 IU/L) . An abdominal ultrasound (US) was performed to rule out intra-abdominal pathology and showed a small amount of free fluid in the lower abdomen (mainly in the left lower quadrant), with an estimated volume of approximately 20 mL and few prominent mesenteric lymph nodes . The pancreas was visualized and appeared normal. Mild pelviectasis was also detected, with a diameter of 1 cm and a mildly prominent proximal left ureter.
At this stage, the patient was treated as a case of AP following the standard protocol of nil per os and IV analgesia to control his pain. The possibilities of an intra-abdominal abscess and surgical abdomen could not be ruled out; therefore, the antibiotic was upgraded from penicillin to piperacillin-tazobactam to provide wider coverage for gram-negative enteric organisms and anaerobes. A surgical consultation was obtained, and the surgical team chose supportive management.
On the sixth day of his hospital stay, the patient still experienced severe abdominal pain; therefore, the abdominal US was repeated, together with an abdominal X-ray. He was scheduled for computed tomography of the abdomen on fourth day of admission to rule out any serious pathology that could have been missed by the US, but the family refused the procedure. Abdominal US showed a fluid pocket of 11 cc in the left iliac fossa (which is an improving compared to the previous scan) and another 8 cc pocket of fluid on the right side, with small para-aortic and mesenteric lymph nodes that were most likely reactive as per the radiologist report. The abdominal X-ray showed gas distension of the transverse colon, with no other abnormalities . Additionally, pancreatic enzyme analysis was repeated at this stage to check the trend, and upward trends in both enzymes were indicated (amylase increased from 101 units/L to 131 units/L (25–101 units/L) and lipase increased from 169 IU/L to 293 IU/L (3–32 IU/L)). A test of CRP levels was also repeated and showed an upward trend, from 120 mg/L to 123 mg/L (0–5 mg/L). Blood and urine cultures were negative at this stage.
The patient’s condition continued to be managed as a case of pancreatitis. The gastroenterology team’s input was requested at this stage, and they recommended continuing supportive management, monitoring the trend in amylase/lipase on a daily basis, and considering starting a free fluid followed by a fat-free diet. The patient was started on IV morphine for better pain management and omeprazole to avoid stress-induced ulcers.
On the seventh day of his hospital stay, the patient’s abdominal pain and diarrhea started to improve, and his stool culture was reported to be positive for Salmonella group B. Repeated amylase analyses initially showed an upward trend but then trended down (day 15 of admission), and repeated lipase analyses showed a downward trend (day 11 of admission), correlating with clinical improvement . Repeated inflammatory marker (CRP) analyses showed a downward trend, from 123 mg/L (0–5 mg/L) (on day 6 of admission) to 13 mg/L (0–5 mg/L) (on day 11 of admission).
Thereafter, the patient continued to show gradual improvement in his abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea, and he was gradually started on a regular diet. His fever subsided on day 11 of the hospital stay, as did his abdominal pain and diarrhea. Later, the patient was discharged home with full recovery and with a close follow-up with gastroenterology, infectious disease, and general pediatric teams. The patient presented to the outpatient clinic for follow-up, and he was completely well with no further concerns. US repeated on day 15 of illness (outpatient setting) showed a complete resolution of the fluid pockets that were seen before.