A 41-year-old man presented with sudden painless loss of vision in his left eye, occurring one morning after straining at stool because of constipation. Our patient had no history of vascular disease or blood dyscrasias. On ophthalmic examination, his left best-corrected visual acuity was hand motion at 5cm and his right visual acuity was 20/20. Retinal examination of the left eye showed a well-circumscribed premacular hemorrhage . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT; Spectralis HRA+OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed a dome-shaped hypo-reflective area, consistent with blood beneath a hyper-reflective band at the macula . Above the level of settled blood, two distinct membranes were shown: the patchy low reflectivity of the posterior hyaloid surface and the hyper-reflective internal limiting membrane . We gave the patient three options to consider: observation alone, Nd:YAG laser membranotomy, or vitrectomy with release of the ILM. Considering the potential risks, benefits and costs of surgery and laser, at this stage the patient chose a conservative approach.
After 40 days of observation, his left visual acuity improved to counting fingers at 1 m. Fundus photograph revealed little resolution of the hemorrhage. A pulsed Nd:YAG laser membranotomy was performed (energy power 2.5 mJ; VISULAS YAG III, Carl Zeiss, Germany). The patient was followed-up monthly, and his visual acuity, retinal appearance and SD-OCT findings were documented.
After 1 month, visual acuity of the left eye had improved to 20/20 and the hemorrhage had been absorbed completely . OCT revealed an unsealed gap and no reattachment of ILM .
Three months after treatment, fundus photography demonstrated ILM striae, radiating from the central laser opening . OCT showed that the ILM was still elevated with an un-sealed gap .
At an 8-month follow-up visit, visual acuity was stable at 20/20 and the patient did not mention any symptoms of metamorphopsia. The fundus showed progressive wrinkling of the ILM in addition to a persistent unsealed and un-reattached ILM . Over the course of subsequent follow-up visits, OCT tracking showed there to be no significant anatomic improvement of the laser perforation and no obvious resolution of the sub-ILM cavity.