A 34-year-old female with a history of cerebrovascular accident 1 month back with left-sided hemiparesis presented with a history of severe right leg pain for 8–10 days, progressive blackish discoloration of the right lower limb for 3 days. Echocardiographic evaluation showed floating, pedunculated, soft thrombus in the cardiac chambers, attached to left atrial appendage, mitral apparatus, right atrial cavity, and at right ventricle apex . CT angiography showed a common filling defect within the femoral bifurcations extending to the superficial femoral artery. The proximal and mid-superficial femoral artery showed absent filling. Reconstitution of flow seen in the distal femoral artery. Popliteal artery was not opacified suggestive of occlusion . The patient underwent emergency right sided superficial femoral arterial thromboembolectomy (for SFA long segment thrombosis) and below knee amputation. Infective endocarditis with distal embolization was suspected, and the patient was started on empirical antibiotics. Post procedure she was started on heparin infusion along with antiplatelets.
Multiple sets of blood cultures were sent, which were reported as negative. Prothrombotic workup was sent including anti-nuclear acid test, antiphospholipid antibody workup, and homocysteine levels. All the tests were negative. On the seventh day of hospital stay, the patient was noted to have newly onset dysarthria and delirium. MRI brain showed new acute infarct in the left parietal region. Hyperacute left middle cerebral artery (MCA)/posterior cerebral artery (PCA) borderline infarct. Old MCA infarct right sided with embolic infarcts in right MCA territory; focal thrombosis in right internal carotid artery (ICA) and absence of flow in the distal ICA and wall thickening in right common carotid artery; and focal irregularity in right PCA. CT chest and abdomen showed left upper and lower lobe pulmonary veins thrombus. Mediastinal lymphadenopathy and few lung nodules were present. A few airspace opacities and patchy consolidation were seen in the left upper lobe. Both kidneys (right more than the left) showed segmental wedge-shaped nonenhancing area suggestive of infarcts. Main renal arteries were patent. Other findings included right internal iliac artery occlusion, right common femoral artery occlusion extending to the superficial femoral artery, nonopacified popliteal artery, suggesting occlusion and few collaterals in the thigh.
Histopathological examination (HPE) of the clot showed metastatic squamous cells ( and ). EBUS with mediastinal lymph node biopsy showed metastatic squamous cells . The family reported a history of hysterectomy 1 year back with no histopathology reports available. Hence, it was decided to send Pap smear from the vault, which was suggestive of high grade squamous intra epithelial neoplasia ( and ). Oncology opinion was taken and a diagnosis of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma with vaginal vault as most likely primary with endocardial secondaries was made and initiated on palliative chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin. Bronchioalveolar lavage was done and the culture showed Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antibiotic was adjusted according to the culture and sensitivity report. Patient was gradually bridged with warfarin and discharged home.