A 62-year-old Asian woman with hypertension was under medical control with β-adrenergic blocking agents and calcium channel blockers for approximately 10 years. Hypertension was also noted in her family history. She underwent a thyroidectomy for treatment of papillary thyroid cancer in 2004. After the operation, she regularly took levothyroxine to maintain her thyroid hormone level. She denied smoking or consuming alcohol. She had a daughter and entered menopausal status when she was 49 years old. She underwent screening with contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen in 2010 . This MRI study revealed multiple nodules in the bilateral renal cortices, with mild hypointensity on T2-weighted (T2W) images and isointensity of the adjacent renal cortex on T1-weighted (T1W) images. Diffusion restriction on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map and hyperintensity on diffusion-weighted images (DWIs) were also seen. Relatively poor enhancement on contrast-enhanced T1W images was observed. Ten years later, follow-up MRI findings in 2020 revealed a higher tumor number and larger lesions than seen in previous studies in 2010. In 2010, most of the tumors were smaller than 10 mm, while in 2020, several tumors were larger than 10 mm. Otherwise, these renal nodules presented with imaging features similar to those observed 10 years earlier. Biological markers of kidney function (such as serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and urine analysis) were within normal limits . However, the tumor marker CA 19-9 level increased progressively over the 10-year period (from 228.2 U/mL in 2010 to 654.9 U/mL in 2020), while no apparent tumors were noted in the hepatobiliary system or pancreas.
A renal tumor was noted in the right kidney on a follow-up contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan in 2018 , which showed an enhancing pattern that differed from that of the other renal nodules. In addition, there were multiple hypoenhanced nodules in both kidneys in the parenchymal phase. Because the possibility of a malignant tumor could not be excluded, the patient subsequently underwent right partial nephrectomy for tumor resection in November 2018. During admission, there were no abnormal findings on physical or neurological examinations (her sclera was anicteric, her conjunctiva was pink, no neck mass, clear breathing sounds, no heart murmur, soft abdominal wall without striae, normal muscle power, and deep tendon reflex), and her vital signs were also stable . She continued taking antihypertensive medication and levothyroxine during her hospital stay. The renal tumor was a well-defined tumor with a predominant myomatous element admixing with tortuous vessels and some adipose elements, which are pathological characteristic features of epithelioid angiomyolipoma. Furthermore, some large and unusual hyperchromatic nuclei without evident mitotic activity were also noted. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for melan-A protein and smooth muscle actin staining .
Furthermore, in addition to angiomyolipoma, there were multiple small renal tumors in the adjacent renal parenchyma, which were considered to be papillary adenomas . Pathological analysis of peritumoral tissue from the partial nephrectomy specimen showed multiple unencapsulated proliferative epithelial nodules with papillary, tubular, or tubulopapillary configurations . The tumor cells had low-grade nuclei. The tumors were as large as 1 cm. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and focally positive for α-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase (AMACR, also called p504s) but negative for thyroid transcription factor-1. Therefore, we excluded the possibility of metastasis with a thyroid origin. The multiple tumors showed a morphology and immunophenotype similar to those of papillary renal cell carcinoma; however, the size of these papillary tumors did not exceed 15 mm. Therefore, a diagnosis of renal adenomatosis was established.
Due to the malignant potential of renal adenomatosis, tumor biopsy was performed under ultrasound guidance in September 2020. The pathological analysis revealed no malignant features and no increase in the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio.