The patient was a 49-year-old self-employed male in good health who liked to tend to flowers and plants and was found to show evidence of mouse bites. The patient developed a cough at home 4 days prior to admission. Occasionally, the sputum was tinged with red blood, which was accompanied by pharyngeal and knee pain; his highest temperature was 39.2 °C and was accompanied by chills. He did not experience night sweats, herpes of the mouth, chest pain, abdominal pain, diarrhea, hoarseness, headache, vomiting, etc. He visited our hospital because of chest tightness after activity. Upon admission, the patient was conscious, with a temperature of 37.5 °C, a pulse rate of 105 beats/min, a respiration rate of 18 breaths/min, and a blood pressure of 100/49 mmHg. The following observations were recorded: the bulbous conjunctiva was free of congestion, his lips were not bluish, wet rales were heard in both lungs, his heart rate was 105 beats/minute. The laboratory tests showed a c-reactive protein level of 90.87 mg/L, and white blood cell count, 9.6 × 109 /L; hemoglobin, 117 g/L,platelet count, 96 × 109 /L. The results of the blood gas analysis revealed a PO2 of 119 mmHg, pH of 7.43; PCO2 of 38 mmHg, and procalcitonin (PCT) level of 4 pg/mL . The chest CT revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltrations . After admission, piperacillin tazobactam was administered at a dose of 4.5 g iv q8h due to moderate severe pneumonia, a 40 mg methylprednisolone injection was administered to control body temperature, and supportive nasal catheter oxygenation was provided (5 L/min). The patient’s condition worsened after 4 h, with a temperature increased to 39 °C, a heart rate of 150 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 26 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 85/55 mmHg, shortness of breath, but no chills; additionally, the patient’s SpO2 level through the nasal catheter decreased to 70%. The patient’s SpO2 increased to 86%, when switched to a venturi mask, but his shortness of breath persisted. The patient was transferred to ICU for adequate fluid resuscitation and blood culture is collected. The patient soon exhibited hemoptysis, his SpO2 decreased to 67%, the PO2 of 43 mmHg, blood pressure was 96/56 mmHg, and wet rales in both lungs had significantly increased. A pulse index continuous cardiac output examination was performed, which resulted in a extravascular lung water index of 36.9 mL/kg (normal range 3.0–7.0) and pulmonary vascular permeability index of 6.0 dn.s.m.2/cm5 (normal range 1.0–3.0). The patient’s heart function was normal, his lung permeability increased, and the presence of extravascular fluid in the lung increased. After 10 h in the ICU, the patient’s condition deteriorated again. He was agitated under noninvasive mechanical ventilation, and the SpO2 level was difficult to maintain within the normal range. Mechanical ventilation via tracheal intubation was performed. During the process of endotracheal intubation, a large amount of bloody secretions sprouted from the airway, the heart rate rapidly decreased to 40 beats/min, and the arterial pulse and SpO2 were not detected; Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was implemented immediately. After 1 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient recovered spontaneous circulation but was still agitated and in respiratory distress with an SpO2 of 80%, despite full mechanical ventilator support. Five hours after the patient was sedated using midazolam and fentanyl through continuous micropumping, his shortness of breath was still not relieved. The ventilator provided a small tidal volume ventilation with a frequency of 50–60 breaths/min. The blood gas analysis indicated a pH of 7.19, pCO2 of 65 mmHg, PO2 of 61 mmHg, and hemoglobin concentration of 68 g/dL. The patient showed significant pulmonary hemorrhage and clinical manifestations of ARDS. After a discussion among the staff of the cardiology department, thoracic surgery department, ICU, respiratory department and other experts in our hospital, v-vECMO was initiated at 4.5 L/min, with sweeping gas flow through the oxygenator at 4.5 L/ min of 100% oxygen. After the procedure, the patient’s SpO2 was 100%. The partial thromboplastin time (PTT) was maintained at 40–50 s by administering a heparin infusion, and the PTT was monitored every 4 h to avoid aggravating the pulmonary hemorrhage. The ECMO blood flow was maintained at 4.5 L/min during the first 3 days. Because general community-acquired pneumonia was considered an unlikely diagnosis, 4.5 g of piperacillin tazobactam iv q8h and 0.5 g of azithromycin iv qd as anti-infection medications and 40 mg of methylprednisolone q8h were continued. A tracheoscopic examination prompted diffuse bleeding in the airway and alveolar lavage fluid was collected and for second-generation gene sequencing on the next day. The hemoglobin concentration decreased to 61 g/dL after an infusion with 3 units of red blood cells, and the platelet count decreased to 57 × 109/L. Six units of a red blood cell suspension were applied to correct the anemia, and 10 units of platelets and 600 mL of fresh frozen plasma were re-administered to supplement the clotting factors. The laboratory tests revealed an increase in the PCT level to 77 ng/mL, and the antibiotics were upgraded to 0.5 g of intravenous meropenem q6h for a suspected severe infection. Four days later, second-generation gene sequencing of the patient’s alveolar lavage fluid was positive for Leptospira interrogans. Although the blood culture and urine culture did not detect leptospirosis, prior to discharge, the results showing strongly positive Leptospira serology with an IgM titer of 1:1280 detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Leptospirosis was considered, and the patient was administered an injection of 800,000 U of penicillin q8h (with a first dose of 400,000 U) as anti-infective treatment. The patient was sedated using midazolam and fentanyl during the ECMO supportive treatment, and no obvious complications occurred. After 6 days, the chest radiograph of the patient was significantly improved and ECMO was stopped . On day 9, the endotracheal tube was removed, and the patient was transferred to the general ward on day 10.