A 68-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for further examination of jaundice. She had no remarkable past history.
Laboratory findings were notable for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level within normal limits; however, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was slightly high (65.9 U/mL), and liver enzyme levels were elevated: aspartate aminotransferase, 155 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 98 IU/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 1620 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 1980 IU/L; and total-bilirubin, 5.3 mg/dL.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 27 × 23-mm irregular mass with a low-contrast effect in the duodenum and dilatation of both the upstream main pancreatic duct and the common bile duct . Duodenoscopy revealed a swollen villous tumor with radiating folds at the duodenal papilla . Endoscopic biopsy revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed a dilated main pancreatic duct without stenosis . A biliary stent was inserted endoscopically.
The tumor was diagnosed as an ampullary carcinoma, and SSPPD with modified Child reconstruction was performed. The operating time was 353 min, and total blood loss was 195 mL.
Macroscopically, the tumor measured 80 × 55 mm with a villous appearance around the orifice of the duodenal papilla . Microscopically, the tumor invaded the sphincter of Oddi and duodenum but not the pancreatic stroma. All surgical margins were negative. The pathological stage was T2N0M0 stage IB. Microscopically, neither invasion of lymph vessels nor microvessels was found. The results of immunohistochemical staining were as follows: cytokeratin7 (−), cytokeratin20 (+), MUC1 (+), and MUC2 (+) .
After surgery, the patient was followed up every 6 months. Three years later, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a peripherally contrasted 14-mm-diameter region near the pancreaticojejunal anastomosis . Laboratory data including CEA and CA 19-9 were within normal limits. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed an accumulation of SUV max 6.8 at the tumor, while any findings of other metastases were not observed . EUS revealed 16-mm hypoechoic tumor with irregular margins. The tumor appeared to originate from the mucosal layer of the main pancreatic duct, subsequently invading surrounding stroma of the pancreas . EUS-guided fine needle aspiration revealed ampullary carcinoma that was morphologically similar to the specimen from the first surgery. The tumor was diagnosed as recurrence of ampullary carcinoma rather than a new primary remnant pancreatic cancer or a metastatic cancer from other organs. A total remnant pancreatectomy was performed. The surgical duration was 229 min, and total blood loss was 251 mL. Her postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on 14th postoperative day.
On gross examination of the resected specimen, recurrence in the pancreatic duct was observed at 2.5 cm from the pancreaticojejunal anastomosis . There was neither invasion of lymphatics nor microvessels. There was no peritoneal dissemination or lymph node metastasis. The main tumor had infiltrated into the main duct and stroma .
The remnant tumor was morphologically similar to the original ampullary carcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining results were identical to those of the original specimen . There were no other malignant findings nor atypical lesions in the remaining pancreatic duct epithelium on gross pathological examination. Ten months after the second surgery, there were no signs of recurrence.