A 61-year-old male presented with a clinical stage III (cT3N1 M0) squamous cell carcinoma at the middle third of the esophagus. After a partial clinical response following neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy, he received a robotic assisted minimally invasive esophagectomy and reconstruction. During the laparoscopic harvest phase for the gastric conduit, the right gastroepiploic artery (RGEA) and vein (RGEV) were accidently transected and ligated by an energy device. Ischemic changes in the gastric conduit were subsequently deteced. We then converted the laparoscopic approach to a laparotomy and identified the both ends of the ligated-transected gastroepiploic vessels. End-to-end microvascular anastomosis was performed by a plastic surgeon using 8–0 nylon for both the gastroepiploic artery and vein. After revascularization, indocyanine green (ICG) fluorescence imaging was applied to evaluate the perfusion of the gastric conduit . Both the patency of the vessels and perfusion of the conduit were confirmed. The following gastric conduit pull up through the retrosternal space and cervical esophagogastrostomy were performed without complications. The final pathologic report demonstrated a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (ypT2N0 M0).
During the postoperative recovery period, no gastric conduit necrosis occurred. Esophagography was routinely performed on postoperative day 7 to evaluate the esophagogastrostomy, which did not disclose any extravasation of the contrast that was evident. However, some turbid fluid was found around the cervical incision on postoperative day 8, which suggested that a leakage of the esophagogastric anastomosis was occuring. It was treated successfully by conservative drainage and antibiotic administration. Follow-up computed tomography with contrast showed that there was no abscess around the leakage site. Meanwhile, the gastric conduit was fully vascularized and the right gastroepiploic artery was patent . This patient was discharged at postoperative day 43 with normal oral intake. There were no subsequent complications related to malperfusion of the gastric conduit in the following 6 months either.