A 35-year-old female presented with fever, diarrhea, headache, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, and tinnitus to the emergency department. She first developed earplugs and tinnitus in November 2009, which eased after rest. In the same year, sudden hearing loss (50 decibels, high frequency) occurred in the left ear, accompanied by dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. Oral corticosteroids and hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HOT) improved her symptoms. In February 2011, she first presented with ocular symptoms, including swelling and redness in her right eye. One year later, she developed blurred vision, mainly in her right eye. Oral and topical corticosteroids relieved her symptoms but recurred when she stopped using them. In 2016, she suffered from finger and knee pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. There was no family history of vascular disease or collagen disease.
Clinical examination revealed bilateral red eyes, swollen eyelids, lacrimation, and ocular secretions. An ophthalmological examination was performed: Intraocular pressure was normal. Slit lamp examination showed signs of keratitis. Orbital ultrasonography revealed a thickening of the medial rectus muscle. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed signs of optic disc oedema and macular degeneration. Fundus angiography showed no abnormalities. An audiogram revealed a pattern of sensorineural hearing loss. The degree of hearing loss was extremely severe in both ears . CT and contrast-enhanced MRI of the inner ear were normal. However, brain MRI showed patchy hyperintensity in the centrum semivale.
Laboratory tests showed elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (ESR, 69 mm/h; CRP, 151 mg/L). The white blood cell count was 14,290/μL (84.5% neutrophils) and the interleukin-6 titer was 25.9 pg/mL. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), protease 3-ANCA, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-extracted nuclear antigen peptide antibody (anti-ENA antibody) and rheumatoid factor, liver and kidney function tests were normal. Treponema pallidum antibodies and cultured cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were negative. Her electrocardiogram, transthoracic echocardiogram, and CT of the chest were normal. The diagnosis of Cogan syndrome was based on a combination of bilateral keratitis, sensorineural hearing loss, and systemic vasculitis manifestations.
The patient initially received intravenous methylprednisolone 40 mg/day in combination with oral methotrexate 10 mg/week. Ocular symptoms and hearing were relieved to normal levels. Symptoms recur during corticosteroid tapering. In October 2016, she suffered multiple joint swelling and pain, severe hearing loss in both ears (left ear 120 decibels, right ear 80 decibels) with elevated inflammatory indicators (CRP, 69 mg/L; ESR, 108 mm/h). Methylprednisolone (40 mg/day), methotrexate (10 mg/week), and cyclophosphamide (0.4 g/week) were prescribed to improve her symptoms. One month later, her inflammatory indicators decreased, but her hearing and joint symptoms did not ease. She was prescribed with rituximab 500 mg/week for 3 months. Her tinnitus, nausea and vomiting improved significantly. Unfortunately, her hearing function showed little improvement. In April 2017, she had a fever with diarrhea, visual field defect, headache, tinnitus, and increased blood interleukin-6 levels. The interleukin-6 inhibitor tocilizumab (TCZ) (480 mg/month subcutaneously) was then added. Her inflammatory markers level normalized immediately (CRP, 0.6 mg/L; ESR, 3 mm/h). Although the audiometry results did not improve significantly, she regained the ability to hear loud conversations. Ocular lesions did not progress. Although we increased the dose of MTX to 15 mg/week, a relapse occurred when the prednisolone dose was reduced to 20 mg/day. The patient developed glucocorticoid side effects in January 2019. The dose of glucocorticoids was gradually reduced and a tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α inhibitor (etanercept 25 mg, 2 times/week) was administered. Methotrexate therapy continued with hydroxychloroquine adjuvant therapy. The incidence of conjunctivitis and eyelid edema decreased, and hearing did not deteriorate further. During hospitalization, the patient complained of fever, cough, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and tinnitus. CRP (151.79 mg/L) and ESR (69 mm/h) were elevated. She was prescribed with methylprednisolone (60 mg/d), TNF-α inhibitor (etanercept 25 mg, 2 times/week), and immunoglobulin (2.5 g/d × 3d). The patient's body temperature gradually returned to normal. Respiratory and tinnitus, dizziness symptoms eased, and inflammatory markers decreased (CRP, 39 mg/L; ESR, 29 mm/h). After discharge, the patient was followed up regularly in the outpatient clinic. During the gradual tapering of hormones, to relieve the symptoms of joint pain and tinnitus, we tried to treat her with a Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor (tofacitinib, 10 mg/day), and the patient's inflammatory indexes returned to normal. As maintenance therapy, prednisone was reduced to 5 mg/day orally. Symptoms such as fatigue, anxiety and joint pain have been relieved. There were no serious infections other than occasional mild cough and diarrhoea.