A 36-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with swelling, skin redness and pain in the upper limb that persisted for 6 mo without a prior history of trauma.
The patient underwent ultrasound (US) and a computed tomography (CT) scan. The US revealed a blurred large solid mass in the deltoid muscle. Plain CT showed a hypodense mass in the superficial deltoid muscle extending to the intermuscular space with axillary lymphadenopathy , while contrast-enhanced CT revealed a slightly heterogeneous enhancement of the mass with blurred margins . There was no evidence of calcification or mineralization in the mass, and the adjacent structures were all normal.
A clinical examination revealed that the 6.0 cm x 4.0 cm mass was tender without discharge or drainage sinus.
MRI: MRI was performed using a 1.5T whole-body MR scanner (Signa, Excite, HDxt, General Electric Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA). The MRI protocols were as follows : (1) Conventional MR scan sequences included coronal or axial T2-weighted fast spin-echo (FSE) images, T1-weighted fat-saturation spoiled gradient recalled echo (T1 FSPGR) images; (2) Axial T1 3D FSPGR liver acquisition with volume acceleration (LAVA) sequence (total 4 phases, repetition time/echo time (TR/TE) = 6.0 ms/3.0 ms, FA = 12º, slice thickness/slice spacing = 5.0 mm/2.5 mm, acquisition time = 23 s/one phase) was performed after an injection of 0.1 mmol/kg gadolinium using an antecubital vein power injector at a rate of 2.0 mL/s followed by 20 mL saline; the first acquisition started 25 s after contrast agent injection; and (3) DWI (b = 500 s/mm2) with TR/TE of 4700 ms/69 ms, slice thickness/slice spacing of 6.0 mm/1.5 mm, a field of view (FOV) of 280 mm x 252 mm and matrix size of 256 × 256 were used; DWI was performed before contrast injection.
MRI analysis: All MR images were transferred to a GE workstation (Advantage Windows 4.5; General Electric, Madison, WI, USA) for image processing and were interpreted by two radiologists with more than five years of diagnostic experience. Only the consensus of any diagnosis between the two readers was used for the final MRI analysis. The following lesion characteristics were recorded: (1) Signal intensity on T2WI and T1 FSPGR; (2) Morphology and maximum lesion size on dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI); (3) Time-intensity curve (TIC) obtained from DCE-MRI; and (4) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value obtained from DWI.
On morphological MR images, the manifestations of the mass were obvious. The maximum lesion size was 6.0 cm. Compared to muscle signal intensity, the lesion showed hyper-intensity on T2WI without fat saturation , and heterogeneous hypo-intensity to iso-intensity on T1 FSPGR . On DCE-MRI, the solid mass showed multiple nodular enhancements with irregular shapes and blurred margins . Furthermore, internal enhancement was heterogeneous. The TIC showed slow increased type . On DWI (b = 500 s/mm2), the lesion was hyperintense with a higher mean ADC value of 2.19 × 10−3 mm2/s than surrounding normal soft tissue (1.03 × 10−3 mm2/s) .