Lower abdominal pain and bloody stools.
During winter, a 54-year-old female patient with no significant medical history presented with general malaise and a fever of 39.2°C. The next day (the second day of symptom onset), the patient visited a nearby medical institution.
Her blood pressure was 115/60 mmHg, and her pulse rate was regular with 77 beats/min.
At the same institution, the patient was diagnosed with influenza type A using a rapid antigen kit (Quick Navi-Flu2 Influenza Diagnostic Kit, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokushima, Japan), and she was administered a dose of 40 mg laninamivir via inhalation. Approximately three hours after inhalation on the same day, the patient reportedly experienced bloody stools and lower abdominal pain while sleeping at night. On the third day of symptom onset, the patient visited our institution and was hospitalized due to persistent intermittent lower abdominal pain every 20 min and bloody stools at a frequency of ten times a day. No oral medication, including any anti-platelets/anticoagulants, was prescribed.
Nothing in particular.
Nothing in particular.
Upon clinical examination, the patient appeared lucid. Her blood pressure was 125/67 mmHg, pulse rate was regular with 67 beats/min, body temperature was 36.7°C, respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min, and SpO2 was 97% at room air. No pallor was observed on the palpebral conjunctiva. Heart sounds were regular, and there were no cardiac murmurs. Breath sounds were clear. The abdomen was flat and soft, with tenderness on the left flank. There was no rebound tenderness or muscle guarding. Bowel peristaltic sounds did not increase or decrease, and no palpable mass or hemorrhage was observed on rectal examination. There was no edema in the extremities, and no signs of cyanosis were observed. Her mouth was dry, and the capillary refilling time was four seconds, which suggested dehydration.
Blood test results revealed the following: white blood cell count, 7810/μL; hemoglobin, 12.9 g/dL; platelet count, 20.7 × 104/μL; L-dimer, 1.0 μg/mL; blood urea nitrogen, 17.7 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.47 mg/dL; creatinine kinase, 75 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 17 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 13 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 155 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 210 U/L; C-reactive protein, 3.08 mg/dL; and glycated hemoglobin A1c, 5.9%. She had no abnormalities, such as diabetes mellitus or liver dysfunction, which could manifest in ischemic episodes. Stool culture tests were performed for normal intestinal flora alone, and Salmonella growth was not observed. Polymerase chain reaction was not performed to detect bacteria in stools, and the stool was negative for Clostridium difficile toxin A and B.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed edema-like changes that extended from the descending colon to the sigmoid colon .