A 40-year-old female with a past medical history of type II diabetes mellitus, hypertriglyceridemia, and pancreatitis presented with worsening blurry vision in her left eye. Previously, she had been treated for diabetic macular edema with a single intravitreal injection of bevacizumab. She reported that she was not currently on any medical treatment for her chronic conditions due to extenuating social circumstances. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/25 in the right eye and 20/400 in the left eye. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed mildly tortuous vessels with intraluminal whitening and white discoloration of the retina. Posterior segment examination of the left eye demonstrated similar vascular changes along with peripapillary and macular edema, intraretinal hemorrhages, and cotton wool spots . Though normal in the right eye, fluorescein angiography of the left eye demonstrated dilated vessels and late peripapillary leakage . Ocular coherence tomography (OCT) was significant for increased retinal thickening with intraretinal and subretinal lipid exudation . Lab workup at this visit was notable for a complete blood count that was within the normal limits, a hemoglobin A1c of 8.9%, and elevated levels of total cholesterol (> 650 mg/dL) and triglycerides (> 1,575 mg/dL). Subsequent lipoprotein electrophoresis confirmed a pattern of dyslipidemia consistent with type IV hypertriglyceridemia . Upon confirmation that the intraluminal whitening represented lipemia retinalis, the patient was treated with an intravitreal injection of bevacizumab.
After three consecutive monthly intravitreal bevacizumab injections, the patient's vision in her left eye improved to 20/20, though peripapillary hemorrhages, macular edema, exudate, and intravascular whitening persisted . An OCT scan demonstrated improvement of intraretinal and subretinal fluid with persistent hyperreflective outer retinal exudates . In contrast to her visual improvement, repeat serum lipid examination showed persistently elevated total cholesterol (872 mg/dL) and triglycerides (> 4,425 mg/dL), and the patient was counseled again about the importance of starting systemic treatment. The patient's vision and retinal examination were stable 2 months after the last injection. She reported starting cholesterol lowering therapy with gemfibrozil 600 mg twice daily and atorvastatin 40 mg daily under the guidance of her primary care physician.