A 20-year-old male with a history of polysubstance abuse presented to the emergency department (ED) after being found unconscious by family members in a car. The patient was with his father and a cousin, and all three individuals were snorting both heroin and cocaine. Emergency medical services (EMS) reported the patient was apneic and had peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) 65% at the time of arrival, but they were able to raise oxygen saturations to 92% with use of bag-valve-mask. EMS administered two doses of two milligrams intramuscular naloxone with spontaneous return of breathing and consciousness.
On initial presentation to the ED, the patient’s vitals were as follows: heart rate 123 beats per minute; blood pressure 98/79 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg); respiratory rate 21 breathes per minute; SpO2 100% on six liters per minute oxygen via nasal canula. and temperature 36.7° Celsius. The patient was awake and alert and able to answer questions with a primary complaint of chest tightness and persistent scant hemoptysis. The patient’s family noted epistaxis about five minutes after initial drug ingestion. After two liters of normal saline were bolused, the patient showed a reduction of pulse to 94 beats per minute and an increase in systolic blood pressure to116 mm Hg. On physical exam, no obvious sources of bleeding were identified intranasally, within the oropharynx or mouth. Auscultation of the lungs demonstrated coarse breath sounds in all lung fields. Initial blood laboratory tests, including a complete blood count and coagulation panel, were normal. Initial chest radiography demonstrated bilateral extensive alveolar densities The patient’s respiratory and mental status were maintained without need for additional doses of naloxone.
Three hours after arrival to the ED, the patient’s oxygen saturation began to decline, and he became tachypneic, tachycardic, and hypotensive. The patient required invasive mechanical ventilation for hypoxic acute respiratory failure. After initial intubation with confirmation of tube placement via capnography and radiography, achieving adequate oxygen saturation of >92% required acute respiratory distress syndrome protocol, volume-control ventilator settings: rate 24, tidal volume 440 milliliters, fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 100%, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 15 centimeters water. The patient was then admitted to the medical-surgical intensive care unit for further management.
During his hospital stay, the patient remained hemodynamically stable, afebrile, without leukocytosis or lactic acidosis. Electrocardiogram (ECG) did not show evidence of ischemic changes and serial troponins were normal. Non-contrast enhanced computed tomography of the chest showed extensive bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrates with sparing of the periphery .
Bronchoscopy revealed moderate to severe diffuse bronchial hyperemia and mucosal erosions, and successive aliquots of bronchoalveolar lavage showed progressively increasing blood-tinged secretions. Rheumatologic workup was unremarkable. Sputum and blood cultures were negative, and bronchial lavage cultures had no growth. The patient was treated empirically with piperacillin-tazobactam and azithromycin. After the first 24 hours with mechanical ventilation, the patient tolerated lower settings of FiO2 and PEEP and was later transitioned to non-invasive ventilatory support, with return to baseline ventilatory status and discharged home on hospital day six.