A nine-year-old Caucasian male with no significant past medical history, family history, medications, or allergies presented for an adenoidectomy due to hypertrophy. Two days later (day one of illness), he had a low-grade fever for 2 days, followed by 2 days of headache. Transient abdominal pain was noted on day five. On day six, he had swelling, warmth, tenderness, and decreased range of motion of his left knee and left foot. He was unable to walk and presented to the Emergency Department. Scattered petechiae were noted on his lower legs bilaterally. Left knee and foot x-rays were negative for fracture. CRP was 1.2 mg/dL (nl < 1) with a normal serum creatinine, complete blood count, and urinalysis. He was discharged home with supportive care for presumed Henoch-Schonlein Purpura.
On day nine, he saw his primary care physician (PCP) for follow-up. He continued to have intermittent swelling of his bilateral knees and ankles, low-grade temperatures (99-100F), and a non-blanching rash on his lower extremities. A slightly red posterior oropharynx was noted, however rapid throat swab for Group A streptococcus was negative. Later that day, he developed severe abdominal pain and returned to the Emergency Department.
Upon arrival, he was afebrile and received fentanyl for pain control. Laboratory results included CRP 5.1 mg/dL (0–1), ESR 10 mm/hr. (0–15), ASO antibody 530 IU/mL (0–200), Anti-DNase B antibody 588 U/mL (0–170), negative ANA, RF 6.5 IU/mL (0–13.9), C4 44 mg/dL (14–44), C3 183 mg/dL (82–167), and positive Rhinovirus/Enterovirus from a nasal washing. Gamma-glutamyl transferase level, complete metabolic panel, complete blood count, blood cultures, and urinalysis were all unremarkable.
Abdominal ultrasound suggested mild bowel wall thickening in the left upper quadrant at the site of point tenderness. An echocardiogram, ordered by his PCP to rule out acute rheumatic fever, revealed dilation of the left main coronary artery (LMCA: 5.32 mm, Z score + 4.25) and left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD: 3.51 mm, Z score + 2.64) with no other abnormalities . EKG was unremarkable. He ultimately had a skin biopsy of his lower extremity rash that revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis with positive IgA staining .
The patient met criteria for HSP given his palpable purpura, abdominal pain, arthritis and skin biopsy. He did not meet criteria for typical (or atypical) KD, given his lack of persistent fever. Nevertheless, KD treatment was initiated, per Infectious Disease and Cardiology, given the potential sequelae of untreated inflammatory-mediated dilation of the coronaries. He received high dose aspirin, 2 g/kg of IVIG over 10 h, and 5 mg/kg of infliximab as per our hospital protocol. His CRP normalized and his abdominal pain improved. He was discharged with Cardiology follow-up for an echocardiogram and a PCP appointment to monitor blood pressure and kidney function. Of note, Group A streptococcus culture turned positive during his admission and thus amoxicillin was started.
By day 17, his arthritis resolved, his rash improved, and his energy and appetite returned. Repeat echocardiogram on day 21 showed persistent dilation of his LMCA (5.24 mm, Z score + 3.91) and LAD (3.74 mm, Z Score + 3.07). He remained on daily low dose aspirin until his next echocardiogram 3 months later revealed normal coronary dimensions. He had no evidence of hypertension, hematuria or proteinuria.