In July 2005, a 68-year-old man was admitted to our institution with a 3-week history of low-grade fever and headache on the left side. The patient had a history of chronic sinusitis, and also had DM. Transnasal fiberscopy revealed left lateral pharyngeal wall edema, or asymmetrical bulging from the level of the Rosenmüller fossa to that of the uvula, and no inflammatory signs in the pharyngeal tonsil . Laboratory evaluation revealed severe inflammatory conditions in our patient and suggested the requirement for surgical treatment: white blood cells (WBC), 19,000 cells/mm3; C-reactive protein (CRP), 42.68 mg/dL; HbA1c, 14.5%; and glucose, 565 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) of the neck showed marked thickening of the epipharynx on the left side . The lesion extended from the level of the epipharynx to that of the hyoid bone. Signs of left hypoglossal palsy and left Horner's syndrome were also evident. Thus, the lesion was due to deep neck infection extending from the epipharynx to the surrounding poststyloid space, although CT did not show any typical features of abscess at this time (1 week before the operation) . Micro-otoscopy showed left purulent otorrhea through a central perforation of the tympanic membrane.
As symptoms persisted despite antibiotic therapy (meropenem trihydrate 1 g twice/day and clindamycin 600 mg twice/day), we suspected a very acute stage of abscess formation after diagnosis by CT. Unfortunately, we could not repeat the CT scan to confirm abscess formation, because repeated CT scans to check progress within 30 days are not covered by either Employees' Insurance or National Health Insurance in the Japanese Social Insurance System. We elected not to perform a transcervical procedure under general anesthesia due to severe DM, severe inflammation, and trismus. In addition, an external approach under local anesthesia was considered difficult because the region of suspected abscess formation was located mainly between the levels of the base of the skull and soft palate medial to the great vessels, and did not involve multiple spaces, and the patient did not have any airway obstruction. Therefore, due to the patient's severe general condition and the anatomical location of the lesion, we instead chose to perform surgical drainage using a transnasal endoscopic approach under local anesthesia 1 week after CT scanning.
A vertical incision, 1 cm in length, was made in the lateral epipharyngeal wall. The opening was enlarged by removing some inflamed mucosa with forceps. We observed no apparent pharyngeal constrictor muscle on transnasal endoscopic surgery, which may have been due to severe tissue encroachment by inflammation, and we could reach into the poststyloid space using only forceps without a microdebrider. Dissection into the poststyloid space produced an enormous amount of purulent material. Upon inspection with a 30° angled fiberscope, pulsation of the left internal carotid artery was clearly visible. The operation time was 20 minutes. Cultures of the purulent material yielded S. aureus. Histological examination revealed only nonspecific inflammatory cells and fibrous cells. These clinical and laboratory observations supported our diagnosis of deep neck abscess.
The postoperative course was uneventful. Transnasal endoscopic aspiration was started on the first postoperative day and continued once a day for 30 days. The patient reported a rapid improvement in symptoms, except those related to cranial nerve palsy. Six weeks later, endoscopy showed normalization of the epipharynx. CT examination demonstrated the presence of a small necrotic retropharyngeal lymph node at the level of the epipharynx . Laboratory analyses showed improvement in inflammation: WBC, 7600 cells/mm3; CRP, 0.47 mg/dL . Thirty months after surgery, the patient had no symptoms other than those related to cranial nerve palsy.