A 40-year-old female presented as an outpatient with chronic kidney disease. At 23 years old, she had been hospitalized for a TIA and was diagnosed with vasculitis. Occasionally, she had experienced discomfort in her hands and feet that was triggered by warm or cold temperatures. At age 27, several other TIA episodes occurred. When the patient was 37, she was hospitalized for an episode of severe angina and palpitations. At that time, a transthoracic echocardiography was performed that showed concentric LV hypertrophy, with an end-diastolic septal wall thickness of 14 mm, a normal ejection fraction of 53%, and impaired diastolic function; in addition, hypokinesia of the infero-lateral wall was observed. Further evaluation included a myocardial scintigraphy with Tc-99 m-MIBI that showed a persistent defect at the level of the infero-lateral region of the LV, consistent with the diagnosis of myocardial infarct. The patient suffered another TIA episode during the period of hospitalization. Furthermore, the patient presented proteinuria with value of 1.2 g/24 hrs, normal blood pressure (130/70 mmHg), serum creatinine levels of 2.3 mg/dl, a glomerular filtration rate of 35 ml/min, serum Urea of 71 mg/dl, serum albumin of 4.2 g/dl. Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), Coombs test, antibodies anti-platelets and anti-granulocytes were negative. The patient also reported that she had undergone two normal pregnancies. Her family medical history was negative.
In order to evaluate the nature of the persistent proteinuria and the impaired renal function, the patient underwent a renal biopsy. Optical microscopy of the glomeruli (38–61) showed collapse in 4–6 of them and glomerular sclerosis in the others (data not shown). The interstitium showed a chronic inflammatory infiltrate and focal areas of tubular atrophy; residual tubules showed epithelial vacuolization and focal fibrosis. Immunofluorescence was negative for IgA, IgG, IgM, kappa and lambda chains, C3, C4, C1q, and fibrinogen. An electron microscopy study showed several typical lysosomal inclusions in tubular cells, podocytes and mesangial cells, which are histological hallmark of FD .
To further characterize cardiac morphology, the patient underwent a cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) study using a 1.5-T MRI system (Gyroscan Intera, Philips Medical Systems) equipped with high performance gradients. After a survey scan was obtained, a breath-holding T2-weighted black blood multiecho multishot turbo spin-echo (TSE) sequence with four different TEs was used to obtain images of the four-chamber horizontal long-axis plane for myocardial T2 relaxation time (MT2RT) measurements. LV four-chamber horizontal long-axis images were acquired using a breath-holding 3D balanced turbo field-echo multiphase multislice sequence; subsequently, biventricular short-axis images were obtained for evaluation of LV mass. MT2RT and LV mass were calculated as previously described [,]. There was a significantly prolonged MT2RT throughout the entire LV myocardium . A prolongation of MT2RT throughout the entire myocardium may be observed in patients with FD [,]. Researchers have shown that factors such as myocardial water and lipid alterations can lead to an abnormal prolongation of the MT2RT and to an increase in signal intensity . Therefore, it is reasonable to presume that the prolonged MT2RT in all myocardial regions, as observed in this case, was related to the marked glycolipid deposition in the myocardium. Our patient showed an ejection fraction of 53%, LV mass of 128 g, inter-ventricular septal wall thickness of 14 mm and postero-lateral wall thickness of 15 mm .
As a result of the renal biopsy and cardiac MRI study findings, associated to the clinical history, suggesting FD, the patient underwent enzymatic and genetic analyses of α-galactosidase A. Enzymatic analysis was performed using the Dried Blood Filter Paper test (DBFP) described by Chamoles et al., with minor modifications . The patient showed almost a normal value of α-galactosidase A activity in the blood; nevertheless, this value give no clear indication of FD because the subject affected is a female. As an X-linked genetic disorder, FD was first thought to affect only men and women were generally considered to be asymptomatic carriers. However, recent studies suggest that female heterozygotes for FD may still develop vital organ damage causing severe morbidity and mortality.
Genetic analysis was performed by high resolution melting (HRM) analysis on DNA samples, isolated from whole blood, using the Light Cycler 480 system . PCR products presenting melting curves different in position or shape from those of the wild type control were sequenced to identify the suspected mutations. DNA sequencing has identified the presence of four previously reported mutations, combined in a heterozygote haplotype -10C>T (g.1170C>T), c.370-77_-81del (g.7188-7192del5), c.640-16A>G (g.10115A>G), c.1000-22C>T (g.10956C>T), mapping in promoter and regulatory intronic regions [-]. These intronic mutations could play both qualitative and quantitative roles in the transcription of the gene and in the translation of α-galactosidase A, a hypothesis strengthened in some cases by the presence of Gb3 and/or lyso-Gb3 in the blood and urine of patients . It has been shown that regulatory intronic regions may regulate the splicing of the corresponding mRNA, and that mutations in these regions, or factors that act in trans with them, can cause genetic diseases [,].
After these findings, the patient underwent to enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alfa, the efficacy of which is due to its ability to reverse lysosomal glycosphingolipid accumulation. Due to the short period of treatment, to date patient’s symptoms have not improved but disease progression was arrested.