A 62-year-old woman had a history of right breast cancer and had undergone BCS. Pathologically, the tumor was classified as pT1cN0M0 pStageIA. Adjuvant RT (50 Gy) was administered to the residual breast tissue followed by hormone therapy (tamoxifen 20 mg daily for 5 years). There was no evidence of recurrence. However, 8 years after the first surgery, a tumor measuring 3 cm in size, appeared cutaneously in her right breast. The inside of the tumor had a low echoic area and the tumor borders were unclear on ultrasonography . CNB was performed twice and the bloody tissue was collected; however, it did not reveal a definitive diagnosis . Two months later, the tumor had grown bigger . CNB was performed again, but it did not reveal a definitive diagnosis. PET/CT showed accumulation in the tumor and no metastatic disease . We suspected that the tumor was angiosarcoma because of her medical history as well as the examination results. First, she had received RT after BCS. Second, the tumor had grown rapidly. Third, PET/CT had suggested the presence of malignant disease. She received an excisional biopsy and the pathological analysis yielded a diagnosis of angiosarcoma . Subsequently, mastectomy was performed and the pathological analysis yielded a diagnosis of residual angiosarcoma because of strong positive staining with antibodies against CD31 and EGFR . The tumor differentiation status was Federation Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) Grade 3 (tumor differentiation: score 3, mitotic count: score 3, tumor necrosis: score 0). The surgical margin was negative. We discussed the need for adjuvant chemotherapy using PTX. One month after the surgery, a nodule appeared on the skin around the surgical scar, which was confirmed as a recurrence of angiosarcoma by excisional biopsy. A few weeks later, a nodule reappeared on the skin around the surgical scar and was identified as a second recurrence of angiosarcoma by excisional biopsy. Subsequently, she underwent chemotherapy with PTX. There was no recurrence for 8 months following the second recurrence.