The authors report a case of a 72-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of controlled hypertension, followed in the cardiology consultation for uncorrected TOF. In the past, she had a pregnancy that elapsed without complications and gave birth to a healthy daughter. Currently, she usually complains of dyspnea, and is in class II of the New York Heart Association (NYHA).
During follow up in the cardiology consultation, she underwent a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging , which revealed a large subaortic VSD, with a diameter of 26mm and bidirectional flow (QP:QS = 0.9); an overriding of the aorta over the septum ≤50%; a marked hypertrophy of the RV with subpulmonary stenosis (maximum gradient of 31mmHg) and moderate pulmonary regurgitation; a dilatation of the pulmonary artery and its branches; and a non-dilated left ventricle with preserved systolic function. It also revealed the absence of patent ductus arteriosus.
Approximately 1 year prior to her admission to hospital, she had started treatment of dental caries and a tooth extraction was carried out under antibiotic prophylaxis. Five months prior to admission, she reported persistent predominantly vespertine low-grade fever episodes associated with asthenia and weight loss. The patient sought medical assistance several times and was medicated with four antibiotics for the proposed diagnosis of respiratory and urinary infections. Given the persistence of fever and progressive worsening of heart failure, she was brought to a hospital. At admission, she was in class III of the NYHA and presented with fever, slight peripheral cyanosis, finger clubbing despite oxygen saturation of 91%, a regular pulse of 95 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 149/70mmHg. Cardiac examination revealed a single second heart sound, a systolic thrill and loud systolic ejection murmur (grade IV) at the base of her heart. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with first degree atrioventricular block and incomplete right bundle branch block. Blood picture showed leukocytosis (white blood cells: 17,700), elevation of C-reactive protein with high sedimentation rate and rheumatoid factor (RF) and mild anemia (hemoglobin 11.7g/L and hematocrit 0.35L/L). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed the components of TOF and an echodense, irregular and mobile mass, 10mm long and 3mm wide, adherent and downstream to the pulmonary valve suggestive of vegetation without associated regurgitation. Therefore, she was hospitalized in our Cardiology Department for suspected IE.
Blood cultures were collected and empiric antibiotic therapy with vancomycin, gentamicin and ciprofloxacin was started. No vascular or immunological phenomena (except RF) were detected. All blood cultures collected, at admission and during antibiotic therapy, were negative inclusively for atypical organisms. Serology tests were also negative. Computed tomography images revealed no signs of cerebral, thoracic or abdominal embolizations.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was not able to confirm or exclude the presence of pulmonary vegetation given the complex heart anatomy. Despite this, because the patient had a predisposing heart condition, fever and elevated RF, it was decided to maintain the empiric antibiotic therapy.
After 4 weeks of antibiotic therapy, the fever and the elevation of the inflammation markers had resolved, the patient was back in class II of the NYHA and no images suggestive of vegetation were detected on TTE . Therefore, the patient was discharged.
One year after her hospitalization she remained apyretic and without any images suggestive of vegetation on TTE.