Forgetfulness.
The proband was a 76-year-old woman (II-1 in the pedigree in Figure ). She was admitted to a hospital at the age of 65 because of forgetfulness that had been present since she was 60 years old. She could make only a simple meal, repeated the same conversations, and bought the same things many times. Her MMSE (mini mental state examination) score and HDS-R (Revised Hasegawa Dementia Scale) scores were 19 and 20, respectively, which indicated a possibility of dementia (MMSE score below 24, HDS-R score below 21). The coefficient of correlation of the HDS-R to the MMSE was as high as 0.94, which suggested the HDS-R was valid in terms of compatibility with the established dementia screening test. Her Wechsler adult intelligence scale-revised (WIAS-R) total intelligence quotient (IQ) was 87, verbal IQ was 83 and performance IQ was 92.
42 year: Uterine myoma.
58 year: Cerebral aneurysm clipping surgery.
The proband graduated from a junior high school, married at the age of 21, and had been employed in farming, for a construction, and food service, etc.
She had a positive family history of brain calcification, as shown in Figure . Her brother had calcification in the brain as well as mental retardation, and another brother presented with alcoholism. Her parents had no clinical symptoms and lived a normal life as far as we know, and they had no dementia. Although we do not know the details, her father died of heart disease and her mother died of stroke.
No pyramidal or extrapyramidal signs were observed. The Albright sign was nega-tive.
Biochemical examination showed that the levels of thyroid hormones, parathyroid hormone (PT), serum calcium, serum phosphate and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were all in the range of normal values. Additionally, the Treponema pallidum haemag-glutination assay test was negative.
Symmetrical calcifications in the globus pallidus, pulvinar thalami, subcortical area in the right frontal lobe, and border area of the cortex and white matter in the occipital lobe were found in CT scanning . A T1-weighted MRI revealed small patchy hypersignals in the globus pallidus and pulvinar thalami . A T2-weighted MRI revealed small patchy hyposignals in the globus pallidus . However, it is obscure in MRI scans compared to CT scans. Her brain perfusion SPECT images showed decreased perfusion in the bilateral basal ganglia and thalamus as well as the right frontal lobe .