A 5-year-old girl presented to our institution with complaint of twice hemoptysis over the past year. She suffered the several bloody sputa at the first time a year ago, and then she visited a children’s hospital at once. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed right upper and middle lobes pneumonia and right middle lobe atelectasis . Bronchoscopic examination demonstrated mucosal hyperemia on the right side of bronchus, hilar swell and stenosis in the right upper and middle lobes with bleeding when palpated. Brush biopsy in bronchoscopy and pathogenic bacteria culture in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) all were negative. The serum Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)-specific human antibodies and antigens 38KD, LAM were positive. Then she visited the tuberculosis physicians. They performed Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR), tuberculin skin testing (TST) of Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) and T-spot.TB, all of which revealed negative results. According to the past contact history (her grandfather suffered from TB) and laboratory result, physicians diagnosed this girl as suspected pulmonary and bronchial tuberculosis. She was taken anti-tuberculousis treatment (ATT, isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide,) for 11 months before this presentation. The reviews of thoracic CT scans examinations showed the disease was stable during the period of ATT . She presented to our institution when suffered the second hemoptysis. About 100–200 ml of arterial blood was intermittent coughed up in an hour. The physical examination showed no abnormality and routine hematological and biochemical parameters were roughly within normal range. After confirming that hemostatics treatment by drugs is invalid, the patient underwent exploratory thoracotomy at first. General anesthesia and double cavity intubation was used during operation, then bronchoscopic examination indicated active bleeding in the right middle lobe. A right upper and middle lobectomy was performed, since a mass locate in the right upper and middle lobe and the middle lobe were atelectasis. It was reported as PIMT by histologic examination . The patient has no current complaint, and a postoperative thoracic CT showed there is no emerging lesion after six months .