A 14-year old male soccer player was referred to our orthopedic tertiary care referral facility as a result of failure to respond to non-operative management. He first experienced pain on the medial side two years prior that was noted after sports activities although no clear injury was identified. The knee was intermittently painful and with time these symptoms progressively worsened despite several attempts at non-operative management to include anti-inflammatories and physical therapy. The symptoms limited the ability of the patient to participate in sports. Physical examination revealed no effusion, complete range of motion, and no signs of meniscal pathology. There was no tenderness to palpation of the medial or lateral joint line, a negative McMurray, and a normal ligamentous examination. There was no pain with hyperextension, and the only positive examination finding was mild pain on hyperflexion. Radiographs were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), was performed in another facility and, showed normal medial and lateral menisci except for the absence of a medial posterior root insertion both on coronal and on sagittal images. There was no evidence of meniscal extrusion or a meniscal ghost sign . On sagittal magnetic resonance images, the presence of thin low-signal band was identified just anterior to the ACL . Diagnostic arthroscopy was performed secondary to failure of nonoperative management and revealed a white rounded band that was noted to extend from the anterior horn of the medial meniscus to the intercondylar notch adjacent to the femoral insertion of the ACL . This band was clearly a distinct structure from the ACL with probing. Next careful examination of medial compartment revealed that the meniscus did not have evidence of tearing or degenerative changes and appeared to be floating into the medial compartment without the typical anterior bony attachment. The posterior horn showed absence of any firm bony attachment as well. Some fibers were detected below the anterior aspect of posterior cruciate running towards the lateral compartment . No chondral pathology was detected. Because of absence of meniscal lesions or other intrarticular abnormalities, we elected close observation rather than surgical intervention. The patient made rapid recovery after diagnostic arthroscopy and returned to his soccer activity after 2 months without any pain, discomfort, or limitation of activity. At 4-year follow-up, he had no symptoms or abnormal findings and he was still playing soccer at a youth competitive level. On the follow-up MRI there no meniscal or chondral lesions and no significative change of the appearance of the meniscal roots from the index MRI.