A 42-year-old male presented to a nearby clinic complaining of macroscopic hematuria and pain during urination. The patient was in good condition and had no urinary infection. Urine cytology was positive for urothelial carcinoma, and the patient was referred to our hospital. The patient had no history of HPV infection but he had multiple heterosexual partners. The physical and laboratory findings were within normal limits. The patient was immunocompetent and was free from HIV infection. Cystoscopy revealed a broad-base nonpapillary bladder tumor . There were no specific findings in the urethra. Computed tomography examination showed no apparent metastasis of the bladder tumor.
Transurethral resection of the bladder tumor was performed, and histopathologic examination revealed high-grade, pT1 urothelial carcinoma . The resected specimen concurrently involved the condyloma acuminatum of the bladder. There was also a poorly dysmorphic, stratified squamous epithelium and a papillary lesion covered with a proliferating squamous epithelium. Binucleated cells and koilocytosis were observed, which may correspond to condyloma acuminatum . We extracted from the paraffin-embedded TUR-Bt tissue specimens. HPV11 was detected in condyloma using PCR and in situ hybridization, whereas HPV was not detected in urothelial carcinoma .
The patient underwent 7 weeks of intravesical instillation of BCG. The second TUR-Bt was performed 3 months after the first cycle of BCG therapy. We did not detect residual urothelial carcinoma or condyloma acuminatum. However, about 6 months later, cystoscopy revealed mucosal irregularities and redness, and urine cytology was positive for urothelial carcinoma. The patient underwent TUR-Bt and the pathological diagnosis was high-grade urothelial carcinoma in situ. No recurrence of condyloma acuminatum was observed. We recommended radical cystectomy for a BCG refractory case, but the patient wished to avoid radical cystectomy and preserve sexual function. Therefore, we performed a second BCG intravesical instillation therapy. The patient is currently under careful follow-up.