A 69-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with a 3-year painless mass in the penis as his main complaint. Three years ago, the patient had a soy bean-sized, painless mass in the middle shaft of the penis with no obvious cause. No ulceration or effusion, urinary frequency, urgency, or urinary pain was present nor was there a fever or any other discomfort. The lump rapidly enlarged to a diameter of 3 cm 6 months ago, without any swelling, heat, pain, or any other discomfort. The patient had a history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, both of which responded effectively to oral treatment.
Physical examination revealed an irregular lobulated mass measuring about 3 cm × 2.5 cm in the middle shaft part of the penis on the ventral side, with a smooth surface, tough texture, clear border, a moderate range of motion, and no tenderness. There was no visible skin ulceration on the surface, no redness or swelling of urethral orifice, and no aberrant secretion. The epididymis and bilateral testis were both normal, and there were no swollen lymph nodes in the inguinal region. The skin color of the scrotum was also normal.
Auxiliary examination revealed that the usual tests for blood, urine, stool, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, myocardial enzymes, coagulation function, and prostate-specific antigen were all normal. Preoperative pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (male genital system) showed a nodular mixed signal shadow in the distal penis, with a size of about 31 mm × 27 mm × 22 mm, and a high signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). No noticeable large lymph nodes were seen in the pelvis . Preoperative ultrasonography showed that no enlarged lymph nodes were detected in the bilateral inguinal region.
Under intralesional anesthetic, the patient had the penile lump removed. The mass was in the lower fascia layer (Eberth fascia), totally excised, and there was no visible adhesion between it and the surrounding tissues.
Gross examination revealed a grey-yellow necrotic tumor, measuring 3 cm × 3 cm × 2.5 cm. Microscopic examination showed severe atypia and high mitoses. Immunohistochemical results showed that S-100 (−), CD34 (−), Ki-67 (about 70% +), P53 (consistent with wild type), smooth muscle actin (SMA) (+), Desmin (+), and Caldesmon (+). Results from immunohistochemistry and morphology were consistent with LMS .
Three weeks later, the patient was readmitted and an extended resection was performed under endotracheal anesthesia based on sufficient dialog with the patient and his families. The skin was excised from the surgical site within 3 cm, and subcutaneous tissue was dissected all the way to Buck’s fascia. Postoperative pathology suggested no residual tumor cells.
There was no local discomfort after surgery and slight scarring at the wound; postoperative erectile function was basically the same as before. No local tumor recurrence, inguinal lymph node enlargement, and metastasis were noticed over the 20-month follow-up.