A 40-year-old woman, originally from the Maghreb region, had a genetic consult because at 39 years of age, she presented breast cancer, a high grade in situ ductal carcinoma, with suspected microinvasion. She underwent mastectomy, but received neither chemotherapy nor radiotherapy. She had endometriosis and resection of three hyperplastic polyps of the endometrium. She had first-degree relatives with cancers, one sibling died at 14 years of age of brain tumor and another sibling had colorectal carcinoma at 47 years of age. Her mother had surgery at 52 years of age for a right-side moderately differentiated colon adenocarcinoma, and died 1 year later. There was no cancer in the paternal branch.
Familial history was not sufficient to perform BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene analysis. No cancer was available for analysis by IHC or for MSI and the patient had no contact with her sibling with CRC. IHC and MSI could not be performed on breast cancer (BC) nor on endometrial hyperplasia for technical reasons.
One year after the first genetic consult, the patient presented an infiltrating, well-differentiated and keratinizing skin squamous cell carcinoma of the nose. Five markers, BAT25, BAT26, NR21, NR24 and Mono27 (Promega MSI analysis system) were used to determine the level of instability of the SCC. BAT25 marker was unstable. The results were intermediate for BAT26. Not enough healthy tissue was available and it was contaminated by tumor. SCC was classified as MSI-Low. Immunohistochemical expression analysis was made with MLH1 (clone G168/728, Ventana), MSH2 (clone G219-1129 BD Biosciences), MSH6 (clone 44 BD Biosciences) and PMS2 (clone A16-4, Pharmigen) antibodies. Expression of MSH2 and MSH6 proteins were heterogeneous and only at the periphery of the lesion .
Hence, taking into account family history and the results of IHC and MSI, a genetic test was suggested. Direct sequencing of entire coding regions and intron/exon boundaries of MLH1 and MSH2 genes and last exon of EPCAM gene was performed. Germline deletion was found in MSH2 gene (c.1277-? _1661 + ?del), exon 8 to 10.
At 45 years of age, the patient presented eight hyperplastic rectal polyps and two fibrous skin lesions, one in the back, corresponding to a sebaceous adenoma, the second, on the thigh, corresponding to epithelial hyperplasia. IHC and MSI analyses were performed on the sebaceous adenoma showing three unstable markers (BAT25, BAT 26 and Mono27), thus corresponding to MSI-H tumor. There was a total loss of expression of MSH2 and MSH6 protein, characteristic of MMR deficient tumors, while in the SCC loss was only in the center of the tumor.