A 46 years old, previously healthy man presented with typical clinical signs of acute onset of limb ischemia (pain, paleness, pallor, pulselessness, paralysis and paresthesia), predominantly on the right limb. An emergency contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the complete aorta to thighs was performed, based on the initial suspicion of an aortic dissection. An aortic dissection however was ruled out. Main findings were a complete occlusion of the distal right common-, the right external- and internal iliac artery and common femoral artery. Furthermore, an occlusion of the left profound femoral artery and mild arteriosclerosis was found, the occluded vessel segments however were characterized by hypodense thrombotic material . The CT scan, in addition, was noticeable for an asymptomatic subacute left sided kidney- and small right-sided posterior cerebral infarction . Patients` history was positive for moderate nicotine consumption. The patient denied dyspnea, fatigue, cough, fever, orthopnea/paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, stroke related symptoms, chest pain, or lower extremity edema. The patient was on no long-term medication. On admission, he presented with an increased respiratory rate of 20/min, hypertensive blood pressure of 161/105 mmHg and a normal heart rate of 74/min and an oxygen saturation of 97%. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated moderate biventricular enlargement and severe systolic LV dysfunction with an estimated ejection fraction of 35% without signs of wall thickening, valvulopathy or pericardial effusion. Further clarification for the source of embolism and due to a poor transthoracic acoustic window, additional transesophageal echocardiography was justified and revealed a striking amount of spontaneous echo-contrast in the LV cavity (Video ). There were no signs of LV wall thickening, valvulopathy or pericardial effusion. Initial laboratory testing was noticeable for a slightly elevated lactate of 3.2 mmol/l, rapidly increasing to a maximum of 6.3 mmol/l and normalizing post intervention and a leukocytosis of 11/nl, increasing to a maximum of 24/nl 2 days post admission and likewise normalizing thereafter. The patient was directly taken to the operation theater and open thrombectomy via femoral access was performed on the right limb, in combination with full fasciotomy on the right calf. On the next day, a compartment syndrome of the right thigh developed as well as clinical detereoration of the left limb arterial perfusion. Therefore, fasciotomy of the right thigh and revascularization of the left limb was indicated and a massive compartment syndrome on the right thigh was relieved. Total occlusion also of left popliteal artery suggesting an impaired chronic and aggravated impaired perfusion indicated also urgent left sided revascularization . Revascularization of the left limb was complex, due to a mixture of fresh and older sticky and organized harder thrombus, inducing scarring and vessel shrinking in combination with a perivascular inflammatory reaction. Revascularization however was achieved by hybrid surgery in terms of open thrombectomy of femoral and popliteal artery and all crural vessels, endarterectomy and patch of popliteal and tibiofibular artery. Additionally, stent-angioplasty of the popliteal artery and angioplasty of the anterior and posterior tibial artery and fasciotomy of the left calf was performed. Post-surgical laboratory results revealed markers suggesting rhabdomyolysis with a highly increased creatinine kinase of up to 206000U/l and acute renal failure with an elevation of creatinine of 4.7 mg/dl. Further laboratory work-up revealed no peripheral eosinophilia. Perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA) were negative. In addition, laboratory testing was negative for antiphospholipid syndrome and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and showed normal levels for protein C and S. Further investigation by a coronary angiography on day 6 showed no coronary heart disease. The diagnosis of an underlying LE was established by subsequent LV endomyocardial biopsy (EMB). Histological findings present on day 11 were suggestive for LE, and showed increased amounts of CD3 T-cells, CD68 + macrophages and eosinophilic granulocytes in the endocardium . Due to an increased body mass index of 41 and patients disability to endure, Cardiac Magnetic Resonance (CMR) imaging had to be terminated prematurely and data could not be obtained. Acute renal failure was treated with continuous hemofiltration, following renal replacement with intermittent dialysis. On day 23, a Demers catheter was implanted. Additionally, a beta-blocker medication was started. Immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) was initiated on day 12 and continued for 14 days, followed by a dose tapering regimen of 10 mg every four weeks in combination with azathioprine (300 mg/day). Because of an increase in inflammatory markers, most likely in the context with a decubital ulcer, azathioprine therapy was temporarily discontinued and prednisolone therapy was reduced. Due to the high risk of systemic embolization, antithrombotic therapy with continuous unfractionated heparin was immediately started on day 1 and switched to Phenprocoumon (vitamin K antagonist). In the further course secondary wound closure of fasciotomy sites could be achieved and both limbs salvaged.
After the patient had gone through a SARS CoV2 infection he was finally discharged from hospital free of symptoms 8 weeks after admission. Last follow-up echocardiography revealed an unchanged LV dysfunction with an estimated ejection fraction of 34%, associated moderate LV hypertrophy and decreasing spontaneous echo contrast. Heart failure medication in combination with anticoagulation and continued immunosuppressive therapy including prednisolone and azathioprine was continued. The patient was equipted with a LifeVest® as wearable cardioverter defibrillator to protect patients at risk of sudden cardiac death.