A 67-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department suffering painful right knee. His medical history was remarkable for diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, and rheumatoid arthritis.
On physical examination, the patient was hemodynamically stable (heart rate [HR]=75 beats per min (bpm), blood pressure [BP]=130/80 mmHg), and febrile (38°C). The right knee was swollen and warm, while skin lacerations were evident above the knee joint. Range of motion (ROM) was significantly restricted due to pain (flexion= 45°, extension=10°, and internal rotation=0°). After detailed medical history, the patient appeared to have recently performed agricultural activity where his lower limbs were widely exposed.
Laboratory investigation revealed leukocyte count=15.500/cm2 with 89.5% neutrophils and C-reactive protein (CRP)=273 mg/dL. At that point, arthrocentesis of the knee joint was performed. Abundant yellow opaque fluid was aspirated and sent for urgent laboratory examination. Laboratory examination of the fluid showed 175.000 leukocytes/μL and 92% neutrophils, while Gram stain was positive for a Gram-positive pathogen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed showing signs of knee joint infection .
At that point in time, urgent arthroscopic debridement under general anesthesia was performed and samples were acquired and sent for microbiological examination. Consequently, the patient was commenced on empirical antimicrobial treatment including intravenous (iv) vancomycin and ciprofloxacin. The patient remained febrile (37.5°C) the first 2 days following surgery with slight improvement of knee ROM. Peripheral blood leukocytes were 13.800/μL and CRP=220 mg/dL. Cultures revealed a vancomycin sensitive Streptococcus agalactiae. On the 3rd post-operative day, the patient’s general condition deteriorated becoming hemodynamically unstable (HR=110 bpm, BP=180 mmHg) and febrile (38.6°C), while the knee was warm, swollen, and tender. At that point, CRP reached 330mg/dL and leukocytes=16.300/μL. Open surgical debridement of the joint was then proposed and performed.
Under general anesthesia, midline longitudinal skin incision followed by medial parapatellar arthrotomy was used to expose the joint. Meticulous debridement was performed and tissue specimens were sent for microbiological examination. Subsequently, lavage with 15 liters of normal saline concluded the procedure. The treatment with iv vancomycin and ciprofloxacin was continued.
Two days after the 2nd surgery, the patient had regained most range of joint motion, was afebrile, while inflammatory laboratory profile was significantly improved (CRP=130 mg/dL and leukocytes=12.400/μL). In addition to the previously isolated S. agalactiae, tissue cultures yielded P. agglomerans, resistant to cefoxitin, and fosfomycin. Antimicrobial treatment was switched accordingly, to iv linezolid, ciprofloxacin, and clindamycin.
The patient remained in the hospital for 10 additional days, receiving iv antimicrobial treatment. On discharge, the affected knee had regained full ROM, without local signs of inflammation. CRP at that point was 30 mg/dL. The patient was discharged on linezolid and ciprofloxacin per os for 3 months.
The patient is followed up for 12 months now. Oral antimicrobial treatment was discontinued 3 months after discharge. On final follow-up, the patient looks healthy without any signs or symptoms of an infection.