A 19 year old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with generalised myalgia, fevers and low back pain on the background of two weeks of coryzal symptoms. She had no significant past medical history and her only medication use was the combined oral contraceptive pill, taken for menorrhagia. She denied any history of illicit drug use nor any family history of coagulopathy, connective tissue or renal disease. She was a student at the local university and did not smoke or drink alcohol on a regular basis. She demonstrated no elicitable flank tenderness but did exhibit mild suprapubic tenderness. Her renal function was normal (Cr 68 μmol/L) and her inflammatory markers were elevated. Urine dip revealed moderate pyuria, 1+ proteinuria and heavy microscopic haematuria, which was attributed to menstruation (which had finished 24 h beforehand). She was mildly tachycardic (heart rate 110) and mildly hypertensive (blood pressure 138/88 mmHg) with a low-grade fever (37.5 °C). A presumptive diagnosis of urinary tract infection on the background of viral illness was made and after 24 h observation she was discharged on oral antibiotics. Her urine culture showed mixed growth, likely to represent perineal contamination.
She presented again to the ED one week later with ongoing symptoms. In addition she now complained of ocular pruritus and a mild cough, productive of white sputum. Her inflammatory markers remained elevated and her creatinine, whilst still in the normal range, was elevated compared to previous (Cr 86 μmol/L). Her urine dip was similar to previous. She was reassured and discharged with the diagnosis of viral infection.
One week later she was re-referred to hospital by her general practitioner due to ongoing lethargy, medium and small joint arthralgia, pyrexia, nausea and now bilateral flank pain. There was no history of haemoptysis. On admission she was tender in both flanks and in the suprapubic region. She now demonstrated splinter haemorrhages in the fingernail beds and tender proximal interphalangeal joints without overt synovitis bilaterally. She had bilateral knee effusions. Her admission creatinine was 159 μmol/L. The course of her renal function with major clinical events is summarised in Fig. . She had a microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin 94 g/L) with a mild thrombocytosis (platelet count 581 × 109/L), leucocytosis (white cell count 27.3 × 109/L) and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (86 mm/hr). Urinalysis demonstrated moderate proteinuria (quantified as equivalent to 1.2 g/day) and heavy microscopic haematuria. The initial diagnosis was of possible sepsis arising from an abdominal or endocarditic source. She was commenced on broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics and a computed tomography (CT) of her chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed “multiple wedge-like areas of low attenuation in both kidneys consistent with infarcts”. There were two areas of ground glass shadowing in the right upper lobe of the lung, suggestive of pulmonary haemorrhage, though subsequently pulmonary function testing was not consistent with this .
An urgent transthoracic echo demonstrated normal cardiac size and function with no intracardiac thrombi or vegetations. Admission urine and serial blood culture were subsequently negative. Autoimmune serology yielded a cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (cANCA) titre of > 1:40 with markedly elevated proteinase 3 (PR3) antibody and rheumatoid factor titres (170 U/mL [normal range < 3 U/mL] and 42 [normal range < 15 U/mL] respectively). Anti-nuclear antibodies, glomerular basement membrane antibodies, cryoglobulins, C3 and C4 levels were normal. Hepatitis B and C and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) serology was negative. On specific questioning it was revealed that both her mother and maternal aunt had a history of recurrent miscarriages: however a thrombophilia screen was negative .
CT angiogram revealed normal large vessels but multiple bilateral renal infarcts and splenic infarcts , which, on retrospective review, were present on the admission CT . Due to the slightly atypical splenic distribution of the infarcts, sulphur hexafluoride microbubble (SonoVue, Bracco UK) contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) was performed, which confirmed the ischaemic nature of the splenic lesions, with > 50% normal splenic enhancement but multiple areas of wedge-shaped non-enhancement at 2 min post contrast . The patient was initially anticoagulated with high-dose low molecular weight heparin and was converted to oral anticoagulation with warfarin after renal biopsy.
Renal biopsy demonstrated a necrotising crescentic glomerulonephritis (crescents seen in 17 of 25 glomeruli), extensive mononuclear interstitial infiltrate, frequent tubular red cell casts and 30% interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. There was no evidence of extraglomerular arteritis.
A diagnosis of PR3 AAV involving small and medium vessels was made and treatment was initiated (48 h after admission) with intravenous methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisolone. The patient subsequently received two doses of 1 g rituximab at a fortnightly interval. Renal function has continued to deteriorate throughout the investigative process and peaked at around 400 μmol/L. Once plateaued at this level the patient was discharged on a weaning course of corticosteroids.
On review in clinic around one month later the patient’s symptomatology was much improved and her creatinine was starting to fall . Repeat PR3 titre was 22 U/mL. Most recent testing, 16 weeks after initial presentation, demonstrated a creatinine of 196 μmol/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 27 mm/hr. and a mild leucocytosis (white cell count 16.1 × 109/L). Systemic oral anticoagulation is intended to continue for six months after presentation.