A 61-year-old woman was referred to an emergency department in Rome (Italy) due to sudden loss of consciousness and cardiac arrest. She could not be resuscitated and was declared dead soon after admission. The patient had contact history with confirmed COVID-19 patients, and 32 days before decease was tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), from a nasopharyngeal swab. Patient tested negative 5 days before death; the test was repeated at a distance of 48 h, confirming negative result. She had no medical co-morbidities or any cause of immunosuppression, taking no medications, and presented as healthy individual before SARS-CoV-2 infection. No relevant symptoms have been shown neither at the time of RT-PCR test, nor until exitus.
To determine the cause of death a whole body post-mortem examination was performed at the National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani-IRCCS Hospital (Rome, Italy).
Macroscopic inspection of the lungs revealed pulmonary edema, massive bilateral congestion and regions of dark-colored hemorrhage. The pleura was inconspicuous, except for fibrous adhesions, and pleural effusion was absent. The most striking feature was the presence of a large thrombus occluding the main pulmonary artery at bifurcation . The presence of thrombi was detected also in medium-sized arteries . Lungs were bilaterally extensively sampled for a complete histological evaluation. Microscopic analysis of tissue showed heterogeneous pattern of pathological changes and different stages of diffuse alveolar damage, with edema and hemorrhagic areas . Numerous vascular thrombi were detected . Diffuse interstitial fibrosis with fibroblast proliferation was present , together with inflammatory infiltrate in pulmonary interstitium . The alveolar capillaries were thickened, and displayed extravasation of erythrocytes into alveolar spaces . Infiltrating T lymphocytes, both CD4+ and CD8+ , were found into alveolar septa and clustered around capillary vessels, as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. In addition numerous macrophages (CD68+) were present . Of note, positivity for CD20 was not detected, indicating the absence of infiltrating B-lymphocytes. Some areas of the lungs appeared not affected and presented no signs of alveolar damage .
Gross examination of heart revealed decrease in volume and consistency (weight 250 g). Left and right atrium and ventricles appeared dilated. The myocardium was flabby, congested and hemorrhagic . At the histological level, myocytes hypertrophy and variable degrees of interstitial and vascular fibrosis were found . Active myocarditis was characterized predominantly by lymphocytic mononuclear infiltrate dissociating myocyte fibers . The infiltrating cells were mainly represented by CD68+ macrophages . CD4+ T lymphocytes were numerous , while CD8+ T lymphocytes were rare ; B-lymphocytes were not detected.
Other organs analyzed showed histopathological modifications, similarly to findings reported in autopsy of severe COVID-19 patients : kidneys displayed interstitial and perivascular fibrosis; the spleen showed white pulp atrophy and congestion of red pulp; macrovesicular steatosis was observed in the liver (data not shown).
In the final report, the cause of death was listed as pulmonary arterial thrombosis.