This case is of a 15-year-old male who sustained a knee dislocation resulting in a multiligamentous knee injury. At presentation, he had a concomitant popliteal artery injury that was managed by the vascular surgery team and was provisionally stabilized with external fixation by the orthopedic team. His ligamentous injury was later managed by the senior author, who completed a fellowship in orthopedic sports medicine.
This patient underwent staged reconstruction of his multiligamentous knee injury. He underwent an elective all-inside allograft PCL reconstruction with arthroscopic assistance. The patient was positioned in hemilithotomy with a commonly used leg holder for 180 min due to positioning, sterile draping, and the duration of the procedure. He was then extubated and taken to recovery in stable condition with good peripheral pulses.
Forty-five minutes after arrival to the post-anesthesia care unit, he reported worsening pain in the non-operative leg. The pain was increasing in severity and requiring narcotic medication. Physical examination at this point revealed firm and non-compressible compartments of the non-operative leg and severe discomfort with passive stretch of the toes and ankle. Sensation was intact to light touch throughout the non-operative extremity and he had a palpable dorsalis pedis pulse. It was determined that the patient had a case of impending ACS.
The patient immediately returned to the operating room, intubated, and placed supine. A 4 compartment fasciotomy of the right lower extremity was performed through two incisions. The muscle protruded through the fasciotomy sites. The anesthesiologist noted a dramatic decrease in heart rate and blood pressure after the releases. All muscle tissue in all compartments was viable; the muscle was entirely contractile with light use of electrocautery. A non-adhering dressing and wound vacuum sponge were applied sterilely, and the patient was extubated and taken to recovery. He had palpable dorsal pedis pulses bilaterally. Five days later, the patient underwent irrigation and debridement and split thickness skin graft.