A 41-year-old female presented to us in October 2016 with the complaints of a progressively increasing pain and swelling over the left arm. She was evaluated clinicoradiologically, on examination, a diffuse swelling was seen over the anterolateral aspect of left arm, on palpation, the consistency was from to soft with local tenderness over the swelling. Overlying skin was free, range of movement at the left elbow was limited from 70 to 110 degrees, shoulder range of movements were full. She had full range of movements at wrist and fingers with no distal neurovascular deficit. MRI reported a heterogeneous well-defined mixed solid cystic enhancing lesion of size 7 × 8 × 10 cm with soft-tissue signals arising from the brachialis muscle suggestive of soft-tissue sarcoma, with lesion abutting and laterally displacing the adjacent neurovascular bundles, no evidence of any bone involvement . PET CT showed no evidence of metastasis. Core needle biopsy reported spindle cell sarcoma with bizarre nuclear features and atypical mitoses . IHC showed S100 positivity, negative for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, and desmin from which a diagnosis of UPS was concluded.
The patient in supine position, after painting and draping left upper limb under appropriate antibiotics coverage, an incision spanning the anterolateral aspect of the left arm was made involving the previous biopsy scar . Soft-tissue dissected and tumor plane identified are separated from the surrounding tissue.
Median nerve and brachial artery identified and tagged with loop.
Radial nerve was found to be partially encased within the tumor .
The tumor was excised en bloc, including the tumor and the radial nerve, maintaining an adequate wide margin. The excised en bloc mass is then lifted from the surgical bed. The tissue mass is then isolated from the surgical bed using mops soaked with hydrogen peroxide for preventing contamination of tumor bed for nerve dissection . Following this step, the tumor was turned around and it was found that the nerve was only partially encasing the tumour and was not adherent to it. Hence, it was decided to proceed with epineural dissection of nerve from the mass. It was separated out by epineural dissection. Epineurium was split using sharp dissection on the surface of the nerve . The epineurium was reflected back to the surface of the tumor with any associated vessels. The nerve fibers then were lifted directly out of their epineural sheath. If any nerve fibers were seen entering into the gross substance of the tumor, then those were sacrificed during the course of dissection . Fascicles were maintained in continuity. To eradicate the microresidual tumor, the nerve was soaked in alcohol for 5 min as part of the ISP technique . An adequate margin (R0) was achieved, except for the radial nerve. Wound closed in layers after attaining hemostasis.
After surgery, the patient was started on gentle physiotherapy from post-operative day 2 and there were no wound-related complications. Sutures were removed on day 14. The patient was on regular follow-up since then.
After suture removal and once the wound was healed, she was sent to the dept. of radiation oncology where she was given 3DCRT with a dose of 6000 cGy/25 Fr/5 Fr/ week over a duration of 6 weeks.
She was followed up every 3 months for the 1st year followed by every 6 months then after. MRI and PET CT were repeated at yearly interval ever since.
At the end of 5 years, the patient is disease free and has full range of motion at elbow, wrist, and fingers . Her post-operative function at 5 years according to the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society was 27.