A 42-year-old gravida 1 para 0 woman was admitted to our university hospital (Balıkesir, Turkey) with a history of lower abdominal pain and desire for pregnancy. Her history was unremarkable with the exception of three in vitro fertilisation cycles for male-factor infertility and one pregnancy that was aborted in the sixth week of gestation. Physical and abdominal examination findings were normal. On vaginal examination, a mobile mass approximately 4 cm in diameter was detected in the right lower abdomen. Her CA 125, CA 15-3, CA 19-9, CEA, and AFP values were within normal limits. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a right adnexial mass 38.9 mm × 36 mm in diameter that showed a homogeneously isoechoic pattern . The mass was solid and well circumscribed, and pathologic blood flow was not detected in Doppler ultrasonography. Pelvic MRI showed a 4 cm × 3 cm, well-circumscribed solid tumour in the right adnex that exhibited low-intensity signals on both T1- and T2-weighted images. A laparatomy was performed under general anaesthesia. During laparotomy, inspection of the uterus and adnexes revealed a solid, firm, oval, right-sided ovarian tumour with a smooth surface, approximately 4 cm in diameter. The tumour was distinctly separated from the uterus and exhibited no adhesion to or infiltration of the surrounding structures. There was no accompanying uterine mass. The left salpinx, ovary were normal on inspection and were left intact. Right unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, and frozen sectioning revealed a benign tumour suggesting thecoma or fibroma. After surgery, histological and immunhistochemical examination resulted in a diagnosis of primary ovarian leiomyoma. Pathologic examination revealed a tumour composed of interlacing bundles of fusiform cells, resembling a leiomyoma . There was no atypia or pleomorphism, and mitotic count and necrosis were absent . Immunohistochemical staining showed strong and diffuse positive staining for smooth muscle actin (SMA) . Ki-67 proliferation index was low . The postoperative period was uneventful.