A 65-year-old man with a history of poorly controlled type II diabetes mellitus presented with an infected BKA stump. The patient had had multiple previous operations to the affected leg over the span of 5 years, beginning with two partial toe amputations and three débridementsfor infection. He underwent a transmetatarsal amputation, which failed because of wound breakdown and infection. Thus, he underwent a BKA. The wound appeared to be healing 2 weeks postoperatively, and alternating sutures were removed but began to deteriorate shortly after. At 1 month postoperatively, it appeared erythematous, was infected at the skin edge, and had a foul smell. The patient was not septic.
Surgical irrigation and débridement was pursued with 2 g of cefazolin IV administered preoperatively. The wound was opened and dissected down to the level of the bone. There was a slight foul smell and erythematous wound edges. Deep wound swabs were taken, and tissue specimens were sent for culture and sensitivity. We débrided until we were satisfied with healthy-appearing, bleeding tissue. The osteotomy site on the tibia was cleaned using a rongeur. Nine liters of saline with bacitracin was run through the wound. Twelve antibiotic-eluting cement beads were then prepared using 40 g of DePuy cement, 2.4 g of tobramycin, and 2 g of vancomycin. These were placed on a PDS suture, knotted, and placed in the tibia and throughout the wound. The wound was then loosely closed with large PDS mattress sutures and dressed. Two grams of IV cefazolin was administered q8h postoperatively. Ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO BID was also started and discontinued 2 days postoperatively.
On post-op day 2, preliminary deep cultures returned positive for Staphylococcus aureus and two unidentified gram-positive organisms. The tissue appeared viable with reasonable vascular supply. Thus, we decided to proceed with revision closure using an antibiotic spacer in an attempt to salvage the stump.
Again, 2 g of IV cefazolin was administered preoperatively. We began with a circumferential superficial to deep débridement of all tissue layers. Swabs were sent. A rasp and a rongeur were used to débride the tibia and the fibula. Synthes hand reamers up to 19 mm were used to ream in the proximal tibia within a few millimeters of the subchondral bone under fluoroscopic guidance. The antibiotic spacer was then fashioned using 2 g of vancomycin and 2.4 g of tobramycin (chosen for broad-spectrum coverage) mixed into 1 package of medium viscosity cement. This mixture was used to fill a 20-mL syringe (pretreated with sterile mineral oil to allow for easy removal), allowed to dry, and removed from the syringe . This 18-mm-diameter “dowel” was then placed inside the reamed tibia . The wound was felt to be ready for closure at this time based on the appearance of the tissue and was closed using a spaced combination of #2 Prolene and 3-0 nylon mattress sutures. An incisional VAC dressing was also applied.
Final cultures from the first débridement returned positive for Staphylococcus aureus (sensitive to cefazolin, clindamycin, erythromycin, cloxacillin, and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim), coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (sensitive to clindamycin, erythromycin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, and vancomycin), and Corynebacterium jeikeium (sensitive to vancomycin and gentamycin).
Our infectious diseases colleagues were consulted for antibiotic management. One gram of vancomycin was administered intravenously q12h postoperatively. This was increased to 1.5 g q12h the next day and continued using a pump after discharge. The dose was decreased to 1.25 g q12h at the 2-week follow-up. IV Cefazolin was discontinued 3 days postoperatively. Deep cultures taken during the second procedure produced no growth. The VAC dressing was removed 5 days postoperatively, during which the incision line appeared clean and dry.
At 1 month postoperatively, the incision was still slightly open at the medial aspect with minimal drainage and no evidence of infection. A single-use PICO negative pressure dressing was applied to the wound for 7 days. Vancomycin was decreased to 1 g q12h.
A week later, this dressing was removed and the stump had improved. There were two 5 mm open areas at the center and the lateral edge. All but three sutures were removed.
At 2 months postoperatively, the wound was very small and scabbed over with no evidence of infection. Vancomycin was discontinued, and oral sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim 800 mg/160 mg was started BID for the first 2 weeks and daily for the next 2 weeks.
At the 3-month follow-up, the wound appeared almost closed with only small scabbing in the center of the suture line. Antibiotics were stopped.
At 14 weeks postoperatively, the patient's course was complicated by a TIA requiring a 2-day admission. He also underwent carotid endarterectomy. Fortunately, he recovered and the wound appeared closed and healthy 4 months after the initial procedure. He was discharged from wound care.
The patient was seen again 8 months postoperatively. The wound was fully healed. He had been fitted with a below-knee prosthesis and was able to walk multiple blocks without difficulty . At 15 months, he scored above average in the physical and mental component scales of the SF-36 survey (52.70 and 58.47, respectively) and the ambulation and well-being components of the Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire (92.25 and 95.50, respectively).