A 12-year-old Iranian Caucasian boy presented with a limp and bone pain in the knee region of about 2 months duration. He was otherwise relatively well and asymptomatic. There was no significant past medical history. The patient had no history of receiving chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Physical examination performed at the time of presentation revealed limitation of left knee flexion but no other abnormality on general physical examination. No lymphadenopathy or organomegaly was detected. Hematologic investigations showed hemoglobin of 11.6 g/dl with MCV = 86, platelet count of 275000/microliter and WBC of10000/microliter. ESR was 35 and biochemical test results of blood were unremarkable. Radiographic assessment of the knee revealed a lytic-sclerotic lesion on the superior part of the tibia and a bone scan showed just one bony lesion in the same area. An open biopsy was performed and the lesion was diagnosed as eosinophilic granuloma. During the 4-month follow up period, without initiation of any treatment, the patient developed constitutional symptoms of weight loss, persistent limping and bone pain in the knee region and generalized lymphadenopathy with splenomegaly noted on physical examination.
A thoracoabdominal spiral CT scan was performed and showed mediastinal, cervical, right axillary and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathies, pulmonary nodules and hepatic and splenic involvement.
The differential diagnosis was disseminated lymphomatous involvement or disseminated Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Bone marrow and cervical lymph node biopsy were performed and the initial histopathologic diagnosis of eosinophilic granuloma for bony lesion was reviewed and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining was performed.
A biopsy of the lytic bone lesion revealed an admixture of inflammatory cells including many eosinophils with Langerhans cells . Langerhans cells showed somewhat glassy pink cytoplasms, indistinct cell borders and longitudinal coffee-bean grooves in their nuclei with undulating or indented nuclear membranes. There was no obvious mitotic activity. As a result, a pathologic diagnosis of eosinophilic granuloma was made. Subsequent bone marrow evaluation showed no abnormality (M/E = 2). Cervical lymph node biopsy revealed a lymph node with fibrotic bands, Reed Sternberg cells and Lacunar cells in a mixed inflammatory milieu which lead to a pathologic diagnosis of Hodgkin's lymphoma of the nodular sclerosis type. At this time the initial bone biopsy was reviewed to rule out any bone lymphomatous involvement by immunohistochemical staining. The immunohistochemical staining showed positive reactivity for S100 and CD1a and negative reactivity for CD15 and CD30 in large cells with folded nuclei .