The proband was a 7-year-old boy who presented to our hospital with complaints of absent speech and development delays. He did not make eye contact when called out by his name. The proband was the first child of non-consanguineous parents in China and had no family history of similar symptoms. There were no significant differences in his prenatal and birth history. He was born via vaginal delivery (weight: 3350 g, length: 50 cm). The Apgar score was 9 at 1 min, 10 at 5 min, and 10 at 10 min after birth. The mother underwent regular prenatal examinations during the pregnancy, and all results were normal. The proband had no significant birth history and was exclusively breastfed without any food or drug allergies.
The proband raised his head at 5 months, rolled over at 7 months, sat at 8 months, and walked at 1 year and 10 months. At the age of 2 years, he was found to have delayed language development, and at 2 years and 11 months, he was found to have severe developmental delays in cognitive and verbal expression after functional assessment. At 3 years and 11 months, the proband was initially diagnosed with ASD on account of having developmental delays with mild-to-moderate intellectual impairment, accompanied by speech problems, motor development delays, and coordination difficulties. At the age of 7 years, he received a comprehensive physical examination. His height was 95 cm (50th–75th percentile), weight was 25 kg (50th–75th percentile), and head circumference was 56.4 cm (>97th percentile). His dysmorphic features included macrocephaly, wide forehead, wide eye distance, wide nasal bridge, low ear position, long feet and toes, disordered social behavior, global developmental delay with mildly delayed walking, intellectual disability, and poor language ability (A). After a few months of speech and occupational therapy training, the proband could watch people occasionally. Sometimes, the proband could respond to the sound of his name, and pronounce monosyllables but could not engage in active speech. Other times, he was unable to cooperate with simple instructions; his attention was quickly diverted, and joint attention could not be elicited. He showed poor eye contact and was not interested in his surroundings, so he had an abnormal social interaction. His blood counts, liver and kidney function tests, and thyroid function tests were normal, and there were no abnormalities in haematuria metabolism and blood ammonia levels. A fat-soluble vitamin test showed that vitamin D levels were lower than normal.
The proband has a younger brother who exhibits similar facial and clinical features, and has been diagnosed with moderate intellectual and developmental disabilities. During the physical examination, it was observed that the younger brother could respond to the sound of his name sometimes, had short eye contact, partially followed simple instructions, exhibited attention diverted quickly, lacked cooperation in joint attention tasks, and displayed poor coordination of limbs.
The father has similar facial and foot features as the proband, including macrocephaly, wide forehead, wide eye distance, wide nasal bridge, low ear position, and long feet and toes (B). The father also showed language and motor developmental delay in his childhood. He could walk at 2 years old and call his mom and dad at 3 years old. However, it seemed that these developmental delay conditions were alleviated to some extent after reaching adulthood. The proband's mother and paternal grandmother said that “the father could communicate with others normally.” Because no assessments were conducted to evaluate the father's intellectual capacity or language development level, it remains inconclusive whether he still shows indications of developmental delays. We will continue to monitor and follow-up with both the father and the younger brother.
The proband's brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities in the size and shape of ventricles and cisterns. The mucosa of the right sphenoid sinus was thickened, and no obvious abnormalities were observed in the brain parenchyma (C). Long-term video electroencephalography (EEG) showed no obvious abnormalities. Ophthalmic and hearing assessments were normal. The Autism Behavioural Examination Scale (ABC) score was 55, and the Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) score was 30. A detailed examination of the family history revealed no similar findings in any relative except his younger brother and father.
To determine the aetiology of the disease, ES was performed with the consent of the proband's family members. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Lianyungang Maternal and Child Health Hospital (Project no. LW2023003). Written informed consent was obtained from the proband's parents for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral venous blood from the family members using a QIAamp DNA Blood Mini kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The isolated gDNA samples were randomly fragmented by a Covaris sonicator. They were end-repaired, enriched, and circularized into DNA nanoballs. Subsequently, exome sequencing was performed to comprehensively identify the disease-causing variant using a DNBSEQ-T7 platform (BGI, Shenzhen, China), and the desired average sequencing coverage for each sample was obtained. After data filtering, the clean data of each sample was used for further bioinformatics analysis [,]. The ES protocol is mentioned in a previous report ; we screened all genetic variants.
Finally, the frameshift variant c.438_439ins[TCTT; KT192064.1:1_310] in KMT5B (NM_017635.5) was evaluated using the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines criteria and the human reference genome used was the GRCh37/hg 19 version. Sanger sequencing was used for evaluation and confirmation of results (A). The primer sequences for the variant to be confirmed were forward 5’-TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTTTGTGGCAGATAACCCATTCA-3’ and reverse 5’-CAGGAAACAGCTATGACCCATTCGCCTGAAGTCAAACAT-3’. We identified that the proband carried a heterozygous frameshift variant c.438_439ins[TCTT; KT192064.1:1_310], p.(Asp147Serfs*33) in exon 5 of KMT5B (GenBank: ). This frameshift variant resulted in the insertion of 314 bp in exon 5 of KMT5B 438–439. The variant sequence came from KMT5B exon 5 434–437 TCTT and AluYa8 (GenBank: ) 1–310. The sequence of the inserted 310-bp fragment was as follows: GGCCGGGCGCGGTGGCTCACGCCTGTAATCCCAGCACTTTGGGAGGCCGAGGCGGGCGGATCACGAGGTCAGGAGATCGAGACCATCCCGGCTAAAACGGTGAAACCCCGTCTCTACTAAAACTACAAAAAATAGCCGGGCGTAGTGGCGGGCGCCTGTAGTCCTAGCTACTTGGGAGGCTGAGGCAGGAGAATGGCGTGAACCCGGGAGGCGGAGCTTGCAGTGAGCCGAGATCCCGCCACTGCACTCCAGCCTGGGCGACAGAGCGAGACTCCGTCTCAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA. This sequence was derived from the AluYa8 transposon (GenBank: ). Sanger sequencing confirmed that his father and younger brother were carriers of the heterozygous variant (B). However, his mother and paternal grandparents were confirmed to not carry the heterozygous variant and had normal clinical manifestation (A). The proband's father also carried a heterozygous variant, but did not manifest an evident clinical phenotype. The proband's younger brother was similar to the proband and was diagnosed with moderate intellectual and developmental disabilities. We will continue to monitor and follow-up with the family members in the future.