A 75-year-old man presented with upper abdominal pain. The blood biochemical tests showed the following: total bilirubin, 2.3 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 1.6 mg/dL; gamma-glutamyl transferase (γ-GTP), 194 u/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 1057 u/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 56 u/L; and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 54 u/L; without abnormalities in amylase. Computed tomography (CT) showed dilation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts, soft tissue density in the common bile duct, wall thickening of the common bile duct, and atrophy of left lobe of the liver . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrated defects in the left intrahepatic and common bile ducts . Although the cytological analysis obtained from the bile duct did not detect the presence of cancer cells, perihilar cholangiocarcinoma was suspected and the patient underwent left hepatectomy combined with caudate lobectomy and extrahepatic bile duct resection . Biliary continuity was established by a right hepaticojejunostomy. The operative time was 610 min, and blood loss during surgery was 670 mL. The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged 23 days after surgery. The resected specimen showed a whitish and irregularly shaped tumor arising from the common bile duct invading the left hepatic duct . Histologically, the tumor consisted of well-differentiated neuroendocrine cells forming nest or cord-like pattern. The number of mitoses was 2.4 per 10 high power fields . Immunohistochemical staining showed that all the tumor cells were positive for CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A and the Ki-67 index was 7% . Collectively, we diagnosed the tumor as NET G2. Surgical margin was negative, and 7 out of 25 lymph nodes were positive for metastasis.
Two years and 9 months after the first operation, a liver metastasis was detected by follow-up CT . The patient underwent a limited liver resection of segment 8. Another liver metastasis was newly detected intraoperatively at segment 8 by contrast-enhanced intraoperative ultrasound (CE-IOUS) using perflubutane . It was difficult to find this tumor by CT, MRI, or contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) before surgery. Limited liver resections were performed for these two lesions. Pathological findings showed two other metastases in the resected lesions , and a total of four metastases were included in the specimen. All four liver metastases were diagnosed as NET G2 .
Five years and 4 months after the first operation (2 years and 5 months after the second hepatectomy), four liver metastases were detected by CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In-pentetreotide scintigraphy (OctreoScan) showed uptake in liver tumors. Octreotide long-acting release (LAR) 30 mg was given monthly for 3 months, and the tumor size increased slightly. Then, octreotide LAR was replaced with lanreotide depot/autogel 120 mg at monthly intervals. Seven months later, the tumor grew more but the number of tumors did not change. Then, the third hepatectomy was performed for the four tumors (6 years and 3 months after the first operation). Three other metastases located at segments 5 and 8 were newly detected by intraoperative CEUS, and eventually, five limited liver resections of segments 5, 6, and 8 were performed . Pathological findings showed 7 liver metastases with NET G2 recurrence.
Seven years and 1 month after the first hepatectomy (10 months after the third hepatectomy), four liver metastases were detected. After 6 months of everolimus (10 mg/day) administration, all tumors shrank . Although everolimus seemed to be effective, it was difficult to continue the chemotherapy because of its side effects, such as nausea, anorexia, and taste disorder. In the fourth surgery, no newly detected tumor by CE-IOUS nor pathological findings were noted. After the fourth hepatectomy, the patient had no recurrence and obtained long-term survival for as long as 8 years after the first surgery .