A 22-year-old white woman presented with decreased VA and a central floater in her right eye (OD) for 2 weeks. Apart from bilateral high myopia of –14 diopter ophthalmological, her general and family history were unremarkable. Her Snellen VA was 20/32 in her OD and 20/20 in her left eye (OS). Her intraocular pressure was normotonic. Funduscopy revealed a myopic fundus with lacquer crack and small macular hemorrhage in her OD . OCT showed discrete subretinal fluid suspicious for CNV. FA was consistent with CNV . She did not show up for further examinations for personal reasons.
She presented again 11 months later with a loss of VA and floaters in her OD. In the meantime she had received intravitreal bevacizumab (2.5 mg/0.1 ml) for CNV in her OS elsewhere. Her VA was 20/200 in her OD and 20/32 in her OS. A clinical examination showed vitreous cells and roundish yellow to gray chorioretinal lesions in the central and midperipheral fundus bilaterally. A small subretinal hemorrhage was found in her OD and macular fibrosis was found in her OS. In FA the multiple lesions were hypofluorescent in early phase and hyperfluorescent in late phase. A discrete macular leakage corresponded to a subfoveal CNV in her OD . Borreliosis, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis were ruled out serologically. A clinical examination did not show any evidence of tuberculosis or sarcoidosis and MFC with panuveitis was diagnosed. A combined treatment of oral steroids (prednisolone 60 mg daily administered orally, tapered off gradually) and intravitreal bevacizumab in her OD was started. Subsequently, cyclosporine was administered orally. One month later VA in her OS dropped to 20/100 with a corresponding late leakage in FA which was compatible with CNV reactivation. Bevacizumab was re-injected in her OS.
During the following 15 months the number of inflammatory lesions remained constant with ongoing pigmentation indicating absent active inflammation. Her VA increased to 20/100 in her OD and 20/25 in her OS. Systemic immunosuppression was discontinued. However, 1 month and 7 months later CNV recurred in her OS. Bevacizumab was re-injected twice. Three years after her first presentation her VA was 20/40 in her OD and 20/200 in her OS.