A girl aged 6 years and 5 months was admitted for SMA in the Children’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University for 18 times. Clinical data were collected for analysis after obtaining the written informed consent from her guardians. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Children’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (202206118-1). The child was full-term born to cesarean section with a birth weight of 3 kg. Perinatal diseases, and family history of neurological, metabolic or genetic diseases were not reported. Her elder sister was healthy. The child presented progressive limb weakness at post-birth 3 months, which became more serious at 5 months. She was diagnosed as SMA by genetic testing at 7 months. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) data revealed homozygous deletion in exon 7 and 8 of SMN1, and 3 copies in exon 7 and 8 of SMN2. The child developed a bell-shaped chest prior to genetic therapy. Neurological examination showed systemic hypotonia, grade 2 muscle strength of upper extremities and grade 1 muscle strength of lower extremities, and reduced deep tendon reflexes. She was unable to completely move bilateral arms and legs under gravity, or independently sit and walk. Malnutrition was determined according to her body weight of 11 kg (HAZ: −2.01SD), height of 100 cm (WAZ: −3.64SD), body mass index (BMI) of 11.0 kg/m2 (BMI-Z: −3.61SD), and skinfold thickness of 11 mm at the age of 5 years. The child had a pneumonia history of 1–2 times per year before the age of 4 years. She was given respiratory care using a mechanical insufflation-exsufflation (MIE) device at home at the age of 3 years and 10 months, and respiratory support using a non-invasive ventilator at the age of 4 years and 2 months. The child was admitted to the ICU for cough and dyspnea in January 2020 at the age of 4 years and 3 months. Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were performed for severe dyspnea, which was extubated on the 22nd day, and then discharged as condition was improved. However, she was readmitted at 10 days after discharge for dyspnea, and tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were performed again. We tried to remove the ventilator twice, but both failed. We recommended tracheotomy, which was refused by her parents. Later, the child was managed by ventilator support at home through nasotracheal intubation. In November 2020 (5 years), the child received the first general anesthesia descending intrathecal injection of nusinersen (5 ml/12 mg), followed by 3 injection of nusinersen on the 14th, 28th and 63rd day. Nusinersen were injected every 4 months after the 4th injection. The child received 8 injection of nusinersen till now . Respiratory function of the child was assessed by analyzing the duration of weaning from ventilator support, parameters of mechanical ventilation, and blood gas analysis, length of stay, pulmonary infection and other parameters during nusinersen treatment. In addition, motor function was assessed using the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Infant Test of Neuromuscular Disorders (CHOP INTEND) and Hammersmith Infant Neurological Exam-Part 2 (HINE-2) . After 5 loading doses of nusinersen treatment, the child could breathe normally for 2 h after withdrawal from mechanical ventilator support. Three months after 6 injections of nusinersen (6 years 1 month), we tried to wean the child from the invasive ventilation for non-invasive respiratory support using a nasal mask. One month later (the age of 6 years and 2 months), the length of non-invasive respiratory support was gradually reduced from 24 h to 15 h per day. At present, the patient shows oxygen saturation (SpO2) above 95% without ventilator support during the daytime, and no signs of dyspnea. A non-invasive home ventilator was used at nighttime for the sake of safety. Thankfully, the CHOP INTEND score increased by 11 points from the first loading dose to the sixth. She can now move her limbs against gravity, take in food orally and perform partial vocal function.