A 63-year-old Japanese man was transferred to our hospital for detailed investigation of a liver tumor. At admission to our hospital, the hematologic and blood chemistry data were as follows: white blood cell count 3,800/μL, hemoglobin 15.9g/dL, platelet count 146,000/μL, blood urea nitrogen 17.9mg/dL, creatinine 0.82mg/dL, albumin 4.3g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 26IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 33IU/L, and total bilirubin 0.9mg/dL. Serum hepatitis B (HB) surface antigen, anti-HBe antibody, and anti-hepatitis C virus antibody were negative. Alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and cancer antigen 19–9 levels were within the normal ranges. Dynamic CT depicted a mass measuring 1.5 × 1.4cm with a bulging contour in segment 8 of the liver, which was enhanced in the arterial phase and showed subtle low density with focal capsular enhancement in the delayed phase . A magnetic resonance image (MRI) demonstrated low signal intensity on T1-weighted image, and slightly high signal intensity on T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images . Dynamic contrast (gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid)-enhanced MRI of the tumor showed subtle marginal enhancement in the delayed phase and well-demarcated low intensity in the hepatobiliary phase . Gastroscopy revealed atrophic gastritis and colonoscopy showed normal findings.
Based on the radiologic findings, we suspected the tumor to be an atypical hemangioma, metastatic, hepatocellular carcinoma, or a cholangiocellular carcinoma. Due to a suspicion of carcinoma, a hepatic segmentectomy of segment 8 was performed. On pathological examination, the resected liver tumor measured 1.1cm × 1.1cm × 1.0cm. Sectioning revealed a relatively homogenous, well-circumscribed white solid nodule with several dark-red, pin-point spots . Histopathological evaluation revealed that most areas were composed of sclerotic hyalinized collagenous tissues with scattered tiny-to-small, thin-walled vascular spaces . The vascular spaces were frequently collapsed and lined by flat endothelial cells. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the cells were positive for CD34, an endothelial marker and alpha smooth muscle actin, a marker of vascular smooth muscle . Based on these pathological findings, the tumor was diagnosed as HSH.
Furthermore, we also observed the tumor by electron microscopy and investigated the expression of caveolin-1 by immunohistochemistry (Additional file ). On electron micrograph, the tumor appeared to be hyalinized. Cells resembling mast cells or histiocytes, fibroblast-like cells, and remnant endothelial cells were observed . Remnant endothelial cells contained a few micropinocytic vesicles and caveolae, but numerous cytoplasmic filaments . We also found residual LCH composed of numerous caverns in various shapes and sizes. The caverns formed a labyrinth, communicating with each other. They were lined by spindle-shaped endothelial cells . The endothelial cells also contained numerous cytoplasmic filaments . Moreover, caveolae and multiple micropinocytic vesicles were observed along the luminal and basal cell surfaces. Slender intraluminal processes were also found, sometimes overlapping with the cytoplasmic extensions from other cells . Immunohistochemistry revealed caveolin-1 expression on the hepatic artery, capillary venules, portal vein in the portal tract, and in the hepatic sinusoidal lining cells around pericentral zone 3 in normal control liver areas . Caveolin-1 remained overexpressed in the endothelial cells of the capillary tufts at the edge of the residual LCH but was reduced in the sclerosed hyaluronic lesion . High expression of caveolin-1 was observed in the endothelial cells of the hemangioma . Caveolin-1 immunostaining was nearly absent in fibroblasts .
CT images obtained from the same patient 10 years ago were available, and provided insight for the evolutional process from LCH (showing peripheral high attenuation in the early phase and homogeneous high attenuation in the late phase; Figure a and b) to HSH (showing peripheral high density in the arterial phase and subtle low density with focal capsular enhancement in the delayed phase; Figure ).
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged after 2 weeks.