A 64-year-old, multiparous Japanese woman was referred to our institution with a 1-year history of abnormal vaginal bleeding and a 2-month history of abnormal vaginal bleeding and left groin pain. Her medical and family history was unremarkable, and she was not taking any medication. A gynaecologic examination revealed a raised, dark-red necrotic lesion, 5 cm in diameter, located on the left lateral wall of the proximal vagina, and a non-pigmented thick tumour in the lower two-thirds of the posterior vagina. The cervix and fornix appeared normal. Her left groin was reddish and swollen, and enlarged inguinal lymph nodes were palpable with tenderness. Her left lower abdomen was oedematous. We performed a biopsy of the vaginal tumour, and arrived at a tentative diagnosis of unresectable vaginal cancer with metastasis to the inguinal lymph nodes.
The patient was informed about a window-of-opportunity clinical trial registered in the University Hospital Medical Information Network (UMIN 000018388), which included oral itraconazole therapy and tumour biopsies before and after itraconazole treatment. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for inclusion in the trial. Thus, on the first day of referral, she was started on 200 mg itraconazole orally twice a day, and we planned to continue this treatment regimen until the biopsy results were obtained and imaging studies were performed.
On day 1 of itraconazole treatment, her serum lactic dehydrogenase was slightly elevated (252 U/L) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen was normal (1.1 ng/mL). Her complete blood count and liver function were normal.
On day 6, FDG/PET–CT findings suggested a vaginal tumour and multiple metastases to the left inguinal, pelvic, and para-aortic lymph nodes, and right foot . The largest total diameter of the aggregated inguinal lymph nodes was 50 mm, and its maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) was 19.8.
On day 7, she reported relief from her left inguinal pain. Physical examination revealed that her left inguinal nodes had shrunk and that the oedema had improved.
On day 9, microscopic evaluation of the biopsy sample confirmed the diagnosis of vaginal malignant melanoma, with positive immunohistochemical staining for HMB-45, S-100, and Melan A .
On day 13, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a thickened vaginal wall . We subsequently performed a second vaginal biopsy on the same day. Head MRI performed on day 14 revealed brain metastases. Each of the two brain tumours measured 1 cm in diameter, and the patient experienced no headache or neurological symptoms. On day 23, she underwent gamma-knife radiosurgery for brain metastases.
FDG/PET–CT performed on day 30 showed that the diameter of aggregated inguinal lymph nodes decreased to 38 mm, with an SUVmax of 14.6 . Overall tumour response indicated stable disease according to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumours (RECIST) version 1.1 . Genetic testing of the tumour yielded negative results for BRAF mutation, and immunohistochemical staining of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) on day 30 yielded a 20% positivity rate. Therefore, nivolumab was chosen for systemic treatment. Itraconazole was discontinued on day 30. A third vaginal biopsy was performed on day 30.
The biopsied specimens obtained on days 1, 13, and 30 were subjected to cDNA microarray analysis. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) was isolated from the specimens and subjected to cDNA microarray analysis using SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K v3 Microarray kit (Agilent Technologies, Tokyo, Japan). Altered gene expression was calculated as log2 (messenger RNA [mRNA] levels in itraconazole-treated tissues versus the mRNA level before itraconazole treatment). Genes down-regulated to < 1/32 of baseline levels after 13 days of itraconazole administration are listed in Table .
During itraconazole treatment, the patient experienced no side effects and remained pain-free. Itraconazole also relieved her genital bleeding. In the 5 days between stopping itraconazole and starting nivolumab, her left inguinal nodes got enlarged and her left lower abdomen became oedematous, causing mild pain.
Initiation of nivolumab (3 mg/kg, repeated every 2 weeks) gradually improved her symptoms; however, the primary vaginal tumour increased in size after 10 weeks. After 12 weeks of nivolumab administration, the patient developed grade 3 immune-related hepatitis with elevated alanine transaminase (ALT; 194 U/l) but no bilirubin elevation. We discontinued nivolumab, and immediately administered 1 mg/kg of methylprednisolone. After 6 days, her liver enzyme levels promptly decreased to a grade 1 level. She developed left inguinal and left pelvic pain, which was treated with diclofenac rectal suppositories. FDG/PET–CT showed growth of the primary vaginal tumour and increased 18-FDG uptake in both the metastatic lymph nodes and the primary vaginal tumour. The patient was administered itraconazole, and her pain diminished the next day. During the 6-week steroid tapering, her ALT increased to 408 U/l, and 2 mg/kg of methylprednisolone was re-administered. After 3 months of itraconazole re-challenge, the primary vaginal tumour size gradually increased. However, a CT scan revealed that metastatic lymph nodes were stabilized, and no new metastatic lesions were found. Head MRI revealed remission of brain metastases. She has not reported any pain in the 4 months after the itraconazole re-challenge.