A 57-year-old Korean man was admitted for chemotherapy. The patient did not smoke or drink alcoholic beverages for religious reasons and exhibited no specific underlying diseases. Under ultrasonography performed due to sudden pain in his right testis, a 4cm-sized testicular mass was observed. Subsequently, he received right radial orchiectomy 26 days prior to hospitalization and was diagnosed with ENKTL nasal type through biopsy from surgical specimen. Paranasal sinus computed tomography (CT) was performed 14 days prior to hospitalization and no abnormal mass or mucosal edema was seen. In addition, CT in neck, chest, and abdomen were performed but no enlarged lymph nodes were observed throughout his entire body. There was no abnormal finding in positron emission tomography (PET) CT (A). Bone marrow biopsy results showed normally matured myeloid/erythroid cell and normocellular marrow with reticulin grade 1 and 40% cellularity. At the time of hospitalization, blood test results showed elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase (306 U/L) and Epstein-Barr virus polymerase chain reaction result (860.40 copies/uL), but all other measurements including complete blood count, liver function test, renal function test, electrolyte, amylase, and lipase levels were within normal range.
The patient did not exhibit disseminated lymphoma throughout his entire body. After confirming no additional abnormal findings, chemotherapy using the same regimens, Dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, L-asparaginase, and etoposide (SMILE), was started. On Day 8 of chemotherapy, L-asparaginase (6000 IU/m2) was administrated and he complained of sudden onset epigastric pain and tenderness after 2 days. He was hemodynamically stable at the time, and his blood test results were mostly normal with the following values: white blood cell 4400/mm3 (neutrophil 67.2%, lymphocyte 23.8%), hemoglobin 12.8 g/dL, platelet 165,000/uL, total bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL, aspartate transaminase 33 IU/L, alanine transaminase 24 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase 63 IU/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 14 IU/L, triglyceride 123 mg/dL, calcium 8.2 mg/dL, and IgG4 707 mg/L. However, he had elevated levels of amylase (683 U/L) and lipase (1437 U/L), which were three times higher than the normal value. Under abdominal CT (2 days before EUS-FNB), diffuse enlargement of the pancreas was observed compared to the pre-chemotherapy CT (B), although neither abnormal mass at pancreas parenchyma nor fluid collection at the peripancreatic area was observed (A–C).
After being diagnosed with acute pancreatitis, the patient fasted for therapeutic purposes and underwent EUS to identify the cause. The echogenicity of pancreas parenchyma was mildly decreased, but there was no lesion with different echo levels in the whole pancreas. Main pancreatic duct did not dilate (A) and there was no obstructive maneuver on the papillary side. Stones or sludge within gallbladder was not observed (B), and common bile duct did not show dilatation (C). In order to determine if the acute pancreatitis occurred due to pancreas involvement of ENKTL or L-asparaginase, we performed EUS -FNB using 25-gauge needle (Acquire, Boston Scientific Corp., Natick, MA, USA) (D).
We observed microscopically that pancreas acinar cell structure was destroyed by diffusely infiltrated tumor cells (A). These tumor cells were medium to large in their size, with irregular pleomorphic hyper-chromatin nuclei (B). Tumor cells were strongly positive for cluster of differentiation (CD) 3 (C) and CD 56 (D) while negative for CD 20 (E).
Therefore, he was given a final diagnosis of acute pancreatitis due to diffuse pancreas metastasis of ENKTL, and we resumed chemotherapy using the SMILE regimen. On the second day after fasting, epigastric pain and tenderness started to improve, and the patient resumed oral food consumption. In the follow-up CT performed after 2 months, pancreas enlargement was improved . The patient continued with his chemotherapy with the SMILE regimen, but refused to continue after the third cycle due to severe generalized weakness, and eventually died due to pneumonia. summarized our patient’s hospital course with timeline.