A 58-year-old woman presented in another institution with complaints of headache, dizziness, bilateral arm paresthesia, and visual disturbance. Her neurological examination showed abducens nerve palsy. A computerized tomography scan (angio-CT), and later cerebral angiography, displayed a giant partially thrombosed right VA (V4) dissecting aneurysm , distal to the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) origin, extended to the VA-basilar junction. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the posterior fossa confirmed the presence of a giant aneurysm , partially thrombosed, with mass effect on the brainstem.
After beginning antiplatelet therapy, the patient underwent two stent insertions: the first PED 3 × 14 (Medtronic/Covidien, Irvine, CA) in the left VA-basilar junction to exclude the dissecting segment of the right VA, and the second Silk 3 × 18 in the right VA-PICA junction (Balt Extrusion, Montmorency, France). Before discharge, VA angiograms demonstrated correct placement of diversion flow stents and an initial stasis of contrast . During the following days, the patient experienced moderate improvements in both convergent strabismus and initial symptoms.
Unfortunately, a subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiogram performed at 9 months after endovascular stenting showed persistent filling and continued growth of the aneurysm, which remained partially thrombosed and maintained a remarkable mass effect on the brainstem. The patient began to deteriorate after 6 months developing dizziness and gait ataxia.
The patient was referred to our neurosurgical center 1 year after the stenting, with a 6-month history of worsening spastic paraparesis, mild swallowing disturbance, light dysphonia, and diplopia. A right and left vertebral angiogram with an occlusion test was performed using a temporary-occlusion silicone balloon catheter placed at the right VA just proximal to the stent in the VA-PICA. The angiogram showed the patency of the PICA, the proximal part of the VA, and the partial thrombosed aneurysm. There was no patency at the distal part of the VA in conjunction with the basilar artery where the second stent was positioned. The contralateral left vertebral angiography did not show any reflux into the right VA. After ascertaining that the patient had tolerated a 15-minute test occlusion, the balloon was removed. In addition, the angiography indicated that a left small artery from the left VA supplied the aneurysm.
On second admission, the patient underwent a right suboccipital craniectomy followed by partial aneurysmectomy. The surgical procedure was preceded by the placement of a nondetachable flow dependent balloon catheter (Balt B1, Balt Extrusion, France) to be inflated during reduction of the intra-aneurysmal thrombosis and clip positioning. The exact position and the inflation and deflation volume of the balloon were carefully checked several times. A 3,000 unit of heparin bolus was injected at the beginning of the procedure. The catheter had been successively washed with heparinized saline solution (5,000 units/l). When we were sure of the correct position and the adequate volume of balloon inflation, we moved the patient with the complete arterial femoral system to the neurosurgical theatre.
We performed a right suboccipital craniotomy with the patient under general anesthesia along with neurophysiological monitoring. An endotracheal tube with electrodes was used for monitoring the vocal cords. Upon opening the cisterna magna, the segment of VA-PICA containing the flow diversion stent was exposed. The aneurysmal sac was identified and isolated from the surrounding tissue and cranial nerves . We then inflated the balloon in the VA positioned proximally to the PICA because no temporary clipping was possible due to the stent whereas a temporary Yasargil clip (Aesculap, Center Valley, PA, USA) was positioned on the distal part of the PICA. To reduce the temporary distal occlusion of the PICA, the aneurysmal sac was opened in the most proximal part close to the PICA bifurcation. Inside thrombus was rapidly removed using an ultrasonic aspirator. The decompression and a partial aneurysmectomy proceeded until it was possible to apply a fenestrated clip to maintain the PICA patency and exclude the distal aneurysmal VA dilatations [Figures and ]. Moderate venous bleeding from the aneurysm wall occurred. At the end of the resection, we left the outer wall of the aneurysm attached to the brainstem, which appeared to be otherwise clear and pulsating. The presence of a markedly developed vasa vasorum necessitated prolonged coagulation of the aneurysm wall. Neurophysiological multimodal monitoring, used throughout the procedure, showed mild fluctuations in the electrophysiological parameters.
After a transient admission to the intensive care unit, the patient was transferred to the ward. A postoperative CT scan showed no hemorrhage or ischemia in the posterior fossa. During the postoperative course, the patient experienced temporary mild worsening of her dysphonia and dysphagia, a new development of right partial palsy of the VII cranial nerve palsy (III HB) and left superior arm thermal hypoesthesia. Laryngeal endoscopy highlighted a right partial vocal cord paresis with only mild dysphagia. There was no marked effect on her gait disturbance. Speech and rehabilitation therapy was scheduled.
An angiography performed 10 days later showed complete resolution of the aneurysm patency, however, unfortunately also the PICA occlusion even if without sequelae. MRI confirmed an initial reduction of mass effect on the brainstem and cerebellum and no evidence of PICA distribution ischemia. However, the patient's condition improved gradually; she was discharged 18 days after the surgery to a rehabilitation unit.
After 4 months, the patient experienced a progressive and almost complete recovery. Now she ambulates independently without assistance, has a normal diet, and has right HB 1 facial paresis. Follow-up angiography and MRI were performed at 4 months after the surgery. The angiogram confirmed the right PICA occlusion and the exclusion of the aneurysm from the circulation . It also showed some anastomosis between the right superior cerebellar artery (SCA) and terminal branches of right PICA. MRI highlighted significant reduction of mass effect .