A 15-year-old Oromo male child who came from the rural area of Bale Zone and visited medical emergency outpatient department of Goba Referral Hospital presented with a complaint of periumbilical pain of 4 month duration. The pain worsened over the past 2 weeks. It was migratory and prominent on the left lower abdominal quadrant. Associated with this he had a history of loss of appetite and easy fatigability of the same duration. Additionally, he had a past record of experiencing a bout of watery diarrhea, occurring 3–4 times a day, persisting for a week. He was admitted to our hospital three times for the same complaints, despite visiting the hospital many times in between. The first visit was 3 years prior and he was diagnosed with appendicular mass and multiple regional and peritoneal lymphadenopathy. He was managed with ceftriaxone 1 g intravenous twice a day and metronidazole 500 mg intravenous three times a day for 5 days consecutively and discharged improved with cephalexin 500 mg orally twice a day for 5 days and metronidazole 500 mg orally three times a day for 5 days. A year prior, he presented with the same complaint and was managed the same way. Otherwise, he had no history of nausea or vomiting, no urinary complaint, no history of trauma to his abdomen, and no history, family or otherwise, of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and cardiac illness.
Physical examination was unremarkable except for mild tenderness over left lower quadrant and periumbilical area. For this, he was investigated with hematological tests and imaging. Likewise, hemoglobin was 12.1 g/dl, hematocrit 37.5%, white blood cell 15,100/µl, neutrophil 45%, and lymphocyte 45%. Urinalysis and stool examination was non-revealing. Posteroanterior chest x-ray was normal .
Abdominal ultrasound showed multiple regional and right peritoneal lymphadenopathies, the largest measuring 2.8 cm in size . There was no loculated or free fluid collection in the peritoneal cavity. The liver was normal in size with homogeneous echo pattern and no focal lesion but found on the left side . The spleen was normal in size and echo pattern but found on the right side , and two-dimension echocardiography showed no structural or functional cardiac abnormalities. The heart apex was positioned toward the left side .
He was eventually treated with ceftriaxone 1 g intravenous twice a day and metronidazole 500 mg intravenous three times a day for 5 days conservatively and discharged improved with cephalexin 500 mg orally twice a day and metronidazole 500 mg orally three times a day for 5 days. After 1 month of follow-up, we repeated sonographic evaluation. Mesenteric lymphadenopathies have shown significant remission.