A 15-year-old boy without cardiovascular risk factors or previous history of cardiovascular disease presented to the emergency department in our institution for persistent chest pain with mild fever (<38°C) for the last 3 days. The patient reported no respiratory tract signs.
The physical examination revealed blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg, heart rate of 75 b.p.m., oxygen saturation of 98% while breathing ambient air, and body temperature of 36.9°C. The electrocardiogram showed diffuse ST elevation without reciprocal changes .
Blood tests revealed a slight increase in C-reactive protein level (41 mg/L, normal <6 mg/L) with normal leucocytes (6.1 × 109/L, normal 4–10 × 109 cells/L) and elevated cardiac troponin 6.1 μg/L (99th upper reference limit 0.045 μg/L). N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP 65 ng/L, normal <300 ng/L) and D-dimer (259 ng/mL, normal <500 ng/mL) remained normal.
Because of systematic suspicion of COVID-19 in patients with unexplained fever, a PCR was performed on a nasopharyngeal swab and resulted positive for SARS-CoV-2. A multiplex real-time PCR was also performed and resulted negative, allowing the exclusion of viral co-infections. Chest CT scan showed no lung anomalies . There were no other family members tested positive for SARS-coV-2.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mild diffuse hypokinesia with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) at 50%, preserved cardiac output, normal right ventricular function, no significant valvular disease, and normal pulmonary pressure without lower vena cava dilatation. There was a mild pericardial effusion around the lateral wall of the left ventricle (maximum, 5 mm) without signs of tamponade .
The patient was admitted to the cardiology intensive care unit with a diagnosis of suspected myocarditis. Given the echocardiography changes and elevated markers of myocardial injury in a low cardiovascular risk patient, emergent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was performed on the day of admission.
CMR showed moderate left ventricular dysfunction with LVEF of 48% and normal right ventricular function. Tissue characterization based on T2-weighted and late gadolinium enhancement sequences revealed interstitial oedema and myocardial damage involving the subepicardial layer in the posterolaterobasal wall of the left ventricle. First-pass perfusion was normal. There was a mild pericardial effusion with an enhancement of the pericardium adjacent to the posterolaterobasal segment. Diagnosis of acute myocarditis was thus confirmed based on the classic Lake Louise criteria According to the reliable CMR findings, typical of acute myocarditis, no subsequent coronary angiography and no endomyocardial biopsy were done.
The haemodynamics of the patient remained stable without indication for inotropic support. He remained afebrile and the biological inflammatory syndrome gradually decreased. No ventricular arrythmia was observed during his hospitalization. High-sensitivity troponin I peaked at 13.1 μg/L (99th upper reference limit 0.045 μg/L) on day 3. The patient was treated with beta-blockers (bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily) and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ramipril 2.5 mg daily). Due to this favourable clinical course, no specific treatment of COVID-19 was introduced.
The patient was discharged from hospital on day 5 with a CMR scheduled control at 6 months. The echocardiography performed at discharge showed a preserved LVEF at 55% with normal cardiac output.