The patient was an 8-year-old girl of two healthy parents. She has short stature of 105 cm height and weight of 40 kg. She has normal intellectual abilities. Her physical examination showed that her height was under average, with bent lower limbs (genu varum), limited mobility and dislocation of the joints at both knees. Personal and family histories were reviewed for each member of the three-generation Vietnamese family .
Back in her prenatal stage, at 22 week old, the sonogram revealed the shortness of the limbs. However, the family still decided to keep the baby. There was no family history of musculoskeletal problems. Her karyotype results were 46, XX, with no abnormalities detected at chromosomal level (data not shown).
As the patient learnt to walk, the bending of the legs became more pronounced. She was admitted to the hospital and was provided with a cast for her legs in 3 months. After removing the cast, her condition was not improved. At the age of 6, the patient received a knee arthrodesis procedure.
The patient has a varus deformity of the lower limbs. Her limb lengths were lower than average: her femur was 33 cm long, and her tibia was 30 cm .
Radiological documentation revealed abnormal development in the femur and patella as ossification of the epiphyseal growth plates occurred irregularly. Tibial metaphysis are deformed and flatten; the femoral heads were short and flat. No deformity was detected in her hands and feet .
The study was approved by the Institute of Biotechnology and Hanoi Medical University Hospital (Ha Noi, Vietnam), and informed consent was obtained from all family members prior to blood sample collection. All family members from a Vietnamese family were recruited at Hanoi Medical University Hospital (Ha Noi, Vietnam) between April and May 2019. Genomic DNA samples were then extracted from the peripheral blood leucocytes of all family members using the Qiagen QIAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. DNA concentration and purity was measured using a NanoDrop™ ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Genomic DNA samples were preserved at − 20 °C prior to use.
All sequences of exons 8–19 (COMP), exon 2 (MATN3), intron 3-exon 3 (COL9A2), intron 2-exon 3 (COL9A3), intron 7-exon 8 (COL9A1) were amplified in family members using PCR with Taq DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.), and specific primers sequences for COMP, MATN3, COL9A2 designed by previous studies [, , ], respectively. We designed new primers for amplification of target regions of COL9A3 and COL9A1. All primer sequences were listed in Supplementary . DNA (100 ng) in a 50 μl reaction was amplified. All reagents used for PCR were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. The amplification included a single 5 min step at 94 °C followed by 40 cycles of 94 °C for 45 s, annealing at temperatures listed (see Table ) for 45 s and 72 °C for 45 s followed by a final 10 min step at 72 °C. Products were separated using 1% agarose gel electrophoresis and stained with ethidium bromide. DNA products then were purified using a QIAquick PCR Purification kit (Qiagen Inc.) and sequenced in each direction using an ABI3100 Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). The variant detection was firstly performed for COMP and expanded to MATN3, COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3 in order by Variant Reporter™ Software v2.0, Initial License (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.), and analysed using SeqMan (version 2.3; Technelysium Pty, Ltd., South Brisbane, QLD, Australia), and compared against reference sequences obtained from NCBI with the code of NG_007070.1 (COMP), NG_008087.1 (MATN3), NC_000001.11 (COL9A2), NG_016353.1 (COL9A3), NG_011654.1 (COL9A1).
The Sanger sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous variant at cDNA position c.572C > A in the exon 2 of the MATN3 in the patient, but not in unaffected parent and unaffected brother . This missense variant changes the codon for Alanine to Aspartic acid at the protein level (p.A191D). The heterozygous c.572C > A variant in exon 2 of MATN3 is evolutionarily conserved among species . The following criteria were used to determine if the sequence variation was pathogenic variant: the chemical nature of the amino acids substituted, co-segregation with phenotype in family, interspecies amino acid conservation, absence in healthy individuals. Protein damaging structural information of the missense variant (c.572C > A, p.A191D) was predicted in MutationTaster , Polyphen-2 and SIFT to be ‘Damaging’ with a score of 0.999, ‘Disease causing’ with a score of 1.000, and ‘Affect protein function’ with a score of 0.02, respectively . Based on the standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology , the c.572C > A (p.A191D) variant is classified to be ‘Pathogenic’. In addition, the variant has not been found in any public database, including dbSNP , 1000 genomes , Human Gene Mutation Database , Genome Aggregation Consortium , Human Genetic Variation Database , ClinVar , ESP6500 . Therefore, the de novo missense variant (c.572C > A, p.A191D) was considered to be novel.
Moreover, two known coding-synonymous variants: c.447C > T, c.615G > A in exon 2 of MATN3 were identified in patient and unaffected father, unaffected brother . These variants are not conserved. The frequencies of these variants are above 40% in several public databases: 1000 Genomes, ExAC, GnomAD_exomes and Vietnamese. Based on the standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology , these variants are classified to be ‘Benign’ for pathogenesis. All variants detected in this family, the variant frequencies in the population and variant classifications were shown in Table .
To understand the consequences of the Alanine to Aspartic acid substitution at amino acid position 191 in matrilin-3 protein, we used the model of the tertiary structure of human matrilin-3 (UniProt ID: O15232) constructed by SWISS-MODEL [–] as the wild-type and introduced the p.A191D variant into this model using PyMOL v1.3 (Schrödinger, LLC, New York, USA) to create the mutantmatrilin-3 protein . When the two predicted structures of the wild type and the mutatedmatrilin-3 were compared, the p.A191D substitution caused conformational changes near the mutation site, resulting in deformity of the β-sheet of the single A domain of matrilin- 3.