A 45-year-old Caucasian true hermaphrodite, who has been raised as a male, presented with a hard left testicular mass which had significantly increased in size over the preceding few months. His past medical history included a left orchidopexy at the age of 10 years. He had also previously undergone a hysterectomy and a right oophorectomy and no testicular tissue had ever been identified on the right side. On examination, he had a left-sided inguinoscrotal scar. His left testis was enlarged and hard. We could detect no other abnormality. His human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) level was elevated (11 mIU/ml) and the other tumor markers, including lactate dehydrogenase (LDH - 240 U/L) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP - 3 ng/ml), were normal. A staging computed tomography (CT) scan showed no evidence of metastatic disease. A left radical orchidectomy was performed. Intra-operatively, his whole testis was found to be hard and no distinct mass was identified. A histopathology examination revealed a homogenous friable testis with no epididymis identified. The tumor breached the tunica albuginea and tunica vaginalis. Microscopic examination showed a classical seminoma with vascular and perineural invasion . The spermatic cord margin appeared free of the tumor and the tumor reached the excision margin. Therefore, histological staging demonstrated a T2 lesion. His HCG level was normal after the orchidectomy. He was commenced on a testosterone replacement therapy post-operatively. At a routine eight month follow up, he was found to have an enlarged lymph node in the left inguinal region. A CT scan confirmed the presence of a 2.4 cm left inguinal lymph node . There was also pelvic lymph node and chest involvement. An excision biopsy of his inguinal node revealed a classical metastatic seminoma with extra-capsular spread to the surrounding adipose tissue . Treatment was started with two cycles of carboplatin AUC10. He made a good recovery after the chemotherapy and repeat CT scans have shown no evidence of recurrence after two years of follow up.