A 49-year-old man presented with chest discomfort for 5 days and was admitted to our emergency unit. His medical history was unremarkable, except for cigarette smoking and a lower left limb embolic event that was treated by surgical embolectomy 3 years prior. Electrocardiography and laboratory tests were normal. A contrast-enhanced CTA surprisingly demonstrated a large filling defect suggestive of a thrombus in a healthy distal ascending aorta . Further investigations, including autoimmune, thrombophilia, and blood culture studies were negative , and so did his family.
For a young male with such a large floating thrombus in the ascending aorta, we chose surgical removal of the intra-luminal mass to avoid the recurrence of a peripheral or visceral embolism. After a discussion with professionals from multiple disciplines, we performed surgical intervention for this patient. Under general anesthesia, a preoperative transesophageal echocardiography showed a mobile lesion on the anterior wall of the distal ascending aorta (Additional file : Video 2). The surgery was performed through a standard median sternotomy on cardiopulmonary bypass after heparinized. The right femoral artery and the superior and inferior vena cavae were cannulated, with the intent of obtaining deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (at 24 ℃). The heart was arrested with retrograde cardioplegia, followed by retrograde cerebral perfusion and circulatory arrest. A transverse aortotomy was performed, and the ascending aorta and arch were carefully inspected. A 5.5 × 3.0 cm mixed thrombus was attached to the aortic wall at the junction of the ascending aorta and proximal arch . After thrombus removal, an extensive area of intimal defect and an abnormally thick and fragile aortic wall was observed at the attachment site. To seal the prothrombotic area and avoid recurrence, the ascending aorta and proximal arch were replaced with a 28 mm Dacron vascular prosthesis conduit (Gelweave, Vascutek, Terumo, Inchinnan, UK). Histological examination of the aortic specimen confirmed the thrombotic nature of the structure, and no sign of connective tissue disorders or malignancy was detected. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 7 days after surgery. No complications were reported in 3-month follow-up. As we resected the aortic thrombus and its attachment stie, and the replaced artificial blood vessel had anticoagulated properties, no anticoagulation treatment was required for this patient. The CTA scan at the 3-month follow-up confirmed the stability of the grafts without a recurrence of an aortic thrombus.