A 56 year-old male was admitted to our department for liver mass. Because of type B hepatitis for more than 20 years and inappropriate and discontinuous anti-viral therapy, he was diagnosed with slight liver cirrhosis several years before admission. There were few positive findings on physical examination. Based on the elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein level (51 ng/ml) and typical imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma with a history of hepatitis. The patient underwent laparoscopic left lateral hepatic lobectomy on 23 May 2019. Postoperative pathology confirmed moderately to highly differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma . Liver radiofrequency ablation was performed on 19 October 2020, for local tumor recurrence. However, unexpectedly, another two lesions were found in the next 2 months. Thus, lenvatinib plus camrelizumab was administered, which was aborted 2 months later because of severe drug-induced liver injury. The patient spent more than 2 months recovering his liver function. The patient was found to have lumbar metastases. Lenvatinib plus camrelizumab was retaken 1 month after liver function returned to normal. Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) was performed on 23 April 2021, to inhibit tumor progression in the liver. Stereotactic radiotherapy was adminstered to relieve bone destruction in May. However, the tumor continued to grow in size. Lenvatinib was replaced by sorafenib on 9 August 2021. He underwent TACE on 9 November 2021 and 6 December 2021.
The therapy was replaced with regorafenib plus sintilimab after the 5th thoracic vertebral metastasis in November. However, in December 2021, the patient experienced hypoesthesia and hypokinesia below the nipple line plane as 5th thoracic vertebras as metastasis progressed with spinal cord compression. Thoracic vertebral lesion resection combined with thoracic laminectomy and decompression was performed to relieve compression. The pathology of the metastasis is also shown in , which was slightly different from the primary pathology. A summary of disease duration is shown in .
Common therapies for unresectable HCC, including tyrosine kinase inhibitors, checkpoint inhibition immunotherapy, radiotherapy, and interventional treatment, seem to have gradually become invalid. The patient suffered a 5th thoracic vertebra metastasis, ending to paralysis from the waist down. Although lumbar decompression was performed to help regain exercise ability immediately, the tumor showed a rapid progression.
Thus, next-generation sequencing (NGS) was used to identify potential molecular-targeted agents. NGS covers all the coding exons, selected introns, and promoters, and analyses all gene mutations, including single-base mutation, DNA intercalation or deletion, gene copy number amplification or loss, and gene fusion or rearrangement. The NGS results of this patient showed MET amplification with copy number variations of 30.2.
The patient received crizotinib (200 mg/day) on 24 January 2022 and was continually administered until the last follow-up without any adverse events. The baseline condition and images of the patients are shown in . The patient presented with mild anemia and acceptable liver damage (40 U/L for ALT and 92 U/L for AST). The AFP level was beyond the detection range and PIVKA-II was approximately 75,000 mAU/ml. Enhanced abdominal CT showed multiple masses in the liver, hilar, retroperitoneal, sacrum, and ilium; right branch of the portal vein invasion. The most recent follow-up visit was on 31 January 2023, and the images (taken on 16 December 2022) are shown in . The patient achieved excellent tumor remission after targeted treatment. The levels of tumor markers, including AFP and PIVKA-II, declined to the normal range, while routine blood and hepatorenal function tests were stable. The advanced CT scan showed that the diameter of the tumor was observably reduced and even disappeared at several sites.