A 63-year-old South Asian male presented with pain over the upper and mid-back with progressive weakness of bilateral lower limbs for 2 months. The pain was insidious in onset and gradually progressive which aggravated on walking and relieved on rest. He had a history of T7 fracture with paraparesis 9 years back, for which he underwent posterior stabilization and instrumentation followed by a complete recovery of his neurological deficit and implant removal a year later. Neurological examination revealed spastic paraparesis with Grade 2 power (MRC grading) and exaggerated knee and ankle reflexes in both lower limbs. His bowel and bladder functions were normal. MRI showed an extradural lesion measuring 4.2 × 1.6 × 1.9 cm (CC × AP × Trans), which was mildly hypointense on T1- and hyperintense on T2-weighted images with strong relatively homogenous enhancement following contrast administration within the posterior aspect of the spinal canal at the T6-T8 vertebral level, causing severe compression and anterior displacement of the cord [-]. It was also protruding into the proximal aspect of the right T7/T8 neural foramen. Altered signals with abnormal enhancement were also seen in the adjacent right pedicle, proximal transverse process, and right posterolateral aspect of the T7 vertebra.
In view of neurological deficit, the patient underwent T6–T8 wide laminectomy and facetectomy. The lesion appeared as a well-circumscribed spongy, purple hemorrhagic epidural mass over the dura extending into the T7/T8 neural foramen, which was removed in toto by carefully detaching it from dura. Histopathology examination revealed a highly vascular tumor with innumerable thin-walled capillary vessels of varying sizes, lined by flattened endothelium, and embedded within a fibro-fatty tissue with a total lack of smooth muscular elements suggestive of capillary hemangioma . Unlike cavernous hemangiomas, the lesion was devoid of abnormally hyalinized vascular channels, thromboses, calcifications, or surrounding deposition of hemosiderin pigment. No mitotic activity or cellular atypia was seen.
Postoperative period was uneventful and the neurology improved significantly to Grade 4 within 2 weeks and to Grade 5 at the end of 3 months.