An 84-year-old woman sustained a left ulnar shaft fracture due to fall. Prior to the fall, she had been aware of pain in her forearm while carrying a heavy luggage. She was on bisphosphonate therapy (ibandronate and alendronate) for more than 10 years; therefore, the fracture was considered an atypical fracture due to SSBT. Radiography and computed tomography showed a transverse fracture in the proximal third of the left ulnar shaft; in addition, there were sclerotic changes at the fracture site . Among laboratory data, total type I procollagen-N-propeptide (bone formation marker) level was 15.5 ng/mL (reference range: 26.4–98.2) and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-5b (bone resorption marker) level was 138 mU/dL (120–420). These laboratory data indicated severe suppression of bone turnover. Bone mineral density of the L2–L4 was 0.974 g/cm2 (t-score: − 1.5), which is not in the osteoporotic range defined by the World Health Organization . Whole body 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate bone scan showed abnormal tracer uptake not only at the fracture site but also at the right femur . Radiography of the right femur also showed an external bone reaction . Based on the patient work-up, two problems were identified. One was the atypical fracture of the left ulna, and the other was the external bone reaction of the right femur due to SSBT. Owing to the lack of any pain in the right thigh, no active treatment was planned for the femoral lesion apart from administration of teriparatide and close monitoring. Surgery was performed for the former condition. The surgical strategy is summarized below.
Drilling and decortication Autogenous cancellous bone graft from iliac crest Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using dual plate (VA-LCP Proximal ulna plate and LCP-Reconstruction plate; DePuy Synthes, Zeist, Netherlands) Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) treatment (Accellus; NIPPON SIGMAX Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) Administration of teriparatide (56.5 μg/week: normal dose)
The transverse fracture with cortical thickening was evident during the procedure . Dual plate was used for ORIF in order to achieve rigid stability at the fracture site and to avoid implant failure due to the typically long time required for bone union. Permanent histologic section of the fracture site showed reactive bone formation, little osteoblast activation, and few osteoclasts, which was consistent with SSBT. The tendency for bone union was observed at 8 months after the operation; bone union was observed at 11 months . The elbow and wrist joints showed almost complete range of movements with no pain. Moreover, bone mineral density of the L2–L4 improved to 1.050 g/cm2 (t-score: − 1.0).