A 76-year-old man who suffered from remnant gastric cancer was transferred to our hospital. He previously underwent distal gastrectomy, D1+ lymphadenectomy, and Billroth-I reconstruction for early gastric cancer in another hospital at 63 years of age. The histopathological examination showed pStage IA gastric cancer according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma, 14th edition . A gastrointestinal endoscopic checkup after gastrectomy revealed an ulcerative lesion located on the lesser curvature of the remnant stomach. The histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen revealed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. After being transferred to our hospital, hematologic examinations including tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen, α-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and carbohydrate antigen 125, were within the normal range, except for the total protein level, which was slightly low (6.5 g/dL). An upper gastrointestinal series showed a 12-mm Type 0-IIc lesion on the lesser curvature of the remnant stomach with an estimated depth within the mucosa (T1a). A gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an 18-mm Type 0-IIc lesion on the lesser curvature of the remnant stomach, which also had an estimated depth within the mucosa (T1a). Tumor biopsy revealed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) failed to detect the primary lesion; however, a slightly enhanced 13 × 10-mm nodule was observed near the lesser curvature of the remnant stomach . An endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a hypoechoic lesion without vascular flow, and the margin of the lesion was slightly indistinct . An endoscopic ultrasonography-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) of the nodule showed no cancer cells. Following a clinical diagnosis of early gastric cancer confined to the mucosa (T1a) without lymph node metastasis, endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) was performed. The histopathological examination revealed Type 0-IIc, 25 × 15 mm, tub 1 > tub 2, T1b2 (SM 2, 625 μm), UL (+), ly (−), v (−), HM 0, VM 0. So, the ESD was diagnosed as noncurative according to the Japanese Gastric Cancer Treatment Guideline, 14th edition , and an additional surgical resection was planned. Before the resection, CT was performed again, which had a 3-month interval with a previous CT, showing an enlargement of the nodule to 16 × 12 mm . We diagnosed the nodule as a lymph node metastasis and his remnant gastric cancer as early remnant gastric cancer, M-12-S, post-Billroth-I reconstruction, U, Less, Type 0-IIc, 25 mm, tub 1 > tub 2, pT1b2, cN1, cM0, cStage IB. The differential diagnoses of the nodule were lymph node without metastasis, hamartoma, schwannoma, neurofibroma, desmoids, inflammatory fibrosarcoma, and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. He underwent resection of the remnant stomach, D2 lymphadenectomy, splenectomy, and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The nodule rigidly adhered to the remnant stomach and appeared to be a lymph node metastasis in #3a. Macroscopically, the relatively well-demarcated, yellowish-white nodule was in the ventral side of the remnant stomach; however, the 11 × 6-mm nodule had no fibrous capsule . In the histopathological examination, no residual cancer in the resected specimen was detected; the nodule showed wavy proliferation of nerve fibers without atypia nor mitosis, and a hyalinized stroma was seen between nerve bundles . Therefore, we diagnosed the nodule as AN. We did not perform immunohistopathological examinations because we were able to distinguish hyperplasia from neoplasm in the HE staining. The histopathological diagnosis was early remnant gastric cancer, pT1b2, N0, M0, pStageIA. The postoperative course was uneventful, and there is no evidence of recurrence 37 months after surgery.