The patient was a 49-year-old woman with uterine cancer. CT revealed a left adrenal tumor, enlarged aortic lymph nodes, and multiple liver tumors . Serum hormone and tumor marker levels were normal, and no signal accumulation was observed in the left adrenal glands on 131I-adsterol scintigraphy and a retroperitoneal tumor on 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanidineI scintigraphy . Ultrasonography-guided percutaneous biopsy of the left adrenal mass was performed, which revealed that the tumor cells contained abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, and the Weiss score was 4 points (out of 9), exhibiting high mitotic rate, atypical mitoses, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and coagulation necrosis . The Ki-67 labeling index was 30% at the hot spot . Tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for steroidogenic factor 1 and caveolin-1 .
The patient was diagnosed with primary nonfunctional ACC, T2N1M1, and ENSAT stage IV based on the diagnostic imaging and histopathological findings. As the adrenal gland tumor was too large for curative resection, the patient was treated with mitotane (1500 mg/day) orally as first-line therapy, but the dose was reduced to 500 mg/day due to drug-induced liver dysfunction. Eight months after mitotane administration, CT revealed progression of the adrenal mass and liver metastasis .
She then received systemic chemotherapy consisting of TJ-M. A total of 70 mg/m2 paclitaxel was administered weekly via intravenous infusion on days 1, 8, and 15, while carboplatin (area under the curve, 5) was administered every 28 days starting from day 1. The patient received premedication for paclitaxel-associated hypersensitivity reactions, consisting of dexamethasone (8 mg), diphenhydramine (50 mg), and ranitidine (50 mg). After three cycles, she achieved complete remission of the liver metastasis, and the adrenal tumors reduced in size. Nine courses of combination chemotherapy were administered following this regimen without any progression . However, chemotherapy could not be continued due to severe bone marrow suppression. Thus, the primary adrenal lesion was surgically resected. The adrenal glands along the left kidney were also removed . Histological findings revealed viable tumor cells with pleomorphic nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm with no tumor infiltration of the kidney . The Ki-67 labeling index decreased to 4% after TJ-M therapy . At the last follow-up, she had been alive for 20 years since her initial diagnosis and treatment with oral mitotane (500 mg/day).