A 48-year-old man attended our center with a hepatic space-occupying lesion detected 3 d previously.
The patient was found to have a hepatic space-occupying lesion detected by regular abdominal color Doppler ultrasound, with abdominal distension as the only manifestation.
The patient had a history of viral hepatitis B for at least 30 years and had never received antiviral therapy.
No specific personal and family history.
No obvious abnormal physical signs.
Initial laboratory examinations: The patient’s alfa-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 5789.0 ng/mL. Blood analysis, blood biochemical parameters, prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times, d-dimers, arterial blood gas, and electrocardiogram were all normal.
At 93 d after the initial operation: AFP had reduced to 3119.0 ng/mL, and the indocyanine green 15-minute clearance rate was 4.0%.
At 2 mo after the initial operation: AFP was 9.2 ng/mL.
Pre-operative examination: Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scanning of the upper abdomen revealed a large mass in the right lobe of the liver, centered on the right posterior lobe, with the larger section measuring about 14 cm × 10 cm × 14 cm. The right hepatic vein mostly ran along the edge of the lesion, and the right hepatic vein and right portal vein were affected by pressure . The total liver volume was 3103.959 cm³, and the left hemi-liver volume was 662.376 cm³.
At 53 d after the initial operation: Repeat enhanced CT scanning of the upper abdomen showed no significant changes in the patient’s left or right liver , with a total liver volume of 3002.174 cm³ and a left liver volume of 846.648 cm³. CT angiography indicated that the tumor was mainly supplied with blood via the middle hepatic artery, with a smaller contribution from the left hepatic artery.
At 93 d after the initial operation: Repeat enhanced CT scan of the upper abdomen revealed a large soft tissue mass in the right lobe of the liver, with dot-like or sheet-like high-density shadows, slightly smaller than previously. Other imaging findings were similar to previously . The total liver volume was 2526.944 cm³ and the left liver volume was 780.415 cm³.
At 2 mo after the initial operation: Enhanced CT of the upper abdomen revealed a small amount of fluid in the operation area and no obvious abnormalities .
At 98 d after the first stage of surgery: Postoperative pathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated HCC with extensive necrosis, microvascular invasion grade M0, and the surrounding liver tissue with chronic hepatitis, G2S3.