A 52-year-old male patient was admitted to our department with complaints of a moderate intermittent headache and dizziness for more than 1 mo.
The patient’s symptoms started from more than 1 mo with a moderate intermitted headache and dizziness, and his health status deteriorated during the last 7 d. There was no obvious nausea, vomiting, blurred vision or disturbance of consciousness.
The patient had a normal and healthy condition in the past; no past history of chronic heart, liver, kidney, lung diseases or infectious diseases; and no past history of head trauma or surgery.
The patient had a past history of smoking and alcohol consumption for more than 30 years, had already quit smoking for 5 years and had quit drinking for 1 year. There was no special family history.
During the neurological examination, we found that the patient had mild abducent paralysis on his left eyeball with limited eye movement. No abnormities were found in other physical exams.
No abnormities were found in the laboratory examinations.
A plain computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed a homogeneous low-density and round shape-occupying lesion in his left cavernous sinus. No hemorrhage, calcification or bone destructive lesions were noted on CT . The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the head revealed a 3.4 × 3.0 cm sized, well-defined mass with an irregularly round shape located in the left cavernous sinus and simultaneously involving the sellar region and right cavernous sinus. The tumor was homogeneously hypointense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and heterogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) with septal or stripe-like iso-hypointensity in the central area and significant hyperintensity in the paracentral area . A gadolinium injection-enhanced MRI scan of the head also revealed a well-defined and heterogeneous well-enhanced tumor with an irregular round shape that was mainly located in the left cavernous sinus and involved the sellar area and right cavernous sinus. In addition, the tumor was not or slightly enhanced in the central part but was significantly enhanced in the remaining part . No abnormities were found in plain chest and abdominal CT scans.