A 66-year-old Caucasian male with history of coronary artery disease (CAD) complicated by unstable angina status post three-vessel stenting, insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes, and essential hypertension presented to the emergency department with palpitations, presyncope, and intermittent chest pain for 4 days. Blood pressure was 108/85 mmHg, respiratory rate was 20/min, and physical examination was unremarkable except for tachycardia. Blood count and metabolic profile were both unremarkable. High-sensitivity troponin peaked at 156. Electrocardiogram revealed monomorphic VT with normal axis and early transition of QRS complexes in lead V2 ( and ). Ventricular tachycardia was initially aborted with intravenous amiodarone bolus followed by lidocaine infusion plus as-needed intravenous metoprolol. However, the patient experienced three episodes of sustained VT on the first 24 h of admission, qualifying a diagnosis of VT storm.
Suspected aetiologies included ischaemic VT, scar-mediated VT, and idiopathic left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) VT originating from the basal septum given the QRS morphology on the ECG. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55% and an interventricular septal diameter (IVSd) of 14 mm, which was unchanged from prior TTEs. Peak LVOT gradient was measured at 25 mmHg ( and ). A coronary angiogram revealed patent stents and non-obstructive CAD. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed IVSd measuring up to 18 mm in the mid-basal septum with mid-myocardial LGE within the hypertrophic segment corresponding to likely fibrosis ( and ; see ). No LGE was observed in the territories of prior coronary intervention. Prior literature correlates LGE with VT foci. The QRS morphology also suggested septal origin. Given the diagnostic clarity achieved with imaging, an electrophysiology mapping study was bypassed.
Considering the significant burden of recurrent VT despite antiarrhythmic drug therapy, RFA was recommended prior to Implantable Cardiac Defibrilator (ICD) placement. All ECG and imaging data thus far suggested that fibrosis within the hypertrophic septum should be the target of ablation. However, because the stripe of LGE was so central, it was believed that traditional RFA would have a low chance of completely ablating the segment. Several strategies were considered including simultaneous epicardial–endocardial ablation, bipolar ablation from the left and right ventricles, and surgical myectomy. Review of existing literature did not support one approach as superior. During the original echocardiogram, the 25 mmHg LVOT gradient was misinterpreted as aortic stenosis and no gradient under Valsalva was measured. Given the 18 mm IVSd, it was suspected that the true gradient was significantly higher. Coronary angiogram showed favourable anatomy for successful septal branch ablation . Therefore, TCEA was chosen to ablate the focus of VT while also potentially ameliorating the patient’s LVOT obstruction.
Dual arterial access was established for simultaneous left ventricle and aortic pressure measurement. Resting post-premature ventricular contraction (PVC) gradient across the LVOT was 45 mmHg. A balloon was advanced into the first septal perforator branch . With the balloon inflated, 1.5 mL of ethanol was injected into the first septal branch. Post-PVC gradient was reduced to 17 mmHg after ablation. A new right bundle branch abnormality was seen post ablation . Repeat TTE revealed LVOT gradient of 15 mmHg, akinesis of the basal septum, and LVEF 55%. An ICD was then implanted, and the patient was discharged on oral metoprolol alone. At 4 months post-TCEA, the patient was noted to have five runs of VT aborted with antitachycardia pacing and amiodarone was initiated. At 1 year post-procedure, the patient had only one episode of VT in the preceding 6 months. He takes 100 mg of amiodarone daily, and there are no plans for further ablation.