Three-month-old female infant, admitted for social reasons. Fourth daughter of
non-consanguineous parents; mother with cognitive deficit. Born of 36-week pregnancy
complicated by gestational diabetes in the third trimester. Caesarean delivery due
to dystocia. Apgar Index=8/9; birth weight of 2,650 g (Percentile3-15),
length of 45.5 cm (Percentile3), head circumference of 33.2 cm
(Percentile15). Admitted in the first five weeks of life to the
neonatal intermediate care unit due to respiratory failure, asymptomatic
hypoglycemia, feeding difficulty and by social reason. Second admission to hospital
at two months old, lasting 48 hours, for acute bronchiolitis caused by respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV). Adequate weight-bearing growth and psychomotor
development.
The infant was taken to the pediatric emergency room for a clinical picture of 48
hours of fever (maximum axillary temperature 38.5°C), prostration and groaning, in
the context of varicella, with the first skin lesions identified for about ten days.
Upon examination at the emergency room, the infant had fever, was groaning, normal
fontanel, blood pressure of 94/54 mmHg, heart rate at 150 bpm, good perfusion,
eupneic. Numerous skin lesions in crust throughout the body, with signs of secondary
bacterial infection on the scalp. Remaining examinations showed no alterations.
Laboratorial results were :
hemoglobin 76 g/L, leukocytes 45,7×109/L (neutrophils 51%), platelets
588×109/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 18.8 mg/dL, glycemia, serum
transaminases and blood gas analysis were normal, two negative blood cultures,
urinalysis without abnormal findings, sterile urine culture, normal chest
radiography.
The patient was admitted with diagnostic hypothesis of sepsis, probably secondary to
impetiginized varicella. Intravenous antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone (100
mg/kg/day) and topical (fusidic acid) was initiated.
On the third day of hospitalization, a swelling was identified in the left 7th rib,
at the nipple line, with hard consistency and poorly defined limits, apparently
painful to palpation and no other local signs of inflammation.
On the following day, laboratorial tests were repeated : hemoglobin 79 g/L, leukocytes 13.4×109/L
(neutrophils 15%), CRP 4.8 mg/dL, sedimentation rate of 80 mm/1st hour. Chest
radiography did not show changes in costal arches. Ultrasound of soft tissues showed volumetric increase of the
costochondral joint with free intra-articular fluid and irregularity of the costal
arch’s anterior end. Three-phase 99mTc-HMDP bone scintigraphy showed focal hyperemia in the left anterior mid-arch
of the left costal arch and, in late images, high uptake of the radiopharmaceutical
in topography corresponding to the focus of hyperemia identified in blood diffusion
phase and area of hypo fixation of the radiopharmaceutical upon respective
costochondral joint topography, aspects compatible with inflammatory/infectious
pathology. The distribution of the radiopharmaceutical was normal in the rest of the
skeleton.
During hospitalization, the infant was always hemodynamically stable, with apirexia
from the third day and progressive improvement of general condition and cutaneous
lesions. Ten-day therapy with ceftriaxone was completed, at which time the infant
was submitted to laboratory reassessment : hemoglobin 86 g/L, leucocytes 14.8×109/L (neutrophils
19%), CRP 0.3 mg/dL and sedimentation rate at 35 mm/1st hour. Oral
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (70 mg/kg/day) was initiated, completing six weeks of
antibiotic therapy, presenting at the time of resolution of the palpable swelling
sedimentation rate at 10 mm/1st hour, CRP lower than 0.1 mg/dL and control ecography showing
irregularity of the costal arch’s anterior extremity, although sclerotic borders of
apparently continuous form and aspects suggestive of consolidation were seen .
Follow-up was maintained with appointments in Pediatrics, and immunity was then
tested with determination of immunoglobulins, resulting normal. There were no
intercurrences in the following year after hospital admission.