A 48-year-old Sri Lankan male suffered multiple wasp stings (around 70 stings) and was immediately admitted to the local hospital due to syncope. He was hypotensive (90/40 mmHg) on admission and was treated for anaphylactic shock with intramuscular (IM) adrenaline, intravenous (IV) hydrocortisone and IV fluids. Over the next 30 min his oxygen saturation dropped with evidence of bronchospasms. He was intubated and ventilated due to increasing difficulty in breathing and reduced level of consciousness. During the next 6 h he became critically unwell needing escalating doses of IV Noradrenaline (0.5 µg/kg/min) and developed anuric acute kidney injury (AKI). Due to lack of intensive care facilities at the local centre, he was transferred to the medical intensive care unit (ICU), National Hospital of Sri Lanka, for further management. The patient did not have other co-morbidities apart from well controlled hypertension. He was known to have allergies to multiple food items and drugs, but had never had a wasp sting before.
Upon admission to the ICU, the patient was volume resuscitated with IV crystalloids and vasopressor support was continued. He was treated with IV antibiotics and steroids in view of anaphylaxis. Over the next 3 days, the patient progressed to acute fulminant hepatic failure, stage III AKI, rhabdomyolysis, coagulopathy, haemolysis and thrombocytopenia (without fragmented red cells in the blood picture). The vasopressor requirement gradually increased to achieve a mean arterial pressure of 65 mmHg and by the 3rd day he was on IV noradrenaline 1 µg/kg/min and IV vasopressin 0.02 U/min. Septic screening was negative. He developed blisters at the site of the stings with surrounding skin necrosis . The progression of biochemical parameters over the 1st 3 days is given in Table .
He was initiated on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT—CVVHDF—continuous veno-venous haemodiafiltration) from the 3rd day due to progressive multi-organ failure, and continued till the 8th day. Despite initiating CRRT, his organ functions deteriorated with worsening lactic acidosis. Haemoadsorption therapy using extra-corporeal whole blood adsorber was used in series with CRRT from 4th to 7th days, with the intention of removing wasp toxins, myoglobin, bilirubin and cytokines (large molecular compounds). CRRT dose was escalated from 25 ml/kg/h to 35 ml/kg/h due to worsening metabolic acidosis. Fluctuation of his acid base status during the hospital stay is given in Fig. . The vasopressor requirement diminished gradually and was tailed off by the 5th day. Urine production gradually increased from the 4th day. The fluctuation of biochemical and haematological parameters during the hospital stay is given in Figs. , , , and the timeline of events in Fig. .
From the 7th day of admission, blood-cultures were persistently positive for Candida which was treated with IV fluconazole (echinocandins were not available in the low-resource setting, the patient was managed). The patient’s clinical parameters started to deteriorate from day 12, with increasing vasopressor requirement. The patient passed away on the 16th day due to overwhelming fungal sepsis despite increasing organ support.