A 25-year-old female patient with a past medical history of mitral stenosis for fifteen years and a treatment-resistant hypertension with nicardipine, without family history or psychosocial history. During her pregnancy, she presented severe high blood pressure without proteinuria then she was referred to our department from a gynecologist. The clinical examination revealed a blood pressure at 190/95 mmHg in upper limb and 100/60 mmHg in lower limb, left parasternal holosystolic murmur, with posterior irradiation, weak pulse in both lower limbs. The ECG showed a coronary sinus rhythm with a Heart Rate of 75 beats per minute, with left atrial hypertrophy .
The transthoracic echocardiography (TTE); showed an undilated left ventricle, hypertrophied (posterior wall at 13 mm), of good overall systolic and segmental function left ventricle fraction at 57%, sub-mitral membrane, with a single sub-papillary muscle, an attachment defect of the mitral valves responsible for a minimal leakage and a mitral stenosis under the tight valve (the mean gradient at 12 mmHg). Contrasting with the mitral surface, which was at 2 cm 2 by planimetry 2.2 cm2 by pressure half time (PHT). Left-right shunt between the aorta and the right ventricular, outflow responsible for a maximum gradient at 164 mmHg and Vmax at 6.42 m/s suggesting a small perimembranous ventricular septal defect or aorto right ventricular fistula. Tricuspid aortic valve; left atrium dilated free of echo, Dilated coronary sinus, two non-motile rounded hyper-echogenic formations in the right atrium, measuring 21/16 mm. The second 10/16 mm suggest embryonic residue with a dilated coronary sinus. (B). Undilated right ventricle with, good systolic function, No sign of pulmonary hypertension. The suprasternal view showed the presence of coarctation of the aorta with V max at 4.43 m/s with a mean gradient at 79 mmHg and an extended speed reduction during diastole (A), without a patent ductus arteriosus.
Trans-esophageal echocardiography (TOE) showed presence of a sub-mitral membrane, and a single papillary muscle, with attachment defect of the mitral valves responsible for a tight sub-valve mitral stenosis (mitral surface at 2 cm2 by planimetry and 2.2 cm2 by PHT, Gmoy at 12 mmHg) and minimal leakage. It showed also the presence of a left-right shunt between the aorta and the right ventricular flushing chamber responsible for a max Gradient at 164 mmHg and Vmax at 6.42 m/s: aorto RV suggested a small perimembranous ventricular septal defect .
A complementary thoracic CT angiography showed an aspect of narrowed aortic arch with a diameter of 6 mm, measured 9 mm bellow the origin of the left subclavian artery (B), and the left superior vena cava (LSVC) was also found (A).
The patient is actually on anti-hypertensive therapy (perindopril/indapamide/amlodipine) with persistence of borderline blood pressure and referred to cardiovascular surgery.