MH is a 2-year and 4-month-old male patient who presents to our hospital with progressive right 3–5th toe enlargement and change in shape. The enlargement was present in the 4th toe since birth and then later involved the other toe with a progressive increment in size, which makes it difficult to wear shoes. He was able to walk independently without waking aids. Neither the left foot nor the upper extremity was involved. No family history of a similar illness or no other known familial illness. He is right-handed. He is from a low socio-economic family and lives in the countryside. No previous known medical illness and no surgical intervention. No skin allergy, no self or family history of asthma or smoking exposure. No other pertinent history. The family visited health facilities at the age of 1 year but they were told it will improve by itself. Currently referred to our hospital for better management arrived at regular OPD walking on foot.
Conscious with stable vital signs and pertinent fining was on the lower extremity, which showed significant enlargements of the 3–5th toes prominently in the middle and distal phalanx with the biggest toe being the 4th toe . A left foot radiograph was done and showed thickening and hypertrophying of the three distal toes . He was diagnosed to have macrodactyly left 3–5th toes. There were no difficulties in reaching the diagnosis and no other alternative diagnosis was considered. Preoperatively: The patient was assessed for any underlying medical condition preoperatively by a pediatrician and anesthesiologist and there were no findings. He was categorized as fit for surgery. He was prepared for surgery and informed that written consent for the operation was taken from his mother. The patient was managed per the schedule. Intraoperative: After positioning supine., under general anesthesia; the right foot was cleaned and draped. The metatarsophalangeal joint of the 4–5th toe and the distal interphalangeal joint of the 3rd toe disarticulation and amputation was done . The wound was closed layer by layer. There was no accident intraoperatively and the patient’s vital sign was stable. The operation was done in a tertiary hospital setting by an orthopedic surgeon. Postoperative: The patient was transferred to the pediatric ward after the surgery, kept NPO, and put on maintenance fluid for 12 h. He continued paracetamol 125 mg suppository and Ceftriaxone 250 mg IV for 48 h and the hospital course was smooth. During discharge, the patient was advised to wear shoes when the wound completely heals. The parents were adherent to the advice provided during discharge. He was discharged after 5 days of hospital stay and he had subsequent follow-ups in the orthopedic clinic every three months for the last year and patient was comfortable enough to wear shoes. Parents were happy about the management as their child is able to wear shoes and they were curious about the genetic transmissibility but after they were advised they were happy and reassured.