A 75-year-old female presented with a 4-week history of right-sided scalp dysaesthesia and formication and a 2 week history of ipsilateral ptosis. On examination, visual acuity was 20/25 bilaterally with normal intraocular pressures. The ophthalmic examination did not reveal any evidence of uveitis. There was a palpable smooth painless mass in the right superior and inferior orbit, with associated right-sided proptosis of 4 mm and globe dystopia of 2 mm. There was almost complete right ptosis and no levator function. Extraocular motility was full, and optic nerve function was normal.
Investigations revealed an unremarkable inflammatory and vasculitic screen (including C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, anti-nuclear antibody, proteinase 3, and myeloperoxidase antibodies). Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) was normal at 52, and serum IgG4 was within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbits was performed and confirmed a right supraorbital mass, the epicentre of which was located within the lacrimal gland with extension into the superior and lateral aspects of the orbit . The mass showed homogenous enhancement and restricted diffusion suggestive of either a lymphoproliferative or inflammatory process. The frontal nerve was enlarged and enhancing.
An orbital biopsy via a superior lid crease approach was performed, which demonstrated non-caseating granulomatous inflammation with no acid-fast bacilli or fungal elements seen on staining. Areas of granulomatous inflammation contained tight collections of epithelioid histiocytes, without evidence of vasculitis. PCR testing for tuberculosis of the biopsy specimen was also negative. A computed tomography chest, abdomen, and pelvis scan showed no systemic disease.
A diagnosis of IGOI was thus made. An intralesional triamcinolone injection was given, delivered via a 25-gauge needle to the superior orbit, and the patient was additionally commenced on oral prednisolone 50 mg daily for 2 weeks followed by a taper, reducing the dose by 5 mg every fortnight until ceased to reduce the risk of recurrence. At subsequent review 8 weeks later, the right upper lid ptosis and palpable mass in the superior orbit remained. A repeat intralesional triamcinolone injection was given, and the patient was instructed to increase prednisolone to 25 mg daily with a plan to wean by 5 mg every fortnight.
Following cessation of steroid treatment, there was residual ptosis and superior orbital mass. Repeat MRI demonstrates a size reduction of the orbital mass. A right ptosis repair and repeat orbital biopsy were performed, which again showed non-caseating granulomatous inflammation most consistent with IGOI. At 14-month follow-up, a repeat ACE level was normal and there was no evidence of systemic sarcoidosis. Her orbital disease also remained stable. The patient will continue to undergo long-term follow-up to monitor development of sarcoidosis.