A 68-year-old man was admitted for approximately 10 h after consumption of a pipeline dredging agent and 200 mL liquor.
The patient consumed 200 mL liquor at home at approximately 13:00 on April 22, 2021. At approximately 16:00, his family found him unresponsive with blackened lips, blood spots in the corners of the mouth, and blood stains on the ground beside him, along with an empty bottle of ‘pipeline dredging agent’ (50 g). He was admitted to a local emergency department 1 h later, where he was diagnosed with acute pipeline dredging agent poisoning and acute alcohol poisoning. Accordingly, he was administered naloxone and lansoprazole as symptomatic supportive treatment to reverse the effects of alcohol overdose and protect gastric mucosal, respectively. Later, the patient gradually gained consciousness and agreed to have ingested the pipeline dredging agent orally. Given the sequence of events, we speculate that it was suicidal poisoning. As the patient was suspected to have sustained severe corrosive damage to the digestive tract, he was transferred to our department at 23:15 on 22 April 2021.
The patient had a history of coronary heart disease for 8 years and denied any history of hypertension, diabetes, and other diseases.
No specific genetic diseases were reported by the family.
The patient’s vital signs were as follows: Temperature, 36.3°C; heart rate, 97 beats/min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; blood pressure, 118/67 mmHg; and oxygen saturation, 98%. The patient, an elderly man, was moderately nourished and was lying in bed in an active position. He was conscious and cooperative during the examination. His range of mouth opening (approximately 2.5 cm) was slightly limited. Black burn marks were scattered on both sides of the face, particularly in the nasolabial sulcus. Mucous membranes, such as those on the lips and tongue, were black with obvious ulceration and bleeding . The neck was soft, and no venous engorgement was observed. The patient’s thyroid gland was not palpable, and there was no thrill or bruit. The trachea was centred, and chest and respiratory movements were symmetrical. Cardiopulmonary physical examination yielded negative results, and the abdominal wall was soft with no tenderness. The liver, as well as the spleen, was not palpable under the ribs. Physiological reflection was observed, and no pathological reflection of Babinski's sign was induced.
The results of laboratory tests conducted at our department were as follows: WBC 6.47 × 109/L; neutrophil ratio (NEU%), 91.10%; alanine transaminase, 20 U/L (reference value 21–72 U/L); aspartate transaminase, 70 U/L (reference value 17–59 U/L); creatinine, 57 µmol/L; serum myoglobin, 72.20 ng/mL (reference value 0–70 ng/mL); high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I, 6.61 ng/L (reference value < 17.5 ng/L); N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide, 162.40 pg/mL; and lactic acid (Lac), 4.40 mmol/L.
Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed coronary artery calcification, thickened oesophageal wall, and a dilated lumen. No significant changes were observed on ECG.