A 52-year-old man underwent a left nephrectomy in another hospital for left RCC in 2004 (pathological diagnosis unknown). He developed left lung metastases in 2010, and started treatment with interferon-α. Right renal metastasis also appeared in 2010 , so he was referred to our hospital and underwent a right partial nephrectomy. Later, he also underwent a left partial pneumonectomy . The histopathological finding of each excised tissue showed clear cell RCC. In April 2015, he began sunitinib treatment for multiple lung metastases (International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium risk group was favorable), but a lumbar spine metastasis was found in February 2016 . His medication was switched from sunitinib to axitinib in November 2016. In October 2017, he began taking nivolumab because of the progression of lung metastases and appearance of left hilar lymph node disease . In January 2018, he received a transarterial embolization for his left hilar lymph node, because of progressive disease. Both the hilar lymph node and lung disease showed durable responses.
Three days after his 11th nivolumab administration, he began displaying abnormal behavior, such as disagreeable speech and sudden anger. Eleven days later, he also developed a short-term memory loss and calculation disorder and was hospitalized on the same day. Brain MRI showed multiple lesions, with high signals in T2-weighted images in his cerebral white matter . Their open-ring signs suggested demyelination rather than metastatic tumors . Demyelination caused by nivolumab was considered to be likely, although we need to rule out infectious diseases, collagen diseases, and MS. His cerebrospinal fluid showed normal glucose, protein, and white blood cell count, presence of oligoclonal bands; normal levels of myelin basic protein, immunoglobulin G, and immunoglobulin A for toxoplasma, and negative JC viral DNA. No malignant cells were found in the cerebrospinal fluid. Most autoantibodies, including anti-aquaporin 4 antibody, were negative except anti-nuclear antibody. On the basis of the above examinations, we diagnosed CNS demyelination caused by nivolumab, which was classified as a grade 2 adverse effect in accordance with the CTCAE version 5.0.
Nivolumab was ceased and intravenous mPSL (1 g/day) was administered for 3 days from the day of his hospital admission. However, as his neurological symptoms did not greatly improve, we began intravenous mPSL (1 g/day) again for 3 days from the eighth day of hospitalization. He then began to show improvement of abnormal behavior as well as imaging findings. Neurological symptoms, such as disagreeable speech and sudden anger, subsided completely. He was discharged on the 23rd hospital day and fully recovered a short-term memory loss and calculation disorder 3 months after the onset. No steroid was administered other than intravenous mPSL for a total of 6 days. After 6 months, his brain MRI showed further improvement of multiple lesions in the cerebral white matter . Nivolumab has been discontinued and neither neurologic symptoms nor progression of RCC have been observed for 26 months without any treatment.