A 72-year-old female was admitted for haemolytic anaemia, congestive heart failure (New York Heart Association Classes III–IV), and chronic kidney disease. The patient’s medical history was notable for long-standing rheumatic heart disease, arterial hypertension, and permanent atrial fibrillation. Bileaflet mechanical mitral valve replacement (LIKS-28), tricuspid valve, and left atrium (LA) plasty were accomplished in 2008. Ten years later, due to a worsening mitral PVL, a thorough clinical and echocardiographic evaluation was performed and the suspicion of infective endocarditis was ruled out by negative blood culture tests. Redo surgery was performed and the leakage was closed by direct pledget-supported sutures, preserving the mechanical valve. On admission, bilateral basal crepitations, elevated jugular venous pulse, and mild lower limb oedema were found. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with an average heart rate of 86 b.p.m. and diffuse ST-segment abnormalities. Chest X-ray revealed signs of widened cardiothoracic ratio, interstitial oedema, and pulmonary venous blood diversion. The patient was on diuretics, aldosterone inhibitors, betablockers, anticoagulants (warfarin), angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and amiodarone. She received occasional blood transfusions. Laboratory test results showed an increase of brain natriuretic peptide (452 pg/mL; normal values <125 pg/mL), serum lactate dehydrogenase (896 units/L; normal values: 140–280 units/L), and reticulocyte count (4.6%; normal values: 0.5–2.5%) and decreased levels of haptoglobin (30 mg/dL; normal values: 50–220 mg/dL) and haemoglobin (10 g/dL; normal values for women: 12.0–15.5 g/dL). Two-dimensional (2D) transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) colour Doppler showed severe biatrial dilation, significantly enlarged right ventricle with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 17 mm, estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 75 mmHg, and dilated left ventricle (LV) with an ejection fraction of 60%. Three-dimensional (3D) transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) colour Doppler showed no prosthetic dysfunction, a huge crescent-shaped posteriorly located (6–7 o’clock) mitral PVL with severe regurgitation (PISA 1.2 cm, vena contracta 0.9 cm, regurgitant volume 90 mL, EROA 1.2 cm2). By cropping of regurgitant jet volume on 3D colour Doppler TOE image the size of the leak was measured to be 22 mm × 10 mm in diameter. Coronary angiography showed a stenosis of 40% on the first obtuse marginal branch of the left circumflex artery.
After heart team discussion and due to prohibitive surgical risk, it was decided to address her recurrent mitral PVL using a catheter-based technique. The patient was consented after the local ethics committee and the local regulatory agency have approved the use of the device. The procedure was carried out in a hybrid operating room under general anaesthesia, continuous real-time 2D/3D TOE colour flow Doppler, and fluoroscopic guidance with the presence of both interventional and surgical teams. Left anterolateral thoracotomy was performed and the LV apex was visualized. Pledgeted purse-string sutures were then placed at the apex and an access needle was introduced to puncture the apex. Once in the LV cavity, a 0.035″ standard guidewire was introduced via the needle and the needle was exchanged for a short 7 Fr sheath.
Fusion of real-time 3D TOE and cardiac fluoroscopy imaging was obtained using EchoNavigator-system. The location of the PVL was marked to aid the pathway of the guidewire crossing the PVL. Through the short 7 Fr sheath at LV apex, a 0.035″–180 cm highly hydrophilic Glidewire® (GR3508, Terumo) was used to get across the leakage into the LA (Video 1) with the help of a 6 Fr multipurpose C guiding catheter. The guiding catheter was advanced into the LA and the hydrophilic wire replaced with a 0.035″–260 cm Amplatz extra-stiff wire . Over the extra-stiff wire placed in the LA, a 12 Fr–28 cm in length Sentrant introducer sheath with hydrophilic coating (Medtronic) was advanced crossing the leakage: through the sheath an 18 mm × 10 mm rectangular waist paravalvular leak device (PLD, Occlutech, Helsingborg, Sweden) was advanced into the LA ( and ). The self-expanding, flexible, double-disc device made from nitinol-braided wires (LA disc, 28.5 mm; LV disc, 26.5 mm) was deployed under fusion imaging modalities guidance. A correct device alignment to the defect with significant decrease of the regurgitant jet was achieved without impingement on the prosthetic discs ( and Video 2). A pull-and-push manoeuver was done to check the PLD stability and the device was finally released. Transillumination rendering 3D TOE (TrueVue, Philips Medical Systems) images nicely showed the final position and orientation of the device ( and Video 3). The access site was closed surgically at the completion of the procedure. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home on the fifth postoperative day without complications. TTE confirmed stable position of the device with trivial residual leak.
At 2-month follow-up the patient had a significant clinical improvement with no need for further blood transfusions. TTE confirmed the abolition of residual leak, normal function of the mechanical mitral prosthesis, and an estimated pulmonary artery pressure of 45 mmHg.