All procedures performed in the present study was approved by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Research Committee.
A 35-year-old male presented with low vision in right eye for two months that was painless and gradual in onset. He had a history of being treated with two intravitreal injections of bevacizumab for subfoveal choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM) in the left eye one year back. The best corrected visual acuity was 6/36 in the right eye and 6/60 in the left eye. Anterior segment examination and intraocular pressure were within normal limits in both eyes. Fundus examination revealed a spider web-like network of blackish–brown colored radially oriented interconnected streaks that emanated from the peripapillary region in both eyes. These streaks were seen to reach up to the pre-equatorial region of the inferior and temporal quadrants of both eyes on UWF imaging [Figure 1] (Optos, Optos plc, Dunfermline, UK). Further, a subfoveal CNVM with subretinal bleed was seen in the right eye, while a disciform scar was noticed in the macular region of the left eye. Extramacular retinal hemorrhages were visualized in temporal immediate periphery of both eyes [Figure 1]. The patient was clinically diagnosed to have AS in both eyes, with active CNVM in the right eye and macular scar in the left eye.
UWF fluorescein angiography of the right eye revealed an actively leaking subfoveal CNVM with hypofluorescence corresponding to hemorrhages, while the left macula showed only staining [Figure 2]. The AS were visualized as curvilinear lines with alternating areas of hypo and hyperfluorescence in both eyes. Additionally, the temporal AS of the right eye that passed underneath the CNVM had minimal leakage in its peripheral, most extensions corresponding to the area of fresh retinal hemorrhages [Figure 2]. SSOCT imaging (Topcon DRI OCT Triton, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) of the AS in this area showed multiple elevations corresponding to the AS along with breaks in the RPE-Bruch's membrane complex [Figure 3]. While the left eye had no subretinal fluid, SSOCT angiography of the right eye revealed a type 2 CNVM in the macular region, while no such membrane was seen in the area corresponding to peripheral retinal hemorrhages [Figure 4].
The patient was worked up for systemic associations of AS, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum, Paget's disease and anemia were ruled out.[ The patient, however, gave the history of long-term over-the-counter steroid abuse in the past with the intention of weight gain and increase in muscle mass. He had consumed varying doses of oral methylprednisolone ranging from 10 to 40 mg daily for a period of three to five years up to the current presentation. He also had a history of long-term use of anabolic steroids. The patient was counseled against further self-medication and was offered intravitreal anti-VEGF injection in the right eye. The patient however did not follow-up for the treatment despite adequate counseling.