A 53-year-old Asian woman visited our emergency department complaining of progressive headache and vomiting for 2 days. There was no traumatic event related to her symptoms. She had no previous medical history, and all laboratory tests were within the normal range. Her vital signs were normal. Initial neurologic examination showed alert consciousness and no abnormal neurologic signs. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a right-sided acute-type SDH with a focal, round-shaped, high-density mass in the right parietal convexity . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a heterogeneously enhanced, round-shaped, 2.6 × 1.5 cm sized, extraaxial mass along with diffuse SDH in the right fronto-temporo-parietal area, as well as mild midline shifting . She was admitted to the neurosurgical department, then medically managed for increased intracranial pressure with intravenous mannitol and steroid administration. On the next day, her neurologic status progressively deteriorated, resulting in stupor. Follow-up CT scan revealed an uncal herniation with no increase in SDH volume.
She underwent an emergency operation. After craniotomy and dura opening, an acute type SDH was noted. The mass lesion identified on MRI was not clearly visible because of thick blood clots. When the dura mater was reflected, the bloody mass lesion inside the dura mater was clearly detached from the cortex without any dissection. This mass measured 1.5 cm in maximal diameter and was covered with fresh blood clots. There was only a small tearing on a cortical vein adhered to the tumor base arachnoid capsule. After gross total removal of the mass and its surrounding dura extending 2 cm from the tumor margin (Simpson grade 0), bleeding was controlled. There was no other active bleeding point, such as a cortical artery or bridging vein in the subdural space. Brain swelling was not excessive, the bone flap was closed, and the wound was approximated layer by layer. In the postoperative course, her neurologic deterioration reverted to normal right after surgery. She was discharged on the 10th postoperative day without any focal neurologic deficit. The follow-up brain MRI taken 6 months later showed no tumor or hemorrhage relapse .
Histopathologic examination of the tumor revealed hypercellular components with numerous vascular structures. Mitosis was rare (≤ 2 per ten high-power fields), and the proliferation index (Ki-67) was low, with 3%. No microscopic invasion of the dura or brain tissue was identified, as well as no evidence of malignancy, necrosis, atypia, or anaplasia . These characteristics supported the histopathologic diagnosis of angiomatous meningioma, a benign meningioma of WHO grade I.