A 24-year-old man with a history of aortic surgery was admitted to our hospital with malaise. Three months before admission to our center, he had undergone AVR in another hospital for congenital aortic stenosis. Ten days after discharge, dyspnea urged him to seek medical contact, and he was re-hospitalized in the same hospital. Upon arrival, severe hypotension, massive pericardial effusion, and cardiac tamponade were detected, and he was transferred to the operating room emergently. The diagnosis of aortic rupture due to extensive endocarditis was made in that hospital. Based on the surgical report, the surgeon observed multiple vegetation attached to the aortic valve and ascending aorta. The bioprosthesis was excised, and he underwent a redo biological valved conduit aortic root replacement (Bentall surgery), and antibiotics therapy was started. The exact antimicrobial initiation dosage and timeline were unclear as we gathered these data based on limited discharge notes. Still, the positive results of the vegetation culture changed the treatment regimen to intravenous (IV) anti-fungal. Based on the discharge sheet, he was treated with the proper intravenous (IV) anti-fungal regimen for one month. Then, he was discharged with oral antifungal treatment. Despite two months of therapy with Voriconazole, he continued to suffer extreme fatigue and was referred to our team for further assessment. Figure shows the brief timeline of the disease presentation. After admission to our hospital, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) followed by transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed. Diffuse multiple masses in the entire tubular graft with significant flow restriction in ascending aorta were detected. A disrupted aortic tubular graft and a large pseudoaneurysm (1.5 cm × 1.8 cm) in its posterior part were seen. Extending this bulky vegetation from the pseudoaneurysm neck to the peri-aortic space created an extraordinary echocardiographic view . Following TEE, the patient underwent a contrast-enhanced Computed tomography (CT) scan, which demonstrated polypoid soft tissue densities in the previous surgery site of the ascending aorta in favor of infective vegetations along with contrast media out pouching adjacent to the aortic root indicating pseudoaneurysm .
Upon admission, three blood culture sets were obtained from separate venipuncture sites before initiating anti-fungal therapy. The intravenous (IV) anti-fungal treatment with Voriconazole and Caspofungin) was restarted. Despite treatment, his symptoms began to worsen during the following three days after admission. He had a fever, malaise, vomiting, and right abdominal, back, and flank pain with right upper quadrant and right costovertebral angle tenderness. The results of three blood cultures were negative. An abdominal ultrasound showed a narrow free fluid rim in Morison’s pouch and splenorenal recess. There was no evidence of appendicitis or hydronephrosis. Increased bladder thickness with debris was seen in favor of pyelonephritis. A spiral abdominopelvic CT scan with oral and intravenous contrast was recommended for evaluating mesenteric ischemia and septic embolism as differential diagnoses. Still, a Doppler ultrasound was performed instead due to acute kidney injury (rise in creatinine level from 1.09 to 1.7 mg/dl). In this situation, a high-risk 2nd redo homograft aortic root replacement surgery was planned. He and his family were informed about the risks and finally underwent surgery. The excised biologic valve was sent for culture, and Aspergillus flavus was isolated in the specimen. After surgery, he had acute renal failure and septicemia and received antibiotic and antifungal treatment. Acute tubular necrosis occurred, and he, unfortunately, expired in the intensive care unit (ICU) two days later despite hemodialysis.