A 58-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of right lower extremity weakness and numbness. He also reported progressive gait disturbance of 1-month duration. He denied bowel and bladder incontinence and sexual dysfunction. There was no medical or family history of neurologic dysfunction or bony tumour. Neurologic examination showed profound weakness, decreased pinprick sensation, and hyperreflexia of his right lower extremity. Right ankle clonus and positive Babinski response were also elicited.
Plain radiographs of the lower thoracic and lumbar spine regions showed an exophytic bony mass on the right side of T12-L1 . CT scans showed a multilobulated and sharply outlined osseous mass that was continuous with the cortical lines and the medulla of the head of the right 12th rib at the costovertebral junction (i.e. originating from the right 12th rib). The mass obliterated the neural foramen of T12-L1 and extended into the spinal canal, causing spinal cord compression. Pressure erosions, which suggested slow growth of the mass, were noted in the adjacent bony structures such as the vertebral pedicle and body. The pedicle of T12 showed bony fusion with the osseous mass, which was also suggestive of a slow-growing tumour. The cartilage cap, the pathognomonic sign of osteochondroma, was not well delineated on CT scans . Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed an extradural osseous mass arising from the right 12th rib with spinal cord compression and compressive myelopathy. A cartilage cap showing intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images was observed on both the posterior and the intraspinal aspects of the osseous mass . The differential diagnosis of this lesion included chondrosarcoma. The presence of a thin cartilage cap (thickness < 1 cm) and the absence of any adjacent soft tissue mass formation strongly implied a benign tumour. However, the possibility of malignancy, such as chondrosarcoma, could not be definitively excluded because of the age of the patient and the presence of adjacent bone erosion. Therefore, en bloc surgery was selected as the treatment of choice.
A posterior midline skin incision was used to expose the posterior elements of T11 to L1, and the exposure was extended to both ribs. After dissection, the large outer fragment of the multilobulated osseous mass was completely exposed . This fragment was resected en bloc, resulting in a residual osseous mass originating from the right 12th rib and extending through the T12-L1 foramen to the spinal canal and the adjacent bony structures (i.e. vertebral pedicle and body). For safe excision of the residual fragment, the following procedures were performed sequentially using an air drill, allowing complete excision of the residual tumour mass: hemilaminectomy of the right T12 vertebra, total facetectomy of the right T12-L1 joint, partial removal of the proximal portion of the right 12th rib, total pediculectomy and partial vertebrectomy on the right side of T12 after exposure of the tumour in the canal, transection of the L1 transverse process, and resection of the tumour below the transverse process. On the left side, transpedicular screws and a rod were inserted into the T11-L1 vertebrae under C-arm fluoroscopic guidance. Laminar decortications were performed on the left side of the T11, T12, and L1 vertebrae. After autologous iliac bone harvest was performed on the right side, autograft bone chips were placed on the decorticated laminae.
Pathologic examination of the tissues of the lesion showed proliferated hyaline cartilage but atypical changes indicative of myxoid degeneration were not observed. The histologic examination results indicated the strong possibility of osteochondroma, but low-grade chondrosarcoma could not be excluded because of the age of the patient and the erosion of adjacent bones . After surgery, lower extremity weakness and numbness improved. One week after surgery, MR images and CT scans showed an enlarged spinal cord and complete resection of the osseous mass. At the 3-month follow-up examination, the weakness had completely resolved and the patient could ambulate independently. An additional CT scan obtained at 1 year after surgery did not show any evidence of tumour recurrence .