A 40-year-old man visited a clinic complaining of chest tightness. Computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed a 15 × 6 × 5 cm tumor in the anterior mediastinal region and he was transferred to our hospital due to the risk of airway compression by the large tumor. Oxygen saturation level upon admission was 97% room air and other vital signs were also stable. His past medical history was insignificant, though there was a smoking history of a pack per day for 20 years. In laboratory results, there were no abnormal levels, other than elevation of the serum tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) at 619 ng/ml and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) at 69.4 ng/ml. Chest X-ray results showed a widened mediastinum. Systemic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CE-CT) scanning revealed a 15 × 9 × 5 cm anterior mediastinal tumor with obstruction of the trachea and esophagus , while invasion to the main trunk of a pulmonary artery was also suspected . Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) indicated a high accumulation of the main tumor (SUV-max 13.2), with no lymph node or distal metastasis.
Initially, the patient was diagnosed with a germ cell tumor based on a high serum AFP level and imaging findings, and a CT-guided biopsy from the main tumor was performed for diagnosis confirmation. However, a histopathological examination revealed a small cell carcinoma, for a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio in the tumor cells , as well as immunohistochemically positive findings for chromogranin A , and synaptophysin . Based on the imaging findings, the tumor was diagnosed as clinical stage IIIB thymic small cell carcinoma (cT4N0M0, TNM staging 8th edition). Following discussion by the cancer board at our hospital, induction chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery was planned.
Two cycles of chemotherapy (cisplatin 80 mg/m2, etoposide 100 mg/m2 for 3 days) and radiation therapy (45 Gy/30 fractions) were administered, with partial response shown, as the tumor size was reduced to 8 × 7 × 3 cm in accord with drastically decreased serum AFP at 220 ng/ml and NSE levels at 10.8 ng/ml. A radical resection was planned for 7 weeks after radiation therapy. However, pre-operation CE-CT and PET–CT findings revealed bilateral pleural dissemination and para-phrenic lymph node metastasis . Because of the discrepancy in response to chemotherapy between the main lesion and site of metastasis, the possibility of a mixture with another histological type such as germ cell tumor led to a surgical re-biopsy from both the main tumor and metastatic lesions on the left pleura . Histological examinations of the resected specimen from the both sites showed the same findings, as a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio in the tumor cells , as well as immunohistochemically positive findings for chromogranin A , synaptophysin , and AFP . In contrast, neither NUT , CD 30 nor CD 117 was positive, indicating that the tumor was not NUT carcinoma or germ cell carcinoma but rather AFP-positive thymic small cell carcinoma. Following the second surgical biopsy, the patient underwent two more cycles of chemotherapy with the same regimen. Unfortunately, cancer progression could not be controlled, resulting in death 8 months after the first medical examination.