A 21-year-old girl with no significant past medical history, presented with a 6-month history of progressive right arm pain, followed by a 3-month history of right-sided otalgia, jaw and shoulder pain, dysphagia, dyspnea and cervical mass. On physical examination, she had a large painless mass arising from the right-sided parapharyngeal space causing severe airway narrowing with no cervical lymphadenopathy. Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large contrast-enhanced mass arising from the right-sided parapharyngeal space causing airway obstruction and pressure effect on the major cervical vessels. Fine needle aspiration through cervical region was performed and reported as benign spindle cell tumor. The patient then underwent near total tumor resection. In less than 8 months after the completion of multi-modality therapy, she developed multiple lung metastases.
The FNA biopsy was performed using 25 gauge 1-inch needle attached to a disposable 20-mm syringe. Approximately one half of the smears were immediately wet-fixed with 95% ethyl alcohol for Papanicolaou and immunostaining. The remaining smears were air-dried and stained by Wright method.
Immunohistochemical stains were performed on prefixed unstained cytologic smears and paraffin embedded tissue by the standard avidin-biotin technique after a microwave citrate buffer antigen retrieval step. The panel of antibodies used included cytokeratin ([CK]AE1/AE3, 1:80; Dako Co.), S-100 protein (1:400; Dako), muscle specific actin (1:10; BioGenix, San Ramon, CA), desmin (1:100; Dako), actin (1:100; Dako), Vimentin (1:100;Dako), and epithelial membrane antigen ([EMA], 1:300; Dako).
Small and large clusters of cells with bland chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, oval to spindle-shaped cytoplasm with branching tumor tissue fragments, and vessel stalks were identified . Acinar structures scattered in between spindle cells with scant mucin background were also seen. Ovoid cells had short and long cytoplasmic processes; and finely granular chromatin and small or indistinct nuclei. Smears also showed a mixture of dispersed or clusters of spindle cells with bland chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and epitheloid cells which occasionally formed acinar structures. Immunocytochemical staining for CK showed focal positivity in the spindle cell component and also positivity in epitheloid cells for EMA . Immunocytochemical staining for S100, actin and desmin were negative.
Grossly a fragile, spongy, nonencapsulated 4 × 3 × 2 cm mass was resected. Microscopic examination showed submucosal hypercellular tumoral tissue . On higher magnification the tumor had a biphasic pattern. Epithelial cells formed glands that contained eosinophilic secretions. The stromal component was composed of oval to spindle cell arranged as sheets and fascicles. Immunohistochemical study revealed cytokeratin and EMA positively in the epithelial component and diffuse vimetin positivity in spindle cells.