Our patient was an 11-year-old Japanese boy (height 141 cm, weight 36.5 kg) with acute lymphocytic leukemia. Since the onset of acute lymphocytic leukemia, he had received early-stage intensive chemotherapy, remission therapy, and maintenance therapy; however, because he had a positive test result for minor breakpoint cluster region, umbilical cord blood transplantation was performed. After transplantation, he complained of abdominal and articular pain; his abdominal pain was accompanied by frequent diarrhea. These were considered to represent gastrointestinal symptoms of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD); thus, opioid therapy was initiated. For long-term opioid therapy, few opioid medications provide information on the label regarding the safety and effectiveness of the drug in pediatric patients . We selected fentanyl because chemotherapy for leukemia predisposes the patient to renal dysfunction, and it is considered effective because it has high selectivity for mu 1 receptors in the treatment of mucosal pain [, ]. However, the dose of fentanyl was gradually increased for pain management, resulting in dose as high as 2300 μg/day, which required intervention from the palliative care team.
At the time of intervention, the patient was isolated in a sterilized room after transplantation. In addition to the major complaint of pain in the lower left abdomen, upon palpation, the patient complained of pressure pain throughout the abdomen; he also complained of joint pain in the legs when the abdominal pain intensified. Computed tomography revealed changes showing pancreatitis and mild intestinal edema, which was considered to be a sign of GVHD .
Given the intense acute pain caused by GVHD, the fentanyl dose was increased again to 2700 μg/day; however, the frequency of the rescue dose for pain (equivalent to 1-h dose of continuous infusion) did not decrease below 15 times per day, and continuously increasing the dose did not reduce the frequency of the rescue dose. After the opioid was switched to 90 mg/day of oxycodone injections, the patient continued to experience pain, and there was no change in the frequency of oxycodone rescue doses .
The patient’s general condition improved, and he did not require isolation. Despite attending school in the hospital, there was no improvement in his complaints of pain, and just before entering junior high school, he expressed anxiety about friends, learning, and whether he would be understood by the teachers. Considering the possibility of opioid overdose in response to complaints of nausea and fatigue, dose reduction was planned; however, he exhibited strong resistance. Furthermore, he became irritable, and his mental instability became evident as exhibited by violent outbursts.
Computed tomography revealed no findings that caused physical pain. His pain was considered to have alleviated; thus, health professionals involved in his care (that is, pediatrician, pediatric psychiatrist, palliative care team, ward nurse, child medical care support provider, and childcare worker) examined the possibility of mental anxiety resulting in the lowering of pain threshold and the possibility of chemical coping.
Expecting to use less opioid, we initiated duloxetine, which exerts an antidepressive effect and adjuvant analgesic effect, at a dose of 10 mg/day. Furthermore, to address the patient’s mental anxiety, a meeting was held with the teacher whose class the patient was expected to attend. The new school staff cooperated so that the patient could attend the same class as his good friends. To address the patient’s drug use, upon suspicion that the sudden increase in blood concentration due to administration of rescue doses of opioid injections could have caused chemical coping, switching to oral opioids was attempted; however, on a pain scale (scale of 0 to 5), the patient assessed that the rescue doses of intravenous oxycodone had reduced his pain from 5 to 1.2 points, whereas the oral oxycodone immediate-release preparation had only reduced pain from 5 to 4.5 points; thus, switching to oral drugs was not successful.
We believed that the rescue dose of intravenous oxycodone resulted in a sudden increase in blood concentration, and the administration of the rescue dose could have been a coping behavior. An explanation regarding opioids in general and the possibility that the number of rescues will not decrease for purposes other than analgesia (such as antianxiety) was shared with the patient and his family members who provided the consent; thereafter, we decided to lower the concentration of intravenous oxycodone without informing the patient of the timing of dose reduction.
After approximately 1 month, the intravenous oxycodone dose was gradually reduced to 3 mg/day; however, there was no major change in the frequency of rescue doses. After the patient was informed that the intravenous oxycodone had been reduced to a dose that had been ineffective as an analgesic, we prescribed 200 mg of acetaminophen and 100 mg of ibuprofen to be taken as needed. Subsequently, oxycodone infusion was discontinued, and the patient did not complain of pain. Thereafter, he expressed no desire for opioid use and was discharged. Currently, he is being treated on an outpatient basis and is opioid-free.