A 70-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with generalized weakness and abnormal laboratory results. Four months before her presentation, she underwent TAVI with SYMETIS SA valve (Boston Scientific Company, Ecublens, Switzerland) due to symptomatic severe aortic stenosis. Her other medical history stands for hyperlipidaemia, essential hypertension, iron-deficiency anaemia, severe kyphoscoliosis, and chronic obstructive lung disease. She was deferred from surgery by the institution’s heart team due to her comorbidities.
A few weeks following the TAVI procedure, she was diagnosed with vocal-cord paralysis due to disturbing hoarseness. The paralysis was suspected to be caused by laryngeal nerve compression or infiltration. Shortly after the diagnosis, she presented to the hospital due to general weakness, weight loss, and severe anaemia. On admission, her vital signs were normal. Blood pressure was 130/57 mmHg, heart rate was 88 b.p.m., air room saturation was 98%, and her temperature was measured 37.1°C. On physical examination, heart sounds were normal, without murmurs, breathing sound decreased diffusely, jugular venous pressure was normal, and the thyroid gland was not enlarged. Her laboratory work revealed elevated inflammatory markers with white blood count of 16.12K/μL (normal range 4.8–10) with neutrophilia (83%), C-reactive protein was 14.3 mg/dL (normal 0.0–0.5), haemoglobin was 8.5 g/dL (normal range 12–16), creatinine was elevated 1.3 mg/dL (normal 0.5–1.2), and liver enzymes were elevated five times the upper normal limit.
Abdominal sonography was normal. Chest X-ray demonstrated deviation of the trachea and raised the suspicion for mediastinal widening. Therefore, she underwent a CTA which revealed a 28 mm pseudoaneurysm of the ascending aorta and a small pericardial effusion . Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal functioning prosthetic valve with no vegetations, although a pseudoaneurysm flap was noticed in the aortic root . Two days after her admission, she developed acute dyspnoea with cardiogenic shock. Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated a marked thickening of the aortomitral continuity, which was suspected to be an abscess . She was transferred immediately to the operating room for emergent cardiac surgery. After a mid-sternotomy, a tamponade was diagnosed with active bleeding and blood clots in the pericardial cavity. The 2 × 2 cm2 pseudoaneurysm was identified protruding from the ascending aorta, with a dissection of the ascending aorta anterior wall from the sinotubular junction. She underwent surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) with Perimount 21 mm tissue valve and ascending aorta replacement with interposition graft. A 2 cm vegetation was found on the TAVI prosthetic valve and sent with the involved portion of the aorta for pathology and cultures .
A culture from the vegetation and the ascending aorta pseudoaneurysm revealed an Actinomyces neuii infection. Pathology from the ascending aorta was positive for fragments of the aortic wall showing massive transmural necrosis with neutrophilic infiltrates. Repeated blood cultures were negative. Intravenous ampicillin treatment was administrated for 12 weeks, followed by 12 months of oral amoxicillin treatment. During the immediate post-surgical period, the patient was haemodynamically stable and both kidney and liver functions gradually improved. However, due to her obstructive lung disease, weaning from ventilation was prolonged and eventually she underwent tracheostomy and was discharged to a rehabilitation centre. She underwent a successful weaning from mechanical ventilation and was discharged home following 25 days of respiratory rehabilitation. Her follow-up echocardiography 6 months following her discharge showed normal functioning prosthetic valve and good left ventricle function.