A 37-year-old man who was 172 cm tall and weighed 62 kg, BMI 21.5 kg/m2 underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic right upper posterior segmentectomy with systematic mediastinal lymphadenectomy. His had no history or ongoing (chronic) health problems like hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cerebrovascular disease and atrial fibrillation (AF). He had a smoking history of 15 pack-years. A an 8-mm ground-glass opacity (GGO) lesion had been identifed at the posterior segment (S2) of the right upper lobe during incidental computed tomography (CT) screening 6 months prior to his presentation to us. The ground-glass nodules grew slightly during the follow-up period . Results of all preoperative laboratory tests including electrocardiogram, blood examination and urine examination were within normal limits. Platelet function tests were not performed.
During the surgery, the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position with the arms extended to 90°. General anesthesia was induced, and intubation was achieved via a double-lumen endobronchial tube. The first stage of this operation was opening the oblique fissure. Incomplete oblique fissure was divided via endoscopic stapler (Ethicon ECHELON FLEX™ ENDOPATH EC60A stapler, blue staples). We exposed the central vein, V2a and V2b but not found and isolated the draining veins of posterior segment (S2) specifically . Next the pulmonary artery was dissected distal to expose the posterior segmental artery(A ). The A2 was then dissected, and ligated by hemolok. Then the posterior segmental bronchus was dissected from right superior lobar bronchus. Before closing the bronchus with the stapler, we ventilated the right lung to confirm the target bronchus. The B2 was then transected by stapler (Ethicon ECHELON FLEX™ ENDOPATH EC60A stapler, green staples). Then, the S2 parenchyma was divided followed the inflation-deflation method by stapler (Ethicon ECHELON FLEX™ ENDOPATH EC60A stapler, blue staples) . The specimen was retrieved in a self-made bag using a surgical glove. Examination of a frozen section confirmed lung adenocarcinoma; Systematic mediastinal lymphadenectomy was then performed. The total operation time was 1 h, 15 min. The postoperation pathological diagnosis of the tumor was adenocarcinoma (pT1aN0M0-stage IA1 as defined by the 8th Edition of TNM classification (TNM8) of lung cancer) .
After surgery the patient returned to the intensive care unit. 20 h later, Mild consciousness disturbance [Glasgow Coma Scale, 11 points (E3V2M6)], conjugate deviation of the eyes to the left, right hemiplegia (Manual Muscle Testing upper limbs score of 1 of 5 and lower limbs score of 0 of 5), mixed aphasia were observed, with National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score of 23. His vital signs were a blood pressure of 118/67 mmHg, a heart rate of 107 /min, a respiration rate of 17 /min and SpO2 of 100% with nasal catheter oxygen at 4 L/min. Emergent head enhanced CT showed left middle cerebral artery M1 occlusion . The left middle cerebral artery were not visualized in intracranial vascular computed tomography angiography (CTA). Considered the risk of hemorrhage in the postoperative period, we decided to perform IAMT. Trombus at the M1 branch of the middle cerebral artery were removed successfully, and successful recanalization was achieved . A pathological examination after the operation showed the thrombus were mainly composed of laminar fibrin, abundant neutrophils, and erythrocytes .
The patient was observed in the intensive care unit for 3 days. The patient’s Mental status and motor function gradually improved. During this time, We performed some physiological examinations including Holter electrocardiography, transthoracic echocardiography, venous ultrasonography, carotid artery ultrasonography, and also checked blood tests such as coagulation function, and autoantibodies of collagen diseases. However, no anatomic abnormality or thrombophilia factors were observed. Three days after thrombus removal, his NIHSS score was 0. Follow up brain CT were done, and there was no significant findings. The patient was discharged without major complications after rehabilitation training for 7 days.