On September 2016, a 77-year-old male was diagnosed with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction due to acute chest pain and underwent coronary angiography. Coronary angiography showed diffuse plaques in the left main coronary artery (LM), left anterior descending artery (LAD), left circumflex artery (LCX), and right coronary artery (RCA). There was an ectasia in LM with up to 40% limited terminal stenosis, and with stenosis up to 90% in the mid-distal segment of LAD, Therefore, the patient was implanted with a stent in the middle of the LAD , and then regularly took drugs for secondary prevention against coronary heart disease.
On October 2021, he had a recurrence of acute myocardial infarction. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the coronary artery and aorta showed that the wall of the proximal LM was significantly thickened, with a giant aneurysm. RCA, LAD, and LCX showed extensive calcification, plaque, and stenosis . In addition, there were multiple plaque ulcers and perforating ulcers in the aorta with local mural thrombus, multiple aneurysms, and plaque ulcers in both iliac arteries, and right superficial femoral artery occlusion . Blood tests revealed erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 70 mm/h. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) level was 43 g/L, with an IgG4 level of 18.6 g/L. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative. He was diagnosed with IgG4-related disease with multiple arterial involvements. However, due to significantly elevated inflammatory indicators of IgG4-RD at that time, he received conservative treatment with medications instead of intervention, Dual antiplatelet therapy, prednisone 40 mg/d and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 0.5 g bid were prescribed, and his chest pain was relieved. 1 month later, reexamination showed normal C-reactive protein (CRP) level and ESR level. Then prednisone was gradually reduced to 17.5 mg/d.
However, on January 2022, he suffered recurred chest pain again, and the symptoms were attributed to the recurrence of IgG4-related disease, thus prednisone was increased to 40 mg/d, but aspirin was discontinued because of multiple positive fecal occult blood test results and anemia. On February 3th, he had a sudden squeezing chest pain and was admitted to the emergency department. Electrocardiogram showed obvious ST-segment elevation in AVR and V2-V3 leads with ST-segment depression in II, III and AVF leads. Coronary angiography showed significant aneurysm-like ectasia of LM with a diameter of 28 mm , 90% stenosis and segmental ectasia in RCA, LAD and 100% occlusion in LCX and LAD. CRP level was increased to 59.5 mg/L. He recieved aspirin 100 mg qd, clopidogrel 75 mg qd, atorvastatin 20 mg qn, prednisone 40 mg qd, plus CTX 100 mg qod and relieved. The cardiac surgeon assessed that he had an indication for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), but his severe coronary and peripheral vascular lesions led to extremely high surgical risk and mortality, his family requested conservative medical treatment; on February 7, 2022, he suffered another sudden acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction involving the extensive anterior wall with atrial fibrillation and ventricular tachycardia, his family refused invasive operation, then he was treated with beta-blockers, lidocaine, epinephrine, and eventually died after being rescued ineffectively. Figure shows the timeline of the patient’s entire course.