A 46-year-old Asian woman was referred to our department for a renal angiogram following 8 months of uncontrolled hypertension despite receiving medications. Initially, the patient presented with severe headache and fatigue. She had no history of smoking or drinking alcohol, was not diabetic, and had no history of diabetes in her family. She had no history of atherosclerosis. Apart from high blood pressure, the result of her physical examination was unremarkable; her general, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. Neurological examination on admission showed that the patient was alert, attentive, and oriented. Her speech was clear and fluent with good repetition, comprehension, and naming. She recalled 3/3 objects at 5 min. All of her cranial nerves were intact. Motor examination revealed no pronator drift of outstretched arms. Her muscle bulk and tone were normal. Her strength was full bilaterally. Her reflexes and sensory were both intact. Her coordination and gait were normal. Laboratory investigations revealed normal complete blood count, serum cholesterol, lipid profile, and renal function (serum creatinine 119 μmol/L). Her left kidney size was normal with measurement of 9.6 cm by 4.8 cm. Renal Doppler ultrasound confirmed renal artery stenosis with renal resistive index of 0.58. The percentage of renal artery stenosis in the two branches of the left renal artery was 70% and 75%, respectively , before the first balloon angioplasty; after the first balloon angioplasty, these percentages remained the same. After the second ballooning and stenting procedure, revascularization was achieved. The patient had been attending a hypertension clinic and receiving antihypertensive drugs for the past 8 months on a regular basis under close observation. Despite this treatment and care, her blood pressure remained high at 175/110 mmHg, which the attending doctor concluded to be uncontrolled blood pressure. Initial imaging indicated left renal artery stenosis, and the patient was referred to our department . Prior to the diagnosis of renal artery stenosis, the patient had been receiving amlodipine 10 mg twice daily, bisoprolol 10 mg twice daily, and indapamide 2.5 mg every morning.
The procedure was performed under the guidance of digital subtraction angiography (floor-mounted Artis zee; Siemens Medical Solutions, Munich, Germany) using the Seldinger technique. With the patient under local anesthesia, the right femoral artery was punctured by a 21-gauge vascular access needle with an angled tip 0.035-inch guidewire, then catheterized with a 5-French introducer sheath (Terumo Interventional Systems, Tokyo, Japan). The first aortogram was obtained using a pigtail catheter , then an 8-French guiding catheter (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA; Cordis, Hialeah, FL, USA) was used to obtain selective renal angiograms whereby the proximal main flow and the stenosis of both branches and their respective distal flow on the left renal side were revealed. The right renal artery was normal in appearance. The left renal artery angiogram then was used as a reference for further guided interventional procedures in which the individual length and diameter of stenosis were measured. The decision was reached to perform percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty, and the length and diameter of balloon needed were calibrated. With two balloons of 4 mm × 18 mm (Biotronik, Berlin, Germany), both were was dilated at the same time. Despite expert effort in dilatation, the stenosis was observed to persist . Stent placement was considered, and the procedure was continued. A preprocedure intravenous bolus of 5000 IU of heparin was administered. By using two 0.014-inch guidewires (V14; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA), the interventional radiologist guided the stent to cross the upper and lower branches, respectively, through the same vascular sheath . Two balloon expandable stents measuring 4 mm × 18 mm and 5 mm × 18 mm (Biotronik) were placed in parallel (kissing) and simultaneously inflated both branches. A good angiographic result was revealed with no need for further ballooning. Angiography contrast media (Omnipaque 350; GE Healthcare, Shanghai, China) were used. Volumes of 25 ml of contrast agent were injected at a flow rate of 5 ml/s. The final angiogram was obtained to confirm the position of the stent, the patency of the lumen, and distal blood flow. Finally, the femoral access site was closed with Perclose ProGlide (Abbott Vascular, Chicago, IL, USA). After the procedure, the patient was admitted in the ambulatory room for further observation. Her blood pressure was monitored and recorded, it showed a significant reduction of blood pressure to 128/87 mmHg. After 24 h of observation, the patient was discharged to home with aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day for 3 months). During 12 months of follow-up, the patient remained well with blood pressure of 126/87 mmHg. Renal ultrasound showed bilateral kidneys of normal size and shape with good cortical medullary differentiation. A bilateral renal Doppler study appeared normal.