A 67-year-old man was referred to our hospital after positive fecal blood test results. The patient was 164 cm tall and weighed approximately 51 kg. Further examination revealed advanced rectal cancer located below the peritoneal reflection and at the level of the dentate line that involved the prostate . According to the eighth edition of the TNM classification set by the Union for International Cancer Control, the initial diagnosis was clinical T4b (prostate) N2aM0, stage IIIC without lateral lymph node metastasis.
Neoadjuvant CRT consisting of 45 Gy in 25 fractions combined with tegafur, uracil, and folinic acid was administered. After neoadjuvant CRT, the tumor size decreased from 55 to 45 mm, but the prostate was still involved . Possible surgical procedures were discussed at a multidisciplinary conference. Partial prostatectomy was thought to be a suboptimal procedure for attaining negative tumor resection margins. The advantages and disadvantages of bladder-sparing prostatectomy with vesicourethral anastomosis were considered. For patients with lower rectal cancer who undergo neoadjuvant CRT, a diverting ileostomy is usually planned to avoid anastomotic leakage and two-stage stoma closure because of the impact of neoadjuvant CRT on anastomoses. However, there is little evidence supporting the feasibility of vesicourethral anastomoses after CRT. Because of the concern regarding refractory vesicourethral leakage in the dead space of the pelvic cavity after TPE, we abandoned vesicourethral anastomosis and pursued RA-TPE. Because our center for minimally invasive surgery had been performing robotic surgeries for more than 10 years, the institutional ethical review board decided that our proposal for RA-TPE successfully met the guidelines for safe introduction of highly complex medical techniques set by the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare. The expense for this novel surgery was not covered by the Japanese health insurance; therefore, it was covered by our institution.
Five robotic ports were placed, including one 12-mm port . Another 12-mm conventional laparoscopic port for an assistant operator was placed in the right upper quadrant because of the uncertainties regarding the adequacy of current measures to achieve effective hemostasis using robotic instruments. The patient was positioned in the modified Lloyd–Davies position and tilted in the Trendelenburg position by 17 to 20 degrees. The Da Vinci Xi® (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) surgical system cart was installed on the left side of the patient. First, the colorectal surgeons targeted the left external iliac artery with the robotic axis for mobilization of the left mesocolon. The inferior mesenteric artery was ligated for total mesorectal excision. After the pelvic phase, the axis changed toward the peritoneal reflection. Mobilization of the posterior mesorectum proceeded down to the pelvic floor. Subsequently, the urological surgeons began operating without repositioning the robot. The bilateral urinary tracts were taped and dissected toward the bladder. The Retzius space was dissected to reach the prostatic apex. The deep dorsal vein of the penis was divided and sealed with a robotic vessel sealer. Santorini’s venous plexus was tied using 3–0 V-Loc® (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Renal damage was minimized by transecting the ureters at the end of the procedure. The RA procedure was completed by amputation of the sigmoid colon using a surgical stapler, and the specimen was retrieved through perineal resection. For patients who have undergone neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy, prophylactic lymph node dissection of the pelvic wall is not routinely performed at our institution. An ileal conduit and ureteric anastomoses were created extracorporeally with a mini-laparotomy measuring 7 cm.