A 48-year-old Pakistani Punjabi female presented to the plastic surgery outpatient department (OPD) in March 2020, with a history of painful, progressive swelling of her right groin and medial aspect of the right thigh for 4 months. After detailed history, she had a positive history for deep venous thrombosis (DVT), for which she was on oral anticoagulant therapy. She had undergone Trendelenburg operation (saphenofemoral junction ligation) with stripping and multiple stab avulsions for varicose veins of the right lower limb a year ago. She developed slow growing swelling of her right groin; furthermore, she underwent multiple sessions of aspiration along with compression bandaging. Sclerotherapy was also attempted by her primary operating surgeon, three sessions of 2G tetracycline and one session of 60 mg of bleomycin. These treatment modalities temporarily alleviated the condition but ultimately failed. She is a known patient with diabetes and hypertension, controlled with the oral medication.
On examination, there was a large swelling in the right groin and medial aspect of the right thigh, approximately 65 cm × 25 cm. It was tense, cystic, and slightly tender on palpation. The overlying skin was warm and appeared to be red and shiny. A long transverse scar was also seen in the groin, along with multiple smaller scars over the whole lower limb, which was a sign of her previous surgery for varicose veins. The girth of the right thigh was 96 cm, measured at the time of initial presentation, and currently, in her last follow-up, it was 73 cm compared with the 65 cm girth of her other thigh. Her rest of the systemic examination was unremarkable .
Routine investigations were carried out. Her complete blood count (CBC) showed a raised white blood cell count of 22,000 with neutrophils dominating (82%). The rest of the parameters were within normal limits. Her glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels were raised at 8.2%, signifying poor control of glucose levels. Her liver function test was normal and hepatitis profile was negative. Needle aspiration was also carried out. The fluid was found to be straw colored and was sent for routine analysis and cytology.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was the mainstay for diagnosing her condition, which showed a large thin-walled hypoechoic lesion. The swelling was therefore diagnosed as a case of a refractory giant lymphocele and the patient was admitted and optimized for surgery. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine frog leg position for ease of surgical site access. Subdermal methylene blue dye injections were given at four points around the swelling in the region of the thigh and anterior abdominal wall. This procedure was performed to observe the absorption of the dye, which would help locate any lymphatic vessels draining into the cystic cavity.
A stab incision was made at the convexity of the swelling and 6 L of yellow straw-colored fluid was drained from it. A transverse incision was made over the swelling, utilizing the groin scar already present. The scar was excised and the cavity was explored. The methylene blue dye was not encountered in the cyst cavity during exploration. Excision of the pseudo bursa was performed . However, a small portion of the bursa wall overlying the femoral triangle was left in situ as there was a fear of damaging the femoral vessels due to the presence of dense adhesions. It was gently curetted to make it rough and for it to bleed to promote the formation of adhesions. A pedicled Gracilis muscle flap was raised and rotated and inserted transversely to obliterate the resultant cavity (defect), with the expectation of promoting lymphatic drainage . It was secured using Vicryl 2/0 sutures. Hemostasis was secured. The dead space was then further eliminated with the help of quilting sutures. Two drains were placed, and the overlying skin was stabilized with bolster sutures to prevent its separation due to lymphatic fluid collection . The drainage tubes were connected to a low vacuum suction, which was turned on for 20 minutes and then off for an equal amount of time. The cycle was repeated throughout the postoperative hospitalization period of the patient.
Drains were removed at 2 weeks and the patient was discharged on oral prophylactic antibiotics and analgesics. Skin holding bolsters were not removed for another 4 weeks. The patient returned for follow-up after 6 weeks and a small collection was noted, measuring 7 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm on the medial side of the thigh. It was aspirated and a pressure dressing was applied, which led to its resolution. On each of the follow-up visits that were scheduled every 3 months over a year, bilateral lower limb girth was measured. The measurement of the right thigh was almost the same as for the left thigh. Fortunately, the lymphocele had completely resolved and no further recurrence of the swelling was detected, and her follow-up is done up to 2-years postoperative. .