A 50-year-old woman visited another hospital for examination of forgetfulness. She had no relevant medical or family history related to her condition. A paraclinoid aneurysm was identified on magnetic resonance angiography. Therefore, she was referred to our department. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) demonstrated a left paraclinoid aneurysm with a maximum diameter of 6.1 mm [ and ]. She hoped to receive endovascular treatment for this aneurysm; therefore, we planned FRED deployment. This study was approved by relevant ethics committee and the patient provided informed consent for publication.
Under local anesthesia, a 6-Fr shuttle sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA), was inserted into the right femoral artery. Using a coaxial system consisting of 5-Fr Sofia select (Terumo Corporation, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA), Headway 27 (Terumo Corporation, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA), and ASAHI CHIKAI 18 (ASAHI INTECC CO., LTD. Aichi, Japan), the Sofia select was inserted into the petrous part of the internal carotid artery (ICA), and the Headway 27 was placed to the left middle cerebral artery (MCA). A 4.0 mm × 18 mm FRED was deployed from the orifice of the anterior choroidal artery to the cavernous portion of the ICA, fully covering the aneurysm neck .
After 5 min, the left ICA angiography showed slow flow and a contrast defect in the FRED . A 9-Fr OPTIMO (Tokai Medical Products, Inc. Aichi, Japan) was navigated to the left ICA cervical portion and Ozagrel sodium was injected under balloon inflation. Next, a 4.0 mm × 11 mm Scepter XC (Terumo Corporation, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA) was used to cross the lesion through the FRED, but it was impossible to do so because of some obstruction in the FRED [ and ]; . Neurodeo (Medico’s Hirata Inc., Osaka, Japan) was navigated to the left MCA through FRED and exchanged for CHIKAI 14 300. Subsequently, transform 4.0 mm × 7.0 mm (Stryker, Fremont, CA, USA) was guided and angioplasty was performed to improve the contrast defect . PROWLER SELECT (Cerenovus, Irvine, CA, USA) was exchanged and CERENOVUS ENTERPRISE 2 VRD (Cerenovus, Irvine, CA, USA) 4.0 mm × 16 mm was deployed to improve the defect. Although the defect persisted after the procedure, flow was dramatically improved. The patient had no neurological deficit. Follow-up DSA after 3 days demonstrated that the contrast defect had improved . Cone-beam CT showed some space between the FRED and ENTERPRISE 2 VRD . Three-dimensional rotational angiography (3DRA) also demonstrated a contrast defect in the same space . The patient was discharged after confirmation of no apparent infarction on magnetic resonance imaging. Subsequently, using the aneurysm model, as shown in the figure, we tested whether the FRED would show kinking in such situations.
A 4.5-mm FRED was deployed with intentional excessive pushing and this shape was verified. The results showed localized kinking of the FRED [-]. Cone-beam CT demonstrated a folding formation [-].