The case involved a 33-year-old man diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) who experienced repeated episodes of HF requiring hospitalization despite optimal guideline-based HF treatment. His medical history included refractory Crohn’s disease (he had been treated with ustekinumab, methotrexate, 5-aminosalicylic acid, and elemental diet since August 2017). His first episode of HF occurred 9 years ago. He was diagnosed with DCM and severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF, 24%), and treatment with beta-blockers, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors was initiated. The patient did not require readmission for HF for 6 years. However, he was re-hospitalized with worsening HF and LVEF (18%) 3 years ago because of poor medication adherence and excessive fluid intake.
After hospital discharge, he required unplanned hospitalization seven times over the next 2 years, because of worsening HF, despite evidence-based pharmacological therapy, cardiac resynchronization therapy, and usual self-care education (USCE). He was re-hospitalized in December 2019 with worsening HF symptoms only 30 days after his previous hospital discharge .
Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia with biventricular pacing. His vital signs included blood pressure of 85/53 mmHg, heart rate of 114 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. On physical examination, his jugular vein was distended at 45°. Mild lower extremity oedema was noted. Laboratory testing revealed that his haemoglobin and creatinine levels were 10.7 g/dL and 1.37 mg/dL, respectively. His B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was elevated at 987.8 pg/mL. Chest X-ray revealed a cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) of 57% with mild pulmonary congestion . Transthoracic echocardiography disclosed a severely dilated left ventricular (LV) chamber size with severe LV dysfunction and mitral regurgitation [left ventricular end-diastolic volume index (LVEDVI) of 182 mL/m2, LVEF of 18%] ( and Video 1).
During a previous hospitalization, he underwent right heart catheterization and cardiopulmonary exercise testing in a clinically compensated status after conventional HF treatment. Right heart catheterization revealed low cardiac output and compensated haemodynamic data; pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 15 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure of 22 mmHg, mean right atrial pressure of 4 mmHg, and a cardiac index of 2.10 L/min/m2. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing disclosed markedly reduced functional capacity (peak VO2 of 10.7 mL/min/kg and % predicted peak VO2 of 34.7%) and increased ventilatory response (VE-VCO2 slope of 35.2). The MECKI risk score, which is identified the risk of cardiovascular death or urgent cardiac transplantation within 2 years, was 45.10%.
He experienced rapid and repetitive exacerbation of HF symptoms early after discharge despite compensated haemodynamics and optimal guideline-based HF treatment.
In this case, poor adherence to self-care such as excessive fluid intake and excessive daily activities after hospital discharge was the main cause of recurrent hospitalization for HF. During all previous HF hospitalizations, USCE about lifestyle advice was provided by multidisciplinary HF team to prevent HF readmission. Despite repeated patient education to correct his diet and lifestyle, he could not change his lifestyle behaviour. He drank large amounts of juice, ate salty foods, and overworked after discharge despite USCE regarding lifestyle habits.
A detailed medical interview by the clinical psychologist revealed that the patient was ambivalent about HF self-care. In this case, he had a strong desire to consume more fluids and a strong desire to quit drinking to prevent HF hospitalization. He was perfectly aware that he should avoid excessive fluid intake and excessive daily activity, but his motives conflicted with behavioural modification.
Motivational interviewing emphasized the need for behavioural changes by the patient rather than advising why he should change his lifestyle . He received weekly counselling from a clinical psychologist (∼60 min in duration) and daily counselling from a doctor, nurse, and physical therapist (∼15 min in duration) during hospitalization. To create a specific plan for behavioural modification, multidisciplinary HF team discussed his negative behaviours that resulted in worsening HF. For example, when he walked up to the second floor, his heart rate increased with an excess response from 80/min to 108/min based on the daily rehabilitation record. The recommended changes included restricting stair climbing to three times a day, and taking a rest after stair climbing when pulse rate recovery was poor. We also stressed the importance of self-assessments of pulse rate to prevent HF exacerbation. Moreover, the multidisciplinary HF team explained the importance of fluid and salt restriction with a conscious awareness of collaborating and engaging with the patient.
After discharge, counsellors (doctor and nurse) trained in motivational interviewing met with the patient twice a month (approximately each 15 min per session). After 10 months, his self-care behaviour had gradually changed. He started checking his pulse and bought a smartwatch equipped with pulse monitoring. He paid attention to his daily fluid consumption and weighed himself regularly. Self-care scale scores, as evaluated by the Self-Care of HF Index v.6.2 (SCHFI v.6.2), were improved (self-care maintenance scale scores, 46.7–69.9; self-care confidence scale scores, 33.4–66.7). Cardiac size, mitral regurgitation, LV function, and functional capacity were also improved without deterioration of HF (CTR 46.6%; LVEDVI, 90 mL/m2; LVEF, 37%; peak VO2, 15.2 mL/min/kg; predicted peak VO2, 50.0%; and VE/VCO2 slope, 32.3) ( and Video 2). Furthermore, the MECKI risk score improved from 45.10% to 3.13%. Currently, the patient has no HF symptoms, and his BNP level has remained low despite tapering HF therapy . The patient was gradually tapered off pimobendan, whereas diuretic therapy (furosemide) was gradually reduced. This patient gave us a message about his perspective and experience .