A 36-year-old Asian male presented to our facility with a 4-month history of worsening headaches and complete right homonymous hemianopia. He had a medical background of the left occipital, intracranial cerebral hematoma 2 years before the current event, the etiology of which was never found. The ensuing computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed a left occipital lobe hematoma with an underlying left tentorial tumor, suggesting the presence of a cavernous angioma . The patient had a craniotomy in an attempt for gross total resection; however, the intraoperative findings indicated tumor invasion of the falx cerebri as well as the cerebral cortex resulting in a subtotal resection. An early postoperative MRI was not performed. Postoperative CT did not report significant findings. Yet according to the surgical report, no major bleeding was reported during and after surgery despite of the vascular nature of these tumors.
After maximal save resection (subtotal resection), the histopathological examination demonstrated the presence of spindle cells forming masses with branching ecstatic vasculature and focal collagenous regions, with up to 20 mitoses per ten high power fields. Further immunohistochemical studies showed strong immunoreactivity for CD31, CD99, and Fli-1 with a few scattered S100 positive cells but negative for CD34, EMA, desmin, muscle-specific actin, and Bcl-2; the latter findings were suggestive of meningeal sarcoma with angiosarcomatous features, ultimately assessed as a malignant endothelial cell sarcoma/AS [ and ].
Nevertheless, in view of the complex morphology, location and patterns of infiltration of this tumor, further efforts were made toward a broad differential diagnostic panel. We screened our patient with a next generation sequencing platform performed at Foundation Medicine (Cambridge, USA). Two diagnostic panels were performed (FoundationOne and Foundation heme assay), analyzing 236 genes, 47 introns from 19 genes rearrangements for solid tumors including non-small cell lung cancer, colorectal, breast, ovarian, and Melanoma, and 405 DNA genes, 31 introns from rearrangements, 265 RNA genes, gene fusion for hematologic tumors including leukemias, myelodysplastic syndrome, myeloproliferative neoplasm, acute myeloid leukemia, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia, respectively. Both of these tests were negative for identifying any genomic alterations with therapeutic implications. Gliosarcoma, a new variant of IDH-wildtype glioblastoma based on the WHO 2016 classification characterized by a biphasic tissue pattern with alternating areas displaying glial and mesenchymal differentiation was also considered. Further molecular analysis did not detect the presence of O6-methylguanine- DNA methyltransferase promoter methylation.
Still eager to elucidate the origin of this tumor, the patient was referred to the MD Anderson Cancer Center for a new pathology review. The reviewed immunohistochemistry proved positive for CD31, focally positive for factor VIII and S100 and negative for CD34, BCL2, EMA, actin, and desmin . The final conclusion from this second institution was a meningeal sarcoma, the WHO Grade III. Of note, a concurrent PET scan showed a solitary pulmonary nodule assessed to be an infectious process or a malignancy; due to its complex location, the nodule was not biopsied. Not showing clinical signs of extracranial disease, it was decided that the patient should stay on follow-up by a clinical oncologist. Following diagnosis, he received a 7-week course of adjuvant intensity-modulated radiation therapy (45 Gy in 15 fractions followed by a 14.4 Gy boost in eight fractions); however, the tumor progressed 8 months later as evidenced on a follow- up MRI. He was subsequently treated with linear accelerator- based stereotactic radiosurgery (Novalis Tx, 25 Gy in 5 fractions), followed by weekly paclitaxel (90 mg/m2) days 1, 8, and 15 in 4 weeks cycle. He completed seven cycles and tolerated well except for alopecia and mild peripheral neuropathy. He retained a Karnofsky Performance Status of 90% and continued working full time at his particular time. After completing eight cycles of paclitaxel, the patient started having worsening headaches and head pressure sensation that improved with the addition of dexamethasone; MRI studies showed a significant volume increase of the lesion with intratumoral hemorrhage within the limits of the left tentorium, further extending into the cerebellum; paclitaxel was then discontinued. A left occipital craniotomy was completed and pathology revealed a residual/recurrent malignant meningioma with reactive changes consistent with treatment effect. Patient was not eligible for inclusion to sarcoma specific trials due to the history of intracranial hemorrhage and lack of safety data in CNS involvement. The patient died following a massive cerebral hemorrhage. The previously reported lung nodule remained stable throughout follow-up; the patient died 21 months following diagnosis.