A 19-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital with moderate headache associated with nausea, vomiting, left facial hypoesthesia, and low visual acuity. These symptoms started 2 months before admission. On the neurological exam, Glasgow Coma Scale 15, bilateral papilledema, low visual acuity, left facial hypoesthesia, and absent vomiting reflex were present. Furthermore, after hospitalization, the patient evolved with dysphagia.
The magnetic resonance image (MRI) [-] showed a large heterogeneous expansive formation in sphenoid bone and clivus with neoplastic aspect. Signs of dissemination due to contiguity and invasion of skull base structures, especially cavernous sinus and internal carotid artery, determining also compression of the brainstem and optic chiasm.
In view of the atypical radiological aspect, we initially opted for an endoscopic transnasal biopsy in August 2017. The pathological study showed odontogenic epithelial islands composed of peripheral palisade columnar cells at basal layer, hyperchromatic. The cells show reverse polarization away from basement membrane (Vickers-Gorlin change). The edematous center mimics the stellate reticulum of the enamel organ. No dentin or enamel formation was found. Other patterns are also seen featuring acanthomatous with squamous metaplasia and variable keratinization of stellate reticulum-like cells, and plexiform with cords and sheets of anastomosing odontogenic epithelial cells. These characteristics defined ameloblastoma as diagnosis [-].
After the biopsy, we concluded that the maximal resection would be the best initial treatment. In September 2017, the patient underwent to a pure endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal approach to the skull with a total resection of the lesion. There was mild bleeding and the lesion was very heterogeneous with some areas highly calcified .
The initial endoscopic approach was chosen because it allows brainstem and optic nerves decompression, with less risk of damage to nervous and vascular structures, in addition to being a suitable surgical route for resection of the lesion in question when compared with other skull base approaches.
After surgery, the patient presented good evolution and the MRI control image demonstrated excellent local control of tumor [-]. No adjuvants therapies were needed. The patient’s follow-up continues after 2 years of surgery with improvement of symptoms and no evidence of lesion regrowth on the radiological exams.