A 13-year-old boy presented with bilateral and asymmetrical keratoconus relating to a 3-year history of blurred vision. The best-spectacle corrected visual acuity (BSCVA) of the right eye (RE) was 20/25 (+0.25–1.50 × 95°), the maximum keratometry (K
max) was 43.8 diopter (D), and the thinnest pachymetry was 573 μm. The BSCVA of the left eye (LE) was 20/400 (−3.0 to 3.0 × 160°), K
max was 59.8 D, and the thinnest pachymetry was 504 μm. The patient did not tolerate the test with gas-permeable contact lens.
The implantation of intracorneal ring segments (ICRS) was performed, after informed consent was obtained from the patient and his parents, on the LE in order to regularize the shape of the cornea and decreasing corneal aberrations. Femtosecond laser (Visumax® Zeiss) was used to create the intrastromal channel. Two Ferrara rings of 160° (AJL Ophthalmic S.A., Spain) were implanted at 400-μm corneal depth by using an incision at 65°.
One day after the implantation, the BSCVA was 20/200 and the K
max was 52.5 D. No other findings on the slit-lamp examination were reported .
Seventy-two hours after the procedure, the patient presented with hyperemia and ocular pain. A whitish infiltrate appeared in the inferior union of both rings. Anterior chamber reaction was mild but no hypopyon was present at that time. Corneal curettage samples were collected for stain and culture. Topical treatment with hourly fortified antibiotics was started (vancomycin 50 mg/mL and ceftazidime 50 mg/mL). On day 4, the infiltrate grew and a 5-mm hypopyon appeared. The patient was hospitalized to explant the ICRS and irrigate the ring channels with vancomycin and moxifloxacin. Intravenous vancomycin 350 mg every 8 h was started.
Cultures came back positive for methicillin-resistant S. aureus.
One day after the explantation, the hypopyon level was higher and an intense corneal melting was present . An 8.5-mm keratoplasty à chaud had to be performed to save the integrity of the globe. Ten days after the surgery the corneal graft was clear with no signs of infection. Tobramycin (3 mg/mL) and dexamethasone (1 mg/mL) eye drops (Tobradex; Alcon Cusí S.A., Barcelona, Spain) five times daily were started. The patient was allowed to return to his country of origin but presented 4 months later with a marked corneal edema and all the stitches were loose . One month later a new penetrating keratoplasty was performed and the patient now has a transparent graft .