A 79-year-old woman (height, 155.0 cm; weight, 50 kg) visited our hospital's pain clinic with a characteristic rash of HZ following the distribution of C5-T2 left dermatomes with severe pain scoring 10 on the numeric rating scale. Fourteen days after the onset of her initial symptoms, she complained of motor weakness without sensory defects in her left upper extremity.
Considering the patient’s severe pain, we decided to hospitalize her. Upon her first visit to our pain medicine clinic, she was alert, and her vital signs were stable except for her body temperature (37.2 °C). The patient was clinically diagnosed with an HZ infection. Medical treatment was initiated with intravenous acyclovir (5 mg/kg) for 9 d and analgesics (celecoxib, targin CR). In addition, neuraxial block for pain control, including cervical plexus block, axillary nerve block, and cervical epidural block with a long-acting local anesthetic (0.15% ropivacaine) injection, was performed during her hospitalization. Because of her current medication history (ustekinumab and methotrexate), we did not use glucocorticoids for injection. Symptoms of skin rash and pain were relieved over time.
However, 14 d after the initial symptoms, the patient complained of motor weakness without sensory defects in her left upper extremity. There was no history of recent trauma or surgery.
The patient had underlying diseases, including hypertension, psoriasis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Her prescription included amlodipine, ustekinumab, and methotrexate.
Personal and family histories were unremarkable.
The patient was examined neurologically to assess the motor dysfunction of the left upper extremity. She complained that she could not lift her upper extremity against gravity. (Shoulder abduction/ adduction G2+/G2+, elbow flexion/extension G3+/G3+).
Initial laboratory test results were within normal limits; complete blood cell count and blood chemistry tests, such as renal panel, hepatic panel, and coagulation tests, were performed. Electromyography (EMG) of the left arm suggested denervation potentials in the brachioradialis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, deltoid, extensor indicis, and C6 paraspinalis muscles .
MRI of the brachial plexus showed a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images and an isointense signal on T1-weighted images without definite enhancement in the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis muscles of the left shoulder, indicating the potential for neuropathy without any muscle injury .