A twelve-year-old female with a history of type I diabetes mellitus presented with recurrent, tender parotitis refractory to antibiotics, xerostomia, and keratoconjunctivitis sicca since the age of five. Her parotitis was more pronounced on the right side, with the inflammation resulting in mild otalgia. Her lab work was negative for SSA (Ro) and SSB (La) autoantibodies, but positive for salivary protein 1 IgA autoantibody and antinuclear antibody (ANA). She also tested positive for labial biopsy with a focus score greater than one, and her sialometry measured below the cut-off for hyposalivation (0.099 ml/min). Her clinical symptoms, serologic markers, positive lip biopsy, and sialometry measurements warranted a formal diagnosis of childhood Sjögren’s Disease (cSjD). She underwent salivary gland ultrasonography (SGUS), with scoring criteria as proposed by Hocevar et al. Her baseline SGUS score was 16, and imaging revealed multiple hypoechoic lesions in each parotid gland . Ophthalmologic exam showed normal tear break up time, small tear lake, blepharitis, and mild hyperopia. Schirmer’s test was attempted, but the patient could not tolerate the test. Pharmacologic treatment included 200 mg hydroxychloroquine daily, and she underwent bilateral parotid duct and gland sialendoscopy with 100 mg triamcinolone irrigation to each parotid gland under sedation. Upon visualization of the ductal system the inner lining appeared white, indicating a lack of vascularity. While patency was maintained without obvious obstruction, some diffuse narrowing was present .
In the months following sialendoscopy, her SGUS score decreased to 10 or 11 at all subsequent appointments, indicating significant improvement in glandular inflammation . The imaging revealed homogeneous findings, suggesting reduced inflammation. Six months after sialendoscopy, sialometry measurements still showed a flow rate below 0.1 mL/min. Eleven months post-sialendoscopy, the patient experienced recurrent swelling in the right parotid gland. As a precautionary measure, the hydroxychloroquine dose was increased to 300 mg, and methylprednisolone was prescribed as needed for symptom exacerbation. However, the patient reported not requiring systemic steroid treatment during that time. Twelve months after sialendoscopy, she reported no symptoms, clinical examination showed no parotid swelling, bilateral expression of clear saliva was observed, and the SGUS score remained at 11 .