A 50-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with recurrent abdominal pain following the second dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine.
The patient developed two days of diffuse abdominal pain, chills, and emesis without diarrhea or fever, eight days following her COVID-19 vaccination. The patient had tolerated the first COVID-19 vaccine dose six weeks beforehand with no side-effects. The patient had no changes to her bowel movements, no sick contacts, and no toxic ingestions including alcohol, raw fish, or undercooked meats. There were no symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection. The autoimmune review of systems was negative. The patient did not use herbal or over-the-counter supplements and is a lifelong non-smoker.
She presented to the emergency department following two days of symptoms and was diagnosed with dyspepsia and received a prescription of pantoprazole 40mg once daily by mouth. Her pain improved transiently, but she represented one week later with sudden onset of sharp, epigastric pain without nausea, diarrhea, fever, rigors, or rash.
The patient has a history of an ectopic kidney and hypertension treated with nifedipine. Her surgical history includes a remote appendectomy. In her childhood, she had an episode of jaundice with hepatitis that had not recurred. The patient had a one-year history of non-specific intermittent lower abdominal pain with a normal computed tomographic (CT) of the abdomen performed three weeks prior to presentation.
The patient denied any family history of inflammatory and autoimmune disorders.
On examination, the patient was afebrile with a blood pressure of 174/90, heart rate of 87 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation in room air of 97% with 18 breaths per minute. She had right-sided abdominal tenderness without rigidity, guarding or rebound tenderness with a negative murphy’s sign. The cardiorespiratory exam was normal. There were no features of joint swelling or rash.
Blood work revealed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) at 19 mg/L (normal < 4.8 mg/L), Alkaline phosphatase 150 U/L (normal 30-105 U/L) and gamma-glutamyl transferase at 45 U/L (normal < 43 U/L). The rest of the liver enzymes and bilirubin were normal: ALT 17 U/L (normal 5-45 U/L), AST 40 U/L (normal 10-40 U/L), Lipase 41 U/L (normal < 55 U/L), and total Bilirubin 7 umol/L (normal < 20 umol/L). A complete blood count was normal with an international normalized ratio of 0.9 (normal 0.9-1.2). Metabolic investigations showed a normal lactate dehydrogenase, thyroid-stimulating hormone 1.61 mU/L (normal 0.32-5.04 mU/L), albumin 49 g/L (normal 35-48 g/L), normal renal function and electrolytes. Infectious work-up with urine analysis, screening serology for human immunodeficiency virus, Hepatitis B and C, and Heliobacter pylori were negative. COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction nasopharyngeal swab was negative.
Initial imaging with an abdominal doppler ultrasound revealed a prominence of the vessels at the porta hepatis with possible hepatic artery wall thickening. A computed tomography (CT) image of the abdomen, obtained on the same day, revealed interval development of a thick rind of soft tissue thickening surrounding the hepatic artery with severely focal distal narrowing and beaded intrahepatic arterial branches. These findings were new from her normal CT scan three weeks prior and were radiographically consistent with hepatic artery vasculitis .