A 4-year-old boy complained of repeated left femoral fractures.
The patient had repeated left femoral fractures for four times (at 1 year and 3 mo, 1 year and 11 mo, 2 years and 10 mo, and 4 years and 3 mo old), and the difference in the length of his lower limbs gradually became apparent by the age of 2 years. While repeated femoral fractures were initially considered as bone metabolic disorders associated with ALGS, the serum phosphate levels had remained at the lower limit of the standard for age, and the level of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) was high as 117 pg/mL (reference range: 15-49 pg/mL). At the age of 4 years and 8 mo, radiographic findings revealed a “ground-glass” appearance in his left femur and tibia and “shepherd’s crook deformity” in his left thigh bone, which were characteristic features of fibrous dysplasia .
The patient was born at 40 wk and 6 d’ gestation; with a birth weight of 2726 g. Failure to thrive was noted at 18 d following birth. Further evaluation of this concern revealed hepatomegaly, elevated liver transaminase level [aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 193 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 424 U/L], and hyperbilirubinemia (T-Bil 8.0 mg/dL, D-Bil 6.6 mg/dL). Liver biopsy was performed at the age of 1 mo, which revealed bile duct paucity (the ratio of the bile duct to the portal tract was 0.1) . Other than cholestasis, peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis, hypokalemia, and metabolic acidosis due to renal tubular dysfunction were observed. No butterfly vertebrae or ocular abnormalities were found. Although any large deletion and duplication were not observed in the JAG1 gene by the fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, the patient was clinically suspected to have ALGS and was listed for liver transplantation. Cholestatic liver injury was gradually normalized by the age of 2 years under oral ursodeoxycholic acid and glycyrrhizic acid treatment and did not deteriorate even after both medications were tapered. His DNA was further subjected to a targeted next-generation sequencing that covers 14 genes responsible for cholestatic liver diseases, and no pathogenic variants were found in his genes including JAG1 and NOTCH2.
The patient was born to non-consanguineous Japanese parents. The pregnancy had been uncomplicated, and his family history was unremarkable.
At the age of 4 years and 9 mo, his height was 101.7cm ( -0.81 SD); body weight, 15.2kg ( -0.82 SD); and arm span, 104 cm. The difference in the length of the lower limbs was 1 cm (right, 53 cm; left, 52 cm). He did not exhibit jaundice or hepatosplenomegaly. He was noted to have a grade 2/6 systolic heart murmur. He did not have café-au-lait skin spots. His testicular capacity was 2 mL, pubic hair had not yet grown, and no precocious puberty was observed.
Laboratory examination at the age of 4 years revealed elevated levels of serum alkaline phosphatase (2506 U/L, reference range: 430-1200 U/L), bone alkaline phosphatase (216 U/L, reference range: 59-107 U/L), FGF23 (86 pg/mL), and serum type I collagen cross-linked N-telopeptide (171 nmolBCE/L, reference range: 14-57 nmolBCE/L). No endocrinological abnormalities were found. The transaminase and bilirubin levels were within the reference ranges (AST 28 U/L, ALT 25 U/L, T-Bil 0.6 mg/dL, and D-Bil 0.2 mg/dL).
Bone scintigraphy with 99 mTc-hydroxymethylene diphosphonate, which was employed to detect lesions with enhanced bone metabolism, revealed multiple lesions with increased uptake in the left skull and upper left limb in addition to the left femur and left tibia .
For the mutational analysis of the GNAS gene, genomic DNA from the peripheral blood was extracted using magLEAD Consumable Kit® (Precision System Science Co., Ltd., Chiba, Japan). In addition, it was polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified for exons 7 to 10 and their splice sites of the GNAS gene, where mutation hotspots for MAS were reported. PCRs were conducted using the 5′-TCACTTCCG TTGAGCCTGAC-3′ and 5′-CTTGCACGGGGTTCTTCTCT-3′ primer set designed for detecting the mutation; however, sequencing after PCR did not reveal any mutations .
Therefore, mutation analysis of the GNAS gene was also conducted from bone tissue samples, which were obtained from fibrous dysplastic lesions during a fracture surgery at the age of 5 years and 6 mo. The dissected bone sample was immediately snap-frozen using liquid nitrogen and crushed using 6700 Freezer/Mill (SPEX SamplePrep, NJ, United States). Genomic DNA from the bone tissue was extracted using DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and was PCR-amplified and sequenced similar to that of the peripheral blood. As a result, an activation point mutation (c.601C>T, p.Arg201Cys) was detected in genomic DNA, and the patient was diagnosed with MAS .
Furthermore, when he was 6 years old, DNA was extracted from a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) liver tissue that was collected during the biopsy performed at the age of 1 mo. To isolate genomic DNA from the FFPE liver tissue, Agencourt FormaPure XL Total kit (Agencourt Bioscience Corporation, Beverly, MA, United States) was used. Genomic DNA from the liver tissue was PCR-amplified and sequenced for the corresponding site to the peripheral blood and bone tissue. PCRs and sequencing were conducted using the 5′-TTCGGTTGGCTTTGGTGAGA-3′ and 5′-CACGTCAAACATGCTGGTGG-3′ primer set designed for detecting the mutation. The same mutation from the bone tissue samples was observed .