A 67-year-old woman presented with a superior mediastinal mass that was revealed by chest computed tomography (CT), an optional examination she hoped, during a medical checkup. She did not have dyspnea, dysphagia, blepharoptosis, diplopia, general fatigue, fever, night sweats, or weight loss. Contrast-enhanced CT confirmed the presence of a 2 × 1.3 cm mass anterior to the trachea in the superior mediastinum, which was characterized by peripheral poor enhancement and central low density during the arterial phase . The central region of the mediastinal mass was enhanced during the secondary phase . Tumor-feeding arteries were observed arising from the vessels in the thorax . The mediastinal mass was circumscribed and was not connected with the thyroid gland in the neck. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the mediastinal mass depicted low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity of the central region on T2-weighted images . Diffusion-weighted imaging of the mass showed a signal intensity that was similar to that of the thyroid gland. The apparent diffusion coefficient was not decreased. Enhanced MRI of the mass showed stronger enhancement than that of the thyroid gland, and tumor-feeding arteries arising from the vessels in the thorax were observed . The radiologist suggested that the mass was a paraganglioma. I-131 meta-iodobenzylguanidine did not accumulate in the mediastinal mass. Serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase, interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R), catecholamine, and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody were within the normal range. Preoperative thyroid function was not assessed.
For diagnosis and treatment, the patient underwent resection of the mass through a transverse neck incision. The well-circumscribed mass was located anterior to the trachea. The cervical thyroid appeared to be normal and was not connected to the mediastinal mass, which had an independent blood supply from the vessels in the thorax. A frozen section of the mass showed ectopic thyroid tissue and chronic thyroiditis. The resected specimen was 15 × 12 × 9 mm and opaline in color . Histopathological examination of the specimen found abundant thyroid follicles and lymphocytes, suggesting a lymphoproliferative disorder . The lymphocytes stained positive for cluster of differentiation (CD)79a (B cell marker) . The lymphoepithelial lesion that showed lymphoma cell infiltration to epithelial cells stained positive for thyroglobulin, a characteristic of MALT lymphoma arising from ectopic thyroid tissue . Lymphocytes in the mass were prominent peripherally. Polymerase chain reaction identified recombination of the DH1-6/JH region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain, indicating immunoglobulin heavy chain class switch recombination . Therefore, the diagnosis was ectopic thyroid tissue associated with MALT lymphoma due to chronic thyroiditis. 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed a marked accumulation in the cervical thyroid, but no accumulation elsewhere. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the cervical thyroid gland that was performed postoperatively showed chronic thyroiditis but no evidence of lymphoma. Postoperative thyroid function and the sIL-2R level were within the normal range. The serum levels of anti-thyroglobulin antibody and anti-peroxidase antibody assessed after surgery were elevated at 33 IU/mL (normal range, 0–27 IU/mL) and at 210 IU/mL (normal range, 0.0–15.9 IU/mL), respectively. The patient has been monitored with no further treatment. She has been well with no recurrence thus far.