A 51-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital for the fifth time with abdominal distension for 9 mo.
For 9 mo, the patient had abdominal distension, accompanied by edema of the lower extremities, anorexia, and fatigue. The patient underwent the following ancillary tests before the fifth admission to hospital. Urine was positive for protein and occult blood, while 24-h urine protein was 0.19 g/L and urine microalbumin was 74.1 mg/L. Thyroid function indicated thyrotropin of 5.183 mIU/L, free thyroxine of 1.17 ng/dL, and iodothyronine of 1.1 pg/mL. Immunoglobulin G was 18.0 g/L, and complement C3 was 0.66 g/L. Purified protein derivative test and tuberculosis antibody test were positive.
FibroScan showed liver stiffness of 21.9 kPa, while the electrocardiogram showed a heavy load of the right atrium. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the head, chest, and abdomen on March 16, 2021 revealed inflammatory changes in the lingual segment of the upper lobe of the left lung and lower lobe of both lungs, slight enlargement of the heart, slightly thickened bilateral pleura and a small amount of effusion in the left pleural cavity, some enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum and bilateral axilla, suspected liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, and abdominal and pelvic hydrops, swollen and thick intestinal walls, and blurred fat space in the abdominal and pelvic cavity . Biopsies of cervical and inguinal lymph nodes showed reactive lymphoid hyperplasia.
The Rivalta test of ascites fluid was negative, and pathology of ascites fluid indicated that a large number of inflammatory cells were present. Laboratory tests of ascites fluid showed a nucleated cell count of 120 × 106/L, a red blood cell count of 110 × 106/L, 80% mononuclear cells and 20% polynuclear cells, total protein of 43 g/L, and glucose of 8.17 mmol/L. The bone marrow smear showed active proliferation of nucleated cells, while the bone marrow biopsy showed active bone tissue proliferation. Liver biopsy illustrated chronic hepatitis G1/S1 .
Positron emission tomography-CT scans showed multiple slightly larger lymph nodes with mildly increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the bilateral neck, clavicle area, mediastinum, bilateral axilla, retroperitoneum, and inguinal area, which were consistent with lymph node inflammatory hyperplasia changes. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and enlarged heart and massive effusion in the abdominal and pelvic cavity were observed. Ultrasound-guided peritoneal biopsy showed interstitial edema with a small number of inflammatory cells and mesothelial hyperplasia. Routine blood test, liver and kidney function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, tuberculosis γ-interferon release assay, portal vein ultrasound, gastroscopy, and colonoscopy results were all negative.
The patient received diagnostic anti-tuberculosis therapy (rifampicin 0.45 g qd + isoniazid 0.3 g qd + pyrazinamide 1.50 g qd + ethambutol 0.75 g qd) in the 5 mo prior to admission. She had a poor response to this therapy, accompanied by progressive renal insufficiency, oliguria, and anemia, and treatment was stopped 2 mo prior to admission. Moreover, the patient underwent a laparoscopy during the diagnostic anti-tuberculosis therapy, which indicated the presence of inflammation and edema of the intra-abdominal tissue, especially on the right upper quadrant of the liver and diaphragm, a pus coating, and approximately 1000 mL pale yellow ascites fluid. Peritoneal and omental biopsies revealed inflammatory lesions .
Due to papillary thyroid cancer, the patient underwent a total thyroidectomy, bilateral neck lymph node dissection, and a parathyroid transplantation 4 years prior. No tumor cells were found in the enlarged superficial lymph nodes that were removed during the operation. There were no obvious abnormalities in the bone marrow smear and biopsy at that time. The patient was diagnosed with high blood pressure 2 years prior. She had a cholecystectomy because of cholelithiasis in 2020.
There was nothing remarkable in the patient’s personal and family history.
The patient was emaciated. Bilateral swollen lymph nodes, approximately 3-5 mm, were noted on the neck, armpits, and groin. The lymph nodes were firm, flexible, and without tenderness. Abdominal shifting dullness was positive. Muscle strength of the bilateral lower extremities decreased to level 1. There were no signs of jaundice, lower extremity edema, abdominal tenderness, or pulmonary rales.
Arterial blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis (pH 7.2; oxygen partial pressure 69 mmHg; oxygen saturation 89%; actual bicarbonate 10.6 mmol/L; standard bicarbonate 12.6 mmol/L; total carbon dioxide 11.8 mmol/L). Renal function tests indicated renal failure (urea nitrogen of 41.77 mmol/L; creatinine 441 μmol/L; endogenous creatinine clearance rate 24.5 mL/min). Brain natriuretic peptide was 234.37 pg/mL. Routine blood examination showed anemia and thrombocytopenia (white blood cell 5.06 × 109/L; hemoglobin 50 g/L; platelet count 48 × 109/L). Routine and biochemical examination of ascites fluid showed increased total protein (39.2 g/L) and a positive result in the mucin qualitative test. The serum ascites albumin gradient was 8.2 g/L, indicating that the ascites was exudate. Peripheral blood free light chain measurements were: κ light chain 96.36 mg/L; λ light chain 333 mg/L; and κ/λ 0.2894.
Blood immunofixation electrophoresis revealed immunoglobulin G-λ type. Serum protein electrophoresis showed α1 globulin at 6.84%. M protein was positive. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was increased to 221.23 pg/mL (1.56 × upper limit of normal). An abnormally elevated concentration of prolactin was detected (44.98 ng/mL). Furthermore, nerve conduction velocity showed demyelination of extremity nerves with axonal changes involving motor and sensory nerve fibers, chronic neurogenic damage in both upper extremities, damaged lower motor neuron nerve roots, and abnormal conduction of skin-spinal cord-extremity sensory pathway. Meanwhile, peripheral blood immunoglobulin G4, human herpesvirus 8, and metagenomic next-generation sequencing tests of ascites fluid and blood were all negative.
A chest CT on November 12, 2021 showed moderate effusion in the bilateral pleural cavities and a small amount of effusion in the left lobe fissure, which was significantly more than that seen in previous images on March 16, 2021. Multiple inflammatory changes were scattered in both lungs and were increased compared with previous images. The heart was enlarged more than in the earlier images, and moderate effusion in the pericardium was evident compared with earlier images. The bilateral pleura was slightly thickened. There were multiple lymph nodes in the mediastinum and bilateral axilla; some of them were enlarged. An abdominal CT found multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneum and bilateral groin, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, increased abdominal pelvic effusion, a thickened gastrointestinal wall, blurred fat space in the abdominal cavity and pelvis, thickened perirenal fascia, a small cyst in the left lateral lobe of the liver, absence of the gallbladder, and soft tissue edema of the waist, abdomen, and buttocks .