A 68-year-old man felt sudden-onset chest pain when he was playing golf, and he was transferred to our emergency department. He had a past medical history of hypertension and dyslipidaemia. He had a blood pressure of 183/110 mmHg, a heart rate of 82 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air at arrival. On physical examination, he had regular cardiac rhythm with no heart murmurs. The laboratory data showed an elevation of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin-I up to 70 ng/l (99th percentile value of 34.2 ng/l for male, coefficient of variation of 3.5%, ARCHITECT i2000SR STAT hs-cTnI assay, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL, USA). The electrocardiogram showed an elevation of ST-segment in leads II, III, aVF, and V5–6. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed mild hypokinesis of inferior wall with preserved left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 70%. Based on a diagnosis of Killip Class I inferior STEMI, 200 mg of aspirin was administrated and he was immediately transferred to our catheterization laboratory.
Emergent coronary angiography (CAG) showed a 75% stenosis with filling defect in the distal LMT . Primary PCI was indicated and 20 mg of prasugrel was administrated. Intracoronary electrocardiogram of the left circumflex artery (LCx) showed ST-segment elevation, whereas not for the left anterior descending artery (LAD) . OCT imaging showed massive thrombus in the distal LMT extended to the ostial LCx and the LAD . Thrombus vaporization with ELCA using a 0.9 mm catheter in the three directions of LMT to proximal LAD, proximal LCx, and obtuse marginal branch was performed. OCT examination in the LAD and LCx after ELCA showed a significant reduction of thrombus and preserved lumen size . Although the intimal flap potentially caused by ELCA procedure was observed, no apparent plaque ruptures or calcified nodules were detected. Since his symptom was relieved with accompanying TIMI flow Grade III and the resolution of ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads, we decided to complete the procedure without stenting to avoid bifurcation-related complicated PCI procedure such as the two-stent strategy. Peak post-PCI creatine kinase was 861 IU/l. He started cardiac rehabilitation on Day 2. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging on Day 9 showed a small inferior late gadolinium enhancement and no myocardial ischaemia induction. Follow-up CAG on Day 11 showed no angiographic restenosis . OCT during the follow-up CAG showed potentially organized thrombus and residual intimal flap, but no significant luminal narrowing of the culprit lesion . Since no stent was implanted and he was considered to have a moderate bleeding risk (HAS-BLED score of 2, PRECISE-DAPT score of 22), we decided to shorten the duration of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT). DAPT with aspirin and prasugrel was administrated for 6 weeks, and prasugrel as a single antiplatelet therapy has been continued. Optimal medical treatment including high dose statin, beta blocker, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors has been administrated and he has been free from any cardiac events for 8 months after the index primary PCI.