A 14 years old female presented to OPD with complain of swelling at the nape of neck for the last 9 months. The swelling was small initially and then started increasing gradually in size in last 2 months. The swelling was painless and there was no discharge from swelling. The family history of patient was negative for any such swellings.
On examination, a firm non-tender and normothermic swelling measuring 6 * 8 cm was found in the nape of neck with normal overlying skin. The swelling was non-mobile in both(vertical and horizontal) planes. There were no dilated veins or visible pulsation over swelling and the skin over swelling was pinchable. No bruit was auscultated. The examination for cervical and axillary lymph nodes was unremarkable.
Ultrasound of neck showed a well capsulated and lobulated mass with cystic areas which contain internal echoes seen at the nape of neck .
MRI neck gives impression of a large lobulated mass lesion approximately measuring 9.2 * 9.1 cm in size at the back of neck with main bulk on right side. Lesion is predominantly cystic with some solid component and appears hyperintense on T2W and FLAIR images, iso to hypointense on T1W images and appearance is suggestive of lymphangioma/cystic hygroma (a, b).
Tru-Cut biopsy was taken under aseptic measures from multiple areas and it showed only fibroadipose tissue without any granulomatous or neoplastic process. After detailed discussion, it was decided to go for excisional biopsy of mass under general anesthesia. Skin crease incision was given. Skin and subcutaneous tissue incised. The tumour was located muscle deep against vertebra. So, muscles were incised and tumour delivered to the surface. It was well circumcised mass (a–c). Haemostasis secured and then muscles were closed and then skin closure done.
Gross examination of specimen measured a 8.5 * 5 cm mass and histology revealed a circumscribed neoplasm comprised of hypocellular lobules of adipocytes with fibrous septa separating the lobules. Background stroma is myxoid with thin chicken wire vasculature. No atypia, mitoses or necrosis seen. The diagnosis of Lipoblastoma was made (a–c)
Post-operative course and follow up of patient was without any complication.