A 67-year-old female complained of gross hematuria with frequent micturition and urgency. No abnormalities were found during cystoscopy at the outpatient department of Xiangtan Central Hospital. Because the patient refused to undergo ultrasound, CT and other related examinations, she was diagnosed with urinary infection and was given antibiotics and other related treatment. The symptoms did not improve, and she was hospitalized.
After admission, CT showed a soft tissue mass with a size of approximately 60*47*53 mm below the bladder and in front of the vagina (see Fig. A), MRI showed a round mass around the urethra with a size of approximately 45*49*62 mm, with a capsule and clear boundary, and a urethral shadow could be seen in the center of the lesion (see Fig. B, C). No urethral diverticulum or mass was found under cystoscopy, and obstructive changes such as trabecula were found in the bladder. Before the operation, the patient underwent transperineal mass biopsy guided by ultrasound. Pathology and immunohistochemistry showed clear cell adenocarcinoma. After being transferred to Xiangya Hospital of Central South University for PET-CT, no lymph nodes or distant metastases were found. The patient underwent urethral resection combined with anterior pelvic organ resection and ileal conduit construction. The excised specimen showed a white carrion-like mass around the urethra with an obvious capsule. She was diagnosed as clear cell adenocarcinoma of the urethra involving the vaginal wall. HE staining showed tumor cells had vacuolated, clear cytoplasm and basally located pleomorphic nuclei without prominent nucleoli, numerous tumor cells with clear cytoplasm . IHC demonstrated that tumor cells diffusely and strongly expressed CK7 in a membranous pattern and negative for GATA3, GK20, P63, CDX-2, PAX-2, CA9. The patient underwent genetic testing and was provided a drug regimen for chemotherapy (see Table ). The gene ARID1A p.l1160x (ex13) was detected in the tumor of the patient, suggesting that the patient may benefit from everolimus and bevacizumab, and the patient had LOH (HLA-A * 02:01 deletion), suggesting that the patient is less likely to benefit from immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment. She refused further chemotherapy or targeted therapy. One year after the operation, no recurrence was found.