An 11-year-old female spayed domestic medium-hair cat was presented for dental prophylaxis and extractions owing to grade 4 dental disease. It had a mildly elevated respiratory effort associated with a previously diagnosed congenital peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia. On physical examination, there was an intermittent systolic murmur. A cardiology consultation noted no structural or functional cardiac abnormalities. Preoperative blood work was normal except for a mild lymphopenia 1.3 × 109 (reference interval 1.5–7.00 × 109), which was considered insignificant. Owing to the patient’s fractious temperament, gabapentin (50 mg PO) was administered 1 h before appointments. During the dental procedure, 15 teeth were extracted or had crown amputations, leaving four upper incisors and two upper molars remaining. No masses or other abnormalities were noted on dental radiographs. Robenacoxib (Onsior; Elanco) and buprenorphine (Simbadol; Zoetis) were prescribed for 3 days for analgesia. Fifteen days post-procedure, the owner noticed a small, red swelling extending from the gingiva to the mucocutaneous junction on the rostral portion of the mandible. At the recheck appointment 21 days post-procedure, the cat was sedated for a more thorough examination of the swelling. Dental radiographs were performed, and a fine-needle aspirate and an incisional biopsy were obtained. Dental radiographs showed a soft tissue swelling of the rostral mandible.
Cytology of the aspirate identified large numbers of spindloid-to-rounded mesenchymal cells with moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. A few of the mesenchymal cells were described as having a plasmacytoid appearance. The incisional biopsy of the rostral mandibular soft tissue swelling was 0.5 × 0.2 × 0.1 cm, homogeneously tan in color and firm. Microscopically, abutting intact lamina epithelialis mucosa, the lamina propria was infiltrated by neoplastic round-to-spindloid mesenchymal cells arranged in streams and small, dense aggregates that were unencapsulated and supported by pre-existing collagen. Cells had variably distinct cell borders, an oval-to-indented, occasionally eccentrically located, nucleus with vesicular chromatin and 1–2 variably distinct nucleoli, and small-to-moderate amounts of eosinophilic, vacuolated cytoplasm. Additionally, some cells had subtle paranuclear clearing. The neoplastic cells exhibited mild nuclear pleomorphism, moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, and the mitotic count was 10 mitoses per 10 high power (× 400) fields. Immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) was negative, ruling out an epithelial origin of the neoplastic cells. The final diagnosis was sarcoma, and plasmacytoma and lymphoma were listed as possible differential diagnoses. In lieu of additional immunohistochemistry, a second opinion by a board-certified pathologist specializing in oral pathology was requested. The second-opinion, final diagnosis was round cell neoplasm (favored plasmacytoma). Further immunohistochemistry was declined.
Owing to the poor prognosis for long-term survival and potential complications of mandibulectomy in cats, the owner elected for palliative care. Prednisolone (2 mg/kg per day PO [Compounded; Roadrunner Pharmacy]) was prescribed and the patient was given buprenorphine (Simbadol; Zoetis) as needed for pain management. The mass grew rapidly over 6 months, with moderate amounts of hemorrhage. Euthanasia was elected when the cat was dysphagic and appeared uncomfortable 195 days after the initial dental procedure (180 days after the owner’s initial observation of the mass).
On gross examination of the oral cavity, there was an irregular 3.0 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm, firm, ulcerated, tan-to-dark red (previous hemorrhage) infiltrative mass arising from the right rostral mandibular gingiva, invading and expanding the rostral portion of the right mandible, and extending to the right ventral aspect of the tongue . All teeth were absent except the right and left maxillary molars and incisors. The right submandibular lymph node was firm and on cut section there was a focal 0.3 cm diameter tan nodule obliterating the parenchyma. Aside from the oral mass, additional postmortem findings included peritoneoperi-cardial hernia and unilateral renal lymphoplasmacytic interstitial nephritis and fibrosis. All other organ systems were grossly unremarkable. Samples of the oral mass, right mandible, tongue, mucocutaneous junction of the mass, right submandibular lymph node, liver, lungs, adrenal glands, stomach, small and large intestines, kidneys, brain, urinary bladder, heart, spleen and pancreas were placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, processed routinely, paraffin embedded, sectioned at 4 µm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
Microscopically, the oral neoplasm was invasive and consisted of poorly differentiated, spindloid-to-round cells arranged in streams, bundles and occasionally sheets. Within the sections of the mandible and right submandibular lymph node, the previously described neoplastic cells were invading and replacing the bone and were effacing and replacing the normal architecture of the right submandibular lymph node . Neoplastic cells were not identified in any of the other examined tissues.