A 68-year-old Japanese man was injured while electrically reeling a wire rope on a fishing boat. Shortly after, the patient was transported to our hospital’s emergency room, where he was treated for hypertension. The patient had no relevant family or psychosocial history. On physical examination, two large soft-tissue defects were observed in the medial left ankle . The patient’s left foot was pale, and we did not palpate any arteries in his lower legs because of severe ankle pain. Next, pulses from the peroneal, tibialis anterior, and tibialis posterior arteries, as well as the capillary refill, color, and temperature, were compared between the injured and uninjured feet. Then, the paramedics brought in a 75-mm tibia that had fallen out of the body on the fishing boat. The bone was contaminated; therefore, we determined that the bone could not be returned to the tibia . Three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed injury to the peroneal, tibialis anterior, and tibialis posterior arteries . The preoperative Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS) was 7 points. We considered limb salvage feasible and performed reconstructive surgery. A total of 6 hours after the injury, we debrided the soft tissues of the injury in the operating room (day 0). After debridement, the soft-tissue defect measured 40 mm × 80 mm. We decided that acute limb shortening and gradual lengthening would be a reasonable method for rapid revascularization. Accordingly, we shortened the fibula with a 75-mm osteotomy to match the length of the tibia. We resected and prepared a spike in the distal tibial fragment . We crimped the fracture sufficiently and fixed it with an Ilizarov external fixator for temporary ankle joint-bridging fixation . We reconstructed the anterior and posterior tibial arteries and veins with end-to-end anastomosis (day 0). No severe nerve injury to the lower leg was observed.
Revascularization was completed 6 hours after the injury, after which circulation in the injured foot improved. The size of the soft-tissue defect was now 20 × 80 mm. Negative pressure wound therapy was used to address the soft-tissue defect . After the patient gained consciousness following anesthesia, ankle joint circulation was good and automatic movement of the ankle joint and toes was possible . The patient had normal motor and sensory nerves in his lower leg. Although the patient had mild renal dysfunction, he did not undergo hemofiltration and recovered without permanent organ damage.
A total of 2 days after the injury (day 2), we cleaned the open fracture again, performed additional debridement, and reapplied negative pressure wound therapy. A total of 14 days after the injury (day 14), osteotomy was performed at the proximal tibia with an Ilizarov external fixator for gradual limb lengthening . A total of 3 weeks after the injury (day 21), gradual lengthening of the proximal tibia was initiated. We noted that the bone strength was weak at the time of wire insertion; therefore, we measured the bone density and identified primary osteoporosis. A baseline dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan showed that the bone mineral density at the femoral neck was 0.441 g/cm2 and T-Score was −3.3 standard deviation. He was started on a once-weekly injection of 56.5 μg of teriparatide. Furthermore, after osteotomy, treatment with a low-intensity pulsed ultrasound stimulation (LIPUS) device (SAFHS 2000, Exogen, Inc., Piscataway, NJ) was started for 20 minutes/day at the fracture and osteotomy sites. This device had a frequency of 1.5 MHz, a signal burst width of 200 μs, a signal repetition frequency of 1 kHz, and an intensity of 30 mW/cm2. The patient was allowed to walk with full weight-bearing capacity immediately after the surgery (Day 22). He also performed knee and ankle range of motion exercises (day 22). We performed bone lengthening at a rate of 0.75 (0.25 × 3) mm/day. The patient continued to undergo bone lengthening at home after discharge. The patient visited the outpatient clinic once a month for radiography. The patient was positive about returning to his original job, and was consistently mentally stable. Radiography performed 1 year later revealed good callus formation . The fixator was removed after one year. The patient returned to his original job as a fisherman 2 months after the fixator removal. The patient’s 14 months of treatment was covered by industrial accident compensation insurance.
At the 5-year follow-up after injury, radiographs showed good callus formation and bone union . The patient was independently mobile, with a knee range of motion of 0–140°, ankle dorsiflexion of 5°, and plantar flexion of 50° . During the 12 months in which the fixator was inserted, there were a few superficial pin-tract infections, which were treated with empirical oral antibiotics and daily pin-tract dressings. A total of 5 years after surgery, the patient returned to work without any problems, with an American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score of 95 points. The clinical results, according to the AOFAS score, were excellent in this patient.