A 32-year-old previously healthy woman initially sought medical advice in a primary hospital in September 2019 with a chief complaint of repeated shortness of breath, vomiting and diarrhoea. Transthoracic echocardiogram suggested pericardial effusion without any suspicious mass in the image. Pericardial puncture drained haemorrhagic fluid. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral pleural effusion without any visual mass in the image. Thoracic puncture drained haemorrhagic fluid (left thoracic cavity) and light-yellow fluid (right thoracic cavity). Pericardial biopsy showed nonspecific pericarditis. Tuberculosis was excluded from a negative T-spot test, tuberculin test and sputum smear. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with nonspecific pericarditis. She underwent pericardial effusion drainage and pleural effusion drainage. The patient was discharged from the hospital after symptom relief.
In March 2020, the patient was admitted to our institution with shortness of breath and pain of the right shoulder. Physical examination revealed a marked pale appearance, distant heart sounds without a heart murmur, and weak breath sounds in the right lung. She had no fever and no significant weight loss. The laboratory tests showed notable decreases in haemoglobin and albumin, with other blood tests being normal. No tumour marker was elevated. Exfoliative cytology detection of massive pleural effusion and pericardial effusion revealed no tumour cells.
Three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed an irregular cystic mass measuring 8.49*3.81 cm in the lateral wall of the right atrium, indistinctly demarcated from the pericardium. The mass obviously compressed the right atrium . A contrast chest CT scan displayed a pseudoaneurysm with thrombosis inside the right atrium . Multiple nodules in both lungs and on the right pleura, as well as right hydropneumothorax, were also noted. Contrast MRI demonstrated a 100 mm*48 mm pseudoaneurysm on the right side of the right atrium with a thrombus. There was a defect measuring 22.5 mm between the pseudoaneurysm and the right atrium . PET-CT suggested that FDG metabolism inhomogeneity increased in the mass in the right atrium. FDG metabolism slightly increased in multiple nodules in both lungs. Multiple ground glass foci in both lungs were considered bleeding.
Given the above findings, the patient underwent right thoracic exploration and biopsy. Upon surgical inspection, we found a massive lobulated and friable tumour in the pericardium with severe bleeding . There were extensive metastatic tumours with severe bleeding implanted on the right chest wall and the right lung. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography clearly showed right atrial rupture with pseudoaneurysm formation . Biopsy results demonstrated spindle cell sarcoma with bleeding and necrosis . The patient was managed with conservative treatment. She died in April 2020.