A 71-year-old woman with a history of left lateral hepatectomy and cholecystectomy, presented to the emergency room with a 48 h history of fever and abdominal pain. On physical examination, the patient’s blood pressure was 131/75 mmHg, the pulse was 91 beats perminute, the temperature was 36.3℃, the respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute. The laboratory data obtained on admission revealed a white blood cell count of 12,680/µL with 88.7% neutrophils and a C-reactive protein level of 224.5 mg/dL. Abdominal CT and MRI scan of the abdomen showed low density lesion in the right lobe of the liver with circular enhancement, suggesting a high possibility of liver abscess and choledocholithiasis . Because the liver abscess without liquefaction, antibiotics treatment was considered as the main treatment option. The patient was started on treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam at a dose of 4.5 g administered every eight hours under a diagnosis of bacterial cholangitis and liver abscess.
The treatment principle for hepatolithiasis is that removal of lesions, relief of obstruction, alleviation of stricture, and retaining of drainage of bile duct. Therefore, for the treatment of this patient’s choledocholithiasis, surgeon considered that surgery was still the best choice. On day 9, the patient’s vital indication were basically normal, and laparoscopic choledocholithotomy is planned to be performed. During intraoperative exploration, surgeon discovered extensive adhesions between the liver, stomach, duodenum, and abdominal wall. A portion of the gastric wall tissue was removed to separate the adhesions. However, Due to extensive adhesion between the common bile duct and the greater omentum, making it difficult to dissociate under laparoscopy, changed to open choledocholithotomy was performed. After the surgery, the patient clinically improved, with resolution of her fever and abdominal pain, the patient received treatment such as antibiotics and fluid infusion. On day 18, the patient experienced abdominal pain, high fever, and chills again (with body temperature fluctuating between 38.6 and 39.5 ℃). Surgeon explored the patient’s wound and found pus and food residue flowing out . The laboratory data revealed a white blood cell count of 9200/µL with 83.7% neutrophils and a C-reactive protein level of 178.36 mg/dL. The patient immediately underwent abdominal CT, gastroscopy, and oral methylene blue experiment. Abdominal CT images showed gas accumulation and exudation around the gastric antrum. Oral methylene blue experiment found that blue staining liquid flows out of the wound. Gastroscopy showed duodenal bulb ulcer with residual suture and indistinct descending passage. All examination results indicated postoperative gastric leakage, then, urgent second surgery. During the operation, approximately 100 ml of purulent fluid around the liver in the upper right abdomen, and an abscess cavity measuring 4 *4 * 5 cm was observed between the left liver and stomach, containing approximately 30 ml of yellowish-white pus. A fingertip sized rupture was also detected on the posterior wall of the gastric meatus and a drainage tube was placed next to the gastric leak, which drained milky-white purulent fluid that grew R. ornithinolytica.
The R. ornithinolytica isolate exhibited susceptibility to amoxicillin/clavulanate, piperacillin/tazobactam, cefoperazone/sulbactame, imipenem, ertapenem, amikacin, levofloxacin, tigecycline and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Based on the poor overall condition of the patient, we chose meropenem to enhance anti-infection therapy. But, after using meropenem for 3 days, the patient’s condition showed no significant improvement. We added levofloxacin and after 5 days of combined treatment, the patient’s body temperature returned to normal, abdominal signs improved, and infection index significantly decreased compared to before.