A 40-year-old Hispanic woman veteran with a past medical history significant for major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, irritable bowel syndrome, and migraines was admitted to an inpatient psychiatry unit from a walk-in clinic referral. The patient's psychologist, psychiatrist, and husband all encouraged inpatient admission as they had noticed acute changes in behavior and self-injurious behavior. Medications on admission included venlafaxine extended-release 75 mg by mouth daily, clonazepam 0.5 mg by mouth daily, and phentermine 7.5 mg/topiramate 46 mg by mouth once daily. The complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, liver function panel, and urinalysis upon admission all were within normal limits. Additionally, the patient had a negative urine drug screen and pregnancy test. The patient described her recent mood as having a depressed affect, with no suicidal ideation. She also admitted to recently displaying abnormal behaviors, such as self-harm by cutting her wrists multiple times. The patient denied racing thoughts, decreased need for sleep, irritable mood, impulsivity (except for the above-mentioned cutting), or grandiosity. Furthermore, the patient displayed delusional thinking, in which she believed that the military should allow her to become an assassin and that a portal to death/afterlife actually exists. The patient denied any past medical history of delusional thoughts or psychosis.
The patient was started on venlafaxine extended-release 37.5 mg by mouth daily for 7 days in April 2015 and was titrated to 75 mg daily. According to the patient, she was taking venlafaxine consistently for a month prior to admission. Upon further questioning, it was discovered the patient was restarted and prescribed her previous medication phentermine/topiramate for weight loss approximately 1 week prior to admission by an alternative prescriber. The patient was previously taking the medication in April 2014 for weight loss with no concomitant psychotropic drugs at the time. The patient denied any suicidal ideation or behavioral changes prior to taking the combination of venlafaxine and phentermine/topiramate, specifically during the first couple weeks of venlafaxine therapy. Additionally, the patient denied any behavioral changes occurring while taking phentermine/topiramate in the past. The patient was started on lurasidone 40 mg by mouth in the evening for psychosis, while venlafaxine and phentermine/topiramate were discontinued. Total duration of inpatient stay was approximately 1 week. Upon discharge, the patient reported improvements in her bizarre behavior, no impulses to self-harm, and no suicidal ideation. The patient was discharged on lurasidone 40 mg by mouth every evening, and her previous outpatient medication clonazepam 0.5 mg by mouth daily was continued. The patient was continued on lurasidone for a total of 4 weeks without recurrence of symptoms.