A 59-year-old postmenopausal woman complaining of vaginal bleeding and pelvic pain presented to the gynecological department in May 2019. The woman had a significant past medical history of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and her past surgical history included appendectomy 45 years ago. Her family history is negative for malignant ovarian and breast cancer in first-degree relatives. Previous screening for cervical cancer had not been performed.
Clinical and gynecological examination revealed no abnormalities, while transvaginal ultrasonography (TVS) was performed and revealed a cystic lesion 10 × 7 cm in diameter on the left ovary and a cystic lesion 1 × 1 cm in diameter on the right ovary. She underwent colposcopic examination followed by punch biopsy and endocervical curettage. Histological analysis of punch biopsy and endocervical curettage revealed possible endocervical mucinous adenocarcinoma. The differential diagnosis included either endocervical gastric-type mucinous adenocarcinoma, or metastatic mucinous colorectal or ovarian adenocarcinoma. Pelvis magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 10 × 8 cm sized cervical mass and enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes.
In November 2019, the Council of Gynecologic Oncology decided that the tumor was inoperable, because it had a large diameter and there was a suspicion that the tumor had spread to the bladder. The patient received 6 cycles of chemotherapeutic agents with carboplatin, paclitaxel and bevacizumab from December 2019 to March 2020. Although there was a decrease in the level of all tumor markers after chemotherapy, a new pelvis MRI showed enlargement of the cervical mass, which measured 24 × 21 × 12 cm.
The patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, bilateral pelvic and aortic lymph node dissection and complete omentectomy. Intraoperatively the tumor was determined to be about 30 cm and had invaded part of the bladder, as well as the sigmoid colon, so a left hemicolectomy and partial cystectomy was also performed. Her final histopathology report indicated a gastric-type mucinous adenocarcinoma of the cervix with low differentiation. The surgical margin was all free from everywhere. The patient was discharged and referred to the oncology department for further management. Three months after surgery, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed with the absence of the uterus and ovaries, without lymph node enlargement or other changes. Further management was continued by the oncology team for possible adjuvant chemoradiation therapy after radical surgery.