A 4-year-old boy was referred for evaluation of hypertriglyceridemia, which was incidentally detected four months prior (triglyceride level, 3734 mg/dL). He was born via vaginal delivery at 38 weeks’ gestation, with a birth weight of 3.7 kg and no perinatal complications; his parents were non-consanguineous. His motor and cognitive development well within normal ranges. However, he did not achieve coherent speech until he was 3 to 4 years. The patient had no personal history of pancreatitis or other medical conditions and no family history of xanthomas or early atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. On physical examination, his height and weight were 97.4 cm (-1.8 standard deviation score [SDS]) and 15.0 kg (-1.4 SDS), respectively. There were no cases of eruptive xanthoma. The abdomen was soft and nontender without hepatomegaly. Fundus examination revealed no evidence of lipemia retinalis.
Fasting biochemical tests revealed elevated total cholesterol (223 mg/dL) and triglycerides (1418 mg/dL) levels . The high-density and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels were 14 and 62 mg/dL, respectively. Hepatic, renal, and thyroid function test results were within normal ranges. Lipoprotein electrophoresis revealed the presence of chylomicrons and an increased proportion of pre-beta lipoproteins . LPL mass concentrations in post-heparin plasma were measured using a commercial LPL ELISA kit (LPL ELISA “DAIICHI”; Daiichi Pure Chemicals Co., Ltd., Tokyo) . The post-heparin plasma LPL mass was low (57 ng/mL; reference range: 164–284 ng/mL).
The patient was suspected to have a monogenic cause of severe hypertriglyceridemia because of his young age; therefore, his brothers underwent fasting blood tests. The first brother had a normal lipid profile; however, the second, 9-year-old brother displayed severe hypertriglyceridemia (2133 mg/dL). He had no relevent medical history, including pancreatitis. The patient had no cutaneous or ocular manifestations, and his hepatic, renal, and thyroid functions were normal . The brother’s lipoprotein electrophoresis also demonstrated the presence of chylomicrons and an increase in the proportion of pre-beta lipoproteins, and the post-heparin plasma LPL mass was low (30 ng/mL; reference range: 164–284 ng/mL). The fasting serum triglyceride levels of the father, mother, and first brother were 113, 69, and 51 mg/dL, respectively.
On suspicion of FCS, massively parallel sequencing was performed using a molecular panel of 31 targeted genes associated with lipid metabolism disorders (Supplementary Table ) . Target enrichment was achieved via hybridization with oligonucleotide probes, and sequencing was conducted on an Illumina MiSeqDX platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). There were no pathogenic variants in previously known genes. Copy number variant (CNV) screening using next-generation sequencing (NGS) depth information suggested a heterozygous deletion encompassing all coding exons of GPIHBP1. As FCS is an autosomal recessive disorder, Sanger sequencing was performed to investigate variants in the counter allele; however, exon 4 amplification failed (Supplementary Fig. ). Because an additional deletion of exon 4 on the counter allele was suspected, we performed real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) on both siblings and parents to confirm the deletion site around exon 4 of the GPIHBP1 gene. Exons 1, 2, 3, and 4 were assessed using customized primers (Supplementary Table ). The results revealed two heterozygous CNVs consisting of a whole-gene deletion and an exon 4 deletion in the patient and his second brother, which were derived from their father and mother, respectively . The single-nucleotide polymorphism in the ApoA5 and Apo E gene, which are known to be associated with the risk of hypertriglyceridemia, were analyzed using NGS. The APOE genotype was ε3ε3, and single nucleotide polymorphism rs2075291 (c.553G > T) in APOA5 was not detected.
The brothers initiated a low-fat and medium-chain triglyceride oil-based diet with a restriction of dietary fat intake to 15% of the total energy. Owing to the risk of acute pancreatitis associated with high plasma triglyceride levels, omega-3 acid ethyl ester (1 g) was prescribed once daily. During the 17 months of follow-up, their conditions fluctuated; however, triglyceride levels remained within the range of 200–740 mg/dL without the development of acute pancreatitis . Plasmapheresis was performed because triglyceride levels decreased to < 1000 mg/dL without pancreatitis alone through dietary intervention.