An 87-year-old woman was transferred to our centre for revision of a pacing lead 2 months after implantation of a dual chamber pacemaker. After finding failure of capture on the passive fixation ventricular lead, chest radiography had been performed and showed the lead to be outside the cardiac silhouette, apparently in the left pleural space. The patient had no significant comorbidities and her recorded observations were stable, including height of 156 cm, weight of 64 kg, and a body mass index of 26.3 kg/m2.
We extracted and replaced the lead under general anaesthesia with cardiac surgical cover. Due to the anticipated risk of bleeding into the pericardial or pleural cavities, we performed a peri-procedural TOE and used invasive haemodynamic monitoring. The TOE probe was a standard model (Philips X7-2t) and there were no reports of difficulty or undue resistance with probe insertion. The TOE was performed for a total duration of 15 min. This enabled a review of the cardiac structure and function at the start of the procedure, and the TOE probe was left in situ for the rest of the case. The TOE was used again at the end of the procedure to rule out any pericardial effusion or other structural changes. This patient did not have a history of heart failure and TOE confirmed good left ventricular systolic function. The right ventricle was of normal size and systolic function. A new active fixation right ventricular lead (CapSureFix 5076, Medtronic) was placed in a mid-septal position using left cephalic venous access. This new lead achieved satisfactory sensing and pacing threshold parameters.
The perforating lead, a passive fixation model (CapSure Novus, Medtronic) was removed with the aid of a Liberator® Beacon® Tip Locking Stylet (Cook Medical). With gentle traction only, the lead was freed and removed entirely. There was no immediate haemodynamic disturbance and at procedure conclusion, there was no evidence of pericardial or significant pleural collections on repeat TOE. The offending lead, including the tip, was inspected and no overt abnormality was evident.
Upon recovery from general anaesthesia, the patient complained of severe chest pain and became hypotensive, requiring intravenous fluids. Emergency chest radiography showed a pneumomediastinum and pleural effusion ; a transthoracic echocardiogram showed no pericardial effusion and only a small pleural effusion. The initial clinical impression was that this was pulmonary injury from the original offending pacing lead that perforated into the pleural cavity. A computed tomography thorax was performed and reported as confirming the chest radiograph findings only .
The patient remained systemically unwell with low grade pyrexia, despite broad spectrum antibiotic therapy (intravenous ertapenem was advised by microbiologists as empirical cover; all blood cultures were negative). Her blood pressure was 102/80 mmHg, and she had episodes of tachycardia, in atrial fibrillation at 150 b.p.m. Without supplemental oxygen, her saturations dropped to 90%. Inflammatory markers were markedly raised with a climbing C-reactive protein (CRP) of 433.3 and white cell count of 16. Albumin was low at 16. In our laboratory, the normal reference range for CRP is 0-10 mg/L, for WCC it is 4-119/L and for albumin, the normal range is 35-50 g/L. Kidney function and urine output remained stable and she was cognitively intact. Alongside her deteriorating clinical condition, the pleural effusion also increased in size, raising the possibility of an empyema, so a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical procedure was performed to drain it. This unexpectedly revealed food material in the chest cavity. A gastrografin study confirmed the presence of oesophageal perforation, with continued communication to the pleural space. The patient was transferred urgently for a surgical review and possible surgery.
Correspondence from the district general hospital confirmed that the patient was managed conservatively. At 1-year post-event, the patient is well but has not regained her premorbid health status.