A 78-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, non-flow limiting coronary artery disease, and early Alzheimer’s dementia was referred to our centre with class II heart failure symptoms due to severe aortic stenosis. On physical examination, he had a slow rising pulse and auscultation revealed a 3/6 ejection systolic murmur radiating to the carotids, with absent second heart sound. Coronary angiography showed mild coronary artery disease, and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed good left ventricular (LV) function with severe aortic stenosis (pressure gradients: 96 mmHg peak/52 mmHg mean, aortic valve area of 0.9 cm2) with mild aortic regurgitation. There was mild concentric LV hypertrophy with normal biventricular size and function with an LV ejection fraction (EF) of 62%, mild mitral regurgitation, and normal estimated resting pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP). The proximal ascending aorta had normal diameter. Based on his age, comorbidities and in particular the presence of early dementia, our multidisciplinary valve team decided to offer TAVI. A multi-slice cardiac computed tomography (CT) showed an aortic valve calcium score of 4736, an aortic valve area of 0.7 cm2, and perimeter of 95 mm. There was adequate iliofemoral access from either side. A balloon expandable (Edwards SAPIEN 3) 29 mm valve was chosen in order to avoid a significant paravalvular leak due to the high calcium burden.
We performed the transfemoral TAVI according to standard practice. The aortic valve was crossed with an AL1 and a straight wire and the latter was exchanged for a Confida stiff wire. The valve was implanted at optimal height using rapid pacing at 200 beats per minute. On final aortogram, there was mild paravalvular leak. Post-implantation TTE revealed a small, high velocity jet from aortic root to the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) suggestive of a possible defect. A departmental TTE showed a well-seated TAVI with mild anterior and posterior paravalvular aortic regurgitation, aortic root defect of ∼0.4cm2 with a continuous shunt to the RVOT, with a peak gradient of 90 mmHg, preserved LV systolic function, mild basal dilatation of the right ventricle (right ventricular basal diameter = 4.3 cm) with preserved function and raised PASP of 60 mmHg. A decision was made to treat the patient conservatively at this stage with furosemide 40 mg daily. He was discharged 5 days after the TAVI procedure with further outpatient follow-up. Two months later (month 2 on timeline), he re-presented with significant shortness of breath and peripheral oedema and he was treated with intravenous (IV) diuresis. An inpatient TTE was similar as the one post-TAVI, showing mild right ventricular dilatation. A right heart catheterisation showed step-up in oxygen saturations in the right ventricle with Qp:Qs of 1.98. A 4D cardiac CT scan showed a communication between the aortic root and the right ventricle just behind the TAVI struts . Given the location of the defect and the relative frailty of the patient the heart team opted for conservative management (months 2–6 on timeline) uptitrating his furosemide to 40 mg twice daily. However, 4 months later (month 6 on timeline), he re-presented with right sided heart failure symptoms. Whilst an inpatient, he started slowly drifting into multiorgan failure despite IV furosemide infusion and single-agent inotropic support with dobutamine. Following repeat multidisciplinary discussions, in view of the recurrent episodes of decompensation and evidence of progressive biventricular impairment on serial TTEs (LV EF 43%, dilated right ventricle with reduced radial function, right ventricular basal diameter = 6.5 cm, mid right ventricular diameter = 4.3 cm, severe functional tricuspid regurgitation), we decided to proceed with percutaneous closure of the fistula as a salvage procedure. The procedure was undertaken under general anaesthesia with TOE guidance. On intra-procedural TOE, a 5 × 3 mm ARV fistula was visualised above the TAVI annulus (Video 2). The defect was readily crossed with a JR4 catheter and Terumo wire, which was exchanged for an Amplatzer stiff wire under fluoroscopic and TOE guidance (Video 3, ). A 4 mm Amplatzer ASD occluder was then successfully deployed with no residual fistula or significant shunt seen on intra-procedural TOE (Video 2). There was only mild transvalvular aortic regurgitation of the TAVI prosthesis as previously noted. The patient recovered well with improvement in his symptoms and his organ function and was started on bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, spironolactone 25 mg and ramipril 1.25 mg daily. A repeat TTE 1 month later (month 7 on timeline) showed improvement in right ventricular size and biventricular function . The patient remains asymptomatic and in good health 11 months after the TAVI and 5 months after the ARV fistula closure, with the latest TTE showing mild basal right ventricular dilatation and preserved biventricular function.