A 36-year-old female was referred to our emergency room by her homeland local hospital in Cape Verde (West Africa), with complaints of headaches and diminished vision over the last 4 months. On neurological examination, she had impaired visual acuity (right eye: 6/10; left eye: 7/10) and bilateral papilledema. No other neurological signs were observed. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hydrocephalus apparently caused by a well-defined cystic lesion in the fourth ventricle. The lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI sequences and had a peripheral millimetric solid component hyperintense on both sequences . Another MRI was done 8 hours later due to a temporary malfunction of the gadolinium injector. In this second exam, the lesion showed no contrast enhancement but had changed its location to the contralateral side within the fourth ventricle , revealing its mobile nature. The FLAIR sequences showed cerebellar edema surrounding the cyst.
A surgical plan was elaborated to solve both problems – the hydrocephalus and the intraventricular cyst – at the same surgical time. Initially, an uneventful ETV was performed and intraventricular CSF was collected for further laboratorial analyses. No external drainage was left in place. The patient was then placed in prone position and underwent a suboccipital median craniotomy. Using microsurgical technique, a telovelar approach to the fourth ventricle was performed. The cyst microdissection was particularly challenging due to its thin wall and partial adherence to the surrounding ependyma, which contributed to an intraventricular cyst rupture by the end of its total removal. Extensive irrigation of the ventricle space with Ringer's solution was performed to avoid intraventricular dissemination.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. The CSF analysis showed no alterations. Postop MRI showed a total removal of the cyst lesion and reduction of the ventricle dimensions . The pathology report confirmed the cyst to be a T. solium larva in its vesicular stage as had already been suspected . It was decided not to initiate antiparasitic medication given the lack of evidence of a positive effect in intraventricular single neurocysticercosis cyst. The patient was discharged asymptomatic seven days later with a prescription to a progressive corticosteroids’ weaning of.
Five weeks after discharge, she presented back, complaining of headaches and worsening of vision again. A significant pseudomeningocele with no CSF leak was visible underneath the frontal surgical wound. A bilateral papilledema was evident in the ophthalmological examination. The MRI showed hydrocephalus recurrence with no evidence of CSF flow through the previous ventriculostomy stoma . A second endoscopic approach was performed to collect CSF and to reopen the ventriculostomy stoma, using the same burr hole and parenchyma trajectory. Intraoperatively, we visualized a transparent CSF plenty of floating debris . In the histopathological examination, these were found to be fragments of brain parenchyma with granulation tissue foci, lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrates, with histiocytes, few neutrophils, and multiple calcifications. The CSF analysis showed no cells and normal glucose and proteins’ levels. The patient did well postoperatively and was discharged 5 days later with no neurological deficits.
She has been followed up for 5 months now, remaining asymptomatic, with clearly defined optic discs on fundoscopy and has fully recovered visual acuity. The 5-month postop MRI ruled out hydrocephalus or any recurrent lesion .