An 85-year-old Japanese man with a history of malignant melanoma of the nasal cavity presented to our department with severe thyrotoxicosis and poor blood glucose control. He had been treated for hypothyroidism secondary to Hashimoto’s disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus with insulin self-injection therapy before undergoing treatment of malignant melanoma. A surgical operation of his nasal cavity was done at first, followed by one of four planned cycles of nivolumab therapy. Subsequently, two courses of ipilimumab were given as standard therapy after nivolumab therapy. Two weeks later after receiving a dual course of ipilimumab as a third treatment, he presented with a fatigue, nausea, and sweating, which progressed to clinical and biochemical thyrotoxicosis. On admission to our hospital, he was febrile with a temperature of 38.0 °C, tachycardic, agitated, and acutely anxious but still conscious (restlessness). His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 14/15. His blood pressure had decreased to 70/50 mmHg.
His physical examination revealed a diffuse goiter without exophthalmoses. His abdomen was soft and non-tender and his skin was warm and wet. He was also diaphoretic with jugular venous distension and peripheral edema, and his chest was clinically clear. His medical history included hypothyroidism due to Hashimoto’s disease, diagnosed at 62 years of age and treated with thyroid hormone replacement, as well as type 2 diabetes mellitus treated by self-injection of insulin with a good glycemic control. He had both family histories of thyroid diseases and diabetes. An electrocardiogram showed marked tachycardia with atrial fibrillation, but a chest radiograph was normal.
The laboratory data are shown in Table . Laboratory investigation revealed the following thyroid function results: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) below sensitivity, free triiodothyronine (FT3) 31.7 pg/ml, and free thyroxine (FT4) 3.43 ng/dl. Remarkably, his thyroglobulin was elevated to 48,000 IU/ml. TSH receptor antibody was negative, and a 99mTc-labeled thyroid scan revealed a markedly decreased uptake (Tc retention index-uptake ratio 0.0%; normal range 0.4–3.0). His blood glucose was markedly elevated; in which case, we needed to increase the amount of insulin to control his blood glucose. Further immunological investigation revealed normal serum levels of anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibody, anti-insulinoma antigen 2 (IA-2) antibody, and insulin autoantibody (IAA).
According to the diagnostic criteria of the Japan Thyroid Association for thyroid storm , he was diagnosed as having thyroid storm 1 (TS1), definite thyroid storm, since he had thyrotoxicosis, a central nervous system symptom (restlessness), fever (38 °C), GI symptoms (nausea, vomiting), and tachycardia (135 beats per minute) in atrial fibrillation. Based on the diagnostic criteria of Burch and Wartofsky for thyroid storm, he scored 60; a score higher than 45 is suggestive of thyroid storm . Graves’ disease was less likely as thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin was within the normal range, and 99mTc-scintigraphy revealed a quite low uptake. These results indicated that his diagnosis of thyroid storm was due to destructive thyroiditis.
His clinical course is shown in Fig. . He was treated with an intravenously administered insulin infusion and intravenously administered fluid therapy. At first, the thyroid storm was treated with orally administered potassium iodide (50 mg every 6 hours) and a short-acting beta-adrenoreceptor blocker, landiolol hydrochloride, was used at 4–10 μg/kg per minute to control his heart rate. The potassium iodide was aborted when he was diagnosed as having distractive thyroiditis. Prednisolone was given at 0.5–0.7 mg/kg per day as a treatment for irAE and thyroid storm. Although previous reports suggested the optimum dosage of prednisolone to be 1–2 mg/kg per day [, ], we used a lower dose due to the coexisting and uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. By day 5, his tachycardia had resolved, and the landiolol hydrochloride was discontinued. On day 11, his thyroid function was found to have improved, and the amount of total insulin used to control his blood glucose was decreased. On day 25, he was found to have hypothyroidism, and so we restarted the replacement of thyroid hormone. He was discharged from our hospital on day 35 on daily maintenance insulin injection and levothyroxine sodium hydrate.