An 82-year-old woman with a history of chronic angle-closure glaucoma (ACG) in the left eye presented to our ophthalmology clinic complaining of intermittent double vision for 6 months, accompanied with blurry vision while reading and a “sandy” feeling in her eyes. Five years prior, the patient underwent bilateral cataract extraction with no intraoperative complications. Four years postoperatively, she began experiencing intermittent episodes of shallowing of the anterior chamber in her left eye with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), along with two acute angle-closure attacks, which were successfully treated with laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI). After LPIs were performed, the patient had another episode of acute shallowing of the chamber. Because no ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) was available, treatment by neodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG) capsulotomy was done to rule out the possibility of capsular bag distension syndrome and to address concerns of possible aqueous misdirection; however, she continued to experience episodes of elevated IOP afterward. She was started on latanoprost daily and dorzolamide/timolol twice daily.
Five years after cataract extraction, she was referred to our outpatient glaucoma service for evaluation of left eye intermittent chamber shallowing and UBM assessment. Visual acuity of the left eye was 20/150 without correction and 20/40-2 with correction as the patient had planned monovision with her initial cataract surgery. Visual acuity of the right eye was 20/25 without correction and 20/20 with correction. Goldmann applanation tonometry revealed IOP measurements of 14 mm Hg OS and 16 mm Hg OD. Slit-lamp examination OS demonstrated a shallow peripheral anterior chamber, patent LPIs at 3 and 9 o’clock positions in the iris, and an Alcon SA60WF IOL located posterior to the iris plane with optic against the posterior pupil margin. Slit-lamp examination OD was unremarkable as evidenced by a deep and quiet anterior chamber, a well-positioned PCIOL in the capsular bag, and a round and reactive iris. Normal pupil constriction and dilation were observed in both eyes. Gonioscopy OS demonstrated a closed angle 360° with peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) and no visible angle structures with the lens implant touching the posterior iris surface at the pupil. Gonioscopy OD showed adequate visualization of the posterior trabecular meshwork (TM). Gonioscopy and dynamic gonioscopy results of the left eye indicated the presence of chronic PAS in the peripheral chamber due to inability to visualize angle structures. Posterior vitreous detachment was observed in both eyes. UBM confirmed the presence of IOL haptics in the sulcus OS, with the lens optic and haptics anterior to the capsular bag. While no evidence of effusions or anterior rotation of ciliary processes were noted, UBM images also revealed the presence of a Soemmering’s ring and chronic angle-closure findings OS. Optical coherence tomography of the optic nerve showed a healthy retinal nerve fiber layer in both eyes.
At most recent follow-up, the patient’s IOP was effectively controlled on drops, with stable optical coherence tomography and VF findings. The patient declined further intraocular intervention at this time. She returned to her referring ophthalmologist on drops with follow-up to monitor her chronic angle closure.