A 66-year-old male patient underwent an electrophysiological study and five catheter ablation procedures for atrial fibrillation and atypical AFL. In the five previous catheter ablations due to radiofrequency, pulmonary vein (PV) isolation, cavo-tricuspid isthmus ablation, left atrial posterior wall isolation, atrial septum ablation, right PV carina ablation, superior vena cava isolation, and MI ablation, including coronary sinus (CS) and epicardial ablations, the MI line remained incomplete. During CS ablation, catheter impedance exceeded 200 ohms, and radiofrequency ablation was performed at a low output of 15–20 W. The patient complained of atypical AFL-induced palpitations that recurred 10 days after the fifth procedure, refractory to anti-arrhythmic drugs (bepridil and bisoprolol). The sixth catheter ablation for an atypical AFL was performed after obtaining written informed consent from the patient. He has no medical history other than this arrhythmia. On admission, the electrocardiogram showed 2:1 AFL with a heart rate of 124 bpm, echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 70% and left atrial diameter of 37.8 mm, and blood tests showed N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide 446.9 pg/mL with no other special findings. The AFL activation map with a 265 ms cycle length in the left atrium (LA) was created using the CARTO 3 mapping system (Biosense Webster, Irvine, CA, USA) and a 20-electrode mapping catheter (PENTARAY; Biosense Webster) showing peri-mitral AFL-like colouration with clockwise rotation (see , ). However, the MI line indicated a conduction block on the endocardial side and a centrifugal pattern on the 4 o’clock of the mitral valve annulus (MVA) . The local activation time was only 200 ms, suggesting epicardial or intramural crosslinking in the MI area. A 1.8-Fr catheter (EP Star, Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the vein of marshall (VOM) using the femoral approach, and an entrainment map was created at various locations as follows: The post-pacing interval-cycle length (PPI-CL) values were 0, 5, 0, 30, 40, and 40 ms at the 12 o’clock position of the MVA, 4 o’clock position of the MVA, 2 o’clock position of the MVA, LPV upper ridge, LPV lower ridge, and VOM 3–4 electrode on the endocardial block line in the MI, respectively (, site 1–6). Based on the above findings, we diagnosed peri-mitral AFL via pathways other than endocardial conduction on the MI. When radiofrequency energy (40 W, 30–60 s) was applied, as shown in , cycle length prolongation without a change in the conduction sequence was observed (from 265 to 400 ms), although the AFL did not terminate. Considering the potential change in the tachycardia circuit, entrainment pacing was repeated at the same sites; however, PPI-CL had similar values. We considered that radiofrequency application from the endocardial side could not reach the tachycardia circuit extending from the intramural region to the epicardium and decided to perform CBA in the same area. First, an eight-electrode mapping catheter (ACHIEVE ADVANCE mapping catheter, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was anchored into the left inferior PV , and the northern hemisphere of the cryoballoon (Arctic Front Advance pro, Medtronic) was directed towards the MI for ablation (freezing time: 180 s, minimum nadir balloon temperature: −38°C). Subsequently, the catheter was pulled to the balloon tip, and the steerable sheath (FlexCath Advance, Medtronic) was bent approximately 90° to the left atrial appendage base for second ablation (freezing time: 180 s, minimum nadir temperature: −38°C) . Finally, the MI annulus side was targeted. Since the northern hemisphere of the cryoballoon could not target the MI annulus side using similar catheter orientation as in the first and second CBA procedures, a third CBA was performed by bending the steerable sheath tip down and pulling the sheath downward while unbending and crimping the northern hemisphere of the cryoballoon to the MI annulus side (freezing time: 180 s, minimum nadir balloon temperature: −37°C) ( and ). Overall, five CBA procedures were performed at different angles. During the second CBA, the cycle length was prolonged and terminated . No electrocardiographic ST changes were observed during the CBA. Differential pacing confirmed a bidirectional block of the MI line. Postmapping was performed, confirming wide and uniform lesion formation in MI area . The session was completed without complications. The patient was symptom-free after discharge from our hospital and maintained sinus rhythm for 12 months.