In December 2021, a 7 month-old female infant with Down Syndrome, was admitted to another hospital (Annunziata Hospital in Cosenza, Italy) with acute respiratory distress as a result of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Medical history evidenced that she was born eutocial at 31 weeks of gestation after regular pregnancy. Birth weight 2,750 kg. In last October she was followed at home by the pediatrician for a viral bronchiolitis.
At hospital admission she was first assisted through non-invasive ventilation an underwent a course of antibiotics (Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg/die), corticosteroids (dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg/die), and low molecular weight heparin (100 U/kg bpd) according to the local guidelines at that time. As she wasn’t improving clinically, it was also decided to start a 5-day course of Remdesivir (loading dose 5 mg/Kg, then 2.5 mg/kg), two-doses of anti-IL-6 (Tocilizumab) and one administration of monoclonal antibodies (Casirivimab-Imdevimab).
Due to a progressive worsening of the clinical picture she was eventually transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit of the same hospital. The chest-CT scan, performed on the same day her clinical conditions worsened, showed evidence of interstitial pneumonia evolving to an irregular paving pattern . Unfortunately, she further worsened developing a hypoxic respiratory failure for which invasive mechanical ventilation with an FiO2 of 100% was started.
On day 15th of her hospitalization, it was decided, due to the lack of clinical improvement, to transfer the patient to our PICU for potential need of extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
Once she was admitted to our hospital, SARS-CoV-2 infection was confirmed through real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on a nasopharyngeal swab and bronco-alveolar lavage (BAL). The microbiological work-up evidenced a positive blood culture for multisensitive “Candida albicans.” Blood chemistry gave the following values: White Blood Cells (WBC) 13.0 103/μL, Hemoglobin 15 gr/dl, Platelets 137 103/μL, Neutrophils 10.7 103/μL Lymphocytes 1.59 103/μL, C-Reactive Protein and Procalcitonin returned negative, Ferritin 552 ng/ml, D-dimers 1.96 μg/ml, Anti-thrombin III 104%, hepatic and renal biomarkers were in the normal range.
At the time of admission, the patient was hemodynamically stable without need of inotropes or vasopressors (lactate min 1.2–max 2.9 mmol/L). She continued invasive mechanical ventilation (Peep 10 Pip 24 RR 24 FiO2 100%) in association with nitric oxide 20 ppm and prone-supine position. Arterial gas analysis showed a PaO2/FiO2 ratio min 95–max 160 mmHg; paO2 min 76–max 100 mmHg, pCO2 min 38–max 44 mmHg).
We continued ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg/day), dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg/day), low molecular weight heparin (100 U/kg bpd) and, in order to treat “Candida albicans,” Micafungine was added.
Due to the child’s critical conditions, it was also decided to prolong the therapy with Remdesivir to 10 days in total (2.5 mg/kg/die) and she also received intravenous immunoglobulins (400 mg/kg/die) for 5 days.
At admission, sublingual microcirculation measurements using handheld vital—microscopy with an IDF technology (Cytocam, Braedius Medical, Huizen, Netherlands) were performed (Supplemental ). Briefly, the IDF imaging technique uses green light produced from a ring of circumferential light-emitting diodes at the end of a light guide through a magnifying lens. The green light is transmitted to the tissue and absorbed by Hb; thus, the RBCs appear as dark globules and WBCs as white globules. The imaging results in sharp contour visualization of the microcirculation, showing flowing RBCs and leukocytes captured by a high-definition image sensor. The IDF handheld vital microscope captures images at a rate of 25 frames/s, of which 100 frames are recorded in a single video clip . Sublingual video clips with at least one postcapillary venule unit (C-PCV) were included for analysis. The selection criterion used to define a C-PCV vessel segment was that a Capillary (Cap) should merge into a PCV (small venule distal to the capillary) with no branching vessels present . Study of the C-PCV unit enables the tracking of WBCs from the Cap into the PCV thereby identifying the presence of activated leukocytes. We made a quantitative assessment of leukocytes using a manual counting methodology in sublingual recordings subdividing the screen into 9 rectangles. We counted the number of C-PCV in each square and the number of leukocytes that were identified in each C-PCV . Furthermore, to distinguish between leukocytes and plasma gaps (PGs) and to identify the nature of the kinetics of the leukocytes in the capillaries and venules, we analyzed the microcirculatory images using space time diagrams (STD) . STDs of single vessels can be generated using specialized softwares such as the Analysis Manager V2 software, which was originally developed for the measurement of RBCs velocity and requires user interactions. Briefly, the y-axis of the STD corresponds to the length of the detected vessel segment. The x-axis corresponds to time in line with the frame number. Each column represents the image intensity along a vessel centerline of one video frame. Alternating black and white bands in the STDs are formed by flowing RBCs and white bands of PGs or leukocytes, respectively. The slopes of the black and white bands in these diagrams represent the velocity (distance/time velocity), RBCs accumulation behind the larger and slower leukocytes is defined as the “train formation” of RBCs and is detectable in the STDs as a large dark band next to the large white band. These dark bands behind the leukocytes caused by the train formation of the RBCs are larger than the black lines of the RBCs and the white lines of the PGs. Leukocytes were further subdivided into non-rolling (NRL) and rolling cells (RL). Rolling leukocytes were identified by the marked deviation in the titled bands on the STDs. The change in the slope marked slowdown in the leukocyte velocity. Non-rolling leukocytes showed a linear (straight) within the band on the STD .
Sublingual microcirculation analysis revealed not only the presence of microcirculatory alterations characterized by RBCs with sluggish and no-flow vessels, as already reported in our studies , but also an extensive presence of microcirculatory leukocytes. In we present the numbers of PCV units per selected each video, in , the pictures of each selected video associated to the space-time diagram for each PCV-unit and the respective space time diagram describing the behavior of the leukocytes (rolling vs. non-rolling).
On day 23rd of her hospitalization, the patient developed a septic shock which needed norepinephrine (max dose required 0.15 μg/kg/min) and antimicrobial therapies were implemented with piperacillin-tazobactam (100 mg/kg tpd), meropenem (40 mg/kg tpd) and amphotericin B (5 mg/kg). Dexamethasone was reduced for a persistent leukopenia and central venous access was changed. Blood chemistry on this day showed a WBC count of 4.26 103/μL, Hemoglobin 9.8 gr/dl, Platelets 50 103/μL, Neutrophils 2.62 103/μL Lymphocytes 1.14 103/μL, C-Reactive Protein 2.48 mg/dL; Procalcitonin 2.58 ng/ml; Ferritin 1421 ng/ml, D-dimers 4.61 μg/ml, Anti-thrombin III 88%, hepatic and renal biomarkers remained in normal range limits.
A week later she progressively improved and norepinephrine was stopped. She was weaned by invasive mechanical ventilation on day 30th and discharged by PICU on day 41st .