A 30-year-old woman with no history of chronic diseases, no drug use. She went to the emergency department with an acute abdominal pain, an exploratory laparotomy was performed, finding multiple peritoneal adenopathy, with histopathology report of peritoneal tuberculosis. In search of the primary focus, a three-region tomography was performed, in which multiple lymphadenopathies were found: axillary, cervical, mesenteric, retroperitoneal, and inguinal, as shown in .
Four days later, presented with occipital headache predominantly right retroauricular, oppressive, of sudden onset, associated with nausea, vomiting, phosphenes, and tinnitus. One day later, the patient presented numbness in the right arm, pain, and edema. A neck ultrasound was requested, which reported multiple cervical lymphadenopathy and partial occlusion of the left IJV. Physical examination revealed a 15-point Glasgow, bilateral papilledema, with painful ophthalmoplegia. No meningeal signs. Hyperemic right limb with hyperesthesia and edema. In addition to increased thoracic superficial venous circulation.
Given the clinical suspicion of cerebral venous thrombosis due to occlusion of the IJV, a diagnostic cerebral angiography study was performed. With findings of the absence of venous flow in the left internal jugular to the left brachycephalic trunk, dilatation of the left external jugular vein, and increased volume of the right IJV; in addition to slowing in the late venous phase of contrast medium clearance as shown in .
The patient was treated with low-molecular-weight heparin, adjusted to her weight. After the start of treatment, the patient reported an improvement in the headache and clinically edema and pain in the right arm decreased. In the angiographic control , which was carried out 7 days later, it was shown that the flow was not fully restored, but symmetry could be observed in both IJVs and so decrease in the venous collateral circulation. The patient was discharged 8 days later with improvement and oral anticoagulation as well as start antituberculous treatment.