A 74-year-old Filipino woman presented with a skin lesion in her right antecubital fossa. It was a 2 cm soft, mobile, well-circumscribed mass which appeared over three weeks. Suspecting liposarcoma, her general practitioner referred her to the hospital's surgical team. Urgent excision biopsy revealed metastatic carcinoma expressing neuroendocrine markers. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the patient had a strong positivity for CK20, which was a sensitive and specific marker for Merkel cell carcinoma . She was also highly positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD117, thus confirming the diagnosis of MCC. She showed no staining for TTF-1, which excluded lung primary small cell carcinoma.
Subsequent computed tomography (CT) examinations of her chest, abdomen and pelvis identified significant right-sided axillary lymphadenopathy, with the largest node measuring 6 cm in diameter. The CT was conducted two months after our patient's initial clinical presentation, and the axillary adenopathy was now clinically apparent. There was no hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy observed. Her lungs, bones and intra-abdominal organs were all clear of metastasis. A positron emission tomography (PET) body scan showed high uptake in her right axilla, with moderate heterogeneous uptake in some bowel loops. This was thought to represent inflammatory change in the presence of diverticular disease. No definite primary source, however, was identified.
At axillary lymph node dissection, eight of 26 lymph nodes, as well as the axillary vein, were found to contain tumour. Adjuvant radiotherapy was administered to our patient's axillary and subclavicular regions (42 Gy, 21 fractions, 31 days), but it was postponed until six months postoperatively due to the presence of seroma and lymphoedema. Surgical and oncological follow-up at intervals of two, three and six months found our patient asymptomatic.
At 18 months from the initial diagnosis, our patient was referred by her general practitioner for urgent review with symptoms of obstruction, specifically early satiety, bloating, colicky pains and occasional vomiting. On examination, a firm mass in her right upper quadrant was clinically detectable. A whole body CT scan found a tumour in the ileocaecal valve that extended into the caecal lumen . The tumour was associated with mesenteric lymphadenopathy and local infiltration into the pericolic fat and vessels.
At colonoscopy a tumour was seen at 70 cm from our patient's anus. The morphology and immunoprofile of the biopsy confirmed it as a recurrence of MCC. Markers for colorectal cancer (CA 19.9, CEA) were negative.
Our patient underwent a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. At surgery the tumour was seen to be fungating and involved the full thickness of her bowel wall. Histological examination showed clear resection margins but vascular invasion and multiple lymph node involvement were also noted. Our patient's postoperative recovery was uneventful. Follow-up CT scan 3 months after the resection revealed peritoneal deposits with no recurrence in the right axilla . She was then scheduled for palliative chemotherapy.
Prior to chemotherapy our patient became increasingly frail and deteriorated rapidly. She died of bronchopneumonia 28 months after the initial diagnosis of metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma.