An inherently healthy 87-year-old man underwent first aid after a traffic accident. At the hospital, his general condition was stable and there were no abnormalities in his vital signs. Blood biochemistry tests showed an increased inflammation and a marked increase in pancreatic enzymes (AMY 818 U/L, P-AMY 705 U/L, and lipase 1191 U/L). Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed fluid retention around the pancreas and wall thickening of the horizontal segment of the duodenum . The pancreatic head was severely injured, and laceration to the pancreatic head was suspected. The duodenum wall was enlarged, especially at the third part, and the horizontal segment was considerably large. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed to evaluate the presence of a main pancreatic duct injury. Pancreatography revealed a substantial leakage of the contrast medium from the main pancreatic duct at the pancreatic head . Endoscopic naso-pancreatic drainage (ENPD) was performed at the proximal side of the injury.
Following the diagnosis of a pancreatic injury of grade IV or V, an emergency operation was performed. Intraoperative findings confirmed the severe pancreatic head injury . The pancreas was completely transected at the head of the pancreas, but the degree of disruption itself was not high. Based on these findings, the present case was classified as grade IV according to the AAST-OIS classification. In addition, the horizontal segment of the duodenum was widely swollen and its wall was thickened.
The ENPD tube could not be differentiated from the main pancreatic duct because the ENPD interposition was moved by the operative procedure. Our first treatment strategy was a primary repair by suturing the pancreatic laceration. However, the ENPD tube could not be detected at the main pancreatic duct, and the severe laceration would not heal by simple suturing. Although damage control surgery would have been another choice for this condition, our suspicions of a massive duodenum injury required us to remove this injured organ. We used PD-II as the reconstruction method. Pancreatojejunostomy was performed, with the Blumgart modification added for pancreatic duct-to-mucosa anastomosis. The pancreas was transected diagonally, and it was difficult to use the lacerated pancreas in anastomosis, so an anastomosis was performed by adding a pancreatic resection on the distal side. The operative time was 389 min, and blood loss was 527 mL. There were no postoperative events. No abnormal findings such as an abscess formation or pseudoaneurysm formation were found on computed tomography images 10 days after surgery . He was discharged on postoperative day 25. Examining the resected specimen of the pancreas, the pancreatic parenchyma revealed acute pancreatitis with an evidence of fat necrosis and neutrophil infiltration into the pancreatic parenchyma. The resected specimen of the duodenum also revealed that a mucosal enlargement and irregular bumps were found from the descending segment to the horizontal segment . Microscopic findings showed that atypical lymphocytes with a sickle-shaped nucleus and a nodular structure in the segment of the duodenum wall thickening occurred. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD20 and bcl-2 and negative for CD5 . Duodenum follicular lymphoma (FL) was diagnosed.