An 80-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with loss of consciousness. Her daughter reported that she had been experiencing general weakness, fever, jaundice in the eye, and abdominal pain starting 3 days prior. She had been previously diagnosed with distal common bile duct cancer with para-aortic and hepato-duodenal lymph node metastasis and underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage (ERBD) a year ago. The patient had a temperature of 38.2 °C, a heart rate of 108 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 72/50 mmHg, and a SaO2 of 97%. Abdominal physical examination revealed tenderness without rebound on the upper right quadrant of the abdomen and a positive Murphy sign.
Biochemical analyses demonstrated leukocytosis and neutrophilia as follows: hemoglobin, 10.2 g/dL; white blood cell count, 24.79 × 109/L (neutrophils: 83%, lymphocytes: 4%, monocytes: 7%, myelocytes: 1%), platelet count, 315 × 109/L; and hypersensitive C-reactive protein (CRP), 20.797 mg/L (reference range 0-0.75 mg/dL). The hepatic enzymes showed mixed cholestatic and hepatic features: alkaline phosphatase, 904 U/L (reference range 25-100U/L); alanine aminotransferase, 105 U/L (reference range 3–40 U/L); and gamma-glutamyl-transferase, 204 U/L (reference range 0-50U/L). The total bilirubin level was 8.36 mg/dL (reference range 0.2–1.2 mg/dL), and the direct bilirubin was 7.68 mg/dL. Hepatic synthetic function values were as follows: albumin, 2.3 g/dL (reference range 3.5-5 g/dL); prothrombin time, 21.0 s (reference range 11–15 s); activated partial thromboplastin clotting time, 62.4 s (reference range 27–45 s); and D-dimer, 7.53 (reference range 0-0.5µg/mL).
Compared with previous computed tomography findings, gallbladder, common bile duct, and intrahepatic duct dilatation had deteriorated, suggesting biliary tract obstruction caused by ERBD malfunction followed by cholecystitis. ERBD repositioning or removal was needed but not applicable considering the general condition of the patient. Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage and percutaneous transhepatic gallbladder drainage were performed. Two sets of aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures and one set of bile cultures (BACT/ALERT Culture Media, bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) were initiated prior to an intravenous infusion of 2 g cefotaxime every eight hours.
Bacterial growth was confirmed in the aerobic blood culture bottles after 21 h. The sample was cultured on MacConkey (MICROMEDIA Corp., Busan, Korea) and blood agars (MICROMEDIA Corp.) with 5% CO2 for 24 h. Two colonial morphologies were isolated from blood agar, but none grew on MacConkey agar. First one was identified as Streptococcus constellatus subsp. pharyngis. However, the other yellowish, opaque small colonies were poorly identified, with low discrimination quantity to Aggregatibacter aphrophilus by conventional biochemical identification methods using the Vitek2 NH card (bioMérieux). Similarly, many gram positive cocci and moderate gram negative bacilli in bile culture grew on blood agar after 24 h. Gram-positive cocci were identified as Streptococcus constellatus and other small interspersed colonies with few large colonies were poorly identified with A. aphrophilus.
The biochemical results were negative for urease, ornithine decarboxylase, α-arabinose, and N-acetyl‑D‑glucosamine and positive for D-galactose, phenylalanine arylamidase, and β-galactopyranosidase indoxyl.
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics Inc., Billerica, MA, USA) also could not identify the isolate. The greatest similarities were obtained with A.
aphrophilus strains, but identification was unreliable, with log scores in the range of 1.47 to 1.80. A single measurement exceeded the 1.7-log-score breakpoint, but the result was not reproducible.
We sequenced the 16 S rRNA gene for identification at the species level and obtained 1474 bp with 99.73% similarity with the sequence of A.
kilianii strains (GenBank accession no: NRCN00000000.1, Fig. ).
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing for ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin, imipenem, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was performed by E-test method (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Étoile, France) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined visually as the lowest concentrations with no visible growth. The MICs values in our study were as follows; ampicillin (MIC 0.19 µg/mL), amoxicillin-clavulanate (MIC 0.38 µg/mL), cefotaxime (MIC 0.016 µg/mL), ciprofloxacin (MIC < 0.006 µg/mL), imipenem (MIC 1.0 µg/mL), and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (MIC 0.023 µg/mL). The Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M45-A2 guideline provides only information on broth microdilution when interpreting the MICs of the HACEK group , so susceptibility interpretation was not performed.
In our case, because both bacteria responded to cefotaxime, initial treatment was continued. On day 3, CRP began to decrease, and the patient was able to make eye contact. On day 6, the patient was able to answer simple questions. On the 13th day, CRP decreased to 2.048 mg/L, and the patient’s general condition improved. Her family insisted on discharge, and she was released with oral antibiotics. A month later, follow-up was conducted by phone. The patient’s daughter said the infection had improved, but the patient’s general condition had worsened, and the family was planning to admit her to a hospice hospital.