A 53-year-old woman was admitted to the clinic with a 2-month history of trigeminal neuralgia, dysesthesia and hypoesthesia in the left side of the face, combined with a lengthy history of persistent temporal headaches and a progressive hearing problem. An MRI revealed a tumor in the left Meckel's cave, with partial compression of the trigeminal nerve and extension to the posterior cranial fossa . A temporobasal craniotomy was performed and the lesion was completely removed. The histological pattern of the specimen was classified initially as an atypical meningioma (WHO grade II) in 2005. Two years later, in 2007, a follow-up MRI showed a contrast-enhanced lesion, a seemingly recurrent meningioma mass in Meckel's cave. A local stereotactic radiotherapy (10 Χ 4 Gy) was applied. However, the patient was re-admitted to the hospital 1 year later, in 2008, because of progressive clinical disturbance and increased volume of the lesion seen in follow-up MRI scans , and a decision for re-operation was made. A left lateral suboccipital approach was used under neuronavigational guidance. The tumor was almost completely removed. The histopathologic examination of the specimen [–] showed fragments of well-organized, compacted and nested epitheloid cells of the tumor dispersed in lobules (Zellballen architecture, composed of nests of polygonal chief cells enclosed by trabecula of fibrous and sustentacular elongated cells) which were histologically and immunohistochemically classified as a paraganglioma (WHO grade I). A comparative histopathologic reinvestigation of the tumor specimen surgically removed during the first operation gave the result that the first tumor was a paraganglioma too, not an atypical meningioma. Five months after the second surgical intervention, in 2009, another local recurrence of the tumor was diagnosed in a follow-up MRI . Consequently, the tumor was removed and again classified as a paraganglioma (WHO grade I).
In addition to the examination of hematoxylin and eosin-stained tumor tissue [ and ], an immunohistochemistry investigation was performed. Several markers, including neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, neurofilament (NF) proteins, chromogranin A, Gomori reticulin stain, and S-100 protein, were used to identify immunohistochemical features of the tumor. NSE immunoreactivity was strongly positive . Immunostaining for NF was also positive . These reactions, as well as a positive reaction for synaptophysin, permitted identification of the chief cells. Gomori reticulin stain showed septae delineating Zellballen . Chief cells were not immunoreactive for chromogranin A, and sustentacular cells were not immunoreactive for S-100 protein. All of the primary and recurrent tumors had similar histopathologic features.
The proliferative activity, given as the percentage of Ki-67/MIB-1 immunoreactive cells, was calculated using a 10 × 10 square ocular grid. The tumor cells showed a mean of 20% proliferative activity, as measured by Ki-67/MIB-1 staining . Ki-67/MIB-1 expression levels were similar in all primary and recurrent tumor specimens.
It was decided to confirm further the diagnosis of paraganglioma using an electron microscopic (EM) examination. For this purpose, a transmission electron microscopy study was carried out in specific areas of the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks, using a modified protocol of previously described various methods. The areas that were rich in chief cells as identified by immunohistochemistry and light microscopy were marked on the surface of the paraffin-embedded blocks. In these marked areas, tissue fragments of 1 mm3 were cut with a sharp razor blade. Samples of 1 mm3 that were cut out were deparaffinized using toluene solution at room temperature for 90 minutes. The specimens were transferred to an absolute alcohol solution, and after a reprocessing protocol, the re-embedded epon blocks of the tissue pieces were sectioned and ultrathin sections of 400-600 Åf were obtained using an ultramicrotome (LKB Ultramicrotome, Stockholm, Sweden). Thick sections were stained with toluidine blue and examined. The ultrathin sections were contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Finally, these ultrathin sections were analyzed and documented photographically using a transmission electron microscope (JEOL 100 C, Tokyo, Japan). The ultrathin sections permitted the identification of neurosecretory granules, which are the distinctive ultrastructural feature of chief cells and confirmed the diagnosis of paraganglioma in this case .