A 60-year-old Caucasian male retired nurse was admitted three years ago to our Infectious Diseases Hospital because of a three-day history of ingravescent dyspnoea, a skin abscess on his left arm and a very high fever. He had a past medical history of arterial hypertension, ischemic cardiomyopathy, cholecystectomy, lumbar discal hernia self-treated with steroids in case of lumbar pain, and an allergy to ceftriaxone.
Thirteen days prior to the present admission, our patient was admitted to an emergency room of another hospital for more severe lumbar pain; there he received intravenous steroids that improved his pain, and he was discharged on the same day. After three days, he consulted his general practitioner because of fever and the swelling of his left arm where a peripheral intravenous line was located during his previous emergency admission. With the suspicion of phlebitis, he was given piperacillin and calciparine for seven days. However, due to the persistence of the fever and arm swelling and the onset of dyspnoea, one week later he was admitted to a general hospital. His blood pressure was 100/60mmHg, pulse rate 120beats/min and temperature 39.5°C. Physical examination revealed right basal chest crepitations and an abscess on his left arm. Blood examinations showed a white blood cell count of 9.2 per mm3 with 76% neutrophils, C-reactive protein 58mg/dL (normal value <0.60mg/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 90 (normal value 0-12mm/h) and glycemia of 456mg/dL.
Red blood cells, platelet counts, and the other blood examinations were normal. A chest X-ray showed a right basal consolidation. On the second day of admission, his skin abscess was surgically drained, yielding S. aureus with a vancomycin minimum inhibitory concentration of 1μg/mL. On the same day, our patient developed chest pain and was admitted to the cardiologic ICU for an inferior ST segment elevation myocardial infarction.
On day 4, his clinical conditions worsened and our patient presented with seizures: total-body computerized tomography showed multiple cerebral lesions described as brain abscesses, right pneumonia and scapular soft tissue abscesses . Blood cultures were then performed. He was started on imipenem (500mg intravenously three times a day), ciprofloxacin (200mg twice daily) and teicoplanin (200mg once daily).
On day 5, because of persisting fever and dyspnoea, our patient was transferred to the ICU of our Infectious Disease Institute. At the moment of ICU admission, he was febrile (39.8°C), confused and dyspnoic: blood and draining cultures were performed, and empiric antibiotic therapy, including meropenem (1g intravenously three times per day), linezolid (600mg intravenously twice daily) and levofloxacin (500mg intravenously twice daily), was started. Urinary antigen tests for Legionella and Streptococcus pneumoniae were negative.
His fever still persisted by day 6. A vertebral nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging study was negative for spondylodiscitis and transthoracic echocardiography showed no endocardial vegetations. On day 7, another surgical drainage of his left arm and scapular soft tissue abscesses was performed. His clinical condition was stable. Both the blood cultures and swabs performed in our Infectious Diseases Hospital yielded MRSA.
Both strains of SA isolates were methicillin-resistant. Molecular characterization was conducted by polymerase chain reaction of mecA, pvl and major enterotoxin content genes, SCCmec-typing and multilocus sequence typing (MLST); pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was used only to define possible relationships among the isolates. All techniques were performed as previously described [,]. Strains were identical, as demonstrated by PFGE (data not shown) and belonged to the ST8 SCCmec IV.3. A further characterization to define the virulence gene content showed that the strains were PVL-negative, but possessed different superantigen toxins (enterotoxins k, q, d, j and tst), all conferring the hypervirulent behavior demonstrated by the strains. The isolated strains were susceptible to rifampin, fluoroquinolones, gentamicin, tetracycline and cotrimoxazole and were also fully susceptible to glycopeptides, linezolid, daptomycin, quinupristin/dalfopristin and tigecycline. The SA strain isolated during the previous admission to another hospital was not available to perform further microbiologic analysis.
On day 12, a whole-body computed tomography showed that the multiple brain abscesses previously described had worsened, and new brain lesions were evident. In addition, computed tomography showed the presence of left basal pneumonia and the onset of new multiple muscle abscesses (left deltoid, paravertebral, left pectoral and right psoas, gluteal and iliac). A neurosurgery consultation excluded the possibility of draining the brain abscesses. Daily administration of daptomycin 6mg/kg was started and the administration of meropenem was interrupted.
On day 22, the clinical and radiologic findings improved. Our patient became non-febrile, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein decreased. On day 38, a chest X-ray was normal, daptomycin and levofloxacin were interrupted, and our patient was discharged in good general condition. Administration of linezolid 600mg twice a day was continued for two weeks. After a two-year period, our patient is still in good health.