A 60-year-old man, who had been on haemodialysis for 3 years due to diabetic nephropathy, had a history of myocardial infarction and stent implantation, and was receiving anticoagulants for chronic atrial fibrillation, developed cardiopulmonary arrest on the street. At the first contact of an emergency medical service, his initial rhythm was VF, which was successfully terminated by an automated external defibrillator. He was transferred to the hospital, where emergent coronary angiography showed no significant progression of coronary artery stenotic lesions. Echocardiography showed the patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction to be 41% with left ventricular diastolic and systolic dimensions of 53 and 40 mm, respectively, thus suggesting that the VF in this case was due to an old myocardial infarction with left ventricular dysfunction. He recovered without any neurological abnormality within a few days. The medical therapy at the time of admission was warfarin 1 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, pitavastatin 4 mg, ezetimibe 100 mg, linagliptin 5 mg, repaglinide 0.75 mg, lanthanum carbonate 750 mg, and precipitated calcium carbonate 500 mg per day. There was no family history of sudden cardiac death. An electrocardiogram was not suggestive of long QT or Brugada syndrome.
An S-ICD was recommended for secondary prevention of sudden cardiac death rather than a transvenous ICD, because the patient did not require pacing therapy for bradycardia support, cardiac resynchronization, or antitachycardia pacing and therefore might have been at high risk for infection and venous access trouble due to diabetes and haemodialysis. A pre-screening test was performed in the supine and standing positions as well as on exercise. The primary vector sensing from the proximal sensing electrode ring on the subcutaneous electrode to the active surface of the device did not pass the pre-screening test, but both the secondary vector sensing from the distal sensing electrode ring on the subcutaneous electrode to the active surface of the device and the alternate vector sensing from the distal sensing electrode ring to the proximal sensing electrode ring on the subcutaneous electrode did pass.
An S-ICD with a left parasternal electrode was implanted without any complication by the two-incision technique. There were no artefacts during the tapping test at the proximal or distal electrodes. The alternate vector was selected according to the automatic vector setup. As per the protocol, VF was induced via the 50-Hz pulse method after the device implantation, where adequate sensing of VF wavelets was observed. The first 65-J shock effectively restored sinus rhythm with a shock impedance of 33 ohms.
On the morning of the third post-operative day, S-ICD shock therapy was delivered. Because surface electrocardiogram monitoring revealed no tachyarrhythmias during the shock therapy, the lead noise was considered the cause of inappropriate shock therapy. Although air entrapment at the electrodes was suggested as a cause of the lead noise, tapping at either proximal or distal electrode resulted in no artefacts. Therefore, the possibility of air entrapment at the connector between the lead and the generator was considered, but provocative maneuvers failed to reproduce any artefacts including myopotential oversensing.
On the seventh post-operative day, inappropriate shock was delivered again . Device interrogation revealed that a reproducible noise could be detected by tapping at the generator but not at the proximal or distal electrodes. There was no obvious evidence of lead dislodgement, air entrapment around the devices, or a loose pin at the connecter on fluoroscopic imaging . Because the reproducible noise was observed in both the secondary and alternate vectors, the sensing vector was changed from the alternate vector to the primary vector. Appropriate shock delivery without a sensing abnormality was confirmed by a defibrillation test. On the sixteenth post-operative day, the patient was discharged from the hospital with optimal medical therapy in accordance with the current guidelines, including amiodarone (200 mg per day), which was initiated in the current admission. No β-blocker therapy was introduced because of sinus bradycardia below 50 bpm.
Two months after the discharge, the patient died of VF after receiving appropriate S-ICD shock delivery seven times. The S-ICD was retrieved from the body , and it was revealed that the seal plug was incompletely sealed . However, after reinsertion of a torque wrench, the seal plug returned to its normal closed position without any damage .