A 49-year-old woman presented with back pain. She had no particular medical history, but she has suffered from lumbago since she was young. And she had no surgical or drug consumption history. There was no family history associated with this disease. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a posterior mediastinal mass measuring 4.2 × 1.8 × 3.2 cm closed to the tenth thoracic vertebra (A), while plain chest X-ray was normal. Chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated hypo-intensity on T1-weighted images and hyper-intensity on T2-weighted images (B). It was estimated that the posterior mediastinal mass did not contain a tumor component. The tumor was growing and symptomatic; therefore, surgery was indicated.
The patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in a lateral decubitus position and fixed with a fixing mattress (Magic Bed, Okada Medical Co. Ltd., Tokyo) on the operating table. An artificial pneumothorax for scope introduction was produced by needle thoracentesis under atmospheric pressure. Two ports were created at the seventh and eighth intercostal spaces; each skin incision was 2–5 mm long. A mini thoracoscope (2.9 mm IDEAL EYES, Stryker Co., Kalamazoo, MI) was used. The mediastinal semilucent cyst existed at the anterolateral portion of the tenth thoracic vertebra. The fluid in the cyst (10 mL) was absorbed using a 16G needle; rapid cytology of the fluid showed no malignancies. The fluid was watery and crystal-clear without cell particles. A coin-sized fenestration was created using a pair of scissors and electrocautery. There was a risk of hemorrhage at the anterior surface of the vertebral body when the whole cyst was dissected due to the exposure of blood vessels on the luminal surface of the cyst. Surgical cyst fenestration without excision of the cyst was performed under mini-VATS (A, B). At the end of the procedure, a double-lumen silicon catheter (18F Phicon Samp Catheter, Fuji Systems Co., Tokyo) was inserted into the thoracic cavity.
The thoracic catheter was removed on postoperative day 1, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 4. The postoperative course was uneventful. Histopathologic evaluation of the resected specimen revealed a mesothelial cyst (A, B), and the origin of the mediastinal cyst was pleura. The patient experienced complete relief of symptoms. Fluid accumulation in the cyst was not observed on CT images 12 months postoperatively .