A 70-year-old man was referred to the Movement Disorder Unit of the University of Pisa for gait difficulties, described as the tendency towards a left lateropulsion while walking followed by frequent backward/lateral falls and difficulty in standing up from a sitting position. This had lasted for 3 years, and in the same period he also referred difficulty in controlling his strength of movements. Urinary urge incontinence was also present.
In addition, his wife reported limb movement during sleep, although from his clinical history this was not compatible with REM Sleep Behavior Disorder . His medical history also reported hypertension, anxiety-depression disorder, type 2 diabetes and chronic constipation. However, there was no mention of any family history of neurological disease.
On neurological examination the patient showed ataxic gait, with defined spasticity in the left lower limb, and asymmetric pendular movements of the upper limbs more evident on the right side. He maintained the Romberg position but with multidirectional oscillations, and was unable to perform tandem gait. Trunk and limb ataxia, especially on the left side, and adiadochokinesia of the left hand were evident. He was able to perform the finger-to-nose test and the heel-to-knee test with some difficulty on the left side. Brisk symmetrical deep tendon reflexes were detected with increase in the reflexogenic zone in the lower limbs and the upper left limb, but with absence of the Babinski sign. Mild hypokinesia was found in all 4 limbs, especially in the left foot.
Blood samples ruled out coeliac disease and vitamin E deficiency. Electromyography did not reveal lower motor neuron involvement; sensitive and motor nerve conduction studies were normal.
MRI disclosed atrophy of the cerebellar hemispheres and vermis , and also revealed gliotic areas of the frontoparietal white matter bilaterally and dilated perivascular spaces at the basal ganglia level .
DAT-SCAN imaging showed bilateral nigro-striatal degeneration , which oriented us towards a form of parkinsonism. Furthermore, the presence of ataxia concomitant with mild parkinsonism and pyramidal signs, in a patient with anamnestic presence of urinary dysfunction, led us to make a diagnosis of a possible MSA-C .
MSA mimicries should always be considered in the case of uncommon presentation of the disease [–]. Therefore, because of the atypical disease course (after 3 years from the onset of symptoms he was still walking without any support despite marked spasticity in the left leg), we conducted a next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis by Miseq illumine sequencer of all coding exons and related exon/intron junctions with SureSelectXT custom (Agilent Technologies) for the following genes: FXN, ATM, SETX, TTPA, SACS, SIL1, NPC1, NPC2, ANO10, PHYH, OPA1, C10ORF2, SPG7, POLG. Then we performed confirmation of variants by direct sequencing on DNA (Analyzer 3500, Applied biosystem). We also analyzed genes through Polymerase Chain Reaction analysis for SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA 7, SCA8, SCA12, SCA17, DLRPA, ATXN1, ATXN3, CACNA1A, ATXN7, ATXN80S, PPP2R2B, TBP, ATN1. A homozygous missense variant [c.1529C > T, p.(Ala510Val)] was found in the exon 11 of the SPG7 gene. Although this variant can be detected up to 2–3% of normal individuals in large genomic databases, in the last decade its pathogenic role has been described .
The patient’s parents had lived in a small village of around 200 inhabitants, so we cannot exclude consanguinity.