A 24-year-old male patient with a history of D-TGA with VSD who underwent Rastelli repair at age three and subsequently lost to follow-up was admitted for worsening dyspnoea on exertion and fatigue for 1 month duration.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction with ejection fraction (EF) of 25% with a 1.5 cm LV thrombus ( and Videos 1–3). The RV was moderately dilated with severe systolic dysfunction and suprasystemic RV pressure. The RV was markedly hypertrophied with an apical RV thrombus as well. There was moderate pulmonary regurgitation and critical homograft stenosis with mean and peak gradients of 42 and 79 mmHg, respectively.
Over the course of the hospitalization, he developed cardiogenic shock requiring inotropic support and intravenous vasodilators. He was deemed not a candidate for advanced therapies given history of incarceration and poor social support, and was at prohibitive surgical risk. After multi-disciplinary discussion and discussion with the patient, it was felt given his young age, an attempt at a high-risk transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement (TPVR) was warranted, understanding that there is no surgical or transplant back-up.
The patient was taken to the cardiac catheterization lab and underwent intubation given he was unable to lie flat. Vascular access was obtained and as angiography was being performed the patient suffered cardiac arrest. As cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed the patient underwent peripheral cannulation of veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) with a 24 Fr venous cannula and an 18 Fr arterial cannula and ultimately he achieved return of spontaneous circulation after several rounds of CPR and defibrillation.
Once the patient was stabilized the pulmonary conduit was crossed using a 4 Fr angled glide catheter and a wholey wire as it was too critically stenosed to allow a wedge catheter to cross. Haemodynamics were tenuous when dilating the conduit despite being on ECMO support. Serial dilations of the conduit were performed with 6.0 and 8.0 mm × 40 mm Charger balloons at 16 atm . The wholey was exchanged with a Lunderquist wire over the glide catheter into the distal left PA for better support. An 18 Fr curved sheath was then advanced into the RV and the conduit was further serially dilated with a 12 through 20 mm VIDA balloons with angiography ruling out rupture or contrast extravasation, and coronary angiography during homograft balloon dilation without any evidence of coronary compression. The sheath was advanced further across the conduit, and a 10-Zig 4.5 mm Cheatham Platinum (CP) stent crimped onto a 20 mm Balloon-in-Balloon (BIB) was used to stent the conduit , which was post-dilated with 22 and 24 mm VIDA balloons to reach a stent diameter of 20 mm. Transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement with a 22 mm Melody valve over a 22 mm ensemble was then performed within the CP stent ( and ). Pulmonary angiogram post-deployment showed no regurgitation (, ), and invasive gradient of <5 mmHg .
Given significant improvement in haemodynamics immediately post-TPVR, the patient underwent ECMO weaning and decannulation the same day. Intra-aortic balloon pump insertion was performed first to safely transition off ECMO support. Post-procedural transoesophageal echocardiogram revealed a well-seated Melody valve with no pulmonary insufficiency and a gradient of 4 mmHg.
The patient recovered well and he was started on a heart failure medication regimen and ultimately discharged home. The intracardiac thrombi resolved with anticoagulation during the hospital stay and anticoagulant was discontinued. He had a follow-up TTE 5 months later demonstrating improved LVEF to 35%, moderate RV dysfunction ( and , ), and mean and peak gradients across the Melody valve of 22 and 40 mmHg, respectively.