A 68 year old gentleman was referred to the cardiology clinic due to an episode of chest pain which occurred whilst travelling from the UK to Australia via Singapore. He developed chest tightness after take-off in the UK which persisted continuously for the entire duration of the flight until it landed in Singapore on transit. When the flight touched down on ground, he noticed that the tightness had completely disappeared. It recurred after take-off and once again, persisted throughout the journey from Singapore to Australia. The pain was cardiac in nature. He has never smoked. A chest x-ray and a CT pulmonary angiogram done previously had not revealed any lung parenchymal disease. His cholesterol levels were 5.3 with raised low density lipoprotein (LDL) of 3.5. There was no significant past medical history except for benign prostatic hypertrophy for which he took Finasteride and Tamsulosin. Physical examination was unremarkable.
His resting electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a normal sinus rhythm with normal cardiac intervals. His clinical examination was normal. Blood pressure in clinic was raised at 165/112 mmHg, however, a subsequent 24 h blood pressure monitor only revealed a mildly raised mean nocturnal blood pressure of 137/87 mmHg. Initially a CT coronary angiogram was organised due to the unusual presentation. This revealed significant stenoses in the proximal to mid left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) with a 50% stenosis in the circumflex and obtuse marginal artery. An invasive coronary angiogram confirmed critical proximal to mid RCA stenosis and a long segment of proximal LAD stenosis .
Fractional flow reserve (FFR) measurement in the RCA was strongly positive and the lesion was subsequently treated with a drug eluting stent. FFR measurement in the LAD was also physiologically positive and in turn this also treated with a single drug eluting stent. Following treatment he flew again with no recurrence of symptoms.