A 50-year-old woman presented to the 7th People’s Hospital of Chengdu with an erythematous breast mass that was painful and had central necrosis in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast . Physical examination revealed an immobile mass in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast, with an orange-peel appearance, but no signs of nipple retraction were noted. The patient had a medical history of well-controlled hypertension, which was being treated with felodipine and enalapril. She denied any history of smoking, alcohol or substance abuse, and had no family history of cancer. Her physical examination, aside from the breast mass, was unremarkable.
Breast ultrasound revealed an 8.8cm mass with mixed solid echogenic and cystic anechoic components. . The contrast-enhanced CT scan showed an 11.7×8.9cm mass occupying a substantial portion of the right breast, accompanied by right axillary lymphadenopathy . An ultrasound-guided fine needle biopsy revealed the presence of immature myeloid cells . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis demonstrated strong expression of CD68KP1 , CD45 , CD33, Cyclin D1 and CD4, with weak positivity for myeloperoxidase (MPO), and a high level of Ki67 expression (80%). The cells were negative for CD34 , CD3 , CD20 , CD79a , CD14, CD117, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT). A bone marrow biopsy was performed, and there was no evidence of systemic hematological malignancies such as AML, MPD, or MDS. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with isolated myeloid sarcoma (MS).
The patient underwent neoadjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy, which included cytarabine and daunorubicin. After undergoing two cycles of chemotherapy, which included cytarabine at a dose of 100 mg/m2 administered over days 1-7, and daunorubicin at a dose of 60 mg/m2 over days 1-3, a follow-up CT scan revealed a significant reduction in the size of the breast mass (4cm×3cm) and a ground-glass appearance in the upper lobes of both lungs . The patient presented with newly onset of dry cough and dyspnea. Empirical treatment with cefoperazone-tazobactam was initiated, but did not result in significant improvement of the patient’s condition. A fungal infection was suspected, and she was switched to voriconazole, which resolved her respiratory symptoms within 2 weeks. However, the patient declined subsequent cycles of chemotherapy due to adverse effects. Three months after completing chemotherapy, the patient underwent a right mastectomy. Histological analysis of the surgical specimen revealed the presence of both epithelial and mesenchymal components. Benign epithelial components are illustrated in . The spindle-shaped hyperproliferative fibroblasts, representative of the malignant components, are shown in . The cartilage region is considered to be heterogenous mesenchyme, which is associated with tumor invasion. . Notably, these malignant interstitial cells are characterized by the permeative border , heteromorphism and abundant mitosis, with a visible nuclear division rate of 11/10HPF . In summary, the pathological analysis aligns with a diagnosis of borderline phyllodes tumor with malignant features. The IHC analysis demonstrated strong expression of ER , PR, SMA and SATB2, with a moderate level of Ki67 expression (25-30%) and weak positivity for CD117 and Blc2 . The tissues were negative for P63 , CD34 . CD10 , desmin, cytokeratin-5/6 .
The patient developed a local recurrence at the site of the surgical incision 4 months after the initial mastectomy and underwent another surgical excision to remove the new lesion. The subsequent pathological analysis confirmed the presence of borderline PT with malignant features. The patient has been closely monitored every 2 months since the second surgery and has remained disease-free for the past 8 months.