We report a 42-year-old gentleman who presented with chief complaints of abdominal pain and distension, associated with nausea and vomiting for 2 months. Sometimes pain was aggravated by food intake. Stool consistency was loose with a fluctuating frequency of 4–6 episodes/day, sometimes associated with mucus without blood, and one episode of black stool 2 months before presentation. He also gave a history of pain and tightness over his left lower leg on walking long distances or brisk walks, which relieved by rest. Furthermore, there was a history of left lower leg discolouration and decreased sensation and was advised to get the opinion of a vascular surgeon 7–8 years ago. However, he did not seek a vascular opinion and the symptoms improved later, with no similar issues to date. He has a history of binge drinking and smoking since the age of 20 amounting to 20 pack years. On examination, his vitals were stable (pulse 80 beats per minute, blood pressure 139/90 mmHg, afebrile, respiratory rate of 18/min), with normal bilateral dorsalis pedis and popliteal arterial pulsation. On abdominal examination, multiple small lipomas with mild epigastric tenderness observed in a nondistended abdomen. Respiratory and cardiac examinations were normal. Laboratory investigation showed hemoglobin mildly elevated at 18.4 gm/dl and C-reactive protein of 22.6 mg/dl, otherwise lab values were within the normal limits . Initial ultrasonography showed mural thickening and dilatation of jejunal loops in the left hypochondrium and epigastric region with normal peristalsis suggesting enteritis. Furthermore, magnetic resonance enterography in our center revealed segmental circumferential and symmetrical minimal wall thickening with stricture in the mid part of the jejunum with features of small bowel obstruction, prominent vasa recta, and few enlarged lymph nodes in mesentery suggesting probable inflammatory bowel disease (IBD-Crohn’s disease). The celiac trunk, proximal superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and inferior mesenteric artery were normal, however, few beaded appearances of the distal branches of SMA were seen without occlusion . Given the history suggestive of recurrent subacute bowel obstruction, laparoscopic-assisted resection anastomosis of the jejunum was performed. Intraoperative findings showed dense adhesion between the jejunal loop (10 cm), omentum and transverse colon, circumferential stricture in the jejunum in the adhesed loop 80 cm from the duodenojejunal flexure, and dilated proximal loop with collapsed distal loop. Multiple enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes were observed adjacent to the stricture. Therefore, the postoperative first differential was IBD-Crohn’s. However, the histology revealed a denuded ulcerative mucosa with acute and chronic inflammation, hemorrhage, and necrosis extending to the submucosa. No granulomas were seen. There was marked fat necrosis in mesenteric fat with histiocytic reaction, giant cells and broad areas of sclerosis. Submucosa also showed sclerosis. Blood vessels, especially arterioles showed intimal thickening with edema and fibrosis and many with near occlusion, rare small vessel inflammation. Fibrinoid necrosis was not seen and the internal elastic lamina was intact. Adjacent mucosa showed regenerative villi. Lymph nodes showed reactive changes. The severe mesenteritis could be related to a healed perforation/mural necrosis. The features were consistent with thromboangiitis obliterans or Buerger’s disease given the histological findings and history of heavy smoking .
The patient was advised to strictly quit smoking. Further investigations were done to rule out Buerger’s disease-related other organ involvement. Both venous and arterial Doppler scans of bilateral lower limbs were normal. Mild mitral regurgitation was seen on echocardiography without other abnormalities, which have no clinical significance with Buerger’s disease. The patient was asymptomatic at 6 weeks follow-up and the hemoglobin dropped to 16.7 g/dl on subsequent consultation.
This work has been reported in line with the Surgical Case Report (SCARE) 2023 criteria.