A 60-year-old woman was admitted to our rheumatology department due to progressive dry mouth and enlarging cutaneous nodules.
Over the past 3 years, the patient has experienced mild-to-moderate dry mouth without dry eyes or any special medicine. A painless cutaneous nodule was found in her right lower leg 1 year previously, and the nodule had gradually enlarged within the past 6 mo. The nodule was resected, and pathological examination showed a possible lymphoproliferative disease. In the following months, her symptoms of dry mouth were aggravated, and nodules in the right lower leg relapsed with an increase in number. The patient was then referred to our hospital for further examination. She did not have arthralgia, parotid gland swelling, fatigue, decreased appetite, or unintentional weight loss.
The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable.
The patient’s personal and family history was also unremarkable.
Physical examination only showed two hard subcutaneous nodules on her right lower leg .
On admission, laboratory tests showed normal blood cell count, and routine urine, creatinine, coagulation markers, cardiac enzymes, complement, and inflammatory biomarker levels. Elevated alkaline phosphatase (203 U/L, reference range, 35–135 U/L) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (423 U/L, reference range, 7–45 U/L) were noted. Serum tumor markers (CA125, CA153, CA19-9, AFP, CEA, and CYFRA21-1) and viral serology (HIV, HBV, and HCV) was negative. Protein and immunofixation electrophoreses revealed no evidence of serum monoclonal gammopathy or Bence-Jones proteinuria. Serum-free light-chain levels were normal. Anti-nuclear antibody was positive (1 : 640 centromere pattern), while no Sjögren's syndrome type A antigen (SSA)/Ro or type B (SSB)/La antibodies were detected. The bone marrow aspirate and biopsy results were normal.
High-resolution chest computed tomography (CT) did not show any signs of interstitial pneumonitis or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Positron emission tomography CT demonstrated increased fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the right anterolateral tibialis anterior, and several nodular shadows . There were no signs of invasion or spread to the surrounding structures or organs.
The Schirmer’s test showed positive results, despite the absence of dry eyes. Labial salivary gland biopsy revealed lymphocytic infiltration and chronic inflammation with a focus score (FS) of 2 . Repeat cutaneous biopsy showed a possible neoplastic infiltration composed of small lymphocytes occupying the marginal zone and plasma cells associated with hyperplastic B-cell follicles at the periphery of the follicle zone . She was Bcl2- , CD5-, CD20- , and PAX5-positive , and CD3-, CD10-, and Bcl6-negative. Plasma cells were highlighted by CD138 and showed clear kappa-light chain restriction . Immunoglobulin gene rearrangements were positive for IgK (Vk-Jk, Vk-Kde+INTR-Kde) and probably positive for IgH (FR1-JH, FR2-JH).