A 74-year-old woman, with a history of treatment-refractory Crohn’s disease on budesonide therapy (6 mg daily), psoriasis, and pernicious anemia developed abdominal pain, cramping, and non-bloody diarrhea 8 weeks prior to her current hospital admission. Colonoscopy was performed at onset of these flare of symptoms and demonstrated edema, erythema, and erosions at the ileocolic anastomosis with biopsies revealing severe active ileocolitis . Standard dose of ustekinumab was added to her chronic budesonide regimen with moderate improvement in her symptoms. Approximately 6 weeks after ustekinumab was started and 2 weeks prior to her current admission, she was evaluated in urgent care with complaints of low-grade fever and a tender, non-pruritic bilateral lower extremity rash. At that time she began treatment with oral levofloxacin for presumed cellulitis. Her rash subsequently progressed, spreading to the abdomen and upper extremities. Her subjective fevers persisted, and she developed headache, fatigue, arthralgias, and generalized weakness along with worsening of abdominal pain and diarrhea. Given worsening of her symptoms despite antibiotic therapy, she presented to the emergency department for further evaluation and was admitted for presumed ineffective outpatient treatment of cellulitis and intravenous vancomycin therapy.
She was a retired factory worker from Wisconsin, USA who had been diagnosed with Crohn’s ileitis 30 years prior (A1, L3, B1) and maintained on budesonide. Prior therapies ineffective for her CD included mesalamine, prednisone, and adalimumab. Methotrexate trial was not tolerated due to allergic reaction (hives), and both infliximab and vedolizumab led to worsening of her psoriasis. Following the latest CD flare up standard dose of ustekinumab had been added to budesonide with the plan to continue the regimen with 8 week dosing intervals.
The patient was a former smoker who did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs. Her medications included ustekinumab, budesonide, vitamin B12 injections and a multivitamin. Her psoriasis had been quiescent, and had required no recent treatment.
On physical exam she appeared well-developed in mild distress due headache, abdominal pain, and painful rash. Patient was febrile to 38.2 °C; other vital signs were normal. Oral mucosa was moist and without ulcerations. Lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally and heart sounds were regular, and without murmur. Abdominal exam revealed tenderness to deep palpation in the right lower quadrant without peritoneal signs. Rectal exam was negative for perianal fistulas. Neurologic exam was normal. Skin exam was remarkable for a tender, petechial rash involving her abdomen and extremities .
A complete blood cell count demonstrated hemoglobin of 13.0 g/dL, white blood cell count of 5.7 x × 109/L, and platelet count of 133 × 109/L. A comprehensive metabolic panel demonstrated normal electrolytes, renal and liver function. Tick-borne panel including testing for Lyme disease, Anaplasma spp, Ehrlichia spp and Babesia microti was negative as well as blood cultures. Inflammatory markers were elevated with sedimentation rate (ESR) 42 mm/h, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 15.2 mg/L. Rheumatoid factor, cryoglobulins, and anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) were negative. Serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) was negative for monoclonal protein spikes. Complement C3 and C4 levels were within normal range. Testing for viral hepatitis including Hepatitis A, B, and C were negative for both acute and chronic infection, and showed immunity against Hepatitis B virus. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) demonstrated a nucleated cell count of 0 with normal glucose and protein. A non-contrast head CT was negative for intracranial lesions. Recent mammogram and cervical cancer screening were normal.
In the absence of leukocytosis and coupled with the symmetric distribution of the rash, cellulitis seemed unlikely, leading to discontinuation of antibiotics. Evaluation of rash with skin biopsy demonstrated findings consistent with leukocytoclastic vasculitis, including: 1) neutrophilic infiltration of the blood vessels with necrosis and perivascular fibrinoid deposition, 2) disruption of some small caliber blood vessels walls with hints of fibrin deposition, 3) bits of nuclear dust in and around blood vessel walls, and 4) extravasated erythrocytes . A Periodic acid–Schiff stain (with appropriate positive control) did not demonstrate spore or hyphal form. Bacterial cultures of skin and blood remained negative.
High dose intravenous steroids were recommended as treatment of choice, but patient declined. Budesonide dose was subsequently increased from 6 mg to 9 mg daily, and within 48 h her rash began to subside, and patient noted improvement in abdominal pain and constitutional symptoms. Prior to discharge, she received another dose of ustekinumab without exacerbation of her rash, and with continued improvement in her gastrointestinal and constitutional symptoms. Eight months following her episode of CD flare associated with LCV she continued to do well on ustekinumab and budesonide has been gradually tapered off.