A 37-year-old man presented to the clinic with the chief complaint of intermittent neck pain, with no associated history of recent or past major trauma.
He also complained of spontaneous posterior head and occipital pain and stiffness during certain neck movements.
His current resting baseline pain level was 3/10 on a Numeric Rating Pain Scale (NPRS) (0, no pain;10, maximal pain) and his worst pain in past 24 h was reported to be 6/10 .
He was concerned because of one recent drop attack episodes after a header during a soccer match with subsequent facial numbness reported during prolonged postures after that incident.
The patient had not previously visited a medical physician or physiotherapist for these symptoms; however, he did admit controlling symptoms with the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and pain killers.
From this episode he described a new spontaneous headache episode and limited neck range of motion (ROM) into right rotation. Additionally, he complained of dizziness during neck extension movements. He denied any night pain and reported no upper limb symptoms. However he described two previous episodes in which he had difficulties in lifting or pulling heavy weights. He wasn’t able to exactly define when the NP symptoms originally started. No other neurological symptoms were reported.
Review of the past medical history, including a review of symptoms, was performed. The patient did not have any significant past or current medical problems but was noted to not be concerned about the symptoms; however, he was seeking treatment for his occipital headaches that reportedly were getting more frequent and more intense.
The physical examination started with visual analysis of posture, followed by active ROM testing of the cervical spine. Assessment revealed decreased active cervical ROM in all six planes, especially during left side bending and right rotation, with a dizzy feeling and facial numbness during sustained neck extension. During active cervical extension and right rotation, the patient also complained of occipital pain. No additional provocative or over-pressure testing were performed.
Cranial nerve testing (CNs II-V, VII-VIII, X-XII) were recorded as normal. There was no nystagmus, facial asymmetry, deviation of the tongue, or slurring of words.
Due to the absence of CN’ findings and the presence of dizziness and facial numbness during sustained extension, it was reasonable to pursue additional physical examination procedures in order to clear the cervical spine.
A more comprehensive set of neurological tests was performed. Upper extremity reflexes were found to be bilaterally present and symmetrical. No deficits were noted upon light touch sensory testing in the dermatomes of the upper extremities. However motor strength of the upper extremity muscles, assessed with manual muscle testing, revealed a 4/5 grade bilaterally on the C5 (shoulder abduction) innervated muscle group . Ankle clonus was not present and Hoffman’s reflex was negative. Rhomberg’s test did not reveal any loss of balance [, ].
Due to the presence of dizziness, facial numbness, focal muscle weakness in one myotome, and a recent drop attack episode, it was thought that his signs were more suggestive of a serious medical pathology, rather than a benign musculoskeletal condition.
However the examination continued with the assessment of the craniocervical structures. A modified Sharp-Purser test was performed with the patient seated and the head brought into extension. The palm of one hand is placed on the patient’s forehead while the spinous process of the axis is held by the opposite hand. No discernable movement or reduction was noted but the positioning itself appeared to reduce the severity of the dizziness and facial numbness.
Several components of this patient’s history and physical examination were consistent with a condition for which physical therapy intervention would not have been indicated until more definitive cervical spine diagnostic imaging had been completed. More specifically, the physical therapist was primarily concerned about the possibility of a serious pathology that would preclude the use of manual therapy and/or exercise to craniovertebral region.
A decision to refer the patient to a neurosurgeon was made at this time. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was deemed necessary prior to initiating any additional examination or treatment procedures.
A cranial-cervical spine MRI revealed a “basilar impression” in the sagittal T2-weighted image and demonstrated a slight dorsal increase of the odontoid dens with a cranio-dorsal sagittal shift of approximately 6 mm with associated footprint of the anterior surface of the bulbospinal tract (yellow arrow in Figs. and ). However, no areas of altered signal intensity of the medulla were identified. A reduction in amplitude of the foramen magnum was also noted, in which the cerebellar tonsils were wedged. Posterior somatic osteophytes, especially at C3-C4 were evident. A moderate disc protrusion at C3-C4 and at C4-C5 and C5-C6, without spinal cord compression, were also visualized . A coronal T2-weighted image demonstrated a cranial-cervical malformation with a subtotal fusion of the atlas with the occipital bone and a hypertrophic right articular process of the dens of the axis (yellow arrow in Figs. and ) resulting in an asymmetrical position of the facet joints . A partial somatic fusion at C5-C6 was also visualized .
The neurosurgeon decided to not evaluate the dynamic stability at the time.