We herein report the case of an 81-year-old hypertensive female who was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) at our institute (an academic tertiary referral center), in January 2019, and managed by the pulmonary and critical care team as a case of type II respiratory failure. On admission her oxygen saturation was 78% on rom air, and her arterial blood gases (ABGs) were: pH = 7.32, PaCO2 = 61 mmHg, Pa O2 = 45 mmHg, and HCO3 = 33 mEq/L. The ABGs readings reflected acute on top of chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure. Surgical consultation was received upon the discovery, on chest x-ray (CXR), of a large mediastinal mass narrowing the trachea and displacing it to the left . The patient reported a history of subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves' disease. However, she was not on thyroxine replacement therapy and her thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 0.7 IU/L (normal range 0.35–3.0 IU/L). Her main complaint was shortness of breath of 4-month duration, but, no dysphagia, or dysphonia. She had no palpable mass in her neck. The radiographic appearance was classical for retrosternal goiter (RG). However, in view of her history of thyroid surgery we opt to confirm the thyroid origin of the mass by scintigraphy prior to proceeding to computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast to avoid thyroid stunning (Wolf-Chaikoff effect) . Indeed, thyroid origin was confirmed by scintigraphy. CT of the neck and chest, with the arms on the sides, was then performed for further characterization of the retrosternal extension, and to assess the need for sternotomy. It demonstrated a secondary right-sided RG extending below the carina, as well as into the posterior mediastinum. The volume of the RG was estimated to be 375 mL on CT . Despite the history of a previous neck surgery and the considerable anatomical extent of the mass in the mediastinum, the decision was made to operate via a cervicotomy. Nevertheless, on-site Thoracic Surgeon standby was arranged. Prior to surgery, the pulmonary team commenced non-invasive ventilation by BI-PAP for 5 days. The patients' ABGs improved to become: pH = 7.42, PaCO2 = 50 mmHg, Pa O2 = 57 mmHg, and HCO3 = 38 mEq/L, and her oxygen saturation became 89% on room air. trans-Nasal flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopic evaluation of the vocal folds demonstrated normal and symmetrically mobile vocal cords. The American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) category 3 patient underwent fiberoptic intubation followed by a successful right-sided hemithyroidectomy conducted through the neck using the LigaSure™ small-jaw sealer and divider. The procedure was performed by a high-volume Endocrine Surgeon (SB) who has an annual case-load in excess of 300 procedures. The procedural steps of the operative technique applied included: 1. Section of the superior pedicle 2. Division of the isthmus for further mobilization and medialization of the thyroid lobe 3. Identification of the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) superiorly, and dissecting it caudally 4. Release of lateral thyroid attachments using the energy-based device 5. Concomitant pulling of the gland using the left hand, and blunt dissection of lateral and postero-lateral adhesions using the right hand which aids in delivering the gland from the thorax. It is worth mentioning at this point that the distal edge of the RG was way beyond the reach of the surgeon's finger. This implies a cautious and meticulous dissection and delivery of the lobe due to possible attachments to great vessels in the thorax beyond the surgeon's visual field and reach. Therefore, forceful delivery in the presence of resistance should always be avoided not to inflict harm resulting from potential inadvertent intrathoracic vascular injury. A size 10 Readivac® drain was placed. Operative time was 30 min from incision to closure. demonstrates the resected right thyroid lobe. The patient's respiratory parameters, on the anesthesia monitor, improved immediately following resection of the RG. The patient was transferred to the ward. Post-operatively, her oxygen saturation on room air was 96%, and her ABGs were: pH = 7.42, PaCO2 = 42 mmHg, Pa O2 = 77 mmHg. Her post-operative chest x-ray is displayed in . The drain-output was 30 cc of serosanguinous fluid on the morning following surgery, therefore, it was removed. She was discharged on the first post-operative day without morbidity. Thyroxine replacement therapy was given applying the weight adjusted dose for elderly (1.2 x Body weight). One-week post-surgery the patient expressed complete satisfaction with the outcome of her surgery, and was content with the cosmetic appearance of her surgical site . The histologic examination of the surgically resected specimen reported that the specimen weighed 497 g, and that the longitudinal axis of the retrosternal component measured 15 cm. There was no evidence of malignancy.