The 62-year-old female was admitted to hospital in February 2021 due to left foot ulcer for one month, aggravated and painful for one week.
The patient had a left foot ulcer for one month, aggravated and painful for one week.
The patient had a history of chronic renal failure, uremia, and hemodialysis for 5 years. Four years ago, she underwent left forearm arteriovenous fistula formation. In July 2019, the patient underwent balloon angioplasty and stenting for lower extremity arterial sclerosis with ulceration in the left leg. In November 2019, she underwent balloon angioplasty and stenting for lower extremity arterial sclerosis with ulceration in the right leg.
The patient denied any family history of diseases.
Physical examination at admission showed a body temperature of 38.3℃, pulse rate of 103 bpm, a respiratory rate of 21 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 162/83 mmHg. According to a specialized medical check-up, the left foot, with toenail hypertrophy, was dark in color, with the fourth toe absent, and fine hair had fallen out. An ulcer 4 cm × 2 cm in size was observed in the middle of the planta pedis, and the base was yellow and rotten, with the plantar fascia exposed. In addition, the peripheral skin showed wound undermining, which had spread to the heel ulcer. There was a large area of absent skin on the heel, exposing the calcaneus, and the base was yellow and rotten. A dark scab was found on part of the wound, and around the area where the pus percolated, the skin was red and swollen, with a blurry boundary and symptoms of wound undermining. The vascular lacuna had spread towards the lower leg via the proximal end.
Laboratory examinations were performed at admission. As shown by routine blood examination, the red blood cell and white blood cell counts were 3.12 × 1012/L and 18.23 × 109/L, respectively, and the hemoglobin concentration was 83 g/L. The following blood biochemistry indices were obtained: K+ mmol/L, serum albumin 24.0 g/L, serum creatinine 468.0 μmol/L, plasma brain natriuretic peptide > 35 000 pg/mL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 65.0 mm/h, interleukin-6 89.5 pg/mL, C-reactive protein 83.7 mg/L, procalcitonin 6.6 ng/mL, and glycosylated hemoglobin 8.1.
Echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 34%; the ankle-brachial index (ABI) was 0.6 on the left side and 0.7 on the right side. According to digital subtraction angiography, the patient suffered from severe stenosis of the left superficial femoral artery at the proximal and distal ends of the stent, extensive stenosis and occlusion of the left peroneal artery, and occlusion of the left posterior tibial artery.
Based on clinical symptoms, physical signs, as well as laboratory and auxiliary examinations, the patient was diagnosed with: (1) Type 2 diabetic foot combined with peripheral vascular disease, peripheral neuropathy, and retinopathy; (2) Chronic renal failure treated with dialysis for uremia; (3) Hypertension (Grade 3) defined as a very high risk; (4) Coronary atherosclerotic heart disease with cardiac function Level III; (5) Anemia; (6) Hypoproteinemia; (7) Arteriosclerosis obliterans of the upper limbs with gangrene; and (8) Hyperkalemia. In addition, this patient had undergone PTA of both lower limbs and resection of toes on both feet.