A 12-year-old male child was brought to the outpatient department of a tertiary care hospital by his father due to progressive painful muscular weakness especially the proximal muscles of both upper and lower limbs and recurrent skin nodules. The patient developed muscular weakness at the age of 3 years which progressively worsened to the level that he is now unable to walk or perform routine work. The muscular weakness was associated with pain for which he used paracetamol and nonsteroidal inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). He did not have a respiratory problem or difficulty swallowing food. The patient started developing skin nodules at the age of 8 years that are hard ulcerated and had a white chalky discharge. Initially, the skin nodules were episodic and now progressively worsened and involve both upper and lower limbs and axillae. The patient was unable to walk, comb his hair or change his clothes due to pain and weakness. The patient used painkillers on and off for body aches in the past and did not visit a hospital due to affordability issues. Family history was unremarkable for similar conditions.
On examination, the patient was vitally stable with a blood pressure of 100/70 mm Hg, pulse rate of 66 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and a temperature of 99°F. The patient was underweighting with a BMI of 16.5 kg/mm2. An erythema was visible covering the bilateral checks extending up to the auricular helix with nasolabial folds sparring .
Multiple tender ulcerated skin nodules of about 1 × 1 to 2 × 2 cm with a white chalky discharge were visible over both upper and lower limbs including axillae (calcinosis cutis; ).
The rest of the dermatological and nails examination was unremarkable. Musculoskeletal examination revealed tender muscles, and a power of 3/5 in all 4 extremities, and the patient exhibited a positive Gower’s sign (uses his hands and arms to stand up from a squatting position). The tone of both the upper and lower limb was decreased and the reflexes were normal. The patient’s cutaneous dermatomyositis disease area and severity index (CDAIS) score was calculated, the total activity score was 9 and the total damage score was 8. The patient was admitted to the dermatology unit for further workup, and initial laboratory evaluation revealed raised total leukocyte count (TLC), raised creatinine phosphokinase, and antinuclear antibody (ANA) was negative, while lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was elevated .
Autoimmune workup was negative for anti-nucleosome antibodies, and Mi-2 except for the weakly positive lupus anticoagulant antibodies and positive anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA). Chest radiograph and 2-dimensional echocardiogram were also normal. An X-ray of the lower limb was ordered which showed calcification in the soft tissues bilaterally .
A preliminary diagnosis of juvenile dermatomyositis was made and for confirmation, electromyography was done which showed a myopathy pattern. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thigh was inconclusive Biopsy from the thigh muscles was taken which showed predominantly unremarkable skeletal muscle with a focal mild chronic inflammatory infiltrate involving nonnecrotic muscle fibers, skin biopsy showed subcutaneous deposits of calcium presenting calcinosis cutis, epidermis was unremarkable. The patient was started on tablet prednisolone 2 mg/kg once daily, IV methotrexate 10 mg/mA2 once weekly, and oral Diltiazem 2 mg/kg/day. The patient was asked for close follow-ups at 4, 8, and 16 weeks, he showed mild improvement in his muscular pain and weakness and was evaluated for drug side effects at each visit. On the 16th week of follow-up, the patient showed improvement in weakness the power of both shoulder and hip joint increased to 4/5, and the patient’s pain improved and was reported as 3/10. The patient was continued on diltiazem for calcinosis cutis and oral corticosteroid.