A 55 year old male who was concerned about the appearance of his right eye over the past year was referred by his optometrist to the ophthalmology department. He reported a 12 month history of foreign body sensation causing frequent troublesome blinking. He had no symptoms suggestive of inflammatory ocular disease. He denied any other significant past medical history including atopic, allergic and skin disease at this stage. Ocular examination revealed bilateral inferior conjunctivochalasis, most notable at the right inferior corneal margin . There was no superior conjunctivochalasis. There was no evidence of meibomian gland disease or tear film instability. Fluorescein staining of the cornea did not reveal any punctate epithelial erosions. Topical ocular lubrication was commenced, but there was no symptomatic improvement. He was therefore offered excision of his right conjunctivochalasis under local anaesthesia. Informed consent was obtained prior to the surgery, at which time the procedure was discussed with him in lay language. In particular it was explained that the ‘excess skin covering the eye’ will be excised. This prompted the patient to volunteer the symptoms of joint hypermobility and skin elasticity . Further ophthalmic examination revealed no lens subluxation or blue sclera. The posterior segments were unremarkable and there were no angioid streaks.
Consultations were sought from Dermatologist and Clinical Geneticist. A diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), Classical Type (Type I/II in old nosology) was made based on the clinical findings of joint hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, and wide scar morphology, which is indicative of tissue fragility and poor wound healing. Molecular testing, although available at the time, was declined by the patient. Cardiovascular assessment was unremarkable; in particular, there was no evidence of mitral valve prolapse on clinical examination or following echocardiography. No other members of his family were affected.
The patient’s symptoms improved significantly after the surgery. The conjunctival specimen was sent for histopathological analysis, which revealed evidence of marked damage to the lamina propria collagen, with mild regenerative atypia in the overlying epithelium. This is reported as a non-specific change that would not be directly linked to EDS or any other collagen disorder.