An 18-year-old previously healthy female experienced bilateral purpura-like rashes on both calves 9 months before admission. The details of the subsequent clinical course are outlined in timeline form in . After 1 month, she developed a sudden right-foot drop and steppage gait. On month 4, she noticed numbness on the ulnar side of her right hand with an intermittent fever of 39°C. She was admitted to a local hospital, and an abnormal full blood count was found (WBC 1.30–2.9 × 109/L, Hgb 91–95 g/L, PLT 175–238 × 109/L). ESR was elevated to 64–94 mm/h. Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) was 37.62 g/L. Autoimmune antibodies provided a positive result for PR3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). Urine routine, liver and kidney function, serum Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV) DNA, high-sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP), serum immunofixation electrophoresis, bone marrow biopsy, bone marrow pathology, and bone marrow flow cytometry analysis showed no abnormality. Nerve conduction studies were conducted, and the results are shown in . Cranial, cervical, and thoracic vertebrae magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no obvious abnormality. She was then treated with antibiotics, and her fever was relieved, but in month 5, she gradually developed symptoms of bilateral pain in both hands and feet, which disturbed her daily life. She was diagnosed with systemic vasculitis and was referred to the Department of Rheumatology and Immunology for further diagnosis. Serum tests showed PR3-ANCA at 60 RU/ml titer and anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) S1:160(+). She was diagnosed with connective tissue disease and was treated with methylprednisolone (MP) 1 g intravenously for 3 days, followed by 48 mg prednisone orally. She was also treated with cytoxan (CTX) 1 g intravenously. After treatment, her symptoms of hand and foot pain were relieved dramatically, but limb weakness and numbness did not change. On month 7, hand and foot pain re-appeared to a severe extent, and she developed a sudden left-foot drop. She gradually lost the strength of her left hand, and on month 9, she was unable to hold a spoon or lift her both wrists. She was treated with MP 1 g × 3 days, CTX 1 g once, and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg) at 0.4 g/kg × 10 days, but her symptoms did not relieve. On month 9, muscle atrophy could be observed on both of her hands, forearms, and calves. Before 1 week of admission, she developed signs of left peripheral facial palsy. She was admitted to our hospital 9 months after the disease onset.
Physical examinations at admission showed a few old eruption stains on both calves, but no fresh rashes could be observed. Nervous system physical examinations showed signs of left peripheral facial palsy. Tendon reflexes were absent. The muscle atrophy of the thenar and interosseous muscles of both hands could be observed. The proximal muscle strength of the right upper limb is grade IV, while the left upper limb is grade III. The strength of the distal muscles of the upper limbs was grades I–II. The proximal muscle strength of both lower limbs is grade V, and the muscle strength of the dorsum of the foot is grades I–II. The muscle tension was normal. The Romberg sign was positive. The sensation of acupuncture and vibration decreased in a sock-like and glove-like fashion in both upper and lower limbs.
The work-up, including serum tests, cerebral-spinal fluid (CSF) examinations, positron emission tomography-computer tomography (PET-CT), and electrodiagnostic tests, was conducted after admission. Serum tests for EBV DNA showed a positive result with a copy number varying from 500 to 2,400/ml. Serum tests for IgG and IgM of HBV, HCV, HIV, RPR, TPPA, CMV, Lyme, and brucellosis were all negative. Serum tests of ANA, ANCA, and anti-C1q were negative. Serum and CSF anti-GM1, anti-GQ1b, anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-Ri, anti-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionicacid (AMPA), anti-CV2, anti-γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), anti-Amphiphysin, anti-contactin-associated protein 2 (CASPR2), and anti-leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 (LGI1) were all negative. The serum levels of interleukin (IL) 10 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α were elevated at 16.4 and 28.5 pg/ml. The CSF results showed a slightly elevated protein level of 52–54 mg/dL, and the cell count was 32–34 cells/μl. Oligoclonal bands were negative in CSF. Cells in CSF were mostly lymphocytes, and no atypical cell was observed. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) for pathogens in CSF proved to be positive for EBV with a copy number of 2,564. The CSF levels of IL6, IL8, and IL10 were all elevated at 18.3, 222, and 15.4 pg/ml, respectively. CSF flow cytometry was negative. PET-CT gave a very interesting finding of hypermetabolism in the subcutaneous fat tissue all over the body with a slightly elevated standard uptake value (SUV) maximum of 1.6 . PET-CT also showed a soft tissue signal with a SUVmax of 3.3 in the bilateral nasal meatus. Nerve conduction study results are shown in . Electromyogram (EMG) results showed an enormous amount of positive sharp waves and fibrillation discharges in the left deltoideus muscle and left tibialis anterior muscle. Nerve ultrasound was conducted and revealed an unremarkable cross-sectional area (CSA) enlargement in bilateral median, posterior tibial, and peroneal nerves.
Pathological tests of both abdominal subcutaneous fat tissue and left nasal meatus soft tissue were conducted subsequently. The histologic study of abdominal subcutaneous fat tissue revealed many distended vessels filled with atypically large lymphoid cells, causing vessel occlusion. The tumor cells had large, irregular hyperchromatic nuclei and ample eosinophilic cytoplasm that was not only confined to the vessels but also disseminated in the fat tissue. Immunohistochemical staining showed the cluster of differentiation (CD)21(–), CD138(–), CD34(around vessels+), CD20(+), CD3(+), Ki-67(index 80%), CD56(–), CD5(+), CD7(-), CD2(+), CD4(+), CD38(+), granzyme B(+), TIA-1(+), and EBER (+), which consisted of the diagnosis of ENKTL . The left nasal meatus soft tissue showed a microscopic finding of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium infiltrated by lymphocytes and plasma cells, which was regarded as an EBV-related T-cell proliferative disease. The patient was diagnosed as ENKTL, staging IVb.
The patient was then treated with a classic scheme for ENKTL, including dexamethasone (DXM) 40 mg iv d1-d4, methotrexate (MTX) 3.6 g iv d1, cytoxan (CTX) 1.2 g iv d2-d4, vepeside (VP16) 150 mg iv d2-d4, after which her nervous system symptoms showed no improvement. The patient developed septic shock and digestive tract hemorrhage and succumbed to the disease 12 months after its disease onset.