We report an unusual case of EF in a 46-year-old Caucasian male patient who received an ASCT in the context of relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma. He was a farmer and had no reported personal and familial medical history of note. The diagnosis was made in November 2013, with the patient presenting kappa IgG gammopathy (44 g/L), 41% medullar plasma cell infiltration, bone lesions, and hypercalcemia (2.76 mmol/L). The Revised International Staging System (R-ISS) score was 2 (ISS 2, normal karyotype, elevated lactate dehydrogenase at 450 IU/L). Frontline therapy was four courses of bortezomib with thalidomide and dexamethasone (VTD), followed by ASCT in February 2014, then two cycles of consolidation with VTD. Twenty months after transplantation, the appearance of bone lesions on positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) imaging with 18fluorodeoxyglucose led to the diagnosis of relapse. Second-line treatment began in March 2016 with lenalidomide and dexamethasone. In June 2017, a second diffuse bone relapse was revealed by PET-CT imaging, which required radiation therapy of the right pelvis, followed by treatment with daratumumab, bortezomib, and dexamethasone. One year later, the patient showed a partial response according to International Myeloma Working Group criteria .
Given the young age of the patient and the high risk of progression, an ASCT from an HLA-identical sibling donor (sister) was planned. The donor/recipient status was as follows: O+/O+, CMV−/−, EBV +/+, toxoplasmosis +/+, and hepatitis B virus −/−. Myeloablative conditioning with high-dose melphalan (140 mg/m2) and total body irradiation (8 Gy) was performed in February 2019. Prophylaxis of acute GVHD included cyclosporin, methotrexate (days + 1, 3, 6, and 11) and T-cell depletion with anti-thymocyte globulin (days + 3, + 2). The recovery of hematopoiesis was normal (13 days of aplasia) and no acute GVHD occurred. Three months post-ASCT, minimal extramedullary residual disease was negative on PET-CT imaging, with complete response on electrophoresis and immunofixation. Blood chimerism was 100% donor. Cyclosporin was gradually tapered and discontinued 4 months post-transplant (day + 133).
Major hepatic dysfunction with cytolysis and cholestasis occurred 7 months post-transplant (day + 218). The standard etiological workup, including drug-related cause, hepatitis virus serologies and PCR, and autoantibody determination, was negative. Between days + 228 and + 242, he was admitted due to the appearance of edema and pain in the extremities. Physical examination revealed diffuse skin induration, predominant in the limbs, and mucous lichen associated with rare morphoea-like lesions . The patient was febrile (38.7 °C) with normal blood pressure and the heart pulse was 100 beats/min. We observed dyspnea and global weakness of the limbs, without arthralgia or typical groove sign. Results of a neurological examination were normal.
Results from laboratory studies were as follows: platelets 52 × 109/L, hemoglobin 131 g/L, and leucocytes 4.4 × 109/L, with a normal eosinophil granulocyte count (0.26 × 109/L). Other results included: aspartate aminotransferase 418 UI/L, alanine aminotransferase 302 UI/L, alkaline phosphatase 270 UI/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase 189 UI/L, C-reactive protein 16.5 mg/L, and a low level of albumin at 22 g/L. Specific studies showed positive homogeneous speckled antinuclear antibodies, elevated aldolase levels, and hypergammaglobulinemia. The infection workup was negative.
Total body magnetic resonance imaging showed increased signal intensity in short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequences in the superficial and deep fasciae . Active fasciitis involved all muscles and was predominant in the inferior limbs. No myositis or arthritis was found. A skin-to-muscle biopsy of the left thigh confirmed fasciitis and edema, with rare eosinophil infiltration . The fascia was dissociated by loose and slightly inflammatory fibrosis, with edema, fibrin, and fibroblasts. Liver biopsy confirmed concomitant cGVHD, with fibrosis and inflammatory infiltrate featuring lymphocytes and eosinophil granulocytes, without apoptotic bodies.
Corticosteroids (prednisolone, 0.75 mg/kg/day) and cyclosporin (3 mg/kg/day) were initiated, with a good response. Following the standardization of hepatic function, weekly administration of methotrexate (15 mg/m2) improved the clinical and biological response . Skin induration and edema vanished within a few days. The last follow-up was in October 2020 (13 months later), with sustained complete response and few signs of cGVHD-like oral lichen planus.