A 72-year-old Caucasian retired man with a 100 pack-year smoking history who was a married father of three children underwent medical investigation because of progressively increasing dysphagia, acute dysphonia, and a 3-kg weight loss. His medical history revealed a left testicular seminoma treated by orchiectomy and radiotherapy 12 years previously with complete remission, as well as long-standing epilepsy, hypertension, and tendinopathy of the rotator cuff. His clinical examination revealed hoarseness and a palpable mass in the left supraclavicular fossa. The results of cardiopulmonary auscultation and a neurological examination were within the normal limits. The patient’s vital signs were normal. The results of his laboratory tests, including complete blood count and liver and renal function, were within the normal limits, except for his red blood cell count, which revealed anemia with 129 g/L hemoglobin (reference range 140–180 g/L).
Contrast-enhanced positron emission tomography (PET) with fludeoxyglucose was performed , which demonstrated a hypermetabolic mass in the left upper lung lobe associated with mediastinal infiltration. PET-CT likewise revealed a 7-mm hypermetabolic nodule in the contralateral lower lobe, along with mediastinal and left supraclavicular lymphadenopathy (short axis < 15 mm). Indirect signs of left recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis secondary to the mediastinal mass were identified as causing hoarseness. A bronchoscopic biopsy obtained 1 day after PET-CT confirmed squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification cT4N3M1).
A partial oncologic response was seen after six chemotherapy cycles with carboplatin-gemcitabine over a 4-month period, with an overall decreasing size of the pulmonary mediastinal tumor from 58 × 44 mm to 31 × 26 mm on axial CT images, consistent with a > 30% reduction of the longest diameter of the target lesion, according to RECIST 1.1 criteria (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) .
Local radiotherapy was initiated 6 weeks thereafter. After three sessions of 2.15-Gy radiation doses, each on the left paramediastinal region and apical segment of the left upper lobe, the patient was hospitalized because of major dyspnea. Upon admission, clinical examination revealed bilateral rhonchi, and neurological examination yielded 12 points on the Glasgow Coma Scale with a decorticate response to pain stimuli. The rest of the results of the clinical examination were within normal limits. Oxygen saturation was decreased to 70%. The patient’s heart rate was 130 beats/minute, body temperature was 39.7 °C, and blood pressure was 113/75 mmHg. His laboratory test results were suggestive of major infection with leukocytosis at 19,000/L (reference range 4,000–11,000/L), and his C-reactive protein concentration was 415 mg/L (reference range 0–10 mg/L). His complete blood count revealed moderate anemia with 98 g/L hemoglobin (reference range 140–180 g/L). His liver and renal function test results were within the normal limits. Arterial blood gas analysis confirmed respiratory acidosis with a pH of 7.18 (reference range 7.35–7.45), arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 8.7 kPa (reference range 4.67–6.4 kPa), and arterial partial pressure of oxygen of 8 kPa (reference range 11.07–14.4 kPa). The results of the patient’s urine analysis were normal. At admission, the patient was receiving the following medications: irbesartan for arterial hypertension, clonazepam, and valproic acid for epilepsy, and ibuprofen and tizanidine for tendinopathy of the rotator cuff.
A chest x-ray revealed a left superior mediastinal pulmonary mass and parenchymal radiopacity in the left apical lung, along with excavated lesions and a “silhouette sign” of the left mediastinum, consistent with secondary infection. The patient’s blood test results were positive for gram-positive cocci. The patient was treated with intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g every 8 hours and vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours) for severe pulmonary sepsis. Despite antibiotic treatment, his fever and dyspnea persisted over the 10-day treatment period. A repeat chest X-ray revealed multiple excavated lesions of increasing size . A contrast-enhanced CT scan was then obtained , which confirmed persistent lung infection with unfavorable extensive evolution. Moreover, a fistula from the upper third of the esophagus to the left upper pulmonary lobe was suspected on the basis of the presence of air in the mediastinum. To confirm the suspected esophageal pulmonary fistula, videofluoroscopy with a water-soluble contrast agent was performed . This clearly depicted leakage of contrast material from the cervical esophagus into the left lung via a fistulous tract.
Two days later, the patient underwent endoscopy, thereby allowing fistula treatment with a covered self-expandable metallic stent, placed just below the upper esophageal sphincter . The patient recovered from his pulmonary infection within 2 weeks after fistula treatment. Four weeks later, a CT scan was obtained because of hemoptysis. The CT images showed a major decrease of the left upper lung lobe infection but progression of the mediastinal tumor with vascular encasement, in particular invasion of the left common carotid artery, left subclavian artery, and left brachiocephalic vein. One week after a percutaneous embolization attempt, the patient died of massive hemoptysis. No autopsy was performed.