A previously healthy 50-year-old gentleman presented in the emergency room with recurrent episodes of chest pain for the last 2 days. The intensity of the retrosternal localized chest pain varied during respiration and was associated with ear throb.
The lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. Cardiovascular examination showed regular heart rate and rhythm, normal sounds, no murmurs or rubs, and no peripheral oedema.
An electrocardiogram was carried out and showed unspecific abnormalities (T-inversion in the posterolateral leads) .
An acute myocardial infarction was ruled out by negative troponin. The D-Dimer test was positive, so a computed tomography angiography (CTA) was carried out. Pulmonary embolism as well as lung malignancy could be ruled out. However, the scan revealed a large homogeneous intramural mass of the inferolateral wall of the left ventricle with an intracavitary component and presence of pericardial effusion. These findings correlated with the transthoracic echocardiography performed after CTA. Left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV) function were normal. For better tumour characterization, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) and transoesophageal echocardiography were carried out within the following 5 days .
Though a large pericardial effusion was present, there were no signs of cardiac tamponade. The patient was haemodynamically stable with mild diastolic hypertension (138/97 mmHg) and normal heart rate (82 b.p.m.). Pericardiocentesis showed a haemorrhagic effusion without any higher atypical cells.
The main pathological finding of the cMRI was observed on the LV inferolateral wall, growing exophytically into the ventricular lumen and pericardial space. Two further foci missed by the previous computed tomography (CT) were located in the RV wall and on the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve with exophytic growth. The masses were slightly hyperintense with respect to myocardium in T1- and T2-weighted sequences, with an improved contrast in late gadolinium enhancement imaging. Due to these characteristics, the initially suspected diagnosis was lymphoma or metastases of unknown origin. However, in CT no other suspect organ lesions or lymph nodes were found. Biopsies were taken of the LV tumour mass via transaortal access. Histopathology demonstrated a poorly differentiated small cell tumour of the neuroendocrine type (G3) . Immunohistological analysis revealed diffuse strong positivity for keratin components as CK7, neuroendocrine markers as synaptophysin, and CD56. Additionally, weak focal detection of chromogranin and a clear response for p53 oncoprotein were found. Laboratory results showed that the tumour was not actively secreting proteins.
Despite further investigations (CT-neck/chest/abdomen/pelvis, dermatological examination, and somatostatin receptor scinitigraphy), which were carried out within 2 weeks after the diagnosis, no primary was found.
After an interdisciplinary board decision (cardiology, cardiac surgery, and haemato-oncology), in the absence of resection options, chemotherapy was initiated with Carboplatin and Etoposid. Due to the extent of the tumour’s infiltration of the LV and RV walls, there was concern about a ‘tumour meltdown’ with perforation.
After six cycles of chemotherapy a size progression of the tumour was detected. After initial pericardial drainage, a recurrence of pericardial effusion did not occur . The patient was clinically stable. Detailed staging, including CT-chest/abdomen, scintigraphy, and PET-CT, revealed no metastases. Since no other suspect lesions were detected, the NEC in the heart was assumed to be a possible primary tumour.
For this patient heart transplantation was a possible treatment option. It was performed quickly after high urgency listing 6 months after diagnosis, followed by immunosuppression with Tacrolimus, Everolimus, and Prednisolon. Regular follow-ups were planned every 1–3 months, depending on the clinical situation. Unfortunately, the patient didn’t comply. He only went to the emergency room of another hospital when he suffered with fatigue 5 months after heart transplantation. CT and magnetic resonance imaging revealed pericardial, cerebral, pulmonal, pancreatic, and osseous masses.