A 5-month-old intact female Maltese dog, 2.7 kg bodyweight, was presented with acute onset of vomiting, diarrhea, inappetence, and depression. The dog was regularly vaccinated and dewormed for ectoparasites and endoparasites. Physical examination revealed a poor body condition score (3/9), depression, approximately 10% dehydration, pale mucosal membranes, tachycardia (180 ppm), and abdominal pain.
A complete blood count showed mild anemia and moderate neutrophilic leukocytosis, with band and toxic granulation neutrophils. Biochemistry revealed a moderate increase in hepatocellular and cholestatic enzymes, with hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia (, T0).
Radiographs of the abdomen, interpreted by a board-certified radiologist, revealed multiple spot-like calcific areas in the ventral epigastric region and loss of serosal details, suggestive of peritoneal effusion and/or peritonitis. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) showed focal thickening of the proximal part of the descending duodenal wall, associated with reduced layering details, and multiple spot-like hyperechoic reverberant interfaces crossing the whole duodenal wall, consistent with gas. The mesenteric fat surrounding the duodenum appeared focally thickened and hyperechoic; tributary lymph nodes were enlarged, and there was mild peritoneal effusion between the proximal duodenum and the liver. Furthermore, the gallbladder was not identified. The remaining organs were within normal limits. On the basis of clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings, duodenal wall perforation and focal peritonitis were suspected, and an exploratory laparotomy was scheduled.
During abdominal exploration, a small amount of free turbid peritoneal fluid and severe hyperemia of the greater omentum was observed. The peritoneal exudate was collected and underwent cultural examination, which did not yield any bacterial growth. The liver appeared subjectively small with diffusely irregular margins; however, obvious focal lesions were not detected. The gallbladder was not identified either in the classic or ectopic sites. Moreover, the lesser omentum was severely thickened and hyperemic, with numerous adherences to the liver capsule, the pylorus, and the proximal portion of the duodenum. These adherences were gently solved by blunt and sharp dissection, revealing a duodenal perforation of 4 mm in diameter on the antimesenteric side, 3 cm distal to the pylorus . The edges of the duodenal lesion were extremely friable and bleeding slightly, and surgical findings were consistent with perforated DU. Ulcer debridement was performed and tissue from the marginal surface of the ulcerative lesion was sent for histopathological analysis. The defect was sutured transversely with a full-thickness simple interrupted pattern with 4-0 USP absorbable monofilament (Glycomer 631) (ByosinTM; Medtronic, Dublin, D02, Ireland) . A serosal patching, using a nearby jejunal loop, was also performed to reinforce the duodenal repair and multiple liver biopsies were collected for histological evaluation. After peritoneal lavages with sterile warm saline, the celiotomy was closed routinely.
The dog recovered uneventfully from surgery and anesthesia and was hospitalized in the intensive care unit for post-operative monitoring. Buprenorphine (10 µg/kg IV q 8 hours), ampicillin-sulbactam (20 mg/kg IV q 8 hours), maropitant (1 mg/kg IV q 24 hours), and omeprazole (1 mg/kg IV q 12 hours) were administered.
The clinical condition and blood work gradually improved during post-operative hospitalization (, T1). The dog started eating a canned gastrointestinal diet 24 hours postoperatively and was discharged 4 days after surgery with antimicrobial therapy (amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 12.5 mg/kg orally q 12 hours) and proton-pump inhibitor (omeprazole 1 mg/kg orally q 12 hours) to be administered for 7 days.
Histopathology on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples collected during explorative laparotomy confirmed a severe, diffuse subacute fibrinous peritonitis, with steatonecrosis and granulation tissue corresponding to transmural intestinal ulceration, and the liver showed a moderate, multifocal, bridging portal fibrosis with moderate to marked bile ductule proliferation and moderate hyperplasia of juvenile intrahepatic arterioles . These findings were suggestive of a congenital hepatic disorder, such as ductal plate malformation (DPM), with histopathologic features of proliferative-like phenotype .
At 15-days follow up, the dog was in good clinical condition, but occasional post-prandial depression was reported by the owner. Biochemistry showed a persistent increase in liver enzymes with normal blood ammonia levels (, T2), and no signs of DU relapse were observed at the abdominal US.
Two months after surgery the patient was rechecked for vomiting and diarrhea, associated with inappetence and depression. Physical examination revealed tachycardia (160 ppm), polypnea (60 bpm), and enlargement of the abdomen. Abdominal US reassessment highlighted different tortuous vessels directed from the splenic vein to the left renal vein, consistent with acquired nephro-splenic shunts. Portal blood flow velocity, measured by micro-convex probe (5–8 Mhz) (Epiq5G Ultrasound System; Philips Healthcare, Monza, 20900, Italy) with color flow Doppler, was 7.43 cm/second. Furthermore, decreasing liver size, pancreatic edema, and severe peritoneal effusion were also detected, without any sign of DU recurrence. The abdominal fluid was cytologically and biochemically consistent with low-protein transudate, and these findings were suggestive of pre-sinusoidal portal hypertension, likely secondary to the ductal plate abnormalities . Results of serum biochemistry were suggestive of liver failure (, T3). Specific treatment with omeprazole (1 mg/kg orally q 12 hours), famotidine (1 mg/kg q 24 hours), ursodeoxycholic acid (20 mg/kg orally q 24 hours), s-adenosylmethionine (18 mg/kg orally q 24 hours), metronidazole (7.5 mg/kg orally q 12 hours), spironolactone (5 mg/kg orally q 12 hours), lactulose (0.5 ml/kg orally q 8 hours), and a hepatic diet were introduced. Clinical signs gradually improved and 1 month later (3 months after surgery) the dog was bright, alert, and responsive with a good appetite. The physical exam was unremarkable and a decrease in liver enzymes and ammonia was noted (, T4). Ursodeoxycholic acid, s-adenosylmethionine, spironolactone, and hepatic diet were continued, while other therapies were discontinued, and the patient maintained a good clinical condition over the next 5 months.
Eight months after surgery, the dog was reexamined for disorientation, circling, vomiting, and diarrhea. Icteric mucous membranes, severe dehydration, enlargement of the abdomen, neurologic signs (postural reaction deficits and prosencephalic signs) were detected on physical examination, and hepatic encephalopathy was confirmed by blood work (, T5). Additionally, severe peritoneal effusion and worsening of portal hypertension (portal blood flow velocity of 5.74 cm/second) were found in abdominal US. Due to the poor clinical condition and unfavorable prognosis, the owner elected euthanasia.
Severe peritoneal effusion, decreased liver size, gallbladder absence, and multiple acquired portosystemic shunts were found on necropsy examination . Signs of bowel ulceration or perforation were not detected.