A 76-year-old woman, diagnosed with ET and the JAK2-V617F mutation, presented with complaints of shortness of breath. She developed dyspnoea 6 months before hospitalization and was unable to perform daily activities because of it. The progressive dyspnoea worsened and limited even short-distance movements, and she was admitted to our hospital. On admission, her blood pressure was 153/84 mmHg; pulse rate, 96 beats per minute (b.p.m.); oxygen saturation, 92% in room air; and body temperature, 36.8°C. The World Health Organization (WHO) functional class was III. On auscultation, a pansystolic murmur was heard at the cardiac apex, but no rales were heard. A significant physical finding was lower limb edema. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm and deep T-wave inversion in leads V1–5 . Echocardiography showed right ventricle dilatation and severe tricuspid regurgitation with a flattened interventricular septum . The peak tricuspid pressure gradient (TRPG) was 61 mmHg, with suspected PH. Laboratory data revealed a platelet count of 74.3 × 104/µL (normal 15.8–34.8 × 104/µL), D-dimer level of 3.7 µg/mL (normal <1.0 µg/mL), and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 872 pg/mL (normal <18.4 pg/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed an eccentric thrombus in the right PA and thrombi in bilateral distal PAs . The pulmonary embolism severity index score of 126 points at the admission showed a very high mortality risk. We initially diagnosed the patient with acute pulmonary embolism (PE) and initiated heparinization. On Day 2 of hospitalization, despite continuation of anticoagulation therapy, her haemodynamics gradually worsened. Her oxygen saturation deteriorated further to 90% in the presence of supplemental oxygen (10 L); thus, non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) was initiated. Her PH worsened, and her TRPG elevated to 87.6 mmHg. We administered recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA 800 000 units, Monteplase, Eisai, Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Nevertheless, her oxygen saturation was not restored, and PH remained severe. As thrombolysis did not improve the patient’s condition, we suspected the presence of combined acute PE and CTEPH.
On Day 3 of hospitalization, the patient’s condition had not improved. The patient’s blood pressure was 108/52 mmHg; however, the pulse rate increased to 120 b.p.m., and her urinary volume decreased. We considered haemodynamic shock; therefore, we decided to perform an emergency right heart catheterization (RHC) and pulmonary angiography (PAG). RHC showed her PAP of 79/24 mmHg (mean pressure: 45 mmHg), right arterial pressure (RAP) of 11 mmHg, PAWP of 8 mmHg, cardiac output (CO) of 4.31 L/min, cardiac index (CI) of 3.29 L/min/m2, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 8.58 Wood units. PAG showed fresh thrombi floating in the right A3, 5, 8, and 10 segments and the left A8, 9, and 10 segments along with organized thrombi in several segments. We considered the patient as presenting with acute PE based on CTEPH. Therefore, rescue BPA was performed. We dilated the right 4 segmental and 9 subsegmental pulmonary arteries (A1abc, A3, A8, A9abcd) using semi-compliant balloons (1.5, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 mm) (, see , ). After BPA, good pulmonary venous return was established in all therapeutic segments. Consequently, the patient’s dyspnoea decreased. At 24 h after BPA, the patient’s oxygen demand drastically decreased to 1 L. Her BNP level decreased to 60 pg/dL. Echocardiography showed disappearance of the flattened interventricular septum, and her TRPG decreased to 38 mmHg. Warfarin administration was initiated as lifelong coagulation. The patient was discharged on Day 18 of hospitalization. Three months later, lung perfusion scintigraphy revealed multiple wedge-shaped defects. PAG showed persistence of organized thrombi in several bilateral segments despite warfarin continuation. The lesions were in the peripheral pulmonary artery. Her haemodynamic status improved with a PAP of 49/14 mmHg (mean pressure: 29 mmHg), RAP of 6 mmHg, PAWP of 10 mmHg, CO of 4.34 L/min, CI of 3.36 L/min/m2, and PVR of 4.38 Wood units. PH remained despite 3 months of effective anticoagulation therapy. A definitive diagnosis of peripheral-type CTEPH was confirmed. After introduction of riociguat, additional BPA was performed three times. Her symptoms were further improved as well as a mean PAP of 18 mmHg and PVR of 1.6 Wood units without complications.