A 22-year-old male presented with a history of atypical pineal parenchymal tumor of intermediate differentiation resected by suboccipital craniotomy at the age of 12 with adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy, followed by a large, atypical meningioma resected through the left parietal craniotomy at the age of 14. The patient reported 3 weeks of altered mental status, visual deficits, fatigue, decreased appetite, weight loss, and lethargy.
On physical examination, he had dysarthria with the paucity of speech without receptive or expressive aphasia – there was some difficulty with repeating complex sentences. There were no focal neurological deficits, the sensation was intact, and there was full strength and spontaneous movement of all extremities. The patient was afebrile and preliminary laboratory results were unremarkable.
Imaging showed a giant – 9.7 cm anteroposterior × 7.5 cm transverse × 6.6 cm craniocaudal – bilobed, heterogeneous, partially cystic mass centered in the anterior cranial fossa, extending to the middle fossa, and intraventricularly with marked mass effect including regional erosion and involvement of the ethmoid air cells and frontal sinus [ and ].
Given the patient’s history, differential diagnostic considerations included atypical/malignant radiation-induced meningioma or metastatic pineal parenchymal tumor. He subsequently underwent extensive tumor resection through bifrontal craniotomy with a skull base approach to the left orbit and ethmoid sinus for microsurgical resection.
A right parietal ventriculostomy was placed and a bicoronal incision was done for a bifrontal stereotactic craniotomy with pericranium preservation. The bifrontal craniotomy was done with multiple bur holes, one above the glabella, two frontal bilateral, and then intermediate around the superior sagittal sinus. Afterward, the epidural dissection was performed, and the bone flap was removed. An extended transbasal approach was, then, added. The tumor was extending toward the ethmoid sinus and into the left orbit. Using bipolar electrocoagulation, the tumor was devascularized from the anterior and posterior ethmoid arteries bilaterally. We proceeded to debulk the orbital segment of the tumor, followed by the ethmoidal segment, and then finally the dura and anterior fossa. The anterior aspect of the superior sagittal sinus was ligated just behind the tumor using silk sutures as well as hemo-clips. Debulking was done with the ultrasonic aspirator. After adequate central debulking, we were able to access the posterior lobule of the tumor and collapsed the capsule, dissecting it away from the third ventricle and lateral ventricle. When approaching the segment of the tumor that was attached to the pericallosal artery on the right side, a small opening of the pericallosal artery was encountered. A temporary clip was used proximally, and (9 0) sutures were placed to close the area of hemorrhage adequately. The temporary clip was removed, and adequate flow was restored after this. Hemostasis was carefully achieved. An absorbable hemostatic sponge and surgical glue were used to isolate the ventricle from the surgical cavity in the anterior fossa. An additional ventriculostomy was placed with direct visualization. We used a fat graft that was harvested from the abdomen to seal the anterior fossa around the ethmoid sinus and the orbit. We placed fibrin glue and then a titanium plate was used to reconstruct the anterior aspect of the floor of the anterior fossa. We continued to perform the suturing of the pericranium down to the dura at the level of the titanium mesh. At this point, we placed a nonsuturable dura substitute and fibrin glue followed by a suturable dura substitute in the convexity . The bone flap was replaced with miniplates and screws, and a subgaleal drain was placed as well .
Histologic examination of the mass revealed a spindle-cell neoplasm with fasciculate architecture and strong diffuse reactivity to caldesmon, supporting smooth vessel origins. The tumor specimen was negative for STAT-6 and e-cadherin staining. These findings, along with the patient’s history of radiation, were supportive of an LMS arising from the base of the skull or meninges.
The patient required a ventriculoperitoneal shunt and was discharged on postoperative day 20 to acute inpatient rehabilitation in improved and stable condition. At the patient’s most recent follow-up (33 months after), there was the presence of a small area of enhancement at the anterior fossa, some ventricular enlargement, and mild enlargement of left parietal enhancing lesions on imaging. However, due to the patient’s clinical condition, it was felt that further treatment was not necessary. Clinically, the patient had improved physical, visual, and cognitive abilities. In addition, the patient demonstrated the ability to independently ambulate.