A 39-year-old African para 4 + 1, gravida 6 presented at 11 weeks of gestation with severe lower abdominal pain that was sharp and continuous in character and had gradually worsened over the last 4 h. She had associated dizziness but no vaginal bleeding. She had a history of four previous hysterotomy scars with only one living child. She had two previous uterine ruptures in 2016 and 2019 at 34 weeks and 28 weeks, respectively. Her obstetric history revealed the following: her first pregnancy was in 2013, which was complicated by an emergency cesarean section (CS) at 28 weeks due to non-reassuring fetal status and subsequently a neonatal death shortly after. The second pregnancy was in 2015, which was complicated with preeclampsia with severe features; the patient had an emergency CS at 31 weeks and a neonatal death thereafter. Her third pregnancy was in 2016, she developed preeclampsia and was delivered at 36 weeks via emergency CS due to uterine rupture with a good neonatal outcome. Her fourth pregnancy in 2018 ended up in an incomplete miscarriage in the first trimester that was medically managed. Her fifth pregnancy in 2019 ended up with a uterine rupture and a stillbirth at 28 weeks of gestation.
Antenatally, the patient had been positively screened for antiphospholipid syndrome and was started on subcutaneous enoxaparin 40 U daily and acetyl-salicylic acid (asprin) 150 mg (mg) daily. Her antenatal profile, dating scan, and nuchal translucency were all normal.
On admission, her vitals were stable with blood pressure of 110/67 mmHg, pulse rate of 89 beats per minute, oxygen saturation of 100%, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and temperature of 36.8 °C. She had mild conjunctival pallor and on abdominal examination fundal height corresponded to a 15-week gestation with generalized severe tenderness with guarding.
Her complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 11.2 g/dl, platelets of 226 cells/µl and white blood cells of 15.29 cells/µl.
A focused abdominal sonogram of trauma (FAST) ultrasound revealed free fluid in the abdomen with a viable intrauterine pregnancy . She consented to an urgent diagnostic laparoscopy and was wheeled to theater immediately.
Intraoperatively, an anterior uterine rupture of approximately 10 cm was found with a hemoperitoneum of approximately 1000 ml. The tubes and ovaries appeared normal bilaterally. The decision to convert to an open procedure was made on the basis of achieving a better uterine repair due to the early nature of her dehiscence. The procedure was converted to open surgery where the gestational sac was found protruding from the uterus and was expelled spontaneously . The placenta was expelled next and was noted to be attached on the posterior uterine wall . The uterine rupture was repaired in three layers with polyglactin (vicryl) number 0 suture and hemostasis was achieved . An abdominal washout was done with normal saline and abdomen was closed in layers. There were no intraoperative complications. She recovered well and was discharged on the third postoperative day.