A four-year-old female was referred to the Endocrine Unit due to a slow-growing mass at the level of the left thyroid lobe. No history of the disease was present in her medical record, and she was not under any drug. Family history was unremarkable. Her mother had observed a cervical mass progressively enlarging in the past two years with no apparent pressure symptoms such as dyspnea or dysphagia.
On palpation, a smooth mass of hard consistency, mobile on swallowing, was felt in the anterior neck, inferiorly to the left of the trachea. Lab tests detected normal blood count, liver renal, and coagulation function values. Serum Thyrotropin (TSH) concentrations were 5.14 mcIU/mL (normal range (n.r.): 0.35 – 4.94), FT4 8.8 pg/mL (n.r.: 6 - 12), calcitonin < 1 pg/mL, calcium 10.4 mg/dL (n.r: 8.5 - 10.5), and parathormone (PTH) 26 pg/mL (n.r.: 10 – 70).
The neck ultrasound showed a solitary hypoechoic, mildly vascularized, 2.1 × 2.3 × 3.3 cm large nodule with well-defined margins close to the inferior third of the left thyroid lobe; no concurrent suspicious lymph nodes were seen. Fine needle aspiration biopsy was performed: Cytological exam (-) demonstrated a population of large cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, regular nuclei, and prominent nucleoli and spindle cells without significant atypia, consistent with a benign lesion of neurogenic origin. The wash-out liquid was negative for parathormone, calcitonin, and thyroglobulin.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck revealed a well-circumscribed 4 cm large mass, closely adhering to the lower third of the left thyroid lobe. The neoplasm dislocated the trachea contralaterally and showed a strong signal in T2 sequences enhancing after contrast administration. No cervical lymphadenopathy was evident. The report suggested a lesion originating from the peripheral nervous system.
Subsequently, the patient underwent surgery. The complete excision of the neoplasm was achieved without complications: in particular, there was neither evidence of Horner syndrome symptoms nor voice changes. Grossly , the mass measured 2 × 2 × 3 cm and appeared semi-capsulated, with defined margins and a white, compact cut surface. Histological examination, completed after fixation with formalin (4 µm sections were obtained and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) after deparaffinization), showed a thin-capsulated lesion with well-defined borders and moderate cellularity. The cell population comprised two subtypes: Spindle cells arranged in small intersecting fascicles separated by loose stroma and consistent with Schwann cells and large elements with abundant cytoplasm, round to oval vesicular nuclei, and prominent nucleoli corresponding to ganglion cells. Schwann cells stained positively for S-100 protein, ganglion cells, and their axonal processes for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and neurofilament (NF) protein. The NF expression and histochemical staining for AB-PAS showed the presence of cellular neuropil all over the neoplasm. Staining for cytokeratins, EMA, and TTF-1 was negative. The Mib-1 and Ki67 label indexes were less than 5%. The diagnosis of ganglioneuroma (GN) of the neck with benign biological behavior was made. The presence of neuroblasts was sought by thorough sampling and was excluded. Interestingly, the lesion bordered normal thyroid tissue and a fragment of the normal parathyroid gland, thus confirming the proximity between the neoplasm and the thyroid.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using standard procedures with DNeasy Blood Kit on the MagCore Extraction System. Molecular characterization of DNA was performed by NGS, using NGS Clinical Exome Sequencing (CES), which comprises 4800 genes using Sophia Genetics Kit on the NextSeq550 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's protocol. The BaseSpace pipeline (Illumina, ) and the SOPHIA DDM software were used for the variant calling and annotating variants, respectively. Variants identified were visualized by the Integrative Genome Viewer (IGV). The BWA alignment algorithm was used to map sequence reads to the UCSC human genome reference build 19. Variants altering the coding sequence were selected when present at a frequency of < 1:100 (0.01) in the control population. Sequence changes were analyzed and interpreted, taking into consideration cancer-related genes. The clinical significance of the variants identified was examined using standards and guidelines recommended by the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) and the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP), integrated with Invitae Variant Classification Sherloc Criteria (, ).
We performed genetic analysis using the CES approach and focused on evaluating genes associated with predisposing conditions to tumors and genes associated with somatic cancer. No pathogenic variants were detected in paraganglioma-associated genes (FGFR1, FGFR3, LZTR1, MGMT, NFKBIA, PPARG, TACC3, TP53, IDH1, ERBB2, PTEN, EGFR, NF1, NF2, BRCA2, POT1, PIK3CA, CDK4, MDM2, ALK, ACVR1, MLH1, MSH2, EPCAM, PMS2, MSH6, MLH3, BRAF, KIF1B, VHL, APC, RET, SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, TMEM127, MAX, SDHAF2, KIT, PDGFRA, CHEK2, ATM, DLST, and SLC25A11) but we identified 14 germline Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUS) affecting 14 different genes .