A 65-year-old woman was diagnosed with anomalous systemic arterial supply to the normal basal segment of the lung in her early forties. As she was asymptomatic, she had been under observation only since the time of her diagnosis. Her medical history included hypertension; she was found to have hypertension two years ago when she was admitted to a previous medical emergency for hypertension.
She reported to the emergency room of her previous doctor with the chief complaint of blood in her sputum. After a computed tomography (CT) scan, the anomalous systemic arterial supply to the normal basal segment was suspected as the cause of the presenting symptom, and surgery was considered necessary. Thereafter, the patient was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment.
CT images revealed a calcified aberrant artery with maximum diameter of 11 mm at the root. The vessel originated from the descending aorta at the level of the eighth to ninth dorsal ribs . Thickening and calcification of the vessel wall was observed mainly at the root. There was no abnormality in the pulmonary vein. However, a shadow suspicious of pneumonia was also present in S6 beyond the pulmonary vein and between the S6 and the basal segment. After discussions with the vascular surgeons open chest surgery was decided to be the safer option as the use of automatic sutures to treat the calcified vessel carries the risk of an incomplete resection. The decision was then made to perform a left lower lobectomy, as the image of pneumonia was also present in the S6.
Pulmonary function examination showed a forced expiratory volume per second of 1.69L (80.1% of the predicted volume) and a forced vital capacity of 2.11L (77% of the predicted volume). Echocardiography showed good cardiac contractility with an ejection fraction of 65%. The patient’s TR max was 2.4 m/s, TAPSE was 10.2 mm, and TRPG was 23.2 mmHg.
We performed a left lower lobectomy with aberrant artery excision. First, the patient was placed in the left lateral recumbent position under general anesthesia . The thoracic cavity was approached from the sixth intercostal space and the aberrant artery of about 1.5 cm in diameter was detected to be originating from the descending aorta . Macroscopic changes between the normal lung parenchyma and the parenchyma perfused by the aberrant artery were observed, such as dilated capillaries. The origin of the aberrant vessel was sutured with two pledgeted 4–0 polypropylene sutures. In addition, two clips were placed in order to close off the central site of the vessel suture. The peripheral side was then ligated with a silk thread. The abnormal artery was dissected between the pledgeted 4–0 polypropylene sutures and the silk thread. Thereafter, a 4–0 polypropylene suture was used to close the end of the vessel. Then, the lower pulmonary vein and pulmonary artery of the lower lobe were resected in the same order. Side clamping of the descending aorta was not necessary. After this, the pathological specimen was removed by separating the left lower lobar bronchus. The operation time was 162 min with a total blood loss of 50 mL. On post-operative day one, the drain was removed and the patient was discharged without any complication on post-operative day seven.
Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed elastic type artery exhibiting intimal thickening and lumen dilation with calcification. On its peripheral side, some atheroma formation was also observed.