A 22 year old right handed female was referred to Neurology outpatients with a three year history of lower limb cramping relieved by movement and involuntary nocturnal lower limb movements. She was able to suppress the movements but this increased discomfort. Initially, there was a brief and non-sustained response to a dopamine agonist (pramipexole commencing at 0.18 mg daily up titrated to 2 g three times a day). In addition, she reported painful involuntary pulling sensation in her head and trunk. Past medical history was unremarkable and there was no history of Dystonia or Parkinsonism in her two sisters, parents or grandparents. No identifiable triggers including trauma or neuroleptic use were identified. Over the next two months, these symptoms rapidly progressed and the patient was admitted for assessment. Examination at that time revealed hyperkinetic movements comprising of extensor posturing in the upper limbs, severe retrocollis and retropulsion of the neck and torso. There was no notable diurnal variation. There was no evidence of Parkinsonism, pyramidal or cerebellar dysfunction. Deep tendon reflexes were brisk and symmetrical with downgoing plantars. There was no clinical response during a period of direct observation with inpatient neurology and physiotherapy assessment to a low dose of Carbidopa-Levodopa (Sinemet) 10 mg/100 mg three times a day (TID). Her symptoms continued to progress and two months later, the patient was unable to mobilise independently or lie flat.
A Dystonia and Parkinsonism Next Generation Sequencing panel was requested and revealed a heterozygous point mutation GCH1gene c.305T>A with a Met102Lys protein change. This mutation has previously been reported with Autosomal Dominant Dopa-Responsive Dystonia . CSF biomarkers revealed low levels of biotetrahypterin and total neopterin which supported a defect in GTP-cyclohydrolase. She was retrialled on a higher dose of Carbidopa-Levodopa (Sinemet) 30 mg/300 mg TID with complete resolution of symptoms (total daily levodopa dose 900 mg). At two year follow up, the patient remains asymptomatic on the same dose. The medication is well tolerated without adverse effects and the patient has an excellent quality of life.