A 48-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital with left flank pain and gross hematuria with clot retention. The patient did not report any history of renal trauma, hypertension, known urolithiasis, or recent medical intervention in which percutaneous instrumentation was used. The patient denied any bleeding disorder and was not taking any medication. Her physical examination results were normal, and there was no abdominal bruit on auscultation. The patient's blood pressure was normal at 90/60 mmHg, and her heart rate was 110 bpm.
Her biochemical and coagulation parameters were within normal limits. Urine analysis showed no evidence of leukocytosis, but erythrocytes were present. Urinary system ultrasonography revealed no kidney or bladder lithiasis and no parenchymal or collecting system abnormalities of either kidney.
Both computed tomography (CT) and Doppler sonography were performed. Doppler sonography was performed using an IU 22 scanner (Philips, Best, The Netherlands) with a 2 MHz to 4 MHz convex probe. Both color and spectral Doppler sonograms were obtained, which showed turbulent flow with an increased flow velocity of 59.2 cm/second .
The patient underwent multi-slice CT (MSCT) (Aquilion 64; Toshiba Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan). After unenhanced CT was performed, 120 mL of iopromide (370 Iomeron; Bracco Imaging SpA, Milan, Italy) was administered using a mechanical injector at a flow rate of 4 mL/second. Biphasic CT was then performed in the arterial phase, and delayed venous phase scanning was performed at a fixed delay of 90 seconds. The CT scan showed the presence of tortuous blood arterial opacified vessels with thin arterial ramifications of spiral form located next to the ileum on the upper pole of the left kidney .
The patient was immediately carried into the angiography room for endovascular treatment. Selective left renal artery angiography was performed using a right transfemoral approach and a 5-French sheath (Terumo Corp., Tokyo, Japan) with a 0.036-inch hydrophilic guidewire coupled with a 5-French cobra-shaped catheter (Cordis, Warren, NJ, USA).
Digital subtraction arteriography (DSA) demonstrated the feeding artery to the AVM. The lesion was selectively catheterized with a microcatheter (Progreat; Terumo Corp.) and embolized with 4 mm and 3 mm microcoils (Vortex; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) and microparticles of polyvinyl alcohol 300μ to 500μ and 700μ to 900μ (Bead Block; Terumo Corp.) . No complications occurred during or after the procedure.
At the end of the procedure, complete excision of the AVM was detected using DSA . The patient's hemodynamic parameters, such as blood pressure, were monitored. The patient was discharged seven days later with no signs of hematuria.