A 38-year-old, middle-aged woman had a regular menstrual cycle (9/27 days) with normal menses amounts, and her last menstrual period was on 3/9/2019. She had mild dysmenorrhoea, which was relieved within 3 days, without treatment. Starting in December 2018, her dysmenorrhoea worsened. She visited our hospital on 3/22/2019 and received an ultrasound examination, which presented a 104 mm × 55 mm × 60 mm pelvic mass on the right side of the uterus, with dense echoes, and an extremely rich blood signal in the cyst wall . The patient underwent laparoscopy under general anaesthesia on 3/26/2019. The uterine body tissue was located in the left pelvic cavity. The right side of the uterine protrusion was obvious and bumpy. There were three protrusions connected in a line. The right fallopian tube and round ligament were severely compressed and completely separated, with a distance of 40 mm between them. The right ligament of the right ovary was stretched, while a large amount of tension was maintained on the surface of the uterine protrusion (a). When we opened the posterior wall of the uterus, a large amount of chocolate-colored thick fluid was seen (b). The cystic fluid was fully aspirated, and the cyst was completely removed. The tumour cavity was then sutured with 1-0 V-Loc ™ 180 absorbable and barbed sutures (coviden, CO, USA) (c). The detailed procedure of the laparoscopic surgery is shown in the video (Supplementary materials). Postoperative pathology revealed myometrial cysts and bleeding on the inner wall. Microscopic examination confirmed the presence of endometriotic cysts . Based on pathology results and laparoscopy findings, cystic adenomyosis was postoperatively diagnosed. Three days after surgery, the patient was discharged. More than one month after surgery, the patient received a repeat pelvic ultrasound. There were multiple strong echogenic spots in the right muscular layer of the uterus, which were considered postoperative changes . She no longer experienced dysmenorrhoea.