A 68-year-old man with type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease presented to our out-patient department with a progressive sharp lower back pain associated with left lower extremity numbness lasting more than 2 months. The symptoms were exacerbated by standing and walking and relieved by rest. Physical examination revealed midline lumbosacral tenderness with paresthesia radiating to his left thigh and calf over L5/S1 dermatome. L-spine plain films showed mild lumbar spondylosis with marginal spur formation and decreased disc height, which might imply degenerative disc disease that causing the symptoms. Nerve conduction velocity test and electromyography showed bilateral lumbosacral polyradiculopathy or sensorimotor polyneuropathy of lower limbs. Sciatica with diabetic polyneuropathy were suspected and conservative treatment with pain control, blood sugar control and rehabilitation were prescribed. However, after 3 months of treatment, the symptoms gradually progressed to involve his right leg and the patient complaint about claudication and bilateral leg weakness that he needed to walk with a walker. Physical exam in the clinic showed decreased bilateral leg muscle strength (Medical Research Council scale 4). Under the impression of sciatica refractory to conservative treatment, MRI without contrast was then arranged, which revealed spinal stenosis at L4/L5/S1 level and, surprisingly, an abnormal epidural mass at L5-S1 and a mass at the paraspinal area . These masses had well demarcated margins, and they displayed hypointense and hyperintense signals in the T1-weighted image and T2-weighted image, respectively. Abscesses or tumors were suspected on the basis of the images. He denied previous infection elsewhere, previous spinal surgery, injection, acupuncture and constitutional symptoms such as weight loss, headache, prolonged fevers, fatigue, dyspnea, and malaise. He was then admitted for further evaluation. The values for hemoglobin level, white blood cell count, CRP level, ESR and HbA1C from the initial laboratory study were 7.1 g/dL, 12.9 k/μL, 0.73 mg/dL, 67 mm/hr, and 9.4% respectively. Anemia was microcytic (MCV 73.1 fL) and the iron profile revealed iron deficiency anemia with superimposed chronic inflammation (serum iron 11 μg/dL, ferritin 85.54 ng/mL, TIBC 244 ug/dL, transferrin 223 mg/dL). The stool was soft and brown and he denied constipation and change of bowel habit. Digital rectal exam and stool occult blood test were unremarkable. Due to progression of his neurological symptoms, posterior decompression was performed on the 2nd day from admission. Epidural abscess at L5/S1 with adhesion of ligamentum flavum and dura, partial bony destruction of lamina and facet joint were noted in the operation. Posterior decompression with laminotomy of L5-S1, sequestrectomy of infected lamina and debridement were performed. The pus culture isolated Streptococcus gallolyticus. Ceftriaxone 2 g Q12H was administered and the sensitivity report later on showed susceptible. No microorganisms were isolated from the blood cultures, and no fever was noted before or after the operation. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed no valvular vegetation. Prompted by the well-established association between S. gallolyticus and colorectal cancer, a tumor workup was performed. Elevated tumor markers were noted: CEA level at 9.5 ng/mL (0.0–5.0) and CA199 level at 144.3 U/mL (0.0–37.0). The CT scan revealed a 5 cm tumor at the sigmoid colon extending to the sigmoid rectal junction with four enlarged lymph nodes around the inferior mesenteric artery. A colonoscopy located one circular ulcerative tumor at the sigmoid colon . The biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma. The colorectal surgeon was consulted and a laparoscopic lower anterior resection was performed. The final pathology stage was determined to be pT3N2bMx, stage IIIC and the histologic grade was G2 (moderately differentiated). Notably, the patient had no family history of cancer and denied experiencing the common symptoms of colorectal cancer (weight loss, recent changes in bowel habits, and tarry or bloody stool). He tolerated the surgeries well and the neurologic symptoms gradually recovered. CBC/DC, CRP and ESR returned within normal ranges in a regular monitor. He was discharged after 19 days of hospitalization and was referred to hematology department for chemotherapy. He completed the treatment course and no focal recurrence nor distant metastasis was detected in a 3-year follow up period.