A 67-year-old man presented with right limb weakness for 5 d.
Five days ago, the patient developed right limb weakness and non-fluent speech, without treatment, but no obviously aggravated trend in symptoms.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 5 years, and was taking nifedipine controlled-release tablets and irbesartan hydrochlorothiazide to control his blood pressure. In addition, he had been suffering from type 2 diabetes for 3 years and was taking acarbose and repaglinide to manage the disease; however, control of his blood sugar level was slightly worse. Furthermore, he had a history of coronary heart disease and was treated with aspirin and atorvastatin.
There was no family history of stroke.
The patient’s temperature was 36.7 ℃, heart rate was 72 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 155/95 mmHg. He was conscious with non-fluent speech, the right nasolabial sulcus was shallow and the tongue was extended to the right, the right limb had grade 4 muscle strength, the right Babinski sign was positive, and the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 4 points.
The results of laboratory examinations were all within normal limits, including complete blood count, routine urinalysis, coagulation function, kidney function, and liver function. The results of hepatic serology were also negative. The fasting blood glucose level was increased at 9.7 mmol/L (3.9-6.1 mmol/L). No atrial fibrillation was found after dynamic electrocardiography.
Diffusion-weighted imaging after admission indicated acute left frontal-parietal infarction. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) also revealed severe stenosis of the bifurcation of the left common carotid artery. The patient was maintained on 100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel daily for 21 d. The right femoral artery approach was used for digital subtraction angiography (DSA), which showed a type III aortic arch and severe stenosis at the bifurcation of the left common carotid artery . The right femoral artery approach was performed, and an embolic protection device (ev3 Spider FX 5 mm; ev3 Inc, 4600 Nathan Lane North, Plymouth, MN, United States) was placed. The left common carotid artery was dilated with a 5.0 mm balloon ( Aviator 5.0 mm × 30 mm; Cordis Europa N.V, Oosteinde 8,9301 LJ Roden, The Netherland), and a carotid stent (Precise 8 mm × 6 mm × 30 mm; Cordis Corporation, 14201 N.W. 60th Avenue Miami Lakes, FL, United States) was inserted. Angiography after CAS placement showed that the stenosis at the bifurcation of the left common carotid artery was significantly improved .
On the first day after surgery, the patient developed abdominal distension and abdominal pain, which were accompanied by inhibited defecation. Even though no vomiting was observed, abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) was immediately performed. The results suggested that the structure of the intestinal canal in the abdomen was unclear, and that some parts of the intestine were dilated due to pneumatosis and hydrops. The fluid level could be observed; however, the intestinal wall of the small intestine in the right lower abdomen was slightly thickened, indicating intestinal obstruction and edema of the intestinal wall . It was also observed that the superior mesenteric artery showed severe stenosis with poor distal angiography .