A 22-year-old Caucasian man with end-stage renal disease secondary to Senior-Loken syndrome presented with high creatinine and low hemoglobin levels. He reported symptoms of fatigue and some shortness of breath with activity. Our patient did not have any history of bleeding, or any evidence of bleeding on physical examination at that time. He had no complaints of chest pain or palpitations, or any postural symptoms.
On examination, our patient looked pale. He had a pulse of 88 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 145/85 mmHg. A head and neck examination did not reveal an elevated jugular venous pressure. A chest examination revealed equal air entry bilaterally, without any adventitious sounds. A cardiovascular examination revealed a normal S1, S2, without any murmurs or adventitious sounds. Abdominal exam revealed a slightly distended abdomen, but it was soft and non-tender with good bowel sounds. Examination of his extremities revealed minimal edema bilaterally.
His laboratory investigation showed a hemoglobin level of 46 g/L and a platelet count of 161 × 10 cells/L. His sodium level was 140 mmol/L, potassium 3.4 mmol/L, chloride 104 mmol/L, bicarbonate 17 mmol/L, urea 33.2 mmol/L, and creatinine 320 μmol/L. His international normalized ratio was 1.0. Our patient was admitted and received two units of packed red blood cells. In order to establish a diagnosis, a bone marrow biopsy was arranged. The procedure was performed using a strict aseptic technique with local anesthesia. A right posterior superior iliac spine approach was used. The biopsy required two attempts before the sample was obtained. The procedure was well tolerated and our patient left the procedure room in a stable condition. A few hours after the procedure, our patient developed pelvic pain and discomfort. His hemoglobin level dropped from 93 to 55 g/L. He then became hypotensive. He was briefly admitted to the intensive care unit for pressor support.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast was performed. It showed a large mixed-attenuation retroperitoneal hematoma involving the left psoas, extending into the midline and pelvis. It extended cephalad to the level of his first lumbar vertebra. There was an arterial extravasation in his pelvis, anterior to his inferior sacrum . The arterial supply was the medial sacral artery, which arose at the level of the aortic bifurcation .
An emergency angiography and embolization procedure was arranged. His right common femoral artery was punctured in a retrograde fashion using a single wall needle. A 5-French vascular sheath was placed over a guide wire. A 5-French straight flush catheter was advanced through the sheath and his abdominal aorta was selectively catheterized. Three-dimensional rotational pelvic arteriography was performed. No active bleeding was seen on this angiogram . Using lateral fluoroscopy, a 5-French reverse curve angiographic catheter was used to engage his median sacral artery ostium . Using a combination of a micro-catheter and guide wire, his median sacral artery was selectively catheterized and the micro-catheter combination was advanced into the pre-sacral portion of his median sacral artery. Contrast injection demonstrated active extravasation, as demonstrated on the CT scan . A total of seven micro-coils were advanced through the micro-catheter and the feeding median sacral artery was successfully embolized . The micro-catheter was retracted and arteriography demonstrated complete occlusion of the feeding artery at the level of the coils with no further extravasation of contrast seen. The vascular sheath was removed and hemostasis was achieved with manual compression.
Following embolization our patient’s hemoglobin levels stabilized. He was briefly intubated for this procedure and was successfully extubated the next day. The bone marrow biopsy showed hypocellular marrow with unremarkable trilineage hematopoiesis. He was discharged home after one week in a stable condition with stable hemoglobin levels. Our patient recovered very well and continued to have follow-up appointments with the nephrology clinic for 2 years after discharge.