We report the case of a 40-year-old white woman diagnosed with autism whose clinical features included qualitative abnormalities in reciprocal social interaction and communication, and restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior together with mental retardation, as is common in autism . Her clinical history (AN07770) was collected by the Autism Tissue Program (ATP) through a parental interview using the Autism Diagnostic Interview - Revised (ADI-R). Later the ATP collected her brain. The ATP has transitioned to a new autism brain network called Autism BrainNet. Summarizing, our patient was a full term baby who weighed 2.95 kg (6 lb 8 oz). Her physical development is described as being normal. She was diagnosed at an early age with mental retardation. Her language was significantly delayed. No signs of convulsions, vision or hearing problems, or neurological abnormalities were diagnosed. She demonstrated apparent adherence to non-functional routines and several sensory aversions to loud noises. She was medicated with Vistaril (hydroxyzine), Decadron (dexamethasone), and Demulen (ethinyl estradiol). Her maternal family history is notable in that her grandmother had emphysema. Her paternal family history is significant in that her father died at age 53 due to atherosclerosis after undergoing two bypass surgeries. Her magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated moderate cerebral and cerebellar atrophic changes, and extensive low intensity in her substantia nigra and basal ganglia bilaterally, probably secondary to iron deposition. At age 38 she experienced mood swings, was leaning to the left and walking on her right toe with her right arm curled in. By the end of that year she was unable to walk and was confined to a wheelchair. At age 39 years she was diagnosed with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), because of the spasticity in her limbs and feet. She experienced rapid and severe regression of her motor skills and ability to speak and died at age 40 due to respiratory arrest. No pathology report was obtained. Her brain was very small (890 grams).
We analyzed prefrontal tissue from areas BA45, 46, 47, and 9. No obvious modification in cell size or density was observed. Of these areas, only BA47 presented with abnormal white matter islands extending into the cortical grey matter. The rest of the brain tissue from this patient was distributed to other research groups. We are not aware of any additional report of pathology in this case. Publications reporting on this case included that by McKavanagh et al. that reported on the temporal cortex (BA40, 41, and planum temporale) and the orbitofrontal cortex (BA11) .
Our patient presented with abnormal white matter extensions and islands into the cortical grey matter in BA47. These white matter regions resembled the pencil fibers of the striatum and therefore we referred to them as “pencil fibers.” Cortical pencil fibers have never been described in autism. Pencil fibers encompassed most of the extent of the cortical grey matter, some including all layers from VI to II, but did not extend into layer I . We performed 14 μm coronal sections of BA47 area and immunostained it with specific cell type markers. We found that oligodendrocytes (SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 10 and oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2; Sox10+ and Olig2+), astrocytes (S100+ and glial fibrillary acidic protein; GFAP+), and microglial cells (ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1; Iba1+) were present within the pencil fibers. Some of the microglia were immunopositive for CD68, indicating that they were activated cells . However, neurons were not present. Pencil fibers were rich in axonal neurofilament 312 (SMI312+) and neurofilament H non-phosphorylated 132 (SMI32+) fibers. Overall, the cellular composition within the cortical pencil fibers resembled that of the underlying white matter region. We found b-amyloid deposits and tau+ neurofilaments, which are typical of neurodegenerative diseases including PKAN, within the cortical grey matter but not within the white matter pencil fibers. Iron deposits were not detected.