A 34-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a complaint of menstrual arrest for 19W, abdominal pain for over 4 hours, accompanied by syncope once.
The patient had regular menstruation in the previous, and the last menstruation occurred on April 2, 2014, the same amount as the normal menstruation. She felt fetal movement from the fourth month after pregnancy. She received regular examinations at the local maternal and child health care hospital. At 4 o’clock that morning, she suddenly felt persistent and severe abdominal pain. There was no obvious feeling of anal distension, nausea, and vomiting. Besides, no fever, chills, and vaginal bleeding were reported. At 4:00 am on August 15, 2014, she suffered from lower abdominal pain, then fainted once, and fell on the ground. Hence, she came to the hospital for emergency treatment at 8:25 on August 15, 2014. She presented a pale face and a poor mental state, with cold limbs and a faint pulse.
This patient had a history of laparoscopic surgery due to “ectopic pregnancy” in 2011, and a history of pelvic inflammatory diseases. Moreover, she suffered from atrophy of the left kidney due to kidney stones. Based on these findings, 2 routes of venous channels were opened immediately, and infusion was used for anti-shock treatment (including 1000 mL of crystal and 500 mL of colloid). Subsequently, blood preparation was actively carried out. Then, the rescue plan was performed, and the pregnant and lying-in women rescue team was notified at the same time. After the critical condition was explained to the patient and her family members, they signed the informed consent form and received the critical notice.
The patient had no specific personal and family history. At the initial inspection, the patient had a blood pressure of 62/32 mm Hg and a pulse rate of 100 beats per minute. The patient is pale face, cold limbs, and slight shortness of breath. Then, this patient was transferred to the ward, with a heart rate of 100 times/min, abdominal distension such as the month of pregnancy, 2 fingers under the umbilicus at the bottom of the uterus, not hard, full abdominal tenderness, marked by tenderness under the umbilicus and the right lower abdomen, obvious rebound pain, not reaching uterine contraction, fetal heart sound 148 times/min. The liver and spleen were not touched under the ribs, turbidity was removed (+), and no edema was found in both lower limbs. The gynecologic examination revealed the following results: there was no vaginal bleeding and no internal diagnosis.
The emergency blood routine examination revealed the following results: white blood cell count: 18.78 * 10 ^ 9/L, neutrophil percentage: 89.2%, hemoglobin: 82 g/L, hematocrit: 0.26, platelet: 166 * 10 ^ 9/L, and hypersensitive C-reactive protein: 2.9 mg/L. Abdominal puncture extraction did not coagulate. The emergency B-ultrasound examination showed that the fetal heart sound was 155 times/min. The placenta was attached to the right wall of the posterior wall of the uterus. The echo of the basement membrane of the placenta was continuous. No obvious liquid dark area was detected in the rear. The echo of the right wall near the uterine corner was uneven. A few linear liquid dark areas appeared to be connected with the right abdominal cavity. Large areas of the hyperechoic omentum were observed in the right abdominal cavity. Free liquid dark areas were observed in the liver, spleen, renal recess, and the perihepatic, pelvic, and abdominal cavity, with sound transmission. These findings revealed a single live fetus, approximately 19 + W. A large volume of ascites suggested that there may be ruptures of pregnancy in the right uterine horn. The final diagnosis of the case is cornual pregnancy rupture.
After admission, relevant rescue measures were adopted to immediately improve the liver and kidney functions. Then, blood coagulation and other tests were conducted, and 1000 mL of red blood cells were prepared. During emergency exploratory laparotomy, it was found that the uterus was enlarged, presenting with 4 + months of pregnancy, and the right uterine horn was ruptured with a rupture size being about 3 * 3 cm. The placenta tissue and amniotic sac protruded from the rupture, with high tension, without obvious active bleeding. The size of the placenta was about 5 * 5 * 5 cm, and that of the amniotic sac drum was about 6 * 6 * 6 cm. There was no abnormality in the appearance of the right fallopian tube, the left fallopian tube, and the bilateral ovaries. During blood aspiration and exploration in the abdominal cavity, it was found that the amniotic sac was gradually enlarged and the fetus was delivered from the right corner of the uterus. After the amniotic sac was punctured, the fetus was delivered, and oxytocin 20 IU was injected intramuscularly into the body of the uterus. It was found that part of the placenta was delivered spontaneously, and part of the placenta adhered to the corner of the uterus. The adherent placenta was stripped by hands. After relevant examinations, the right uterine horn was repaired as per the following steps. Firstly, 1 # intestinal sutures were used to intermittently suture the rupture of the right uterine horn, and the uterine contraction was unfavorable during surgery. Subsequently, 20 IU of oxytocin was administered intravenously, 10 IU of Murphy tube was administered, and a total of 750 μg of Xinmupei was injected into the uterine body. Then, 1 # absorbable intestinal sutures (B-Lynch sutures) were used to suture the anterior and posterior walls of the uterus. One drainage tube was placed in the abdominal wall and the pelvic cavity, respectively. The intraoperative infusion was 6000 mL, the intraoperative bleeding was about 5000 mL, the blood transfusion was 1000 mL, and the plasma was 600 mL. The urine was clear with a volume of 640 mL. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. The uterine contraction, anti-infection, fluid replacement, blood transfusion, and symptomatic support treatment were performed routinely. This patient recovered and was discharged from the hospital 11 days after surgery. In 2021, she was pregnant again and delivered a child.
Postoperatively, neutrophil granulocytes returned to normal levels. The patient delivered a live, healthy, full-term babyviaa cesarean section. After 2 years of follow-up, the patient and baby were found to be healthy.