A 71-year-old man with severe cough presented with left-sided pleural effusion. After thoracentesis, he was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma with malignant effusion without activating epidermal growth factor receptor mutations and anaplastic lymphoma kinase rearrangements (clinical T1aN3M1a, stage IVa). He was a former smoker with a smoking index of 15 pack-years. He was an electrical engineer with a history of occupational X-ray exposure. Four cycles of carboplatin (area under the blood concentration-time curve of 6 mg/mL・min) and pemetrexed (PEM, 500 mg/m2) were administered, followed by talc pleurodesis. Thereafter, six cycles of maintenance therapy with PEM were performed. Disease progression after 9 months from his first chemotherapy session led him to receive nivolumab as a second line therapy . He received nivolumab (3 mg/kg) every 2 weeks for a total of 13 rounds. Nivolumab resulted in a partial response only with grade 3 lymphocytopenia (approximately 300–400 cells/μL) .
Four days after the 13th nivolumab administration, he developed otitis externa on his left ear and it got worse. Moreover, an additional 4 days later, he developed unsteadiness on standing with acute onset. His initial neurological findings revealed sensory ataxia of his four extremities: positive Romberg’s test, decreased vibration sense of the bilateral ankles, and poor proprioception of his bilateral upper limbs, with no significant limb weakness, pyramidal signs, or decrease in superficial sensation. Four days after the onset of unsteadiness, his temperature increased (39.0 °C) without headache or meningism. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was not suggestive of carcinomatous meningitis or metastatic lesions. Contrast-enhanced MRI was performed to monitor the spinal cord and brachial plexus, and yielded no abnormal findings.
His otitis externa was diagnosed as VZV infection of the left external auditory canal due to VZV reactivation. He clearly declared his childhood experience of chicken pox and no recent close contact with patients who suffered from VZV infection, and his serum immunoglobulin (Ig) status against VZV at his initial admission soon after developing his symptoms showed a significantly elevated level of serum IgG (44.2 antibody index by the enzyme immunoassay [EIA]: normal range of < 2.0) and a normal level of serum IgM (0.16 antibody index by the EIA: normal range of < 0.80). He was admitted to our hospital 9 days after his initial symptom presentation and started aciclovir (15 mg/kg/day: 900 mg/day) intravenously (day 1) for 7 days . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assessment on day 1 revealed an elevated white blood cell count (63 cells/mm3), protein level (62 mg/dl), and IgG index score (0.76): this is simply calculated by the following equation:
to see whether there may be intrathecal increase of IgG, and its normal range is 0.34–0.58 . Meanwhile, no malignant cells were found and the glucose level was normal (63 mg/dl). In addition, the level of VZV-DNA was significantly increased (10,000 copies/ml, normal range < 200 copies/ml). Following the development of otitis externa, left-sided facial nerve palsy was observed from day 2 and worsened to the most severe level (House-Brackmann grade 5) on day 3. These clinical features and laboratory data corresponded to RHS. We additionally administered 60 mg of prednisolone on day 3.
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) were performed on day 14 to evaluate his sensory ataxia. These studies revealed a significant reduction in the sensory nerve conduction velocity (SCV) with fewer sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) on the left median (SCV 37.2 m/s, SNAP 9.5 μV) and ulnar nerves (SCV 33.9 m/s, SNAP 7.5 μV), and no significant abnormal findings in compound motor action potentials. Sensory-dominant ataxic neuropathy was considered to be the most likely etiology. While the sensory ataxia was not improved by acyclovir and prednisolone treatments, a partial response was observed in the facial nerve palsy due to RHS, maintaining a House-Brackmann grade of 5. We also performed somatosensory evoked potential (SEP) studies to assess neurological function, which revealed neuropathy instead of myelopathy. We opted to reduce the prednisolone dose and discharge the patient under close observation on day 16.
Since his unsteadiness worsened even after completion of aciclovir and reduction of prednisolone, he was re-admitted to our hospital on day 20 . We re-evaluated the CSF on day 22 and found slight improvements in the white blood cell count (14 cells/mm3) and protein level (44 mg/dl), and VZV-DNA was not detected. Spinal MRI again revealed no significant changes to support VZV encephalopathy or myelitis. Notably, 12 antibodies of paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) (Hu, Yo, Ri, PNMA2, CV2, Amphiphysin, anti-Tr/DNER, GAD65, ZIc4, Titin, SOX1, and Recoverin; examined using an immunoblotting method by BML Inc.) and anti-ganglioside antibodies including anti-ganglioside complexes in the serum were all negative on day 22. Since the sensory ataxia persisted even after treatment with aciclovir and a short course of prednisolone, we suspected an immune-mediated etiology other than VZV infection. Thus, we performed one course of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) therapy (400 mg/kg/day for 5 days [days 23–27]). Within 2 days, his facial nerve palsy had significantly improved (House-Brackmann grade 2), and his deep sensation also began to recover, which enabled him to take Romberg’s and Mann’s postures. Eventually, he was able to stand on his left leg at 15 days after the administration of IVIg (day 38). We confirmed abnormal NCS features with the delayed SCV and decreased SNAP amplitudes recovered on the median nerve (day 91).
During the treatment for RHS and ataxic sensory neuropathy, the status of lung cancer remained stable without the use of any chemotherapeutic agents.