A 44-year old female patient presented to the triage emergency department in the evening of July 17th, 2019. She complained of a crampy epigastric pain. She was slightly jaundiced but afebrile. She was otherwise in good health. This was her first and only episode. Blood tests were ordered. She was discharged with ibuprofen and a follow-up visit was planned the day after.
The patient was evaluated by the emergency physician the next morning. The pain was still present at the epigastrium. On examination, she was not in distress. She was still slightly jaundiced. Her body temperature was 36.5 °C. Blood pressure was 159/85 and pulse rate 90. The abdomen was depressible, with light sensitivity at the epigastrium and no rebound tenderness. Bilirubin was 51 μmol/L (normal: 3–21 μmol/L), alkaline phosphatase 418 U/L (normal: 35–105 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase 167 U/L (normal: 5–35 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 241 U/L (normal: 5–35 U/L). Hemoglobin was 130 g/L and white blood cell count 11.7/mm3.
A gastroenterology consultation was ordered. The gastroenterologist elected to go directly for an endoscopic ultrasound and considered that neither formal ultrasound nor tomodensitometry was necessary. This test was held at 10 AM and showed a dilated common bile duct at 10 mm with an impacted 4.9 mm stone and multiple stones in the gallbladder. The patient was brought for an ERCP, which was done few hours later at 1 P.M. Successful extraction and clearance of the common bile duct stone were performed.
Thereafter, the general surgeon on call was consulted and a laparoscopic cholecystectomy was scheduled. The cholecystectomy was carried out at 9 PM, when operating room was available. A 12 mm port at the umbilicus and two 5 mm ports at the right hypochondrium were introduced. The dissection was carried out with a bipolar hook. Cystic artery and duct were divided after clamping with Hem-o-lok™ clips. There was neither edema nor sign of inflammation. The procedure lasted 35 min without any difficulty or complication. The patient was discharged the day after in the morning. One month later, the patient showed an uneventful recovery.