A 39-year old man was referred to our institution for investigation of recent cough. He experienced a unique slightly bloody sputum. He was a mild current smoker (less than 15 packs/year). There were no baseline abnormal conditions, and physical examination was unremarkable. The chest-X-Ray was normal. The bronchoscopy revealed a swollen lesion at the internal proximal part of the main right bronchus . Endoscopic findings were uncommon. The entire lesion measured less than 1 cm2. It was a plane, non-bleeding, non-glistering sub-mucosal lesion. No enhanced coloration appeared. The tumor was soft and biopsies were easy despite the tangential localization in the bronchus. Histopathological examination revealed a mixed papilloma. It was an endobronchial polypoid lesion, 2.5 cm long and 0.2 cm wide, made of thin fibrovascular cores with moderate lymphoplasmocytic infiltrates, and lined by squamous and glandular epithelium. Pseudo-stratified ciliated and non ciliated, cuboidal to columnar cells, with rare mucinfilled cells were mixed with acanthotic and focally keratinizing squamous epithelium. Squamous atypia, ranging from mild to severe dysplasia could be seen, but viral cytopathic changes were not reported. No glandular atypia nor necrosis were seen . In situ HPV hybridization was negative.
The CT scan did not find any abnormalities: absence of significant lymph nodes, no bronchial thickening, no peripheral mass or nodules. Pulmonary function tests were normal. Serum tumors markers (CEA, SCC antigen, CYPHRA 21-1) were also normal.
Endoscopic treatment was proposed with a rigid bronchoscope (EFER, La Ciotat, France) under general anesthesia. We used an electrocautery knife (ERBE, Tübingen, Germany). The procedure was rapid and easy. A fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed 7 days after the procedure showing a total destruction of the tumor with a small scar. Further endoscopic controls over 12 and 24 months did not reveal any relapse and the patient was considered to be cured.