An 85-year old man was referred to the cardiac arrhythmia service for an implantable loop recorder to exclude arrhythmia as a cause of recurrent syncope. The patient had previously been seen in consultation regarding syncope by a general cardiologist, with no definitive diagnosis made. The patient’s past medical history included a history of PD with cognitive impairment and labile hypertension. He had no prior history of coronary artery disease or cardiac arrhythmias. His only medication was levodopa/carbidopa.
Previous attempts at characterizing the patient’s syncope had been limited by his cognitive impairment. However, a second history was taken in conjunction with the patient’s family. Based on the family’s recollection, the patient’s syncope would only occur while standing. However, the timing between standing and his events were variable, often occurring after several minutes of standing. The presence of symptoms prior to events were unclear, but the family reported they could often tell before he was about to faint based on his appearance. The syncopal events were brief, typically lasting several seconds with rapid return of consciousness. The syncopal events were gradually increasing in frequency, and now occurred several times per day. Previous investigations, including a 24-h Holter monitor and echocardiogram, were unremarkable.
Given this history, there was a high clinical suspicion for nOH. Orthostatic vital signs were assessed, revealing a supine blood pressure of 150/80 mmHg and a heart rate of 70 b.p.m. After standing for 5 min, the patient’s heart rate was still 70 b.p.m., but the blood pressure dropped to 90/50 mmHg. Although the patient did not report any symptoms, family members reported that the patient ‘looked like he was about to faint’. Cardiovascular autonomic function testing was performed, which confirmed significant autonomic nervous system failure, including a marked hypotensive response on tilt-table testing and a lack of vasoconstriction during Valsalva manoeuvre, which are shown in and . Overall, the clinical presentation was characteristic of nOH [blood pressure drop of >20/10 mmHg (or >30/15 mmHg with baseline supine hypertension) with only a minimal or absent increase in heart rate].
Although levodopa may be contributing to the patient’s hypotension, it was required to manage his PD. Therefore, the patient was given a prescription for midodrine 5 mg PO q4H ×3 (with nominal dosing times of 8 a.m., noon, and 4 p.m.). The patient’s family was directed to give midodrine prior to the patient’s typical active periods to avoid exacerbating his supine hypertension. Additionally, the family was advised that they should help the patient to a supine position when he appeared similar to the event which was reproduced in clinic. This resulted in a subjective decrease in the frequency of syncope during follow-up.