A one-hour-old male neonate weighing 3 kg who was born at 38 weeks of gestation presented to the pediatric department with the complaint of respiratory distress.
The baby had an immediate cry, vitamin K was given soon after birth, and there was no history of resuscitation after birth. On examination, he was pale, jaundiced up to the abdomen, and had bluish discoloration of the feet, but was fully conscious and alert. Baby’s vitals were: heart rate 124/min, respiratory rate 68/min, temperature 98F, random blood sugar 60 mg/dl, and saturation 98%. Apgar scores were seven and eight at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Anthropometric measurements were within the normal range. Further examination revealed obvious respiratory distress with subcostal and intercostal recessions and a continuous grade 2 murmur at the left upper chest; the liver was palpable 1 cm below the right subcostal margin with a palpable splenic tip.
He was the fourth product of a consanguineous marriage. An emergency C-section was performed because of the history of ruptured membranes and leakage. Antenatal history was not significant except that the mother was diagnosed with gestational diabetes mellitus during the fourth month of gestation, which was well controlled.
To evaluate the examination findings, some laboratory investigations were ordered, which showed low Hb. For furthur evaluation of low Hb, investigations including serum bilirubin levels were ordered, as shown in Table .
Incompatibility occurs in newborns who have type A, B, or AB blood group and whose mothers’ blood group is O. In our case, the mother’s blood group was B negative and the baby’s blood group was O, which has no antigen to trigger an immune response. In the case of ABO incompatibility, it must have affected previous pregnancies, and should be less severe in this case but was not; this ruled out ABO and Rh incompatibility as a possible cause of jaundice. There was no family history of hereditary spherocytosis, sickle cell anemia, or thalassemia.
Conservative management was started, and the baby was kept on CPAP, maintenance fluids, cefotaxime 150 mg IV BD, amikacin 25 mg IV BD, and double phototherapy with an eye pad was applied for 3 days.
His Hb was decreasing continuously and bilirubin was raised (Hb: 8.8 g/dl, TLC: 38×10 e9/l, T. Bili: 14.1 mg/dl, D. Bili: 2.1 mg/dl, and In. Bili: 12.0 mg/dl). Consequently, whole blood was arranged and an exchange transfusion was done on the second day of life. Post-transfusion complete blood count (CBC) and serum bilirubin levels are shown in Table . His peripheral blood smear revealed a dimorphic picture, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, polychromasia, and nucleated RBCs, and the reticulocyte count was 16.60%; Continuously dropping Hb, increasing bilirubin along with the peripheral blood smear supported ongoing hemolysis. A Glucose 6PD enzyme assay was done, which was within the normal range, which excluded Glucose 6PD deficiency as a possible cause of hemolysis. Serum lactate dehydrogenase was raised (986 U/L), and the direct Coombs test was positive. On the fourth day of life, his Hb dropped back to 11 g/dl and serum bilirubin levels were increased; this suggested ongoing hemolysis. The direct Coombs test was positive again and prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day was started, suspecting warm AIHA. Belonging to a third world country, we tried to offer the minimum required investigations to reach a diagnosis and effectively treat the patient as the patient could not afford, preventing cost-burden. From the blood grouping test, we concluded that in the type of blood grouping pair (O negative baby and B negative mother), ABO incompatibility cannot occur. While other types of alloimmune hemolytic anemia are very rare and cannot cause hemolysis to such extent present in this baby.
Investigations were repeated again 4 days after the steroid use which are shown in Table . Repetitively positive direct Coombs tests and improvements in Hb and bilirubin levels after the steroid use strongly supported the diagnosis of warm AIHA. On the first day of stay in the hospital, the CBC showed a raised TLC count of 39.5×10 10e9/l; it was raised in the subsequent CBCs too, and the baby had two fever spikes during the hospital stay. The urine culture revealed no growth, whereas the blood culture revealed the presence of micrococcus bacteria. A positive blood culture, tachycardia, tachypnea, and a raised leukocyte count showed that the baby was in sepsis. There was no history of autoimmune disease in the family, and the AIHA in this baby could be either idiopathic or secondary to infection as the baby was in sepsis.
The baby improved clinically, and the CBC showed improved Hb: 12.5 g/dl. The dose of steroid was tapered slowly, and the antibiotics were changed to tazobactam and piperacillin 110 mg/kg/day for 7 days, according to the culture and sensitivity reports.
Cardiac examination findings and a second-grade continuous murmur at the left upper chest were further investigated through echocardiography, which showed grade 2 ASD, muscular VSD, and PDA. AIHA was associated with congenital cardiac anomalies in this baby and the baby was referred to the cardiology department for further evaluation, where he was asked to appear for follow-up after 1 month. Echocardiography was repeated which showed resolved ASD, VSD, and PDA, however, the patient had a mild patent foramen ovale, which was also subsequently resolved after 6 months of re-evaluations.