A 71-year-old man with a history of a resected right colon adenocarcinoma, Stage IIIB (pT3, pN1b, cM0) on atezolizumab, was admitted to the hospital with acute on chronic abdominal pain and non-bloody diarrhea. The patient was on oral vancomycin due to a positive Clostridioides difficile test 6 days prior to admission which had not improved his diarrhea and repeat stool testing on admission was negative. A CT scan revealed a normal colon and thickening of multiple loops of duodenum and proximal jejunum with mesenteric edema, consistent with enteritis . An upper endoscopy showed many clean-based non-bleeding duodenal ulcers to the third portion of the duodenum which were biopsied. Biopsies showed gastric foveolar metaplasia and no evidence of CMV infection. Flexible sigmoidoscopy was endoscopically and histologically normal. Although the duodenal biopsies were non-specific, his bowel movement frequency (5–6 a day) was concerning for grade 2 ICI-induced enteritis. IV methylprednisolone was initiated with improvement in his symptoms. He was thus transitioned to prednisone and discharged.
He presented one day after discharge with hematochezia and hemorrhagic shock. CT showed overall improvement in duodenal and proximal jejunal thickening . A push enteroscopy demonstrated multiple duodenal and jejunal ulcers , two with visible vessels which were treated with epinephrine, hemoclips and bipolar cautery. Despite endoscopic therapy and re-initiation of IV methylprednisolone, he continued to have clinically significant bleeding. IR angiogram revealed active extravasation at multiple sites in the proximal jejunum for which he underwent a small bowel resection with removal of 40 cm of ulcerated jejunum. Pathology showed scattered mucosal erosions with active enteritis and ischemic-type changes, with multifocal areas of denudation and granulation tissue. There was no evidence of vasculitis, fungal elements, or viral staining for CMV or adenovirus . He continued to have melena with transfusion requirements after his small bowel resection, requiring inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery embolization. Given his progression to Grade 4 ICI-induced enteritis, he was loaded with infliximab 10 mg/kg with resolution of his GI bleeding 2 days after his infusion. He underwent one additional outpatient dose of infliximab and has had no further bleeding episodes and reported resolution of his diarrhea on his most recent clinic follow up.