A 28-year-old man was admitted due to an increase of the circumference and pigment changes on the whole right leg and gluteal region from the time he was born. Segmental resection was performed multiple times during childhood at another hospital. Pressure therapy with normal stockings was performed intermittently, but his symptoms gradually worsened and our hospital was subsequently consulted. At consultation, swelling was detected in the whole right leg and showed a difference in circumference between the left and right legs . In addition, he exhibited signs of right leg cellulitis with a fever about 40° at frequency of the degree once a month. In addition, pain of NSR (Numerical Rating Scale) 4–5 degree was detected during inflammation. The measurements (cm) for the right lower extremity diameter at initial diagnosis were as follows: dorsalis pedis, 22.5; ankle, 28.6; 10 cm below the knee joint, 35.8; knee joint, 42.0; and 10 cm above the knee joint, 45.0. He started wearing elastic stockings for lymphedema after consultation with our department and symptoms resolved at once. However, because he developed cellulitis again, we planned to perform LVA of the right leg to prevent cellulitis of the lower limbs. We conducted lymph flow evaluation by indocyanine green angiography preoperatively. At first, indocyanine green was injected on the tip of the foot as part of normal indocyanine green angiography, but the dye almost did not move from injection site. Next, we injected indocyanine green around skin lesions on the femoral and gluteal areas . We identified voluminous, significant lymph, which flowed out from skin lesions. We performed 7 lymphaticovenular anastomosis at the femoral region, groin region, the calf, ankle joint, and the buttocks (, ). As for the lymph that entered the anastomosis, the smallest diameter of the anastomosis 0.35 mm and the maximal diameter was 0.8 mm. In particular, we anastomosed the lymphatic duct and vein near the border of the lesion from normal tissue in the area of the femoral and gluteal skin lesions. The operative time was 4 h and 28 min.
The measurements (cm) for the right lower extremity diameter at one week after operation were as follows: dorsalis pedis, 21.5; ankle, 27.5; 10 cm below the knee joint, 33.5; knee joint, 42.0; and 10 cm above the knee joint, 46.0. Therefore, slight improvement in the condition was observed. The operation caused infection to develop in the surgical suture in the ankle, postoperatively, but symptoms cleared by removing the thread. The patient has been cellulitis-free for 1 year post-operatively and has been able to live his daily life without any problems. He uses elastic stockings intermittently. The patient has agreed to the publication of this paper.