A 48-year-old man presented with numbness and weakness in lower extremities 1 year before admission in our center. Progressive proximal weakness had been developed in 3 weeks, and he was not able to walk and became wheelchair dependent. No abnormalities in urination and bowel habit were detected. In history he has had a history of low back pain since last year that had been diagnosed as a discopathy and medical treatment had been advised. In the physical examination, his muscle strength was 2/5 in proximal lower extremities and 3/5 in proximal of upper extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were decreased. Touch and pain sensation were also impaired, but anal sphincter tone and cranial nerves were normal.
In lab data except elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein (90 mg/dl), there were no other abnormalities. Due to ascending and distal sensory motor polyneuropathy, Guillain-Barre syndrome was diagnosed, and plasmapheresis and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) were administered. About 2 weeks after hospitalization thrombocytosis (1,120,000/µl) was detected in lab data, which was associated with splenomegaly and para aortic lymphadenopathy in abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan. Peripheral adenopathy was not detected. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy reported normal. Splenectomy was performed, but patient had no symptom relief. Finally, after 2 weeks, he discharged with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy diagnosis and advised receiving IVIG monthly. Despite receiving IVIG monthly, his neurological symptoms were aggravated, and he became bedridden. Plasmapheresis was administered, but it had no effect. About 10 months after symptoms onset he was referred to hematology the ward for evaluation of thrombocytosis. He complained of overt weight loss, low back pain, nasal speech and pedal, and hand edema. He had no cardiac or respiratory symptoms. In physical examination, the patient was quadriplegic and deep tendon reflexes were absent. In ophthalmoscopy bilateral papilledema were present. Other abnormal physical examination findings were clubbing and whitening of nails, pedal and hand edema, bilateral gynecomastia and hypertrichosis. Peripheral lymph nodes were not palpable. The cranial nerves were normal. shows the patient lab data. Serum protein electrophoresis was normal, but in serum immunofixation immunoglobulin G (IgG) lambda and IgA lambda biclonal gammaglobuline were seen.
In urine immunofixation, free kappa and lambda light chain were detected. In bone marrow aspiration large clumps of platelets suggestive of severe thrombocytosis and up to 3% highly atypical plasma cells was seen. In bone marrow biopsy, although osteosclerosis was not seen, but infiltrated sheets of poorly differentiated cells were seen . Rectal biopsy was performed. Congo red stain of rectal biopsy was negative. Electromyography and nerve conduction velocity studies revealed axonal and demyelinating polyneuropathy. Multislice CT scan of full spine revealed a sclerotic bone lesion in the body of T5; measuring about 10 mm .
As the patients had most criteria, diagnosis of POEMS syndrome was considered. In last admission, he had explained episodes of chest pain and dyspnea. Results of cardiovascular and pulmonary examination were normal, evaluation of pulmonary thromboembolism was negative, his electrocardiograph (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm, frequents premature ventricular contractions (PVC) (three geminal PVC), PR interval 160 ms, QRS interval 100 ms, and QTC interval 163 ms. To reduce PVC diltiazem 30 mg twice daily started. After 2 days heart monitoring in cardiac care unit the patient had frequent episodes of transient complete heart block in cardiac rhythm. On echocardiography, normal cardiac function whit no structural abnormality was detected. After discontinuation of diltiazem, electro-physiologic study was done that showed infra-His atrioventricular (AV) block and patient candidate for permanent pace maker. After pace maker insertion, he referred to the radiotherapy ward for irradiation of sclerotic bone lesion. Unfortunately, radiotherapy was ineffective, and his neuropathy progressed and he passed away with respiratory failure.