A 58-year-old woman was diagnosed with proctitis due to UC and was referred to our department in December 2021. After induction therapy with topical budesonide for 5 months, she started additional maintenance therapy with 5-ASA, which is an multimatrix system, and due to a sufficient response, it was given at a daily dosage of 2,400 mg in May 2022. On day 35, following the commencement of the tablets, the patient developed Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) grade 2 neutropenia, which was closely monitored. Despite close monitoring, on day 98, the patient developed CTCAE grade 4 liver enzyme elevation. The patient was then hospitalized for further examination and treatment.
Physical examination did not reveal any abnormalities, and the liver and spleen were not palpable. Blood test results indicated grade 2 leukopenia without progression; however, mixed-type liver damage was diagnosed based on an AST 1,064 U/L, ALT 1,293 U/L, gamma GTP 567 U/L, and ALP 269 U/L. The patient tested negative for hepatitis A immunoglobulin M, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, herpes simplex virus (HSV) immunoglobulin M, antinuclear, anti-LKM-1, and anti-mitochondrial M2 antibodies and had a history of cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus infection. Thyroid function was normal . There was no family history of liver disease, alcohol abuse, or international travel. Computed tomography did not reveal any abnormalities in the biliary system or pancreas, and no gallstones were found . Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a sharp hepatic margin, smooth surface, and normal internal echo without fatty liver changes. However, there was slight swelling of the lymph nodes in the porta hepatis. However, mild liver stiffness presented on two-dimensional shear wave elastography (1.53 m/s, compatible with fibrosis score 2). The patient did not take any medication other than 5-ASA. Based on these findings and the consideration that she took no other oral medications other than 5-ASA, we suspected that she had DILI due to the 5-ASA, and the 5-ASA formulations and topical budesonide were discontinued. However, liver injury did not improve significantly. A liver biopsy performed on day 7 of hospitalization showed scattered small necrotic foci as well as a considerable number of Councilman’s bodies in the lobule and interface activity with modest inflammatory infiltration, suggesting liver injury with an acute hepatitis pattern. The inflammatory infiltrates in the portal area were primarily composed of lymphocytes, although few plasma cells were observed . The International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group (IAIHG) 1999 revised scoring system calculated a total score of 10, causing a suspicion of AIH but not for a definitive diagnosis of AIH. A total score of 6 was calculated on the DDW-J 2004 scale , indicating a high probability of DILI. We initiated treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid at a daily dosage of 300 mg and subsequently increased it to 600 mg/day, and this was given together with a stronger neominophagen C at a daily dosage of 40 mL. Eventually, the patient’s liver function improved without steroid therapy. After 24 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged (AST, 49 U/L; ALT, 105 U/L; gamma GTP, 199 U/L; and ALP, 134 U/L). Finally, we made a definitive diagnosis of DILI due to the 5-ASA formulations based on the clinical course and liver biopsy results .
On the eleventh day after discharge from the hospital, the patient’s liver function tests showed improvement with AST levels of 21 U/L and ALT levels of 27 U/L. In addition, the white blood cell count improved to 5,400/μL. Since then, there has been no evidence of liver injury recurrence. However, despite restarting treatment with topical budesonide 11 days after discharge from the hospital, the patient’s UC symptoms remained incomplete, with moderate symptoms persisting, as evidenced by a full Mayo score of approximately 6 points. Colonoscopy revealed rectal erosions. Consequently, vedolizumab was initiated 3 months after discharge, and the patient is currently being followed-up on an outpatient basis. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report and is attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).