A 38-year-old woman with no comorbidities was diagnosed with EC due to complaints of vaginal discharge between periods. The disease was histologically confirmed via abrasion, and after imaging and clinical examination the disease was clinically staged as per TNM 8 as pT3ap N0 M0. Open surgery (laparotomy) was the initial treatment approach: Pfannenstiel skin incision, followed by layer-by-layer dissection of the abdominal wall and gradual approach to the lesser pelvis. Total hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy was done in view of the above-described EC. After R0 tumour resection the abdomen was closed: the peritoneum was closed via a long suture with absorbable surgical threads; the incision of the muscles of the anterior abdominal wall was closed with single stitches using non-absorbable silk surgical threads. The subsequent closure of the abdominal cavity was again done as a typical layer-by-layer suture, and the subcutaneous connective tissues were closed with single stitches, using absorbable surgical threads. The skin defect was closed with single stitches via non-absorbable monofilament surgical threads.
The final histology report confirmed endometroid EC without myometrial invasion and with no lymph node involvement; a metastasis to the left ovary was identified, and thus the postoperative TNM-8 disease stage was pT3A pN0 M0. The stage of the disease indicated the need of adjuvant treatment, and external beam RT was prescribed. After primary healing of the surgical incision RT was initiated 4 weeks after surgery. The volumetric-modulated arc therapy (V-MAT) delivered RT via a linear accelerator, using a cone beam, continuously rotating around the patient. A 2-Gy daily dose and a total dose of 56 Gy were delivered to the tumour bed in the lesser pelvis.
One month after the last day of RT, the patient reported having pains above the symphysis in the area of the Pfannenstiel incision scar. She did not report any other symptoms such as fever or chills. A computed tomography of the abdomen and lesser pelvis identified a rounded lesion, considered as “an abscess” in the lower anterior abdominal wall, involving the fascia of the abdominal rectal muscle. Gynaecological examination identified a post-hysterectomy normal vagina with no sign of recurrence. All laboratory tests, including peripheral blood count, and biochemical and urine tests, were within the normal ranges. Surgical management of the local inflammatory process was the initial step. In the tissues of the anterior abdominal wall a solid lesion, involving hypoderm, fascia, and muscles, was found . The mass was entirely preperitoneal and was resected with clear resection margins , and the defect of the fascia and abdominal wall muscles was closed using a mesh.
The final histology result with Van Gieson stains identified fatty fibrous tissue material and striated muscles; presence of lipogranulomas, foreign body granulomas, and necrosis, surrounding a pseudocyst wall in incomplete transition to connective tissue. There was no cancer tissue, and only chronic inflammatory infiltrate with pigmented macrophages and hyalinosis were found .
The surgical incision healed primarily and until now, at 6 months of follow-up, the patient has not reported any further complaints or complications. She is also free of the oncological disease (EC) at present.