A girl aged 5 years and 10 months (weight, 13.9 kg, height, 100.5 cm) was scheduled to undergo strabismus surgery under general anesthesia. A diagnosis of arginase-1 deficiency was made based on high levels of serum arginine and ammonia, as well as on the results of genetic testing at the age of 4 years and 4 months. Her older sister was also diagnosed with the same disease. She has been treated with oral sodium phenylacetate and did not prefer to consume foods with animal protein/soy foods. Except short statue (− 2.4 S.D., standard deviation) and frequent ketotic hypoglycemic episodes, other symptoms were not observed. Serum arginine and ammonia levels were 811 nmol/ml (normal range, 71.8–230.4 nmol/mL) and 83 μg/dL (normal range, 19–79 μg/dL), respectively. Other laboratory data, chest X-ray, and electrocardiogram showed no abnormalities.
General anesthesia was induced with 50% nitrous oxide and with a stepwise increase in the concentration of sevoflurane administered via a face mask, followed by the insertion of intravenous line and tracheal intubation with rocuronium. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane in 40% oxygen, fentanyl, and rocuronium. Acetate Ringer solution with 1% glucose was infused during anesthesia. Although circulatory and respiratory conditions were stable, blood glucose started to reduce from 82 mg/dL immediately after induction to 47 mg/dl 85 min after induction. It further decreased to 42 mg/dL despite the infusion of 5 mL 20% glucose. However, it subsequently increased to 127 mg/dL on administration of 5 mL 50% glucose. Surgery was completed without complications. The duration of surgery and anesthesia was 46 and 105 min, respectively. The tracheal tube was removed in the operating room. Blood glucose levels ranged between 90 and 100 mg/dL; serum arginine and ammonia levels were 623 and 73.8 nmol/ml, respectively, after surgery. Neither of them increased above the preoperative levels. The patient was discharged without complications the day after surgery. Patient’s consent was obtained for the publication of information using institutional written consent form.