The patient is a 16-year old Indian male who presented at the age of two years with nephrotic syndrome. This did not respond to initial steroid treatment and renal biopsy eventually revealed collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. No mutations in podocin and nephrin genes were found. He responded to a combination treatment regime comprising of prednisolone, cyclosporine A and mycophenolate mofetil. After a course of rituximab at the age of 14 years, he achieved remission and was maintained without steroids or other immunosuppressive therapy. Unfortunately, he relapsed one year later and progressed quickly to end-stage renal failure when he was 16 years old.
He was commenced on thrice-weekly conventional hemodialysis, using Gambro® AK 95™, via a permanent catheter. Unfractionated heparin was used for anti-coagulation. Platelet count remained normal during this period. His residual renal function declined rapidly, and three months after initiation of dialysis, he was no longer nephrotic. A brachio-axillary arteriovenous graft (AVG) was then created, but he developed four episodes of AVG thrombosis over a period of four months, necessitating repeated thrombectomies and angioplasties. Clopidogrel therapy did not prevent the recurrent thrombosis. Investigations revealed persistently elevated serum homocysteine level of 21.8 μmol/L (reference range 5 to 15 μmol/L) despite normal folate and vitamin B12 levels. Protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III levels were normal, and he was negative for factor V Leiden and antiphospholipid antibodies (anti-β2 glycoprotein, anti-cardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant). He had no other history of thrombotic events and the family history was similarly non-contributory. He had never smoked and was not obese (body mass index 20.4 kg/m2).
The patient switched to home hemodialysis, using the NxStage® System One cycler, nine months after initiation of renal replacement therapy. His dialysis prescription was based on a target standard urea weekly Kt/V of 2.0 and involved five-hour sessions four times a week via his permanent catheter. A single bolus of unfractionated heparin 1,500 units was given at the beginning of each session. The first three sessions were uneventful. At the end of the fourth session, red clots were observed in the dialyzer. Accordingly, the bolus heparin dose was increased to 2,000 units at the following session. During rinse back at the end of the fifth session, white particulate matter measuring 1 to 3mm was found firmly adherent to the arterial and venous blood tubing (Figure ). These were not present in the drip chamber or dialysate lines. Red clots were simultaneously noted in the dialyzer. The patient remained clinically well before, during and immediately after dialysis. The access, effluent and venous pressures during this session were not significantly higher than previous sessions. He presented to our nephrology service six hours later when he noticed decreased thrill in his AVG and was found to have AVG thrombosis, necessitating thrombectomy and stenting. Subsequent dialysis was carried out via conventional hemodialysis using Gambro® AK 95™. Unfractionated heparin was given at 1000 units and 500 units per hour as loading and maintenance doses respectively. During rinse back at the end of the next dialysis session, similar white particulate matter was again noted in the tubing, along with red clots in the dialyzer.
Several investigations were performed to elicit the cause of white particulate matter. Blood biochemistry and clotting function were all within acceptable limits. There was a 60% decrease in his platelet count (405 × 109/L) two weeks prior; to 163 × 109/L on the first day of white thrombi formation. At the second episode two days later, the platelet count increased slightly to 199 × 109/L. His hemoglobin level (11.2 g/dL) and leukocyte count (8.27 × 109/L) remained stable from baseline. Complement levels were normal. Antibodies for heparin-associated immune thrombocytopenia (HIT) were not measured. Analysis of the dialysate composition was within acceptable limits, with absence of free chlorine, chloramine, heavy metals and endotoxin. Dialysate microbiological cultures were negative. The polyvinylchloride tubing with the white particulate matter was cut and light microscopic examination of the deposits revealed platelet aggregates.
After the second episode of white thrombi formation, he was switched back to NxStage® System One home hemodialysis. An additional midway bolus of heparin 1,000 units was given for a few sessions with no further recurrence of white thrombi. Unfortunately, NxStage® home hemodialysis had to be discontinued after two months as the patient had poor hand dexterity following peripheral nerve injuries sustained during the creation of his AVG. During the 2 months of waiting for neurologic recovery, he was placed on Gambro® AK 95™ conventional hemodialysis with standard heparin doses. When he was converted back to NxStage® home hemodialysis, he had a newly created arteriovenous fistula. In an attempt to prevent fistula thrombosis, the anticoagulation regimen was changed to intravenous enoxaparin on dialysis days, and subcutaneous enoxaparin on non-dialysis days. His peak anti-Xa levels were maintained at 0.45 to 0.59 IU/ml on dialysis days. A third episode of white thrombi formation occurred while on NxStage® and the dose of enoxaparin was increased with no further recurrence. None of the other nine patients in the hemodialysis unit experienced the same phenomenon throughout the entire period.