This case report was approved by the institutional ethics committee.
A 61-year-old male patient, who does not have a history of chronic disease, had consulted different outpatient clinics several times because of longstanding abdominal pain, discomfort, bloating, and loss of appetite. The patient was confined and given various medications for bloating and abdominal discomfort, which were prescribed by general practitioners but failed to relieve the patient's symptoms. In the history assessment, the patient stated that a mild pain persisted for several years, during which he was not admitted to any clinic. With the increase in the frequency of his symptoms in the last few weeks, he sought treatment from different outpatient clinics. He did not have a history of smoking, alcohol consumption, or previous abdominal surgery. The physical examination yields no remarkable findings, except for mild epigastric tenderness. Hemogram and biochemistry panel were within normal limits. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) detected multiple loculated collection areas in the abdomen, the largest of which was observed in the subdiaphragmatic area at the anterior of the liver, adjacent to hepatic segments 8, 4, and 5, and it was 4.7 × 11 × 10 cm in diameter. The mass did not contain any solid components or pathological contrast enhancement . The result of the indirect hemagglutination test was < 1/80 (negative < 1/160). With all these findings, we performed diagnostic laparotomy. During the operation, a yellowish-pink, soft, fluid-filled multiloculated cystic mass measuring 10 × 15 cm adhered to the anterior surface of the liver, and numerous similar small cystic lesions were scattered on the right paracolic area and peritoneal surfaces. All cystic lesions were excised with LigaSure and electrocautery . For possible appendiceal malignancy, an appendectomy was performed.
After an uneventful follow-up, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5. Pathological examination of the excised specimen with hematoxylin and eosin demonstrated multiloculated, honeycomb-shaped, regular-walled cystic structures filled with clear or yellow serous fluid . Immunohistochemical stains or markers were not used. The appendix had a normal structure, and only lymphoid follicular hyperplasia was noted. Since all these findings were compatible with benign cystic lesions, the pathological diagnosis was BMPM. Ultimately, the patient was followed up in the outpatient clinic.