An 11-year-old Indian girl presented with a history of recurrent non-healing left leg venous ulcers associated with swelling of the involved limb. There was no associated erythema and her leg was non-tender. There was no history of trauma. There was no significant antenatal history in her mother and our patient was delivered normally at a local hospital with an uneventful postnatal period. There was no history of umbilical cannulation, cardiac catheterization, or any other femoral intervention. She had reported these symptoms since early childhood but no medical evaluation was done in the past. There were no other complaints.
Her physical examination was remarkable for large venous collaterals on her anterior abdominal wall with flow from below upwards . She was also noted to have swelling and multiple venous ulcers on her left lower limb . Both lower limbs had varicose veins. There was no calf tenderness. There was pedal edema on her left lower limb. The rest of her examination was normal.
On color Doppler examination, her infrarenal IVC as well as her bilateral internal and external iliac veins were not visualized. A short segment of her proximal right common femoral vein and proximal superficial femoral vein were faintly visualized. Her left-sided common femoral, superficial femoral, and popliteal veins were not visualized.
A computed tomography (CT) venogram done to define her venous anatomy showed absence of infrarenal IVC as well as absence of bilateral common iliac and left common femoral veins . A short segment of her right common femoral vein was seen with collaterals draining into her anterior abdominal wall. Her venous system at the level of the renal vein and above was normally developed . There were well-developed collaterals over her anterior abdominal wall and in her bilateral lower limbs. The superficial venous system of her bilateral lower limbs was well developed and draining from collaterals.
Echocardiography showed normal cardiac anatomy and function.
With symptomatic treatment, her venous ulcers improved. There were no surgical or interventional therapies possible in this case. She was not started on anticoagulation therapy.