A 71-year-old woman came for an optometric and ophthalmological examination because of her sudden onset of double vision. She reported two hospital stays in 2019 because of the optic disc edema in anamnesis. The patient reported that she was diagnosed with strabismus at the age of 6 (esotropia of left eye (LE)); however, she had neither operation nor visual training (VT) rehabilitation. Because of LE deprivation, her vision worsened with increasing age.
Optometric examination showed objective refraction: right eye (RE): sph + 4.00 cyl – 0.50/106° and LE: sph + 5.75 cyl – 1.25 /120° (Topcon RM– 8900). Subjective refraction at far showed for RE sph + 3.50 and LE sph + 4.25 cyl – 0.75/140°; at near for RE sph + 6.00 and LE sph + 6.75 cyl – 0.75/140°.
The best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.7 RE and 1.0 LE (logMAR value). Corrected near visual acuity was 0.5 RE and 0.8 LE. The unilateral cover test at the distance result was 20-PD constant esotropia of the LE. At 40 cm, the cover test showed 30-PD constant esotropia of the LE. Red Lens Test in the nine diagnostic positions of gaze revealed esotropia of the LE.
The patient reported seeing five lights on the Worth 4-dot Test at 40 cm and 6 m in the dark and light examination room, indicating the LE’s constant esotropia in the primary gaze. Bagolini Striated Glasses Test showed normal retinal correspondence. Randot Stereogram testing could not be completed because of diplopia at a distance and near. Ocular motility testing found that the movements were not in full range and smooth in the RE and LE, and the patient had a problem with abduction in the LE. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light. Visuoscopy revealed central fixation in the RE and unsteady central fixation in the LE. The minimum amount of relieving prism that allowed for stable sensory fusion at far viewing distances was 12Δ base-out (BO), split equally between the eyes. For near vision, the amount was 20Δ base-out (BO), split equally between the eyes similarly. The patient got two pairs of glasses with prisms: far-distance prism lenses and near 3M Press-On Fresnel prisms. She reported difficulties with near-vision work due to blurry vision. We recommend using eye patching for near work.
The ocular findings were similar at the beginning and the end of visual training rehabilitation. Anterior segment examination of RE/LE revealed dry eye syndrome signs (LIPCOF 3), clear cornea, anterior chamber 3,0 mm deep, free, iris unremarkable, and incipient nuclear cataract. IOP for RE/LE was 18/19 mmHg, central corneal thickness RE/LE = 552/546μm. Posterior segment examination of RE showed a white optic disc with a sharp margin, C/D 0,4; macular drusen, sclerotic arteries and attached peripheral retina. Posterior segment examination of LE showed pale optic disc with sharp margin C/D 0,2; macular drusen, sclerotic arteries and attached peripheral retina attached, arteries were sclerotic. OCT of the macula and optic disc was performed. Central retinal thickness was 233 and 286μm for RE and LE, respectively. OCT of RE and LE: macular drusen – material under the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), causing irregularities from RPE to the external limiting membrane (ELM). The RNFL imaging revealed global nerve fibers loss in the RE and LE (LE except for the inferotemporal sector), GCC complex was also severely impaired in both eyes, whereas changes were more prominent in RE.
We obtained MRI (signs of leukoaraiosis; multiple, small, ischemic changes; no other pathological focal changes), echocardiography (atherosclerosis plaques in the aorta; no other pathological findings), and carotid ultrasound (atherosclerosis plaques in ICA without hemodynamic influence). Laboratory tests (CBC, creatinine, GFR, CRP, Na, K, HDL within normal limits; LDL, cholesterol, and TG levels slightly elevated), neurological consultation (without pathological neurological symptoms, LE squint). The final diagnosis was NAION in the RE, and amblyopia, and squint in the LE. As neuroprotection, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors topically and vitamin B12 orally were recommended. Additionally, we suggested using artificial tears and nutritional supplements for AMD prophylaxis.
Based on the patient’s complaints and our clinical findings, a treatment program of three months of office and home VT rehabilitation was recommended to improve the LE’s visual acuity (VA), fusional ranges, and stabilization of fixation and extraocular motility. She was educated that the treatment goal was to reduce her symptoms by increasing the ability to compensate for esodeviation. The training involved: monocular therapy for the LE using Ann Arbor letter tracking, letter tracking, circle tracking, large Van Order Star; pursuit eye movements for LE and RE using Marsden ball, flashlight tracking, Visual Tracing Worksheet, pencils, Russell Ring; saccades for LE and RE using Hart Chart – column jumps, pencils; eye fixation monocular training using: Russel Ring with Yoked Prism and red filter. The aim of this type of training was to build steady central fixation, accurate pursuit and saccadic eye movements, and improving VA. Patient VT rehabilitation was conducted in-office with the therapist twice a week for an hour supplemented with procedures done at home three to four times a week between office visits. Ann Arbor letter tracking, letter tracking, circle tracking and Van Order Star was designed by using the appropriate threshold target size. The basic task was to find and circle a key sequence of letters and numbers. Fixation is more unstable in amblyopic so patient is taught to use the peak area of the amblyopic eye by searching and identifying threshold letters or targets. After two weeks patient was doing VT rehabilitation monocular with Yoked Prism, where the bases of the prisms were set in the four directions: left, right, up or down and using red filter. The following techniques are particularly suited also for home VT rehabilitation. Pursuit training was performed to increase motility for LE and RE. Several studies have shown that accurate smooth pursuit can improve the perception of spatial detail , motion and color . Marsden Ball was suspended from the ceiling and set in a swinging motion. The patient was looking at the target at the eye level for horizontal pursuit or from below by lying supine for circular pursuits. In flashlight techniques the patient’s task was to follow the therapists spot and to try to superimpose both spots of light. Visual Tracing techniques included series of intersecting lines on a piece of paper, each of this line was connected to a letter on one end and a number on the other. The purpose of this VT training was to match the number with the appropriate letter as the amblyopic eye sights along the line. The pencil and Russel Ring vision training was based on following the moving object in various directions by patient but in Russel ring the patient had to pointed in the circle. Saccadic eye movements were performed monocular and after each eye is shown to perform equally well, the VT rehabilitation may proceed to binocular training.
After three months of treatment (office and home sessions), visual parameters were improved. The patient subjectively noted that visual acuity was improved, and she could perform daily activities better. BCVA was 0.7 RE and 0.5 LE, whereas corrected near visual acuity was 0.5 RE and 0.6 LE. The unilateral cover test at a distance showed a 16-PD constant esotropia of the LE. At 40 cm, the cover test showed 20-PD constant esotropia of the LE. Ocular motility was much better in the LE. The minimum amount of relieving prism that allowed for stable sensory fusion at far viewing distances was 10Δ base-out (BO), split equally between the eyes. Improvement was noted also for near vision because we could prescribe 8Δ base-out (BO), split equally between the eyes. The patient got two pairs of glasses with prisms. An additional VT was implemented to focus on monocular therapy for the LE, red-green filters (anti-suppression Reading Bars, cards, TV-trainer), and fusional vergence ranges (Eccentric Circles – created especially for our patient). Antisuppression training has the effect of building sensory and motor fusion. The patients got different red – green tasks that were designed by using the appropriate threshold target size. Eccentric Circles were used to performed fixation training and increase fusional demand. The VT was performed in prescribe prisms glasses.
Changes in visual system status and daily performance of presented patient are summarized in .