The patient is a 40-year-old male, who was admitted to the emergency department in April 2021 for epigastric pain, which radiated to the back, and vomiting. The patient did not have fever, jaundice, and recent loss of weight or appetite. He was asymptomatic prior to admission. He had a history of gallstone pancreatitis, for which he underwent multiple ERCP procedures overseas between 2008 and 2012. The patient did not have cholecystectomy. He was diagnosed to have DM 3 years ago, which was controlled with oral antidiabetics.
On abdominal examination, it was found that he had epigastric and central abdominal tenderness but no signs of peritonism. Initial investigations showed a white blood cell count of 11.4 × 109/L (normal 4–10 × 109/L), and normal serum amylase and lipase and liver function tests (LFTs) were carried out. Plain abdominal radiograph showed an abnormal hyperdense object in the central abdominal region. After revisiting the patient’s history, he was informed that a metallic stent had been inserted during his last ERCP. Because of the unusual shape of the object, which did not resemble any known metallic stents, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was performed .
The scan showed an unusually shaped hyperdense object on the head of the pancreas, which was distinct from the PD stones seen on the scan. The pancreas was also extremely atrophic with PD dilatation, mild biliary dilatation, and multiple PD calculi throughout the remnant pancreas.
An ERCP was performed, which showed a metallic wire protruding from the ampulla of Vater, which was initially thought to be part of a fractured stent . The foreign body was extracted using an endoscopic grasper. On further examination of the retrieved object, it became clear that it was the fractured end of a Dormia basket, which was likely from the previous ERCP procedure . A balloon was used to remove as many PD stones as possible, but we were unable to clear the PD completely.
The patient recovered well initially and was discharged 2 days after the ERCP. He was readmitted 2 weeks later for central abdominal pain again, and a repeat CT scan showed a thrombosis of the main portal vein with extension into the superior mesenteric vein. The patient was started on anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin and managed conservatively. However, due to worsening symptoms and mesenteric venous edema on subsequent scans with extension of the portal vein thrombus, he underwent a transhepatic catheter–directed portal vein thrombolysis, which resulted in partial success. He was then managed with intravenous heparin infusion with a target APTT ranging between 50 and 60 and subsequently discharged with oral anticoagulation. The patient subsequently sought to return to his home country for the continuation of his treatment, and hence, no long-term information on this condition was available.