A 71-year-old man with anorexia and weight loss visited our hospital in December 2018. Laboratory findings showed elevated levels of inflammatory markers and tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen [17.8 ng/ml (reference range: 0.0–4.9 ng/ml)], carbohydrate antigen 19–9 [765.9 U/ml (reference range: 0.0–36.9 U/ml)], and squamous cell carcinoma antigen [105 ng/ml (reference range: 0.0–1.4 ng/ml)]. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed enlargement of the gallbladder, which was 80 mm in diameter and involved the S5 segment of the liver and the hepatic flexure of the transverse colon . Abdominal CT detected a nodule in the transverse mesocolon, suggesting peritoneal dissemination or lymph node swelling due to metastasis or inflammation. Colonoscopy revealed an elevated lesion on the transverse colon. Biopsy identified no malignant cells, indicating that the elevation was caused by compression from the tumor . Percutaneous liver biopsy for the diagnosis of the tumor revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Although gallbladder cancer with direct invasion to the liver and the transverse colon was suspected, it was difficult to confirm the diagnosis of the nodule in the transverse mesocolon and the possible diagnoses included peritoneal dissemination, lymph node metastasis, and inflammatory lymph node swelling. Therefore, the clinical stage of the gallbladder cancer was diagnosed as T4N1M1 Stage IV-B (in case of peritoneal dissemination or lymph node metastasis) or T4N1M0 Stage IV-A (in case of inflammatory lymph node swelling) according to the TNM classification of malignant tumors (eighth edition) edited by the Union for International Cancer Control . Although the tumor was highly advanced, general condition of the patient was favorable and there was a possibility to achieve R0 resection. Therefore, we scheduled surgical resection including right hepatectomy, transverse colon resection, and lymph node dissection after exploring laparotomy confirmed the absence of peritoneal dissemination or remote metastasis.
The surgery was performed in January 2019. No ascites or peritoneal dissemination was observed on exploring laparotomy. Intraoperative ultrasonography revealed no other intrahepatic metastases. Furthermore, there was no para-aortic lymph node swelling by macroscopic and ultrasonographic findings, and therefore, we did not conduct the sampling of para-aortic lymph nodes. The nodule detected in the transverse mesocolon was not a peritoneal dissemination, but a lymph node swelling. Thus, we proceeded with resection of the tumor. Initially, right hemicolectomy was performed and the nodule in the transverse mesocolon was simultaneously removed. Subsequently, right hemihepatectomy was performed with the clamp crushing method using the Pringle’s maneuver. The lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament were also removed. The operative time was 6 h 18 min and the estimated blood loss was 507 ml. Two units each of red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma were transfused during the operation.
Macroscopic findings of the specimen revealed a whitish mass, 8.5 × 7.5 cm in diameter, involving the transverse colon . Pathological analysis of the tumor demonstrated glandular structures and a tendency toward keratinization in hematoxylin–eosin staining, indicating an adenocarcinoma component and a squamous cell carcinoma component, respectively . Liver was confirmed as the origin of the tumor, since the main tumor lesion was located in the liver and there was no intraepithelial lesion in the gallbladder. The tumor invaded into the mucosal surface of the transverse colon through vascular invasion. Lymph node metastasis was identified in the hepatoduodenal ligament (2/10) and transverse mesocolon (1/3). In terms of lympho-vascular invasion, there were microscopically obvious venous invasion (v3+) and slight lymphatic invasion (ly+) in the infiltrated transverse mesocolon. The surgical margins were negative. Immunostaining of the liver tumor revealed that the tumor was cytokeratin (CK) 7 (+) and CK 20 (−), suggesting adenocarcinoma of the biliary system . The tumor was CK 5/6 (+) and p 40 (+), indicating that it contained squamous epithelium [, ] . Consequently, the final diagnosis was adenosquamous carcinoma (ASC) of the liver [vp1, vv1, va0, sm (−), T3N1M1, Stage IV-B].
The postoperative course was uneventful except slight elevation in the level of hepatic enzymes immediately after the surgery. The patient was discharged 14 days after the surgery without major complications. Although adjuvant chemotherapy using gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) and cisplatin (25 mg/m2) was administered, follow-up CT at 4 months after the surgery detected metastases to the lung. Although systemic chemotherapy using gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) and S-1 (120 mg/day) was initiated, the tumor progressed gradually. The patient died 12 months after the operation.