A 64-year-old man (height: 176 cm; weight: 78.5 kg) with a giant parapharyngeal space tumor was scheduled for bilateral endoscopic sinus surgery and nasal septoplasty due to chronic nasal obstruction. His medical history included sleep apnea, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hyperuricemia. Oral findings and computed tomography scan images showed that the parapharyngeal space tumor occupied the oropharynx, including the upper airway . In this case, a difficult airway was anticipated; thus, we decided to perform normal induction or awake intubation. Normal induction is less stressful for patients but may require invasive procedures, including cricothyroid puncture, in cases where airway management is impossible. Awake intubation is more stressful than normal intubation, but it is chosen in cases where airway management is difficult because spontaneous breathing can be maintained. After consultation with the involved otorhinolaryngologist, oral surgeon, and the patient, awake intubation was performed.
In the operating room, topical anesthesia was applied to the oropharyngeal mucosa using a 4% lidocaine spray. After waiting for a few minutes, the McGrath® MAC video laryngoscope was inserted, and lidocaine spray was applied again. A fiberscope was also inserted to visualize the glottis for intubation. Both the McGrath MAC video laryngoscope and the fiberscope provided an excellent viewing field for manipulation of intubation . Therefore, we selected the McGrath MAC video laryngoscope without a fiberscope as the intubation method. Midazolam (2 mg) and fentanyl (100 µg) were administered for mild sedation. Eventually, tracheal intubation was performed using the McGrath MAC video laryngoscope, resulting in excellent laryngeal deployment, followed by successful endotracheal tube intubation without any specific event. General anesthesia was quickly induced using propofol (100 mg), fentanyl (100 µg), and rocuronium (60 mg) after confirmation of correct placement. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and continuous remifentanil infusion. The duration of surgery and anesthesia was 46 minutes and 74 minutes, respectively, and the patient recovered from general anesthesia and was extubated uneventfully. The same methods of airway management, including the McGrath MAC video laryngoscope and the fiberscope, were used during the preparation for re-intubation after extubation. All surgical procedures were performed successfully, and the patient was discharged 6 days postoperatively without complications. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case.