A 36-year-old female presented in March 2013 with right-sided perimandibular swelling, cervical lymphadenopathy on the right side, dysphagia and pain on the lower face. In January 2013, tooth 47 was removed by the family dentist followed by episodes of recurrent pain during the following two months. On clinical investigation exposed bone surrounded by gingival inflammatory reaction was observed in the region of former tooth 47 . Panoramic radiograph revealed a persistent extraction socket of 47 .
Her medical history revealed Crohn’s disease diagnosed in March 2000 affecting the colon, small intestine and stomach as well as aphthous oral lesions in the vestibulum in the years 2000 and 2001, fistula disease and extraintestinal manifestation with arthralgia. The patient was treated with varying doses of steroids together with 5-aminosalicylic (5-ASA) between 2000 and 2008 . In 2004 steroid-induced osteoporosis was diagnosed and associated with sintering fractures in the lower lumbar spine. Since then Calcium 500 mg and Cholecalciferol 1000 I.E. with concomitant oral Risedronate (Actonel®) 35 mg/week was applied until 2007 followed by two single 4 mg infusions of Zoledronic acid (Alcasta®) in 2008 and 2009. In September 2008, prednisolon and 5-ASA therapy was replaced by Adalimumab (Humira®) 40 mg/ 2 weeks for 3 years and later on monthly (cumulative dose approximately 3,6 g) leading to a total gastrointestinal remission regarding Crohn’s symptoms at the end of 2009 confirmed by endoscopy, histology and clinical disease activity in 2012. Between 2008 and 2013 recurrent events of psoriatic-like lesions, lupus-like erythrodermia and conjunctivitis were observed and treated with topically applied medication. She reported to be allergic to metals (gold, silver, nickel) and had no family history of Crohn’s disease.
In March 2013, the patient was treated after previous MR-imaging revealed increased signalling in the jaw in the area of teeth 44 until 48 and additionally confirmed prominent lymph nodes on both sides of the submandibular region . Due to the fact that the mandibular bone was already exposed more than 8 weeks with no medical history of radiotherapy, BRONJ was diagnosed according to the AAOMS guidelines . Surgical treatment consisted of osteotomy until healthy bone with bleeding from the surfaces was visible. Biopsies of bone were sent for pathological examination. Additionally, sharp edges of bone that can potentially traumatise the surrounding were removed. A mucoperiosteal flap was raised and primary wound closure was carried out without tension on the mucoperiosteal flap after incision of the periosteum with resorbable suture material (Vicryl 5–0, Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany) . Furthermore tooth 46 had to be removed because the necrotic bone affected the roots. Antibiotic therapy consisting of ampicillin/sulbactam (Ampicillin + Sulbactam-ratiopharm®, Ratiopharm, Ulm, Germany) 3 g/day and metronidazol (Metronidazol B. Braun®, B. Braun, Meisingen, Germany) 1,5 g/day and was administered intravenously for 8 days. Oral food intake was not allowed for 10 days and antiseptic mouth rinses (Hexetidin, 5-Amino-1,3-bis(2- ethylhexal) hexahydro-5-methylpyrimidin, Pfizer Pharma GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) was performed three times a day.
Histological examination showed a granulomatous inflammatory reaction with necrotic, avital bone and actinomyces colonisation but no growth of mycobacteria or fungus and no multinucleated giant cells. Humira® therapy was stopped in March 2013 after consultation with the department of gastroenterology and due to the patient’s wish suffering from recurrent psoriatic-like lesions, lupus- like erythrodermia and conjunctivitis. 10 days after discharge the patient presented with adequate wound healing and mild clinical symptoms. During removal of the stitches bone got re-exposed again indicating a compromised mucosal healing. The patient was followed up weekly and received a second operative intervention at the beginning of April 2013 which improved the clinical situation .