We present the case of a 69-year-old woman who initially presented with facial edema, with no chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, or irritation. No significant findings were noted for previous medical behaviors, medication, social, or family histories. The local hospital detected creatinine (CREA) of 1244 umol/L, blood potassium of 5.86 mmol/L, and urea (UREA) of 18.42 umol/L. Imaging revealed that the tumor had invaded the uterus, anterior vaginal wall, rectum, right ureter, right fallopian tube, and right ovary, and multiple pelvic lymph node metastases were observed. The tumor invasion of the right ureter caused severe hydronephrosis of the right kidney and loss of function and mild hydronephrosis of the left kidney . In this patient, we used a whole-digestive tract lavage with polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution for mechanical bowel preparation, and cephalosporin was used preoperatively according to the patient’s drug sensitivity test for antibiotic bowel preparation.We first performed a left ureteral stent placement and bladder mass biopsy. A postoperative pathological biopsy of the bladder mass suggested an invasive urothelial carcinoma . Creatinine levels significantly decreased following surgery , and 4 days following ureteral stent placement, the creatinine was 98 umol/L. Patients and their families strongly desired surgical treatment. After a multidisciplinary consultation, we decided to perform unilateral nephroureterectomy, total pelvic exenteration, extended pelvic lymph node dissection, and small and large bowel diversion under 3D laparoscopy.
We used 3D laparoscopy to perform nephrectomy using the extraperitoneal approach. Following the removal of the right kidney, the right ureter was separated to the level of the iliac vessels. Then, the left ureter was separated using the peritoneal approach, and bilateral ureteral lymph node dissection was conducted. The bilateral internal and external iliacus, obturator, and common iliacus lymph nodes were dissected. Considering that the tumor invaded the uterine adnexa and rectum, we decided to perform a radical pelvic organ resection of the uterus, bilateral adnexa, vagina, and rectum. A suspicious positive resection of the distal rectal margin was performed because of intraoperative findings of tumor invasion in the anterior wall of the vagina and part of the urethra . Vaginal and rectal lysis, ileal conduit placement, and sigmoid colostomy were performed.
The left ureter was fully mobilized. An anastomosis was made at the ileal conduit, whereas the other end was connected to the right abdominal stoma. An incision was made at the lateral margin of the rectus abdominis in the left lower abdomen. The proximal intra-abdominal mesentery of the sigmoid colon was fixed to the peritoneum of the left-side abdominal wall, and the stump was bandaged and sutured layer-by-layer. The operative time was 510 min, and blood loss was approximately 100 ml. No intra-or postoperative complications were observed. Postoperative progress was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on postoperative day 20. Postoperative follow-up examination revealed that the patient healed well without progression on imaging studies and was in good spirits.