A 7-year- and 9-month-old female presented to our clinic as a new patient with an isolated complaint of reduced elbow range of motion (ROM) particularly in extension. She has a known diagnosis HME .
Physical exam revealed a well appearing child with multiple palpable osteochondromas over various osseous anatomy sites consistent with HME. Concurrent with the patient’s chief complaint, a large osteochondroma in the posterior aspect of the left supracondylar region of the humerus was noted. ROM examination of the left elbow revealed full flexion as well as pronation and supination at the elbow and wrist. In extension however, there was a hard stop at 70°. She exhibits full strength in all upper and lower extremity muscle groups. In addition, the patient had no peripheral neurological deficits or abnormal circulatory findings.
Plain radiographs of the left elbow demonstrated large (3.2 × 1.7 cm), sessile, and exophytic mass over the posterior aspect of the supracondylar humerus extending distally the distal aspect of the capitellum on lateral radiograph . Distal to this, there were coarse calcifications involving the posterior aspect of the radiocapitellar joint. A normal coronal plane alignment was observed with a Baumann’s angle of 74°. No subluxation of the radiocapitellar or radiohumeral joints was appreciated. Computed tomography scan of the elbow revealed the osteochondroma to be contiguous with the posterior lateral cortex of the humerus and further revealed stippled calcification in the ulnohumeral joint .
The patient was placed in a lateral position and a pneumatic tourniquet was inflated. A posterior incision curving radially around the olecranon was made and full thickness skin flaps were developed. The ulnar nerve was first localized and protected. The triceps was then elevated both medially and laterally affording excellent visualization of the posterior distal humerus. Adventitial bursa over the osteochondroma was incised and elevated medially and laterally such that base could be visualized grossly. A free intra-articular osteochondroma was then retrieved from the joint along with several other small and calcified fragments. The joint was irrigated copiously then probed to ensure all loose bodies and debris had been evacuated from the joint space.
Attention was then focused on the exophytic osteochondroma overlaying the supracondylar region. Utilizing a small osteotome and working from medial to lateral whilst protecting the ulnar nerve, the sessile osteochondroma was separated from the humeral metaphysis to the midline, then the same was carried out from lateral to medial, meeting in the middle and thereby removing the osteochondroma in its entirety, which was sent to pathology for analysis . A ROM of exam was repeated at this time and it was discovered that the cartilaginous portion of the olecranon was striking the cancellous portion of bone exposed in the posterior distal humerus, precluding extension past about 25°. While flexing the elbow and retracting the triceps, a pneumatic high-speed burr was utilized to recreate the ovoid pseudofossa of distal humerus posteriorly utilizing frequent elbow extension to ensure proper trajectory of burring and taking care not to perforate through bone anteriorly . When near full extension was achieved, an additional 2 mm of resection was performed in anticipation of some bone re-formation postoperatively.
The patient underwent an excision of both the osteochondroma of the posterior distal humerus as well as of the loose osteocartilaginous body within the elbow joint and subsequently had osteoplasty of the left distal humerus with reconstruction of the olecranon fossa. Histopathology noted multiple macroscopic nodular pieces of tan bone with cartilage caps. Microscopic analysis noted columns of organized cartilage. Both findings noted to be benign in etiology and consistent with osteochondromas given clinical history.
Postoperatively, an extension splint was applied but permittance for early ROM with PT. She was seen at 1-week post-operative for wound check at which point there were no immediate complications and she maintained extension to within 5° of full.
At 4 month’s post-operative, her wounds had completely healed without issue and there had been no fractures. Her elbow ROM was from 10 to 120° with full pronation and supination . X-rays obtained at that time showed no evidence of lesion recurrence. She was permitted to resume activities ad lib at this visit .