A 60-year-old man presented with chest tightness and shortness of breath in 2018. He presented to the outpatient department with worsening symptoms and bilateral lower extremity oedema (New York Heart Association functional class III). Systolic and diastolic murmurs could be heard in the mitral auscultation area. Echocardiography showed severe calcified mitral stenosis (MS) (heart rate = 83 b.p.m.; anatomical area = 0.5 cm2; mean pressure gradient = 18 mmHg) with moderate mitral regurgitation (volume = 57 mL) . Severe tricuspid regurgitation (volume = 140 mL) and pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure = 91 mmHg) were suggestive of rheumatic MS. The patient was at extremely high surgical risk (Society of Thoracic Surgery score, 17.1%; European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation Score, 8.3%). In addition, the patient had had a stroke in December 2021, with Wilkins score of 12.
The possibility of TMVR was assessed by transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and computed tomography angiography (CTA) (–). Meanwhile, CTA data in the Digital Imaging and Communication of Medicine format were imported into the software of Materialise Mimics version 21.0 (Leven, Belgium) for three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction. The Standard Tessellation Language format file of the 3D reconstructed model was exported to a Stratasys Polyjet 850 multimaterial full-colour 3D printer . Then, the main procedural steps were simulated during the bench test. After it was released, the unfolded bioprosthetic valve was clearly observed to assist in the evaluation and prediction of major intraoperative complications (–; ).
After the team conducted a comprehensive evaluation, they decided to proceed with TMVR. The transfemoral access was chosen as the puncture point and was used to cross the atrial septum. After the anaesthesia was infiltrated locally, a 5 Fr arterial sheath was inserted, and the atrial septum was punctured with the Brockenbrough needle. A Lunderquist wire was placed into the left atrium, and a 16 mm balloon was selected to dilate the atrial septum. Afterward, an 8 Fr adjustable bent catheter was delivered to the left atrium along the guide wire, and another 6 Fr pigtail catheter was delivered to the left ventricle under the guidance of the loach guide wire. After digital subtraction angiography was used to determine the position of the mitral annulus, the guide wire was delivered to the left ventricle by the trans-septal approach . Then, a 26 mm balloon-expandable PrizValve (NewMed Medical Inc., Shanghai, China) was implanted via a transatrial septal approach (–; ). After the balloon was released, digital subtraction angiography and transoesophageal echocardiography ( and ; ) both showed that the bioprosthetic valve was in a stable position and functioning well [mean pressure gradient (PGmean) = 1 mmHg] without paravalvular regurgitation; bioprosthesis morphology was intact with normal blood flow in the left/right coronary artery. The stability and function of the bioprosthesis were confirmed by a post-operative 3D printed model before discharge. Furthermore, echocardiography showed that the bioprosthetic valve was properly fixed with the leaflets opening and closing normally (maximum velocity = 0.7 m/s; PGmean = 1 mmHg). Tricuspid regurgitation volume was reduced to 5.7 mL, and pulmonary artery systolic pressure was decreased to 65 mmHg (see ).