A 19-year-old female with no medical history presented to the emergency department complaining of intermittent facial twitching and progressive generalized weakness for 6 months. She noted that each episode of facial twitching lasted several minutes and would self-resolve. She described her weakness as “heaviness” in all extremities such that occasionally she was unable to lift her arms above her shoulders. She endorsed bilateral frontal headache alleviated by ibuprofen, and “fullness” in both ears, more severe on the right. She denied visual symptoms, dizziness, tingling in the extremities, pain, or difficulty with ambulation. The initial physical examination was unremarkable; the patient was neurologically intact.
The initial non-contrast computed tomogram of the head showed a large, bifrontal, coarsely calcified extra-axial mass that scalloped the inner table of the skull and displaced the cerebral hemispheres circumferentially . Cerebral angiography revealed no significant arterial feeding vessels or tumor blush. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 7.6 × 5.5 × 6.2 cm bifrontal mass arising from the falx cerebri. The mass abutted on the right side of the superior sagittal sinus and right high convexity dura [-], displaced both cerebral hemispheres inferolaterally, and displaced the corpus callosum and pericallosal vessels inferiorly. There was minimal edema. She was subsequently started on levetiracetam 2000 mg/day to prevent further preoperative events.
Surgery was recommended to alleviate the mass effect and obtain a tissue diagnosis. Given the size of the tumor and the possible pathologies considered, initial biopsy was not performed, and maximal safe resection was planned. The patient underwent bifrontal craniotomy for resection of tumor. The lesion was extremely firm and not amenable to ultrasonic aspiration or typical cautery and suction techniques. Monopolar loop cautery was utilized to progressively debulk the lesion piecemeal so that the capsule could be defined from the surrounding compressed brain. Calcifications were removed en bloc, as they could not be divided sharply or with cautery. There was no brain invasion, and the tumor was removed completely.
Pathologic examination revealed a low-grade cartilaginous neoplasm. The lesion was composed of an encapsulated bland chondroid tumor with a thin fibrous capsule with minimal nuclear atypia, no perceived increase in nuclei within the lacunar spaces, and no identifiable mitotic figures.
However, because cartilaginous tumors of the falx cerebri are very rare and the distinction between chondroma and low-grade chondrosarcoma is challenging, an outside pathologist was consulted for a second opinion. This pathologist noted that although the diagnosis was difficult in this case, due to the presence of moderate cellularity, chondrocyte crowding, mild nuclear atypia, frequent binucleation, patchy necrosis, and myxoid change, a diagnosis of low-grade chondrosarcoma was most likely [-].
The patient’s postoperative course was uncomplicated. Postoperative MRI confirmed a gross total resection with no significant ischemia or edema. She was discharged home on postoperative day 3 with home physical therapy. On the first day at home, she experienced a 3-minute episode of facial spasm. Her dose of levetiracetam was increased from 2000 mg/day to 3000 mg/day. Since this change, she has done well with no complaints. At the patient’s 2-month postoperative follow-up, her only complaints were mild headaches, difficulty sleeping, and some fatigue. At 4-month follow-up, she was completely asymptomatic, and she is currently in the process of attempting to wean off levetiracetam. On-going surveillance imaging for recurrence is planned.