A 40-year-old woman was referred to our center with progressive painless enlargement of right lateral neck mass and a month after total thyroidectomy. She has had history of hypothyroidism for about 20 years. She was on daily levothyroxine. One year before the first surgery, diagnostic fine needle aspiration was done for her, which was not satisfactory for evaluation due to low cellularity. Her concurrent thyroglobulin(TG) and anti-thyroglobulin antibody levels were within normal range. After a while, she underwent ultrasonographic study of neck which showed right thyroid lobe enlargement with heterogenous echopattern containing a few relatively well-defined hypo/iso and hyperechoic nodules accompanied by macrocalcification; the left lobe size and echopattern were normal. Based on this report and the patient desire, thyroidectomy was done for her with preoperative diagnosis of multinodular goiter without any preceding FNA. The surgical pathology report revealed “papillary thyroid carcinoma, follicular variant” in the right lobe, measuring 3 × 2 × 1.5 cm. Tumor multicentricity and lymphovascular invasion were present. No lymph node was submitted.
The patient was referred to the specialist for radioiodine therapy, where the clinician found a 40 × 25 mm mass at the right side of the neck and persistent disease was diagnosed for her. No neck tenderness or dilated veins could be identified. The therapist refused to initiate I-131 treatment and asked for a new ultrasonography.
Subsequent ultrasonography (US) showed a pathologic lymph node at the right side of the neck extending from level 2 to level 4 and also level 6 that encased anterior and anterolateral wall of the right internal jugular vein and also the right common carotid artery. The radiologist was not able to comment on any intravascular masses. The values of TG or antithyroglobulin antibody were not requested. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the mass confirmed papillary thyroid cells in the enlarged lymph node.
Surgery was considered for treatment and in right neck modified radical dissection a 50 × 35 mm dumbbelled-shape lymph node at the lateral side of the common carotid artery was found attaching to and infiltrating the IJV. Longitudinal venotomy revealed the intraluminal part of the mass which had not tumor thrombus or any endothelial adhesion and was easily removed . In addition, about 18 lymph nodes were isolated from the lateral compartment, one was involved by metastatic carcinoma. Multiple matted lymph nodes were also isolated from the medial compartment, number was not specified, all of which were involved.
All the methods were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
Histopathology analysis confirmed lymph node involvement by PTC . The surgery was followed by ablative radioiodine. Whole body iodine scan before I-131 treatment and 2 months after the second surgery revealed significant post-surgical remnant thyroid tissue in the thyroid bed along with upper cervical and upper mediastinal lymph node involvement. Concurrent TG level was more than 100 ng/ml and antithyroglobulin antibody level was 25 IU/ml.
The same study at her last follow-up, about a year after the second surgery, shows radioiodine-avid lesions in the right side of the neck in favor of metastatic lymph node involvement. Her TG level is 76 and antithyroglobulin antibody is 3.6 IU/ml. New course of radiotherapy is considered for her. No sign of distance metastasis is detected.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.