A 22-year-old male presented to the accident and emergency department at a tertiary training hospital with a history of having been involved in a road traffic accident. He was reported to have been an unrestrained driver of a vehicle that was involved in a head on collision approximately four hours prior to time of presentation.
The patient came in complaining of mild epigastric pain for 4 h. He was examined using the ATLS protocol. He was talking on presentation and he had no neck pain but still had a cervical collar applied. His breathing was not laboured and examination of the chest was normal. His vital signs were stable at this point in time with a Blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg, a pulse rate of 80 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. Positive findings were noted in the abdominal examination. He was found to have slight abdominal tenderness in the epigastric area with no abdominal rigidity and normal bowel sounds on auscultation. He had no flank ecchymosis or seat belt sign noted. Digital rectal examination was normal. His secondary survey revealed no further abdominal findings. His initial laboratory results were also normal. A chest radiograph did not show any evidence of free air under the diaphragm. A focused abdominal ultrasound for trauma (FAST) scan done showed minimal peri-hepatic fluid with no obvious solid organ injury. An abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast done was normal. The patient was admitted to the surgical ward and was started on analgesia, kept Nil Per Os (NPO) and was to have vital sign monitoring with serial four-hourly abdominal examinations.
Eight hours into his admission, he was noted to have a temperature of 39 °C, a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, and a pulse rate of 120 beats per minute. Physical examination revealed a diffusely tender abdomen with guarding and reduced bowel sounds. He also reported worsening epigastric pain that was not responding to analgesia with vomiting. Repeat blood works showed he had an elevated white cell count of 21.3 × 109/l and normal serum amylase and lipase. In addition to the treatment he was getting he was also started on antibiotics and antipyretics. The patient was prepped for an emergency laparotomy and consent obtained for the same as he now had peritonitis.
At laparotomy, a perforation of D4 on the anterior wall was found involving less than 50% of the circumference with minimal abdominal contamination. No other injuries were noted and all solid organs were normal. The lacerated edges were freshened and repaired in a single layer using interrupted 3-0 polyglactin suture. An intra-abdominal drain was left in-situ.
Post operatively the patient was admitted to the High dependency unit. On post-operative day one, his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, a pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute and an SPO2 of 96% on room air with a urine output of 2mls/kg/hr. The drain on day one was minimally active with less than 50 ml noted. He was started on incentive chest spirometry and encouraged to start ambulation. Post-operative day two, his vital signs remained stable, He had no fever and was in less pain and was allowed to start feeding as he tolerated. He was already ambulating and the drain remained minimally active. His wound on examination remained clean and showed no features of infection. Blood works repeated 48 h post laparotomy, showed a drop in his white cell count to about 14.6 × 109/l. His amylase and lipase remained normal. He was stepped down to the General surgical floor and was allowed to go home on the fifth post-operative day.