A 35-year-old man visited our hospital complaining of increased defecation frequency, bloody stools and weight loss of 3 kg for one month. The patient denied any history of malignant tumors. And the patient also denied any family history of malignant tumors. Physical rectal examination revealed a circumferential mass with poor activity. Blood was noted by digital rectal exam. Laboratory findings showed that the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were within the normal range. Colonoscopy suggested an ulcerated and irregular mass approximately 8-12 cm from the anus with obvious lumen stenosis . The biopsy result of the rectum lesion indicated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a wall-thickening lesion in the sigmoid colon and upper rectum . Multiple regional lymph nodes showed strengthening signals. The lung and liver were unremarkable.
The surgical specimen consisted of a sigmoid and rectal segment measuring approximately 15 cm in length, with a luminal diameter varying from approximately 5 cm at the proximal end to 9.0 cm at the distal end. The tumor, measuring 6.5 cm×6.2 cm×1.5 cm, occupied 3/4 of the rectal lumen. It presented as a well-demarcated mass lesion with central deep ulceration . The cut surface showed a grayish-white or grayish-yellow solid tumor with central hemorrhage and necrosis. The tumor had invaded through the muscularis propria into the peri-rectal tissues . Forty-six lymph nodes were retrieved from the adipose tissue surrounding the bowel wall, with a diameter of 0.3 cm (4.5×3.5×1.5 cm).
Histopathological findings revealed that the tumor cells had poor connectivity, eosinophilic cytoplasm and a polymorphic nucleus . These characteristics are called rhabdoid features because the morphology of these cells is similar to that of rhabdomyosarcoma tumor cells. These rhabdoid cells contained vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli and a significant amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm . Brisk mitotic activity was a frequent finding . The remaining 35% of the maximal cut surface was not evaluated due to necrosis . The tumor had invaded the peri-rectal tissues and showed lymph-vascular and perineural invasion. The surgical margins were tumor free. Metastasis was observed in 12 of the 46 regional lymph nodes retrieved .
Immunohistochemistry results showed that the tumor cells were positive for both epithelial (cytokeratin AE1/AE3, Fig. A) and mesenchymal (Vimentin, Fig. B) cell markers. Tumor cells showed weak positivity for SATB2 . However, CDX-2 and CEA , which are markers of colonocyte differentiation, were negative. Ki-67, which shows proliferative ability, was as high as 95% . Notably, the tumor cells showed complete loss of INI-1 (SMARCB1 protein), which is normally expressed in the nucleus . Nuclear expression was retained in neighboring nonneoplastic cells. They were diffusely positive for BRG1 (SMARCA4, Fig. B), BRM (SMARCA2, Fig. C) and ARID1A1 . Impressively, the tumor proportion score (TPS) of PD-L1 (22C3) expression was 95%, and the combined positive score (CPS) was 100 . However, probing for MMR proteins, including MLH1 , MSH2 , MSH6 and PMS2 , revealed proficient MMR, suggesting low microsatellite instability (low-MSI) or microsatellite stability (MSS). Additional immunohistochemical staining for BRAF V600E and p53 mutant proteins indicated strong and diffuse expression. The tumor cells were negative for CK7, CK20, CD56, ChrA, Desmin, MyoD1, Melan A, S-100, HER-2 and LCA (Supplementary Fig. ).
Next-generation sequencing was also performed, and the tumor exhibited a tumor mutation burden (TMB) of 5.84 mutations/megabase (Supplementary Fig. A) and microsatellite stability (MSS, Supplementary Fig. B). The results also indicated the presence of BRAF (c.1799T>A, p.V600E) mutation and TP53 (c.818 G>A, p.R273H) mutation.
The final pathological diagnosis was SMARCB1‑deficient undifferentiated carcinoma, pT3N2bM0 (Stage IIIc), according to the World Health Organization classification of digestive system tumors, 5th edition. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was administered using XELOX (capecitabine oxaliplatin). Unfortunately, the tumor recurred while the patient was receiving chemotherapy . Then, he received targeted therapy with tirelizumab, a monoclonal antibody against PD-1. At present, he has received 4 cycles of immunotherapy, and his general condition is good. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the tumor had disappeared , indicating that the above immunotherapy was effective. At nearly one year postoperatively, the patient was still alive, and his general condition was good. Astonishingly, his most recent follow-up was in August, and his condition continued to improve with the tumor has disappeared.