A female patient 40 years old came to our clinic, complaining that she noticed a change in the shape of the pupil in the left eye without other ophthalmic disorders. She is wearing glasses without other systemic diseases.
At the ophthalmologic examination we noted visual acuity in both eyes is 1.0 with correction. External examination was normal for both eyes. Intraocular pressures (IOP) by Goldmann applanation tonometry were 14.0 mm Hg OD and 11.0 mm Hg OS. On the biomicroscope a completely normal finding of the right eye is recorded, in the left eye the cornea is epithelialized, without edema, iris dystrophy stretched in the direction from 11:30 to 5:00 o’clock, lens in place. Both lenses were clear with a normal vitreous cavity. Fundus examination revealed healthy macula and vessels with an intact retina in both eyes.
On gonioscopy OD the angle was grade 3, with iris processes. The left angle had broad based peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) from 6–6:30 o’clock. At the UBM right normal finding, on the left eye from 6–6:30 o’clock, we find iris root glued to the corneal endothelium so that the iris root cannot be separated from the hyperechogenic echo of the corneal endothelium.The structure of the iris is preserved, which is thickened here because it is folded, the echogenicity and homogeneity of the iris stroma are normal, dystrophic stroma is seen in front of the synechia as an irregular iris defect. The structure of the ciliary body is completely orderly. The rest of the circumference is normal.
We concluded at UBM that there was no tumor alteration of the iris and ciliary body. Spectral microscopy of the right eye showed density 3211 cells / mm, on the left we could not get a shot even though the cornea had no changes as well as “Hammered silver”.
OCT of the anterior segment showed CCT corneal thickness of 608 Âµm in the right eye and 595 Âµm in the left eye, OCT of the posterior segment showed normal macular region values. The RNFL thickness of the right eye was 103Âµm, and of the left eye 104 Âµm, whereas C / D of the right eye was 0.54 and of the left 0.53. The visual field in the right eye was MD -0.27, PD 0.88, and in the left one -0.17, PD 2.54.
Based on these findings, we made the final diagnosis of Essential Progressive Iris Atrophy (ICE Syndrome) without secondary glaucoma.
A diagnosis was made based on the epidemiological data (unilateral symptoms in a young female with no family history), patient history, clinical examination (ocular symptoms with no systemic manifestations), and ancillary tests (specular microscopy being useful).
We discharged the patient without therapy with a recommendation for regular check-ups at 3-month intervals.