A 64-year-old man underwent esophagectomy for esophageal cancer, with two-field lymph node dissection at a local hospital in June 2013. The alimentary tract was reconstructed using a gastric conduit with an intrathoracic anastomosis. A severe air leak was observed on postoperative day 1. On postoperative day 3, right empyema caused by anastomosis leakage developed. On postoperative day 7, bronchoscopy and computed tomography (CT) revealed tracheal and left main bronchial injury .
Subsequently, conservative therapy including drainage was performed.
Two months after surgery, a gastro-tracheal fistula and a gastro-bronchial fistula of the left main bronchus were found because an upper gastrointestinal series showed a connection between a gastric conduit and tracheobronchial fistulas . After the examination, conservative therapy was continued between 2 months. As a result of the conservative therapy, the gastro-bronchial fistula of the left main bronchus was cured; however, the gastro-tracheal fistula was not cured. Finally, 3 months after surgery, the patient was referred to our hospital for the management of the fistula in September 2013.
CT performed at our hospital revealed that the gastro-bronchial fistula of the left main bronchus was cured by packing with the omentum from the gastric conduit , and the gastro-tracheal fistula remained open . Bronchoscopy also revealed that the gastro-bronchial fistula of the left main bronchus was closed and covered by mucosa and that the gastro-tracheal fistula was located in the trachea, 3 cm above the carina . When swallowing, bubbles of saliva appeared through the fistula. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a fistula located in the left wall at the anastomosis . We concluded that the fistula would not resolve without further surgical procedure. However, such an operation was expected to be difficult and to need much time due to severe adhesion among the gastric conduit and/or trachea, bronchus, lung, and chest wall. Therefore, a two-stage operation was planned for safety and outcome certainty.
The first operation to close the fistula was performed in October 2013. Though we initially planned to separate the gastric conduit from the trachea and insert muscle flaps into the space, we decided that the gastric conduit should be removed from the right thoracic cavity while preserving the omentum because the wall of the gastric conduit immediately below the esophagogastrostomy had become very thin due to major leakage. However, adhesion was tighter than expected in the right thoracic cavity, and we could not remove the whole gastric conduit while preserving the omentum. The omentum should be preserved for use in covering the gastro-bronchial fistula. Therefore, first, we carefully separated the anastomosis from the trachea and resected the esophagus above the anastomosis and the gastric conduit below the anastomosis. As a result, most of the gastric conduit and the omentum remained, and the fistula was found between the anastomosis and the trachea . Next, direct sutures were placed in the fistula. The fistula was closed with two sutures. In addition to these sutures, another suture was performed at the upper and the lower position of the fistula . All ligatures were performed without needle detachment . The intercostal muscle flap was constructed and folded side by side to cover the bronchial fistula. The left side of the intercostal muscle flap was sutured from inside to outside followed by the right side from outside to inside . Subsequently, the latissimus dorsi muscle flap was constructed and inserted through the second intercostal space. The area including the intercostal muscle flap and left main bronchial fistula covered with omentum was widely covered and fixed with this latissimus dorsi muscle flap . After repairing in the thorax, an esophagostomy was performed in the neck.
One month after the first operation, reconstruction with a pedunculated jejunum was performed via the percutaneous route.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and without complications. He was able to start oral intake on postoperative day 18 and was discharged on day 25. He continues to undergo surveillance, and no signs of recurrence have been observed for 6 years after the operation.