A healthy, non-smoking, 39-year old female of Arabic origin was diagnosed with Stage IV adenosquamous cell carcinoma of the lung. The patient had no family history of malignancy. In the four months prior to the diagnosis of lung cancer, she suffered from dyspnea, cough, and recurrent episodes of pneumonia, despite antibiotic treatment. CT scan of the chest revealed massive left pleural effusion, a mass in the left lower lobe, and a nodule in the left upper lobe. Cytology from the pleural effusion was suspicious of malignancy. Biopsy taken during bronchoscopy revealed adenosquamous cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry was positive for cytokeratin 7, partially for p63, and negative for cytokeratin 20, TTF1, ER, WT1, mammoglobin, and GCDFP 15. PET-CT showed pathological FDG uptake in the left lower lobe, left lung hilum, mediastinal lymph nodes, left pleura, and lytic bone lesions.
The patient was admitted to hospital due to severe dyspnea requiring an oxygen mask, confined to a wheelchair due to fatigue and dyspnea, and suffered uncontrollable pain mandating opioid treatment. She was found to have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score performance status of 3.
A sample of the patient’s biopsy was examined for all EGFR mutations. In the fragment length analysis assay of exon 19, there appeared an uncommon pattern of an insertion of 18 nucleotides. The EGFR exon 19 sequence was deciphered by direct sequencing. We found that the sequence c.2237ins ATTCCCGTCGCTATCAAG was repeated as demonstrated in Figure , showing the 18 bp insertion and resulting in a substitution in the protein (p.K745_E746insIPVAIK).
After reviewing the published data, which included a report of an uncommon insertion mutation in exon 19 responsive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors [Chan et al. ], the patient was started on erlotinib 150 mg daily. Rapid symptomatic improvement followed and, at the one-month follow-up visit, her performance status was evaluated as ECOG 0, not requiring any more oxygen or opioids. PET-CT scan after three months of treatment with erlotinib showed an improvement in all disease sites, including the bone lesions . A good partial response was documented in all the sites of the disease including the left lung mas, mediastinal lymph nodes and the lytic lesions in the bones. The patient responded to erlotinib for nine months until symptomatic and radiological progression. She is now receiving a combination chemotherapy with Cisplatin, Pemetrexed and Bevacezumab, for two months, with a clinical improvement.