A 10-year-old girl was traveling in the back seat of a car, wearing a 3-point restraint, when the car was involved in a collision at an intersection. The girl was transported to a nearby hospital, where she complained of abdominal and back pain. After clinical and radiographic examination, the diagnoses were perforations in the duodenal and transverse colon, a fracture of the right wrist, and an L2 Chance fracture without neurologic deficit. Radiographs of the lumbar spine revealed local lumbar scoliosis at L1–L3 with a Cobb angle of 18° in a supine position . CT images showed a horizontal split in the right L2 pedicle , a collapse of the right anterior vertebral column , and splitting of the L2 left transverse processes, the left L2 pedicle, and the middle of the L2 vertebral column , resulting in asymmetrical kyphoscoliosis. The girl underwent emergency surgery for the abdominal injury and wrist fracture. The Chance fracture was treated conservatively with 4 weeks of bed rest, after which the patient was allowed to walk with a soft brace. However, the deformity gradually deteriorated, and the girl was referred to our hospital. Physical examination showed that her trunk was leaning to the left side, and standing whole spine radiographs revealed kyphoscoliosis at the thoracolumbar area with a Cobb angle of 36° at L1–L3 , a kyphosis angle of 31° at L1–L3 , and a coronal imbalance of 30 mm (the distance between the C7 plumb line and the center of the sacrum) to the left . The kyphotic angle decreased to 2.4° over a bolster . MR images did not show any soft tissue injury or spinal cord damage when she was transferred to our hospital (data not shown). CT images revealed that the fractures had fused .
Ten months after the injury, we performed correction and fusion surgery using asymmetrical PSO at L2. After exposing the posterior elements through a posterior midline approach, we placed pedicle screws bilaterally at T12, L1, and L3 and at the right L2 pedicle. We next removed the upper one third of the elongated left L2 pedicle, the left upper and posterior portion of the vertebra, and the L1/L2 intervertebral disc . After local bone graft into L1/L2 disc space, we applied compression force between the L1 and L3 pedicle screws on the left side while monitoring motor-evoked potentials . The facet joints of T12/L1 and L2/L3 and transverse processes of T12, L1, L2, and L3 were decorticated. The remaining local bone graft was placed along the decorticated bones. The intraoperative time was 91 min; the estimated blood loss was 220 ml .
The scoliosis was corrected from 36° to 1° and the kyphosis from 31° to 1° . At the 2-year follow-up, radiographs showed excellent coronal balance, no instrument failure or loss of correction, and osseous continuity between the vertebrae .