We present the case of a 48-year-old Caucasian woman who had been experiencing sciatic pain for seven years. Her symptoms varied in intensity, and intermittent ambulant medical treatment was administered. When her symptoms increased, with the onset of sciatica radiating from the fifth lumbar nerve root on the right side, an MRI scan of her spine was performed and an intensification of conservative therapeutic methods under stationary conditions was planned. The MRI results (0.5T) were interpreted as a prolapse of the L4/L5 lumbar intervertebral disc, abutting the L5 thecal sac and nerve root, causing the pain in her leg.
Conservative treatment with a series of periradicular infiltrations (including bupivacaine and triamcinolone) in combination with physical therapy resulted in a decrease in her symptoms and our patient was discharged. Subsequently, she underwent an elective hysterectomy due to endometriosis. During this surgery, unusually pronounced varicosis was found in her lesser pelvis that had not previously been detected. Postoperatively, our patient developed a symptomatic pulmonary embolism. Consequently, further evaluation of adjacent structures and diagnostic tests for thrombophilia were initiated. The pulmonary embolism was found to be caused by hypoplasia of her inferior vena cava, with a bilateral occlusion of her vena iliaca communis. A diagnostic evaluation showed that a collateral pathway with ectatic enlargement of the veins of her lesser pelvis had also developed. Anticoagulant medication in combination with compression therapy was recommended because a surgical correction of this malformation was not possible.
Subsequently, our patient was again admitted to our hospital because of an exacerbation of the nerve root irritation. She had classic root tension signs (straight leg raise and bow string tests). In addition, a greater level of pain was experienced with increased intra-abdominal pressure (when, for example, coughing, sneezing or pushing). More severe neurological deficiencies, in the form of paresis or bladder and rectal dysfunction, were not found. She was by this time severely incapacitated and bedridden.
Bearing in mind the hypoplasia of her inferior vena cava, a repeat MRI scan (1.5T) was performed. The MRI results, in conjunction with our patient's history, were considered by the radiologist to be indicative of epidural varicosis. No further pathological abnormalities that could cause the nerve root pain were found .
According to our vascular surgeons, no surgical correction for the hypoplasia of her inferior vena cava was possible because it was a congenital defect. The optimal therapy to manage the progressive pain symptoms of our patient was then considered. Due to the increased risk of bleeding, the consideration of surgical intervention was abandoned and she was treated with peripheral analgesics in combination with low-dose pregabalin, with satisfactory results. In addition, compression therapy (class II) combined with Marcoumar (phenprocoumon) was carried out, which led to an acceptable decrease in her symptoms (target international normalized ratio; 2.0 to 3.0).
To date, our patient still complains of sciatic pain on her right side, but is able to work while on intermittent pain medication.