The patient was a 57-year-old man who had been diagnosed with decompensate liver cirrhosis by hepatitis C virus infection. He was treated with asunaprevir and daclatasvir from 2015 and achieved a sustained virological response. Since 2017, he presented with repeated hepatic coma and refractory ascites. His Child-Pugh score was 10 and model for end-stage liver disease score was 15. CT revealed PVT of Yerdel classification grade II before LDLT . AT III treatment (1500 units per day) for 10 days was performed twice but PVT was progressed . He underwent ABO-identical LDLT using a right lobe graft of his son. The graft weight was 545 g, and the graft-recipient body weight ratio was 0.81. For the recipient operation, Mercedes-Benz incisions were made. After dissection of the main portal vein (PV), the PVT was promptly removed and total hepatectomy was performed. The graft had five hepatic veins (HVs), including the right hepatic vein (RHV; 20 mm), the inferior RHV (IRHV; 9 mm), two V5 (7 and 10 mm), and V8 (12 mm) branches. The graft V5 and V8 branches were formed into single orifice using the recipient’s PV of the extracted liver and donor’s round ligament of the liver as anterior patch graft. Thereafter, HV reconstruction was performed between the recipient’s RHV and the graft formed HVs. IRHV was not anastomosed. The PV reconstruction was performed between the recipient’s main PV and the graft right PV. Hepatic artery reconstruction was performed between the recipient’s right hepatic artery and the graft right hepatic artery under a microscope. Biliary reconstruction was performed with a choledochocholedochostomy.
Intra-operative and post-operative color Doppler ultrasonography was performed to assess the blood flow velocity and pattern. On POD 3, he was treated with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) as prophylaxis against post-operative venous thrombosis. On POD 5, anticoagulant therapy was ceased due to abdominal bleeding. The abdominal bleeding improved by conservative treatment. Thereafter, the post-operative course was good; however, a liver function test revealed elevated liver enzyme levels on POD 14. The laboratory findings on POD 14 were as follows: total bilirubin, 2.76 mg/dl; direct bilirubin, 0.49 mg/dl; aspartate amino transferase, 40 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 122 U/L; prothrombin time, 14.1 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 37.5 s; AT III activity, 68.7 %; fibrinogen degradation product (FDP), 7.6 μg/ml; D-dimer, 6.3 μg/ml; protein C, 71.9%; platelet 5.0 × 104/μℓ. The periodic CT examination on POD 15 revealed PVT in the left side of the main PV at the side of left gastric vein ligation . AT III treatment (1500 units per day) from POD 15 to POD 24 was performed. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the PVT had decreased 10% on POD 27. Furthermore, AT III treatment (1500 units per day) from POD 28 to POD 32 was performed. Figure showed the chronological changes of AT III, FDP, D-dimer during the period of AT III treatment. During the period of AT III treatment, the AT III activity remained above 100%, and FDP and D-dimer levels decreased. On POD 52, he was discharged from the hospital. The CT examination demonstrated the disappearance of PVT on POD 69 and thereafter, he had no recurrence of PVT on 10 POM.