A 48-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital with presyncope, nausea, and palpitations. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed new, complete atrioventricular (AV) block . A permanent pacemaker was implanted, which resulted in resolution of her symptoms. Her serum troponin levels were within normal range. She subsequently developed intermittent watery diarrhea without blood or mucus and was passing 10–15 bowel movements per day. The patient reported having painful, recurrent oral and genital ulcers for the previous 10 months. She also had intermittent large joint swelling and tenderness during this period. Furthermore, she had had an episode of redness of her eyes 2 months before her first admission that had lasted for 2 weeks, consistent with uveitis. She had been admitted 3 weeks before her current presentation with chest pain due to pericarditis. An ECG at that time showed normal sinus rhythm , while an echocardiogram showed small pericardial effusion. At that time, tender swelling of her right knee joint was observed. Her physical examination also revealed numerous mucosal ulcers in her mouth and on the labia minora. Her past medical history included 40 pack-years smoking and a right lower limb deep venous thrombosis when she was pregnant with her second child.
Her clinical examination did not reveal any evidence of extraintestinal manifestation of inflammatory bowel disease. Of note, her pathergy test result was negative. The results of her autoimmune screen, including rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, and extractable nuclear antibodies, were negative. Her human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B51 was negative, but she had genotype HLA-B35 in her blood. Stool microscopy and culture did not reveal any pathogens. An endoscopic evaluation showed a large ulceration in the terminal ileum that did not appear typical of Crohn’s disease. Her histopathological examination showed changes consistent with vasculitis but no granulomas or transmural inflammation. A computed tomographic enterogram showed no other areas of ulceration or evidence of Crohn’s disease. On the basis of this patient’s oral and genital ulceration, documented evidence of synovitis, vasculitic ulcer in the gastrointestinal tract, and an episode of ocular inflammation and no evidence of another inflammatory disease, a diagnosis of BD was made. She was commenced on prednisolone 50 mg with a slow tapering course, as well as sulfasalazine 500 mg twice daily that was later increased to 1 g twice daily, to which she responded with resolution of her diarrhea and mucosal ulceration. She continued to be in remission during once-monthly and then thrice-monthly clinical follow-up.