A 40-year-old male patient experiencing symptoms of hunger, such as fatigue and excessive sweating, for 2 years was admitted to the neurosurgery department at our hospital in August of 2018. The symptoms were relieved with food.
The patient underwent a thymectomy because of thymic carcinoid 10 years ago (July 2008). However, there were intermittent episodes of hypoglycemia symptoms in the following years. The minimum blood glucose level was 2.0 mmol/L. Hypoglycemia-like symptoms can be relieved with glucose infusions. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of the head and neck showed signs of hyperparathyroidism and prolactinoma 2 years prior; thus, the patient underwent a prolactinoma resection (April 2016). Although the surgery was successful, the symptoms of dizziness and hypoglycemia remained unresolved. Therefore, he was readmitted to our department for further treatment and suspected MEN1.
Family history showed that his sister suffered from prolactinoma and underwent gamma knife radiosurgery. His parents, five siblings (sisters), and two offspring displayed the typical triad of amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and infertility.
None.
Laboratory examination findings are summarized in Table . The indexes for thyroid-stimulating hormone, β-collagen-specific sequence, total type I collagen amino-terminal extension peptide, fasting insulin, and insulin release were abnormally elevated.
Parathyroid two-phase CT revealed a strong signal in the upper portion of the left lobes and posterior portion of the right lobes of the thyroid, in addition to the parathyroid glands . Pancreatic perfusion CT imaging showed irregular soft tissue densities of the pancreatic body, which was closely associated with the adjacent stomach wall, with a small reduction in blood volume (BV) and a slight increase in flow extraction product. There was increased blood flow, BV, mean transit time, and flow extraction product in nodules posterior to the pancreatic body; increased blood flow and decreased BV in nodules of the pancreatic head; and multiple circular low or slightly low-density shadows in liver parenchyma . MRI of the liver and pancreas revealed multiple abnormal signals in liver segment II, segment VIII, and the junction area of liver segments II and IV as well as occupied lesions in the tail of the pancreatic body . Enhanced MRI revealed occupied lesions in the body and tail of the pancreas . Enhanced MRI revealed that liver segment IV was occupied, suggesting the possibility of angiomyolipoma. In addition, there were small cysts in segments II and VIII of the liver and occupied lesions in the tail of the pancreatic body .
Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT imaging further showed strong 18F-flurodeoxyglucose uptake in the tail of the pancreatic body and segment IV of the liver, indicating the presence of insulinomas with intrahepatic metastases. There were several circular nodules visible in the right and left lungs, showing partially increased signals in them. After undergoing complete surgical resection of the thymoma, ring-shaped hypermetabolism became visible around the aortic root, which may be a result of fat intake.