An 84-year-old Japanese woman with a history of lung cancer treated by surgery was admitted due to gradual worsening dyspnea over the previous month. She had had asymptomatic and unchanging pericardial effusion and a pelvic mass diagnosed 3 and 11 years previously, respectively, and had been followed-up without the need for treatment. The chest radiography and magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis 4 months before admission are shown in Fig. and Fig. , respectively. The chest X-ray showed a nodular shadow in the right lung field , as well as unchanging pericardial effusion volume revealed by a chest computed tomography (CT) scan . Transbronchial biopsies of the lung nodule were performed, and the pathological specimen disclosed adenocarcinoma. Then, she underwent a right upper lobectomy for localized lung adenocarcinoma with pericardial fenestration, which confirmed that the pericardial effusion included abundant lymphocytes and did not contain any malignant cells. She progressed favorably after the operation and was discharged. However, she began to experience dyspnea on exertion leading to admission. On admission, she was not suffering from fever, night sweats, chest discomfort, or abdominal pain. She had a prior history of pulmonary tuberculosis treated with chemotherapy 20 years before and was treated for diabetes mellitus and hypertension in the hospital. She had no history of smoking, illicit drug use, recent travel abroad, or asbestos exposure.
The patient was conscious and afebrile, with a pulse of 108 beats/min, blood pressure of 148/50 mmHg, respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 90 % in room air, which improved to 96 % on 3 L/min supplemental oxygen administered intranasally. Pulmonary auscultation revealed a decreased breath sound over the right lung field. She had normal heart sounds without murmurs. A large, hard, non-tender mass was palpable in the lower part of the abdomen. There was no finger clubbing, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy, or edema in her extremities.
The complete blood count, blood biochemistry, and autoantibodies were all unremarkable, except for serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) at 6.1 ng/mL (normal, below 5.0 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA-125) at 260 U/mL (normal, below 35 U/mL). The chest radiography showed cardiac enlargement and right pleural effusion, as well as blunting of the left costophrenic angle . Her electrocardiogram (ECG) was within normal limits. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed preserved right and left ventricular function with pericardial effusion. A chest, abdominal, and pelvic CT scan showed the presence of pericardial and bilateral pleural effusion and ascites with a left ovarian mass, 20 cm in diameter, without hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy . Pericardial effusion had decreased compared with that before the lung operation. A thoracentesis revealed clear and yellowish pleural fluid. It was a lymphocyte-predominant exudate; the total protein level in the pleural fluid was 3.1 g/dL (6.2 g/dL in serum) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in pleural fluid was 181 U/L (238 U/L in serum), which fulfilled Light’s criteria for an exudate . The adenosine deaminase (ADA) and CEA levels in the pleural fluid were 9.7 U/L and 2.4 ng/mL, respectively. The bacterial and mycobacterial cultures of the pleural fluid were negative. Cytological examination of the pleural fluid showed abundant lymphocytes without any evidence of malignant cells, similar to that in the pericardial effusion confirmed during the lung surgery.
Despite drainage of the pleural fluid, recurrent episodes of pleural fluid accumulation occurred requiring weekly thoracentesis. Despite tube thoracostomy into the right pleural cavity for drainage, the pleural effusion persisted. As the combination of her ascites, pleural effusion, and ovarian mass was suggestive of Meigs’ syndrome, she was referred to the department of gynecology and underwent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy due to strong adhesions of bilateral ovaries. Histopathological examination of the resected ovarian mass revealed ovarian fibroma . Thereafter, she made an uneventful recovery and the volume of pleural and pericardial effusions, as well as ascites, decreased and subsequently resolved. The follow-up chest X-ray and CT 8 months after removal of the fibroma confirmed no relapse of the pleural and pericardial effusion .