A 28-year-old man presented to the Emergency Department of the Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, with fever of 39.9°C, facial/neck edema, erythematous rash, cervical lymphadenopathy, malaise and shortness of breath that had commenced 24 h previously. He was tachycardic with a gallop rhythm, had dull heart sounds, and was tachypneic (20/min) and hypotensive (60/10 mm Hg). No murmurs or rubs were present. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia (150/min) with occasional premature ventricular extrasystoles. The patients' personal history revealed PFS present since childhood. He had had febrile attacks once a month, accompanied with cervical lymphadenopathy, abdominal cramps and arthritis. His febrile attacks had been treated with nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs and short prednisone courses. Previous attacks had been associated with high inflammatory markers, anemia and mild hepatosplenomegaly. His heart function had always been normal. He had been treated with sulfasalazine (500 mg t.i.d.) for ankle joint arthritis 2 weeks before this latest admission.
On admission, blood tests revealed leukocytosis 18.4 × 109 (78s% neutrophils without eosinophilia and atypical lymphocytes) and the following elevated inflammatory markers: C-reactive protein (151 mg/l), ferritin (19,455 μg/l), creatine kinase (313 U/l), MB (muscle brain) creatine kinase isoenzyme (81 U/l), troponin T (1.6 μg/l), aspartate aminotransferase (287 U/l) and alanine aminotransferase (238 U/l). Metabolic acidosis (HCO3 4.6 mmol/l, pH 7.16, pCO2 1.7 kPa) was present. Chest X-rays showed cardiac enlargement. Plasma N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide was also elevated at 215 ng/l (normal is <100 ng/l).
A diagnosis of cardiogenic shock was made and therapy with oxygen, fluids, inotropic agents, methylprednisolone (120 mg i.v.) and antibiotics was initiated. Despite this treatment, the patient died 8 h after admission.
The autopsy revealed EM with prominent interstitial edema and inflammatory infiltrate composed of eosinophils and mononuclear cells . Vascular congestion of alveolar wall capillaries and alveolar damage were present . Eosinophilic infiltrates were found in the stomach and skeletal muscles, while massive hemophagocytosis was observed in bone marrow and lymph nodes . Acute heart failure caused by EM followed by pulmonary edema was established as the cause of death. The diagnosis of DIHS was confirmed by the first 5 of the following 6 diagnostic criteria: (i) a maculopapular rash developing 2–6 weeks after starting new therapy, (ii) lymphadenopathy, (iii) fever (>38°C), (iv) leukocytosis >10 × 109/l (without atypical lymphocytes and eosinophilia but with prominent tissue eosinophilia), (v) hepatitis (alanine aminotransferase, ALT >100 U/ml) and (vi) human herpes virus 6 reactivation (not tested) . Genetic testing results, which were received postmortem, showed two heterozygous mutations in the gene for mevalonate kinase in exone 11 (C.1129G>A leading to P.V377I) and exone 6 (C.564.G>A leading to P.W188X) localized on 12q24.11, thus confirming hyper-IgD syndrome as one of the genetically defined hereditary periodic fever syndromes.