A 15-month-old girl who had been having diarrhea 10-15 times per day, intermittent vomiting and fever for 2 weeks presented with a 3 day history of bilious vomiting, metabolic acidosis and severe hypokalemia (K: 1,6 mEq/L). She was treated at another hospital for gastroenteritis and paralytic ileus, and was referred to our hospital with the prediagnosis of unknown hypertension etiology, acute gastroenteritis and paralytic ileus after having therapy-resistant hypokalemia, acidosis, diarrhea and manifest hypertension. On her examination, after being admitted to our clinic, she was weak, unwell and lethargic with a blood pressure of 140/93 mmHg. She had severe dehydration and hyperactive bowel sounds, while other systemic examination was found normal. Abdominal ultrasound scan was normal. Laboratory investigations showed metabolic acidosis (arterial blood pH: 7.32, HCO3: 7.2 mmol/L), hypokalemia (K: 1.6 mEq/L), hyponatraemia (130 mEq/L), and leukocytosis (15900/µL). Hemoglobin level was 12.7 g/dL along with polymorphonuclear leukocytes predominant peripheral blood film and platelet count of 445.000/µL. Further blood tests evaluating renal functions showed that BUN was 18 mg/dL, serum creatinine was 0.89 mg/dL. Also serum total calcium and phosphorus were 10 mg/dL and 2.24 mg/dL respectively. Although she had been suffering from therapy-resistant diarrhea and severe dehydration for a long time. Daily urine output was 3.2 ml/kg/hr. Urinanalysis results included urine specific gravity of 1006, a pH of 6, and protein of 150 mg/dL. Direct urine microscopy was normal. The urine spots protein: creatinine ratio was 4.32. Albumin was found 4.95 g/dL. Fractional excretion of sodium was 1.4%. Fractional excretion of potassium was 7.2%. Serum anion gap was assessed as 25.8 mEq/L while the urine was -7.1 mEq/L. Due to the hypertension and severe hypokalemia, the patient was considered to be hyperaldosteronism and some tests are conducted. Serum aldosterone level was found 1200 pg/mL (70-540), plasma renin activity 2.77 ng/mL/s (0.5-2.6 ng/mL/s) and cortisol level 50 mcg/dL (5-25 mcg/dL). While the two previous abdominal ultrasound scans were found to be normal, however, on physical examination of abdominal a suspicious mass was found. Thus, a repeat abdominal ultrasound scan was performed for especially evaluating the adrenal glands. Ultrasound showed a heterogeneous, vascular, solid left adrenal mass measuring 6×5 cm which contains calcification. Abdominal-CT findings were similar to ultrasound and to be compatible with neuroblastoma. Urine levels of vanilmandelic acid (VMA) and serum neuron specific enolase (NSE) levels were elevated which were evocative of a neuroblastoma. The patient underwent an abdominal surgery and the mass excision was performed by pediatric surgeons. Following the tumor excision, therapy-resistant hypertension became normal, diarrhea ceased and the need for fluid and electrolytes replacement caused by the severe diarrhea ended. The histopathological examination revealed a tumor measuring 6×5×4.5 cm with differentiated cells containing large necrosis and calcification suggestive of a neuroblastoma. The surgical margins were free of tumoral invasion. The patient was evaluated as low risk according to the TPOG-2009 protocol, discharged from the hospital and recruited for follow up visits ( and ).