A 40-year-old female with a medical history of HSP and smoking was admitted to our emergency department. The patient was tackled during ice hockey practice and fell on the ice. Thereafter, she skated to the bench where she suddenly lost consciousness. Resuscitation was started immediately with return of spontaneous circulation after 12 min. On arrival of the ambulance, the patient was found unconscious with both pupils dilated and was intubated immediately. On admission, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 3 (E1M1V1) with anisocoria. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and neck showed diffuse SAH . On CT angiography, a saccular BTA and a dissection of the extracranial segment of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) with luminal stenosis were noted. Following multidisciplinary consultation, it was decided to treat the BTA by endovascular coiling [ and ]. During this procedure, that is, a digital subtraction angiography (DSA), the left ICA was reassessed as well, showing no signs of the dissection or stenosis . Nevertheless, tinzaparin sodium (Innohep) 2500 IU 2 times daily was started as prophylactic treatment for a potential ICA dissection.
After the procedure, the patient’s GCS was 5 (E1M3 (right side) V1). A CT scan of the head showed multiple hypodense areas within the territory of the left ICA suggestive of ischemia. This was probably due to the dissection of the left ICA [ and ]. The DSA was repeated, and a severe stenosis of the left ICA was observed. Following the placement of two stents (CASPER 5 × 30 mm and Solitaire 5 × 30m), the stenotic extracranial segment of the left ICA was reopened [ and ]. Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) 250 mg and Abciximab (Reopro) 10 mg were initiated during the procedure and infusion of the latter was continued for 24 h.
After this procedure, the patient’s consciousness deteriorated to E1M2 (right side) V1 and repeated head CT scan showed progressive hypodensities. Antithrombotic medication was changed to ASA in combination with Prasugrel. The patient’s GCS deteriorated to 3 (E1M1V1) and a magnetic resonance imaging of the head was performed showing extensive and diffuse ischemia in the mesencephalon, bilateral deep nuclei, thalamus, and watershed areas . The ischemic lesions were most apparent in the territory of the left ICA, which was probably related to its dissection. Based on the clinical condition and radiological findings, it was decided to discontinue treatment. The patient died 1 day later. The autopsy report confirmed extensive brain ischemia and death due to brain herniation. There were no signs of active vasculitis.