A 53-year-old woman with no previous history presented with short-term memory loss two days after a primary cytoreduction surgery (Ascites aspiration + surgical exploration + bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy + hysterectomy + omentectomy + para-aortic and pelvic lymph node dissection) for HGSOC . The anesthesia and surgical procedure went uncomplicated. No severe adverse event happened. The memory deficit did not affect the patient’s daily activities, and no progression was detected, so she was discharged ten days after the operation. Two weeks later, she was admitted to the neurology department due to confusion, disorientation, speech dysfunction, agitation, and hallucination. The physical examination showed short-term memory deficits, disorientation, and count disturbance. Chest and abdomen CT scans revealed negative results except for signs of mild pneumonia. The brain MRI and Magnetic resonance spectroscopy imaging (MRSI) revealed hippocampus atrophy and diminished NAA/(Cho + Cr) ratio in the bilateral hippocampus region (right 0.25, left 0.1), suggesting sclerosis and neuron damage. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was notable for pleocytosis (309✕106/mL) and elevated protein (0.688 g/L). The paraneoplastic antibody panel for CSF and serum returned positive for AMPAR antibody (CSF IgG 1:32; serum IgG 1:3.2, cell-based assay, Fig. ), as well as anti-TRDNER antibody (+) and anti-Recoverin antibody (+), and the anti-AMPAR encephalitis was diagnosed. Moreover, the paraffin sections of the patient’s ovarian tumor demonstrated mild expression of AMPAR GluA1 and strong expression of GluA2. The patient was treated with Methylprednisolone sodium succinate (750 mg qd for seven days), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (15 g qd for five days), and acyclovir (0.5 g q8h for 15 days) for suspected limbic encephalitis and virus encephalitis.
A week after admission, the patient developed a vigil coma with ocular movement disorders, autonomic dysfunction of severe dysphoria, and epilepsy. The electroencephalography (EEG) was repeated twice without detecting epileptiform discharge.
Nine days later, she developed hypotension and respiratory distress, leading to tracheotomy and intubation. Over the next month, she started another IVIG three times, followed by three cycles of plasmapheresis. The clinical improvement was limited. An FDG-PET/CT scan was performed, showing no signs of tumor. She was then treated with three doses of rituximab, improving her consciousness. She could respond to some simple physical examinations when she was discharged to a rehabilitation unit three months after admission. In a recent follow-up, the patient reported full recovery of her consciousness, speech, and movement abilities, with mild short-term memory loss remaining. She has completed three cycles of chemotherapy. Physical examination, CT scan, and tumor biomarkers found no tumor recurrence.