A 14-year-old adolescent girl was referred to our department for the evaluation of a deformity of her right leg. Her mother described her medical history. The girl was born normally and had been delivered full-term in a country in East Europe.
She was diagnosed with meningococcal infection 3 weeks of age. The diagnosis was confirmed based on the results of cerebrospinal fluid cultures. During the next 6 months, five surgical procedures were performed to drain osteomyelitis and septic arthritis affecting both the proximal and distal parts of the patient’s right femur.
Two additional surgical procedures for osteomyelitis of the distal femur were performed when the patient was 2 and 4 years of age. The cultures were positive for Staphylococcus. The clinical signs of LLD and axis deviation of the patient’s right leg were observed at that stage. The family immigrated to our country, and no data were available on the past medical history. No further osteomyelitis infections were observed. On examination, the girl was unsatisfied with her appearance, refusing initially to get undressed for inspection of the body. She had a limp and had used crouches during the previous 2 years. Her right femur had several incisions, including an anterior incision in the proximal part for hip drainage, as well as medial and lateral incisions in the distal part. Her hip movements were unrestricted.
There was an obvious varus deformity in her leg as well as LLD. The length discrepancy was 7.5 cm, as measured by computed tomography (CT). The discrepancy almost completely affected the femora (35 cm left–28 cm right), while the tibia differed in length by <0.5 cm. The knee flexion was limited to 90°, while the knee had hyperextension to 10° with a slight recurvatum shape.
X-ray examination revealed a distorted and hypoplastic distal lateral femoral condyle and normal-appearing intercondylar notch and medial femoral condyle. The distal femoral growth plate appeared only in the medial part of the distal femur. The proximal tibial growth plate appeared normal and symmetrical. The growth plates showed radiological signs of closure. The patient’s foot shape and ankle joint movements were normal. She had no skin contractures apart from the incisions resulting from the surgical procedures. A bone scan showed negative uptake in the femur.
After completing the evaluation and counseling with her parents, we proceeded with a surgical intervention using a pre-constructed Ilizarov frame.
We used two central and one distal ring connected with universal hinges. The plane of the ring application was proximally perpendicular to the axis of the femur. The distal ring was parallel to the knee joint and had a 10° recurvatum. We performed the osteotomy and started the lengthening procedure on the 5th day. Initially, distraction was performed two and four times daily for the lateral and medial rods, respectively. We achieved correction of the mechanical axis in 4 weeks and then completed the lengthening procedure with similar rates of distraction for both the medial and lateral rods four times daily.
We completed the regeneration process with almost equalization of the leg discrepancy and restoration of the mechanical axis of the femur. During the lengthening procedure, the girl noted the change in the shape of her leg and was satisfied and cooperative. She was weight-bearing using crutches. Her knee flexion remained limited despite efforts to increase it, even though we did not include the tibia in the device. Radiological evaluation was performed every 10 days to assess the progress of the lengthening procedure and avoid possible knee subluxation. The bone regeneration was uncomplicated and normal ossification of the new bone appeared as expected.
After consolidation of the new bone, we removed the Ilizarov device and protected the limb with a knee brace.
The Ilizarov device was used for 5.5 months. We lengthened the right femur by 6 cm, which was 20% of the initial length. The consolidation period lasted for 2 months. The healing index was 0.9 months/cm.
The patient achieved a knee flexion of 0–100° with exercises and physiotherapy. Her behavior also changed, as she started participating in normal activities and dancing. The 10-year follow-up showed restoration of the normal femoral cortices and normal anatomical axis. There were no radiological signs of abnormalities in the knee joint space. Moreover, the patient showed no clinical signs, with normal knee movements, including squatting.