The patient in this case was a 27-year-old male, native to New York State, who had driven across the country by himself to snowboard in Colorado. His ascent seemed to be rapid as he made the trip in 2 days where he arrived at an altitude of 2773m. While in the state, at this elevation and snowboarded at a maximum elevation of 3962 m. He was in his normal state of good health during the drive and for the first several days after arrival at high altitude. He was snowboarding at a local resort with a summit elevation of 3782 m when he had a sudden onset of transient visual blurring which compromised his ability to snowboard for minutes at a time. These symptoms recurred throughout the day (with and without activity) and were accompanied by a mild headache and a feeling of nausea. He was anorectic but did not vomit. That night he was asymptomatic. The next day while snowboarding the visual symptoms recurred lasting a minute and were followed by a significant headache. He presented to a medical clinic situated at 2829 meters complaining of a ‘migraine’ headache. Initial set of vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 160/97, heart rate of 96, respiratory rate of 17, a temperature of 98.4 and a pulse oximeter reading 92% on room air. The patient noted that his father had a history of migraine headaches and typically reported blurry vision followed by headache and nausea. His family history was significant only for migraine headaches; his personal medical history was negative. He was treated with oral ibuprofen and ondansetron and improved. The physician treating him suggested transfer to the local hospital for advanced imaging, but the patient declined and was discharged. The next day the patient had another episode with more significant visual symptoms that lasted an hour and then resolved while ascending a ski lift between 2830 and 3782 meters. His visual symptoms gradually resolved, but he was left with a severe persistent occipital headache, nausea, and an episode of vomiting. He called the medical clinic and was directed to the local Emergency Department (ED). He presented to the ED at an altitude of 2773 m with the chief complaint of headache and visual changes. He was noted to have a normal physical exam including normal vital signs except for a mildly elevated blood pressure of 153/99, a normal neurologic exam, normal vision, and a normal fundoscopic exam without signs of papilledema or retinal hemorrhage. Lab work was also obtained and was unremarkable. He did not have evidence of hyponatremia or hypoglycemia. The complete blood count, basic metabolic panel and liver function test were all with normal limits. Given the recurrent visual disturbances and headache, a magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain was obtained . The MRI showed signs consistent with high altitude cerebral edema. He was given 10 mg of intravenous dexamethasone and transferred to a hospital in Denver at an altitude of 1682 m. He was asymptomatic except for a mild headache after arriving in Denver. He was seen by neurology and observed in the hospital overnight. The following day he was asymptomatic and was discharged after being counseled about proper acclimatization procedures.