A 64-year-old woman was referred to Miyata Eye Hospital (Miyiazaki, Japan) for decreased visual acuity in her left eye. Intraocular inflammation with elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) had been observed in her left eye 10 months earlier at a local ophthalmology clinic. Despite treatment with topical steroids, it was difficult to decrease the IOP, and the patient was referred to us for management.
At initial presentation, slit-lamp examination showed hyperemia, mid-sized keratic precipitates (KP), and pigment KPs, 2+ cells in the anterior chamber of her left eye . Focal corneal edema was also observed from the 9 to 12 o’clock position in the left eye with fluorescein staining ; however, her right eye was normal. Additionally, mild cataracts were observed bilaterally. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.5 and 0.4 in the left and right eyes, respectively; her IOP was elevated to 33 mmHg in the left eye and was 14 mmHg in the right eye. No corneal epithelial defects or ulcers were observed, and the corneal sensation was determined to be normal using a Cochet–Bonnet esthesiometer. Corneal endothelial cell density (ECD) decreased to 1828 cells/mm2, the coefficient of variation (CV) was 29%, and the appearance rate of hexagonal cells (6A) was 45% in the left eye compared with 2058 cells/mm2 in the right eye. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography showed that central corneal thickness was 492 and 530 μm in the left and the right eye, respectively. Posterior segment inflammation was not observed and Goldmann perimetry revealed no visual-field defects.
The patient was subsequently diagnosed with corneal endotheliitis with increased IOP. Treatment was initiated with administration of topical betamethasone and levofloxacin four times daily, timolol 0.5% and travoprost 0.004% once daily, bunazosin 0.01% twice daily, and oral acetazolamide 750 mg/day. Since gonioscopic examination showed bilateral shallow angles, laser iridotomy (LI) was performed with an yttrium–aluminum garnet laser, which lowered the IOP to 21 mmHg.
Serological tests revealed the presence of HSV-1 IgG in enzyme-linked immunoassay and was negative for Treponema pallidum hemagglutination and for antibodies to human T-lymphotropic virus-1, varicella zoster virus, and cytomegalovirus. The blood sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein level, complete blood count, and electrolyte levels were within the normal ranges. Although she had a 3-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, it was well-controlled with a hemoglobin A1c level of 6.2%. She had no other systemic autoimmune disease and did not use oral steroids. The PCR analysis results of the anterior-chamber aqueous humor were previously reported by Sugita et al. ; briefly, HSV-1 and HHV-6B genome sequences were 2.8 × 105 and 7.5 × 105 copy/μL, respectively . Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with corneal endotheliitis and iritis with HSV-1 and HHV-6B. Oral valacyclovir was administered for 1 week at 3000 mg/day, followed by 1500 mg/day.
After 2 weeks, her IOP decreased to 11 mmHg, and topical bunazosin and oral acetazolamide were discontinued, although the 2+ cells in the anterior chamber persisted. As the cells decreased to 1+ after 1 month, oral valacyclovir administration was discontinued, and treatment with acyclovir 5% ocular ointment was initiated five times daily. At 2 months after initial presentation, the cells had completely disappeared, although the BCVA remained 0.5. Anti-glaucoma drugs were discontinued, with continuation of only betamethasone eyedrops and acyclovir ointment four times daily.
Because of gradual progression of the cataract, surgery was performed in her left eye at 15 months after the initial presentation without exacerbation of intraocular inflammation; her BCVA improved from 0.4 to 0.8. Afterward, topical steroid administration, which was transiently increased to four times daily, was gradually tapered to betamethasone twice daily. At 6 years after the initial presentation, the ECD in her left eye decreased to 1698 cells/mm2, the CV was 60%, and 6A was 25%. Corneal endotheliitis did not recur with continued use of topical fluorometholone 0.1% and acyclovir ointment twice daily, although strong corneal opacity was observed. There was no vitreous opacity or inflammation in the fundus except for slight diabetic retinopathy of dot hemorrhage. At 12 years after the initial presentation, her BCVA was 0.5 owing to corneal opacity without recurrent intraocular inflammation or vitreous opacity . The IOP was 17 mmHg with normal optic disc, and there was no retinal detachment or macular edema. Slight diabetic retinopathy was well controlled with HbA1c of 6.2%. Although counting the ECD was difficult in the opacified cornea, the central corneal thickness remained 410 μm.