A 64-year old Caucasian woman had undergone a bone marrow transplantation in September 2006 after diagnosis of acute monocytic leukemia (AML). The patient received induction therapy on March 1, 2006, and at this point all the markers of a previously resolved HBV infection (HBcAb +, HBsAb +, HBsAg −) were observed. In September 2006, following complete remission after rituximab, busulfan, and fludarabine therapy, the patient was treated by allogeneic blood stem cell transplantation.
Except for a short steroid therapy in February 2007 to treat an immune thrombocytopenic purpura, the patient received no further immunosuppressive drugs. In May 2009 (33 months later), all the serological markers characteristic of a resolved HBV infection were still observed in the patient; furthermore, no HBV DNA could be detected [detection limit approximately 100 genome equivalents per milliliter (ge/ml)].
In June 2010, she complained of abdominal pain which had lasted for one week and was admitted to the hospital. Initial laboratory investigations revealed elevated levels of aminotransferase (3295 U/l) and bilirubin (73 μM) .
Despite being still positive for HBsAb (431 IU/l, COBAS-HBsAg II assay, Roche) in serum 46 months after HSCT, tenofovir therapy (300 mg/day) was initiated in view of a low positive HBsAg. The next serum sample taken 3 days later resulted negative for HBsAg and all markers associated with a resolved HBV infection were observed. Both sera gave low positive HBsAg results when tested later by the HBsAg Qualitative [ABBOTT (Architect)] assay. All further sera remained negative in both assays.
However, HBV reactivation was clearly detected by in-house qPCR, since both samples (days 0 and 3 after initiation of tenofovir therapy) showed significant levels of HBV DNA (5 ×108 ge/ml and 1 × 104 ge/ml, respectively). One month later during the course of therapy, the HBV DNA level had dropped to 200 ge/ml and another month later, HBV DNA was undetectable and remained undetectable till date.
Given the rare occurrence of both HBsAb and HBsAg being simultaneously positive, the samples from day 0 and one month after the initiation of tenofovir therapy were tested for the presence of an immune escape mutation in the HBsAg (HBsIE mutation). Surprisingly, in both samples (genotype D) two identical mutations (D144E and G145R, described in literature as HBsIE mutations) were identified.