A 35-year-old male, presented to our outpatient department with complaints of painless solitary mass over the left proximal tibia. The swelling was insidious in onset, gradually progressed for over a period of two 2 years. The swelling was pea sized to begin with, which gradually progressed to a present size of 9 × ×8 cm . On clinical examination of the swelling, there was no local warmth, tenderness, crepitus, or discoloration of the overlying skin. The swelling was firm in consistency which was adhered to the underlying structures. There were no palpable lymph nodes. The regional radiographs revealed a large lytic lesion with well-defined margins and narrow zone of transition without cortical breech or periosteal reaction in the metaphyseal -diaphyseal region of the left proximal tibia . The radiographs of skeletal survey showed no lesions elsewhere. The regional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of tibia showed ill-defined serpiginous areas of heterogenous T2 hyperintensity and T1 hypointensity involving left proximal tibia . On post post-contrast study, these areas show heterogenous enhancement. In the given clinical setting, the above findings were suggestive of bone infarcts. Heterogenous T2 hyperintense with T1 hypointense subcutaneous collection was seen along the anterior aspect of the left proximal tibia and seen communicating with marrow cavity through above- mentioned cortical defect. For further details and to locate the potential primary tumor, Positron Emission Tomography was performed which showed a circumscribed sclerotic lesion with high Fluorodeoxyglucose avidity in the left proximal tibia with no other abnormalities elsewhere . Considering high metabolic activity in a solitary lesion, a biopsy was planned from the most representative part of the swelling. Four core samples were obtained using an 18-gauge biopsy device and histopathology suggested fat cells in organoid arrangement of uniform large cells resembling brown fat with coarsely granular to multivacuolated cytoplasm surrounded by fibrovascular tissue . The cells were positive for S-100 protein. The cells had multiple adipocytes with numerous mitochondria. There is not even a single case reported in the literature which suggests malignant potential in hibernomas. Following biopsy, the decision was made to follow this lesion clinically and to keep a close follow- up every 6 monthly. The patient was followed up for two 2 years for clinico-radiological evaluation. The solitary mass did not further progress in size and was painless. Given the unique quality of this case, the anticipated natural course of this mass in the absence of additional treatment is not known. Further, evaluation with regular follow-up with imaging will be required if the mass undergoes any clinical changes.