A previously healthy 25-year-old male conscript presented to our emergency department. He complained of bilateral leg pain, dizziness, and shortness of breath soon after completing vigorous training comprising running drills. Ten days before admission, he attended his family clinic complaining of cough and a sore throat. The rapid test for influenza A was positive and he was treated with a 5-day course of oseltamivir. Five days after completing the course, his symptoms had resolved completely and he recommenced regular military training. There was no history of trauma or illicit drug use. He also denied having fatigue, weakness, or weight loss, and the rest of his verbal review of systems was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed the following values: temperature, 38.2°C; heart rate, 154 beats/min; respiratory rate, 26 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 93/48 mmHg. The results of his physical examination were otherwise unremarkable except for tenderness on palpation of the muscle groups of the thighs. Of note, there were no neurological deficits, and heart sounds showed no definite gallop rhythm. Laboratory investigations revealed the following values: creatine phosphokinase (CPK), 5,555 U/L with an MB fraction of 78 ng/mL; hemoglobin, 17.2 g/dL; platelet count, 348,000 cells/mm3; and total white blood cell (WBC) count, 15,840 cells/mm3 with a differential of 32% lymphocytes, 4% monocytes, 58% neutrophils, and 3% bands. The cardiac troponin I (cTnI) level was 0.46 μg/L (reference < 0.1 μg/L) and the lactate dehydrogenase level was 836 U/L (reference 135–225 U/L). His serum creatinine level was 2.3 mg/dL and his serum electrolyte levels were normal. Liver function tests indicated an elevated aspartate aminotransferase concentration of 47.8 U/L and alanine aminotransferase concentration of 58 U/L; total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, total protein, and albumin levels were all within normal limits. The result of a urine toxicology screen was negative. His urine dipstick test was positive for blood with a pH of 6.5 but no red blood cells or WBCs were observed by microscopy. A test for urine myoglobin had a positive result. The results of a coagulation test, thyroid function test, complement test and antinuclear antibody test were normal. The C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were initially slightly elevated but had normalized 7 days later. Cultures of blood samples tested negative, and viral studies were negative apart from detecting influenza A (H3N2) virus by polymerase chain reaction analysis of nasopharyngeal wash specimens. Chest radiography did not show any abnormalities. Electrocardiography revealed a regular narrow QRS complex but diffuse PR segment depression and localized concave upward ST segment elevation in leads aVL and V1–V3 with reciprocal changes in the inferior leads . Echocardiography disclosed normal systolic function without pericardial effusion or valve regurgitation.
In the 3 days after admission, the CPK peaked at 34,308, and the cTnI and creatinine peaked at 1.17 and 2.46, respectively. He also developed new-onset left-sided and central chest pain. The pain was pleuritic in nature, and a pericardial friction rub was noted on auscultation. A second echocardiography demonstrated moderate circumferential pericardial effusion without any other abnormalities , consistent with myopericarditis with a predominant pericarditic component. Based on these findings, he was treated with aspirin for acute myopericarditis and aggressive hydration and urinary alkalinization as per the local rhabdomyolysis protocol. After a total of 20 days of hospitalization, the patient’s leg pain resolved, chest pain relieved, and CPK level declined to 656 U/L. His serum cTnI and creatinine levels normalized after anti-inflammatory therapy and supportive management. Preserved ejection fraction without deterioration of the pericardial effusion was noted in subsequent serial follow-up echocardiographic assessments. The patient was discharged with a normal electrocardiogram and no further sequelae.