A 60-year-old male patient was admitted to The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen Medical College, Xiamen, China, in January 2022.
Chief complaint: Recurrent left limb weakness with or without slurred speech for 14 months.
Present illness: The patient had 5 ministrokes within 14 months: November 2020, June, September, and December 2021, and January 2022. Each time, the patient presented left limb weakness, with or without slurred speech. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale: 2 to 5. Several small new infarcts were detected on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion-weighted imaging. Typical lesions are shown in Figures –. No stroke-related abnormality was detected in multiple TTE and dynamic electrocardiography examinations, and no stroke-related artery disease was observed in head and neck computerized tomography angiography.
Diagnosis: Multiple cerebral infarctions (small artery occlusion). Aspirin and clopidogrel were administered to patients as dual antiplatelet therapy after the previous 4 attacks. Then, the dual antiplatelet was changed to single drug antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel after 3 weeks, accompanied by statins and antihypertensive and hypoglycemic therapy. Subsequently, the symptom of stroke improved but recurred after several weeks or months.
History: hypertension for >10 years, diabetes mellitus for 7 years, regular medication, blood pressure control at 130–150/90–100 mm Hg, and no blood glucose monitoring.
Personal history: Smoking for 30 years, >40 cigarettes/d.
Family history: The patient’s parents died of unknown etiology. He had no brother or sister, and his children were healthy.
Physical examination: Body temperature: 36.4 °C, pulse: 78 times/min, respiration: 18 times/min, blood pressure: 134/88 mm Hg, a clear mind, mild dysarthria, equal size and circles of bilateral pupils, with diameter 3.0 mm, sensitive to light reflection. No abnormal movement of bilateral eyeballs was detected in any direction, and no nystagmus was observed. Bilateral forehead wrinkles were symmetrical, the left nasolabial sulcus was slightly shallow, the tongue stuck out to the left, and the bilateral pharyngeal reflex was normal. The muscle strength of the limbs was grade 5, and the muscle tone was moderate. No abnormality was detected in the deep and shallow sensory examinations. Finger/nose, heel-knee-shin tests were normal, Romberg’s sign: negative. Babinski’s sign: left side positive, right side negative. NIHSS score: 2 points; Water swallow test: level 2.
Laboratory examination: Routine blood test, coagulation function, liver and kidney function, electrolyte and blood lipid were normal, fasting blood glucose: 6.7 mmol/L, glycosylated hemoglobin: 6.5%.
Dynamic electrocardiogram: The basal heart rate was sinus rhythm with an average heart rate of 74 beats/min. No persistent or paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (or atrial flutter) was recorded.
Imaging examination: Brain MRI T1 weighted imaging, T2 weighted imaging, and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery identified White matter lesions as shown in Figure .
Carotid artery ultrasound: Plaques formed at the bifurcation of the left common carotid artery and the origin of the right internal carotid artery. Moreover, no abnormal echo was detected in the bilateral vertebral arteries, as shown in Figure .
Head and neck computerized tomography angiography: The right anterior cerebral artery A1 segment was thinner than that of the left side, and calcium plaque formed in the aortic arch and siphon segment of bilateral internal carotid arteries with slight stenosis of corresponding lumens, as shown in Figure .
Transthoracic echocardiography: Aortic valve degeneration and tricuspid insufficiency is observed .
Contrast-enhanced transcranial Doppler: Right-to-left shunt (grade 1, intrinsic type), as shown in Figure .
TEE presented PFO, as shown in Figure .
Contrast transesophageal echocardiography (c-TEE) showed PFO, as shown in Figure .
Diagnosis: Cerebral infarction (cardiogenic), PFO.
Treatment: Based on the cardiovascular surgery consultation and combined with the wishes of the patient, the closure of PFO was suspended. An equivalent of 20 mg qd Rivaroxaban was administered orally to the patient.
Prognosis: No stroke occurred since the adjustment of the treatment plan.
Feeling of the patient: The patient was satisfied with the new treatment without adverse reactions.