An 81-year-old elderly woman presented with cognitive decline characterized by memory impairment and behavioral changes, which progressively worsened with time. She subsequently developed sudden onset headache and rapid deterioration of her clinical condition, necessitating presentation to the hospital. There was no history suggestive of neurofibromatosis type-1. She has no comorbidities but had treatment for colon cancer about 7 years ago without evidence of recurrence.
Examination findings showed a confused lady with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E4V4M6. The speech was fluent, and the Mini–Mental State Examination was 13/30 (suggestive of moderate to severe dementia). Her Karnofsky performance score was 60%. She has no meningeal signs, and cranial nerve examinations were essentially normal. Long tracts were normal, and no abnormal reflexes were elicited. However, she has an unstable gait and truncal ataxia. Finger nose testing was normal, and dysdiadochokinesia was absent.
Her cranial computed tomography scan showed a solid vermian hyperdense mass with intratumoral hemorrhage . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the mass with associated effacement of the fourth ventricle and surrounding cerebellar signal changes suggestive of subacute hemorrhage and hydrocephalus [-]. MRI showed no evidence of other hemorrhagic lesions such as microbleeds suggesting cerebral amyloid angiopathy. She had emergency ventriculoperitoneal shunting done and subsequently had marked clinical improvement and was independent and ambulant on discharge. The family was counseled for surgical excision of the lesion but declined further care.
Five months later, she developed acute worsening symptoms with an associated alteration in consciousness, diplopia, florid cerebellar symptoms, and gait instability. Repeat neuroimaging showed rebleeding of the vermian lesion with features suggestive of posterior fossa hypertension . The families were counseled for surgical intervention; the indication was recurrent bleeding and mass effect of the cerebellar lesion. She had a midline suboccipital craniotomy and subtotal excision through the transcerebellomedullary fissure (Telovelar) approach. The mass was grayish, with features suggestive of an old clot within the lesion. Subtotal resection of the tumor was achieved, and a portion of the tumor morbidly adherent to the right portion of the floor of the fourth ventricle adjacent to the cerebellar peduncle was left behind [-]. After surgery, she had slow but progressive improvement and was subsequently discharged for rehabilitation services. There was no evidence of recurrence after 4 years of follow-up.
Histology showed densely packed atypical glial lineage cells, with Rosenthal fibers (RFs) and eosinophilic granular bodies (EGBs) scattered in the background. Only a few mitotic figures were seen. The features were consistent with PA . There were no obvious vascular-rich components and angioma in the pathological examination. Immunohistochemistry shows strong staining for glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) . P53 was negative, Ki-67 was <1%, and isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH-1) was negative.