A 48-year-old gravida 5 para 5 Moroccan woman with no significant past medical history, including no personal history of thrombophilia or recent surgery and no family history of thromboembolic events or autoimmune disease, presented to our emergency department with a 10-day history of epigastric pain radiating to the back and vomiting. Clinical examination revealed epigastric tenderness. The patient was apyrexic with no jaundice or clinical features of hepatic failure. She was hemodynamically stable; her visual analogue scale score was between 6 and 8; she was conscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15; she had no hemorrhagic manifestations; and she denied drug intake or alcohol consumption. The result of a urine dipstick test was negative for blood and protein. Biological investigation revealed an elevated lipase level (600 IU/L). Her C-reactive protein level was 28 mg/L. The rest of the blood test results were within normal range, including renal function, hepatic function tests, and coagulation. Her platelet count was 240,000/mm3.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the abdomen was performed, which revealed Balthazar grade C pancreatitis with multiple splanchnic thromboses involving the portal vein, superior mesenteric vein, and left renal vein and enteromesenteric venous infarct with no signs of bowel perforation. No free intraperitoneal fluid was observed . The patient had multiple liver lesions with double components: isodense and hypodense lesions in segments V, VI, and VII and a hypodense lesion in segment VIII of ischemic origin . Lower limb venous Doppler sonography ruled out DVT.
The result of a thrombophilia screen was negative. Anti-DNA, antinuclear, and anticardiolipin antibodies; anti-β2-glycoprotein 1; and anti-factor II were all negative. Functional activity of antithrombin III, protein C, and protein S were 79%, 80%, and 74.5%, respectively. Viral serology results were negative as well.
Therapeutic anticoagulation was started using enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily. The patient had a nasogastric tube inserted for 72 h. She was started on proton pump inhibitors and was kept nil by mouth until the vomiting settled, then oral feeding was gradually introduced. For analgesia, we used regular paracetamol 3 g daily and nefopam 100 mg daily. The evolution was favorable, and the patient was discharged 1 week later to the care of the gastroenterology team.
Two months later, the patient was readmitted to the intensive care unit with a 4-day history of confusion. Physical examination revealed jaundice, mild tachycardia with normal blood pressure, and hypoglycemia 0.4 g/L. The patient’s abdomen was distended, tense, and tender to palpation with ascites. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed persistent splanchnic and renal thrombosis and worsening of hepatic lesions with extension of bowel ischemia. The hepatic artery was patent, and there were no signs of necrosis or bowel perforation . Prothrombin time was 25%, aspartate aminotransferase was 10 times normal, alanine aminotransferase was 8 times normal, and total bilirubin was 180 mg/L. Repeat viral serology results were all negative.
Anticoagulation was stopped, and therapeutic measures for hepatic failure were initiated. The patient deteriorated to multiple organ failure with grade 4 hepatic encephalopathy, and she died 48 h later. The patient’s history, symptoms, diagnostic and management are summarized in Additional file .