A 30-years-old female Turkish patient referred to our clinic with compliant of unpleasant appearance of her anterior teeth. Patient has a history of a dentoalveolar trauma and a surgical operation before being referred to a dentist. She indicated that her smile has changed following the surgical operation which applied after the traffic accident in the year 2004. After the healing period she directed her complaints to the plastic surgeon but the doctor persuade her that the problem was related with her teeth only. Therefore the patient appealed to our clinic. The clinical and radiographic examinations revealed that all of the maxillary incisors were vestibulary positioned. The maxillary right canine along the maxillary incisors had oblique fractures involving enamel. The maxillary left lateral incisor had not fractured and was intact. The position of maxillary segment between the right premolar and left canine was approximately 3 mm lower than its ideal position . Observing that the inferiority of right canine and lateral incisor is higher than the others, there is a probability that the segment not only placed 3 mm below its ideal position but also placed a few degrees deviation off the vertical axis . The misplacement of the segment is explained to the patient and segmental osteotomy is suggested. The patient rejected the suggestion indicating that she is tired of serial surgical operations, thus the malpractice played a negative effect on her psychology as well.
A conservative treatment was taken into consideration. The indication was porcelain laminate veneers for the maxillary incisors and right canine, all ceramic crown for maxillary right first premolar because of excessive hard tissue loss and a metal-ceramic fixed partial denture for the anterior mandible due to economic reasons.
Before the prosthetic treatment the maxillary right central incisor and first premolar was endodontically treated as they were found to be non vital during the vitality test. During preparation for ceramic veneers, the facial surfaces were reduced by 1.5-2 mm which resulted finishing the preparation on dentin and the incisal edges were reduced by 3-4 mm. All the incisors and canine were prepared with a chamfered finishing line with rounded internal line angles. Smooth margins were created to prevent stress concentration zones. Once the preparation was completed, impressions were made using polyvinylsiloxane impression material (Elite H-D, Zhermack, Germany), and cast in vacuum-mixed Type IV dental die stone (Fujirock, GC Corp, Tokya, Japan) according to the manufacturer recommendations. Stone dies were carefully separated from the impressions and two coats of die spacer (Spacer-Tray, Kerr) were applied 0.5 mm short of the finish line of the preparations. The veneers were waxed up to dies and they were fabricated from lithium disilicate-reinforced glass ceramic material, IPS Empress 2, using the heat press technique according to the manufacturer recommendations. After divestment the veneers were finished and glazed.
The inner surface of indirect veneers were treated with air-particle abrasion using 50 μm Al2O (Korox, Bego, Germany) with a chairside air-abrasion device (CoJet, 3M-ESPE, Germany) from a distance of 10 mm at a pressure of 250 kPa bar for 10 s. Then each surface treatment was followed by acid etching with 9% hydrofluoric acid (Pulpdent Corporation, USA) prior to silanization . A silane coupling agent (Pulpdent Corporation, USA) was applied to the internal veneer surface for 60 s and air-dried.
During the cementation process each tooth was etched for 15 s using a 37% phosphoric acid etch-gel (Alpha-Etch 37, Dental Technologies, USA). Subsequently, the tooth surface was rinsed thoroughly and air-dried gently. Dentin primer and adhesive were applied as the preparation reached dentin structure, according to the manufacturer instructions (Clearfil, Kuraray). Following the bonding application a thin layer of light polymerizing composite resin luting cement was applied at the intaglio surface of the veneers, placed onto the prepared teeth and light-polymerized for 40 s (Elipar Free Light, 3M ESPE) from palatal, buccal and incisal sides.
Excess luting cement was removed and the marginal area was finished and polished with abrasive discs. The metal-ceramic fixed partial denture on the anterior mandibula and the full coverage all ceramic crown for maxillary right first premolar are constructed with conventional procedures and cemented (,). Restorations were checked to avoid any occlusal interference.
The patient was satisfied with her new smile line and excellent view of the anterior teeth (,). She was recalled in 2 days and encouraged for better dental flossing and also recalled every 6 months for periodical controls. No complication was observed during 3 years clinic service.