A 31-year-old man was admitted to our hospital, complaining of hematochezia which had lasted for 1 month. His past history involved a high anterior resection of the rectum in our hospital due to intussusception caused by Peutz-Jeghers polyposis . He was hospitalized for 1 month after the procedure. Unfortunately, details of the surgical procedure that had been performed and the reason for his extended postoperative hospitalization were unknown, because clinical records from his previous admission were not available. He was followed up for 3 years after the procedure, during which he had no abdominal symptoms. He remained symptom-free until the month prior to readmission when he began to suffer from hematochezia. On this admission, hematochezia was his only symptom and there were no abnormal abdominal findings on physical examination. Blood test results, including levels of tumor markers, were all within normal limits. Colonoscopy revealed a hemorrhagic tumor with a smooth surface protruding from the anastomosis of the previous high anterior resection, at a distance of 10 cm from the anal verge; a second examination 4 days later revealed that the tumor had disappeared . The biopsied tumor and other small polyps were histologically diagnosed as adenocarcinoma and hamartomatous polyps, respectively (data not shown). We performed a low anterior resection of the rectum, including the anastomotic site with the adenocarcinoma, combined with a resection of the ileum for strong adhesion. The patient was discharged from our hospital 42 days after the operation.
Gross appearance of the resected rectum showed a defect of the rectal mucosa with a smooth edge and a mucosal bulge located at the anastomotic site . Cut surfaces demonstrated a submucosal tumor mainly occupying the proper muscle layer under the defect . Microscopically, the submucosal tumor comprised an adenocarcinoma and a bone lesion at the anastomotic site . The surface of the tumor was covered with granulation tissue . The bone lesion not only included the carcinomatous glands but also normal glands in the bone tissue . In addition, we identified the incorporation of the normal mucosa in the submucosal fibrosis at the anastomotic site .