A 51-year-old man, diagnosed with adjustment disorder due to work problems, and hypertension without other vascular risk factors, non-smoker, no alcohol or drug consumption, treated with valsartan/hydrochlorothiazide and omeprazole. He presented with intermittent episodes of incoercible vomiting over a three month period, and was finally diagnosed with adult cyclic vomiting syndrome after an extensive study that ruled out organic origin (normal blood tests, stool test, urea breath test, abdominal CT scan and ultrasound, echoendoscopy with biopsies). The patient was admitted to hospital for prerenal kidney failure after several weeks of uncontrollable vomiting, up to 50 episodes per day. Physical examination was unremarkable except for intermittent optokinetic nystagmus. Blood tests showed creatinine 4.12 mg/dL, urea 92 mg/dL, creatinine clearance 15 mL/min/S, albumin 4.6 g/dL, Na 142 mmol/L, K 3.3 mmol/L, Cl 90 mmol/L, Ca 7.6 mg/dL (normal 8.6–10.2), P 4 mg/dL (normal 2.6–4.5). Intravenous hydration and metoclopramide were started. 24 h later he presented with a sudden and complete right-sided cerebral hemisphere deficit (National Institute of Health Stroke Scale [NIHSS] score of 18), without seizures, fever or other clinical features, and with a blood pressure of 146/93 mmHg. Code Stroke was activated, ECG, brain CT scan and transcranial Doppler were normal and intravenous thrombolysis was decided upon. There was no improvement after 30 min, and a CT angiography was performed showing subtle narrowing of the entire right circulation, and stenoses in several branches of the right middle cerebral artery, making it impossible to rule out a distal vessel occlusion. Rescue therapy with mechanical thrombectomy was proposed, but cerebral angiography showed several segments with stenosis without occlusion in multiple arteries of the right carotid circulation, so no therapeutic procedure was finally realized. There was no improvement after 24 h, and the patient then developed a rapid progressive encephalopathy accompanied by visual hallucinations, ataxia, multidirectional nystagmus and ophthalmoparesis, symptoms in keeping with WE. Brain MRI was unremarkable , with no ischemic areas or other abnormalities. Further complete blood tests were conducted, and magnesium levels were found to be below the level of detection (<0.5 mg/dL, normal 1.5–2.5), mild hypocalcaemia (6.6 mg/dL) and hypophosphatemia (1.9 mg/dL) were also observed. Diuretics, omeprazole and dextrose were stopped, intravenous ondansetron controlled the vomiting, and aggressive intravenous magnesium replacement, saline and empirical thiamine were commenced, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit to control potential cardiac arrhythmias. Blood tests after 24 h showed almost normal calcium levels (8.5 mg/dL) and a mild hypomagnesemia persisting (1.3 mg/dL). In subsequent blood tests all ions were always in normal ranges. No cardiac abnormalities were apparent, and following analytical recovery the patient started to improve and within 48 h the focal symptoms disappeared, and WE was completely resolved within two weeks. CT angiography carried out 7 days after the beginning of symptom onset showed resolution of the arterial changes. Subsequent studies excluded renal tubular diseases (normal magnesium and other ions in 24–hour urine), endocrine disorders (PTH and 25-hydroxy vitamin D normal) and in successive neuroimaging controls no new abnormalities were found. The patient remains neurologically asymptomatic.