A 60-year-old Chinese male patient complaining of abdominal pain for >3 days and vomiting for >2 days was admitted to our hospital in February 2022. Three days prior, the patient had experienced abdominal distension and discomfort in the right lower quadrant, relieved by eating. The pain recurred 1 day later and was accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and constipation. The patient was admitted with a primary working impression of intestinal obstruction. He had diarrhea for more than 6 years, passing loose stools twice a day on average. The patient also had medical history of syphilis. The patient had been using Chinese herbal medicine, specifically Zhizhonghe Cortex acanthopanacis wine, for more than 20 years at a dose of 300 g per day. He had an unremarkable family history. On examination, the patient had a distended abdomen with tenderness at the right lower quadrant and no rebound pain. Laboratory examination showed a peripheral white blood cell count of 13.4 × 109/L and a C-reactive protein level of 194.8 mg/L. Computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed atherosclerotic changes with mild luminal stenosis in the lower segment of the abdominal aorta, left and right common iliac arteries, and left and right internal iliac arteries . Extensive calcification of the ascending and transverse colonic venous networks was observed. The bowel wall was edematous and thickened, and small bowel obstruction was observed . Based on these findings, IMP was considered.
On admission, the patient received symptomatic and supportive treatment, consisting of fasting, gastrointestinal decompression, acid inhibition, gastric protection, fluid replacement, parenteral nutrition, and anti-infection treatment with 2 g of cefotaxime sodium every 8 h. After 10 days of conservative treatment, no significant improvement in the patient's symptoms was noted. Abdominal CT revealed intestinal wall swelling with encapsulated effusion in the paracolic gutter of the adjacent fat colon. These findings suggested intestinal perforation, which was an indication for surgery.
After excluding contraindications to the procedure, laparoscopic exploration was performed on February 25. Intraoperatively, the ascending and descending colon tubes were violaceous, and poor peristalsis was noted. The intestinal wall of the ascending colon was necrotic, thin, and densely adherent to the lateral peritoneum, forming a pus cavity. There were no palpable masses in the intra-abdominal wall, enlarged lymph nodes at the mesenteric root, or ascites in the abdominal cavity. Given the difficulty of separating the ileocecal region, laparotomy with subtotal colectomy and ileostomy were performed. IMP was confirmed by postoperative pathological findings (, ).
Postoperatively, the patient continued receiving cefotaxime sodium for protection against infections, supplemented by hemostatic and analgesic incision dressing change and other supportive means of treatment. The patient fully recovered and was discharged on March 24.