The patient is a four year-old female who presented at age 23 months to the Medical Genetics clinic with global developmental delays of unknown cause. She was born to a 29-year-old gravida IV, para III mother (x1 spontaneous abortion) and a 36-year-old father, both of Mexican ethnic background. At three months gestation her mother had a cholecystectomy and received morphine. At full term gestation, the patient was born by normal spontaneous vaginal delivery with no complications and was discharged the next day. Her birth weight was 7 lbs and 9 ounces (50th-75th percentile) and birth length was 21 inches (90th percentile).
The parents report that her delays in development were first noticed around age five months. At age nine months, the infant was diagnosed with global developmental delay and hypotonia. She began to crawl at 12 months and to sit on her own at 15 months. At the age of 22 months, neurological and formal developmental assessments were conducted at the Stramski Children’s Developmental Center in Long Beach, CA. The patient was assessed using the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID III) and the relative chronological ages for the following developmental domains were as follows: cognitive (11 months), receptive language (3 months), expressive language (6 months), fine motor (15 months), and gross motor (11 months). The patient did not meet the diagnostic criteria for autism.
At age 23 months old, she was evaluated in the Medical Genetics clinic (MVZ and JS). Physical examination showed that the patient had wide eye fissures, down turned corners of the lips, full cheeks, temporal narrowing, gaps between her teeth and long eyelashes. Her fingers were tapered with a hypoplastic distal crease of her left index finger, and she wore corrective lenses for myopia. She had limited speech and mild central hypotonia. Detailed pedigree analysis showed that she has healthy parents, two older siblings (a 14-year-old maternal half-brother and a 3-1/2-year-old full sister), and two paternal first cousins with autism and Asperger syndrome. There was no known consanguinity.
At the age of 31 months, follow-up development assessment by HELP Strands tests suggested global delays. The age equivalence was determined in the following skill domains: cognition (11–16 months), receptive language (8–13 months), expressive language/communication (6–9 months), gross motor (13–15 months), fine motor (13–16 months), social emotional (9–12 months), and self health (12–17 months). She was re-tested using BSID III and exhibited global development delays in both cognitive (percentile rank= 1) and language abilities (percentile rank= 0.1). At 31 months her relative chronological ages for the following developmental domains were as follows: cognitive (18 months), receptive language (9 months), expressive language (9 months), fine motor (20 months), gross motor (15 months).
Additional clinical evaluations included a normal electroencephalogram and brain MRI studies at age 31 months, normal electrocardiogram and echocardiography studies at age 3 years 5 months, and normal bone contour and density by radiographical skeletal survey at age 3 years 6 months.
At her last follow-up clinic visit at age 4 years-9-months old, the patient is making progress and no history of seizures or regression. Her parents report that recently she has displayed a greater sense of understanding when others communicate with her. She also points and uses her hands to communicate when she wants something. She has mild muscular hypotonia and her growth parameters are normal for her age.
To investigate a genetic cause for the patient’s global developmental delays, blood chromosome analysis, DNA analysis for Fragile X syndrome, and Clarisure BAC array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) studies were performed at Quest Diagnostics (San Juan Capistrano, CA). Initial biochemical laboratory studies included quantitative serum lactate, pyruvate and creatine phosphokinase (CPK), quantitative urine organic acids and plasma amino acids at St. Louis University Metabolic Screening Lab (St. Louis, MO). Urine biochemical studies for mucopolysaccharides (MPS) were performed at Quest Diagnostics (San Juan Capistrano, CA) and the Greenwood Genetic Center (Greenwood, South Carolina). IDS enzymatic assay and X-inactivation study of blood samples were performed by the Greenwood Genetic Center. The androgen receptor locus (HUMARA) at Xq12 was used to study X-inactivation . The ratio of active to inactive X chromosome was determined by PCR analysis examining DNA methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme sites near the polymorphic CAG repeat in first exon of HUMARA. Molecular studies for the patient’s parents included Fragile X PCR and Southern Blot analysis and Oligonucleotide SNP array studies and were performed by Quest Diagnostics (San Juan Capistrano, CA). Details of the BAC and Oligonucleotide SNP arrays are available at .
Chromosome and DNA studies found an abnormal karyotype with a deletion on the X chromosome. Fragile X PCR revealed only one unmethylated FMR1 allele within the normal size range (~30 CGG repeats), and Southern Blot analysis confirmed a deletion of the FMR1 region on one X chromosome. BAC array showed a ~10.6 megabase deletion at Xq27.3q28 (144,270,614-154,845,961 bp) encompassed within BAC clones CTD-3109C8 to CTD-2341N11 . This deletion resulted in hemizygosity for 113 RefSeq genes including the FMR1 and iduronate 2-sulfatase (IDS) genes which are associated with Fragile X syndrome (FXS) and Hunter syndrome, respectively . OMIM disease-associated genes within the deletion region included: FMR1, AFF2 (FMR2), IDS, MAMLD1, MTM1, NSDHL, ATP2B3, FAM58A, SLC6A8, ABCD1, L1CAM, AVPR2, NAA10, HCFC1, MECP2, OPN1LW, OPN1MW, FLNA, EMD, RPL10, TAZ, GDI1, G6PD, IKBKG (NEMO), DKC1, F8, RAB39B, CLIC2, and TMLHE.
Parental FMR1 PCR and Southern Blot analysis revealed ~30 and 31 repeats for the mother and ~31 repeats for the father. Oligonucleotide SNP arrays were normal for both parents. These findings indicate that the deletion was a de novo event .
Normal results were obtained for serum lactate, pyruvate and creatine phosphokinase (CPK), quantitative urine organic acids and plasma amino acids. Initial quantitative urine analysis found elevated levels of mucopolysaccharides (17.5 mg/mmol creatinine; reference range= <16.0 mg mg/mmol creatinine) at age 3 years-old. However, repeat urine studies at age 3 years 10 months-old found normal quantitative (6.97, normal less than 16) and qualitative urine MPS studies.
The peripheral blood samples tested normal for IDS activity (808 nmol 4MU released/hr/ml plasma; normal range= 182–950 4MU released/hr/ml plasma). The HUMARA X-inactivation studies showed two alleles with PCR lengths of 287 and 299 base pairs that correspond to CAG repeat lengths of 22 and 26 repeats, respectively. Methylation analysis showed that the 287 PCR fragment (22 repeats) was methylated corresponding to an X-inactivation ratio of 100:0, indicating highly skewed X-inactivation. Because IDS is found within the deletion region and we assume that our patient only has one functional copy of the gene, then the functioning IDS gene must be on the preferentially active X chromosome and the deletion region must be on the inactive X chromosome. Therefore, we concluded that the X chromosome with the deletion region was preferentially inactivated .