A 39-year-old white American man with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and major depressive disorder presented to our facility after being transferred from another facility following an attempted suicide. He presented to our intensive care unit; he was intubated due to respiratory distress and hypoxic-anoxic brain injury, secondary to complications of sharp foreign object ingestion as a means of suicide attempt. According to collateral information retrieved from the sending facility, he was seen aspirating blood while undergoing esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) thus requiring emergency intubation. On admission to our facility, an abdominal X-ray showed no evidence of foreign object ingestion. Another EGD was performed at our facility to investigate upper gastric bleeding which revealed a 2 cm ulcer at the base of his esophagus, which was cauterized resulting in control of the hemorrhage. An abdominal axial computed tomography (CT) scan performed on hospital day 18 showed evidence of a foreign object in his descending colon which was later expulsed via bowel movement on day 20. Per transfer records received at our facility, medications included amlodipine 5 mg orally daily, simvastatin 10 mg orally daily, gemfibrozil 600 mg orally twice a day, and niacin 500 mg daily. According to the history obtained from members of his family, there were no reported medication allergies and no past non-prescribed substance use history.
Within hours of admission to our intensive care unit, his mental status progressively declined due to hypoxic-anoxic brain injury reaching a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 6. On physical examination there was no eye opening response, no verbal response, and he only merely withdrew from painful stimuli. There was neither decorticate nor decerebrate posturing at the time of examination. Lung auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds in bilateral lung bases. His abdomen was distended, obese, with decreased bowel sounds in all four quadrants and tympanic to percussion. His white blood cell (WBC) count was elevated at 14.9 (103/uL), with 83.6 % neutrophil predominance. A chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion. A sputum culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumonia. His clinical picture was consistent with aspiration pneumonitis with severe hypoxia which later decompensated to ventilator-associated pneumonia with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) pneumonia (as seen on sputum culture), which thus made him ventilator dependent due to decreased respiratory drive. His treatment was a combination of levofloxacin 750 mg administered intravenously daily, piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 mg every 6 hours, and vancomycin 1 gram daily. On day 8, a maximum core temperature (Tmax) of 39.6 °C (103.3 °F) was recorded rectally. He had no motor response to painful stimuli, no eye opening, nor verbal response despite being off all sedating agents. His blood culture at this time was positive for Candida albicans and, as a result, micafungin 100 mg administered intravenously daily was initiated. While on this regimen, on day 9, a temperature of 41.6 °C (106.9 °F) was recorded with a GCS of 3. Acetaminophen 650 mg was administered rectally; cooling blankets and multiple ice packs were applied to his groin, axillae, and neck regions resulting in a decrease in his body temperature to 37.8 °C (100.1 °F) within 8 hours of intervention. He continued to have fever on a daily basis with no improvement in cognitive functioning as he remained comatose. On hospital day 11, he had become flaccid and was considered to be in a vegetative state as evidenced by an electroencephalogram (EEG) study, which showed diffuse slowing consistent with encephalopathy with very poor prognosis. His WBC count increased to 27.9 (103/uL) and he remained in a state of septicemia. Due to multiple failed attempts to wean him off the ventilator, a tracheostomy was performed on day 14 and a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube was placed on day 17. Given his neurological decline, a lumbar puncture was considered for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. However, he was already on broad spectrum antibiotics, therefore, the benefits from CSF analysis would have been undermined by antibiotic coverage.
After concerted deliberations over the trial of levetiracetam as a neuroprotective and antiepileptic agent, the decision was made on day 29 to administer 500 mg of the medication via a PEG tube at bedtime. Within 48 hours of administration, he was awake and alert but remained disoriented to person, place, and time. His GCS improved from 3 to 14 and he was able to respond to painful stimuli from his lower extremities up to his knees. Amantadine 50 mg/ml via a PEG tube every morning was started for neurocognitive stimulation as he was noted to have decreased cognitive speed measured grossly during conversation evidenced by increased latency of response when questioned. On hospital day 38 (9 days after levetiracetam 500 mg initiation), he was able to communicate verbally, although with difficulties with phonation even with a Passy-Muir valve. There was orientation to person and place but not to time. His body temperature was 37.3 °C (99.1 °F) without antipyretic agents, while his WBC remained elevated at 20.9 (103/uL) showing persistence of infection.
The finding of a neurological examination was consistent with critical illness polyneuropathy, as he had no motor function below the clavicle after surviving the profound neurological impairment induced by hyperpyrexia. His pain sensation remained intact, he responded to sharp and dull touch sensations, and he responded to vibrations. He was noted to have decreased cognitive speed; therefore, he required neurocognitive stimulation. Amantadine was initiated on day 34, resulting in improved cognitive functioning with noted increased cognitive speed during conversation. Amantadine was increased to 100 mg/ml via a PEG tube for enhancement of neuroprotection on day 41.
He was weaned off a ventilator, then transferred to our medical floor and eventually discharged. Extensive rehabilitation was recommended for neuromusculoskeletal strengthening in all his extremities. A CT scan showed diffuse brain atrophy disproportionate to his chronological age; thus consistent with hypoxic ischemic brain injury.
Following cognitive recovery, he was awake, alert, and oriented to time, place, person, and situation. He remained with a motor strength of 0/5 bilaterally in upper and lower extremities proximally and distally, secondary to critical illness polyneuropathy; however, he had intact temperature and pain sensation to all modalities in the upper and lower extremities, chest, abdomen, and face. He was seen on follow-up evaluation 6 months following initial encounter and he remained cognitively intact.