A 43-year-old Chinese woman, presented with slowly progressive proximal limb weakness for 6 months in 2013. The patient had no family history of cardiomyopathy or sudden cardiac death. Physical examinations showed symmetrically proximal limb weakness (manual muscle testing (MMT) score: 4/5]. Laboratory examinations disclosed increased serum creatine kinase (CK) level (711 U/L; normal range 24–170) and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) levels (263 U/L; normal range 135–214). Cardiac involvement was documented at elevated troponin levels (0.091 ng/ml; normal range < 0.028). The panel of myositis-associated autoantibodies and myositis-specific autoantibodies screened for this patients included anti-Mi-2α, anti-Mi-2β, anti-TIF1γ, anti-MDA5, anti-NXP2, anti-SAE1, anti-Ku, anti-PM-Scl100, anti-PM-Scl75, anti-Jo-1, anti-SRP, anti-PL-7, anti-PL-12, anti-EJ, anti-OJ, anti-Ro-52, and anti-cN-1A antibodies. In addition, anti-ribonuclear protein, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, anti-dsDNA antibodies and connective tissue disease-related factors were also screened. The determination for anti-SRP antibodies (++), anti-MDA5 antibodies (+), and anti-Ro-52 antibodies (+++) were positive. Electrocardiogram was normal except for frequent ventricular extrasystoles. No abnormalities were detected at echocardiography. Electromyography displayed myogenic damage. The biopsied sample from the right quadriceps revealed scattered myofiber atrophy and necrosis with scarce lymphocytic inflammation . Thus, the diagnosis of NAM with positive anti-SRP-antibodies and anti-MAD5-antibodies was made, then she was initially treated with oral prednisone at 40 mg/day. Two months later, tacrolimus at 3 mg per day was added because no improvement of the muscle weakness was achieved. The combination therapy of oral prednisone at 10 mg per day and tacrolimus 3 mg per day yielded a good recovery of muscle weakness. Unfortunately, she experienced a severe relapse in 2016 after she discontinued tacrolimus for half a year because she felt normal. She frequently suffered from shortness of breath after exercises since 2016.The limb muscle strength was scored at 3/5 on MMT. Serum CK and LDH levels were elevated to 1875 U/L (normal range 24–170) and 334 U/L (normal range 135–214) respectively. Electrocardiogram showed the left anterior fascicular block and multifocal ventricular premature beats . Serum anti-SRP (++), anti-Ro-52 (+++) and anti-MDA5 (+) antibodies remained all positive. Serum N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) and creatine kinase-MB isoenzyme (CK-MB) sharply increased [4526 pg/ml and 15.2 ng/ml respectively; normal < 18.4 (NT-proBNP), normal range 0–5(CKMB)]. Cardiac ultrasonography detected left ventricular enlargement and reduced deceased left ventricular ejection fraction (48%) . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed bilateral lobar emphysema, heart enlargement, and pulmonary artery enlargement. Oral methotrexate at 10 mg per week in combination with oral prednisone 10 mg per day led to a considerable remission again without noticeable side effects months later.
From 2016 to 2019, her muscle strength almost returned to a normal range, but she occasionally complained of palpitation, chest tightness and shortness of breath. In 2019, the functional class evaluated using 6MWT was approximately 100 m and NYHA class was IV. The serum CK level was normal, yet the NT-proBNP and CK-MB levels remained elevated [up to 11142 pg/ml and 7.46 ng/ml respectively, normal < 18.4(NT-proBNP), normal range 0–5(CKMB)]. Echocardiography showed that significant biventricular enlargement, increased indirect signs of elevated filling pressures (mean E/e ratio 32), a severely reduced LVEF of 25% in absence of significant valvopathies, and an estimated pulmonary artery pressure of 36 mmHg . The heart enlargement was evident on chest X-ray and chest CT . The patient had no symptoms of myocardial ischemia and coronary angiography was normal. Then the diagnose of dilated cardiomyopathy (end-stage) was made. In May 2019, the patient underwent heart transplantation because of the persistent invaliding symptomatology despite an optimized medical therapy. Currently, tacrolimus at 2 mg a day and 10 mg prednisone a day were employed to prevent transplant rejection and the relapses of myopathy. The symptoms of heart failure have disappeared for months since the transplant operation.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining and Masson staining of biopsied ventricular tissues showed that disarranged myofibrils, atrophic myofibers with remarkable interstitial fibrosis and the absence of inflammatory infiltration. The expression polyubiquitin-binding protein p62/SQSTM1 was observed in many cardiac myofibers . LC3, microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B light chain, merely positively stained few cardiomyocytes . The immunohistochemistry analysis also showed positive staining of cleaved-caspase 3 in a few atrophic cardiomyocytes .