A 38-year-old male presented to our emergency department with progressively worsening dyspnea for several weeks. He had no chest pain or fevers. There was no significant social or travel history. He presented with a heart rate of 144 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 122/82 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute and an oxygen saturation of 86% on room air. Physical findings showed jugular venous distention, an apically displaced maximal impulse, no right ventricular heave, an irregularly irregular fast rhythm, bibasilar lung rales, and pedal edema. There were no significant murmurs or clicks appreciated. Initial 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated AF without any ischemia or Q waves, a normal axis with low voltage ).
His history is notable for hypoplasia of the left lung (diagnosed incidentally during childhood), hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity (Body Mass Index 38.6 Kg/m2), AF with two prior hospitalizations at an outside facility, as well as failed electrical cardioversion. He also had a reported myocardial infarction; however, this was thought to be due to demand ischemia from AF. Hence, an ischemic evaluation was not performed. He had a prior reported echocardiogram with preserved left ventricular systolic function without any reported valvular abnormalities.
Laboratory investigations were significant for a normal cardiac peak Troponin I (less than 0.031 ng/mL) and thyroid-stimulating hormone, and a brain natriuretic peptide of 819.6 pg/ml (normal less than 101.0 pg/mL). His chest x-ray is shown below ). An echocardiogram showed a moderately dilated left ventricle, with an ejection fraction between 20–25%, mildly reduced right ventricular systolic function, suspicion for a bicuspid aortic valve with fusion of the left and non-coronary leaflets with no significant mitral regurgitation. Cardiac catheterization revealed patent coronary arteries and a torturous fistula from the proximal right coronary artery to the pulmonary artery ). Swan-Ganz catheterization is resulted in . Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed electively, 1 month later .
In-hospital management included guideline-directed therapy for AF and decompensated heart failure. He was scheduled to undergo transesophageal echocardiographic guided electrical cardioversion, however, this was deferred due to the presence of a left atrial appendage thrombus (image not shown). After several weeks of uninterrupted anticoagulation, he underwent successful atrial fibrillation ablation and pulmonary vein isolation with restoration to sinus rhythm. He has since returned to work with improved symptoms.