We present the case of a 51-year-old Caucasian woman with a four-year history of recurrent, right-sided facial pain, in the distribution of all three branches of the trigeminal nerve. These episodes occurred on average two to three times per week and were characterised by brief episodes of unilateral right-sided sharp lancinating pain, lasting on average less than one minute and predominantly affecting the maxillary and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve, although occasionally involving all three branches. Attacks were typically triggered by such actions as washing her face or smiling. There were no other features associated with these attacks; in particular there were no associated headaches or visual disturbance. She had no prior history of headache and there was no family history of trigeminal neuralgia. Her neurological and dental examinations, a computed axial tomography scan of brain and sinuses, and routine blood tests were all normal.
The patient initially commenced on gabapentin (up to 1200 mg daily) to which carbamazepine (up to 800 mg daily) was later added without any significant benefit. Following a neurosurgical assessment, she underwent decompression of her right trigeminal nerve, nine months after the initial onset of her symptoms. Unfortunately, her symptoms worsened following this and she was referred for radiofrequency ablation 14 months after the decompressive surgery. This resulted in some permanent numbness in her right infra-orbital area but no pain relief. She was then referred to a specialist pain clinic and initially treated with a combination of dothiepin (75 mg daily), pregabalin (600 mg daily) and numesulide (200 mg daily). This regime resulted in a transient improvement in her symptoms. At this stage, oxycodone 10 mg daily was added; a treatment escalation that her general practitioner (GP) had reservations about. Based on previous experience using sumatriptan for abdominal pain , a trial of oral sumatriptan 50 mg was suggested, to be taken at the onset of facial pain. This resulted in effective pain relief, and propranolol to a dose of 160 mg daily was added. This reduced the frequency of her facial pain from two to three episodes per week to one every two weeks. Numesulide, dothiepin and pregabalin were safely withdrawn.