A 66-year-old Han Chinese man consulted our hospital because of a right lumbar skin lesion with low back pain lasting more than 2 months. He had undergone percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) in his right kidney 8 years ago and 3 months ago, respectively, and he had a history of diabetes for more than 10 years. No gross hematuria was observed. His physical examination revealed that he had a palpable mass about 6.0 cm × 5.0 cm in size at the posterior axillary line in the right low back with skin ulceration 3 mm in diameter and exudation on it. The patient stated that the ulcerative skin was located at the previous PCNL site.
Laboratory investigation revealed that the patient’s white blood cell count and serum creatinine level were 11,260/μl and 1.8 mg/dl, respectively. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed right kidney stones with severe hydronephrosis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hydronephrosis of the right kidney and plaque-like abnormal signal in the middle portion of the right kidney, low signal on T1-weighted imaging, high signal on fat-suppressed T2-weighted imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging, and a significantly decreased apparent diffusion coefficient value. The maximum size of the abnormal signal was 4.8 × 4.3 cm . Two enlarged lymph nodes with the maximum dimension of 4.8 × 3.9 cm were observed on the right of the aorta in the retroperitoneum. A Tc-99m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid renal scan demonstrated that the patient’s estimated glomerular filtration rate was 7.31 ml/min/1.73 in the right kidney and 30.69 ml/min/1.73 in the left, respectively. There was no evidence of distant metastasis. The clinical stage of the patient was considered to be from cT4N1M0 to cT4N2M0.
The patient underwent a right open simple nephrectomy under general anesthesia. During surgery, a huge, distended, and saclike kidney measuring 25.0 × 18.0 × 18.0 cm without grossly visible renal tissue was observed to adhere tightly to the adjacent tissue, including the retroperitoneum, psoas muscles, and diaphragm. The sinus tract formation between the ulcerative skin in the right low back and the middle portion of the right kidney could be found. The distended kidney could not be excised entirely for tight adhesion. The lymph nodes adhering to the aorta also could not be resected; only the right upper ureter could be partially resected. The resected specimen was a fragment of renal tissue. Pathological examination revealed moderately differentiated renal SCC with invasion of the renal parenchyma and perirenal adipose tissue . The patient experienced skin lesion healing and resolution of back pain after surgery. The patient accepted and understood the condition, but he developed local recurrence in the first month of follow-up and was treated with radiotherapy. Radiotherapy was delivered using three-dimensional conformal therapy with a dose of 50 Gy. No adjuvant chemotherapy was given. The patient died 3 months postoperatively.