A 79-year-old woman with hyperlipidaemia and diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department with dyspnoea and orthopnoea for 2 days due to fluid overload. It was ascertained that the patient had undergone dual chamber pacemaker implantation due to complete atrioventricular block 1 week prior to her hospitalization. The patient’s vital signs were recorded as follows: blood pressure of 110/75 mmHg, heart rate of 124 beats per minute with regular rhythm, respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, body temperature of 36.7°C, and oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry of 82% while breathing room air. On physical examination, the patient had signs of pulmonary congestion, and cardiovascular auscultation revealed a grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur at the apex. The transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction ranging from 30% to 35%, along with a moderate level of mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation. The subcostal view revealed the presence of an enlarged inferior vena cava measuring 22 mm in diameter, with no indications of respiratory collapse. Upon admission, laboratory results indicated an increase in brain natriuretic peptide levels to 3148 pg/mL (0–100 pg/mL), as well as elevated levels of aspartate transferase (AST) at 335 U/L (5–34 U/L), alanine transferase (ALT) at 250 U/L (10–49 U/L), blood urea nitrogen at 99 mg/dL (10–49 mg/dL), and creatinine (Cr) at 1.3 mg/dL (0.5–1.3 mg/dL). Additionally, a reduced level of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was observed at 39 mL/min/1.73 m2. Arterial blood gas revealed respiratory and lactic acidosis with pH: 7.18 (7.35–7.45), pCO2: 68 mmHg (32–48 mmHg), pO2: 56 mmHg (83–108 mmHg), and lactate: 3.15 mmol/L (0–2 mmol/L). The remaining results of the urine and laboratory analyses were found to be within the normal range. Green-coloured urine was observed passing through the Foley catheter, as depicted in . Since the patient had no history of HF with reduced ejection fraction, the patient was hospitalized in the coronary care unit for acute decompensated HF caused by possible pacemaker-induced cardiomyopathy and green discoloration of the urine. At follow-up, the probable cause of the green discoloration of the urine was investigated. The patient had a normal serum level of total bilirubin, showed no indication of a Pseudomonas infection and was taking no medication that can make green urine. As the medical history was being carefully examined, 1 h following the dual chamber pacemaker implantation, a rapid endotracheal entubation was performed at another hospital while the patient was under sedation with propofol, and a dosage of 100 mg (one vial) of MB was administered as a treatment for methaemoglobinaemia, which was caused by prilocaine hydrochloride. The patient stated that the green urine continued for 7 days. Hence, a diagnosis of MB and propofol-induced green-hued urine was made. Despite the administration of 40 mg of furosemide diuretic therapy for the purpose of alleviating congestion, the resulting diuresis was found to be ineffective, as evidenced by a spot urine Na+ level of 16 mEq/L at 2 h. For diuretic resistance, the furosemide dose was doubled, and indapamide 2.5 mg was added as a diuretic treatment. Following a period of 2 days, the administration of combined diuretic therapy (CDT) involving furosemide and indapamide was observed to yield superior decongestion outcomes while concurrently improving both renal and liver function. The patient’s GFR exhibited a gradual increase, while the levels of AST and ALT showed a gradual decrease following the administration of CDT and conventional medical therapy for HF. Additionally, the patient’s urine discoloration changed from a colour of grass-green to light green and subsequently to yellow . The patient’s urine colour completely returned to normal after 12 days of treatment. The patient was sent home with conventional medical treatment for HF. According to the response of guideline-directed medical therapy for HF, we planned to decide whether the patient should undergo cardiac resynchronization therapy upgrade in the future for newly diagnosed heart failure with reduced ejection fraction.