A Chinese 28-year-old female, previously a healthy 49 kg, Gravida 2 Para 0 at 21 weeks gestation, was diagnosed with liver dysfunction during a routine health checkup . She was referred to our institution due to suspected hepatitis B (HB). Detailed examination revealed IgM anti-HBc was negative. However, excess levels of HBe-antigen (1017.6 S/CO), HBs-antigen (> 250 S/CO), and HB virus DNA (> 9.0 Logcopies/mL) indicated she suffered from CHB. HB virus genotype was proved B. Intravenous monoammonium glycyrrhizinate therapy, started at 25 weeks gestation, was effective and decreased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels to within normal range. However, at 35 weeks and 4 days gestation, the patient required hospitalization when she presented severe malaise with elevated transaminase levels and coagulopathy . She was diagnosed with acute exacerbation of CHB and was started on 300 mg of oral tenofovir (300 mg, daily) and intravenous vitamin K (20 mg, daily). The next morning, she presented systemic edema. The following afternoon she complained of abdominal pain and nausea. Transabdominal ultrasonography showed ascites and a fatty liver, suggesting AFLP. At this time, she showed blood pressure of 117/68 mmHg, pulse of 86 beats/min, and body temperature of 36.7 °C. Considering the progressive somnolence and sufficient gestational age without cervical dilatation, emergency cesarean section was selected, before referral to anesthesiologists for a detailed preoperative evaluation. The Swansea Criteria, which defines AFLP at 6 points or more [, , ], scored at least 7 points at this time (abdominal pain, elevated bilirubin, ascites or bright liver on ultrasound scan, elevated transaminase, elevated ammonia, coagulopathy, and vomiting were positive; hypoglycemia, elevated uric acid, and liver biopsy were not examined; polydipsia or polyuria, encephalopathy, leukocytosis, and renal impairment were negative). To control coagulopathy, 24 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and 3000 units of antithrombin formula were administrated according to the obstetricians’ estimations. Additionally, 20 units of platelet concentrate (PC) were given due to severe thrombocytopenia . The patient’s vital signs following preoperative blood transfusions were blood pressure of 97/46 mmHg, pulse rate of 86 beats/min, body temperature of 36.0 °C, and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 97% in room air. The patient was classified as American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status Class 3E. The fetus showed reassuring status. In consideration of the severe coagulopathy as well as possible leukoencephalopathy, we avoided using neuraxial block despite the massive preoperative transfusion.
Rapid sequence induction with thiopental 250 mg, fentanyl 100 μg, and suxamethonium 50 mg was selected. The trachea was easily intubated. General anesthesia was maintained with 65% nitrous oxide and 1.0% sevoflurane until delivery. Though fluid-warming devices and a forced-air warmer were prepared, patient rectal temperature dropped to 34.8 °C after induction. A female infant of 2773 g with good APGAR scores (8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively) was delivered 7 min after anesthesia induction. The mother showed hypoglycemia of 65 mg/dL, which was corrected by 10 g of dextrose. Despite appropriate uterine contraction, additional transfusion was required to maintain hemostasis during the operation. Four units of packed red blood cell (RBC), 5 bags of cryoprecipitate, 10 units of PC, and 800 mL normal saline were administered on the intraoperative anesthesiologist’s decision. Estimated blood loss, ascites, amniotic fluid, and urine output were 2020 mL, 300 mL, 450 mL, and 650 mL, respectively. The total duration of surgery was 69 min, and anesthesia time was 81 min. Prolonged hypothermia was recorded as her rectal temperature had dropped to 34.3 °C by the end of the surgery.
After cesarean section, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with tracheal intubation. Vaginal hemorrhage persisted for 12 h, despite transfusion of 18 units of packed RBCs 16 units of FFP and 10 units of PC. Eventually, active hemorrhage was controlled by uterine artery embolization. She was extubated on postoperative day (POD) 2 and was well orientated with stable vital status. At one point, liver transplantation was planned, due to that the Model for End-stage Liver Damage score for acute disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and liver dysfunction on POD 4 was 24 points; however, 4 days of therapeutic plasma exchange (POD 3–6) and 6 days of hemodiafiltration (POD 3–8) were highly effective. Glycerin fructose was used for 9 days (on POD 2–10) because of cerebral edema, but she showed no neurological sequelae. Neither infection, sepsis, major respiratory complications, nor pancreatitis was remarked. Liver biopsy was not performed in consideration of coagulopathy. The patient was discharged from ICU and hospital on POD 13 and 64, respectively. HB virus vaccination and HB immunoglobulin given at birth prevented vertical transmission of HB, and the infant did not show any developmental delay. The infant was discharged from the hospital on postpartum day 12. For 1-year follow-up after discharge, ALT level of the patient has been kept in normal range and her HBV-DNA level as less than 3.0 Logcopies/mL .