A 16 year old male was brought to our attention following concerns by his GP of a strong family history of renal disease. He is a fit and healthy teenager who has had no significant health problems in the past. In the family the patient’s mother had been diagnosed three years previously with renal failure requiring peritoneal dialysis and subsequent transplantation. She was noted upon further investigation to have a small right kidney on ultrasound. The patient’s maternal aunt was also in established renal failure and in addition to one small kidney on ultrasound suffered with gout. She has two sons aged 18 and 20 years with renal impairment, both with raised uric acid levels, but no evidence of renal hypoplasia. Her daughter has shown no sign of renal disease. Two maternal uncles have not had kidney problems, and neither have maternal grandparents. The patient in our case has an older unaffected brother. None of the family members have undergone a native renal biopsy.
Upon initial examination the patient was noted to appear well. His blood pressure of 122/55 was within normal centile range for his height and age. An ultrasound revealed a small right kidney measuring 8.2 cm which was otherwise unremarkable, as well as a normal sized although slightly echogenic left kidney, measuring 13.0 cm. The bladder and ureters were reported as normal. Initial blood tests revealed an estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 64 ml/min/1.73 m2, although this has since declined . Urinalysis was normal. Uric acid was initially 430 μmol/L, however on repeat testing was raised at 506 μmol/L (normal reference range 200-430 μmol/L). The patient is currently being seen at regular intervals to monitor for deterioration in renal function.
In view of the apparent autosomal dominant transmission of this phenotype, further blood samples from the affected family members were sent to test for uromodulin (UMOD) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1β (HNF1β) mutations, which were negative. The index case was also screened for mutations in the renin (REN) gene and the 2p22.1-p21 region using exome sequencing, however, no pathological variants were found (please see supplementary data for methodology and results).