A 3 year, 11-month-old girl presented to the hospital emergency department where she was diagnosed with a closed, displaced extension (ESF) of the right humerus (type III). The isolated injury was caused when she fell indoors off a sofa at home while playing with her sister. On physical examination, the right elbow area was deformed, swollen, and painful. The right distal radial pulse was absent, but there was normal capillary blood flow to a warm hand. The limited neurologic examination and general examination were normal. Right elbow radiographs showed a comminuted ESF . The upper extremity was splinted with the elbow joint in mild flexion. Eight hours after admission, she underwent a successful closed reduction and crossed percutaneous pin fixation of the fracture. Two unsuccessful attempts were made to reduce and fix the fracture using the standard acute flexion maneuvers and two laterally placed Kirschner 0.62-inch pins. At that point in time, it became clear that the fracture was a multidirectional unstable fracture type, which was caused by a large, displaced fracture fragment from the lateral column of the distal humerus. A different fracture reduction maneuver technique was then used with the arm positioned between the fluoroscopic arms.
The extremity was extended at the elbow joint to approximately 45 degrees of flexion, and longitudinal traction was applied across the fracture with the forearm supinated . Gentle local multidirectional manipulation of the fracture helped improve its alignment. A lateral radiograph was then obtained to confirm fracture reduction by rotating the C-arm of the fluoroscan around the supported and immobilized extremity. A two centimeter incision was made over the medial epicondyle. A hemostat was used to probe the wound down to bone to ensure that the ulnar nerve was not at risk of injury. A Kirschner pin was drilled from the medial epicondyle, and the wire was then used as a joystick to improve the fracture reduction. The pin was advanced across the fracture and through the lateral humeral cortex. A second percutaneous cross-fixing wire was then drilled from the lateral epicondyle while avoiding the broken lateral humeral column. At that point, the fracture fixation was considered stable. A long arm posterior splint was applied to the arm with the elbow joint flexed to 70°. The hand remained warm and with good capillary circulation but with an absent distal radial pulse. The patient was discharged with postoperative instructions on the same day.
The patient's postoperative follow-up was uneventful. At the first 2-week visit, she had the return of a normal radial pulse. A long arm cast replaced the splint. At her 4-week visit, radiographs showed a healing fracture in satisfactory alignment . The anteroposterior radiograph showed the appearance of normal posterior periosteal new bone formation on the lateral side. The patient's pins were removed, and the cast was discontinued. The patient was then lost to follow-up.
She was seen in the clinic again after 5 years. She was asymptomatic and had a full range of bilateral symmetrical elbow motion . Elbow radiographs showed a healed and remodeled fracture with normal bone growth and restoration of the lateral humeral column . Both elbows flexed to 120°. She had 14 degrees of hyperextension in the elbows. She had bilateral carrying angles of 10° valgus. The patient's guardians provided informed consent for this case to be published.