A 28-year-old male was admitted to the First Hospital of Lanzhou University due to jaundice and stomachache on March 8, 2021.
The patient experienced intermittent right upper abdominal distension and pain after eating greasy food for 6 mo before admission, which could be relieved by taking medicine. Symptoms worsened 5 d before admission, including abdominal pain and white clay stools. The local hospital checked for elevated BIL, and an abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed cholecystolithiasis and bile duct dilation. Consequently, the patient was transferred to our hospital. The diagnosis was biliary calculi; therefore, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with sphincterotomy + balloon exploration and lithotomy + biliary stent angioplasty was performed. Postoperative BIL remained high, so the patient was transferred to the Department of Infectious Diseases for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient had no history of past illness.
The patient was a cook without any notable unhealthy habits. He was not exposed to drugs or poisons and did not smoke or drink alcohol. The patient and his family members had no specific history of genetic diseases.
Body mass index 22.13 kg/m2, waist circumference 90 cm and hip circumference 93 cm, severe yellow staining of skin and mucous membranes, abdominal tenderness, Murphy’s sign positive, liver not palpable and spleen palpable three fingers under the costal.
Hemoglobin (Hb) was 110 g/L, aspartate aminotransferase was 34 U/L, alanine aminotransferase was 70 U/L, TBIL was 1618 μmol/L, direct BIL (DBIL) was 998 μmol/L, and indirect BIL (IBIL) was 828 μmol/L. The cause of jaundice was actively investigated. The results of the infection index (hepatitis virus, non-heparophilic viruses, bacteria, fungi, and so on), immunological indicators, and iron and copper metabolism index were not obviously abnormal. Drugs, alcohol, parasites, and other factors were also excluded. Liver biopsy showed hepatic lobule structural disorder, widened portal area, fibrous tissue hyperplasia, infiltration of inflammatory cells dominated by lymphocytes, bile duct hyperplasia, punctate necrosis of some hepatocytes, and biliary pigment deposition in the cytoplasm of some cells. Immunohistochemical and specific staining results included net staining (indicating fibrosis in portal area), CK19 (small bile ducts 2+), CD45 (inflammatory cells 2+), CD38 (individual cells 1+), ki67 (18%), GPC -3(-), Masson’s trichrome stain (fibrosis in portal area), and CD34 (vascular 2+). The conclusion from the liver biopsy and staining was that the morphology was consistent with chronic inflammation with liver cholestasis and a tendency of liver cirrhosis (G2S2) (as shown in Figure ).
In terms of hemolytic jaundice, the blood smear showed that the size of red blood cells was slightly different from normal, the filling was acceptable, no abnormal red blood cells were detected, and platelets were scattered and clustered; 39.0% of the blood cells were erythroid, predominantly middle and late immature erythrocytes, with no abnormal morphology, polychromatic erythrocytes were clearly visible and were basically the same size as mature erythrocytes, the filling was acceptable. These findings suggested that a diagnosis of proliferative anemia should be considered. Anemia screening assays (direct and indirect anti-human globules, anti-alkali Hb assay, Hb A2 assay, micro Hb electrophoresis, isopropanol, methemoglobin reduction test, G-6-PD fluorescent spot test, denatured globin body, H Inclusion bodies, and red blood cell osmotic fragility test) were negative. Bone marrow puncture considered hyperplastic anemia.
The patient was screened for hereditary liver disease. The detection was performed on an Illumina sequencing platform and the GATK software suite was used for sequencing data analysis. High-throughput sequencing of a liver panel showed that on chromosome 14 (chr14: 65260580), the SPTB gene in exon 14 had a mutation of cytosine to thymine at nucleotide 1801, resulting in a glutamine nonsense mutation at amino acid 601 to a stop codon [NM_001355436: exon14: c.1801C>T (p.Q601X)]. The variant that was identified in the high-throughput sequencing was validated by Sanger sequencing. This variant was suspected to cause HS. Parental genetic testing indicated that the variant was not found in the father or mother; in addition, the variant was not detected in the patient’s daughter .
The spleen (length × thickness) was 192 mm × 63 mm. Abdominal MRI + magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography + diffusion-weighted imaging and abdominal CTA were not obviously abnormal.