A 61-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency room with the emergency ambulance in a state of shock. The patient had a severe hypotensive state and the presence of a cloudy sensorium made it impossible to detect an accurate anamnesis in the acute phase of assistance.
In moments of lucidity, the patient presented intense psychomotor agitation. His vital signs were blood pressure 80/50 mmHg, heart rate 112/min, and respiratory rate 22 cycles/min. Urgent blood tests were normal. Objectively right radial pulse asphygmia was present.
Evaluating the health documentation presented at a later time and the interview with relatives, it is clear that the patient was suffering from arterial hypertension, not perfectly adhering to the therapy and controls recommended by clinicians, and had a smoking habit for about 30 years. He had no family history of cardiovascular disease. Eight years earlier, he had undergone aortic endoprosthesis surgery for an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
The basic electrocardiographic trace has, however, immediately oriented toward an aspect of probable dextrocardia. It was confirmed by the X-ray chest, which also shows dilation of the mediastinal shadow . Transthoracic echocardiographic examination revealed a dilatation of the ascending aortic and aortic root with visible intimal flap already present immediately after the sinotubular junction, and the presence of a slight amount of pericardial effusion. The size and contractility of the left ventricle and right sections were normal.
He was rapidly subjected to computed tomography (CT) angiography with evidence of Stanford type A aortic dissection in a situs inversus totalis ; the presence of an endoprosthesis for the abdominal aortic aneurysm (previous implant) was detected . Given the seriousness of the clinical situation also characterized by alternating phases of absent sensory to moments psychomotor agitation, he is subjected to sedation and intubation with assisted ventilation and sent to the reference Cardiac Surgery Centre for emergency intervention.
Immediate cardiac surgery was required to avoid complete rupture of the ascending aorta resulting in cardiac tamponade, shock, and cardiac arrest. The patient was placed in the supine position on the operating table. The lead cardiac surgeon positioned himself on the patient’s left side to have a normal anatomical view of the right-placed aorta.
The scrub nurse and instrument table were to the patient’s right, facing the lead surgeon, and the extracorporeal circulation was to the patient’s left side. After general anesthesia, a longitudinal median sternotomy was performed for thoracic access to the aorta. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established by peripheral cannulation of the femoral artery and central venous cannulation of the right atrium. The patient was cooled down to a temperature of 24°C. Ascending aorta and right-placed hemiarchus have been replaced with an integrated 26 mm tubular prosthesis and repair aortic valve by cusps resuspension was performed , using moderate hypothermic circulatory arrest (9 min). No selective brain perfusion was used due to the rapid circulatory arrest and no postoperative neurological complications occurred. Cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic cross-clamping times were 140 and 78 min, respectively. The cardiac surgery lasted a total of 5 h. The postoperative course was complicated by a complete atrioventricular block which required pacemaker implantation. The subsequent course was uneventful.
The patient underwent cardiorespiratory rehabilitation for a period of two weeks before being discharged.