A 49-year-old woman, a vice principal at a local school with a history of hypertension, was brought by Emergency Medical Services after she collapsed and lost consciousness while giving a graduation speech. Upon Emergency Medical Services arrival, she was found to be in ventricular fibrillation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated; she was intubated and was shocked for the underlying rhythm with return of spontaneous circulation. However, she continued to have ventricular fibrillation en route to the hospital and had to be defibrillated eight times with a return of spontaneous circulation each time. The patient has no documented medical history of palpitations, dyspnea, syncope, or related cardiac conditions. She has no history of alcohol consumption or smoking and denies using any medications or drugs. Furthermore, there is no reported family history of cardiac pathology or sudden cardiac death.
At the presentation, her vitals were stable, and her physical examination was unremarkable. Chest radiograph was negative for acute cardiopulmonary pathology as shown in Figure . Electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with nonspecific ST-segment changes, unchanged from baseline as presented in Figure . Lab studies showed troponin of 0.03 ng/ml (reference range 0–0.04 ng/ml). Urine toxicology was negative. Computed tomography scan of the head was negative for acute intracranial pathology. A Transthoracic Echocardiogram (TTE) was performed, which showed mild left ventricular dilation, ejection fraction (EF) of 31%, and hypokinesis of the basal and mid-ventricular segments compared to apical segments, suggestive of an rTTS as shown in Figure . Her electrolytes, including serum magnesium, potassium and sodium levels, were normal. Her thyroid function test was also normal. She was treated as per ACS protocol with emergency percutaneous coronary intervention. Emergent cardiac catheterization revealed clean coronary arteries. She was transferred to a cardiac ICU and was treated with targeted temperature management for cardiac arrest. She was extubated after a successful extubation trial. Repeat TTE was performed two days later that showed EF of 41–45% with persistent basal hypokinesis. Given cardiac arrest without coronary artery disease, Implantable cardioverter defibrillator was placed, and she was discharged home on guideline-directed medical therapy including metoprolol and valsartan-sacubitril with outpatient cardiology follow-up.
A repeat TTE was performed 6 weeks postdischarge during a follow-up, which showed a normal left ventricular size, wall thickness, and systolic function with an EF of 56–60% and a review of the system was negative for chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitation, and dizziness.