Here we present a case of a rare coronary anomaly in a 47-year-old white man with an unremarkable past medical history who presented with atypical angina in late 2012; he does not have a family history of any heart disease, he is not allergic to anything, and he has never had any cardiac procedure. A physical examination and resting electrocardiogram results were normal, and transthoracic echocardiography showed no wall-motion abnormality and normal global left ventricular systolic function. His biochemical parameters were within normal limits. The treadmill exercise test showed 1-mm down-sloping ST-segment depression in leads V4 to V6. Multidetector computed tomographic angiography was performed to evaluate coronary artery disease and revealed an accessory coronary artery arising from the proximal RCA. It took an intramuscular course between the right ventricular outflow tract in the interventricular septal area to the anterior interventricular sulcus (AIVS), giving off septal perforators that reentered the medial LAD. Both vessels ran after the anastomosis in the AIVS as a single vessel . A coronary angiography was performed to characterize the coronary anomaly and to detect any resultant ischemia. His RCA was dominant, giving origin proximally to an anomalous accessory coronary artery that reentered his medial LAD and ran as a single vessel . The left main artery arose from the left coronary sinus and branched into a proper LAD and a circumflex artery . There was no significant obstructive coronary artery disease. We measured the pressure-derived fractional flow reserve (FFR) to detect ischemia in the distal LAD after the anastomosis of the accessory coronary artery using a 0.014-inch (0.3556 mm) pressure wire (Volcano Corporation) during infusion of increasing doses of dobutamine (5, 10, 20, and 30 μg kg−1 minute−1, each in 5-minute increments). The FFR was >0.95. Thus, this anomaly did not cause ischemia during exercise. It was decided that his chest pain might be musculoskeletal in origin; therefore, he was given non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, after 1 month of follow up visits his pain was gone.