An 80-year-old man was injured in a head-on collision with an oncoming vehicle. He was transported to our hospital by doctor car. During the whole-body evaluation, we diagnosed him with traumatic gastric perforation, right femoral trochanteric fracture (AO 31-A3), right femoral shaft fracture (32-A3), right patellar open fracture (91.1-A1), right tibial plateau open fracture (41-C1), right tibial shaft open fracture (42-A3), right lower leg severe crush wound, right fibula fracture (42-B2), and left distal radius fracture(23-A2) (, ). Hemorrhage from his right lower leg wound could not be controlled with compression, and his vital signs indicated that he was in shock. The mangled extremity severity score was 8 points. Taking into consideration the abdominal trauma, his age, and the severity of the lower leg wound, we performed right above-the-knee amputation for lifesaving purposes and to decrease the treatment period. Following amputation, we performed laparoscopic gastrorrhaphy. Considering the patient’s general condition, we decided to perform the femoral trochanteric osteosynthesis operation in two stages. His whole-body management was completed in the intensive care unit. Because he experienced severe hip pain during body movements, after ensuring that his general condition was stable, we performed internal fixation for the right femoral trochanteric fracture on the 5th day after the injury.
While the patient was under general anesthesia, we first inserted a 2.4 mm Kirschner wire under fluoroscopic guidance 3 cm proximal to the femoral cut end and attached a horseshoe and traction rope to it . Then, we tightened the rope to the foot piece of the traction table and secured it . Since there is a risk of injury to the femoral arteriovenous vein when inserting the Kirschner wire, the position of the blood vessel was confirmed in advance by ultrasonography. Although shortening of the bone fracture was reduced by traction, rotation control was impossible; therefore, the horseshoe was manually controlled through clean sheets during surgery to reduce rotational displacement . We performed internal fixation surgery using a trochanteric femoral nail in the usual manner . The patient began transfer to a wheelchair with pain relief the day after surgery, and he started walker walking 2 days after surgery.