A 32-year-old female patient presented to the gastroenterology department of the First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China, in 2017 with complaints of gradually severe bloating, epigastric and left flank ache, nausea and occasional vomiting of 1 month’s duration. The epigastric and left flank ache was aggravated when the patient was supine and relieved in a prone or left lateral decubitus. The abdominal bloating was associated with early satiety. The vomiting always began 40 min after meal. The patient provided a history of urine stone with oral drotaverine hydrochloride tablets treatment 40 mg three times a day (tid) for two weeks before the gastrointestinal symptoms arising. The patient had no significant surgical history, but had a rapid weight loss of approximately 10 kg with a body mass index from 21 kg/m2 to 18 kg/m2 over the last two months. An abdominal examination revealed upper abdominal tenderness and distention. The urine routine examination showed no significant abnormality (no hematuria and proteinuria). There were no remarkable abnormalities during the initial blood tests and other laboratory investigations.
On performing a physical examination, her epigastric region was distended and tender to palpation. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated gastroduodenal dilatation . There was narrowing of the third portion of the duodenum compressed by SMA and AA, with a decreased aortomesenteric distance of 3.7 mm and a narrower aortomesenteric angle of less than 15 degrees, which suggested a diagnosis of SMA syndrome . In addition, the LRV was compressed to 2 mm between SMA and AA , with a 12 mm dilatation in diameter , which formed a “bird beak sign” . Upper gastrointestinal double-contrast radiograph showed a vertical band of extrinsic compression on the mid transverse part of duodenum caused by SMA with proximal duodenal dilatation . Gastroptosis was also observed by fluoroscopy. Colour Doppler indicated that the inside diameter of compressed stenosis of LRV was 1.4 mm on the left edge of AA, with 61 cm/sec of the maximum blood flow velocity. The inside diameter of proximal dilatation site was 6.1 mm, with 20 cm/sec of the maximum blood flow velocity. Additionally, the angle between SMA and AA was approximately 13 degrees, and bilateral iliac vein flow was slow. Therefore, a diagnosis of SMA syndrome and Nutcracker syndrome was confirmed.
Nasogastric tube was placed for decompression. Fluid resuscitation with parenteral and enteral nutritional support was managed conservatively to improve weight gain. Considering the neuromuscular and motility function could be impaired by the disease, pharmacotherapy (Mosapride citrate dispersible tablets 5 mg po tid) and physiotherapy (Functional gastrointestinal treatment apparatus) were treated to modulate the gastrointestinal motor function. Patient underwent a gastroduodenoscopy after the condition was relieved, revealing no intrinsic obstructions. Considering no significant abnormalities in renal function parameters and blood pressure, no special medical interventions were performed for the Nutcracker syndrome. One week later, the patient was discharged and subsequently received family nutrition support treatment for six months.
BMI data were collected each week during the family nutrition support treatment , and BMI values gradually increased . However, in the fourth month, she suspended the family nutrition support and began to work. BMI quickly reduced, and the symptoms recurred including bloating, epigastric pain, left flank ache and nausea. During her second hospitalization, an abdominal examination revealed upper abdominal distention, and the urine routine examination showed hematuria. Nasal jejunal tube was placed and Enteral nutrition was provided for one week. After weight gain and hematuria disappeared, the patient discharged. Subsequently, the patient received family nutrition support treatment for six months, and BMI values fluctuated within the normal range (18.8 ± 0.13 kg/m2 to 19.1 ± 0.74 kg/m2).