A 14-month-old Arab boy whose parents were first-degree cousins was referred to our pediatric ward with a history of frequent severe chest infections, chronic diarrhea and failure to thrive. This family lost two children at the age of 6 and 8 months due to SCID. The patient was found to be lymphopenic and further investigations confirmed severe combined immunodeficiency with the first sign being fever at 1 month of age. The cause of his immunodeficiency was suspected to be ADA deficiency. He also had a Mycobacterium intracellulare infection and was suspected of having cytomegalovirus (CMV) gastroenteritis. He was irritable, in compensated sepsis with respiratory distress and his abdomen was soft with no palpable hepatosplenomegaly. He had a fine skin rash with no lymphadenopathy and his BCG vaccination site showed a non-infected old scar. The rest of his physical exam was normal. His past medical history revealed recurrent severe infections, especially chest infections. He had had at least four severe episodes of lower respiratory tract infection with bronchospasm. Almost all of these episodes needed admission to hospital and treatment with intravenous antibiotics. History of the index case also included diarrhea with loose stools 4 to 5 times daily. At 1 month of age, he developed a bacterial infection easily cured with a course of antibiotics. Investigations revealed mild hydro-uretero-nephrosis and no evidence of vesico-ureteric reflux. Past surgical history included a left inguinal hernia repair. Flow cytometry (FCM) analysis was performed in order to quantify the number of B- T-, and NK-cells. FCM results showed near absences of lymphocytes with only 101 cells per μl (2% of white blood cells). The lymphocyte subsets were 88% T cells with a CD4 to CD8 ratio of 3; 5% B-cells and 7% NK-cells. Absence of the common γ chain (CD132) which is associated with X-linked SCID was not evaluated. However, unlike our patient, X-linked SCID patients characteristically have a T-B+NK-phenotype which is different from our patient who has a T-B-NK-phenotype. The latter phenotype is seen in ADA deficiency and hence prompted our evaluation and study of the ADA gene mutation.
In order to assess the mutation causing SCID in this family, genomic DNA was amplified and the entire coding region and the exon-intron boundaries of the ADA gene were sequenced. The primers used to amplify all 12 exons of the ADA gene are summarized in Table . Briefly, ADA sequences were amplified from 100 to 200ng of DNA using specific primers (5μMdNTP (5mM), PCR buffer 10×, and one unit of expanded long Taq polymerase (Roche). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products were purified using a Qiagen purification kit and then assessed with a capillary electrophoresis bio-analyzer using the DNA 7500 chip. The purified PCR products were sequenced on an ABI 3130xI Genetic Analyzer using forward and reverse primers listed in Table .
Predictions of the tolerance of the protein to the mutation were assessed using SIFT (Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant) programs (http://blocks.fhcrc.org/sift/SIFT.html) and Protean (Protein Structure Prediction and Annotation; LASERGENE V.6 software DNASTAR, Inc., Madison, WI, USA). Protean helps to predict and display patterns, secondary structural characteristics and physiochemical properties (hydropathy index and flexibility prediction). The study has been reviewed by the Evidence Based Medicine and Research center of this institution.
After sequencing the entire ADA gene, we detected a single nucleotide substitution (c.847G>A) in exon 9 of this gene . This nucleotide substitution resulted in the replacement of Arginine (Basic hydrophilic AA) with Glutamine (Neutral AA) at codon 282 (p.Arg282>Gln) thus altering the hydropathy index from 0.48 to 0.37. Protean predicted a change in the amino acid structure and this may affect the function. The mutation was located in the active domain of the protein, which extends from codon 8 to 346, thus it was expected to affect the deaminase activity of the enzyme. SIFT predicted that the AA change at this location could not be tolerated, and thus it is highly likely that it will have an effect on the protein structure and/or function. This sequence change was not detected in 50 unrelated controls of similar ethnicity. Based on the above findings, we strongly believe that this sequence change is probably pathogenic.