Fifty-three years ago, a 23-year-old Japanese woman was referred to the outpatient clinic of our hospital with primary amenorrhea. Examination revealed normal external genitalia and an absent vagina. She was diagnosed with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome. Hereditary disease was excluded based on family history. She underwent neovaginal construction surgery using a segment of the sigmoid colon. At the age of 45, she underwent hysterectomy for uterine myoma. At the age of 76, she visited the original outpatient clinic with the chief complaint of vaginal bleeding. Vaginal endoscopy confirmed anastomosis of the residual vagina with the sigmoid colon and revealed a 4.5-cm protruding lesion in the vicinity of anastomosis, occupying about three quarters of the lumen . Biopsy from the protruding lesion revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed the muscularis propria layer (hypoechoic fourth layer) to be interrupted with an unclear layer pattern and invasion of a hyperechoic tumor beyond the colon wall . The lesion was diagnosed as clinical T3 or deeper, and endoscopic resection was not indicated. T2-weighted MR imaging showed the neovagina, which extended from the vaginal opening to abdominal cavity, to exist between the bladder and rectum . A 4.5-cm protruding lesion was detected along the posterior neovaginal wall. The rectum and urethra appeared to be free of invasion. CT showed no evidence of lymph node or distant metastasis. Colonoscopy of the remnant colon and rectum did not reveal any abnormalities. Tumor marker levels were as follows: CEA 2.5 ng/ml, CA19-9 20 U/ml, CA125 14 U/ml, and SCC 0.8 ng/ml, all of which were within the normal range. Based on the preoperative diagnosis of adenocarcinoma arising in the sigmoid colon neovagina 53 years after construction, we performed total pelvic exenteration for curative resection.
Intraoperatively, the blind end of the neovagina was confirmed on the retroperitoneum side of the remnant sigmoid colon. In the pelvis, the neovagina passed through the antimesenteric side and anterior wall of the rectum and was anastomosed with the vaginal opening . Intra-abdominal dissemination and ascites were not found. The operative time was 8 h and 20 min, and blood loss was 385 ml. The tumor was located in the vicinity of the anastomosis site and was macroscopically a 4.5-cm protruding lesion. Adjacent tissues such as the urethra and labia minora were free of invasion . Pathological examination revealed that radial margins were all negative and an adequate surgical margin was obtained. Sixteen lymph nodes retrieved by lymph node dissection were all free of tumor cells. The histology showed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma in the surface area of the tumor , with a mucinous adenocarcinoma component in the invasive portion . Immunohistochemistry revealed no p16-overexpressing tumor cells, suggesting the lack of human papilloma virus (HPV) infection . The carcinoma penetrated into the submucosal layer of the neovagina without any evidence of vascular or lymphatic invasion. According to the TNM classification eighth edition , the ectopic colon cancer was categorized as T2N0M0, or stage I colon cancer, and thus, the patient did not undergo adjuvant therapy. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on postoperative day 29. At present, 7 months postoperatively, the patient has neither symptoms nor apparent signs of recurrence.