A 72-year-old woman first presented to us with severe pain in the left hip. She had received a right shelf procedure 33 years earlier and a left RAO 25 years earlier for developmental dysplasia of the hip at another hospital. For the past 7 years, the patient had complained of increasing pain with activity limitation, which had recently severely affected her daily life. An anteroposterior radiograph revealed severe osteoarthritic changes in the left hip joint with irregular narrowing of the joint space , and we diagnosed advanced osteoarthritis of the hip. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a large bone defect from the medial side to the anterior aspect of the acetabulum . Therefore, we planned a THA with a bulk bone graft.
After lumbar anesthesia, the patient was placed in the right lateral position. The surgery was performed using a posterolateral approach. After incision of the pisiform tendon, external rotators, and posterior capsule, the femoral head was dislocated and the neck was osteotomized. When the soft tissue in the acetabular fossa was dissected with electrocautery, massive pulsatile bleeding was suddenly encountered. Attempts to stop the bleeding such as tight packing with gauze, using microfibrillar collagen in sheet form, and intravenous tranexamic acid were unsuccessful. The bleeding gradually diminished, but the patient went into shock. The wound was closed without implanting the components and the patient was sent to the emergency hospital 4 h after the incident. Angiography was performed with the femoral artery by an expert interventional radiologist. The definitive diagnosis was achieved by selective digital subtraction angiography of the left external iliac artery, and active contrast extravasation was depicted near the inner wall of the acetabulum . The lacerated portion of the artery was small and it was repaired with metal stent grafting . Due to the massive blood loss, 16 units of red blood cell transfusion, 18 units of fresh frozen plasma transfusion, and 20 units of platelet concentrate were required. Three-dimensional computed tomographic angiography after stent grafting showed that the left external iliac artery was extremely close to the acetabulum . The patient recovered well after the stent graft and was readmitted to our hospital 4 days later. THA was performed 2 weeks after the stent graft, and the post-operative course was uneventful.