A 71-year old male patient presented to our facility with complaint of draining urine per suprapubic catheter for 3 months following acute urine retention and a failure of passing urethral catheter. The urine retention was preceded by long standing history of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTs) characterised by increased urinary frequency, weak stream, sense of incomplete bladder emptying and two episodes of painless gross haematuria. However he denied history of tobacco use or being exposed to chemical carcinogens or pelvic irradiation.
Upon general examination he was fully conscious, afebrile and pink eye sclera. He had a blood pressure of 132/84 mmHg, Pulse rate of 68 bpm, Temperature 36.7*C and respiratory rate of 17breaths/min. Per abdominal examination revealed a 22Fr suprapubic catheter connected to a urine bag that contained clear urine. The abdomen was of normal contours, no masses or organomegaly felt. Digital rectal examination revealed prostatomegaly with benign features. Other systems were essentially normal.
A diagnosis of bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) secondary to urethral stricture with a differential diagnosis of BOO secondary to prostate enlargement was entertained.
Laboratory worked up results is as shown on below.
Antegrade & retrograde urethrogram revealed normal anterior urethral with normal tapering at the bulbomembranous junction, contrast extravasation at the bulbous urethra and closed bladder neck with large filling defect in the urinary bladder .
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed a well-defined heterogeneous mass in the urinary bladder measuring 8.6 cm × 11.1 cm with normal upper tracts. Due to this findings and the history of haematuria a Computer Tomography (CT) with Intravenous contrast was performed and showered; a heterogeneous enhancing soft tissue mass arising from the posterolateral bladder wall, measuring approximately 8.89 cm × 8.4 cm × 6.93 cm (a, b & c). The prostate measured 5.75 cm × 6.73 cm × 5.05 cm. However, there was no metastatic bone lesions noted or evidence of free fluid in the peritoneum. The pre and paravertebral soft tissues and other abdominal structures appeared normal.
He underwent examination under anaesthesia (EUA) and cystoscopy where, there was a smooth, mobile bladder mass measuring 5×7 cm was palpated. Using 16fr flexible scope, both anterior and membranous part of the urethral were normal, there was a giant median lobe of the prostate protruding into the bladder and occupying two third of the lumen. There were extensive trabeculations and sacculations in the bladder with obscuring of ureteric orifices by the giant median lobe. However, there were no urinary bladder diverticulum, stones or exophytic mass arising from its mucosae.
He underwent simple transvesical open prostatectomy where a prostatic adenoma weighing 400 g was enucleated . The surgery took a total of 2 h with no any intraoperative complications encountered. The histological analysis of the removed adenoma showed benign prostate nodular lesion with proliferation of stromal and glandular components, the latter was composed of variably sized glandular structures lined by basal and secretory cells. These findings were consistent with BPH (a, b). A 22fr 3 way urethral catheter inserted and continuous irrigation was initiated. Post operatively the patient was kept on continuous bladder irrigation with normal saline for 1 day, intravenous Meropenem for five days, intramusclular pethidine for 1-day then oral paracetamol and tramadol for 3 days. The abdominal tube drain was removed after 3 days and urethral catheter on day 10 post operative and allowed home. He was attended at the clinic three month later where he reported to be fine with normal voiding pattern. This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE 2023 criteria .