Previously healthy 17-year-old female patient was admitted to the pediatric emergency department because of syncope and hypotension after walking into the classroom door at school when she had hit upper right side of her abdomen. Emergency medical services were noticed and she was transported to the ED via an ambulance. She seemed weak and confused. Her vital signs at admission were as follows: blood pressure 80/35 mmHg, heart rate 120 beats/min, temperature 38.5 °C. Her oxygen saturation on room air was 98%. Upon arrival, she demonstrated an urticarial rash mainly on her face and trunk together with angioedema of the eyelids and lips, and had severe abdominal pain, which occurred in approximately 15-20 min after the trauma. We treated her immediately with 0.5 mg intramuscular 1/1000 epinephrine for anaphylactic shock and initiated intravenous fluid resuscitation. Her response to the initial dose of epinephrine was poor, so that a repeated dosing was required after 15 min. Eventually, her blood pressure was maintained around 110/70 mmHg, approximately 10 min after the second epinephrine dose, with this treatment regime and her hemodynamic status was stabilized soon after. She also received intravenous prednisolone (50 mg) and diphenhydramine (50 mg) to prevent late reaction. Laboratory work-up revealed leukocytosis without eosinophilia and a high C-reactive protein level. Her bilirubin level was mildly elevated and she had hypoalbuminemia. The other laboratory tests were within normal limits .
She and her parents both denied previous history of allergies, current medication use or food ingestion that could have clarified the etiology of a possible allergic reaction. There were no signs of insect bite marks. On suspicion that the anaphylactic shock was due to rupture of a hepatic hydatid cyst abdominal imaging was considered. Ruptured type 2 hydatid cyst (61 × 68 mm) located in the fifth and sixth segment of liver was evident on both abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography . Its close relation to biliary ducts raised suspicion of cyst rupture into the biliary tract. The patient was diagnosed with anaphylactic shock secondary to a ruptured liver hydatid cyst following minor blunt abdominal trauma. After administration of initial dose of anti-helmintic treatment with albendazole (10 mg/kg/day), the patient underwent emergent laparotomy the same day. Cyst rupture into the biliary tree was confirmed during surgery. Cyst membranes were excised, and ruptured cyst content were completely removed. Common bile duct was irrigated with 0.9% NaCl, and was surgically repaired. Surgical field was also irrigated with saline to evacuate any debris or cyst content. Hydatid cyst hemagglutination titer was 1/1280 (negative < 1/160). Histopathological examination showed hydatid cyst germinal membranes and scolices. The patient was discharged 1 week after surgery uneventfully. In order to reduce the risk of secondary hydatidosis, albendazole was continued for 6 months (10 mg/kg/day BID) after surgery. The patient recovered fully with this treatment and follow-up imaging at 3- and 6-months showed no signs of recurrence.