A 35-year-old male attended the orthopedic outpatient department with complaints of displacement of the left patella as he moves his knee into flexion. He first noticed this symptom 3 months before, when he started mobilization exercise of his left knee following a surgical procedure. He had a history of a twisting injury to his left knee during a road traffic accident 9 months back. He experienced buckling of his left knee following that accident, and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) at the mid-substance level. After 2 months, he underwent an arthroscopic ACLR using the ipsilateral semitendinosus autograft in a local hospital.
The patient developed discharge from the surgical wound site associated with fever on the seventh postoperative day. The inflammatory markers, including the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and the total leukocyte count, were elevated. Finally, he got diagnosed with septic arthritis, and arthroscopic debridement of the knee was done in the same hospital, preserving the graft. The condition got resolved initially, and the patient began the mobilization exercises with gradual improvement. However, the features of septic arthritis reappeared 3 months later. The patient underwent a repeat arthroscopic debridement with removal of the graft after 2 weeks of the onset of this second episode of infection. The patient began the range of motion exercise on the second day of this surgery and noticed the patella is dislocating every time he flexes his knee.
On clinical examination, we found dislocation of the patella on each cycle of flexion of the knee, which reduces spontaneously on the extension . Since, unlike recurrent dislocation, the patella was relocating on the extension without any pain and swelling, we termed it a habitual dislocation of the patella. However, there were no signs of active infection. The surgical scar marks of previous procedures were observed, including scars of superomedial, and superolateral, portals. Furthermore, there was no generalized hyperlaxity or exaggeration of anteversion of the femur. The Q-angle was 15°. The skyline view radiograph of both the knees did not indicate trochlear dysplasia considering the sulcus angle on the left side, which was 130° . The Insall Salvati ratio measured by dividing patellar tendon length to patellar height was 0.8.
On further evaluation, we found the tibial tuberosity-trochlear groove (TT-TG) distance to be 18.4 mm , which indicates a mild distal malalignment that predisposes the patient to dislocation of the patella. We performed an MRI of the left knee and noticed a medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL) tear ( and ). The MPFL must have been injured during the surgery, as the patient experienced his first dislocation immediately after the second arthroscopic debridement procedure and as the initial MRI performed before the ACL reconstruction suggested an intact MPFL. Therefore, we made a diagnosis of iatrogenic MPFL tear.
For the habitual dislocation of the patella, we planned an MPFL reconstruction using the contralateral semitendinosus autograft. Despite explaining the need for surgical intervention, the patient denied any surgical procedure and preferred non-operative management. At 2 years of follow-up, the patient does not have any pain in his left knee and complaints of only mild buckling while walking on uneven ground. However, the habitual dislocation of the patella persists. Nevertheless, the patient performs his daily pursuits, including walking, squatting, and climbing stairs without much difficulty. There are no features suggestive of any active infection. The recent radiograph shows signs of early osteoarthritic changes . The patient is still unwilling for any surgery and is under our regular follow-up.