A 72-year-old female who presented with “epigastric pain and discomfort for more than 1 month” as the chief complaint was diagnosed with AEG (Siewert type II). Subsequently, the patient was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) and gastroscopy confirmed AEG with the involvement of small perigastric lymph nodes . The initial TNM staging was cT2N0-1M0. A laparoscopic PG with ROSF was thus performed. The patient experienced a smooth postoperative recovery and was discharged on the 8th day following surgery. One week after discharge, she resumed a normal diet without any issues. However, approximately 2 weeks later, she started experiencing progressive difficulty in eating accompanied by vomiting. Notably, she experienced no discomfort when switching to a liquid diet (Stooler grade II). As a result, she was readmitted for further management due to dysphagia 6 weeks following ROSF. Anastomotic stenosis was revealed through endoscopy .
Generally, during the ROSF procedure, the overlap length between the esophagus and gastric mucosal is around 3 cm, providing enough room for conducting anastomosis. Therefore, the exact mechanism of stricture development in our patient is unclear. We surmised that staple line adhesion could have caused the anastomotic stenosis. Given that attempts at dilation using a gastroscope proved unsuccessful due to the presence of fibrotic scar tissue, ES with IT Knife nano was attempted. The posterior wall of the anastomosis was chosen as a safe area for incision, as it was located behind the posterior wall adjacent to the pseudo-gastric fundus. To prevent reflux, an incision of approximately 1 cm was made on the left lateral-posterior side of the anastomosis, ensuring a spacious opening for gastroscope insertion. Following the intervention, proton pump inhibitor (PPI) was administered for 2 weeks, and the patient recovered well. During the 5-month follow-up period, no symptoms of dysphagia or reflux were reported. A gastroscopy re-examination revealed no evidence of stricture, esophagitis, or inflammation at the anastomotic site. Additionally, the patient's body weight increased following the ES procedure, and laboratory tests showed that nutritional parameters were within the normal range.