A 7-year-old girl presented to the emergency department after a fell on his right elbow while playful activity at home. During physical examination, the patients' elbow range of motion was painful and limited. Their upper extremities were neurovascularly intact. The elbow X-ray showed acute trans-olecranon fracture dislocation of the elbow associated with a radial head fracture (a–b). Closed reduction under conscious sedation was attempted in the emergency department and the elbow was splinted in an above elbow plaster slab . An urgent pre-operative 3D TC was performed that confirmed and clarified the injury pattern . After the child was transferred to the operating room. However, stress radiographs performed in the operating room under anesthesia revealed an associated severe valgus instability caused by medial collateral ligament disruption .
The patient is placed in the supine position, with shoulder at edge of bed, the upper limb affected at 90° on the chest placed over a support. The surgery was performed under intravenous sedation, spontaneous breathing and ultrasound guided brachial plexus block using 0.50% ropivacaine. Sedation drugs used were midazolam, fentanyl in association with ketamine and propofol. The local anesthetic used was ropivacaine 0.50%. A nonsterile pneumatic tourniquet is placed on the affected arm, then a sterile field is set starting from the proximal part of the upper limb down to the hand with the arm draped free. After an exsanguination of the arm performed by a sterile Esmarch bandage the pneumatic tourniquet is inflated. A posterior midline longitudinal incision is made to expose the olecranon and medial epicondyle. The ulnar nerve is identified and protected with retractor. During the ulnar nerve identification, we found that medial collateral ligaments were completely disrupted from the point of insertion to the distal humerus. The olecranon fractures were reduced and fixed with two crossing bicortical 1.5 mm K-wires. The radial neck fracture reduction was achieved with percutaneous 2.0 mm lanceolate K-wire leverage and definitively fixed with one 1.5 mm K-wire inserted percutaneously and dorsally in the wrist in accord with S.E.R.I. technique . Medial collateral ligaments were attached to the distal humerus with a trans osseous absorbable suture fixation (a–b).
Postoperatively, patients were immobilized with an above elbow cast at 90° flexion of the elbow with the forearm in neutral rotation for 4 weeks. A first X-ray was made 1 week after surgery. A second X-ray was performed after 4 weeks from surgery and after removing the cast and K-wire. Olecranon and radial neck K-wires were removed in the clinic without sedation or anesthesia and after the patients is allowed to return to daily activity avoiding contact sports for at least 4 weeks.