A 2-year-old boy was referred to our hospital for the definitive diagnostic workup due to elevated liver enzymes. Approximately 5 months earlier during treatment for a perianal abscess, the child was found to have an abnormal high level of serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT). After resolution of the perianal abscess, the liver enzyme levels continued to slowly rise, although symptoms such as fatigue, anorexia, jaundice or pruritus were not apparent during this period. The child was treated at the initial hospital with magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate and ademetionine 1,4-butanedisulfonate, aiming to improve liver function, but the effects were limited. The child was otherwise in good health with no family or genetic history of liver dysfunction, and no other family member has the similar clinical condition.
After a detailed physical examination, the child was found to be well developed with no pathological signs except a palpable liver approximately 4 cm below the right costal margin. Laboratory data demonstrated elevation of liver enzymes (ALT 225 U/L, AST 261 U/L, total bilirubin 38.7 umol/L, direct bilirubin 34.1 umol/L, albumin 43.1 g/L, alkaline phosphatase 1462 U/L, glutamyl transpeptidase 744 U/L, total bile acid 156.2 umol/L). Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans indicated altered liver morphology, including atrophy of the left hepatic lobe, enlargement of the right hepatic lobe and caudate lobes, irregular dilation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts, multiple choleliths in the bile duct system and thickening of the bile duct wall . These findings pointed to liver cirrhosis and sclerosing cholangitis. To further clarify the diagnosis, an ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed. Pathological findings revealed bile stasis, damage and regeneration of liver cells and the small bile duct, proliferation of fibrous tissue, dilation of the portal area, and infiltration of inflammatory cells . A diagnosis of liver cirrhosis and sclerosing cholangitis was therefore confirmed, although the etiology of the lesion was unclear.
Meanwhile, the liver cirrhosis was progressive, the patient’s Child–Pugh classification was deteriorated from grade A to grade B in approximately 3 weeks . We concluded that this patient would soon require a liver transplantation. Living-donor liver transplantation from his mother was performed about 1 month after the liver biopsy in our hospital. During transplantation surgery, the entire liver and extrahepatic bile duct of the recipient was removed, and cholangiojejunostomy Roux-en-Y was performed.
The macroscopic appearance of the recipient’s liver was consistent with the conclusions of preoperative imaging examination . Microscopically, in addition to the pathological findings of the liver cirrhosis and sclerosing cholangitis described above, diffuse infiltration of eosinophils cells characterized by grooved and convoluted nuclei with scattered chromatin structure were observed in the liver and extrahepatic bile duct . Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that these cells were positive for Langerin , S-100 protein , and CD1a , consistent with the characteristics of Langerhans cells. We confirmed a diagnosis of LCH, although the extent of the disease remained unclear. Following whole-body scanning, high-resolution CT scanning of the lung, and MRI examination of the head, no other lesions were found. Ultimately, a diagnosis of LCH, localized only in the hepatobiliary system, was established. Additionally, the BRAF V600E mutation was also confirmed for this patient after genetic analysis by the pathology department in our hospital.
The child and mother recovered well after living-donor liver transplantation, and were discharged on postoperative day 21. Tacrolimus was used as an immunosuppressor. Due to the presence of the BRAF V600E mutation, dabrafenib was prescribed for the treatment of LCH after fully communicating with the child’s parent and obtaining consent. Now, the child is well with normal liver function with no significant postoperative complication and no evidence of recurrence of LCH at the 22 months follow-up (ALT 17 U/L, AST 34 U/L, total bilirubin 6.9 umol/L, direct bilirubin 3.5 umol/L, alkaline phosphatase 299 U/L, glutamyl transpeptidase 33 U/L, total bile acid 13.5 umol/L) .