A 51-year-old woman presented with a 3-week history of poor balance, nausea and right-sided facial sensory disturbance. Her medical history was significant for bronchiectasis, necrotising granulomatous lymphadenitis, iron deficiency anaemia, eczema, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, recurrent sinusitis, osteonecrosis of the jaw induced by bisphosphonates, diverticulitis, bowel salt malabsorption and vitamin D deficiency. The patient’s daughter had recurrent episodes of CNS inflammation as a child and in adulthood she developed autoimmune hepatitis, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and bronchiectasis. The patient’s son was known to have type I diabetes, thyroid disease, pernicious anaemia and autoimmune encephalitis. FAS sequencing for autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) was normal and, at the time of presentation, extended panel screening for primary immunodeficiency was ongoing. There was prior exposure to corticosteroids but no other immunomodulatory treatment.
On examination, there was reduced light touch sensation in the mandibular and maxillary distribution of the right trigeminal nerve with dysarthria, mild right upper limb weakness and dysmetria. Microcytosis (MCV 80.5 fL) with low ferritin (12 µg/L), lymphopenia (0.87 × 109/L) and hypogammaglobulinaemia (IgG 5.2 g/L) were noted. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed mildly elevated protein concentration (0.75 g/L), with normal white cell count (4/mm3) and the presence of unmatched (type 2) oligoclonal bands indicative of intrathecal IgG synthesis. CSF cytology and flow cytometry were non-diagnostic. Screening for infection including atypical organisms was negative although low-level Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) DNA was detected in her serum (EBV PCR 95 copies/mL; EBV DNA 1.98 log10 copies/mL). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a gadolinium-enhancing lesion in the right cerebellar peduncle with surrounding oedema and effacement of the fourth ventricle ( and ).
Given clinical concern regarding CNS lymphoma, cerebellar biopsy was offered but was initially declined by the patient. Empirical treatment with pulsed methylprednisolone was initiated with clinical and radiological improvement . However, relapse occurred on attempted corticosteroid wean; brain imaging demonstrated extension of the cerebellar lesion . Biopsy of the right cerebellar peduncle lesion was subsequently performed. This demonstrated a florid active inflammatory and demyelinating process. The T-cell infiltrate was composed of CD4 and CD8 cells (approximately 2:1) and an estimated 30%–40% of the CD4 cells co-expressed programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), indicating T-cell activation .
Subsequently, a virtual sub-panel of 194 genes associated with primary immunodeficiencies screened using Agilent ‘Focused Exome’ custom target enrichment system (SureSelectXT) and Next Generation Sequencing demonstrated that the patient (and her affected family members) were heterozygous for a novel, likely pathogenic frameshift deletion variant in CLTA-4 exon 1:c.81dup p.(leu28Serfs*32). An additional novel heterozygous missense variant was identified in the autosomal recessive gene LRBA in exon 42: c.642T>C, p.(Phe2142Leu) but was considered of uncertain clinical significance given that only bi-allelic function loss variants have been linked with disease previously.
Pulsed corticosteroid therapy and oral taper was initiated with clinical benefit and sirolimus (an mTOR inhibitor which blocks the CD28 signalling pathway) was introduced as a steroid-sparing agent. Subsequently, the patient has been neurologically stable; reduced sensation in the maxillary nerve distribution on the right with a mild postural upper limb tremor but no eye signs or dysmetria. There has been resolution of neuroimaging changes and no recurrence of inflammatory CNS demyelination ( and ).