16-year-old girl presented in the orthopedic clinic with a swollen right middle finger associated with occasional pain of one month duration. There was progressive increase in size. The middle phalanx was diffusely swollen, with mild tenderness. She did not have any lesions over the skin. Plain films of the right middle finger showed an expansile lesion with thinning of the cortex and intralesional calcifications. Her complete blood count was normal. Considering her age and the radiological features a diagnosis of enchondroma was made. Computerized tomographic scan[CT scan] showed a central oval round area of geographic destruction in the medullary canal at the metaphyseal region of the middle phalanx of the right middle finger. There were dystrophic calcifications with bulbous expansion of the bone with cortical thinning. There was no soft tissue involvement. As shown in the plain films and the CT scan. With a provisional diagnosis of enchondroma she was operated under general anesthesia. The mass was approached through a curvilinear dorsolateral approach under tourniquet. Dark- brown jelly like contents of the tumor was curetted out. There was break in the volar cortex. The defect in the bone was packed with cancellous grafts harvested from the proximal tibia.
Histopathology showed grey and dark brown tissue, with sections showing fragments of tissue composed of many perforating capillary sized blood vessels that are lined by plump endothelial cells with abundant cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei. Some cells showed vacuoles. At places there was hobnail appearance of the endothelial cells. These were admixed with numerous eosinophils, lymphocytes and few plasma cells. Occasional scattered giant cells also were seen. Immunohistochemistry for vascular markers showed CD31 positive in cords of cells and cells lining blood vessels, many CD 68 positive cells were also seen. Features were consistent with epitheloid hemangioma. [ & ]
At one-year follow up, there was no recurrence of the lesion. The patient regained full movements of the finger, but the finger remained swollen. [ & ].