A 51-year-old lady visited our center in August 2020 for the first time. She was congenitally deaf and mute, and commenced continuous ambulatory PD in 2015 at another facility without knowing the etiology of ESKD. During the 5 years on PD, the patient had not been regularly followed up. She was anuric, with manifestations of fatigue, malaise, anorexia, itchiness, and restless legs. There was no sign of infections. Laboratory exams showed significant anemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypokalemia, and weekly Kt/Vurea of 1.55. The symptoms were improved after increasing the PD dose and medications adjustment. However, 1 month later she was admitted due to uncontrolled hypertension as a result of incompliance with anti-hypertensive therapy.
On admission, the patient was afebrile, conscious but weak, with no obvious abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed no significance except a few collections at the PD catheter exit site. There was no visible turbidity in PD effluent despite an unexpected effluent white cell count (WCC) of 277/μL with 97% polymorphonuclear. CRP (28.83 mg/L) and procalcitonin (1.190 ng/mL) were slightly elevated; peripheral WCC, lipopolysaccharide, and (1 → 3)-β-D glucan were normal; tests for human immunodeficiency virus and M. tuberculosis antibody were negative; no organism was noted on Gram stain for PD effluent or exit site drainage; sonography and CT scan showed no signs of PD catheter tunnel infection, pneumonia, endocarditis, cirrhosis, or other pathology of celiac viscera. PD-related peritonitis and concomitant exit site infection were suspected. Intensified exit site care and empirical treatment with intraperitoneal vancomycin, amikacin and oral fluconazole were initiated immediately after culture samples were sent on hospital day 1.
No bacterium or fungus was isolated from repeated cultures of PD effluent and exit site drainage, and the case was treated as culture-negative peritonitis. The effluent WCC was persistently around 200/μL with neutrophil predominance during the first week, and there was no improvement after replacement with intraperitoneal cefepime and oral rifampin during the second week. Although it was strongly recommended, the patient adamantly refused catheter removal.
On hospital day 14 PD was terminated since the effluent WCC increased to 515/μL. A central venous catheter was inserted uneventfully on hospital day 15, then hemodialysis was performed every other day. Surprisingly, she became stuporous on hospital day 16. Blood tests showed no significant disorder of homeostasis, neither CT scan found any evidence of acute cerebrovascular disease or intracranial mass. Meningitis was suspected. Unfortunately, the family members refused invasive procedures including lumbar puncture and PD catheter removal.
On hospital day 17, the patient had a high fever and signs of peritoneal irritation. Yellow chylous ascites was drained through the PD catheter after detection of intraperitoneal collections by CT scan. Exams for ascites showed WCC of 2700/μL with 65% neutrophil and 35% lymphocyte, as well as elevated triglyceride (3.1 mmol/L) and adenosine deaminase (ADA, 94 IU/L), but normal amylase and negative acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining. Blood CRP ascended to 219 mg/L, while blood and ascites cultures remained negative. Despite use of antibiotics including cefoperazone, levofloxacin, linezolid, and meropenem, the fever and chylous drainage persisted.
On hospital day 23, an ascites sample was sent for massive parallel sequencing. Two days later M. avium was reported, and intravenous azithromycin (500 mg per day) and amikacin (100 mg per day), together with oral rifampin (600 mg per day) and ethambutol (750 mg thrice a week) were prescribed. Within the following days, abdominal tenderness subsided and drainage was apparently reduced, but the hyperpyrexia sustained and the general conditions continued to deteriorate. On hospital day 30, the patient expired from sepsis. The course of hospitalization is summarized in Fig. .