A 60-year-old woman was admitted to the gynecology ward at our hospital to undergo anticancer chemotherapy for pulmonary metastatic uterine cervical cancer. On day 1, she received cisplatin plus irinotecan infusions. On day 2, fever >40°C, diarrhoea, haematuria, and right lower leg swelling developed. Blood culture was performed, and cefmetazole (CMZ) 1.0 g/day was begun. On day 4, the right lower leg swelling worsened. A blood test revealed increased serum inflammatory markers, and acute disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and sequential organ assessment (SOFA) scores increased to 6 and 7, respectively. The patient was transferred to our department on day 5 at 00:30 hours. At the initial examination at our department , the serum CRP and P-SEP level were 28.8mg/dl nad 1,635 mg/mL, respectively. The Glasgow Coma Scale was 14, blood pressure 88/52 mmHg, and heart rate 90 beats/minute. Although severe swelling was observed in the posterior aspect of the right lower leg, there was no warmth or redness anywhere on the right lower leg. A 9-cm2 patch of brown skin discoloration was noted on the anterior surface of the tibia. Because the right popliteal artery was compressed significantly by the severe swelling in the lower leg soleus muscle, and the image quality was poor, no apparent abscess formation could be confirmed by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) at this time. The popliteal vein was completely occluded, and deep venous thrombosis developed. To prevent potential progression to compartment syndrome, a relaxing incision was made on the medial right lower leg, and no distinct signs of infection were observed in the subcutaneous tissues or muscles. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), and nafamostat mesylate 150 mg/day and recombinant thrombomodulin 19,000 U/day were begun, along with low-molecular-weight heparin 15,000 E/day for venous thrombosis. At this point, STSS was not suspected, and CMZ was continued. A blood test on the morning of day 5 revealed a further exacerbation of the inflammatory markers, a further increase in the acute DIC score, and no improvement in the SOFA score. The brown discoloration progressed rapidly to the entire right lower leg. At this point, STSS was suspected for the first time, and antibiotic therapy was switched to ceftriaxone 2 g/day plus clindamycin (CLDM) 1,200 mg/day, and γ-globulin 15 g/day was initiated. On the evening of day 5, blood culture (in the day 3 specimen) was positive for rapidly progressive group A streptococci. After day 6, while the skin discoloration expanded to above the right knee , blood tests showed a trend towards improved. On day 14, the patient was transferred from the ICU to our general ward . The mild swelling and feverishness of the right lower leg continued. Contrast-enhanced CT on day 32 revealed an encapsulated abscess in the right lower leg soleus muscle . Debridement was performed with the patient under general anesthesia on day 34, close to the site of the relaxation incision. No organisms were isolated from the tissue culture of a specimen collected during debridement. After that, CRP remained at 0.4–0.6 mg/dL except during perioperative period, but P-SEP fluctuated between 350 and 380 pg/mL. We considered that local infections remained. And we continued to take oral minocycline (MINO) 200 mg/day. On day 50, CT revealed a residual abscess . Therefore, we performed the second debridement on day 60. After that, P-SEP gradually decreased and CT confirmed the disappearance of the abscess and swelling on day 100 . Oral MINO was discontinued after confirming that the P-SEP level had improved to 88 pg/mL . Subsequently, the patient was returned to the gynecological ward without recurrent infection.