A 1-year-old female infant of Han ethnicity was admitted to the Department of Pediatrics, ShaoXing KeQiao Women and Children’s hospital in ShaoXing, China, due to occasional cough for four days and intermittent fever for two days. During the Spring Festival, she visited her rural hometown for more than half a month where the environment was poor. She developed cough on the 2nd day after returning to live in the city. During this period, she only had poor appetite. The child had no other medical problems. She had no previous history of any underlying disease and preterm birth. Upon admission to the hospital, all of her vital signs were normal. However, palpable wet rales were heard in both lungs. Anteroposterior chest Xray showed pneumonia on the right side . Laboratory results showed white blood cells 37.8*10^9 g/L, with 73.6% neutrophils, elevated CRP 221.6 mg/L (normal value 8 mg/L), but low blood oxygen saturation around 89%. The patient was given meropenem 0.18 g q8h IV and symptomatic supportive therapy such as oxygen. The temperature of the patient fluctuated between 36.0 and 37.4°C after admission. On the first day during hospitalization, the patient’s first blood is put into a blood culture bottle, and the culture bottle is put into an automatic bacterial culture system instrument, which automatically detects the presence of bacteria. The physicians in the laboratory then transfer the culture onto Columbia blood agar plates (which include: peptone, animal tissue extract, yeast extract, agar powder, nutritional supplements, and purified water) and place it at 35°C-37°C. The bacteria reappeared after 48 hours of incubation in an incubator. The petri dish was then placed in an automatic microbial identification and drug sensitivity analyzer, which was finally identified as S. maltophilia. Since the drug susceptibility data of S. maltophilia was not included in the bacterial library of the automatic microbial identification and drug susceptibility analyzer in our hospital, the drug susceptibility results could not be obtained automatically. On day 5, the laboratory doctor performed the drug susceptibility test on the cultured bacteria by Kirby-bauer test, and the drug susceptibility results of ceftazidime, levofloxacin, minocycline and TMP/SMX are sensitivity, and the drug susceptibility results of meropenem and cefixime were intermediate. Subsequently, the treatment was changed to ceftazidime 0.45 g bid IV. About 10 days after starting treatment (ceftazidime IV), the patient’s cough improved, lung rales were significantly decreased, repeat blood culture was negative, and repeat chest X-ray showed significant improvement. Thereafter, she was discharged and continued with oral common cefixime 25 mg bid for a 1-week. During the follow-up at one month after discharge, the child’s symptoms were completely relieved and her chest X-ray showed a marked improvement over the previous X-ray. .