A 63-year-old male patient came with complaints of the right arm pain, swelling, deformity of the right arm, and difficulty in extending the wrist for 3 days. The patient had a history of falls and trauma to the left arm at home. The patient had gone to some hospital where they had given slab and referred to our institute. On examination, the deformity was present in the right arm with wrist drop and mild tenderness in the right hip. X-ray right arm showed distal one-third spiral humerus fracture (, ). The patient was a known case of parkinsonism, schizophrenia, and hypertension on medications. The patient was operated on with humerus nailing and radial nerve exploration was done by the plastic surgeon, which was intact (, ). X-ray and computed tomography scan of the pelvis with both hips showed right neck of femur fracture with associated GT fracture (, ). As the patient was old requiring early mobilization had pain and difficulty in walking, we planned for total hip replacement surgery with a dual mobility cup as the patient was a high risk for dislocation.
The patient was operated on in a lateral position under spinal anesthesia using the posterior approach. Initially, acetabular preparation was done, then the cerclage wires passed in the medial cortex of the proximal femur after the drilling using k-wires and then passed under the vastus lateralis muscle . The femoral preparation was done using sequential rasps. The cemented total hip arthroplasty was done using Zimmer implant of the acetabulum (cotyle double mobilite size of 56–57), femoral component (femoral stem size of 13 and femoral head size of 28), and dual mobility polyethylene liner for the head 28 and cup 56–57. After the implant fixation and hip reduction, the TBW was passed from the tip of the GT through the abductors and distally taken out from the lateral cortex of the femur. Now, both the cerclage wires and TBW were tightened together. Intraoperatively, stability of the hip and the GT was stable. After putting the drain, the wound was closed in layers. The post-operative X-ray showed well-fixed femoral and acetabular components with proper inclination . Weight-bearing was started from the 2nd post-operative day with the walker. After 1.5 years of follow-up, the patient is now comfortable with no pain and difficulty in walking and showing fracture union and bony in growth around stem and acetabular cup . The patient has a good range of motion at the hip. The functional outcome is good as per Harris’s hip score.