A 33-year-old woman, who was a hepatitis B virus carrier, had been followed up since she was 17 years old because a HBV carrier could develop hepatitis or HCC. Annular ultrasound sonography showed a 24-mm tumor in the liver segment VIII, during which time she was in the eighth week of gestation. Laboratory findings showed an alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level of 39.2 ng/mL, AFP-L3 (Lens culinaris agglutinin-reactive fraction of AFP) of 2.8%, and des-γ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) level of 468 mAU/mL. We suspected HCC but could not make a definitive diagnosis because enhanced image tests were limited due to the gestation. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound sonography showed a 37-mm tumor with a classical HCC pattern at 17 weeks of gestation. We diagnosed it as HCC and recommended resection during her pregnancy, but the patient refused surgery because she was concerned about the negative impact on her fetus, although we explained the safety of the surgery during the second trimester to her. We believed that RFA could be an alternative treatment option during pregnancy, but it was not sufficient to achieve curability because of her HCC size. Therefore, we got an informed consent about the benefits and risks of RFA from the patient and we planned to conduct RFA during pregnancy followed by surgery after the delivery.
We performed RFA at 17 weeks of gestation, and any complications did not occur. In a dynamic study, gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance (EOB-MRI) imaging showed a non-enhanced 40-mm tumor at 24 weeks of gestation . She delivered a healthy baby at 37 weeks of gestation.
Multi-detector row computed tomography (MDCT) 13 days postpartum showed a 45-mm non-enhanced mass without any other new lesions . Although there was no proof of residual viable lesion in MDCT, we were skeptical about the curability only by RFA because of the evidence that local recurrence rate increased in RFA for advanced HCC. Therefore, we decided to perform the surgery at postpartum as originally planned under well-informed consent.
The patient underwent segmentectomy of the liver segment VIII 21 days postpartum, and the postoperative course was uneventful. Pathological evaluation confirmed that RFA resulted in a small viable lesion in necrotic tissue with a free resection margin .
She has survived without recurrence for 6 years after surgery, and her child has been healthy as well.