A 52-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed with acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) with an intermediary risk group according to the European Leukemia Net in our hospital. Induction chemotherapy was introduced with the “3+7” scheme: Daunoblastina® (daunorubicin) 45mg/kg/body weight (bw) during 3 days and cytosine arabinoside 200mg/kg/bw during 7 days. Post-induction bone marrow aplasia developed on day 4 of the therapy, with a fever (38°C) appearing a day before. Chest X-ray results were normal and meropenem (3×1000mg/day) was empirically introduced. Due to persistent fever, on day 8 of the chemotherapy, caspofungin was empirically introduced intravenously (70mg/first day; 50mg/following days). Also, high risk patients are routinely screened for IFIs using commercially available serological enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay tests: galactomannan (GM) and mannan (Bio-Rad, France), as well as anti-Aspergillus immunoglobulin (Ig)G and/or IgM and anti-Candida IgG and/or IgM antibodies (Ab; Virion-Serion, Germany). Only one serum sample showed low positivity for GM (index 0.55). On day 14 of therapy, the control chest X-ray showed homogenous opacity of his upper right lobe implying a probable focal pneumonia. Chest computed tomography (CT) verified atelectasis of the lobe with distal pneumonitis . Bronchoscopy was done on day 31 and histology revealed fungal hyphae suggesting invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA). Voriconazole was introduced (2×400mg/first day; 2×300mg/following days). A control bone marrow biopsy showed partial hematological remission of the AML. On day 44 of hospitalization, the patient was discharged with a normal blood count. On the second hospitalization (1 month later) the patient had no subjective complaints and his blood count was normal. A chest CT showed deformation and constriction of all bronchial segments in his pulmonary upper right lobe. There were interlobular septal and nodular (up to 1cm) opacities. Suspected clot masses were seen in the lumen of the superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, azygos vein and splenic vein . The patient received re-induction chemotherapy, “3+7” in the same dose, and voriconazole therapy (2×400mg/first day; 2×300mg/following days) was continued as a secondary prophylaxis of IPA. On day 5 of chemotherapy he developed high fever (38.5°C to 40.5°C) and a bronchoscopy was repeated. Direct microscopic examination was done with a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) sample, and it was negative.
Histologic examination of the new specimen was done, as well as a revision of the earlier samples in the reference laboratory and the diagnosis was switched to pulmonary IMM . Voriconazole therapy had been stopped and changed to amphotericin B (AmB) colloidal dispersion (ABCD) treatment (1×400mg/day). Concurrently, GM showed low positivity in one serum sample while other biomarkers for IFI were negative. A chest CT, done 2 months after second hospitalization, confirmed a persistence of consolidation of the larger part of his upper right pulmonary lobe. The follow-up bone marrow biopsy showed a complete morphological remission of AML. The patient was discharged and secondary prophylaxis with itraconazole (the only available antimold drug for out-patients in Serbia) (2×200mg/day) was started. On the third hospitalization (after 2 months), the patient complained of cough, blood-streaked sputum, and low fevers. He was in complete remission of AML. A multi-slice chest CT showed signs of minor regression of inflammatory consolidation and the thrombotic masses were not seen . The patient received high-dose consolidation chemotherapy (cytosine arabinoside 3g/m2, from D1 to D3). Daily 4 mg/kg/bw of ABCD was reintroduced. The patient developed iatrogenic bone marrow aplasia on day 11 of hospitalization and became febrile. On day 13, hemoptysis, hypotension and septic shock were developed. Manual heart resuscitation and intensive infusion therapy with dopamine hydrochloride infusions were applied (250mg/500mL sodium chloride). A follow-up chest CT was done and showed minor regression of his pulmonary lesions. At the same time IFI early laboratory biomarkers showed a high positive level of anti-Aspergillus IgM (420U/mL). A lobectomy of his upper right lobe was done on day 60 during the third hospitalization. Mycology culture of his lung tissue sample revealed Rhizopus oryzae. A secondary prophylaxis with itraconazole (2×200mg/day) was done during the next 3 months and the patient remained in remission for more than 1 year.