A 58-year-old African-American man came to our clinic for consultation about his eyelid swelling and periocular discharge. He described having several days of unrelenting eyelid swelling, eyelid crusting, and conjunctival discharge, with no accompanying itching. At the time of our initial exam, he had not had any specific treatment for the complaint. Six months prior to the onset of his complaints, he was diagnosed with a grade IV glioblastoma accompanied by isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDH) mutation and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation. Shortly after, he initiated intensity-modulated radiation therapy of 60 Gy in 2 Gy daily fractions with concurrent TMZ 165 mg per day for six weeks. The right forehead received a total of 20–25 Gy, and the medial periocular region received a total of 5 Gy. Four weeks after completing the initial TMZ treatment, he then started adjuvant TMZ treatment cycles: 330 mg per day for five days, with a four-week break between each cycle. His presenting complaint appeared twenty-four hours after initiating the latter TMZ cycle.
Previous ocular and other medical history were unremarkable, with no prior history of blepharitis-associated dry eye, hypercholesterolemia, or rosacea. His visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. The patient’s ocular motility and pupillary examinations were normal. The eyelid examination revealed significant periorbital edema, marked by swollen lid margins, crusting, and the formation of collarettes at the base of the lashes, along with occasional breaks and bleeding of the skin. Additionally, we saw a thick mucus discharge on the eyelid margins of both eyes. Both conjunctivae demonstrated follicular reaction of the palpebral conjunctiva and injection of the bulbar conjunctiva, with no evidence of allergy-related signs such as papillary reaction. Both corneas were clear with inferior punctate epithelial erosions. The rest of the exam of the anterior and posterior segments was unremarkable. The patient denied experiencing any rash or dermatological symptoms elsewhere on his body, except for the acute symptoms affecting the eyes. Based on the clinical history, symptoms, and clinical exam, including no obvious rosacea or systemic allergic reaction on general examination, we made a diagnosis of blepharoconjunctivitis.
We prescribed applying triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% topical cream twice-daily to the eyelids for ten days We also prescribed prednisolone acetate 1.0% eye drops four times a day for 10 days to treat the associated conjunctival findings. We performed repeated slit-lamp examinations on the patient at 4 days and again at 3 weeks. By the time of the last exam, all signs and symptoms had resolved . The oncology team decided to discontinue TMZ both in response to the patient’s reaction and as the patient enrolled in a GBM trial.