An 81 year old Caucasian female, bilateral below knee amputee, presented to the Urology outpatient department with a blocked suprapubic catheter and associated incontinence. She had a longstanding history of urge and stress incontinence.
Suprapubic cystostomy was deemed an appropriate step-up in this patient's voiding dysfunction management. Long term urethral catheterization was proving increasingly difficult and the patient was succumbing to repeated UTIs. The suprapubic catheter was inserted one month prior to current presentation, under direct cystoscopic guidance a 16Ch Foley catheter introduced into the distended bladder, utilising the Lawrence Add-a-Cath approach. (Femcare-Nikomed Ltd, Hampshire, UK.)
No complications were encountered during suprapubic catheter insertion, and the usual precautions were observed [,]. Clear yellow urine passed, and continued to pass up until seven days prior to her re-admission on this occasion.
On presentation, other than an uncomfortable fullness sensation there was nil else clinically. There was little by way of resistance when the suprapubic catheter was replaced, which evidently was unsuccessful at re-establishing drainage. Aspiration by syringe was subsequently attempted, and a dark faeculant fluid was aspirated. No further attempt was made to manoeuvre the catheter.
An office ultrasound demonstrated that the newly inserted catheter balloon was inflated, but its location could not be determined. Cystoscopy however ruled out the bladder as the possible site, and interestingly was unable to visualise a scar to suggest recent occupancy of a catheter. The patient had a urethral catheter passed before being admitted, draining a dark-yellow residual distinctly different to the composition of aspirate the suprapubic catheter remained in-situ with the balloon purposefully kept inflated until further investigative imaging could be arranged.
Remarkably the patient remained systemically well and relatively pain free. A mildly distended abdomen apart, there was no overt tenderness or guarding suggestive of peritonitis. Nonetheless a marked rise in blood inflammatory markers, C-reactive protein measuring 53 mg/L and white blood cells 21.8 × 109/L, heightened our concerns. The computed tomography scan confirmed our suspicions of bowel injury the balloon catheter clearly demonstrable in the small bowel, causing partial small bowel obstruction .
Exploratory laparotomy uncovered multiple adhesions attaching the peritoneum of the anterior abdominal wall to bowel viscera. The inflated balloon was palpated within the lumen of the ileum and a fibrosed entry point noted. Oddly no exit point was evident macroscopically, and equally no lesion seen on the bladder. Adhesionectomy, catheter removal, small bowel resection, followed by re-anastomosis concluded surgical intervention. The patient went onto make an uneventful recovery, reverting back to the use of long term urethral catheters.