In August 2020, a 56-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for a dry cough with an esophageal sensation.
The symptoms started 1 year before presentation.
The patient had no relevant past illness.
The patient had a smoking history for 20 years, with 20 cigarettes daily and drinking approximately 4000 mL of beer 3–4 times a week for 20 years.
There was no abnormal in physical examination.
All blood test results, including tumor markers, were within normal limits.
Gastroendoscopy showed a 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm, superficial, flat, slightly rough, and red esophageal lesion 30 cm from the incisor teeth. Magnifying endoscopy with narrow-band imaging observations showed that the background mucus was brown, and the intrapapillary capillary loop was Type B1 (JES). Iodine staining showed no stain but showed its apparent margins more, and the pink sign was positive in the central part. The remaining esophageal mucosa was scattered in patchy light-stained areas, ranging from 0.2–0.4 cm . Computed tomography (CT) revealed a small cyst in the liver; however, no abnormal thickening of the gastrointestinal wall was observed . Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) was performed 1 wk after the endoscopy , and postoperative pathology revealed mucosal ESCC .
In March 2021, the patient was re-examined 7 mo after ESD. Endoscopic examination showed a 1.0 cm × 2.0 cm scar on the right posterior wall of the esophagus 30 cm from the incisor teeth. Iodine staining showed that the esophageal mucosa was scattered in a patchy light-stained area, with a pink sign (-) . The mucosa of the gastric fundus and cardia were smooth without any abnormalities .
In July 2021, the patient was examined again 1 year after ESD. The esophageal mucosa was the same as that at the final endoscopic examination. While gastroendoscopy also showed a 0.6 cm × 0.8 cm IIa + IIc lesion near the anterior wall of the gastric fundus near the cardia, biopsy of this lesion revealed erosion with regeneration and moderate dysplasia locally. The other mucosa of the gastric fundus and cardia were smooth without any abnormalities . CT also revealed a small cyst in the liver; however, no abnormal thickening was observed in the gastrointestinal wall . The patient underwent ESD of the fundus lesion , and postoperative pathology revealed moderate-to-severe dysplasia of the gastric mucosa .
In November 2021, the patient received a 3rd examination 15 mo after the 1st ESD. Gastroendoscopy revealed patchy light-stained areas throughout the esophagus after iodine staining . The mucosa of the gastric fundus and cardia was smooth, except for the scar after ESD, and no abnormalities were found on a gastroendoscopy . CT showed no abnormal thickening of the gastrointestinal wall. However, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT revealed that the metabolism of the lower esophagus increased slightly, the metabolism of the stomach cardia wall increased slightly, and lymph nodes in the retroperitoneal area had high-density shadows and increased metabolism .
In November 2022, the patient received a 4th endoscopy examination. The esophageal mucosa was smooth, and no advanced cancer was found . Circumferential submucosal tumor (SMT)-like swelling was observed in the cardia and stomach body; local ulceration was observed, and multiple ulcers were formed. The mucosa surrounding the ulcer was regular and tough, the mucosa surrounding the lesion was clustered, and the lower edge of the lesion involved a minor curvature in the middle of the stomach body . A biopsy of the cardia revealed SCC . CT revealed a cardia tumor , perigastric lymph node enlargement, and multiple metastatic tumors of the liver and right adrenal gland .