A 26-year-old man was hospitalized due to a 6-month history of fever, cough, expectoration and melena. In the primary hospital, labs reported decreased hemoglobin and increased serum IgE . Anti-HIV antibody was not detected but immunodeficiency was found in decreased lymphocyte subsets counts, especially the natural killer T (NKT). Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a pneumatocele in the left lung and bilateral infectious lesions . The endoscopy found an ulcer at the ileocecal valve and mild esophageal varices . The results of a culture of the sputum yielded T. Marneffei. Periodic acid-Schiff and Hexamine silver staining of the ileocecal biopsy tissue revealed T. Marneffei infection . Conclusively, intestinal infection of T. Marneffei and hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) were included in the diagnosis, with the score = 28 according to NIH scoring system . The whole-exon gene sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutation in dedicator of cytokinesis-8 (DOCK8), the causing of HIES. He received intravenous amphoterincin B therapy (from small dose to 0.75 mg / kg/d) for 25 days and was discharged on an oral regimen of voriconazole (400 mg / d) for 15 months until the symptoms disappeared. Recheck of colonoscopy showed the ileocecal lesion was cured .
However, the patient was readmitted to our hospital 14 months later because of recurrent melena. Laboratory tests showed decreased hemoglobin, decreased leukocyte, and normal liver function . Endoscopy reveled the gastroesophageal varices significantly aggravated . Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed splenomegaly and gastroesophageal varices without obstruction of main portal vein or inferior vena cava . The liver biopsy was performed due to no evidence of chronic liver disease based on labs and previous history. The histopathological changes showed features of portal vein stenosis and hyper-vascμlarized portal tracts with out pseudolobule formation. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with INCPH.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) was performed to prevent variceal rebleeding. During the procedure, hepatic vein-to-vein communication (HVVC) was displayed via hepatic venography . Portography showed tortuosity of portal vein branches with much interruptions . The hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) was detected as only 4 mmHg while the portal pressure gradient before and after stent placement were 18 mmHg and 6 mmHg, respectively. The collaterals was disappeared after TIPS and there was no hepatic encephalopathy and recurrence of melena during the six-mounth follow-up.