A 66-year-old north African male presented with a past medical history including essential hypertension, stage 3A chronic kidney disease with a baseline glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 55 ml/minute/1.73 m2, dyslipidemia, benign prostatic hyperplasia, history of lower limb varicose veins, and deep venous thrombosis for which he was not on anticoagulation. Past medical history was also significant for hospital admission a year ago due to acute pancreatitis that resolved after conservative treatment without a clear etiology after the initial investigations. This was followed by another episode of acute pancreatitis 1 month prior to this presentation for which he was admitted for 3 days and managed conservatively. A follow-up computed tomography imaging of the abdomen at that time showed a new finding of a splenic artery dilatation, suggesting splenic artery pseudoaneurysm contained within a cystic lesion, which likely represents a pseudocyst.
Surgical history was significant for endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) for symptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysm 6 months ago, recurrent bilateral inguinal hernia requiring surgical repair, and intestinal obstruction requiring surgery intervention. He is an ex-smoker, and there was no alcohol abuse history. History was negative for new medication or herbal supplement, recent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) procedure, or abdominal trauma. Figure , showing the timeline, illustrates the sequence of events regarding his recurrent pancreatitis.
The patient presented with severe recurrent epigastric pain that was worsening in the past 3 days. It was associated with four episodes of hematemesis (around 50 mL of blood each time), nausea, and generalized fatigue. On presentation, the patient was afebrile, blood pressure was 152/100 mmHg, pulse rate was 75 beats/minute, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation was 96% on room air. Physical examination revealed a soft abdomen but with severe epigastric tenderness. There was no organomegaly nor signs of chronic liver disease. His cardiopulmonary examination was unremarkable. Laboratory studies showed a creatinine level of 123 mmol/L (at baseline), lipase of 1822 IU/L, normal electrolytes, liver function test, and coagulation panel, white blood cell count of 8.3 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 14.8 g/dL, and platelet count of 270 × 109/L. The C-reactive protein was 21 mg/L. Venous blood gases showed pH (potential hydrogen) of 7.39, HCO3 of 27 mmol/L, and lactic acid of 3.3 mmol/L. Results showed a triglyceride level of 1.18 mmol/L, immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) of 0.74 g/L, and corrected calcium level of 2.21 mmol/L .
He was admitted as a case of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and acute pancreatitis for investigations.
Computed tomography angiogram (CTA) done on admission ruled out fistula and showed stable abdominal aortic and iliac artery stents with no features that suggest active extravasation, along with edematous pancreatic head and proximal body, features representing underlying pancreatitis changes . It also redemonstrated the incidental finding of splenic artery pseudo-aneurysm within a cystic lesion likely representing pseudocyst size 3.6 × 3.7 cm with no active bleeding . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed thin-walled gallbladder with no filling defect or stone, and no common bile duct CBD dilatation, stone, or stricture. It also showed irregular dilatation of the distal pancreatic duct down to a 3.6-cm pseudoaneurysm in the body of the pancreas . Pancreatitis was managed conservatively with intravenous fluid hydration and symptom-based therapy with improvement in the patient’s clinical condition and symptoms.
The patient was reviewed by the vascular surgery team, and 2 days after admission he underwent intervention radiology (IR) embolization of the aneurysm sac with multiple coils via right retrograde common femoral artery–celiac access .
Investigations for the upper gastrointestinal bleeding including an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which showed normal esophageal mucosa, gastroesophageal junction at 36 cm from the incisors with Hill grade II hiatal hernia. The stomach had mild to moderate erythema in the body and antrum with otherwise no evidence of erosions, ulcers, or masses. The duodenum showed moderate duodenitis seen in D1 with a normal second part of the duodenum. No signs or stigmata of recent bleeding or blood were noticed throughout the examination.
EGD with push enteroscopy was repeated again 5 days after admission due to evidence of ongoing bleeding; however it failed to show a source of bleeding, including the proximal jejunum, which showed normal mucosa with no evidence of erosions, ulcers, or masses. Sigmoidoscopy and full colonoscopy were eventually done and showed internal hemorrhoids with multiple diverticulae in the sigmoid and descending colon filled with altered blood, but no active bleeding was noted.
Further investigations for gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding included insertion of capsule endoscopy for follow-up in the outpatient setting. Follow-up imaging showed stable aneurysm size with no extravasation.