A 66-year-old Thai female with underlying hypertension was admitted to Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand on September 26, 2016 to evaluate the function of an implanted VP shunt and identify the cause of an abdominal mass. Two years earlier, she had progressive memory impairment, dizziness, and difficulty walking for 4 months. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain revealed communicating hydrocephalus without leptomeningeal enhancement or abnormal enhancing lesion. Initial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 54 cells/mm3 with 96% lymphocytes, a protein 165 mg/dL, and a ratio of CSF/serum glucose of 25/126 mg/dL (0.2). The patient was diagnosed with normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) and underwent programmable VP shunt placement to relieve her symptoms. One year later, the gait difficulty and dizziness resumed. A brain CT showed recurrent communicating hydrocephalus. The neurological deficits were reduced after adjusting the VP shunt pressure. Six months following adjustment of the shunt pressure, the patient developed abdominal discomfort with a palpable mass at the right paraumbilical region. The patient did not feel feverish and did not have nausea or vomiting. Prior to this admission, gait difficulty and dizziness including diffuse headache recurred. Recurrent hydrocephalus was suspected and the patient was admitted for further investigation.
The patient was afebrile and had a very large, ill-defined mass with cystic consistency and smooth surface at the right paraumbilical region. Neurological examination revealed a magnetic gait, no neck stiffness and otherwise normal findings. The brain CT revealed communicating hydrocephalus with appropriate in-place VP shunt as shown in Fig. . The abdominal CT identified a well-defined rounded cystic mass measuring approximately 9.6 × 11.3 × 15 cm at the inframesocolic space. This cystic mass encased the distal end of the VP shunt, suggestive of a CSF pseudocyst . CSF was collected by lumbar puncture and returned a WBC count of 12 cells/mm3 with 94% lymphocytes, 20 mg/dL protein, and a ratio of CSF/serum glucose of 46/106 mg/dL (0.43). Ultrasonography-guided aspiration of the intraabdominal VP shunt pseudocyst was also performed. A total of 360 mL of clear yellow fluid was obtained and examined. The WBC count was 20 cell/mm3 with 97% lymphocytes, 472 mg/dL protein, and a ratio of CSF/serum glucose of < 4.32/120 mg/dL (< 0.03). An India ink preparation of the CSF taken from the pseudocyst and from the lumbar puncture revealed a few encapsulated budding yeasts. Cryptococcal antigen testing of the serum and the CSF was positive at the titers of 1:8 and of > 1:1024, respectively. The yeasts grew well on saboraud dextrose agar without cycloheximide. The isolate was identified as C. gattii by biochemical testing and a conversion to blue color on L-canavanine-glycine bromothymol blue (CGB) agar. A molecular typing using the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) of URA5 determined the isolate to be compatible with C. gattii molecular type VGI. Antifungal susceptibility testing by the broth microdilution method was performed and showed minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of amphotericin B deoxycholate (ABD) of 0.5 μg/mL, 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) of 0.5 μg/mL, fluconazole of 1 μg/mL, itraconazole of ≤ 0.015 μg/mL, voriconazole of 0.015 μg/mL, posaconazole of 0.03 μg/mL and all echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin and anidulafungin) of > 8 μg/mL. Unfortunately, when NPH was initially diagnosed 2 yrs earlier the CSF culture had grown C. gattii, but the result was overlooked. Chest radiography found no pulmonary nodules or infiltrations. Complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 12.4 g/dL, hematocrit of 39.4%, WBC counts of 10,930/mm3 (neutrophil 70%, lymphocyte 25%, monocyte 5%) and platelet counts of 385,000/mm3. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and liver function tests were within normal limits. Anti-HIV testing was negative. Immunological studies revealed CD4 T cell counts of 842 cells/mm3 (51.8%), CD8 T cell counts of 361 cells/mm3 (22.2%), IgG 1170 mg/dL, IgA 255 mg/dL and IgM 141 mg/dL. Anti-interferon gamma (anti-IFN-Ƴ) and anti-granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (anti-GM-CSF) autoantibodies were both negative.
During hospitalization, the patient received daily intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate 40 mg (0.7 mg/kg/day) combined with oral fluconazole 800 mg/day. The VP shunt was removed after 14 days of antifungal treatment. After discharge to home, the patient received long-term oral fluconazole for consolidation and maintenance therapy according to the IDSA recommendation . Reimplantation of the VP shunt was performed after 8 weeks of antifungal treatment. The follow-up CSF culture was sterile. Brain CT following shunt reimplantation demonstrated significantly decreased ventricular dilatation . After 6 months of antifungal treatment, the gait abnormality, dizziness and diffuse headache resolved, and the abdominal mass was no longer detectable.