A 19-year-old male and his healthy relatives of Bambara ethnicity were seen for a progressive walking difficulty. He is from a consanguineous marriage and with no remarkable past medical history. The disease started at age 17 with a gait difficulty that worsened gradually and has led to frequent falls. Neurological examination found moderate distal muscle weakness in the upper limbs and severe in the lower limbs. He had decreased tendon reflexes, bilateral flexor plantar reflexes. Muscle atrophy was noted, more marked in lower limbs involving the tibialis anterior muscles. He did not present sensory impairment as well as cardiac or auditory symptoms. Creatine Kinase (CK) level dosage was not done due to the unavailability of the patient. Nerve conduction studies showed reduced compound motor action potential (CMAP) amplitudes and none-response sensory nerves in lower limbs. Six years later, at age 25, he was seen in our clinic with severe symptoms and was wheelchair-bound.
Initially, the clinical pattern was suggestive of peripheral neuropathy, and the CMT panel testing performed in CLIA certified laboratory (Medical Neurogenetics LLC, Atlanta, GA) was negative. However, whole exome sequencing (WES) identified a novel homozygous missense variant c.1838G > A, leading to a Glycine to Glutamate change at position 613 (p.Gly613Glu) in the GNE gene. This variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing, and the Gly613 residue is highly conserved across a wide range of species . In addition, the variant was shown to segregate with the disease status in the family ( and ). This variant is predicted to be deleterious by several in silico tools (CADD = 29) and classified as likely pathogenic (PP3, PM1, PM2) according to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) criteria. More informations on the deleteriousness of the variant are provided in the Supplementary Table S1. Clinical and genetic findings are summarized in .
Importantly, secondary and three-dimensional (3D) structural analyses reveal several major disruptions in the mutant protein compared to the wild-type involving helical structures ( and S1). In addition, hydrogen bond analysis showed that the Glycine-613 is not directly involved in bonding interaction . However, the mutant Glutamate-613 gained four hydrogen bonds with Cysteine-610 . This change is predicted to impact the physicochemical properties of the protein making it unstable while the wild-type is predicted to be stable.