A 29-year-old female patient without a significant family history was admitted to our nephrology department for the evaluation of acute kidney injury and nephrotic syndrome with active urinary sediment. Her past medical history included a well-controlled sexually transmitted HIV infection in the last 6 years with undetectable viral loads and CD4 counts over 500 cells/mm3(939 cells/mm3 at admission). She did not have any history of drug abuse, and no opportunistic/concomitant infections were found during the standard screening (tuberculosis was ruled out by performing an Interferon Gamma Release Assay- QuantiFERON–TB Gold In-Tube test; hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, CMV, EBV and parvovirus infections were ruled out by specific serology). Her antiretroviral therapy at that time consisted of ritonavir, darunavir and raltegravir. Previously, the renal function of the patient was normal (serum creatinine of 70.7 µmol/L), and no urinary abnormalities or electrolyte disturbances were recorded during the periodical follow-ups in the Infectious Disease Unit. There were six weeks between the first signs of renal involvement and admission to our nephrology department.
At admission, her physical examination revealed a normal body temperature, an altered general status, pitting edema, a blood pressure of 150/70 mmHg and a heart rate of 92/minute. Auscultation revealed regular heartbeats and diminished breath sounds in the lung bases with an oxygen saturation of 92% on room air. She reported hemoptysis in the past 2 weeks before admission. Abdominal palpation did not reveal any hepatomegaly, splenomegaly or signs of ascites. Her urine output was 1000 ml/day.
The initial laboratory evaluation showed an increased serum creatinine of 503.8 µmol/L and urea of 45.78 mmol/L;metabolic acidosis, with a serum bicarbonate of 12.4 mmol/l;and serum sodium and potassium within normal ranges. Urinalysis was positive for red blood cells (127 cells/µl) and proteins; 24-hour proteinuria was 7 g with a serum albumin of 2.4 g/dl. Anemia was diagnosed, with a hemoglobin of 6.2 g/dl and low erythrocyte indices; no thrombocytopenia was recorded during follow-up. The mean cellular volume was 68.4 fL, the serum iron was 101 µg/dL, the ferritin was 899 ng/ml and the transferrin was 156 mg/dl. White blood cell counts were in the normal ranges.
Immunological screening was performed and revealed positivity for ANCA (titer of anti-myeloperoxidase antibody (anti-MPO) of 52.4 IU/ml), and a low complement C3 fraction(67 mg/dl). Tests for anti-GBM antibodies were negative, and the value of C-reactive protein was elevated (10 µg/mL).
A percutaneous ultrasound-guided kidney biopsy was performed. The immunofluorescence was pauci-immune. Under light microscopy, there were 8 glomeruli for examination,of which 5 were globally sclerosed. The functional glomeruli presented fibrocellular crescents and fibrinoid necrosis. There was mild interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. There were also signs of acute tubular injury with a simplification of the tubular epithelium with intraluminal cellular detritus and a tubulointerstitial mononuclear infiltrate. Electron microscopy showed diffuse foot process effacement and no dense deposits.
Additionally, computed tomography was performed and revealed alveolar infiltrates suggestive of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage .
A diagnosis of systemic AAV with renal and pulmonary involvement was established, with a Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS) of 18 points. The patient was started on a remission induction immunosuppressive treatment regimen consisting of a combination of cyclophosphamide, rituximab and tapering corticosteroids,which led to resolution of the diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and immunological remission, but owing to renal function loss,hemodialysis was initiated . The patient received prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and no infectious complications were reported during immunosuppression treatment.