A 75-year-old male patient who recently was accepted for a decrease in vision and who was treated for glaucoma appealed to the clinic. He had a longstanding history of pseudoexfoliation glaucoma which had been previously treated with topical medications.
His best corrected visual acuity was 6/38 (Snellen chart) in the right and left eyes. Intraocular pressure was 19 mmHg in the right eye and 23 mmHg in the left eye (Goldman applanation tonometry). Deep anterior chamber and presence of pseudoexfoliation materials with corticonuclear cataract was seen in both eyes by slit-lamp examination. Gonioscopic examination of both eyes has revealed open iridocorneal angle in all quadrants (Shaffer-Kanski classification system, Grade 4). On posterior segment examination we observed bilateral glaucomatous neuroretinal rim loss and vertical cup / disc ratio of each eye was 0.8.
Combinated cataract glaucoma surgery was planned for the patient, and XEN45 (Allergan, Irvine, California, USA) gel implantation was performed from the upper-nasal quadrant after phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation. After subconjunctival/sub-Tenon 0.1 ml (mL) lidocaine [20 mg (mg) / mL] injection to create an area for XEN implantation, 0.1 mL 0.2 mg / mL mitomycin C was applied to the implantation site in the upper nasal quadrant towards the posterior region with gentle massage. Stent placed to anterior trabecular meshwork as ab interno approach and by using intraoperative gonioscopy its placement was confirmed. At the end of surgery, the recommended placement of the XEN gel implant 1–2-3 mm (anterior chamber, sclera and subconjunctival/sub-Tenon’s area, respectively) was confirmed and surgery completed uneventfully.
In the first 3 months, the intraocular pressure ranged from 9 to 13 mmHg without drug use, and no complications were determined. At the third month control, a bleb was seen that extended through the nasal 180 degrees of the eye which caused ectropion of the lower eyelid, and the value of the IOP was 12 mmHg . Considering that the large bleb was linked to overfiltration, topical/systemic carbonic anhydrase treatment and tight closure were performed. Although the IOP was 7 mmHg after treatment, there was not any change in the size of the bleb. The clinic personnel thought this was a hypertrophic bleb, and the bleb was drilled by suture needle. In order to avoid a recurrence, a “Drainage Channel with Sutures,” extending from both sides of the XEN gel implant to the globe equator, was created . This procedure was carried out with topical proparacain eye drops. A conjunctiva/scleral suture was made with 8/0 polyglactin to create scar tissue. While the nasal conjunctiva and the lower eyelid were observed quiet at the one-year follow-up appointment with the patient , the IOP was measured at around 13 mmHg.