A 58-year-old man presented to the ED with complaints of breathlessness and reduced effort tolerance for 1 wk.
A 58-year-old man presented to the ED with complaints of breathlessness and reduced effort tolerance for 1 wk. He denied chest pain, orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. He also noted a 10 kg weight loss over the last 2 mo. He went to a family physician where he was found to have hematuria and proteinuria on urine examination, and hence referred to the ED. He denied hematuria, lower urinary tract symptoms or fever.
He had no past medical history and was not on any long-term medication.
On presentation, his vital signs were stable but he appeared pale and had bilateral pitting lower limb edema up to the knees. Abdominal examination revealed a left sided large, palpable abdominal mass, but there was no rectal bleeding or melena. Examination of respiratory, cardiac and neurological systems was normal.
His electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with T-wave inversions and ST-segment flattening in all leads, along with deep T inversions in leads V2-V4. Bedside ultrasound showed a large heterogeneous mass arising from the left kidney suspicious of RCC. Bedside echocardiogram showed a ball-like structure in the right atrium , oscillating between the right atrium and right ventricle intermittently during cardiac cycles, suspicious for a tumor thrombus. There was no pericardial effusion but the right ventricle appeared larger than the left ventricle, suggestive of signs of right heart strain. Blood investigations showed hemoglobin 7.3 g/dL, elevated serum creatinine 155 mol/L (1.75 mg/dL) and N-terminal pro-B type natriuretic peptide 7325 pg/mL. The remaining blood tests, including liver panel, troponin-T, prothrombin time/activated partial thromboplastin time and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 polymerase chain reaction, were normal.
Chest X-ray revealed mild pulmonary venous congestion. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a 13.9 cm × 15.8 cm × 16 cm irregular, heterogeneous left renal mass, suspicious of RCC, with extension of tumor into left renal vein and inferior vena cava (IVC) and metastasis to the liver. CT pulmonary-angiogram showed extensive right pulmonary embolism with evidence of right heart strain and pulmonary arterial hypertension, as well as pulmonary metastasis . A thrombus was noted in the enlarged right ventricle and right atrial appendage.