A 34-year-old G1P0 Japanese woman with natural conception was determined to have dichorionic diamniotic twins at 6 weeks of gestation and was admitted to a hospital at 13 weeks of gestation for risk of miscarriage. Ultrasound performed at admission revealed molar changes in part of the placenta. At 17 weeks of gestation, the patient was transferred to our hospital for detailed examination. Growth of both fetuses was appropriate for the gestational age, and a coexistent hydatidiform mole was observed. The patient wished strongly to continue the pregnancy, but hemorrhage-induced progressive anemia and growth in the molar tissue were revealed during the next several days, and the patient chose to terminate the pregnancy. The delivered fetuses were both female and had no obvious external malformations. Fetus 1, which was coexistent with the mole, had a slightly yellow skin color that was suggestive of chronic hemorrhage into the amniotic fluid. Macroscopic photographs of the placentas are shown in Fig. . The boundary between the normal placenta and hydatidiform mole was unclear. The patient’s serum human chorionic gonadotropin level was followed after termination. It dropped progressively until it became negative after 28 days . The prognosis of the mother after surgery was good, and she was granted permission for subsequent pregnancies .
Molecular cytogenetic analysis was performed with written consent from the patient. The patient also granted consent for publication of this report. Short tandem repeat (STR) analysis was performed by SRL, Inc. (Tokyo, Japan), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed by Nihon Gene Research Laboratories, Inc. (Sendai, Japan). As shown in Table , two alleles from the male parent and one from the female parent were detected in the mole, and fetus 1, coexistent with the mole, shared all its alleles with the mole. In FISH analysis, the karyotype of fetus 1, coexistent with the mole, was determined to be 46,XX and that of the mole was a mosaic pattern of 46,XY/46,XX . Meanwhile, fetus 2 with a normal placenta was a normal diploid fetus with one allele from the female parent and one from the male parent.