A 64-year-old gentleman presented to the emergency department complaining of sudden onset shortness of breath following intravenous contrast dye injection 30 min back. The patient had a history of painless hematuria for the last 15 days and was undergoing computed tomography-urography for evaluation. He was a reformed smoker for the last 10 years with no known comorbidities or previous allergies. He was not on any regular medications. He was being worked up for his painless hematuria and had no exposure to radiocontrast media earlier. Shortly after the intravenous administration of 80 mL of iohexol 350 milligrams (mg) iodine per milliliters, he developed uneasiness, profuse sweating, generalized itching, and difficulty breathing. He was administered hydrocortisone 200 mg intravenously by the radiologist and was shifted to the emergency immediately.
On arrival, he was conscious, oriented, had generalized blanchable erythema, and was in significant respiratory distress. He had a pulse rate (PR) of 150 bpm, blood pressure (BP) of 82/54 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 77% on room air, and respiratory rate (RR) of 35 per minute. On auscultation, bilateral diffuse wheeze was present along with crepitations. The rest of the systemic examination was within normal limits. The venous blood gas on arrival showed a potential of hydrogen (pH) of 7.275 [reference range: 7.31–7.41], partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) of 19.3 mmHg [reference range: 41–51], partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) of 31.5 mmHg [reference range: 30–40], bicarbonate (HCO3) of 9.1 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) [reference range: 23–29], and lactate of 13.5 mmol/L [reference range: < 1.2]. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia. He was immediately put on oxygen at 15 L/min via a non-rebreather mask and administered intravenous fluids, adrenaline 0.5 mg intramuscularly, diphenhydramine 50 mg intravenously, and ranitidine 50 mg intravenously considering the possibility of an anaphylactic reaction. His clinical condition improved considerably to a PR of 110 bpm, BP of 100/70 mm Hg, SpO2 of 100% on 5 L of oxygen support, and RR—24 per minute over the next half an hour. However, he developed sudden onset slurring of speech associated with deviation of angle of the mouth to the left side and slurring of speech and weakness of the right side of the body. On examination, he was conscious but not oriented to time, place, and person. CNS examination was significant for decreased power of 4/5 in both right upper and lower limbs. His plantar reflex was mute on the right side and flexor on the left side. ECG showed sinus tachycardia with no dynamic ST-T changes .
The patient was shifted for a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain immediately. It showed multifocal areas of diffusion restriction in left thalamus, left medial temporal lobe, left insular cortex, bilateral putamen, right middle cerebellar peduncle, right cerebellar hemisphere, and right half of pons, and an impression of multi-territorial acute infarcts was made .
Owing to active hematuria, the patient was not thrombolyzed and was put on only supportive management, following which his hemodynamic parameters improved.
The investigations on arrival to the emergency are summarized in Table .
The patient was then shifted to the intensive care unit. Holter monitoring done during hospital stay was normal. He later underwent radical cystectomy with ileal conduit during his hospital stay for non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, as it was endoscopically unmanageable. After the resolution of hematuria, he was started on tab aspirin 150 mg once daily. He was discharged after a month in a stable condition with residual weakness of right upper and lower limb (power 4/5) and slurring of speech. There was no visual impairment. After 6-month follow-up, the patient continued to have some slurring of speech, with complete resolution of the limb weakness.