A 5-year-old female child, born out of the non-consanguineous marriage of young healthy parents; presented to the orthopedic outpatient clinic with complaints of inability to bend both the knees since birth which altered squatting and cross leg sitting. Although she had an unassisted bipedal stiff knee gait, she could not run and climb stairs without assistance. The child had normal developmental milestones and fair scholastic performance. There was also a defect in speech which caused mumbling voice, difficulty in social interaction, maintenance of dental hygiene, and feeding. However, she was able to wear her clothes herself, brushing her teeth, transferring, and eating but need assistance with taking bath and with toilet activities.
Antenatal history was insignificant. She was born out of full-term vaginal breech delivery with a birth weight of 2.2 kg. The child was later diagnosed to have bilateral CTEV and genu recurvatum, for which weekly stretching, manipulation, and casting were done for around 2 years. She had two younger brothers; the youngest had a similar clinical presentation at birth and died at the age of 5 months due to respiratory distress. The mother had a spontaneous abortion during her fourth pregnancy at 4 months of gestation. There was no history of similar complaints or primary neurological/muscular disorders in the family.
On examination, the patient had a bodyweight of 10.4 kg, a height of 98 cm, and a head circumference of 42 cm. She had short stature, mask-like face, bilateral ptosis of eyes, microstomia, pursed lips, high arched palate, absent skin creases at the bilateral elbow, knee, and wrist joints, clasped thumb deformity, that is, inability to voluntarily extend and abduct bilateral thumbs. The patient could flex her knee up to 20°. She had pectus excavatum, scoliosis of the thoracolumbar spine with convexity towards the left side, and increased right trunk - arm distance. She also had bilateral broad and wide heels as shown in (, , ). Her ophthalmological examination had revealed poor power of bilateral levator palpebrae superioris muscle, hypermetropia with +2.50 D spherical correction in the right eye and +3.00 D in the left eye. Other features associated with the syndrome such as webbed neck, H-V dimpled chin, mal-occluded teeth, and hearing loss were absent.
Routine hematological investigations including serum creatine phosphokinase levels were normal. Electromyography studies of the bilateral tibialis anterior and the abductor pollicis brevis reported a normal insertional activity, no positive sharp waves, fibrillation, and myotonic discharge. The lateral radiographic view of the skull showed a copper-beaten appearance as shown in , which was most likely because of the craniosynostosis secondary to microcephaly. Her pelvis with bilateral hips showed the following changes in the right hip-decreased femoral epiphysis height, horizontal proximal femoral physis, and coxa breva as shown in . Her lateral radiographic view of the bilateral knee showed genu recurvatum as shown in . A skeletal survey showed the delayed appearance of the ossific nucleus of the proximal fibular epiphysis, medial epicondyle of humerus and patella. However, radiographs of the thoracolumbar spine showed no wedging or hemivertebrae or any other structural scoliotic changes.
The child has been under observation for the past 5 years and the past follow-up was 9 months ago in our department. The child has been stable and no significant worsening has occurred over the past 5 years. Since the clinical presentation of FSS may vary in each individual, we cannot define a particular algorithm of treatment. For our patient, we managed the child initially with manipulation and casting till the age of 2 years, followed by walking with knee stabilizing brace and passive stretching exercises. The child is currently able to do most of the activity of daily living. Due to the unexpected COVID-19 pandemic situation, the child could not be followed up after the last follow-up in March, 2019.
Due to the extreme rarity of this syndrome, and as this is the only case reported in literature from the region, and our center, it may not be possible to define a particular algorithm. Rather we had suggested that the management should be modified on a case to case basis, as highlighted in this case report.