A 51-year-old woman presented with an indurated mass of her right breast, suggesting a carcinomatous mastitis with axillary lymph node extension. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a lesion affecting the entire right breast, 8 cm in size, with an infiltration of the nipple and the axillary lymph nodes. A biopsy of the breast lesion revealed an invasive ductal carcinoma, grade III by Bloom grading system, triple negative (estrogen receptor−, progesterone receptor− and HER-2−), with a high proliferation index (Ki67: 63%). Needle aspiration of axillary lymph nodes was also positive. Positron emission tomography (PET) and bone scintigraphy did not reveal distant metastasis. A neo-adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated with four courses of epirubicin and cyclophosphamide (75 mg/m2 and 500 mg/m2, respectively, every 15 days), followed by 12 once-weekly courses of paclitaxel (80 mg/m2). The overall clinical and biological tolerance was very good. One month later, a mastectomy and a sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed. Histological studies revealed multiple scattered lympho-vascular embolizations involving about 20% of the tumor mass. There was infiltration of two of the three lymph nodes, with micrometastases measuring 1.8- and 5-mm. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the triple negative character of the carcinoma. Histological staging was T1cN1cMx.
Two weeks following surgery, isolated macular and slightly infiltrated erythematous skin lesions were evidenced in the near vicinity of the mastectomy scar. A skin biopsy revealed a dermal infiltration with breast carcinoma cells, triple negative, with a Ki67 of 80%. Capecitabine chemotherapy (1250 mg/m2, twice-daily, 2 weeks every 3 weeks) was initiated and adjuvant radiotherapy was administered (50 Gy, 25 sessions of 2 Gy) to the right chest wall and the supraclavicular region, followed by a boost on the scar and skin metastases (16 Gy, 8 sessions of 2 Gy). Five months later, new cutaneous metastases appeared, presenting as Velpeau’s nodules on the edge of the lower fields of the radiotherapy area . As the PET scanner did not reveal any internal and/or lymph node metastases, a skin-directed treatment with OFAMTX5% was applied (twice weekly for 2 weeks) to the lesions using the Dermadrop® device (MEDDROP GMBH, Hamburg, Germany) . The patient provided written informed consent for the off-label use of this technique (Eudract number 2017-000615-16).
In this procedure, a methotrexate 5% cartridge is inserted into the handpiece , following which the oxygen flow is started, projecting the methotrexate with the carrier solution through a fine needle onto the skin . The application continues for 5–10 min until a full saturation of the treated area is obtained, i.e. a yellowish liquid film remains on the skin . A plastic dressing is then applied for 24 h .
A biopsy performed just prior to the OFAMTX5% treatment revealed once again a superficial and deep dermal infiltration of neoplastic mammary cells with cytokeratin-7 immunohistochemical expression . The treatment sessions were well tolerated and the patient did not experience any procedure-related discomfort during or after the sessions. Two months following the procedure, a post-inflammatory pigmentation was observed but there was no clinical evidence of recurring infiltrated lesions. A control skin biopsy was performed and revealed a total remission . At the control visits 3 and 6 months after treatment, the post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation had faded and there was still no clinical evidence of a local recurrence of CMOBC.