A 33-year-old Indonesian woman, who worked as a live-in caretaker in Taiwan, initially presented to the neurological outpatient department with recurrent episodes of syncope with an upward eye deviation, which had been noticed over a period of two years. The routine awake electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed focal epileptiform discharges over the left temporal region , suggesting epileptic seizure. No intracranial abnormalities were detected on the brain magnetic resonance imaging, and there were no abnormal laboratory findings. Initially, she was prescribed levetiracetam at a dose of 500 mg twice daily, but later switched to oxcarbazepine 300 mg twice daily due to intolerable dizziness. After ASM adjustment, she remained seizure-free for the following one year. However, she reported poor adherence to oxcarbazepine over the past one month due to financial issues. Three days before admission, she presented to another hospital with a head injury attributed to an unwitnessed fall at home. She was initially found unconscious on the ground by her employer, but regained consciousness upon arrival at the hospital. A head computed tomography scan revealed no abnormalities, and she was discharged. However, in the following hours, she experienced frequent episodes of sudden loss of consciousness, followed by bilateral hand twitching lasting for a few minutes, occasionally witnessed by her employer. Although she regained consciousness within five minutes, she had difficulty recalling the details of these events. Due to an increase in the frequency of episodic unconsciousness to six times a day, she was brought to our emergency department (ED) for medical attention.
Upon arrival at the ED, the patient was observed to have clonic movements in both hands, accompanied by upward gazing and impaired consciousness, lasting approximately two minutes. However, before receiving an IV push of lorazepam (2 mg) as prescribed by the ED physician, she gradually regained consciousness, albeit experiencing mild dizziness. In response to the suspicion of convulsive status epilepticus, IV treatment of ASM was initiated. A single IV loading dose of lacosamide (200 mg) was administered in 100 ml of normal saline, infused at a rate of 200 ml/h over 30 min. The ECG recorded on ED admission before lacosamide treatment was unremarkable. However, during the IV infusion of half the loading dose of lacosamide, the patient was found to be cyanotic and pulseless. As such, lacosamide was immediately discontinued due to concerns about its adverse cardiovascular effects. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, with initial rhythm exhibiting ventricular fibrillation (VF) . After two rounds of cardiac defibrillations, a transient return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. However, the cardiac rhythm of the patient degenerated into polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) , requiring further cardiac defibrillations. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) was established as hemodynamic support. Concurrently, myoclonic jerks involving the left limbs with the head turning to the right were noted. Therefore, IV levetiracetam was administered for suspected focal motor seizures. Anti-arrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone, lidocaine and esmolol, in addition to deep sedation and magnesium sulfate were subsequently administered. Emergent coronary angiography revealed patent coronary arteries. Nevertheless, during the procedure, VT/VF persisted, despite repeated defibrillations. Therefore, a temporary transvenous pacemaker was placed for overdrive pacing.
After transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU), the ventricular arrhythmias disappeared, and her hemodynamic parameters gradually stabilized. A comprehensive workup, including electrolytes, thyroid function, drug screening of blood and urine, as well as transthoracic echocardiography, was unremarkable. The testing of lacosamide plasma concentrations was not available at our hospital. Continuous EEG monitoring in the ICU after discontinuing sedative agents revealed focal interictal epileptiform discharges in the left frontal region, leading to the diagnosis of focal impaired awareness motor seizure. Afterwards, the patient regained consciousness at baseline level, and was weaned off the V-A ECMO on the fourth day of admission. Notably, although there was no positive family history of epilepsy, the patient reported that three relatives had experienced sudden cardiac death before the age of 40 years; hence, BrS was suspected. After tapering the overdrive pacing, repeat ECGs showed saddleback ST segment elevation in precordial leads V1–V3, suggestive a Brugada type 2 pattern . Following this finding, an ajmaline drug provocation test was performed in the ICU. Serial ECGs showed a typical Brugada type 1 ECG pattern in the pericardial standard and high intercostal leads , thus confirming the diagnosis of BrS in this young female patient. Subsequently, the patient underwent implantable cardioverter-defibrillator implantation and was discharged with full neurological recovery. Since the patient was a migrant worker, she was referred back to Indonesia for further medical care.