An 81-year-old gentleman presented acutely to the surgical assessment unit with a painful, diffuse swelling in the left popliteal fossa. The swelling, which was first noticed 6 weeks prior to admission, came on suddenly and was associated with pain and tenderness. Over the following weeks, it had progressed in size and become increasingly painful. The patient had a background history of hypertension, but was not on any regular medication.
A provisional diagnosis of a Baker’s cyst had been made by the patient’s primary health care provider and he had subsequently been awaiting an Orthopaedic clinic appointment for this. The swelling continued to increase in size, restricting the range of movement at the knee. The patient subsequently attended the emergency department where a pulsatile popliteal fossa mass was found. The impression was still of a Baker’s cyst and the patient was sent home. In the weeks to follow, the patient struggled to bear weight on the left leg. The 24 hours leading up to his present admission was accompanied by a sudden onset diffuse swelling in the entire left lower leg. An urgent ultrasound was arranged to exclude a deep venous thrombosis which instead revealed a large, 8 cm, popliteal aneurysm in the popliteal fossa, the outer wall of which was not well defined. There was a 5 cm patent channel noted within the centre of this structure with extensive intramural thrombus noted at the periphery. No obvious abdominal aortic aneurysm was seen.
On initial surgical evaluation, the patient was haemodynamically stable and apyrexial. The left leg was grossly oedematous from below the knee, with a pulsatile firm tender mass in the popliteal fossa. The pedal pulses were all palpable with good range of movement in the feet; however, there was marked reduction of movement at the knee joint. Initial blood tests including white cell count and C-reactive protein were normal. To get a more detailed image of the aneurysm and arterial tree in the left leg, an urgent magnetic resonance (MR) arteriogram was arranged, which showed a false aneurysm of the popliteal artery measuring 8.8 cm coronally and 7.4 cm axially . Approximately 50% of the false aneurysm was thrombosed and distal runoff was well preserved. No other aneurysm or stenosis was found elsewhere in the vasculature of the lower limbs. A decision was made to immediately perform an emergency open repair due to rapid clinical deterioration, possibly due to an acute bleed.
Per-operatively, the aneurysm was approached posteriorly and the sac dissected. Bleeding was controlled and clamps applied at either end of the aneurysm. The appearance of the aneurysm was very much indicative of a mycotic aneurysm, and a tissue sample was sent to the microbiology laboratory for microscopy and culture. A 5 cm vein graft was used to repair the aneurysm and the wound was closed. After the procedure, a strong flow signal was detected distal to the aneurysm repair. In the days to follow the patient recovered very well and the oedema in the leg slowly started to settle.
The aneurysm tissue was processed using the local Microbiology Laboratory Standard Operating Procedure for sterile tissues. It was emulsified in sterile saline using sterile glass beads, then plated onto 5% sheep blood (BA), chocolate (CA), CLED and anaerobic (ABA) agar plates and into cooked meat broth (CMB) (bioMérieux), which were incubated in appropriate atmospheres at 37 °C for 48 h (5 days for the anaerobic plate and CMB). The culture on CMB was sub-cultured after 5 days onto BA, CA and ABA, which were then incubated as above. The isolate was identified as Streptococcus sanguinis by API 20 Strep (bioMérieux) – a member of the viridans group streptococci. These results were available on the seventh day post-operatively, confirming the suspicion of a mycotic aneurysm. Intravenous benzylpenicillin and flucloxacillin were commenced for 2 weeks, as recommended by the microbiologist.
Despite these findings, the patient remained afebrile and serial blood cultures taken all came back negative. As the organism is commonly part of the oral flora, an orthopantomogram and transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) were requested to exclude infective endocarditis. Both of these tests were inconclusive and the patient subsequently refused to have a trans-oesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) to evaluate his heart further. The patient regularly visited his dentist and had reasonable dental hygiene. In the absence of any focal source of sepsis, a conclusion was made that the mycotic aneurysm was secondary to transient Streptococcus sanguinis bacteraemia through the oral mucosa. The patient continued to show significant improvement in mobility in the weeks to follow.