A 32-year-old pregnant woman (gravida 2, para 1) was referred to our department at 17th week of gestation for genetic counselling before amniocentesis recommended on the basis of ultrasound findings. The pregnancy was uneventful, the first trimester screening test, counting on the individual risk for trisomies 21, 13, 18, was with normal results. An abnormal facial profile of the foetus was observed (mandible hypoplasia – Pierre Robin anomaly or cleft lip were suspected) on the first trimester scan. Micrognathia was subsequently confirmed during the second trimester scan (17th week of the pregnancy). Bilateral postaxial polydactyly of the hands and hypoplasia of the nasal bone were also detected . Both parents were non-consanguineous, the paternal age was 30, the first child – a girl – was healthy. The family history was unremarkable except for one case of a foetal congenital heart disorder in the child of a paternal aunt.
DNA was obtained from uncultured amniotic cells. A rapid molecular DNA analysis – QFPCR - excluded trisomies of the chromosomes 21, 18, 13. Conventional G-banding karyotyping was performed on metaphase mitotic cells obtained from amniotic fluid according to standard protocols. The karyotype of the foetus was 46,XY (500 bphs). MLPA testing with probemixes SALSA MLPA P036-E3 Subtelomeres Mix1 and P070- B3 Subtelomeres Mix 2B and P245 –B1 Microdeletion Syndromes 1 (MRC, Holland) were required for quick targeted exclusion of “common” microdeletions/microduplications. The DiGeorge syndrome was also excluded with probemix P311 – A2 CHD and P250-B2 DiGeorge syndrome (MRC, Holland) because of the micrognathia and family history of congenital heart defect. MLPA tests were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Analysis of peak areas was performed using software Coffalyser (MRC, Holland).
The loss of the gene BMP4 was revealed by probemix P311 in the foetus. This finding was confirmed by probemix P424-B2 CHD associated loci (MRC, Holland). Investigation of the parental samples of DNA did not reveal any changes. The loss was considered to be pathogenic. The parents opted for termination of pregnancy at 21st week of pregnancy. The extent of the deletion was specified by microarray (Affymetrix Cytoscan HD, Santa Clara, USA) using DNA extracted from the sample of foetal skin biopsy after TOP. Array data were analysed using Chromosome analysis suite (CHAS) software (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, USA).
The result was as follows: arr[GRCh37] 14q22.1q23.1[52468517_60202293]×1. The microdeletion spanned 7.7 Mb and involved 34 OMIM genes – 9 morbid genes . The detected chromosomal aberration was concluded as a cause of the clinical findings in the foetus and occurred de novo. Performed autopsy revealed besides of micrognathia and polydactyly, bilateral anophthalmia and horizontal palpebral fissure, lack of gyrification of the brain. Other organs were found to be without any morphological abnormality. Parental karyotypes were: 46,XX and 46,XY.