A 47-year-old female physical therapist sustained a traction injury to bilateral scapulothoracic muscles during a medical procedure. The mechanism of injury occurred while the subject was awaiting anesthesia in the operating room. Both upper extremities were strapped and restrained on a board with the left arm abducted at 1000 and the right arm abducted at 800 with elbows extended. A nurse grabbed both ankles and pulled forcefully to move the subject down to the end of the gurney causing a bilateral traction event to the scapulothoracic musculature. The subject recalled immediately feeling a sharp pain with severe burning in bilateral periscapular musculature. Soon after notifying the surgical staff, anesthesia was administered, and the intended procedure performed. Upon awaking from anesthesia, the subject reported significant pain in the periscapular region, neck, left arm and difficulty breathing. These symptoms were attributed to a pneumothorax, confirmed by radiographs, and the patient was immediately returned to surgery for insertion of a chest tube and discharged to home that same day with chest tube removed thirteen days later and return to work as a physical therapist two days after insertion of the chest tube.
From the initial incident, symptoms of periscapular muscle burning, rib pain, cervical pain, and increasing weakness with arm motions overhead and away from the body persisted. Conservative physical therapy interventions along with self-management consisted of rib mobilizations, scapular taping, wearing a postural support shirt, ultrasound to the glenohumeral joint, anti-inflammatory medications, and modalities such as ice and heat daily. Strengthening exercise consisted of machine exercises in the gym (such as leg press, abdominal crunches, latissimus pull downs, shoulder press, chest press, triceps and biceps), light free weights and elastic resistance exercises for the upper extremities including specific scapular exercises for adduction, depression, and elevation. Treadmill and bicycle exercises were incorporated to replace running for cardiovascular fitness. These activities were continued for approximately four years.
Despite consistent interventions there was a significant and progressive decrease in strength and range of motion in both shoulders along with an increase in periscapular, cervical, and shoulder pain. Pre-injury fitness activities including running or bicycling had to be eliminated secondary to increased bilateral shoulder and arm pain. The shoulder pain and periscapular burning disrupted sleep every two to three hours. The subject, as a therapist, felt as though she failed at doing what she commonly instructed her patients to perform daily. And, assuming that there was no frank nerve injury, that it had to be a motor control or muscle length – muscle strength balancing problem; thus, within her skill set to resolve. The dosage of exercises, repetitions, or weights were continually modified to make improvements.
Symptoms persisted and increased from local burning along the medial aspect of the scapula to constant left acromioclavicular joint pain, radiating pain down the left upper extremity to 4th and 5th digits, posterior shoulder pain bilaterally with a “cramping” sensation on the bilateral posterior lateral scapula, cervical pain, headaches, and a sensation of arm feeling very heavy that needed to be supported to mitigate symptoms. The subject’s job as a physical therapist was compromised requiring constant modifications of her body mechanics due to the inability to lift, carry, push or pull the weight of her own extremity, or that of her patient’s. The only relief of symptoms was found in sitting with the medial scapular borders compressed onto the trunk with the back of a firm chair and the left upper extremity supported in abduction and slight external rotation. This maneuver of manual compression the scapula onto the trunk for stability mimics the “scapular stabilization” test performed in the clinic. Obtaining such significant and immediate relief confirmed to the therapist/subject that the primary cause of the problem has to do with the lack of scapular stability.
Four years after the initial injury, the subject sought an orthopedic consult secondary to constant left acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) pain and increasing difficulty with all functional activities. An injection to the left ACJ provided immediate relief for a couple days and diminished to 50% in the AC for two weeks but no meaningful change in symptoms to the rest of the shoulder or arm. A subsequent arthrogram revealed a tear in the upper labrum which involved the biceps tendon anchor. The arthrogram was negative for posterior labral tear and rotator cuff tear. A bicipital tenodesis was proposed but declined by the subject.
Electrodiagnostic testing was ordered to rule out nerve injury. There was no electromyographic evidence of cervical radiculopathy, plexopathy, dorsal scapular neuropathy, long thoracic nerve palsy, spinal accessory neuropathy or peripheral neuropathy on the left musculature. All nerve conduction velocities for median and ulnar nerves were greater than 53 m/s ruling out peripheral neuropathy. Antidromic sensory nerve conduction velocities were 36-38m/s for radial, ulnar, and median nerves which are within normal values for sensory nerve testing. Innervation to the muscles were intact yet strengthening and motor control exercises were not effective and injections into the joint provided no relief. The subject suspected a scapular muscle detachment as a possible cause of the chronic symptoms. The subject sought out another orthopedic surgeon who specializes in scapular muscle dysfunction.