The patient was a 75-year-old Japanese woman (II-6) who was suspected to have Huntington’s disease (because she exhibited chorea in her neck and upper limbs and had a family history of the disease) on her first visit to our hospital 2 years earlier (at age 73 years). Genetic testing was performed (with the patient’s consent) and revealed a repeat abnormality (42 repeat) of the HTT gene; thus, she was diagnosed with Huntington’s disease. Psychological test results were as follows: 25 points on the Mini-Mental State Examination and 10 points on the Alzheimer’s disease Assessment Scale—Cognitive Subscale. Tetrabenazine (the only drug capable of preventing disease progression) was then administered; however, nausea and fatigue necessitated the discontinuation of oral administration. The patient’s older brother (II-5) who developed the disease at the same age as she did had rapidly-progressing chorea; 5 years later, he was almost immobile and bedridden . She took memantine for 5 years but did not experience any special adverse effects.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed changes in the striatum. In a cerebral blood flow test (IMP-SPECT), decreased blood flow was observed in the precuneus (anterior wedge) and posterior cingulate gyrus . Usually, such areas of decreased blood flow are observed in patients with Alzheimer’s-type dementia. Therefore, we started treatment with an anti-dementia drug as would be done for a case of Huntington’s disease combined with Alzheimer’s disease.
Initially, donepezil administration was considered; however, because the patient was irritable, a regimen of low-dose memantine (5 mg/day) was started. Thereafter, the patient’s chorea, swallowing symptoms, and oral symptoms improved. A total of 3 months later, the dose of memantine was increased to 10 mg/day; however, the chorea worsened, so the dose was reduced to 5 mg/day. A total of 5 years since then, clinical manifestations have not worsened. The chorea movements also have not worsened substantially, and we have recorded the patient’s gait videos at the age of 75 years (Additional file : Video S1a) and 80 years (Additional file : Video S1b). The patient did not show progression in gait speed and balance. Also, after 5 years, IMP-SPECT revealed improved blood flow images in the frontotemporal lobe. Additionally, the information provided by family members and medical examinations by physicians specializing in rehabilitation did not reveal any deterioration in the patient’s swallowing function or decrease in her activities of daily living.