A 6-year-old boy presented to an emergency room with subacute abdominal fullness and acute abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple solid tumors in his pelvis, with a thickened omentum and ascites . Because a malignant tumor with peritoneal dissemination was suspected, he was remitted to our hospital. He underwent biopsy and was diagnosed with retroperitoneal rhabdomyosarcoma-embryonal type (positive for myogenin, myogenic differentiation 1, and desmin; and negative for α-smooth muscle actin and leukocyte common antigen). The patient was diagnosed with stage IV disease due to dissemination. However, considering that he was less than 10 years old and the histology demonstrated good prognosis, he was classified as an intermediate risk by IRS-V preoperative system. He was treated using the COG D9803 VAC protocol . The schedule of chemotherapy, surgery, and radiotherapy is shown in Fig. . G4 hematotoxicity (leukopenia and thrombocytopenia) was observed (CTCAE version 5) after VAC, before the administration of radiotherapy, but had recovered quickly without delaying the chemo-schedule. He responded extremely well to the VAC, and after the first course of VAC, his ascites almost disappeared. By the 13th week, just before the surgery, CT showed a 2-cm residual tumor in his pelvis. He underwent tumor resection during the 14th week. However, innumerable nodules that were suspected to be peritoneal disseminated tumors were observed in the abdominopelvic region and resecting all of them was not feasible. The nodules were conspicuous in the pelvis; thus, the surgeon randomly picked three nodules for pathological diagnosis. Within the 2-cm tumor, observed via CT prior to the surgery, there was 5% residual tumor, but the tumor was resected without any marginal tumor cells. The three nodules that were suspected to be peritoneal dissemination and were resected for pathological analysis had no residual tumor cells. We concluded that the patient had achieved complete resection. However, there is a high chance of recurrence in the pelvis and abdomen. Therefore, we planned and delivered 30-Gy/20-fr whole abdominopelvic radiotherapy and a 6 Gy/4-fr sequential boost to the pelvis with 10-MV photons. For radiotherapy treatment planning, Eclipse version 13.6 (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA) was used. The patient was placed in the supine position with vacuum fixation cushions and a thermoplastic body shell to immobilize his body and suppress breathing motions. He could not follow our instruction and hold his breath, thus CT was performed without holding the breath. The clinical target volume (CTV) for whole abdominopelvic radiotherapy consisted of the peritoneal cavity, excluding the kidney and liver and CTV for sequential pelvic boost consisted of the pelvic cavity caudal to the kidney. The planning target volume (PTV) was obtained by adding 5 mm to the CTV in all directions. The planning CT was obtained without holding breath, but we evaluated the dose distribution in both the inspiration and exhalation phases and calculated the CT dose in both phases to ensure a sufficient dose distribution for both phases. We adopted the volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) technique for the initial and boost IMRT treatments plan. The dose-volume histogram (DVH) was as shown in Fig. . The dose covering 95% of liver, right kidney, and left kidney were 16Gy, 12Gy, and 12Gy. The percent of the right and left kidney volume receiving at lease 20Gy were 31 and 27%, respectively. Clinac ix (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA) was used to carry out radiotherapy. We used kilovoltage X-ray imaging system first to apply the bone-match, then achieved cone beam CT image to check if the diaphragm was included in the PTV. During and after the radiotherapy, G1 dermatitis, G2 enteritis and cystitis, and G4 hematotoxicity (leukopenia and thrombocytopenia) were observed (CTCAE version 5). Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were observed both before and after the radiotherapy, but was extremely severe, particularly after radiotherapy; as a result, the patient required multiple platelet transfusions . Just after irradiation, the patient’s total bilirubin level transiently increased but eventually decreased to a normal level without any treatment. Transfusion dependence lasted for 1 month after the entire treatment was completed. However, eventually, the patient no longer required transfusion and was discharged. Considering the late adverse event, the patient experienced G1 cystitis and hepatic damage (CTCAE version 5), but did not experience kidney toxicity or radiation pneumonitis. He was in good health with no recurrence for 3 years. In terms of growth, his height increased from 121.7 to 132.4 cm, and his weight increased from 23.5 to 36.1 kg during 3 years of follow-up. The average height and weight for Japanese boys of his age are 119.6 ± 5.1 cm and 23.1 ± 4.1 kg before the treatment and 134.5 ± 5.8 cm and 31.9 ± 7 kg after 3 years; thus, his height and weight are within the 1SD for Japanese boys of the same age. The fusion of images of the pelvis to the femur before treatment and 2 years after treatment is shown in Fig. . The volume of his left iliac bone, which was within the irradiating field, increased from 66.1 to 81.1 cm3 (23% increase), whereas that of the femur, which was outside of the irradiating field, increased from 154.7 to 202.5 cm3 (31% increase).