A 47-year-old female patient was treated in the Dermatology Department of Shengli Oilfield Central Hospital in December 2020 due to neck herpes zoster. The patient is a professional and technical worker with a junior college education level. She used to be healthy and she is an only child in her family. Diagnosis on admission showed that there were several clusters of miliary to soy-sized cuticular herpes in the skin of the patient’s right lateral neck but there is no herpes in the right external auditory canal. Herpes content is clear, without pus and blood, and the boundary is relatively clear. The rash was banded along the unilateral nerve distribution area.
During hospitalization, the patient presented with right occipital pain. In order to clarify the cause, intracranial organic lesions were excluded, and improving cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination. MRI examination results are shown in Figure . Carefully inquire about her medical history, the results are as follows: The patient has a history of neurodermatitis for several years, and the condition is stable; The patient has no history of migraine, acute cerebrovascular disease and epilepsy; The patient has no history of CO poisoning and exposure to toxic substances such as heavy metals, benzene and organophosphorus pesticides; Both parents of the patient are healthy without a family history of hereditary diseases. In addition, the patient’s neurological examination showed no obvious positive signs. Improving the mini-mental state examination score = 29 and improving the Montreal cognitive assessment score = 28. Improving inspection of laboratory indexes, including antinuclear antibody spectrum, antivasculitis antibody spectrum, 4 items before operation (AIDS, syphilis, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus), thyroid function and thyroid antibody, serum vitamin B12 level, folic acid level, serum immunoglobulin, complement, liver and kidney function, blood glucose, blood lipids and so on. No significant abnormalities were observed in the above indexes.
Further ask if any close relatives of the patient had undergone cerebral imaging examination. It was found that her mother had suffered from trauma months ago and had undergone cerebral MRI examination. The MRI examination results as show in Figure . Cerebral MRI of the patient’s mother showed bilateral symmetrical white matter lesions of the anteroposterior and posteroposterior side of the lateral ventricles and the parabody of the lateral ventricles, which were connected into slices. The patient’s mother had the same pattern of white matter lesions as the patient, but the degree of lesions is heavier than that of patients. Therefore, we speculated that the patient had a high possibility of hereditary white matter lesions. Table shows the results of further genetic testing of patient. Figure shows that the patient with a heterozygous mutation c.931T > G (thymine > guanine), resulting in the change of amino acid p.C311G (cysteine > glycine).