A 27-year-old gravida 2, para 0 Chinese woman (body weight: 62 kg, height: 162 cm) was referred to genetic counselling at 30 weeks of gestation due to polyhydramnios and fetal craniofacial deformities. She had experienced first-trimester spontaneous pregnancy loss of a 45,X embryo. She denied consanguineous marriage to her 28-year-old husband, or any exposure to teratogens. The couple showed no facial abnormalities, facial asymmetry, or micrognathia .
Routine antenatal examinations of this pregnancy were performed at her local county hospital, and maternal hyperthyroidism was diagnosed and treated with regular drugs since 10 weeks of gestation. Ultrasonography has been made at 8, 12, 16, 23 and 29 weeks of gestation. Attention was drawn by the continuously high amniotic fluid volume since 16 weeks, especially by the amniotic fluid index (AFI) of 25 cm and single deepest pocket (SDP) of 8.5 cm at 29 weeks to diagnose polyhydramnios . Micrognathia was not recognizable in the printed reports from the local hospital until 29 gestational weeks. The left ear was low-set with no cleft or notching between the helix and the lobule . The fetus was pinpointed for mandibular hypoplasia at our hospital by fetal anomaly scan at 29 weeks and 6 days of gestation , showing severe micrognathia, retrognathia, short and vertical mandibular ramus, linear configuration of the mandibular body, and loss of mandibular angle. The mandibular length was 2.4 cm, which was markedly smaller than that of normal singleton fetuses at 29 weeks of gestation (median: 4.08 cm; lower 95th percentile: 3.8 cm) . The right ear was low-set and semicircular in shape, with no cleft or notching. The face was round with prominent cheeks. No facial asymmetry was observed. The SDP and AFI was 8.2 and 21 cm, respectively. The fetal stomach bubble was 2.78 cm × 0.96 cm, which was comparable to the normal gastric size of 28–30 weeks gestational age (2.23 ± 1.54 cm × 1.28 ± 1.44 cm) . No other structural anomalies were found in the fetus.
Amniocentesis was performed to seek for potential genetic defects in the fetus. Chromosomal aneuploidy and rearrangement were excluded by low-coverage massively parallel CNV-sequencing, which yielded normal results (data not shown). A heterozygous variant of c.140G > A (NM_0064) was found in exon 2 of the GNAI3 gene by whole exome sequencing (WES, Fig. A). Further Sanger sequencing confirmed the variant to be de novo that it did not occur in the parents . It was a missense mutation that caused amino acid substitution of p.Ser47Asn. The Ser47 of Gαi3 is highly conserved across various species (assayed by Ugene, Fig. C). Four in silico tools of PolyPhen, MutationTaster, PROVEAN, and SIFT were used to predict the harmfulness of this missense variant, showing all deleterious except for “Neutral” by PROVEAN . The Ser47 resided in the last amino acid of the G1 box. The 3D molecular model was built using SWISS-MODEL, and the H-bonds toward guanosine diphosphate (GDP) were calculated by Swiss-PdbViewer. As shown in Fig. E, the substitution of Ser47 to Asn47 changed the sidechain direction and disrupted one of the three H-bonds to GDP, which might interfere with the binding and downstream signaling of the G protein. The variant was novel that has been neither reported in literature nor found in the public or inhouse database. This represents the seventh variant to the GNAI3 mutation spectrum in ACS, which was schematically depicted in Fig. F.
By reviewing literature, 19 individuals have been identified carrying 7 distinct missense variants from 8 cases, among which 4 were familial and 4 were sporadic [, , , , –]. Two individuals with GNAI3 mutations (p.Gly40Arg and p.Asn269Tyr) were normal and the penetrance of the GNAI3-underlying ACS was 89.4% (17/19). Being autosomal dominant, the number of female and male individuals carrying mutations were mostly equal (10:9). However, the ratio of female to male probands, who were usually the most severe in the family, was 6:2. Moreover, nearly all the individuals with tracheostomy (7/8, 87.5%) and gastrostomy (7/7, 100%) were females, indicating female-dominated severe cases. The overall expressivity of clinical characters was summarized, showing common features of micrognathia (78.95%), auricular malformation (68.42%), microstomia (66.67%), prominent cheeks (63.16%), mandibular hypoplasia (57.89%), and round faces (57.89%). Four patients showed asymmetric mandibular and auricular malformations that were either more severe on the right or right ear affected only, indicating right-side-prone deformities. The prenatal findings of two patients were retrospectively described in brief. Together with ours, all the three showed polyhydramnios (100%), and two were noticed for micrognathia (66.67%) in the ultrasonography.
The couple in the present case were informed of the genetic diagnosis of ACS, the details of this rare syndrome, and the recurrent risk in their future pregnancies. They eventually opted for pregnancy termination at the local hospital at 33 weeks and 6 days of gestation and refused any photography and post-mortem autopsy of the fetus.