A 12-year-old girl, born of non-consanguineous marriage, with uneventful birth and developmental history, presented with progressive intellectual decline and difficulty manipulating objects with her hands for past 2 years. She was the only child of her parents and there was no history of neurological illness in her family. There was no history of seizures, loss of consciousness, autonomic dysfunction. She was treatment naïve and there was no history of toxin or drug exposure.
Her facial examination revealed presence of dystonia of forehead involving the corrugator and frontalis muscles. There was also oromandibular dystonia giving rise to a “vacuous smile”. There was evidence of dystonic posturing of hands and toes, which was accentuated on voluntary activity. There were no pyramidal, or cerebellar features nor signs of sensory impairment. Of note, parkinsonian features were absent. Cranial nerve examination revealed slow saccades with intact pursuit, and a dysarthric speech. The most striking feature was the presence of a stereotyped, repetitive, involuntary hyperkinetic movement involving both upper limbs which comprised of flexion, extension of fingers at the metacarpo-phalangeal and interphalangeal joints as well as at wrist, giving rise to a flapping appearance . It was not associated with urge, nor could the patient suppress it completely on her own volition. It disappeared during sleep and reduced on distraction, without any feeling of distress. It was not associated with any phonic or vocal phenomenon. The patient did not complain of any unpleasant sensation, paraesthesia, or pain of her upper limbs. There was no evidence of motor impersistence as assessed by sustained hand grip, tongue protrusion and eye closure. No frontal release signs were evident. In addition, there was dystonia in the neck and lower limbs, along with chorea in her toes.
Progressive cognitive decline along with hyperkinetic movement semiologies including dystonia, prompted consideration of secondary and heredodegenerative causes, of which WD was at the forefront. Routine investigations, including complete blood counts, hepatic, renal and thyroid function tests were unremarkable. Serum iron and ferritin were within normal limits. Serum ceruloplasmin was low (8 mg/dL; normal range: 20–45 mg/dL) with elevated urinary copper excretion over 24 hours (more than 200 microgram/24 hours). Ophthalmological examination revealed presence of corneal Keyser-Fleischer ring . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain revealed presence of bilateral, symmetric, putaminal and caudate hyperintensities on T2 weighted sequences . Ultrasonography of liver was normal and there were no signs of hepatic dysfunction. Surface electromyography (EMG) of both upper limbs showed alternate bursts of muscle activity over flexor digitorum superficialis and extensor digitorum communis . A diagnosis of Wilson disease was made, and patient was started on chelation therapy with penicillamine. Elemental zinc tablets of 50 mg twice daily were also started. Symptomatic therapy was administered with oral clonazepam, trihexyphenidyl and baclofen. At time of writing this manuscript the patient had been followed up for six months. The hyperkinetic stereotyped limb movements had reduced. She was able to manipulate objects and hold pen with her hands, which she was unable to do six months prior. The presence of dystonia of hands as well as neck were better appreciated following reduction of upper limb stereotypies .