A 34-year-old white Kurdish woman, gravida 4, para 3, has been on regular hemodialysis in our center for 14 years due to hypertensive nephrosclerosis. She had cerebrovascular disease at the age of 20 years and at that time was diagnosed with hypertension and end-stage renal disease. She was started on hemodialysis 4 h/day, 3 days/week. She was admitted to the author’s clinic with suspected pregnancy in the 8th year of dialysis. A pregnancy at 14 weeks of gestation was been detected on her pelvic ultrasound. She was receiving cilazapril 5 mg/day for hypertension, which was discontinued after diagnosis of pregnancy. She underwent hemodialysis 5 h/day, 6 days/week until the end of her pregnancy. Her dialysis access was via an arteriovenous fistula, and conventional hemodialysis was performed. She did not need antihypertensive medication during this pregnancy. She was given recombinant human erythropoietin, intravenous iron, calcium, and folic acid. In the 32nd week of gestation, she was admitted to the hospital with early membrane rupture. Intramuscular betamethasone was administered twice with an interval of 24 h to induce fetal lung maturation. The patient subsequently delivered a healthy, 1900-g girl. In the postpartum follow-up, neither the mother nor the baby developed a complication.
In the 14th year of the patient’s dialysis treatment, she presented with amenorrhea of 3 months’ duration. Her β-human chorionic gonadotropin blood test result was positive, and a pelvic ultrasound confirmed a single 12-week gestational age fetus. The patient was taking valsartan 160 mg/day and amlodipine 10 mg/day for hypertension. Valsartan was discontinued after her pregnancy diagnosis. Her dialysis regimen was intensified to a regimen consisting of 30 h/week (5-h treatment sessions on 6 days/week). During dialysis, 1.5 m2 polysulfone and a high-flux dialyzer were used and blood flow rate was kept at a level of 280 ml/minute on average. The patient was started on a 2000 kcal/day, 1.5 g/kg/day protein-rich diet. She was anticoagulated with unfractionated heparin. Her blood pressure (BP) was well controlled after intensive hemodialysis, and amlodipine was discontinued. Without any antihypertensive medication, her systolic BP remained at 110–140 mmHg and her diastolic BP was consistently 70–90 mmHg. Anemia was managed with subcutaneous recombinant human erythropoietin three times per week and intravenous iron without transfusion. The median erythropoietin dose was 12,000 international units (IU)/week (range 6,000–18,000 IU/week). Folic acid 1 mg/day and calcium 1500 mg/day were added to her medications. Dialysate bicarbonate content of 30 mEq/L was set to prevent pregnancy-induced respiratory alkalosis. The dialysate contained 1 g/L of glucose, 1.25 mEq/L of calcium, and 3 mEq/L of potassium. The estimated dry weight of the patient was increased according to her weight gain. Her dry weight was 54 kg in the beginning of pregnancy, and her weight gain was 9 kg during the pregnancy. Ultrasonography revealed polyhydramnios at 28 weeks.
In the 30th week of pregnancy, the patient’s contractions began and she had a preterm vaginal delivery of a boy weighing 1400 g. The baby, whose Apgar scores were 5 at the 1st minute and 8 at the 5th minute was taken to the intensive care unit because of his respiratory problem. Forty-five days later, the baby was discharged healthy.