A 46-year-old male with a history of chronic hepatitis B and hypertension was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of multiple liver tumors in December 2020. The liver tumors were detected at a local hospital after he presented with abdominal pain and abdominal distension for one month. The patient reported no past or present alcohol consumption or a history of diabetes. His family history and medical history were unremarkable. A physical examination of the patient showed no obvious positive signs. Laboratory investigations of liver and renal functions were all normal. The only abnormal laboratory results were carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), which was elevated to 710 U/ml. The levels of AFP, PIVKA-II and CEA were 2.77 ng/mL, 20 mAu/mL and 1.39 ng/mL, respectively. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 6.3%. The Child-Pugh Score was A with 5 points. Multiple liver tumors with ring-like enhancement were detected on abdominal contrast-enhanced CT and MRI. The largest lesion (measuring 11.5 cm in diameter) was located in the right anterior lobe and segment 6 . The hilar and retroperitoneal area revealed a shadow of multiple enlarged lymph nodes. No portal or inferior vena cava vein invasion or distant metastasis was observed. To rule out the possibility of liver metastases from gastrointestinal tumors, gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy were performed. No evidence of advanced malignant tumors was found. Considering that multiple intrahepatic tumors were unresectable, we performed an ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. Pathohistological analysis of the tumor revealed adenocarcinoma arising from the biliary tract. The results of immunohistochemical analysis were as follows: PCK(+), EMA(+), CK7 (+), CK19 (+), AFP (-), Hepatocyte (-), VILLIN (+), Glypican-3(-), Arginase-1(-), CK20(-), CD34 (-), and Ki-67 labeling index: 30%. Based on these findings we made a diagnosis of ICC with lymph node metastasis and without macrovascular invasion. The TNM clinical stage was determined as T2N1M0 (stage IIIB) according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Handbook, 8th edition.