A 70-year-old male presented with a 2-year history of a progressive tetraparesis that markedly worsened 2 weeks before presentation. On examination, he was severely myelopathic (i.e. with diffuse hyperreflexia, and bilateral Babinski and Hoffman’s signs).
MR and CT studies documented a large left-sided C1-C2 juxtafacet cyst that resulted in unilateral/dorsolateral extradural cord compression. It was homogeneously hypointense on both T2- and T1-weighted images; additionally, there was significant T2 hyperintensity in the medulla [-]. The CT further documented a 1.2 cm ossified mass occupying more than half of the spinal canal without apparent connection to adjacent bony/articular structures [ and ].
The patient underwent a C1 and C2 left hemilaminectomy. At surgery, the C1-C2 cyst appeared as a yellow, round, well-defined and bone-like finding, easily separated from adjacent neural/dural and/or vascular structures . With a clean cleavage plane between the cyst and the dura, it was readily removed under the operating microscope. In addition, the left C1-C2 foraminal extension was also easily removed [ and ]. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital.
The histopathology was consistent with a juxtafacet cervical ganglion cyst comprised a fibrocalcific capsule containing a moderately fibrous and sclerotic liquid matrix. No atypical cells were observed, and no synovial lining was found .
Here, we reviewed multiple studies involving cervical juxtafacet cysts. Criteria for literature review search strategy included “spinal cyst” or “ganglion cyst” or “facet cyst” or “juxtafacet cyst” or “cervical” or “calcified” in appropriate combination, in the main databases (PubMed, Google Scholar, MEDLINE, and Scopus). We identified 169 patients with these lesions; patients averaged 65.2 years of age and included 96 men, 66 women and unknown 5 cases. Cysts were located predominantly at the following levels: odontoid process in 17 cases (10.06%), C1-C2 facet joint in 25 (14.8%), and C7-T1 facet joint in 57 cases (33.73%). Most of the patients typically underwent laminectomy/hemilaminectomy for the excision of these cysts; 3 had laminoplasty. Posterior cervical fusion was also performed in 22 cases (i.e. two were occipitocervical fusions). Fifteen cases were approached utilizing a transoral route (i.e. most of were C1-C2 facet joint cysts). The histopathological examination, when accessible, documented 103 synovial cyst, 27 ganglion cyst, and 37 were not specified. No completely calcified cysts were found