The case describes a 26-year-old Chinese lady who was pregnant 2 years ago. At 15 weeks’ 15 gestation, she felt a solid lump in her left breast. Physical examination showed that the left breast mass was the size of a peanut, with milk overflow, no tenderness, and no apparent depression or bumps on the breast surface. Breast ultrasound showed mammary gland hyperplasia, and the low echo of the left breast, 12*8 mm, 11*7 mm, breast imaging reporting and data system (BI-RADS) 4a grade. The oncologist suggested re-examination after 3 months. The patient noticed that the breast mass gradually increased, so she saw a doctor again in a large grade 3A hospital. Needle aspiration cytology of the left breast tumour was performed in March 14, 2019, and cancer cells were detected. Using breast ultrasound, a solid nodule was seen in the lower left breast quadrant, 18*13 mm, clear boundary, lobulated, BI-RADS 3 grade. A solid cystic nodule, 10*8 mm, was found, and a solid area could be seen in it, range about 4*3 mm, BI-RADS 4a. Oncologists recommended that the patient should undergo termination of the pregnancy.
Caesarean section was performed at 32 weeks and 4 days of pregnancy in the Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Capital Medical University, and a healthy baby boy was delivered. At the same time as the caesarean section, the ovarian tissue biopsy was taken for OTC to preserve fertility and ovarian function. Half an ovary was removed from one side, and 1/3 of the ovary from the other side. The condition of the fresh ovarian tissue was good, with a corpus luteum and rich blood vessels.
The ovarian tissue was successfully processed and slow-programmatically cryopreserved in ovarian tissue cryobank, and fresh cortex viability and morphology assessment was performed. The methods description was consistent with the previously published article [, ]. A total of 23 pieces of ovarian cortex were frozen. The number of follicles in a round cortical piece of 2 mm is about 45, and it is estimated that 13,000 follicles were frozen for this patient. The images of follicular viability are shown in Fig. , and the images of HE staining in the cortex are shown in Fig. .
A biopsy of the left breast tumour was performed on April 18, 2019. Pathological findings showed (breast tissue) invasive micropapillary carcinoma of the breast, immunohistochemical results: estrogen receptor (ER) (weak-medium positive, 10%), progesterone receptor (PR) (−), androgen receptor (AR) (weak-medium positive, 80%), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) (3 +). Ki-67 (index 30%), p53 (+), cytokeratin 14 (CK14) (−), D2–40 (−), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (+), CK5/6 (−), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (−), synaptophysin (Syn) (−), chromogranin A (CgA) (−). A left axillary sentinel lymph node biopsy was performed on April 24, 2019. Pathology showed that the metastatic carcinoma of the lymph node (left sentinel) (2 positives in 3) and the isolated tumour cells could be seen in the capsule of the other lymph node.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was administered prior to breast surgery. The first chemotherapy regimen was docetaxel 120 mg, epirubicin 110 mg, and cyclophosphamide 900 mg, q3w. Injections of 3.6 mg goserelin acetate every 28 days were given starting after the first course of chemotherapy, planned to continue for 5 years. No menstruation occurred after the start of chemotherapy. According to the immunohistochemistry results, the 2nd-6th chemotherapy regimen was adjusted as follows: docetaxel 110 mg and carboplatin 500 mg. Targeted therapy was administered with trastuzumab, the first dose was 17 ml, which was then changed to 13 ml. Six doses of targeted therapy were administered before breast surgery.
Ultrasound examination of breast and axillary lymph nodes before breast surgery showed that low echo was seen at the edge of the gland in the direction of 6–7 o’clock in the left breast, 19*16*8 mm. The boundary was unclear, and a dotted strong echo was diffused in the left breast, BI-RADS 6.
Simple left mastectomy (preserving nipple-areola) and left axillary lymph node dissection were performed on September 10, 2019. Left breast reconstruction + acellular allogenic dermis implantation + dilator implantation was performed after breast surgery. Pathological report: a few invasive carcinomas in the (left) breast (the largest 7 mm), and a vascular tumour thrombus, the bottom cutting edge not special, lymph nodes showing chronic inflammation (left axilla 0/18). Immunohistochemical results showed: ER (weak positive, 10%), PR (−), AR (weak positive, 90%), Her-2 (3 +), Ki-67 (index25%), p53 (scattered +), EGFR (−), CK14 (−), CK5/6 (−), p63 (−), CgA (−), Syn (−), EMA (+).
After breast surgery, fixed-field intensity-modulated radiation therapy was performed with a 6MV-X line. 95% of the plan clinical tumour volume included left upper and lower clavicle, chest wall, dose 46Gy/23 times (2Gy/f), 5 f / w, filler bolus 0.5 cm.
Fourteen courses of trastuzumab were administered after surgery, followed by about 17 courses of pertuzumab + trastuzumab 13 ml double targeted therapy for 1 year. After breast surgery, goserelin acetate was continued every 28 days, and is planned to last for 5 years. Endocrine therapy using anastrozole, a potent aromatase inhibitor, is also scheduled to last for 5 years.
The serum hormone levels before OTC and 1 year, 1.5 years, 2 years, and 2.2 years after OTC are shown in Table . At present, it seems that the AMH level of the patients is in the normal range, and the levels of FSH, LH, and E2 are all at a low level.