The patient is a 28-year-old female and the only child of consanguineous (first degree cousins, F = 0.0625) healthy parents from the Azorean island of São Miguel (Portugal), born after an uneventful full-term pregnancy . From the second day after birth, she developed hemorrhagic blistering of the skin and oral mucosa, accompanied by a hoarse cry. In addition, at an early age (around 5–6 years old), she suffered from recurrent upper tract respiratory infections, and showed extensive nail dystrophy and hair weakness. No testing of the morphologic features of the hair fiber and shaft was performed; however the hair was thin and dull with extensive shedding. All developmental milestones were normal, with exception of weight (below the 5th percentile). The skin blistering gradually diminished with age, while hair loss from the scalp and eyebrows, without preceding blistering in those areas, progressively increased. Muscle weakness was first noted in adolescence and gradually progressed, resulting in an inability to perform activities of daily living. No similar cases were detected in the family. On physical examination, we observed sparse, tense hemorrhagic blisters and crusts distributed over the patient’s body. Diffuse non-scarring alopecia was evident on the scalp and rarefaction of the eyebrows. Laboratory findings, such as thyroid hormone function, showed no hormonal alterations, and there is no familial history of alopecia. Onychodystrophy (pachyonychia) was found to affect all 20 nails . She also had dental abnormalities (caries and enamel hypoplasia; Fig. ), dysphonia, and severe muscle atrophy in the extremities. On the neurological examination, reflexes were profoundly diminished.
To identify the pathogenic mutation, we performed PCR amplification of all coding exons and exon–intron boundaries of the PLEC gene (isoforms 1a, 1b, and 1c), followed by bidirectional Sanger sequencing, after obtaining the patient’s informed consent (the study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki Principles). This strategy revealed the patient to be homozygous for the novel nonsense mutation PLEC (NM_000445):c.7159G > T (NP_000336:p.Glu2387*) in exon 31 (according to the isoform 1c; Fig. ). Bioinformatic analysis, by the ConSeq server , revealed a score of 9 at this mutated position, indicating a very high sequence evolutionary conservation (data not shown). In order to predict whether the mutation has an impact on the protein biological function, we used PROVEAN and Mutation Taster tools. Both results showed a probable deleterious effect with a PROVEAN score of − 3.158 (cut-off value of − 2.5), and a prediction value of 1 for Mutation Taster (a value close to 1 indicates a high “security” of the prediction). The PLEC:c.7159G > T (p.Glu2387*) mutation results in a premature stop codon, which predicts truncated polypeptides and may also cause down regulation of the corresponding mRNA through nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (not evaluated in present case). Putative splice site variants were also analyzed by two in silico tools: NNSPLICE version 0.9 and Human Splicing Finder , both suggesting that this mutation has no impact on splicing, i.e., there are no evidences of creating new acceptor and donor splicing sites.