Twenty female, 25-week-old FVB/n mice were used in a toxicity study for the safety assessment of a natural compound, the hydroethanolicc French Lavender extract (data not published). This animal belonged to the control group and was not exposed to the extract. These mice were housed in polycarbonate cages, under controlled conditions of humidity (50% ± 10%), temperature (23°C ± 2°C), air system filtration (10–20 ventilations/hour), and on a 12/12 hours light/dark cycle, and were allowed free access to standard laboratory diet (4RF21, Mucedola, Italy) and tap water. During the experimental assay, animals were observed and handled daily. On abdominal palpation, a large mass was detected in the abdomen of one mouse; its body weight was 50.1 g, while the average body weight of the other females was 25.2 g. The animal exhibited poor body condition, and, considering our humane endpoints, it was sacrificed by anesthetic overdose. The animal was subsequently subjected to a careful postmortem examination.
During the necropsy, a large mass connected to the right uterine horn was observed, occupying the entire abdominal cavity, measuring 5.5 × 3.5 × 2.8 cm in its largest dimensions and weighing 20.6 g ( and ). This mass consisted of multiple cysts, the largest measuring 2.8 × 2.0 cm, with brownish content, and small whitish solid areas. The contralateral ovary showed no macroscopical alterations. The stomach was atrophied by compression, and the remaining organs did not show significant changes. The mass and all organs were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 24 hours for histopathologic examination.
The specimens were processed for a routine histopathology examination. After sample fixation, they were cut using a microtome. Histological sections were then prepared and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
The mass presented areas of epidermal differentiation with laminated keratin and sebaceous glands. Cell differentiation into digestive and respiratory epithelium, bone, cartilage, and vast areas of differentiation into nervous tissue were also present (–). Moreover, the nervous tissue presented focal areas of ependymoma. Epithelial areas with hypercellularity, cell atypia, stromal microinvasion, hemorrhages, and necrosis were also observed. Metastatic epithelial cells were detected invading the pancreas, the small intestine serosa, and the mesenterium. Therefore, the mass was classified as a malignant teratoma with abdominal carcinomatosis.
All animals were carefully handled following the European Guidelines for experimental studies (National Decree-law 113/2013 and European Directive 2010/63/EU). The study was approved by the National Competent Authority and by the University Ethics Committee.