The patient, a 28-year-old man, was admitted to the Endocrinology Department of Peking University International Hospital on November 15, 2022, due to “six years of excessive drinking and urination, 6 months of paroxysmal nausea and vomiting”. The patient had symptoms of thirst, polydipsia, and polyuria without inducement 6 years ago and was not diagnosed or treated. The fasting plasma glucose was 8.5 mmol/L (normal reference range is 3.9–6.1 mmol/L) in the posterior examination. Then, he was diagnosed with T1DM after examinations in an external hospital. The patient was given short-acting insulin for three meals and long-acting insulin before bed for anti-hyperglycaemic treatment. He was hospitalized many times for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) because of irregular insulin injections. When discharged from the hospital, the patient was given a preprandial subcutaneous injection of insulin lispro and a presleep subcutaneous injection of insulin glargine. The daily insulin consumption was approximately 47–64 units adjusted according to the blood glucose level. Six months prior, he had intermittent nausea and vomiting with no obvious inducement without abdominal pain and diarrhoea. He was diagnosed with diabetic ketosis (DK) by random intravenous plasma glucose with 21.4 mmol/L, arterial blood gas with pH 7.37, and urine ketone body with 3+. The symptoms were alleviated, and ketone bodies were negative after rehydration and insulin supplementation in the emergency department and then our endocrine department. After discharge, he still had intermittent nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, and abdominal pain, especially after meals. He was given itopride hydrochloride tablets to promote gastrointestinal motility, pancreatin enteric-coated capsules to supplement digestive enzymes, and pinaverium bromide tablets to relieve symptomatic pain. Additionally, psychologists evaluated the patient’s anxiety state and gave duloxetine and oxazepam to relieve anxiety. Unfortunately, the above treatment was not effective. Therefore, the patient himself stopped insulin injections and occasionally measured random peripheral blood glucose > 20 mmol/L. He was then admitted to our department for further diagnosis and treatment. During the course of DM, the patient had no blurred vision, numbness of limbs, cold feeling, acupuncture feeling, sleeve-like feeling, or intermittent claudication. He lost approximately 5 kg of weight in 9 months. For his past history, the patient was diagnosed with a renal cyst, kidney stone, and prostate cyst 3.5 years ago, 8 months ago, and 6 months ago, respectively. He denied a history of pancreatitis or pancreatic surgery. He was born at full term with a birth weight of 2.5 kg without hypoglycaemia. His growth and development are comparable to those of his peers. His mother and other family members did not have a history of DM. Physical examination results were as follows: temperature, 36.2°C; pulse, 72 times/min; respiration, 20 times/min; blood pressure, 140/87 mmHg; height, 175 cm; weight, 50 kg; BMI, 16.33 kg/m2; waistline, 65 cm; hip, 77 cm; and waist-to-hip ratio, 0.84. He did not have a Cushing appearance. He had clear breath sounds in both lungs, no obvious dry and wet rales, regular heart rhythm, no murmur, and additional heart sounds in the auscultation area of each valve. He had boat-shaped abdomen, soft whole abdomen, mild tenderness in the upper abdomen, no rebound pain and muscle tension, normal bowel sounds, no oedema in both lower limbs, normal pulsation of bilateral dorsalis pedis arteries, normal sense of pain, temperature, and vibration, and a negative 10 g elastic wire test on both sides. Laboratory examination revealed that the venous fasting plasma glucose was 26.3 mmol/L, urine glucose 3+, and urine ketone body +. The arterial blood gas analysis was as follows: pH 7.46 (7.35–7.45), PaO2 81 mmHg (80–100 mmHg), PaCO2 48 mmHg (35–45 mmHg), HCO3 − 35.0 mmol/L (22–27 mmol/L), BE-b 10.5 mmol/L (−3.0 to 3.0 mmol/L), venous serum potassium ion 3.5 mmol/L (3.5–5.5 mmol/L), sodium ion 134 mmol/L (137–147 mmol/L), chloride ion 93 mmol/L (99–110 mmol/L), glycosylated haemoglobin 11.2% (4.0%–6.0%), and fasting serum C-peptide level fluctuated between 0.34–1.15 ng/ml (1.1–4.4 ng/ml) and 0.39–2.02 ng/ml 2 hours after breakfast . The patient was negative for glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody (GADA), islet cell antibody (ICA), and insulin autoantibody (IAA). The serum magnesium level fluctuated between 0.39 and 0.71 mmol/L (0.75–1.02 mmol/L). His liver function, glomerular filtration rate, serum lipids, uric acid, calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone, and thyroid function were all within the normal range. The complications of diabetes were examined. No diabetic retinopathy was found in fundus photography, but cataracts were found in the right eye. The successive urinary microalbumin/creatinine ratio (UACR) was measured three times, and the values were 22.32 mg/g, 16.7 mg/g, and 15.85 mg/g (0–30 mg/g). Colour Doppler ultrasound of the carotid artery and lower limb artery showed no atherosclerotic plaque formation. Measurements of pulse wave velocity (PWV), ankle–brachial index (ABI), and quantitative sensory disturbance were normal. Digestive system diseases were evaluated. The enhanced CT scan of the abdomen showed agenesis of the dorsal pancreas (ADP) (considering pancreatic developmental variation), complex cysts of both kidneys, and small stones in the right kidney . An abdominal dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance scan did not show pancreatic duct dilation. Gastric emptying imaging showed that the gastric half-emptying time of semisolid food was approximately 80.53 min (37.25 ± 15.7 min). The tumor markers of the digestive tract, serum amylase, and lipase were normal. Gastroscopy showed chronic non-atrophic gastritis with bile reflux and a positive urease Helicobacter pylori (HP) test. Enteroscopy showed that the intestinal preparation was poor and that the mucosa below the sigmoid colon was normal. No abnormality was found in the upright abdominal plain film radiography and the ultrasound of the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries. The characteristics of this case are summarized as follows: 1) young onset of illness with a primary diagnosis of T1DM and therapy with long-term insulin replacement; 2) no family history of DM; 3) islet β cell dysfunction, but no absolute deficiency was observed; 4) negative for diabetes-related antibodies; and 5) abnormal development of multiple organs. Therefore, the diagnosis of T1DM was challenged. Specific types of DM could not be excluded. After informed consent of the patient was obtained, a peripheral blood sample was taken to Beijing Hope Group Biotechnology Co., Ltd., for examination. First, DNA interruption was performed, and a library was prepared. Then, DNA sample capture and PCR amplification were performed. Finally, the captured DNA samples were submitted for high-throughput sequencing. After the sequencing data were evaluated by Illumina Sequence Control Software (SCS) and qualified, data reading and bioinformatics analysis were performed. The results showed that the patient was suspected to have a heterozygous deletion mutation at [GRCh37 (hg19)] chr17:34842526-36347106 (1.5 Mb) that included 24 genes in total: AATF, ACACA, C17orf78, DDX52, DHRS11, DUSP14, GGNBP2, HMGB1P24, HNF1B, LHX1, LHX1-DT, MIR2909, MIR378J, MRM1, MYO19, PIGW, RNA5SP439, RNU6-489P, SYNRG, TADA2A, TBC1D3K, TBC1D3L, YWHAEP7, and ZNHIT3 . This region contained the complete 17q12 recurrent region (including HNF1B gene), which is not enough to cause a disease with the confirmed single dose. According to the results of gene detection, the diagnosis was revised to 17q12 deletion syndrome. Considering the findings of poor long-term blood glucose control, significantly delayed gastric emptying time, and the digestive tract history, the patient was considered to have DGP. The treatment plan was as follows: 1) diet guidance of low-fat diabetes soft food or semiliquid food and multiple meals with small amounts for each, 2) insulin subcutaneous injection for glucose-lowering treatment, 3) mosapride citrate tablets for promoting total gastrointestinal motility, and 4) pancreatin enteric capsules for supplementing pancreatin. Treatment results and follow-up indicated that the patient’s blood glucose fluctuation was reduced, with his fasting blood glucose fluctuating between 4 and 8 mmol/L and his 2-hour postprandial glucose fluctuating between 6 and 11 mmol/L. No symptomatic hypoglycaemia events occurred. His abdominal symptoms were significantly alleviated. Afterward, he did not seek medical attention due to unbearable abdominal pain .