A 11-year-old girl complained that her left knee flexion was restricted when lying on bed in prone position. Her mother told us that her left gait pattern was mild abnormal since she began to walk. It was not treated and gradually progressed. She denied any knee trauma or pain since she could remember something. This little girl was full-term normal delivery without any physical activity disorder, and her parents had no problems. They declared that no intramuscular injection in her left thigh. Our examination revealed that her left lower limb slightly abducted during walking, especially in the initial period of moving the left foot forward. The movement of the knee free in the supine position with the hip flexion, the range of motion of the knee was measured from 0° to more than 135°. Whereas it was changed from 0° to about 50° when the hip was extended in the prone position. When the knee was forced for flexion, the ipsilateral hip was flexed spontaneously . Besides, sitting in the Japanese-style showed an abnormal appearance with torso bended forward and the hips could not contact with the heels. A strip-like hardened band was palpated on the surface of left quadriceps, which became more obvious when the knee flexed while hip extended.
MRI indicated that muscle volume of the left RF was smaller than the right one, and dark-signal intensity was detected inside the left RF muscle in transverse T1-weighted and T2-weighted images. By comparison with other muscles in the ipsilateral thigh or contralateral RF, the unnormal signal intensity suggest atrophy of the RF on the affected side. On the coronal sections, a hypointensity band connected the anterior inferior iliac spine with the patella was legible. The imaging findings implied that degeneration occurred in the RF muscle, or the latter was displaced by the fibrosis.
Before the operation, body surface symbols and surgical incisions were marked . A 70 degrees arthroscope (Arthrex Inc., Naples, Florida) with a diameter of 2.7 mm was used to visualize tissue via the proximal portal. RFA was performed through the distal approach and contracture band was divided by during arthroscopic procedure while the patient was under subarachnoid anesthesia in the right side-lying position with rigid buttocks fixation. This position facilitated the assessment of surgical effects during the operation by comparing the degree of knee flexion when the hip extended with that before the procedure. In the arthroscopic images, a thick contracture tract was discernible while the surrounding fibrous connective tissue was debrided by mechanical gouging system (Arthrex Inc., Naples, Florida) . Then a plasma knife was used to cut off the tract from the outside edge to the inside gradually . After complete transection, the passive knee flexion could easily reach 120°. Thorough debridement and hemostasis around the broken ends were conducted with the radiofrequency ablation.
The operation lasted 14 min. Two incisions about 0.6 cm for each in length were sutured and dressed. No cast or any other supporting instruments were used and the patient was placed in active position after anesthesia. The flexion angle of the left knee could easily reach more than 90° in the prone position with the hip extended on the first postoperative day. Active exercise was started 2 days after her surgery, for the pain in the surgical site was phenomenal on the first day. No symptom of neurovascular damage after surgery. During the postoperative examination, we found her myodynamia differences between operation side and the contralateral side were nonsignificant, neither between the lower limbs’ nor the thighs’.
At the 6-month follow-up, the patient had no pain, and nearly normal range of motion of the knee flexion . She could walk and fell to her knees in a normal pattern, and she had returned to normal study and daily life. The girl and her families agreed that information about this case to be reported.