A 33-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented with intermittent inflammatory polyarthritis and low-grade fever of 2 months. She had a childhood history of nephritic syndrome but never had seizures, psychiatric illness or hypertension. On examination, she was pale, had generalized oedema and active non-deforming arthritis involving small and large joints. Urine analysis showed albuminuria, 2 to 3 red blood cells (RBC) per high-power field and RBC casts. Autoimmune screening was positive for antinuclear antibodies (titre >1:160), anti-double-stranded DNA, and a low complement C3 level of 39.3mg/dL (normal range: 55 to 120) and a C4 level of 10.1mg/dL (normal range: 20 to 50). A renal biopsy showed World Health Organization class IV lupus nephritis. Based on a diagnosis of active lupus nephritis, she was treated with 1000mg (15mg/kg/day) of intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days and 500mg of intravenous cyclophosphamide. She was discharged from hospital on a maintenance dose of oral prednisolone of 1mg/kg/day.
Two weeks later, she was readmitted for her second dose of intravenous cyclophosphamide in keeping with the treatment guidelines of the Euro-Lupus Nephritis Trial . On admission, she was clinically well with normal blood counts and inflammatory markers, and a blood pressure of 115/70mmHg. Four hours after completion of the cyclophosphamide infusion she developed generalized tonic–clonic seizures (GTCS). In the next 6 hours, she developed eight GTCS and her level of consciousness deteriorated to a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 7/15. She was noted to have a downward gaze with equally reacting pupils and bilaterally extensor plantar reflexes. She was afebrile and did not have neck stiffness. Her blood pressure remained within normal limits. Her haematological and biochemical parameters were within normal limits (haemoglobin 11.8g/dL; white cell count of 9400/ mm3; platelet count 236,000/mm3; normal blood picture; blood glucose 101mg/dL; serum sodium 141mmol/L; potassium 4.3mmol/L; serum creatinine 99μmol/L; serum ionized calcium 2.2mmol/L; serum magnesium 1.1mmol/L). Her blood and urine cultures were sterile. Her urine analysis was normal except for proteinuria of 30mg/dL. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 18mm/hour, C-reactive protein was 3.3mg/dL, and her complement levels (both C3 and C4) remained within normal limits.
She was electively ventilated. Seizure control was obtained with intravenous midazolam and phenytoin with concurrent nasogastrically delivered high-dose sodium valproate and topiramate.
Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain showed symmetrical high-intensity signals confined to the white matter in both occipital regions with no diffusion restriction or contrast enhancement compatible with PRES. Magnetic resonance angio- and venograms were normal.
Her level of consciousness improved over the ensuing 24 hours and she was weaned off the ventilator after 48 hours. Her GCS recovered to 15/15 and she remained seizure-free on oral antiepileptic drugs.