A 65-year-old man was referred to our department for further examination and treatment for suspected PR after gastric cancer surgery at another hospital. The patient had undergone total gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy and Roux-en-Y reconstruction for gastric cancer 13 months prior. One month after the surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 was initiated given a final pathological stage of IIIB (pT4aN2M0) according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma, 3rd English edition . However, during adjuvant chemotherapy 12 months after his surgery, the serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), which had been within normal range before surgery, increased to 6.4 ng/mL and 44 U/mL, respectively. Despite being asymptomatic, the patient exhibited pelvic ascites on abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) , which suggested PR.
Staging laparoscopy (SL) was performed during which white nodules on the right lower abdominal wall and ascites in the pelvic cavity were observed. Histopathological examination of nodules revealed PM, whereas cytological examination of ascites revealed positive results for cancer cells. Accordingly, the patients were diagnosed with PR of gastric cancer with a peritoneal cancer index score of 2 . During SL, an IP access port was subcutaneously implanted for subsequent IP chemotherapy. The patient was then started on combined chemotherapy with IP and IV administration of PTX and oral S-1 2 weeks after SL. Accordingly, 20 mg/m2 of IP PTX and 50 mg/m2 of IV PTX were administered on days 1 and 8, whereas 80 mg/m2 of S-1 was provided daily for days 1 to 14 in a 3-week cycle. PTX was diluted in 500 mL of normal saline and was administered intraperitoneally via the implanted IP access port over 1 h concurrent with an IV infusion of PTX after IP administration of 500 mL of normal saline. The chemotherapy regimen was based on the PHOENIX-GC Trial , a clinical study approved by the Institutional Review Board of Tottori University (approval number: C1704B011). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient included in this study.
After one course of the regimen, peritoneal lavage cytology returned negative for malignancy and remained negative throughout the treatment. CT showed gradually decreasing ascites , whereas serum CEA and CA19-9 levels returned to normal . Combined chemotherapy was continued without oral S-1 intake after the 15th course, whereas rest periods were extended from 1 to 2 weeks after the 34th course. Modifying the regimen and administration period allowed for the continuation of chemotherapy without major adverse effects with the patient remaining progression-free for 33 months with 36 chemotherapy cycles.