A 57-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with a red face, which was continually pointed out to him by his family in the preceding month. He had no notable past medical history, no family history of polycythemia, and had not been taking any medication. He had never smoked and did not take alcohol. He had a clerical job. His environmental history revealed no pertinent information regarding polycythemia. On presentation, his body mass index was 24.1 kg/m2, and his vital signs were as follows: body temperature 36.2 °C, pulse 74 beats per minute, blood pressure 132/74 mmHg, and percutaneous oxygen saturation level 99% (room air). Our hospital is located on the flatland in Osaka, Japan. On physical examination, there were no signs of hypoxia, such as shortness of breath, coughing, wheezing, or cyanosis. His breath sounds were clear bilaterally. Neurologic examination identified no abnormalities. A blood test indicated polycythemia; his Hb level was 20.8 g/dL . No abnormality was observed in his chest radiograph .
Because his EPO level was elevated (70.5 mIU/mL), polycythemia vera was unlikely. An EPO-producing tumor was considered; however, contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed no obvious lesion. On further examination, including abdominal ultrasonography, a 17-mm stone in the left urinary tract and left renal hydronephrosis were evident .
Two weeks later, he was admitted to the urology department of our hospital for transurethral ureterolithotripsy (TUL) on a priority basis. The operation was completed without complications. During his 4 days of admission, he was prescribed 1.5 L of extracellular fluid and 2 g of cefotiam hydrochloride on the day of the procedure and the next day. He was prescribed 90 mg of carbazochrome sodium sulfonate hydrate for 7 days from the day of the procedure, and 2 weeks after the procedure, his EPO level had decreased from 70.5 mIU/mL to 7.5 mIU/mL. A follow-up examination showed reduced hydronephrosis . In accordance with the 90-day half-life of red blood cells, his Hb level decreased from 20.8 mg/dL before and immediately after surgery to 15.8 mg/dL 3 months after surgery. Simultaneously, the redness in the patient’s face lessened. His Hb level was within the normal range (16.1 mg/dL) and his EPO remained low (5.4 mIU/mL) 6 months after surgery .