A 63 years old lady had a right total knee replacement (TKR) in 2013 using the Vanguard® knee system - Biomet implant. She was admitted into hospital in March 2018 - approximately five years following her initial TKR. She presented with an insidious and acute onset of worsening right knee pain and swelling, not associated with any trauma. The pain was affecting her mobility, limiting her ability to weight bear on that joint.
On clinical assessment, she had an erythematous and fluctuant right knee with a moderate joint effusion. Along with this, she had a tender joint line with a limited range of movement. There was no evidence of wound breakdown, equally in 2013 following her primary procedure, she had an uncomplicated recovery period. She had a core body temperature of 37.3 °C, with no accompanying fevers or rigors, and the rest of her physiological markers were unremarkable.
Her initial blood investigations revealed significantly raised inflammatory markers with a white cell count (WCC) of 20.27 × 109/L, neutrophils of 16.68 × 109/L and C - reactive protein (CRP) of 186 mg/L, suggesting an acute infection. Radiographs of the knee showed a relatively well positioned in-situ TKR, with no evidence of loosening, with the possibility of a joint effusion .
Given this patients history, examination and biochemical findings, a right knee septic arthritis could not be excluded, and as such she was taken to theatre for a knee arthrotomy with a view to debride the joint, and potentially replacement of the polyethylene liner.
After the initial arthrotomy was made, significant purulent, dark coloured fluid extruded from the joint. The knee joint was formally opened and at this point no pus was seen, however there was a significant amount of metallosis debris deeply embedded into the soft tissues surrounding the knee prostheses . On further inspection, it was clear that the metal clip which is normally used to secure the polyethylene insert to the tibial base plate had broken and dislodged . Despite this broken metal clip, the polyethylene liner was still in its original position, and on further examination the femoral, tibial and patella implants were all well fixed with no evidence of loosening. There was also no evidence of significant macroscopic wear of the femoral and tibial components.
The broken metal clip was retrieved successfully and in whole (part being dislodged and part being well fixed in the polyethylene liner). The Vanguard® TKR system is no longer used in our trust, and consequently we were unable to replace the liner and metal clip. This lady therefore went on to have a thorough soft tissue debridement of her metallosis and lavage with copious normal saline solution. She later had a second staged procedure (after a total of 18 d) at which point we were able to obtain the correct implants, and thus provide her with a new polyethylene liner and metal clip to secure it in place. In the interim, between stages, she was prescribed a course of two grams of intravenous flucloxacillin antibiotics (to complete a six week course) and was restricted with her weight bearing, to prevent polyethylene liner displacement.
Superficial and deep tissue samples from the time of her 1st procedure did not grow any organisms. The histology report demonstrated areas of black necrosis with reactive fibrosis, a giant cell foreign body reaction triggered by black, irregular metallic particles, confirming the diagnosis of metallosis.