A 29-year-old Asian man presented to our hospital with upper and lower extremity weakness, significant weight gain (20 kg over 18 months), dyspnea, insomnia, early-morning awakening, psychiatric symptoms (illusions, impaired concentration and memory, inappropriate laughter and crying attacks), and erectile dysfunction. Physical examination revealed the typical clinical features of Cushing's syndrome: hypotension, moon face, buffalo hump, multiple purple striae on the flanks, proximal myopathy and oral candidiasis. He was admitted to our hospital with an initial diagnosis of hypercortisolism. Biochemical test results confirmed the diagnosis and revealed that he had elevated serum cortisol (8 a.m.) and ACTH levels on multiple samplings. Dexamethasone suppression test results were positive on two consecutive samplings. His urine cortisol level was elevated, but his vanillylmandelic acid and metanephrine levels were normal. Other laboratory tests were noncontributory to the diagnosis.
An MRI scan of his brain found no pituitary defects, but a spiral abdominal CT scan revealed bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. The clinical and imaging findings raised suspicion of an ACTH-producing tumor. A bronchoscopy and alveolar lavage was performed to investigate the patient's lungs, but no bronchial lesion was found.
Technetium-99m-labeled octreotide acetate scintigraphy was performed in the whole body planar and single photon emission CT mode , 3 hours after the injection of 555MBq (15mCi) technetium-99m-labeled octreotide acetate. The scan demonstrated a focal uptake in the lower lobe of the patient's right lung, just above his diaphragm, which was highly suggestive of an ACTH-producing bronchial tumor.
Corresponding transverse images from a chest CT scan showed a well-defined mass about 22 mm in diameter in the lower lobe of the patient's right lung .
A transthoracic biopsy was performed and histopathological evaluation established the diagnosis of a carcinoid tumor of the ectopic ACTH-producing type. After removal of the mass, the patient's condition improved significantly. His clinical symptoms diminished and the results of biochemical tests returned to normal ranges.