A 48 year old man with ESKD presented with severe decreased sensation in his bilateral feet, originated from bottom of his feet, and gradually advanced to above the ankle level over the course of 2–3 years.
He reported the sensation of “walking on cushions”, as well as progressive difficulty with ambulation. Additionally, he complained of ongoing pain in bilateral legs, as well as dysaesthesia in bilateral hands. He had been diagnosed with ESKD at age 37, secondary to poorly controlled hypertension. He was initiated on peritoneal dialysis (PD) therapy for two years, before receiving a living-related-donor kidney transplant at age 39. His renal graft failed due to chronic allograft nephropathy after 7 years, when he had to be restarted on PD for renal replacement therapy. He had been on PD therapy for 4 years at the time of presenting with above symptoms. He had minimal residual urine output during the last 2 years of PD. As a result, he was receiving continuous cycling peritoneal dialysis (CCPD), 8 liters over 9 hours overnight, with a last fill of 1.5 L, with good compliance. Membrane transport type with 4-hour peritoneal equilibrium test (PET) was high average. His past medical history included a remote history of malarial infection, gout and native kidney nephrectomy due to findings of a mass compatible with renal cell carcinoma on post-operative pathology report, one year prior to current presentation.
He also had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus one year prior to the above presentation, and had appropriate glycemic control achieved by diet and lifestyle modifications. He denied any history of thyroid disease, vitamin deficiencies, lyme disease, alcohol abuse, chemotherapy, heavy metal exposure, amyloidosis or other systemic `diseases. There was no previous history of peripheral vascular disease. His medications included prednisone, verapamil, calcium carbonate, atorvastatin, darbepoetin injection, multivitamin tablet and venlafaxine. Cyclosporine and Mycophenolate Mofetil had been discontinued for 3 years prior to the above presentation.
On physical examination, his vital signs were stable; examination of head and neck, heart, lungs and abdomen was unremarkable. On neurologic exam, there was no evidence of muscle atrophy or fasciculations. The deep tendon reflexes were absent throughout. Sensory exam was significantly abnormal; pinprick and light touch sensations were impaired up to level of mid-calf bilaterally, there was moderate deficit of joint position sensation at the toes. Vibration thresholds were measured 50 microns on right great toe, and 38 microns on the left. Gait was prominently antalgic, but otherwise without specific characteristics. Muscle strengths were found to be symmetrical and 5/5 bilaterally. Cranial nerves were intact. The rest of physical exam was unremarkable.
His initial laboratory testing showed abnormalities consistent with ESKD: blood urea nitrogen above 10 mmol/L and serum creatinine above 1000 umol/L, for the previous several years. HbA1C had been less than 7 % consistently. Hemoglobin averaged around 100 g/L, potassium 3.7 mmol/L, corrected calcium 2.4 mmol/L and phosphate 1.7 mmol/L. Average weekly Kt/V for PD, as an adequacy index was 2.84.
Nerve conduction studies were performed, results of which were compatible with a severe, length-dependent, combined demyelinating and axonal, sensorimotor polyneuropathy. This was deemed to be most in keeping with uremic neuropathy. Although the patient had been diagnosed with diabetes the year before this presentation, the short duration of the disease and absence of other complications of diabetes, made the diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy unlikely. Given the patient’s severity of clinical symptoms , despite a reasonable accepted adequacy for peritoneal dialysis, it was decided to convert his renal replacement therapy to Nocturnal Home hemodialysis (NHD) 5–6 nights per week, 7–8 hours per session of dialysis. We hypothesize that an increase in uremic clearance may improve his uremic neuropathy.
Within 6 months following the switch to NHD, the patient reported significant improvement of dysaesthesia, with reduction in leg pain and improvement in his ambulation.
Routine laboratory values showed improvement in dialysis parameters, including average hemoglobin of 121 g/L, potassium of 4 mmol/L, creatinine of 540 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen of 10 mmol/L, corrected calcium of 2.40 and phosphate of 0.8 mmol/L.
Repeat sensory and motor nerve conduction studies were performed 1 and 2 years after conversion to NHD; there were improvements in nerve conduction velocity, amplitude and latency measures, in both sensory and motor components. The neurophysiological improvements were more pronounced in the upper extremities. These findings were consistent with resolution of symptoms.
Figures and demonstrate motor and sensory nerve conduction studies at baseline and after conversion to NHD.