The patient, a female, was 14 years old when she was diagnosed with scoliosis. She showed no cosmetic effect, nor was there any pressure on her internal organs related to the scoliosis. At age 44, a rib on her left side became noticeably more prominent and measurements showed that she had lost close to two inches in height. She was in good health and had a body mass index below 25. Her only pain medication was an occasional extra-strength acetaminophen. An assessment by an orthopedic surgeon recommended by the Scoliosis Research Society revealed that she had also developed some neuropathy in her left lower limb. A magnetic resonance imaging scan verified thoracic dextroscoliosis and lumbar levoscoliosis with degenerative changes in both areas. Surgery was deemed medically necessary.
Her first surgery was accomplished through a lower abdominal incision. Lumbar vertebra 5 (L5) was replaced by a titanium prosthesis, and a donor bone graft was used to replace the disc. The next day, surgery was performed anteriorly from a left-side incision. A rib was removed, a chest tube was inserted, and discs between T10, T11, T12, and the remaining lumbar vertebrae were temporarily replaced. After surgery, the patient complained of quite a bit of referred pain in her shoulder. She rested on days 3 and 4, but was back in surgery for several hours on day 5. A posterior incision allowed the surgeon to remove the discs from T3 to T9, rotate the spinal column from 85° to 27°, fixate it with rods, screws, and wires, and insert donor bone grafts between all the vertebra. Because the vertebra were scraped to allow fusion with the grafts, the patient required replacement of 14 U of blood.
Postoperatively, the patient had intravenous (i.v.) patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) with morphine. Epidural analgesia was attempted but did not provide any pain relief, so she was maintained on the PCA through day 7. She was then started on 20 mg of controlled-release oxycodone (OxyContin®; Purdue Pharma L.P., Stamford, CT, USA) to be taken orally (p.o.) twice a day, with 5 mg of fast-release oxycodone p.o. as needed for breakthrough pain. On day 9 her controlled-release oxycodone dose was increased to 20 mg at 7:00 a.m., 3:00 p.m., and 11:00 p.m. Fast-release oxycodone 5 mg was continued for breakthrough pain. She was discharged from hospital that afternoon.
A bivalve orthosis (clamshell brace) and two SpinalPak® II Fusion Stimulators (EBI, LLC dba Biomet Spine & Bone Healing Technologies, Parsippany, NJ, USA) were prescribed to stabilize the patient’s spine and to stimulate bone growth. The following days were difficult for her. They entailed making her position comfortable, adjusting the clamshell, replacing SpinalPak® batteries, and relieving constipation associated with the surgery and the opioids.
During the first week at home the patient took approximately three oxycodone 5 mg tablets for breakthrough pain, but by the following week she was able to gradually discontinue it. She became more active and was able to climb the stairs to the second floor of the house in spite of some left leg and foot neuropathy. She was anxious to be able to drive her car, but thought that she should not do so while she was still taking the controlled-release oxycodone.
Twenty-five days after receiving her first opioid and almost 3 weeks after discharge from the hospital, the patient discontinued the middle dose of oxycodone, contrary to usual pain management protocols, which recommend partial decreases at each dosage time over many days. She decided to take 20 mg of oxycodone at 8 a.m. and 20 mg at 8 p.m. By 5 p.m. that same day, she became anxious and extremely depressed. She showed the following signs of withdrawal: crying, cold flashes, piloerection, muscle twitches, tremors, hot flashes, and perspiration. She described symptoms of: abdominal cramps, feeling nauseous and ready to vomit, shaking, and eye twitching. These signs and symptoms lasted over 48 h. She was afraid to reduce the remaining doses of oxycodone and asked for assistance.