A previously healthy 33-year-old Japanese woman presented with involuntary muscle twitch in the right hand in October 2011. She had had low-grade fever for a month before the onset of the neurological symptom. Her involuntary movement gradually aggravated, and she visited a local hospital on day 6. Brain CT and cervical MRI were normal and therefore she was referred to our hospital on day 10. A neurological examination revealed no abnormalities except for EPC in the right hand that was continuous with a semi-rhythmic quality (frequency of 10–15 times/min) and was sometimes aggravated by voluntary movements.
A laboratory evaluation showed normal blood cell counts, electrolyte levels, sedimentation rates, and urinalysis. Anti-nuclear, anti-dsDNA, and anti-cardiolipin antibodies were all negative. Electrocardiography, ultrasound cardiography, and chest radiographs were unremarkable. Electroencephalogram demonstrated slow sporadic high-amplitude waves in the frontoparietal regions. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a normal white blood cell count and protein level. Oligoclonal bands were negative and the myelin basic protein level was within the normal range.
An MRI of the brain revealed a lesion in the left precentral gyrus on day 10 . The lesion exhibited hyperintensities on diffusion-weighted images (DWI) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, and isointensities on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) mapping. On day 12, a follow-up brain MRI scan revealed a slight enlargement of the lesion without contrast enhancement. The third MRI scan revealed a rapid enlargement of the lesion on day 22 . The central part of the lesion showed hypointensities on T1-weighted images, hyperintensities on T2-weighted images, iso- to slight hyperintensities on DWI, and increased ADC values. The outer layer of the lesion showed hyperintensities on DWI and relatively restricted ADC values. Although a contrast enhancement MRI study was not performed, the lesion showed no enhancement on a brain CT scan conducted the same day. A thyroid ultrasound showed an enlarged hypoechogenic gland, and a thyroid status assessment showed euthyroid with high titers of anti-thyroglobulin antibodies and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies in the serum (342 and 100 IU/ml, respectively), which led to a diagnosis of Hashimoto's disease. A test for CSF anti-α-enolase antibody and serum anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antibody was negative. We ruled out multiple sclerosis based on a lack of dissemination in time or space, or anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis. The possibility of a clinically isolated syndrome, a first attack of multiple sclerosis, cannot be completely denied, but it was unlikely because of the patient's brain lesion involving the cortex, and negative oligoclonal bands or CSF myelin basic protein. Therefore, she was diagnosed with HE.
The EPC gradually spread to the right arm and the frequency increased to 1 cycle/second. Phenobarbital, phenytoin, lamotrigine, and levetiracetam were ineffective. Intravenous methylprednisolone therapy (1 g/day for 3 consecutive days) was initiated on day 23, followed by oral prednisolone (60 mg/day). The EPC completely ceased on day 37. On day 44, a brain MRI showed that the lesion had diminished. The titers of anti-thyroglobulin antibodies and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies were decreased on day 54 (101 and 58 IU/ml, respectively).