A 46-year-old white woman presented to the internal medicine clinic with several weeks of worsening symptoms of esophageal reflux, a pressure-like sensation in the abdomen, early satiety, intermittent nausea, and bloating. Her medical comorbidities at that time included seronegative neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder with bilateral optic neuritis resulting in legal blindness and transverse myelitis resulting in neuropathic pain and neurogenic bladder/bowel treated with low-dose prednisone and azathioprine for the past 12 years. She also had Henoch–Schönlein purpura in childhood transiently requiring dialysis, chronic kidney disease, gastro–esophageal reflux disease, obstructive sleep apnea, pernicious anemia, subclinical hypothyroidism, hypertension, asthma, and herpes simplex labialis. Her surgical history included a laparoscopic cholecystectomy 8 years prior. Her family history is limited to lung cancer in a paternal grandfather. Her medications included amlodipine, azathioprine, duloxetine, fluticasone–salmeterol, gabapentin, hydrochlorothiazide, hydroxyzine, norethindrone, omeprazole, oxybutynin, prednisone, simvastatin, and valacyclovir. Physical examination was notable for moderate abdominal tenderness most prominent in the epigastrium and right upper quadrant.
A right upper quadrant ultrasound was obtained, which showed increased hepatic echogenicity suggestive of hepatic steatosis and a 1.9 × 2.4 × 1.9 cm hypoechoic solid mass in the right lobe of the liver. An MRI was pursued to further characterize the hepatic mass . This showed an ill-defined lobulated region of T2 hyperintensity corresponding to the mass visualized on ultrasound. Gastroenterology performed a chart review consultation, and they felt that imaging was compatible with an inflammatory adenoma. The patient was recommended to lose 20–25 pounds over the next 6 months and repeat abdominal imaging at that time.
Six months later, a repeat abdominal MRI was pursued. This was notable for a rapid increase in the size of the mass now measuring 9.3 × 7.0 × 9.4 cm with a small central cystic or necrotic area . No abdominal lymphadenopathy was noted. Approximately 1 month later she underwent a right partial hepatectomy and abdominal cavity lymphadenectomy . Pathological evaluation of the hepatic mass found infiltration of the liver parenchyma with a large abnormal lymphoid population with multiple areas of extensive necrosis. Further histologic testing indicated an Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-positive, CD20-positive DLBCL with no MYC gene rearrangement and a non-germinal center B-cell phenotype . Evaluation of the resected lymph nodes was negative for malignancy. A bone marrow biopsy was performed, which was negative for lymphomatous involvement of the bone marrow. A positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) scan was performed, which showed no abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-uptake to suggest an extra-hepatic site involved by lymphoma. Treatment was initiated with discontinuation of azathioprine and initiation of rituximab infusions (1 g each) with two doses initially 2 weeks apart and two additional doses 6 months later to complete four total doses. After completion of rituximab, she transitioned to surveillance. On her most recent abdominal imaging 2 years after the initiation of treatment, she had no evidence of recurrent disease. A timeline of the patient’s course is presented .