This work did not require review committee approval because a single case report or case
series does not constitute human subjects research requiring review and approval.
A 75-year-old male resident of a long-term care facility was admitted to the hospital after
a 2-week history of fever, chills, and congested cough. The patient had chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and emphysema chronically requiring supplemental O2 at 2 L/min
via nasal cannula. A chest radiograph revealed bilateral infiltrates and a nasopharyngeal
swab culture tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
The patient was intubated on hospital day 2 due to increasing dyspnea and O2
requirements. The ventilator settings immediately after intubation were as follows: volume
control mode, set rate 18 b/min, tidal volume (VT) 450 mL (6 mL/kg), positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 5 cm H2O, and FIO2 100% (Servo-i,
Getinge, Maquet Critical Care AB, Solna Sweden). Blood gas data on these settings were: pH
7.35, PaCO2 39 mm Hg, PaO2 200 mm Hg, and O2Hb 98%. The
PaO2/FIO2 ratio was 200 compatible with mild to moderate acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) according to the Berlin definition . The initial static respiratory compliance was 61
mL/cm H2O compatible with the proposed “L” phenotype of SARS-CoV-2
pneumonia ; however, the patient’s
emphysema presumably contributed to a finding of “normal” compliance.
By ventilator day 5, chemical neuromuscular blockade had been discontinued. The
patient’s level of sedation was —3 on the Richmond Agitation and Sedation
Scale while receiving continuous intravenous infusions of fentanyl and propofol. Despite
sedation the patient remained in respiratory distress on volume control ventilation. Flow
delivery had been changed to the square waveform with “flow support”, which
allows the patient to receive additional flow if the airway pressure falls 3 cm
H2O during the inspiratory phase of ventilation. An oral-gastric tube with
embedded electromyogram electrodes (Edi catheter, Getinge, Maquet Critical Care AB, Solna
Sweden) was inserted to monitor diaphragmatic activity and assess patient–ventilator
synchrony. Proper positioning of the Edi catheter was confirmed using the Edi catheter
positioning function. Despite the use of square waveform gas delivery with flow support, shows marked asynchrony with inspiratory
pressure falling below PEEP during VT delivery and pressure spikes at the
termination of the inspiratory phase. The mean airway pressure was identical to the PEEP
level, which would be expected during unassisted ventilation with continuous positive airway
pressure. The negative deflections in airway pressure due to volume starvation may be
injurious due to a Pendelluft effect [, ]. The electrical activity of the diaphragm (EAdi)
was 25–30 µV, suggesting elevated respiratory drive and work of breathing
. In the EAdi waveform is superimposed over the pressure waveform as a preview of what
the pressure waveform might be when changed to the NAVA mode. However, this overlay can be
misleading because a NAVA breath terminates at 70% of the EAdi peak, where the preview
graphic overlays the entire EAdi cycle over the airway pressure graphic. The ventilator mode
was changed to NAVA at 1 cm H2O per EAdi µV. shows the ventilator graphics after the change to the NAVA
mode. In NAVA the inspiratory airway pressure rose above PEEP, the VT increased
to ≈600 mL (8 mL/kg), with an increase in minute ventilation and decrease in EAdi. A
few days later the patient’s VT had fallen to <300 mL on NAVA
despite increases in the NAVA level. It appeared that the inspiratory phase was prematurely
terminating, and the expiratory threshold in NAVA (70% of EAdi peak) is not adjustable. The
ventilator mode was changed to pressure support with an expiratory flow sensitivity of 30%.
The change to pressure support increased the VT and reduced respiratory
frequency.