A 78-year-old female’s medical history included hypertension and transient cerebral ischaemia. Former cardiac manifestations included Takotsubo cardiomyopathy based on acute heart failure with ejection fraction (EF) of 35%, a normal coronary angiogram, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, and a full recovery of left ventricular EF.
The patient underwent left knee replacement surgery with brief transient immobilization without prophylactic anticoagulation. On Day 18 after surgery, the patient suddenly developed dyspnoea and contacted the emergency medical service (EMS) 12 h after the onset of symptoms. Upon EMS arrival, the patient collapsed with cardiac arrest and pulseless electrical activity (PEA) at first rhythm control. Pre-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was immediately provided according to the European Resuscitation Council (ERC) 2021 guidelines for advanced life support. At return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC), a pre-hospital electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a new right bundle branch block (RBBB) with ST-segment elevation in inferior leads . The patient was intubated, and mechanical respiratory support was initiated; ROSC was achieved twice, but the patient deteriorated and was transferred to the catheterization laboratory (cathlab) with ongoing mechanical CPR using the Lund University Cardiac Assist System (LUCAS). Repeated doses of adrenaline were administered during CPR, totalling 6 mg. Upon arrival at the cathlab, the patient had ROSC at rhythm analysis and an end-tidal carbon dioxide level of 3.4 kPa. Estimated no-flow time was 1 min and low-flow time was 52 min.
Echocardiography at arrival in the cathlab revealed severe dilatation of the right ventricle. The first arterial blood gas showed pH at 6.59 (7.37–7.45), lactate 14.9 mmol/L (0.5–2.5), glucose 19.7 mmol/L (4.2–7.8), and potassium 5.7 mmol/L (3.5–4.6). The most likely reversible cause of the cardiac arrest was PE, and an immediate pulmonary angiogram confirmed obstruction of the main pulmonary arteries . Continuous norepinephrine infusion, 0.20 μg/kg/min, was required to maintain an invasive mean arterial pressure of ∼60 mmHg.
The management was discussed with the PE response team (PERT). Based on the patient’s age, prolonged low-flow time, and comorbidities, the patient was deemed ineligible for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and surgical thrombectomy. Systemic thrombolysis was considered high risk due to gender, age, prolonged mechanical CPR, and recent surgery. Nevertheless, immediate reperfusion was urgently required to restore haemodynamics, and catheter-directed mechanical thrombectomy was considered the best treatment of choice.
The thrombus aspiration was performed through right femoral vein access using the 24-Fr Inari FlowTriever Aspiration Catheter (Inari Medical, Irvine, CA, USA). Large clot masses were successfully aspirated, restoring pulmonary perfusion and haemodynamics . The time from the first contact with EMS to pulmonary reperfusion was 2 h and 31 min, and the thrombus aspiration procedure time was 20 min.
After the procedure, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Head, thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scans showed some residual bilateral PE from the hilus region and peripherally and several fractured ribs. Anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin and target activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) (20–29) between 45 and 60 was administered the first 2 days after the procedure, and thereafter, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was initiated. The patient was extubated on the first post-procedural day without serious neurological deficits and discharged from the ICU to the cardiology ward after 5 days. She fully recovered from her PE, but admission was prolonged due to gastrointestinal Clostridium difficile infection. After 27 days, she was discharged home with apixaban 5 mg × 2.