A 26-year-old female presented to us with a complaint of pain over the right foot great toe for 6 years. She was already evaluated for hyperuricemia and inflammatory arthritis, and for both of them, she tested negative. She was taking over-the-counter painkillers for a long time, in an on-and-off manner. Despite the usage of painkillers, she never had complete relief from pain, which hampered her day-to-day life and affected her daily living. When she presented to us, we re-evaluated her and took a detailed history. Her history revealed that she used to have mid-night pain or late-night pain; for the same, she was taking NSAID, which gave her relief but not complete, and she was taking the same on and off for the past 6 years.
On examination, she had tenderness over the proximal phalanx of the great toe. There was no erythema and swelling . The nail bed and nails were fine. Serum chemistry markers erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and serum C-reactive protein levels were normal. The patient underwent radiographs of the foot, which showed a benign, purely lytic lesion in the great toe proximal phalanx with no periosteal reaction or joint involvement. The non-contrast computerized tomography of the foot showed an eccentric circumscribed lytic lesion (nidus) 5–6 mm in the first proximal phalange with a surrounding sclerotic rim. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a corresponding circumscribed T1 iso to hypointense/T2 hyperintense lesion at the first proximal phalange, showing discrete enhancement with subtle minimal surrounding edema. Adjacent distal interphalangeal joint shows minimal joint effusion with normal soft tissue, bones, and tendons.
On single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT), there was a focal area of increased radiotracer uptake with central nidus with an adjacent region of halo with peripheral sclerosis noted in the computed tomography (CT) in the posterior aspect of the shaft of the first proximal phalanx of the right foot suggestive of osteoid osteoma .
The patient underwent CT-guided radiofrequency ablation (RFA) for osteoid osteoma. An 11G bone biopsy needle was used through which 18G probe needle was inserted. 9 mm active tip bipolar RFA probe (Celon probe) used, and 0.5 KJ energy deposited at nidus. On follow-up, sequential radiographs were taken at 3 months and 1 year following intervention with no recurrence of symptoms.