A 30-year-old man was admitted to the outpatient Endocrinology clinic of Peking Union Medical Hospital (PUMCH) because of recurrent unconsciousness. Four months before this presentation, he had had three prior episodes of disorientation, visual changes, weakness, and palpitations in the late afternoon, and the symptoms were resolved following food intake. He did not receive any medical care. One month before admission, he was found unconscious in the early morning before eating breakfast at home and was transported by ambulance to the local hospital's emergency department. At the time of entry, his blood glucose was 2.4 mmol/L, and the patient rapidly recovered consciousness in response to intravenous 50% glucose administration. Notably, he experienced three similar episodes before this event and admission to PUMCH. He was then admitted for further evaluation and treatment following this critical information. The patient denied any history of diabetes, intake of hypoglycemic agents, and alcohol abuse. On review of his systems, he and his family noted nose enlargement, hyperhidrosis, increased acne, and coarse oily skin over approximately the last two years.
On admission, physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 146/96 mmHg, and his body mass index was 28.4 kg/m2. He had coarse oily facial features with acne, a prominent forehead and brow, a broad nose, prominent nasolabial folds, and acanthosis nigricans. Furthermore, multiple skin tags were present in the neck and anterior chest.
Laboratory tests revealed that blood count, liver and renal function, tumor markers, thyroid function, and 24 h urinary catecholamine were all in normal ranges. The serum adrenocorticotropic and 24 h urinary free cortisol were high, but the low dose dexamethasone suppression test yielded a 24 h free cortisol of 1.76 ug. During a spontaneous morning hypoglycemia (2.2 mmol/L), the corresponding serum insulin level was less than 0.5 µIU/ml, C-peptide level was less than 0.05 ng/ml, proinsulin was 44 pg/ml. IGF-1 level was less than 25.0 ng/ml, and GH level was less than 0.05 ng/ml. The detailed laboratory findings are shown in . Based on the laboratory evaluation, the diagnoses including chronic liver disease, hypothyroidism, pheochromocytoma, adrenal insufficiency, and insulinoma were excluded, and NICTH was suspected. Contrast Computed Tomography (CT) further revealed a large left retroperitoneal mass measuring 7.0 cm × 12.3 cm × 13.0 cm with heterogeneous density, while enhanced CT scans showed moderately uneven enhancement .
Following these assessments, laparotomy was performed. Intraoperatively, an about 12 cm * 12 cm tumor with obvious varicose veins was found in the retroperitoneum, and the tumor adheres to the surrounding tissues. There was no visiable metastasis. After carefully sepatating the tumor, the patient underwent complete surgical resection of the mass . Surgical pathology demonstrated a hemangiopericytoma and a strong positive for IGF-2 . The ki-67 index was 15% . He did not experience subsequent episodes of hypoglycemia after the operation. A CT scan of the patient's abdomen was conducted for monitoring in our hospital every six months, and a 2.5-year follow-up did not demonstrate any evidence of recurrence.