The proband was a 12-year-old Korean boy born to non-consanguineous parents. He had been treated for partial seizure disorder for 2 years. He was referred to the pediatric orthopedic clinic for the evaluation of intermittent knee pain that had occurred for a few months. His height was 144.6 cm (20th percentile) and bodyweight was 41 kg (60th percentile). The height of his father and mother was 170 cm and 160 cm, respectively. His father also suffered from intermittent mild knee joint pain. The proband and his father did not show muscle weakness and pain suggesting myopathy. There was no Gower sign and Trendelenberg sign on physical examination. The level of creatine kinase and lactate were normal. Informed consent was obtained from the parents of the child.
Clinically, the lower extremity of the proband showed mild genu valgum deformity. The knee joints displayed full range of motion. The distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses were affected most, and the distal tibia and distal radius epiphyses were affected less severely. There was no irregularity on the femoral head epiphysis. Distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses showed loss of height, joint surface irregularities and fragmentation . The epiphysis of the distal tibia showed lateral shortening and fragmentation . There was no abnormality of the distal fibular epiphysis nor the talar dome. The tarsal navicular and cuneiform bone showed irregular ossification . The epiphysis of distal radius was wedged shape and the epiphyses of the distal ulnae were relatively small. The carpal bone shows dysplasia and flattening . The spine and the proximal femoral epiphyses appeared normal . X-rays of the proband’s father revealed osteoarthritis of Kellgren-Lawrence grade I particularly on the medial side . However, the proximal femoral epiphyses were spared . Other members of the family were not affected.
PCR from genomic DNA followed by direct sequencing was performed following parental informed consent. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes. Direct DNA sequencing of the COMP, MANT3, COL9A1, COL9A2, and COL9A3 genes was performed. All exons were amplified using the primers previously described . PCR amplicons were bidirectionally sequenced with the Big Dye terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) using an ABI PRISM 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). COMP, MATN3, COL9A1 and COL9A2 revealed no mutations. A novel missense mutation c.104G>A in exon2 of COL9A3, which resulted in p.Gly35Asp, was identified. RefSeq ID: NM_001853.3 reference sequence was used for cDNA nucleotide numbering. This mutation was predicted to be not tolerated by SIFT and probably damaging by PolyPhen [, ]. Also, comparative evolutionary analysis showed that the glycine residue at codon 35 is a highly conserved amino acid during evolution. And the same mutation was observed in the proband’s symptomatic father. We performed Sanger sequencing of 100 healthy controls and none harbored a c.104G>A mutation in exon 2 of COL9A3.
Molecular mechanics potential energy minimization and MD simulations were carried out using the program package AMBER 11 . FF99 force field in AMBER package was used in all MD simulations including hetero atoms. Topology file GAFF force field in AMBER package was used. The generalized Born solvation model was used instead of explicit water . The temperature was kept constant by using Langevin dynamics with a collision frequency of 5.0 ps−1. The minimized system was heated from 0 K to 325 K for 50 ps in a total of 7 stages. By heating gradually in stages, the possible crashes will be reduced by allowing it to equilibrate at each temperature. The heated systems were then subjected to molecular dynamics simulations for 1 ns each at 325 K in a total of 10 stages. In all simulations, the temperature was kept constant at 325 K. The simulations were performed using the PMEMD module with GPU system which utilizes the particle mesh Ewald method . SHAKE algorithm was used to constrain bond lengths involving hydrogen .The mutation of p.Gly35Asp in type IX collagen alpha 3 has a Pro-Pro-Gly consecutive residue pattern. The collagen model structure was generated with a template of 2v53 PDB (protein database bank). After the MD simulation, the wild type and mutant collagen structures were visually inspected. The wild type structure formed hydrogen bonds with its neighboring strand while the mutant was aggregated by themselves . In addition, the distances between the mutation site (C-alpha) of the wild type and the mutant collagen are almost twice . The calculated energy state of the mutant is much lower, causing a self aggregation . Considering the major structural change caused by the collagen mutant, a malfunction of the type IX collagen is expected.