A 63-year-old Caucasian man of British origin who worked as a railway engineer presented to an orthopaedic surgery clinic in December 1998. Clinico-radiological examination confirmed severe bilateral osteoarthritis changes. He had more symptoms on his right knee than his left one. In June 1999 he underwent arthroscopic washout and debridement that confirmed severe tricompartmental degenerative changes.
He was managed non-surgically until May 2002 with anti-inflammatory medication and physiotherapy. His symptoms progressively deteriorated, which in turn necessitated TKA on his right knee. In September 2002, a subtotal knee replacement that spared the patella was performed on the patient. After the operation he complained of an anterior knee pain that was already interfering with his daily activities and his job. Failing any improvement in his symptoms he was offered patellar replacement which was performed in May 2003. A size 41 poly implant prosthesis was cemented in place, which was subsequently noted to have a normal intraoperative tracking.
The patient made a good recovery after the operation, but he complained of aching and clicking when flexing his knee from time to time. His symptoms improved and he was discharged from the clinic within one year. He presented again in January 2006 with a painful locked knee following a sudden flexion movement of his right knee. Radiographs taken in casualty showed that the prosthesis was dislodged and had displaced into the infrapatellar area . His blood test and inflammatory markers were unremarkable. Knee aspirate performed in theater to rule out infection was unremarkable.
He underwent revision surgery of his right knee. Intraoperatively, the prosthesis was noted to have sheared off its fixation pegs and dislocated inferiorly, thus splitting the patellar tendon and forming a pocket in it . The patella was cleaned and the patellar cut was revised to 16 mm and the cemented 38-mm prosthetis was reimplanted with a good patellofemoral tracking . The patella tendon was cleaned and sutured using nylon suture. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was subsequently discharged from the hospital. He remains asymptomatic at two years follow-up and showed no evidence of loosening in his prosthesis.