A 34-year-old woman started to experience unfocused mild back pain and chronic headache for 2 months. The severity of these symptoms had increased in the past 2 days, and they were not relieved with oral analgesic medications. The patient had no history of recent trauma or receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. Patient’s physical examination revealed mild tenderness of the cervical and thoracolumbar spine. Further hematogical analyses, including white blood cell count, red blood cell count, platelet count, hematocrit, red blood cell volume, and hemoglobin concentration, revealed no obvious abnormalities. All vital signs and the results of the neurological examination were normal.
The initial unenhanced CT scan of the brain revealed a small extra-axial hyperdense area located at the left anterior edge of the left tentorium cerebellum, medial to the left uncus, representing a small subdural hemorrhage. However, no subarachnoid or intraparenchymal hemorrhage was detected. CTA of the brain revealed a wide-neck saccular aneurysm originating from the left posterior communicating artery. CT scans of the lumbar spine showed a subdural hemorrhage, likely a continuum of the subdural hemorrhage of the brain.
Subsequent exploratory advanced imaging studies, including MRI of the brain and spine, revealed the presence of a thin layer of blood collection along the dual lining of the tentorium, down to the foramen magnum and extending up to the cervical and dorsolumbar spine. Mixed signal intensity on the T1- and T2-weighted images indicated late subacute or chronic hemorrhage . MRA of the brain revealed a large unilocular wide-neck posterior communicating artery aneurysm. There was no evidence of a separate aneurysm, vascular anomalies, brain edema, and established infarction .
An emergent clipping of the aneurysm and evacuation of the underlying cerebral hematoma were performed without any complications. The operating neurosurgeon confirmed that the rupture site was clotted and located in the lateral wall, close to the aneurysmal neck region. The patient completely recovered after the procedure. Immediate follow-up CT and CTA of the brain revealed no evidence of a recanalized aneurysm sac or recurrence. No neurological complications or persistent symptoms were observed for 2 weeks post surgery, and consequently, the patient was discharged. A detailed and prolonged follow up (every month for the first 6 months and every 3 months thereafter) in the neurosurgery clinic for 2 years showed no further complications.
The patient was kept under clinical observation, as per the recommendation of the neurosurgeon, to monitor for any neurological complications that could have resulted from the subdural hematoma in the spine. To prevent reactive meningopathy, the patient received corticosteroid treatment to inhibit inflammation that could also play a key role in the hematoma formation .
The patient provided written informed consent for the publication of this case report.