A 65-year-old male presented to the emergency center with 2 weeks of anterograde amnesia and related confusion, one episode of urinary incontinence, and gradual functional decline including worsening of his baseline ataxic gait. His medical history included obesity, hypertension, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, diabetes mellitus type II, congestive heart failure, and coronary artery disease with a recent coronary stent placement and start of dual antiplatelet therapy 3 weeks before presentation. Other than impaired word recall, he had no focal deficits on neurological examination. However, initial CT imaging of the head revealed a heterogeneously hyperdense, lobulated mass in the area of the posterior septum pellucidum measuring 2.8 cm in diameter without any evidence of hydrocephalus . A subsequent MRI demonstrated a hemorrhagic mass lesion within the cavum vergae , posterior to the columns of fornix and foramen of Monro [ and ], and displacing the internal cerebral veins laterally. The contour of the mass was irregular, with asymmetric extension posteriorly and inferiorly, resulting in mass effect on the thalami bilaterally . Differential diagnoses included a hemorrhagic metastasis, colloid cyst, central neurocytoma, subependymoma, or subependymal giant cell astrocytoma. His antiplatelet medications were held and one unit of platelets was transfused for reversal. CT imaging of the body was negative for any primary malignancy. Given the presence of intralesional hemorrhage and symptoms likely related to mass effect on the fornix, in addition to obtaining a diagnosis, surgical resection was recommended. Following cardiac clearance, the patient underwent a right frontal craniotomy and an interhemispheric, transcallosal, and interforniceal approach for resection.
The cystic mass was encountered immediately after the callosotomy. It displaced the fornices laterally but did not extend into the third ventricle . The fornices appeared thin and we tried to minimize their manipulation during surgery. The cyst contained xanthochromatic and mucinous debris with evidence of recent as well as chronic hemorrhage . The capsule was densely adherent to bilateral internal cerebral veins, requiring careful microsurgical dissection . Before closure, an external ventricular drain was placed. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. The external ventriculostomy drain was successfully weaned and removed after 4 days. Aspirin was restarted on postoperative day 4 and clopidogrel on postoperative day 6. Given persistent confusion following surgery, CT head, EEG, and infectious work-up were obtained, but no acute etiology was immediately identified. MRI brain revealed gross total resection with no unexpected findings. The patient’s hospital stay was complicated by hyperglycemia requiring an insulin drip, urinary tract infection treated with antibiotics, and dysphagia for which an upper endoscopy was performed revealing gastritis. Gradually, the patient’s mentation improved and he was deemed appropriate for inpatient rehabilitation on postoperative day 15. At time of discharge, his neurologic status was at his preoperative baseline.
On pathology, the cyst was found to be lined by a simple layer of cuboidal cells which were sparsely ciliated and diffusely positive for epithelial markers epithelial membrane antigen and cytokeratin . Periodic acid–Schiff stain was negative. The cyst wall was thick, fibrous, and sclerotic with degenerative changes. No squamous metaplasia was appreciated. Cyst lining was negative for glial fibrillary acid protein. Contents included hemosiderin, mucus, and cholesterol clefts. Findings were consistent with a hemorrhagic colloid cyst.
At 6-month clinic follow-up, he was able to carry out routine self-care activities and conversation although his residual anterograde amnesia and baseline comorbidities kept him relatively sedentary and dependent on family for overall care.