A 64-year-old man was admitted due to left knee pain and limited mobility.
The patient presented with left knee pain and limited mobility 2 years ago. He visited a local hospital several times and was diagnosed with left knee osteoarthritis. His left knee pain was only relieved by oral analgesics. His symptoms improved with medication, and relapsed when the analgesics were stopped. During the past 2 years, his symptoms gradually progressed. The patient was admitted to our department 4 mo prior with severe pain in the left knee and limited knee motion.
The patient had hypertension, but he did not take medicine regularly in the last month.
The patient had no relevant personal or family history.
Dark-brown pigment was clearly seen in the sclera and ears of the patient . The patient's spine was stiff, and a major reduction in movement of the vertebral column was noted. Atrophy of the left quadriceps femoris and slight swelling of the left knee were observed. The left knee had a flexion contracture of 10°, and the range of motion of the left knee was 10° (extension) to 90° (flexion). The left knee patella grinding test and McMurray sign were positive.
Routine blood tests were normal and showed the following results: White blood cell count: 6.14 × 109/L; neutrophils: 63.9%; hemoglobin: 104 g/L; platelet count: 310 × 109/L. C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were elevated at 65.79 mg/L and 90.00 mm/h, respectively.
Radiographic evaluation revealed that the patient's left knee joint showed a similar appearance to that of osteoarthritis, such as joint space stenosis and osteophyte formation . Magnetic resonance imaging of the knee showed bone marrow edema .
We first carried out debridement of the left knee. During surgery, it was found that the cartilage of the knee joint was black-brown in color and there was a lot of synovial fluid in the joint cavity. We collected the synovial fluid for bacterial culture and the results showed the presence of Achromobacter xylosoxidans (A. xylosoxidans) in synovial fluid.