In March 2007, a 75-year-old female with history of hypertension and hypothyroidism presented with a 5-week history of non-productive cough and dyspnoea and was found to have a left lower lobe collapse on a chest X-ray. Her past medical history was significant for a 19-year history of recurrent pulmonary lobar collapse from mucus plugs with cultures positive for Aspergillus and thus bore a diagnosis of CPA. She had no documented history of wheezing, peripheral eosinophilia or obvious clinical response to oral steroids, and thus was deemed unlikely to have allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis . Although she had previously been treated intermittently with itraconazole, the patient had not been on any antifungal therapy for 6 weeks prior to presentation due to difficulty in maintaining therapeutic levels of itraconazole to treat pulmonary aspergillosis . The patient’s radiographic abnormalities and clinical symptoms resolved after a mucus plug was removed by bronchoscopy, and subsequent cultures from mucus material grew Aspergillus fumigatus. To reduce the risk of recurrent bronchial collapse due to CPA, the patient was started on oral voriconazole 200 mg twice daily. For the next 5 years, her respiratory status was stable while on voriconazole and without any subjective complaints, respiratory symptoms or laboratory abnormalities.
However, in June 2012, the patient was hospitalized with a 3-month history of progressive abdominal pain, nausea and diarrhoea without any associated respiratory symptoms. She was afebrile and her white blood cell (WBC) count was 9.4×103 μl−1 with 15 % eosinophils. Concurrent medications included hydrochlorothiazide and levothyroxine that had been well tolerated for at least several years prior to the start of voriconazole therapy. A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography scan revealed mild thickening and adjacent inflammatory stranding in the ascending colon. Empirical ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were started for presumed intra-abdominal infection. On the day after presentation, her WBC was 11.5×103 μl−1 with 49 % eosinophils. Her stool workup was negative for ova and parasites, Clostridium difficile, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Salmonella and Shigella. Six days after presentation, a colonoscopy with biopsy was performed and the patient was found to have active chronic colitis with eosinophilic infiltrates and with no evidence of pseudomembranous colitis . Voriconazole, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were discontinued and oral prednisone 60 mg once daily was started with rapid improvement in her gastrointestinal symptoms. She was diagnosed with eosinophilia/eosinophilic colitis presumably due to voriconazole. We believe that the probabilistic causality between the observed eosinophilia/eosinophilic colitis and voriconazole is deemed probable based on a score of 6 using the Naranjo algorithm . At her follow-up visit 18 days after hospitalization, her symptoms had completely resolved with a WBC count of 8.7×103 μl−1 with 0 % eosinophils.
The patient was asymptomatic without antifungal therapy until November 2012, when she presented with several weeks’ history of shortness of breath. A chest X-ray revealed right lower and middle lobe collapse due to mucus plugs that were removed during bronchoscopy and subsequently grew Aspergillus terreus. As her recurrent respiratory symptoms strongly suggested a recrudescence of CPA while off antifungal therapy, the patient was started on oral posaconazole 200 mg twice daily instead of the labelled dosing (in the USA) of 200 mg three times daily . The dose reduction of posaconazole was discussed with the hospital pharmacy and agreed with the patient, and was primarily due to her age (80 years old at the start of posaconazole therapy) and weight (∼45 kg), and after careful discussion with the patient regarding the potential benefits versus the risk of cross-reactive adverse events, i.e. eosinophilia, while on posaconazole. She was asymptomatic for 15 months but then presented with a 2-week history of progressive diarrhoea and concurrent peripheral eosinophilia of 15 %. A presumptive diagnosis of azole-associated eosinophilia and diarrhoea was made and her symptoms resolved after stopping posaconazole. At the time of writing, the patient remains asymptomatic and off antifungal therapy.