A 35-year old primigravid woman presented to hospital at 21 weeks 2 days gestation. She described a two-day history of periumbilical abdominal discomfort that suddenly became severe, waking her from sleep. There was no history of trauma. She was afebrile and had no other gastrointestinal symptoms. She had previously undergone four hysteroscopic myomectomies and one open myomectomy, during which 5 uterine incisions were made, including a fundal incision, and over 100 fibroids were resected. The indication for these surgeries was primary infertility, abnormal uterine bleeding and anemia. The interval between open myomectomy and conception was 26 months. The current pregnancy was spontaneously conceived and had been progressing normally.
At presentation, blood pressure was 99/54, heart rate 84 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20, temperature 36 degrees Celsius (96.8 degrees Farenheit) and fetal heart rate 160 beats per minute. Abdominal examination revealed diffuse peritonitis and significant tenderness at the uterine fundus. Hemoglobin at presentation was 87 g/L and white blood cell count was 10.89 E9/L (reference range 120-160 g/L and 4.00 to 11.00 E9/L, respectively). Ultrasound examination showed a live singleton fetus with normal amniotic fluid volume. The placental position was left posterofundal. Moderate volume hemoperitoneum was seen. Ovaries appeared normal bilaterally; the appendix was not visualized. Evaluation of the uterine wall demonstrated no focal uterine disruption or thinning, but was limited due to patient tenderness and bowel gas, therefore, a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) study was recommended. Urgent unenhanced abdominal MRI, completed that evening, 6 h following ultrasound examination, showed a sentinel clot at the left aspect of the uterine fundus, where the myometrium was markedly thinned, suspected to be the source of hemorrhage. During the diagnostic work-up, vital signs were stable and hemoglobin reached a stable nadir of 71 g/L.
Differential diagnosis included fibroid degeneration or torsion, placenta percreta, concealed placental abruption, uterine rupture and non-obstetrical causes. A patient care conference and complex consent process was undertaken to include several potential scenarios and outcomes. The patient was counselled extensively around possible complications of surgical repair, including prolongation of the pregnancy leading to severe prematurity, preterm rupture of membranes, and risks of unsuccessful repair, including hysterectomy and fetal loss. With a demonstration of an understanding of these risks, she consented to a diagnostic laparoscopy, uterine repair with possible laparotomy, possible hysterotomy and evacuation of the fetus and possible hysterectomy.
The following day, on the second day of admission, at 21 weeks 3 days gestation, the patient was taken to the operating room. The procedure was initiated laparoscopically via a left upper quadrant veress needle entry. A 10 cm complete thickness uterine fundus rupture was diagnosed . Active bleeding was visualized from the edge of the rupture, and the chorioamniotic membranes were visibly bulging through the defect. Large hemoperitoneum (estimated 1000 mL) was present. Given the extent and location of the defect, the size of the gravid uterus and visualization laparoscopically, we converted to midline laparotomy. Closure of the defect was then undertaken. Unintentional iatrogenic amniotomy occurred due to the suture needle shaft scratching the membranes. This resulted in two adjacent 2 mm defects in the amniotic sac and partial loss of amniotic fluid volume. Two large vascular clips were applied to each defect for repair. We introduced a 22 French foley catheter into the myometrial defect and inflated the balloon to displace the amniotic sac to facilitate uterine repair. With the membranes reduced, a two-layer uterine closure was successfully completed using full thickness continuous 0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) and imbricating 2–0 Polydioxanone (PDS, Ethicon, USA) sutures, respectively . EVICEL and SURGICEL SnoW (Ethicon, USA) were applied to the area of repair to affect hemostasis. Intraoperatively, the patient required transfusion of 7 units packed erythrocytes, 2 units fresh frozen plasma and 1 unit cryoprecipitate; estimated total blood loss was 2500 mL.
The patient’s postoperative course was uncomplicated. Indomethacin was administered for tocolysis per the standard of care at our centre (100 mg per rectum then 25 mg per os every 6 h for 4 doses). Postoperative intravenous cefazolin was administered for 24 h. Fetal surveillance demonstrated amniotic fluid re-accumulation, appropriate growth parameters (estimated fetal weight 60–85%ile) and normal fetal well-being. Amniotic fluid index (AFI) was 6.5 cm on postoperative day (POD) 3, 9 cm on POD4, 8.9 cm on POD5 and 12.5 cm on POD12. Myometrial thickness at the repair site was evaluated at several time points by ultrasound and ranged from 0.29 to 0.4 cm. Ultrasound and MRI at 27 weeks gestation showed a 0.7 cm by 5 cm area of chorion-amnion separation at the site of repair which remained stable throughout our patient’s course . The patient was transferred to a centre with Level 3 neonatal care at 24 weeks gestation, for continued inpatient observation, then transferred back to our Level 2.5 centre at 30 weeks gestation. A course of antenatal corticosteroids was administered at 25 weeks gestation.
Using a multidisciplinary approach, a second patient care conference was held involving Obstetrical, Gynecologic, Maternal Fetal Medicine, Pediatric, Anesthesia and Nursing teams to plan delivery. Consensus decision was achieved for planned cesarean delivery at 32 weeks 1 day gestation. This gestation was felt to be an optimal compromise between fetal maturity, and the maternal and fetal risks of sudden uterine rupture. A liveborn female, weighing 1884 g with Apgars of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, was transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit in good condition (umbilical artery pH 7.28). Intraoperatively, the previous uterine wall repair site was found to be intact at the fundus . Significant neovascularization was found on the serosal surface of the uterus. The myometrium had limited integrity, with several thin and weak areas. The fundal posterior placenta was markedly adherent; approximately 95% of it was felt to be removed. Estimated blood loss was 2000cm3. Three surgical clips were retrieved intraoperatively, but the fourth was not easily palpated and given the clinical circumstances, left behind. In the perioperative period, the patient received 3 units packed erythrocytes.
Mother and infant were stable postpartum. The patient was discharged home on POD6. Her infant daughter received continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) until day 2 of life. During her neonatal course, she underwent phototherapy for neonatal jaundice and was diagnosed with suspected cow’s milk protein allergy. She met appropriate milestones and was discharged home on day 36 of life. Mother passed the last surgical clip spontaneously per vagina 10 weeks postpartum.