A 30-year-old female patient presented to our orthopedic outpatient clinic with pain in both knees with limited range of motion for more than 3 years.
Three years ago, under no obvious predisposing causes, she began to experience pain in both knees, which worsened while walking and squatting. The pain was aggravated after exercise, and joint flexion and extension activities were accompanied by knee snapping. She even displayed the symptom of joint locking.
The patient has no history of other diseases.
The patient had no family or genetic disease history.
On specialized examination, the following results were observed: no bilateral knee joint swelling, normal skin temperature, no varus or valgus knee deformity, negative floating patella sign, positive Apley’s test, pressing pain of the medial articular space, negative over-flexion test, positive McMurray test, negative drawer test, negative Lachman Test, and negative lateral stress test. The joint motion of the left knee was 0-110° and that of the right knee was 0-120°. The Lysholm score was 40.
On preoperative laboratory examination, no abnormalities were found.
Plain radiographs of both knees revealed no significant abnormalities in the knee joint space . MRI is currently the imaging method of choice for diagnosing the discoid meniscus. The presence of three or more consecutive, 5-mm thick, sagittal images that demonstrate contiguity between the anterior and posterior horns of the meniscus is pathognomonic for discoid meniscus. The medial meniscus fills the medial joint space in the coronal view, extending to the medial side of the intercondylar fossa. However, the most accurate criterion for diagnosis is a ratio of the minimal meniscus width to the maximal tibial width of > 20% in the coronal plane. Three consecutive images at the sagittal position of the bilateral knee showed the anterior and posterior corners of the meniscus joined, body hypertrophy, and the medial meniscus was filled in the medial joint space extending to the intercondylar fossa in the coronal position. The medial meniscus showed a horizontal tear .