The patient is a 45-year-old lady with a body mass index of 33 with underlying type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension. She was unable to walk for 2½ years and had been wheelchair bound due to lower-limb stiffness and weakness. The examination of the upper limbs was normal, but the lower limbs were hypertonic with brisk reflexes and a positive Babinski sign. Her motor could not be assessed due to her increased tone, but her sensory level was D10. The bowel and bladder were unaffected. The X-rays showed an extensive OPLL-continuous type from D2 to D12 and more pronounced in the lower thoracic area . The computed tomography scans showed OPLL that was more prominent from D8 to D12 (-). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multi-level compression of the spinal cord due to continuous OPLL and OLF, namely at the L1-2 level and proximally at D2-4 (-). Long-instrumented decompression was done from D2 to L2 . Postoperatively, her drain was removed on the 3rd day . On the 5th day postoperatively, the wound had persistent hemoserous discharge . Wound debridement was done, and cultures were sent from the wound . The wound was kept open, and a negative pressure dressing in the form of vacuum-assisted closure was done. The cultures grew Klebsiella pneumonia and Morganella morganii (sensitive to cefepime, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim). She was started on antibiotics, and the VAC dressing continued for another three cycles of 3–5 days each. As the wound became healthier, secondary closure was done on day 21 ( and ). Subsequently, she was on oral medication (sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim) and referred to the rehabilitation team. After 3 weeks, she complained of disproportionately severe pain and deteriorating neurology. Imaging showed erosion of the L2-3 endplate, collapse of disc space, and distal functional failure ( and ). MRI confirmed spondylodiscitis at the same level without any changes in the cranial operated site ( and ). Revision surgery was done with debridement of disc space, and extension of fusion (after removing the L2 which had become loose) to L5 was done with a domino connector . The culture was negative this time, and the previous culture was also negative for any fungal growth. Intravenous antibiotics were continued for 3 weeks until her acute phase reactants normalized and continued oral for another 6 weeks as she resumed physiotherapy. She was discharged roughly 4 months after her index surgery with some improvement in neurology. At 6-month follow-up, she had regained sensory, some power (MRC 3-4/5 in lower limbs) and her tone had reduced. Her wound was healthy though she was able to stand with support. She is on home-based physiotherapy and is on close watch for evidence of union.