In 2012, a 61-year-old woman with blurred vision presented with corneal opacity of the left eye. Her visual acuity was 20/40 OS and 20/20 OD. She had been diagnosed with HDL deficiency at the age of 46 years, 1997. but she had been off treatment for about 10 years. She had undergone PKP of the right eye for the same symptoms when she was 58 years old, 2009.
The patient was the fourth of 8 siblings. A brother died in an accident and a sister died in childhood. None of her family members had been diagnosed with HDL deficiency, and there was no family history of consanguineous marriage. On physical examination, she had bilateral xanthomas of the eyelids and focal yellow skin discolorations in the cubital fossae of both forearms, but there was no tonsillar hypertrophy or Achilles tendon xanthoma.
Blood tests showed an extremely low HDL-cholesterol level (6 mg/dL) with undetectable Apo A-I (<5 mg/dL). Levels of Apo B and Apo E were slightly elevated (109 mg/dL and 5.8 mg/dL, respectively). Serum triglyceride, total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase levels were within the normal limits. A genetic evaluation was performed as previously described , and showed that she was homozygous for the Apo A-ITsukuba mutation, which is a single-nucleotide insertion of cytosine that alters the reading frame from codon 5 and produces a premature stop codon at codon 34 . Thus, this patient was diagnosed with genetic Apo A-I deficiency. Electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and myocardial scintigraphy showed significant ischemic heart failure and angiography showed severe stenosis of the coronary arteries. Consequently, she underwent percutaneous coronary intervention and coronary artery bypass grafting.
On slit-lamp examination, there was a diffuse corneal stromal opacity with a lucid zone in the left eye. Confocal microscopy (Heidelberg Retinal Tomograph Rostock Cornea Module, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed high-intensity vesicles (10–100 μm in diameter) in the corneal stroma . In 2013, PKP was performed for the left eye, and the corneal button tissues were examined histopathologically and immunohistochemically.
The cornea showed normal thickness and there was no significant abnormality of the epithelium, Bowman’s layer, or the endothelium. There were numerous small vesicles in the corneal stroma , which were of similar size to the vesicles observed with confocal microscopy. The vesicles were more prominent in the deep stroma than in the shallow stroma. Accumulations in the vesicles were Congo-red negative and alcian-blue positive . Sudan III and Sudan black staining could not confirm the presence of cholesterol ester in the vesicles. On immunohistochemical analysis, collagen VI [clone: anti-hCL (VI), mouse IgG1,κ; 1:500; KYOWA PHARMA CHEMICAL CO., LTD., Toyama, Japan] was observed in some vesicles .
Since the PKP, the patient has been on regular medication with pitavastatin and tocopherol nicotinate and has had a normal lipid profile except for low serum HDL-cholesterol levels. In 2015, her current visual acuity is 20/25 OS and 20/20 OD and both corneal grafts have maintained good transparency.