A 46-year-old-man was admitted to our emergency department after a fall from his own height. Two years earlier, he had undergone a resurfacing arthroplasty (Cormet, Corin Group, Cirencester, UK) of the right hip following avascular necrosis of the femoral head. The recovery from the arthroplasty had previously been uneventful, and post-operative radiographs revealed satisfactory positioning of the implants. Three months before the admission in our institution, the patient suffered a motorcycle injury and was diagnosed with a talus fracture, which was treated conservatively.
On admission in the emergency department, the patient complained of severe pain in the right hip and was unable to stand. Radiographs showed a closed intertrochanteric fracture, AO 31-A2 . In our opinion, disuse osteopenia following the conservative treatment of the talus fracture might have contributed to an increased fracture risk.
After consideration of the management options and discussion with the patient, and with regard to the minimal displacement of the fragments, a conservative treatment was undertaken. A skin traction of 3kg was applied.
Ten days after the admission, control radiographs revealed a significant displacement of the fragments . Open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture was then discussed with the patient, who consented.
The fracture was reduced in a closed manner under general anesthesia on a traction table and internally fixed with the use of a 4.5mm LCP Proximal Femur Plate (SynthesDepuy, Johnson and Johnson, USA) .
The patient recovered without complication and was discharged 18 days after surgery, with instructions to walk with crutches and toe-touch weight-bearing for 8 weeks. Full weight-bearing started after 2 months. At the latest clinical review, 17 months after fracture, radiographs showed no complication related to either the resurfacing implant or the internal fixation. The patient reported only slight and occasional discomfort, which did limit activity. No plans have been made to remove the blade plate .