A 65-year-old man presented to the emergency department with two-day history of progressive painful swelling and bluish-purple discoloration of his second and fourth toes of his left foot and history of palpitations for a week. There was no recent history of any trauma, fever, or excessive sensitivity or exposure to the cold. He had a past medical history of hypertension, for which he was prescribed ramipril, metoprolol, and amlodipine, and he was overweight.
On arrival, he was tachycardic at 188 bpm and his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. Clinical examination of his extremities revealed that the left second and fourth toes were tender, slightly edematous, and purple-blue, with a sharp demarcation between discolored and normal skin at the base of both digits. There were no signs of livedo reticularis or superficial lymphangitic streaking in the feet or lower extremities. BTS was suspected because peripheral pulses were palpable in both legs and there was no clinical evidence of ischemia in the contralateral limb.
His CRP was elevated at 10 mg/L (normal < 0.5 mg/L) and D-dimers were positive. Brain natriuretic peptide was elevated, but renal and liver function parameters were well within normal limits. Diagnostic screening for diabetes was negative. Laboratory tests for thrombophilia, which included disorders of plasminogen activation, antithrombin III deficiency, protein C and protein S deficiency, and serum homocysteine levels, were negative.
Left foot radiographs showed mild swelling but no evidence of osteomyelitis or fracture. Duplex ultrasound excluded deep venous thrombosis and confirmed patency of the outflow vessels without any embolus, thrombus, or occlusion in the arterial tree in the lower extremities bilaterally. A bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed normal left ventricular systolic function without any segmental wall motion abnormality. The interatrial septum was thickened but there was no visible mobile echogenic mass in the atria. Signs of pulmonary hypertension were absent. An electrocardiogram showed tachycardia with new-onset irregularly irregular atrial fibrillation.
The patient underwent immediate thoracic, abdominal, and lower limb contrast-enhanced computed tomographic angiography (CTA), which excluded any proximal thromboembolic source or occlusions in the arterial tree . There was no evidence of abdominal aortic aneurysm or severe atheromatous plaque. Chest CT incidentally revealed a focal left atrial cavity filling defect adjacent to the atrial septum. This defect was initially suspected to be a cardiac CT artifact in light of the irregular tachyarrhythmia at the time of acquisition, which can generate slow-moving, turbulent blood due to atrial hypokinesia .
Initially, it was decided to treat the case conservatively with anticoagulant (heparin drip) and anti-aggregate medications (intravenous PGE1). He was admitted to vascular surgery with a diagnosis of acute limb ischemia. He was placed on an empiric antibiotic regimen (ciprofloxacin), received morphine for pain, and was sent to the telemetry unit.
However, the patient experienced extreme worsening of progressive pain overnight that prevented sleep and further bluish discoloration of both toes. Since he had palpable posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulses and a normal ankle-brachial index (1.2; normal > 1), the vascular surgery team decided against toe amputation. An emergency percutaneous vascular angiography showed no further evidence of any major arterial occlusion of the arterial tree of the left limb.
Given the high index of suspicion of an intracavitary thrombus in the setting of new-onset AF and progression of the cyanotic toes, the patient was referred to cardiology, where transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed an anomalous LASP and a 7.7 × 3 mm mobile ovoid echodense mass with a narrow stalk attached to the pouch, suggestive of thrombus . There was no evidence of an atrial septal defect on color Doppler flow imaging , although it showed mild mitral regurgitation. A further confirmatory agitated saline test to exclude atrial septal defect was not performed to avoid dislodging the thrombus. No mass was seen in the left atrial appendage (LAA; peak emptying velocity 63 cm/s). Three-dimensional (3D) TEE visualized the LASP containing a mobile thrombus with attachment of its stalk to the interatrial septum . It is noteworthy that the exact shape and volume of the mass were revealed by the 3D acquisition.
The AF was managed with metoprolol, to which the patient responded adequately. Taking the small size of thrombus into consideration, absence of direct evidence of transit of thrombus in the right atrium, and following multidisciplinary case discussions involving cardiology, vascular surgery, and cardiac surgery, the decision was made to continue therapeutic anticoagulation and observe. Despite the intravenous administration of ciprofloxacin and later tazobactam, after microbiological wound swab culture of normal flora (Staphylococcus aureus and Proteus species), the patient developed wet gangrene and demarcated necrosis in his second and fourth toes. Antibiotic therapy was stopped given the lack of apparent benefit. The patient was offered amputation, to which he agreed due to the likelihood of faster healing and rehabilitation. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen confirmed tissue necrosis without signs of malignancy.
His incisions healed 2 weeks later and, after a short period of physiotherapy, he was able to ambulate. No further infection was detected. The patient was transitioned to an oral anticoagulant (apixaban) and he was discharged from the hospital. He remained well 3 months after discharge, with follow-up TEE showing no evidence of thrombus . On further imaging with agitated saline contrast, there was no evidence of an atrial septal defect .
Extensive tests for autoimmune disorders potentially responsible for thrombotic events, including anti-lupus erythematosus, antinuclear, antimitochondrial, and antiphospholipid antibodies, were all negative. Therefore, the LASP, together with new-onset AF, were likely to have resulted in thrombus formation within the septal pouch with subsequent embolization to the digital artery of the left foot to cause BTS.