A 35-year-old woman who underwent peritoneal dialysis for 11 months because of ESRD secondary to chronic glomerulonephritis was hospitalized for living kidney transplantation. Proteinuria and renal dysfunction were observed during her pregnancy, and her serum creatinine level was 1.4 mg/mL at that time; thereafter, she was followed up by a nephrologist at our institution. Although renal biopsy was considered, the atrophic change of her kidneys was too severe for a renal biopsy for pathological diagnosis. She underwent ABO-incompatible living kidney transplantation donated from her 62-year-old mother. Her left kidney was procured, and the allograft had a single artery that showed no evidence of arteriosclerosis or stenosis . The transplanted artery was anastomosed to the internal iliac artery, and the transplanted vein was anastomosed to the external iliac vein. After the completion of anastomosis, Doppler US revealed an increased peak systolic flow velocity at around 250 cm/sec with > 200 cm/sec peak velocity at anastomosis correlating with significant stenosis . Arterial anastomotic stenosis was suspected; however, there was no evidence for it. At the same time, a change in hue was detected in a part of the transplant renal artery; that part of the artery turned dark brown, and hematoma was strongly suspected . Furthermore, that part was exactly where vascular clamping was performed temporarily in order to drain the air and check bleeding at the anastomosis. Therefore, transplant renal artery stenosis (TRAS) might have resulted from TRAD. The part of the transplanted renal artery was resected, and cold reflux was started again. Injury of the transplant artery was detected macroscopically, and the rest of the transplanted renal artery was anastomosed to the external iliac artery. After re-anastomosis, Doppler US revealed that the blood flow of the renal artery was adequate without an increase in the systolic blood velocity, resulting in sufficient blood flow throughout the allograft. Urine output was also observed as soon as the blood flow returned. An hour after the allograft blood flow returned, the allograft biopsy was performed at the lower pole of the allograft, and no bleeding from the operative field, including the biopsy site, was observed. An immunosuppression regimen including tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, prednisone, and basiliximab was prescribed. After the kidney transplantation, her serum creatinine level decreased to 0.95 mg/dL . An allograft biopsy showed no evidence of rejection or acute tubular necrosis. Furthermore, pathological diagnosis of the resected artery was tunica media dissection. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and her mother for participation in this report.