A 29-year-old woman, gravida 4 para 0, spontaneously conceived. Ultrasound examination at 12 weeks gestation confirmed monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy. The patient was referred to our obstetrics unit at 24 + 5 weeks of gestation because of suspected fetal complex congenital heart disease (CHD). Ultrasound in our hospital suggests aortic coarctation associated with ventricular septal defect in one of the twins. At the first visit, the estimated fetal weight of the CHD fetus fell below the 3rd percentile, and discordance between the estimated fetal weight of the 2 fetuses was 9.4%. Therefore, type I SFGR was also diagnosed. Doppler studies of both twins as well as fetal viability were routinely performed at roughly 2-weeks interval. Serial ultrasound monitoring showed normal fetal growth velocity (see in Table and Fig. ), amniotic volume, UA Doppler, ductus venosus Doppler, and middle cerebral artery Doppler in both fetuses. No significant chromosomal abnormalities in either fetus were detected by chromosome microarray analysis. The patient chose to continue the pregnancy and refused to undergo elective feticide after multidisciplinary consultation with the pediatric cardiovascular physician, neonatologist, and medical geneticist.
The patient was admitted at 30 weeks of gestation for threatened preterm labor and treated with dexamethasone and magnesium sulfate, and discharged at 30 + 4 weeks after inhibition of uterine contractions. At 35 + 3 weeks` gestation, she was readmitted for cervical dilation and underwent an emergency cesarean section. The birth weight of twin female neonates was 2110/2000g (birthweight discordance ratio was 5.2%), and the 1-minute Apgar score was 10. The smaller fetus was immediately transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit and underwent single-stage surgical repair 14 days after birth.
Placental perfusion staining suggests the placental territory discordance ratio was 64.2% (calculated by Image J software processing) with velamentous cord insertion of the smaller/CHD fetus. The smaller fetus had a placental area of only 13 × 9 cm with an islet-like succenturiate placenta of 3 × 2cm. Rarely, we found a lack of Hyrtl’s anastomosis between 2 umbilical arteries in the larger fetus (see in Fig. ).
To make comparisons, we also reviewed more than 50 cases of monochorionic placenta stained by perfusion from December 2021 to August 2022 in our hospital and found that a total of 9 cases had placental territory discordance ratio >50% (for more information on the images see Supplementary Files, ). The remaining 8 patients, except the present case, all presented with type Ⅱ to Ⅲ SFGR. Placental abruption and the smaller fetal demise occurred in 1 case. Considering the poor prognosis of the larger surviving fetus, the patients demand lethal induction of labor. The average gestational age at delivery for the other 7 cases was 31 + 6 weeks, and the average birthweight discordance ratio was 36.2%.