We report the case of a 45-year-old woman who was referred to our hospital for evaluation after some episodes of hypoglycemia neurological symptoms including weakness, fatigue, dizziness, blurred vision, headache, improving after ingestion of sweetmeat and simple carbohydrates but not including loss of consciousness, confusion, bowel habit change, and seizure. In addition, a low serum glucose level was documented in the last episode (47 mg/dL; reference range: 70-95 mg/dL).
Her symptoms began 2 months before admission and almost occurred twice a month. The episodes often occurred in fasting time and occasionally after food consumption. Her blood glucose was in the range of 40 to 70 mg/dl during hypoglycemic episodes.
She had about 20kg weight loss during the last 3 months despite increased food intake and also suffered from abdominal epigastric pain. She had no significant past medical history and any medications without any point in family history. The physical examinations and vital signs had no abnormal finding. Due to persistent neuroglycopenia symptoms despite oral sweat foodstuff consumption, she was prescribed D/W 10% (Dextrose Water) serum to relief the symptoms. Her complete blood cell count, electrolytes, BUN, Cr and liver function tests were normal. Other laboratory tests are placed in .
According to fasting hypoglycemia and Whipple tirade (fasting hypoglycemia<50, hypoglycemia symptoms and immediate symptom relief with glucose consumption), insulinoma was strongly considered. For lesion localizing, a triphasic abdominopelvic CT scan was accomplished. The finding was a 10*12mm nodular lesion in the posterior wall of the third duodenal portion anterior to psoas muscle in the level of third lumbar vertebrae which had strong enhancement in arterioportal phase . There was no other significant finding. In the endoscopic ultrasonography, there was no pathology seen in the pancreas and biliary tract.
All of the evaluations indicated that a duodenal wall lesion is the reason for hypoglycemia presence. Surgical treatment was scheduled. During exploratory laparotomy after Kocher maneuver, a round shape, firm consistency lesion 12mm diameter in the third portion of duodenum originating from the seromuscular layer was found which excised by enucleation without mucosal injury. Immediately after resecting the lesion, the blood sugar level was placed in the normal range. The patient spent her postoperative time without any complications and was discharged on the third day after surgery. In a 6-month follow-up, she did not have any hypoglycemic episodes.
In pathologic study, low grade gastrointestinal stromal tumor with spindle cell type and 1/50 HPF mitotic rate without necrosis was reported . In immunohistochemistry assessment, CD117 was positive in tumoral cells , SMA and S100 were negative while CD34 was patchy positive and 2% of the tumor cells being positive for the proliferation marker Ki67.