This nine-year-old Caucasian girl was born at 41 weeks’ gestation via induced vaginal delivery, and weighed 3260g. She was hypotonic and lethargic at birth with failure to thrive and was nasogastric tube-fed initially for one month. At 15 months of age, she was diagnosed with PWS with a rare imprinting center methylation mutation. She has physical features characteristic of PWS including almond-shaped eyes, down-turning corners of the mouth, small hands and a prominent metopic suture. Other features of PWS include gross motor delay, social delay, obsessive-compulsive behavior and rigid thinking. Her family history is notable for a number of members (including our patient’s father) who suffer from EDS. None of these individuals, however, report characteristics of narcolepsy such as cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations, or sleep paralysis.
Our patient was referred to a pediatric pulmonologist at age two years 10 months for a screening polysomnograph (PSG) sleep study prior to initiation of growth hormone (GH) therapy. An initial screening overnight oximetry study was carried out before the PSG due to concerns that she might not tolerate the monitoring equipment. The screening oximetry was normal; no significant desaturations to suggest obstructive sleep apnea were found. At the follow-up with the sleep specialist, our patient’s mother reported episodes suggestive of narcolepsy. Dating back to early infancy, episodes were reported of our patient falling forward for a few seconds at a time with her eyes rolling back in her head. During these events, she was unresponsive, but appeared to be conscious. The events occurred three to four times per week and were provoked by laughter. The episodes typically occurred after waking from a nap in the mornings, and resolved spontaneously. She was not sleepy afterwards. The episodes were determined not to be seizures; no other associated motor activity, eye deviation or stereotypy consistent with a description of a seizure was present. Daytime hypersomnia was also noted with sleep duration of greater than 12 hours per night in addition to a two- to three-hour daytime nap.
The initial sleep study revealed adequate sleep efficiency, but disrupted sleep overall . Specifically, our patient did not cycle through all stages of sleep as expected; sleep fragmentation was noted, especially during the REM phase. Mild sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) was identified, consisting of four central apneas, one obstructive apnea, and three mixed apneas, particularly within REM sleep. Two obstructive, but no central, hypopneas were observed. The apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) was 1.4 events per hour. The average end-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) measurement was 45mmHg (maximum of 61mmHg). The average oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 95 percent (minimum of 78.7 percent).
A repeat overnight PSG was completed at five years three months of age due to ongoing concerns of EDS and cataplectic episodes. The goals for treatment were to optimize school performance and ensure our patient’s safety. At that time, episodes of cataplexy were still occurring, mainly in the mornings upon awakening. The results of the second PSG study were abnormal and suggestive of narcolepsy. Spikes were noted on electroencephalography without any seizure activity and a shortened REM sleep latency was observed. The overall degree of SDB was improved compared to the previous measurement. Abnormal respiratory events were limited to one obstructive apnea and two obstructive hypopneas with an AHI of 0.4 events per hour. The average EtCO2 was 46mmHg; the SpO2 was also improved with an average of 95 percent (minimum of 87 percent).
Another follow-up PSG was done at age six years and 10 months. This PSG again showed excellent sleep efficiency and decreased REM sleep latency . However, worsening sleep disruptions were observed, with increased spontaneous arousals. SDB or obstructive sleep apnea in REM sleep (an AHI of 4.4 events per hour) were also worse than previous observations. Finally, a multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) was performed to objectively quantify the degree of sleepiness . This test consisted of five nap opportunities, given at two-hour intervals. Her MSLT results showed the following sleep latencies on five respective naps: 9min 18sec; 1min 44sec; 54sec; 6min 23sec; 3min 55sec. The overall mean sleep latency was 4min 27sec. Two SOREM periods were also noted.
The results of the above sleep studies combined with the report of narcoleptic and cataplectic episodes led to the initiation of treatment at age seven years six months with a CNS stimulant, modafinil. The initial dose was 50mg in the mornings and scheduled naps were presented throughout the day. Two months later, the dose of modafinil was increased to 100mg daily. With modafinil treatment, episodes of narcolepsy and cataplexy were not entirely eliminated, but much improved. A decreased level of EDS and fewer cataplectic episodes were observed post-therapy and safety was no longer a concern. Our patient had no history of allergy and no adverse effects of modafinil were reported.
After a year of modafinil therapy a PSG was completed, at age eight years and six months. This study demonstrated improvement compared to all previous tests, showing excellent sleep efficiency . However, sleep latency remained short at 6 minutes and 57 seconds. The REM sleep latency was within normal limits (1 hour) in contrast to previously abnormal results. Disruption of sleep was also observed, with increased time spent in stage 2 sleep (67.4 percent of total sleep time; TST) and less time in REM sleep (16.8 percent of TST). Additionally, SDB was demonstrated (mostly central apneas with an AHI of 2.7 events per hour). These apneas were particularly prominent in REM sleep; the REM AHI was 10.8 events per hour and a lower baseline SpO2 of 93 percent and an EtCO2 in the mid-40s was observed. Finally, there was a slightly elevated periodic limb movement index of 6.6 events per hour.
At age eight years and eight months, our patient was started on GH and a PSG test was recommended six months following GH initiation. The dose of modafinil was increased to 150mg per day to improve the narcolepsy and cataplectic episodes. This fifth PSG was done at age nine years and three months. Again, excellent sleep efficiency was noted. The REM sleep latency was slightly prolonged again at 1 hour 21 minutes, and the proportion of REM sleep was less than expected (20.1 percent of TST). Overall, excellent sleep efficiency was noted in all stages of sleep despite diminished REM sleep and a slightly prolonged sleep latency. Moderate SDB was again demonstrated (mostly central apneas with an AHI of 5.6 events per hour and a REM AHI of 17.6 events per hour). Periodic limb movements again occurred, with three events per hour. GH therapy elicited several benefits in our patient, including increased height and growth rate, increased proportional hand and foot sizes, a decrease in body fat and an increase in lean body mass and increased physical performance. Other potential benefits of the GH therapy were not measured, such as resting energy expenditure, serum cholesterol and bone mineral density.
Long-term modafinil therapy resulted in objective improvement in her PSG results, in conjunction with clinical improvement in her mood and a decreased frequency of naps. An increased level of alertness and stamina throughout the day was noted by caregivers. Without modafinil use, our patient became tired and irritable by early afternoon. With modafinil therapy, our patient no longer required naps after school and was more social, alert, and less irritable. A decrease in the cataplectic episodes was demonstrated; the remaining episodes were limited to the morning hours prior to modafinil administration.