After 5 h of abdominal distention and pain, a 26-year-old Chinese woman reported hospital at 15:30 on December 3, 2017. The patient had previously been hospitalised for AP due to hyperlipidaemia on May 9, 2017, after which she had discontinued the lipid-lowering drugs prescribed by her doctor. During the 3 months before her admission in December, she resumed a high-fat diet. Approximately 7 h before disease onset, the patient consumed fatty food even after the occurrence of abdominal distention and pain. Her abdominal pain gradually worsened, and she vomited twice. The patient was diagnosed with AP based on her medical history, symptoms, signs, hemodlastase, and upper abdominal computed tomography (CT). After 10 h of hospitalisation, her abdominal pain became aggravated, leading to haemodynamic instability. Upper abdominal CT, liver, kidney, and heart function and electrolyte levels were reviewed. A comprehensive evaluation of the patient’s condition revealed a Ranson score of 4, Balthazar CT grade of D, APACHE II score of 17, and SOFA score of 9. The patient was diagnosed with SAP and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (heart, liver and kidney). After hospital admission, the patient was treated with positive expansion, gastrointestinal decompression, and nutritional support, and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) treatment was initiated on the second day. Based on an examination of abdominal imaging, intraperitoneal puncture and drainage was administered under the guidance of ultrasound on days 2, 4, 8, and 15. Subsequently, eight root drainage tubes were placed (pull out of the two tubes of the eight tubes on the 11th day) and jejunal nutrition was administered for 16 days after admission. By day 18 after admission, the patient’s renal function had restored, and intraperitoneal pressure had decreased from 32 mmHg at admission to 13 mmHg. The APACHE II and SOFA scores both became 3 on day 18. Onday 19, the patient’s temperature was within the healthy range at 06:00. The results of a routine blood examination were as follows: white blood cells (WBCs) 9.61 × 109/L, neutrophils 7.8 × 109/L (81%), C-reactive protein (CRP) 39.61 mg/L. Until 17:00 on day 19, the patient experienced chills and high fever. Her body temperature reached a high of 40.2 °C. After blood culture, linezolid and meropenem were performed to anti-infection treatment immediately. Routine blood examination, procalcitonin (PCT), and CRP levels were also observed (WBCs4.64 × 109/L, neutrophils 3.4 × 109/L [73.6%], CRP 51.15 mg/L, PCT 2.68 ng/mL). The patient continued to experience high fever on day 20. Thus, we administered a deep vein puncture tube and removed the remaining six root abdominal drainage tubes. All extracted peritoneal drainage tubes were used to make normalism the patient’s etiological cultivation. The causative agents were determined through high-throughput gene detection from a venous blood sample. Blood culture was performed again. These tests revealed that the patient had a fungal blood infection. Based on the conventional treatmet method, caspofungin was added to the drug regimen. On the 23rd day of treatment, Tc. glabrata was identified as the infecting agent through blood culture and gene detection.
Eventually, we discontinued the administration of meropenem and linezolid, but continued that of caspofungin. The patient’s body temperature was restored to within the normal range on the 25th day of treatment. During treatment, we monitored her routine blood panel and CRP levels once or twice daily. The results showed that her WBC count decreased gradually—to its lowest level on the 21st day of treatment (WBCs 0.58 × 109/L, neutrophils 0.1 × 109/L [2.20%]). Her haemoglobin and platelet levels also decreased. However, the duration of this decline was shorter than that of the WBC decline. The levels of other inflammatory markers also increased on the 23rd day of treatment (CRP 235.89 mg/L, PCT 10.85 ng/mL), alongside an increase in creatinine levels. On the 32nd day of treatment, the patient’s WBC count was finally restored to the normal range.
In summary, the patient’s temperature returned to normal with caspofungin treatment for 10 days. Blood culture was carried out on the 26th and 30th days after admission, and no bacterial growth was found in the two blood cultures. She was discharged on the 33rd day after treatment. And she was followed up every 10 days for 30 days after discharge. Results showed that her temperature was normal. Since then, she has been maintaining the low fat diet.
The timings of the observations (WBC counts, neutrophils, CRP, PCT, ect.) are shown in Fig. .