A 61 year old lady presented to the emergency department with 1 day history of bleeding from her gums. She denied any history of hematemesis, hemoptysis or epistaxis. Furthermore, she did not have melena or hematuria with no preceding history of flu-like symptoms. She noticed a non-itchy well demarcated rash, bluish in color on her right forearm and abdomen .
With regards to her previous medical history, she was diagnosed with lumbar disc prolapse. Recently, she has started BVT sessions to relieve her pain. She received four once weekly direct bee sting sessions, first was a month prior to her presentation. Nevertheless, she is morbidly obese with a BMI of more than 40 and has bilateral knee osteoarthritis as a consequence. She did not use any new herbal or prescribed medications.
Upon arrival to the emergency department, she was fully oriented. She did not show any sign of hemodynamic instability. Systemic examination was unremarkable except for the skin, which showed two ecchymotic rashes. The first one was inferior to the umbilicus, round and macular, bluish in color, with a diameter of 5 cm . The second was in the planter aspect of the right forearm distally; with a diameter of 2 cm .
Laboratory investigations were as follows: Full blood count of WBC 5.8 × 109/L, Platelets 9 × 109/L (manual count: 15 × 109/L), Hb 140 g/L. Her urea and electrolyte; Urea 3.3 mmol/L, Crea 41 mmol/L, K 3.5 mmol/L, Na 140 mmol/L, Glu 5 mmol/L, HCO3 25 mmol/L. Liver function test and liver enzymes; Alkaline phosphatase 154 IU/L, ALT 41 IU/L, AST35 IU/L, Bil 11 umol/L, INR 0.94, APTT 32 s, protein 78 g/L, albumin 35 g/L, TSH 2 mmol/L. After reviewing her previous blood work up, she had a platelet count of 240 × 109/L few weeks before starting her first BVT session.
Her peripheral blood smear showed: WBC; few activated lymphocyte and neutrophils with left shift, RBC; normocytic and normochromic, Platelets; giant platelets seen. Disseminated intravascular coagulation was ruled out based on laboratory test and blood film. She was assessed by a consultant hematologist and a diagnosis of ITP was established. Ultrasound abdomen showed a complete normal study. HCV, HBV and HIV screening was negative.
She was admitted to the hospital for 3 days. Initially, she received a 2 days course of immunoglobulin (IVIG 90 g once daily). After that she received a course of prednisolone (90 mg once daily for 2 weeks). She was clinically stable throughout her hospital stay with no further symptoms. On the day of discharge, her platelet count was 42 × 109/L. The patient was followed up in the outpatient clinic after 8 weeks. She was asymptomatic and her platelet count was 162 × 109/L.