A 44-year-old female presented with a chief complaint of 3-year history of recurrent pain and intermittent swelling to the left mandibular region. The swelling was usually worsened by meals, extreme pain arising once a month. When the pain started, it lasted about 10 min, with an NRS (numeric rating scale) score of 10. She had recently begun to have pain every 4 h. On examination, there was a tense and sensitive submandibular salivary gland and visible swelling in the posterior part of the left side of submandibular area. No salivary flow was appreciated from the left submandibular duct. The radiograph showed an elongated radiopaque structure imposed on the left submandibular area . Computerized tomographic (CT) scan of the mandibular region showed the presence of multiple high attenuated materials and elongated sialolith located within the left Wharton’s duct. Also, very severe atrophic submandibular gland was found .
Preoperative technetium-99m pertechnetate salivary gland scintigraphy revealed that other salivary glands were within normal limits, but with no definite radiotracer excretion in the Lt. submandibular gland .
The patient was placed on the operating table in supine position and was induced with short-acting paralytics to allow for monitoring of the branches of the facial nerve during dissection. General anesthesia was obtained via oral endotracheal intubation. The neck was extended with the placement of a shoulder roll, and the head was turned to the opposite side of the involved parotid. The patient was prepared and draped in a sterile fashion. The ipsilateral commissure of the mouth was prepared as readily visible. The incision line was marked (standard modified facelift incision). 2% lidocaine with epinephrine was injected within the subcutaneous tissues of the proposed surgical incision, involving a standard preauricular curvilinear incision which begins at the tragus, going around the inferior border of the lobule and then continuing backwards in the auriculomastoid groove. The superior aspect of the postauricular incision reached to the level of the superior aspect of the mastoid and then was extended posteriorly into the hair line of the neck for cosmesis .
After skin incision, the subplatysmal skin flap is elevated just above the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle using a monopolar electrocautery under direct vision. The greater auricular nerve and external jugular vein can be identified located superficial to the SCM muscle. The skin flap is elevated until the anterior extent reaches the midline of the anterior neck, the superior extent the inferior border of the mandible and the inferior extent the level of omohyoid muscle. Skin flap elevation below the mandible should be performed carefully to minimize injury to the nearby marginal branch of the facial nerve. Normally two assistant surgeons are required to comfortably lift up the skin flap with an Army-Navy retractor or a right-angle breast retractor. After obtaining a sufficient amount of working space (approximately 10-cm height), a self-retaining retractor is applied through the space and is secured [, ] . Dissection began at the lower border of the SMG using the da Vinci Xi surgical system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., CA, USA) with two endowrist arms (monopolar curved scissors & Maryland bipolar forceps) . The proximal facial artery was ligated with vascular clips, the lingual nerve was separated from the submandibular ganglion with monopolar cautery, and Wharton’s duct was ligated with a vascular clip. The lingual and hypoglossal nerves were well preserved. The specimen was well excised, the surgical bed irrigated with warm saline and bleeding control under both robot view and direct vision was performed . A close suction drain was inserted posterior to the hairline incision, and the wound was closed with Dermabond skin adhesive (Ethicon, USA) after subcutaneous layer suture. The pathologic report was sialolith with ductal atrophy. There was no postoperative complication.