An 82-year-old, bedridden woman with underlying Alzheimer disease, renal insufficiency, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus type 2, with poor blood sugar control, presented with 1 month of fever. A direct reliable clinical history could not be obtained. Her daughters stated that she complained of chronic headaches for more than 20 years, but progressing during the past 6 months. She did not experience rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, anosmia, or facial pain. There was no history of head trauma and temporal region fracture. Nasal endoscopy found purulent discharge from the left sphenoethmoidal recess. Otoscopy showed central perforation of left tympanic membrane. Clear mucoid discharge was present in the middle ear. There was no attic retraction or cholesteatoma seen. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinus showed soft tissue lesions of mixed high and low density that totally filled the left sphenoid sinus, left Onodi cell, and left sphenoethmoidal recess. There was presence of high-density foci involving sinus, like bony flakes produced by fungi. Sinus wall destruction was seen, involving posterior and inferior walls of the left sphenoid sinus, left-sided clivus, and left pterygoid plate , and we suspected chronic invasive fungus rhinosinusitis. Soft tissue density was seen in the left mastoid cavity without evidence of bony destruction. Endoscopic left sphenoidotomy was performed. The accumulation of dense fungal collection was found intraoperatively within the left sphenoid sinus with overlying keratin material. The sphenoid sinus was widely opened, and all fungal balls were removed. Histopathology revealed cyst-like spaces, lined by keratinizing benign squamous epithelium compatible with sphenoid sinus cholesteatoma . Bone erosion, characterized by fragmented bony elements admixed with keratin materials, were observed . Fungal balls, consisting of uniform, regular-shaped hyphae, morphologically consistent with Aspergillus spp. , were detected in the left sphenoid sinus without evidence of tissue invasion. Headache and fever improved after the surgery. Nevertheless, clinical management became increasingly difficult due to the severe Alzheimer disease and multidrug-resistant bacterial infection. Nasal irrigation and topical therapies were not adequate.
Two months after surgery, she complained of worsening headache with abrupt onset of fever. The CT scan showed progression of disease with multiple permeative bony destructions, involving bony sinus walls and central skull base. This was likely skull base osteomyelitis (SBO). It involved left greater wing of the sphenoid bone, left medial pterygoid plate, clivus, medial border of left foramen ovale, left anterior part of foramen lacerum, medial part of left foramen spinosum, left petrous bone, and left carotid canal, encasing intrapetrous internal carotid artery ( and ). Soft tissue density lesions were visualized in left middle ear cavity and left mastoid, with preserved mastoid septae and ear ossicles, and without a connection with petrous soft tissue. This was likely otomastoiditis rather than cholesteatoma of the temporal bone. She was then scheduled for debridement of the infected bone. Left sphenoidotomy was maximally opened together with middle meatal antrostomy and ethmoidectomy. Right sphenoidotomy was performed and combined with left sphenoidotomy by removal of the sphenoid septum. Combined subtemporal and suboccipital craniotomy was performed. Intraoperative findings revealed keratin material with debris involving the skull base. Debridement of skull base was done for removal of cholesteatoma and infected bone. Cholesteatoma and infected bone were left around internal carotid artery and optic nerve area. Mastoidectomy was done. There was no cholesteatoma in the mastoid cavity. The histopathologic report revealed cholesteatoma with SBO. There were many neutrophilic infiltrates admixed with keratin, the features of which were compatible with acute osteomyelitis . Culture reported Klebsiella pneumoniae (ESBL (Extended Spectrum Beta Lactamase)-producing strain). Ertapenam plus oral sitafloxacin was given for treatment of SBO. After the revision surgery, headache persisted with intermittent fever. Nasal endoscopy showed purulent discharge consisting of infected debris. CT scan showed disease progression eroding the central skull base. Risk for further surgery outweighed benefits and she succumbed to this disease.