A 62-year-old Caucasian woman with a 20-year history of non-toxic multinodular goiter presented to our hospital for surgical treatment. She had no associated symptoms such as dysphagia, dyspnea, or dysphonia. Six years earlier, the patient had undergone a left nephrectomy for clear cell carcinoma. A physical examination revealed an indolent subhyoid swelling accompanied by a few round nodules. A preoperative neck ultrasound examination showed an enlarged thyroid gland, with a retrosternal left lobe. The whole left lobe was occupied by an isoechoic vascularized macronodule. No suspicious central or lateral neck lymph nodes were found. The indication for surgery was the result of the sonographic features of the lesion, the thyroid volume, and the retrosternal position of the left lobe; for these reasons fine needle aspiration cytology was considered unnecessary. A total thyroidectomy was performed in our department in April 2010. Her parathyroid glands and recurrent nerves were recognized and preserved. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the second postoperative day.
Upon macroscopic examination, her thyroid was enlarged and multinodular. The left lobe, which was larger than the right one, was occupied by a solid macronodule measuring 53mm; small yellow areas were observed within this nodule. A microscopic examination of the gland revealed thyroid hyperplasia. The left lobe nodule was characterized by microfollicular proliferation with edema and areas of sclerosis and was surrounded by an incomplete fibrous capsule. Inside the nodule, small yellow solid areas were present, and there was a proliferation of large cells with clear cytoplasm and small and hyperchromic nuclei. This second population of tumor cells was well-demarcated from the first (Figure ). Neoplastic cells were immunonegative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), Hector Battifora mesothelial cell monoclonal antibody-1, and galectin-3 (Figure ), whereas CD10 was positive (Figure ). Specimens of the previous renal cell carcinoma were examined, and histopathological features matched the present histology. With these findings, a diagnosis of metastasis of renal cell carcinoma in thyroid follicular adenoma was made.
Postoperative staging demonstrated no other foci of CCRC metastasis.
Three years after her thyroidectomy, no evidence of recurrent CCRC has been found.