A 20-year-old woman with GSDIa was referred to our adult outpatient unit because of short stature. She had a birth weight of 3200 g at a gestational age of 35 weeks. She had been diagnosed with GSDIa by glucose-6-phosphatase enzyme assay and quantitative assessment of glycogen content in a liver biopsy specimen at 7 months of age, after displaying classic symptoms and findings consistent with GSDIa including hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, dyslipidemia, enlarged liver and spleen and nephrocalcinosis, without neutropenia. Recurrent hypoglycemic episodes had been prevented with the use of uncooked cornstarch and frequent feeding over a 20-year follow-up period. However, preprandial hyperlacticacidemia and dyslipidemia persisted despite a lack of hypoglycemia. Initially she grew between -1SD and -2SD. After the age of 7 years growth gradually slowed until it was below -2SD at 9 years of age. She had been evaluated at a pediatric endocrinology department at 14 years of age for growth retardation and delayed puberty. Normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH) and subnormal GH responses to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) and GH stimulation (by L-dopa) tests were obtained respectively . Menarche was delayed, but occurred spontaneously at the age of 16 years. Liver transplantation had been offered, but refused by the members of her family.
During her current admission at an adult outpatient unit, her pubertal development was assessed as being complete. She had short stature with a final height of 141 cm (parental target height: 163 cm). She had no hepatic or renal dysfunction. Laboratory tests revealed no hypoglycemia, but hyperlacticacidemia and severe dyslipidemia were seen (low-density lipoprotein = 212 mg/dl, triglycerides = 409 mg/dl, high-density lipoprotein = 27 mg/dl). Functional evaluation of her pituitary gland was performed with provocative testing and showed normal TSH, FSH, LH and GH responses to TRH, LHRH and GH stimulation (by insulin-induced hypoglycemia) tests . Morphological evaluation by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a hypoplastic adenohypophysis (anterior pituitary height 3 mm) with no abnormality in the neurohypophysis.
Spontaneous overnight GH profiling for 12 hours at 2-hour intervals revealed a mean GH level of 0.16 ng/ml, a spontaneous absolute GH peak level of 0.37 ng/ml and the area under curve value (AUCGH = mean profile GH × time) for the night was 115 ng*min/ml . Daytime and more frequent overnight GH samplings were offered, but not accepted by the patient.