A 79-year-old woman was admitted to a hospital for increasing back pain and left leg radiating pain for several months. She had type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension and was taking medications. She was treated with physiotherapy and injection for her back and radiating pain every other week for several months before her back pain was exacerbated.
On admission, her vital signs were stable, with a blood pressure of 138/75 mmHg, pulse rate of 75/min, respiration rate of 20/min, and body temperature of 36.7 °C. Blood tests on admission showed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 73 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 6.0 mg/dL. ESR and CRP are the most common tests to diagnose and monitor inflammatory conditions . MRI showed infectious spondylitis with an abscess at the posteroinferior aspect of the L5 body and epidural enhancement at the L4-S2 level. (a)
A two-stage operation was planned. The first surgery was performed on the 3rd day of hospitalization. Laminectomy and facetectomy were performed at the L5-S1 spine with massive irrigation. After surgical debridement and collection of culture specimens, empirical antimicrobial therapy with cefotiam was started before the culture results became available. Blood culture was performed before starting empirical antimicrobial treatment, in which no micro-organism was identified Kytococcus sedentarius was identified from a closed pus and tissue culture obtained during surgery. A VITEK® II system (bioMérieux, La Balme-Les-Grottes, France) and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) (bioMerieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France) were used to identify the causative pathogens. The antibiotic susceptibility test showed minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of ≤0.5 mg/L for ciprofloxacin, 16 for vancomycin, ≥4 mg/L for oxacillin, and ≥32 mg/L for rifampin. Once the antimicrobial sensitivity test results became available after 14 days, the antimicrobial therapy was changed to ciprofloxacin. On the 15th day of hospitalization, a second operation was performed to secure the spine’s stability by posterior lumbar interbody fusion.
Intravenous ciprofloxacin was continued for 2 weeks before hospital discharge and switched to oral ciprofloxacin, which was continued for 6 more weeks.
After a total of 8 weeks’ treatment, follow-up MRI showed no fluid collection, abscess, or epidural enhancement (b). Lab tests showed an ESR of 26 mm/h and a CRP concentration of 0.3 mg/dL.
The 6-month follow-up at the outpatient clinic showed that the patient’s back pain and radiating leg pain had been alleviated. The blood tests showed an ESR of 26 mm/h and CRP concentration of 0.2 mg/dL.