Pre-operative planning included proper history taking. A 35-year-old lady with painful right hip and difficulty in walking attended our clinic. Her radiological evaluation showed a dissociated bipolar prosthesis and long cemented femoral stem. She gave past history of giant cell tumor, for which she underwent cemented bipolar and failed within 4 months (, , ). The skin scar was health with no sinus or discharge. Her blood reports did not show any signs of peri-prosthetic joint infection (CRP = 12, ESR = 28). Radiological examination included pelvis with both hip joint and long length femur anteroposterior and lateral views. Serial X-ray study was done to note subsidence. Her bone scan did not reveal any other distant metastasis. She was planned for revision of the femoral stem and conversion into THA.
This procedure was performed with patient in lateral position and conventional posterior approach. Hip was exposed in layers along the old scar. Metallosis was seen all around with no frank pus . The old metal wires around greater trochanter were removed along with loose fragments. A small trochanter fragment along with the abductor and vastus lateralis continuity was preserved and mobilized away augmenting hip exposure. The long femoral stem was found well fixed with a cement mantle all around in an unacceptable retroversion. There was metallosis with no macroscopic signs of infection. Taking in consideration of her young age and the long femoral prosthesis with cement mantle, the idea of ETO was considered inappropriate and more iatrogenic.
Initially, an episiotomy was done along the lateral border of the femur with an oscillating saw to interrupt the radio compressive force of the bone along the cement mantle and stem. However, the lateral episiotomy was not sufficient to loosen up the tight fit between bone and cement interface. Hence, a small wedge episiotomy was done along the lateral border of the femur (, ). A wedge of 5 mm bone along the lateral aspect was removed increasing the exposure of bone cement interface and still keeping the rest of cortical rim intact. This exposure allowed our 2 mm K-wire, drill bit, flexible osteotome, and micro saw to go in between the bone and cement mantle to dissociate it. With utmost care, all the cement mantle and implant were removed. The femoral stem removed was basically an uncemented design 240 × 14 mm fixed with cement all the way down the distal femur. The wound was washed with hydrogen peroxide and betadine solution with high jet pulse lavage and the wound was redraped. A long 305 × 18 mm wagner revision uncemented stem was placed with adequate axial and rotational stability . The long straight stem of 4 mm wider than the extracted was passed along the anterior femoral bowing augmenting the axial fit and the wagner fins helped in getting the much need rotational stability. The acetabular socket was prepared with uncemented cup size of 46 mm with a posterior lip liner poly and 32 mm metal head was used. The wedge of bone was kept back along the lateral border and help with 5-ethibond sutures. Intraoperative histopathology sampling did not show any evidence of giant cell tumor recurrence and microbiology report was negative. The fill length X-ray was found satisfactory . The patient was kept in non-weight bearing walking for a month of 3 months, and then, complete loading was started in the end of 4th month. The patient had no complication at end of 2 years and is in regular follow-up .