A 64-year-old Greek man presented with an eight-hour history of right iliac fossa pain. He denied any other symptoms apart from anorexia and nausea over the last six hours. His only significant past medical history was that of a laparoscopic cholocystectomy five years ago, and he was taking Lipemia syrup for hyperlipidemia.
On his admission, his vital signs were within normal range. A physical examination demonstrated tenderness in the right iliac fossa, rebound tenderness and a positive McBurney’s sign. His blood analysis revealed an elevated blood count, his white blood cells (WBC) were 14,440/μl (normal values 4.6 to 10.2 × 103/mL) and 74% of them were neutrophiles (normal values 40 to 75%). The rest of the routine preoperative blood tests and his erect chest and abdominal X-rays were unremarkable. A provisional diagnosis of acute appendicitis was made and initial management included intravenous fluid resuscitation and antibiotic coverage. No other examinations were performed and, after our patient gave his written consent, he was taken to the operating theatre for an open appendectomy under general anaesthesia.
A McBurney incision was performed and a normal-appearing appendix was identified, which did not have any remarkable sign of inflammation that could explain the tenderness and the peritoneal irritation. During the operation, some serous peritoneal fluid was observed between the small intestine loops. A typical appendectomy was performed. An examination of the small bowel revealed an inflamed and perforated Meckel’s diverticulum due to a foreign body approximately 100cm proximal to the ileocecal valve . The Meckel’s diverticulum had been perforated by a foreign body, which was found to be a fish bone . A Meckel’s diverticulectomy was performed using a gastrointestinal anastomosis stapler (GIA 55mm) . The operational site was irrigated with normal saline solution.
The sectioned specimen showed no ectopic tissue in the diverticulum wall. The patient made an uneventful recovery postoperatively and was discharged on the second postoperative day. At the follow-up examination 10 days and 1 month after surgery he was doing well.