A 45-year-old previously healthy female from the suburbs of Colombo, Sri Lanka presented to a general medical unit of The National Hospital of Sri Lanka (NHSL) with an acute febrile illness associated with unsteadiness of gait. Three days prior to admission, the patient developed high fever with chills, arthralgia, myalgia and moderate headache worse in the morning. During the course of the same day, she found that she had difficulty in walking due to unsteadiness and intermittent dizziness. She did not have any other focal neurological signs or an apparent source of infection.
On admission, she looked ill and was febrile (101.5°F). Her pulse rate was 88 beats per minute; blood pressure was 110/70 with no postural hypotension; respiratory rate was 14/minute. Mild bilateral conjunctival injection was noted, although no haemorrhages were seen. There was no neck stiffness, skin rash, lymphadenopathy or arthritis. On neurological examination she was alert and oriented with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 15/15. She had a scanning dysarthria and marked horizontal nystagmus with bilateral dysmetria, dysdiadokokinesia and incordination which was more prominent on the right. Her gait was wide-based and ataxic with a tendency to fall to the right more than to the left. The rest of the neurological examination including tone, power, reflexes and sensation was normal.
Her investigation results on admission were as follows: leucocyte count 4450/mm3; neutrophils 3070/mm3, lymphocytes 850/mm3, monocytes 400/mm3; platelets 118,000/mm3; hemoglobin 11.7 g/dl, hematocrit 33.4%; erythrocyte sedimentation rate 8 mm/hour. Blood film done a day later showed leukopenia, lymphocytosis and thrombocytopenia suggestive of an acute viral infection. Renal function, electrolytes, blood glucose were normal. Liver transaminases showed a 3 fold rise above the upper limit of normal (alanine aminotransferase; 136 U/l, aspartate aminotransferase; 140 U/l). Non-structural protein 1 (NS1) test for dengue antigen was positive.
Her fever subsided by the fourth day of the illness, but the cerebellar symptoms and signs persisted. The platelet count continued to drop reaching a nadir of 36,000/mm3 by day seven of illness. However, no evidence of plasma leakage or shock occurred. She was managed with oral fluid replacement. On day nine of the illness, her constitutional symptoms resolved completely.
Dengue IgM and IgG antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were positive on the seventh day of the illness. Mycoplasma, herpes simplex virus, Epstein Barr virus, human immunodeficiency virus and cytomegalovirus antibodies were not detected. The Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test was negative. Anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibody was negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with gadolinium contrast (performed at day 7 of the illness) was normal. The patient refused consent for lumbar puncture.
She was discharged from hospital on day 9 when her platelet count returned to normal. Her cerebellar signs progressively improved had resolved completely by D17 when she was reviewed in the follow up clinic.