A 58-year-old Caucasian obese woman (body mass index 31.5kg/m2) was admitted to our hospital with a history of continuous FUO varying from 38°C to 39.5°C for 10 weeks despite several courses of antibiotic therapy. Her history included 30 pack years of cigarette smoking. Currently, she suffered from night sweats, continuous weight loss of 12kg and dyspnea on exertion. No signs of rheumatic or neurological diseases were present, especially no temporal pain, headache or visual impairment. There were no skin lesions, no myalgia of pectoral or pelvic girdle or morning stiffness, and no arthralgia. Her blood pressure was 140/90mmHg on both arms. Initial suspected diagnosis involved malignant or infectious diseases. Laboratory findings showed elevated systemic parameters of inflammation including C-reactive protein (CRP; 22mg/dL) and accelerated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 110mm/hour). Complete blood count showed total white blood cell 13.8/μL, total red blood cell 5 million/μL, hemoglobin 13.4g/dL, hematocrit 42.8%, mean corpuscular volume 84.4fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 26.4pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 31.3g/dL, and platelet 278,000/μL. Differential blood count showed neutrophil granulocytes 88.1%, lymphocytes 8.1%, monocytes 3.6%, eosinophil granulocytes 0.1%, and basophil granulocytes 0.5%. Mean platelet volume was 10.4fL. Serum albumin showed 32.8g/L and β2 microglobulin 1.9mg/L. Detailed blood tests for rheumatic disorders were negative. Repeated microbiological blood tests, stool cultures as well as serological testing for specific pathogens, including Orthomyxoviridae, Herpesviridae, Mycobacteriaceae, Legionellaceae, Spirochaetaceae, Chlamydiaceae and Mycoplasmataceae were negative.
Endoscopic evaluations, including bronchoscopy, esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy as well as transesophageal echocardiography were without pathological findings. In addition, computed tomography (CT) of her thorax and abdomen showed atherosclerotic lesions only; however, no evidence of any inflammatory or malignant focus was detected. In particular, there were no alterations of the vessel wall indicative of inflammation. We decided to perform 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET; Figure ). 18F-FDG PET demonstrated increased metabolic activity in her supraaortic arteries with the most intense involvement of the subclavian arteries and also slightly elevated glucose metabolism in the aortic arch. A borderline asymmetry of the femoral artery was regarded as within physiological limits. There were no additional foci of increased glucose metabolism in her body. Thus, GCA of the supraaortic arteries was proposed as the inflammatory focus. Other causes for aortitis or arteritis (Gsell-Erdheim disease, syphilitic aortitis) and FUO had been excluded initially. After commencement of steroid therapy with 90mg prednisolone daily intravenously, her inflammatory markers dropped rapidly within 10 days (CRP 6mg/dL) and she was discharged in good health. Over a period of 6 weeks steroids were reduced to the lowest effective dose of 40mg daily orally with parameters of disease being clinical symptoms, CRP, and ESR. Methotrexate was added at a dose of 20mg weekly subcutaneous injection to support steroid tapering. Today, she consults our rheumatologic out-patient clinic at intervals of 6 months, the medication has been reduced to 2mg oral prednisolone daily and methotrexate 20mg weekly subcutaneous injection.