The patient is a 34-year-old woman who had an acute episode of excruciating headache and was later found obtunded. She had a history of a normal pregnancy three years prior to presentation. She then had an abnormal pregnancy requiring dilation and evacuation at 10–12 weeks that was found to be a molar pregnancy. She became pregnant again 9 months after the dilation and evacuation of the molar pregnancy. This ended in a spontaneous, uncomplicated delivery 5 months prior to her presentation. There was no history of trauma, recent or remote.
Upon arrival to Emergency Department, she had fixed, dilated pupils and displayed extensor posturing. Computerized tomography of the head without contrast showed a 10-mm left hemispheric subdural hematoma causing significant midline shift and uncal herniation. The patient was then taken to the operating room for emergency decompression via frontotemporal craniectomy. A thick, clotted subdural hematoma was removed. Fresh bleeding from one of the cortical arteries was encountered and controlled with bipolar coagulation. Inspection under microscope magnification revealed no obvious vascular or neoplastic lesion. The coagulated part of the small cortical artery was divided and sent for histopathologic examination along with the evacuated hematoma.
Examination of the tissue showed no evidence of vascular malformation or neoplasm, and cytokeratin immunolabeling showed no signs of choriocarcinoma.
Following neurological and hemodynamic stabilization, CT angiogram showed no evidence of aneurysm or vascular pathology. Magnetic resonance imaging showed changes associated with herniation injury, but no appreciable tumor or intracranial mass. After full obstetric history was obtained, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) level was found to be 55,000 mIU/mL (normal < 5 in non-pregnant patients). CSF examination showed 675 nucleated cells, 20300 red blood cells, protein of 291 mg/dL, glucose of 91 mg/dL, and beta-HCG of 2141 mIU/mL, a serum:CSF ratio of 25:1 (normal > 60:1). CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed lesions in her liver, spleen, kidneys, and lungs. Her neurological status continued to improve. On discharge to the Gynecologic Oncology service one month after presentation, she was extubated and was able to speak slowly, ambulate with assistance, and had no focal motor deficit. She underwent whole brain radiation and chemotherapy with varying regimens of etoposide, cisplatin, bleomycin, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine. She initially did well and was able to transfer to inpatient rehab. However, she developed fibrotic lung disease and then recurrent pulmonary choriocarcinoma lesions, which led to her death four months after her initial presentation.