Two months prior to presentation at our hospital, a 44-year-old man presented at another hospital with a gradually growing tumor in his right breast. He had also noticed a tumor in the left breast 20 years prior. He underwent tumor resections in both breasts at the same time. Recurrence of the tumor in the right breast was discovered 2 weeks after the initial surgery. Due to the rapid growth of this recurrent tumor, he was referred to our hospital for treatment. Macroscopically, the tumor in the right breast measured 12.0 cm in diameter; it was exudative, exhibited ulceration and bleeding, and gave off an odor .
Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a massive mass measuring 10 cm × 7 cm × 9 cm . No metastatic lesions were observed. The pathological diagnoses of the specimens resected at the previous hospital were pleomorphic sarcoma of the right breast and atheroma of the left breast, consistent with undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma .
The patient was treated with combination therapy consisting of chemotherapy and Mohs’ chemosurgery. The chemotherapy regimen was performed according to the K2 protocol . Prior to the application of Mohs’ paste, we applied lidocaine jelly to the normal skin surrounding the tumor because the paste can induce pain in healthy skin. We then painted petroleum jelly on the normal skin around the tumor to prevent Mohs’ paste from directly contacting the normal skin. Using wooden tongue depressors, we painted Mohs’ paste on the tumor, applying pressure to active bleeding sites . It took 10–20 min for oozing from the sarcoma to stop. The extra paste was then wiped off with saline-soaked gauze, completing the procedure. Most surface bleeding points can be controlled with this brief treatment. Following treatment, the surface of the malignant wound became dry, black in color, and hard . We next cut the degenerative surface of the tumor using surgical scissors , and we again pressed Mohs’ paste to the bleeding points of the tumor for some minutes. We repeated this procedure every 3–4 days.
Following three courses of chemotherapy combined with Mohs’ chemosurgery, the tumor had remarkably shrunk in size . We performed wide resection of the tumor and reconstruction with a rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap . Pathological examination of the resected specimen confirmed the presence of fibrosis and foam cells in most parts of the tumor, suggesting that the pre-operative treatments were effective, but variable tumor cells were also found in small numbers. The surgical margins were negative. The patient received three courses of chemotherapy after surgery and was discharged from the hospital. However, bilateral metastatic lesions in the lungs emerged 6 months postoperatively, and the patient died of these metastases 18 months after surgery despite additional chemotherapy.