A 6-year-old boy was born of the second pregnancy and first childbirth to healthy nonconsanguineous parents. The first pregnancy ended in an early miscarriage. Family history is not burdened.
Pregnancy was with threatened spontaneous interruption. He was delivered by scheduled Cesarean section due to high myopia. His birth weight was 3650 g and height was 52 cm. Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min respectively. He was noted to have hypotonia at birth.
His motor milestones were delayed: held head by 7 months, rolled from back to side at 8 months, put into sitting position by 24 months, walked with support at 2,5 years and walked independently at 4 years. His speech development was delayed: at the age of 6 years he had no words.
At 8 month he was hospitalized to Scientific and Practical Centre of Pediatric psychoneurology. Brain computed tomography revealed signs of leukodystrophy and cortical atrophy of frontal, parietal and temporal areas. Radiological studies (neuroimaging) have never been performed until the age of 8 months.
At 13 months he was admitted to the National Medical Research Centre for Children’s Health and was monitored for the next 5 years.
At admission in 13 months brain MRI revealed signs of leukodystrophy, lissencephaly of left occipital lobe, polymicrogyria of both frontal lobes, secondary ventriculomegaly, brain atrophic changes with enlargement of sub-arachnoid spaces. Biochemical analysis showed creatine kinase (CK) level to be elevated to 2024 U/L (normal range 25–140 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) to 59 U/L (upper limit of normal 40 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) to 82 U/L (upper limit of normal 42 U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level to 318 U/L (upper limit of normal 225 U/L). On electromyographic examination, signs of primary muscle lesion have been identified.
At admission in 6 years weight was 21 kg, height was 113 cm, head circumference was 53 cm. Convergent strabismus, insufficiency of convergence and accommodation were noted. He had hypotonia, distal more than proximal. Trunk ataxia, walking on his toes with an atactic component, flat valgus foot were noted. Patient reacted favorably to examination. He can maintain short-term eye contact; speech is misunderstood. The face is hypomimic. In active speech there are long vocalized sounds, rarely - simple babbling syllables, no words. Behavioral features are manifested by periodic fading with subsequent rapidity of breathing and stereotyped swings of hands .
Orthopedic examination revealed thoracic hypokyphosis, lumbar hyperlordosis, double-sided coxa valga, pathological antetorsion on the right, equinox flat valgus feet. Limb movements were not restricted except for restriction of back flexion in the ankles.
Ophthalmological examination revealed congenital high myopia, partial atrophy of an optic nerve and retinal atrophy in both eyes.
MRI revealed hypoplasia of temporal lobes and opercular areas from two sides, hypoplasia of caudal parts of the cerebellum worm with the expansion of external subarachnoid spaces of the cerebral hemispheres (more in the temporal areas), expansion of retrocerebellar cistern, symmetrical expansion of the ventricular system, pachygyria-polymicrogyria of cerebral hemispheres with preservation of the occipital lobe. Increased intensity of MR signal was observed in T2 and T2 FLAIR images. Decreased intensity of MR signal was observed in T1 image. In the cerebellum multiple small cysts, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and pons with the extension of the anterior and covering cisterns are revealed .
Biochemical analysis showed CK level to be elevated to 2253 U/L (normal range 25–194 U/L), ALT to 70,4 U/L (upper limit of normal 40 U/L), AST to 62 U/L (upper limit of normal 42 U/L) and LDH level to 503 U/L (upper limit of normal 314 U/L). Other blood and urine indicators were within normal limits. Patient level of CK was increased 10–15 times and for two years decreased from 3126 (3 years 4 months) to 1986 (at 5 years 2 months). The level of CK-MB was also increased - 61.1 (upper limit of normal 25 U/L).
On electroneuromyographic examination (ENMG), signs of primary muscle lesion have been identified. Motor unit potentials (MUP) were short in duration and low in amplitude. The number of polyphasic MUP has increased. Spontaneous activity in each test muscle was determined.
Electroencephalography (EEG) did not reveal epileptiform activity.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a vertical position of the electrical heart axis, mild bradycardia and arrhythmia, nonspecific intraventricular block, early repolarization syndrome of the ventricles.
A standard karyotype was normal 46, XY. Tandem mass spectrometry did not reveal any changes in the plasma level of amino acids and acylcarnitines.
Genotek Ltd. did clinical exome sequencing. Genomic DNA from peripheral blood sample was extracted using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturerʼs protocol. DNA libraries were prepared using NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (New England Biolabs) with adapters for sequencing on Illumina platform according to manufacturer’s protocol. We used SureSelect XT2 (Agilent Technologies) for target enrichment. Enriched samples were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2500 using pair-end 100 base pairs reads. After sequencing, we trimmed 3′-nucleotides with read quality below 10 using Cutadapt . Raw reads were aligned to reference genome hg19 (GRCh37.p13) using BWA MEM . Deduplication of reads was done using SAMtools rmdup . FastQS was used for data quality control . We called short variants using GATK HaplotypeCaller according to GATK Best Practices DNA-seq [, ]. The effect of each mutation was assessed using snpEff . To assess pathogenicity and conservatism, the data was extracted from the dbNSFP , Clinvar [, ], OMIM database and HGMD , as well as using the SIFT and PolyPhen-2 [, ] utilities to predict pathogenicity of the mutation. Information on frequency of mutations was taken from 1000Genomes project [, ], ExAC [, ] and Genotek frequency data. Pathogenicity was predicted according to the Standards and Guidelines developed by ACMG (American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics), AMP (Association for Molecular Pathology) and CAP (College of American Pathologists) . Copy number alterations were determined using CNVkit .
Sanger sequencing confirmed POMGNT1 pathogenic variants identified by exome sequencing. For labeling amplicons with fluorescent labels, BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit v3.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Sanger sequencing was performed on ABI PRISM 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) according to manufacturerʼs protocol.
After exome sequencing, patient was commenced on muscle relaxants and anticonvulsants. His condition is stable.