A previously healthy 25-year-old White man presented with a 1-year history of blurred vision in the right eye, headache, and weight loss of about 30 kg. On physical examination, he had a body mass index of 28 kg/m2 and visual field defects in the right eye. Initial MRI showed a lightly spotted heterogeneous 19 × 16 × 19 mm tumor located suprasellarly, close to the pituitary gland with no ingrowth or association with the pituitary gland . Endocrine evaluation revealed secondary hypogonadism with low follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, and testosterone but intact thyrotroph and lactotroph axes. An ACTH test was performed with a subnormal cortisol response (30-minute cortisol 248 nmol/L, reference > 420 nmol/L) and low plasma ACTH concentration, indicating secondary adrenal insufficiency, and the patient started treatment with hydrocortisone. The somatotroph axis was not evaluated. Visual field measured by perimetry revealed visual field defects in the right eye.
The tumor was initially diagnosed based on MRI as a craniopharyngioma for which reason the patient was referred to craniotomy as standard treatment. At surgery, the tumor appeared gray and reddish, and was capsulated and fragile with easy bleeding, unlike craniopharyngiomas with sharp, irregular borders, which have a tendency to adhere to vital neurovascular structures and often consist of cystic and/or solid parts . The pituitary tumor was partially resected, and a small amount of capsule remnant underneath the optic chiasm could not be surgically removed. Perioperative frozen section histological examination described the tumor as a possible malignant lymphoma due to lymphocytic infiltration.
The patient was transferred to the Department of Endocrinology at Odense University Hospital for further diagnostic workup and management of pituitary hormone deficiencies. Postoperatively, the patient was still affected by headache and visual deficits on ophthalmologic assessment. MRI showed regression of the pituitary mass (9 × 6 × 8 mm), but remnant pituitary tissue was located just below the optic chiasm . Pituitary hormone insufficiency of all anterior axes and diabetes insipidus was diagnosed, and treatment with hydrocortisone, levothyroxine, testosterone, growth hormone, and desmopressin was implemented.
Endocrine evaluation did not support a hormone-producing adenoma. Sellar lymphoma is a very rare disease often related to immunodeficiency, for example HIV-related, or seen in immunocompetent patients who are over 60 years old . Metastasis was not suspected; the patient did not suffer from cancer in another location. Workup for infectious and rheumatologic etiologies was not indicative of secondary hypophysitis, nor was drug-related infiltration of the pituitary gland a possible differential diagnosis. Final histological diagnosis showed lymphoid reaction with predominant CD20 positive B-cell infiltration and no sign of significant IgG4 involvement. The patient was diagnosed with autoimmune hypophysitis.
Ten months postoperatively, the patient reported impaired vision. MRI showed that the remnant tissue lifted and exerted pressure at the optic chiasm. Perimetry confirmed progression of visual field defects in the right eye and now involvement of the left eye. Because of progression of visual field defects, treatment with glucocorticoid pulse therapy was initiated: methylprednisolone 500 mg infusion for 3 days, followed by reduced prednisolone doses, that is, 37.5 mg per day. Follow-up MRI after 1 month of glucocorticoid treatment (11 months postoperatively) demonstrated significant reduction of the pituitary mass and decreased pressure at the optic chiasm. Perimetry was unchanged. Treatment with prednisolone continued for 3 months.
The patient had intolerable adverse effects to glucocorticoid treatment with excessive weight gain of about 50 kg and cushingoid features. The need for long-term treatment led to initiation of steroid-sparing treatment with 150 mg azathioprine per day under gradual tapering of prednisolone (13 months postoperatively). Visual field defects improved, and repeated MRI showed additional regression of the remnant pituitary mass. Perimetry revealed stable conditions. Due to stable condition over 26.5 months, treatment with azathioprine was reduced. Control MRI after one and a half month showed recurrence with increasing mass in sella turcica causing mass effect on the optic chiasm. Treatment was resumed: azathioprine 100 mg per day in combination with prednisolone 37.5 mg per day.
Despite additional 11 months treatment with azathioprine and prednisolone treatment (52 months postoperatively), control MRI showed further progression with increasing pituitary mass size (11 × 6 × 7 mm) reaching the optic chiasm . Treatment with rituximab was initiated: 1000 mg infusions 14 days apart, repeated every 12 months. This resulted in almost complete regression of pituitary mass (3 × 2 × 7 mm) evaluated by MRI . Rituximab treatment was discontinued after 25 months (77 months postoperatively) because of stable disease. To date, the patient has been followed up for ten and a half years postoperatively. According to control MRI 4 years after end of treatment with rituximab, he is in sustained remission with unchanged pituitary mass size and no affection of the optic chiasm.