A 71-year-old male presented to the clinic with lower back pain and numbness on the right side in January 2017. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine showed a mass in the right retroperitoneum . He had been previously treated for localized prostate adenocarcinoma (Gleason stage 3 + 3 = 6) with brachytherapy 9 years ago and has been in remission ever since. Since the patient was taking rivaroxaban for atrial fibrillation, there was high suspicion for primary retroperitoneal hematoma. However, computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a right retroperitoneal mass associated with retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, thus favoring the diagnosis of malignancy. MRI of the abdomen and pelvis outlined a lobulated T1 isointense right pelvic mass measuring 9.1 × 5.3 × 14.0 cm invading the adjacent psoas muscle, diaphragm, and right pleural space with encroachment onto the posterior right twelfth rib. Many sub-centimetric T2 hyperintense lesions in the posterior left iliac bone were noted, raising the suspicion for metastatic disease. Enlarged retroperitoneal and retrocrural lymph nodes were also seen. Scrotal ultrasound did not show any testicular mass. The imaging studies did not depict any other lesion that could be deemed as the primary source of neoplasm.
Next, CT-guided biopsy of the mass was performed which revealed a high-grade poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, serous sub-type. Immunohistochemistry was positive for WT1, PAX-8, p16, p53, ER, BerEP4, focally positive for calretinin and CK 5/6. Thus, the diagnosis of PRSA was made after a thorough work up . PD-L1 status was positive, PD-L1 present in 10% of tumoral cells and 30% of tumor infiltrating immune cells.
The analysis of tissue DNA by Tempus (Tempus biotechnology, Chicago, IL) showed two potentially actionable mutations: NF1 and TP53. Both mutations were confirmed by circulating tumor DNA analysis by Guardant 360 (Guardant Health, Redwood city, CA), and described as somatic alterations, with a third somatic mutation, FGFR1, identified. However, there was no plausible therapeutic strategy for PRSA that could target these mutations. Table summarizes the results of tissue DNA analysis. A total of eight mutations were detected. The tumor mutational burden was reported to be 1.37 non-synonymous mutations per/Mb. No mutations on mismatch repair genes were encountered.
Additional evaluation with brain MRI identified an asymptomatic 3 mm focal enhancement in the left lateral frontal lobe cortex. Since there was no mass effect, possibility of a metastatic lesion seemed unlikely. Nuclear bone scan highlighted diffusely increased uptake within the right twelfth rib, corresponding to the area where the rib was seen to be involved by the adjacent malignant tissue on prior CT and MRI scans.
On the basis of limited information available in the existing medical literature, the most commonly used therapy for PRSA has been surgical resection of the tumor with adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy, similar to treatment of ovarian serous adenocarcinoma. Hence, the patient was treated with neo-adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel combination (Carboplatin AUC 5 every 3 weeks and paclitaxel 80 mg/m2 intravenously every week) for six cycles. Subsequent imaging after 12 weeks demonstrated a reduction in the size of the malignant mass and lymph nodes . The tumor response map illustrated the gradual decrease in somatic mutation burden from 1.7 to 0.4% over the course of treatment (Additional file : Figure S1).
Six months after starting treatment, follow-up CT scan depicted an essentially resolved retroperitoneal mass with normal-sized retroperitoneal and retrocrural lymph nodes. Despite a dramatic initial response, the malignant mass re-emerged 3 months later on the follow-up CT scan. On MRI, it appeared as a multi-lobulated cystic mass, consisting of three representative nodules measuring 2.4 × 3.0 cm, 1.7 × 2.3 cm and 1.0 × 1.1 cm and extending from the level of T12 to L4/L5 vertebrae. No new enlarged lymph nodes, metastatic bone or brain lesions were identified. The baseline positron emission tomography (PET) scan was consistent with description of the MRI . In addition, there were several areas of increased metabolic uptake in upper abdominal retroperitoneal lymph nodes as well as left supraclavicular/anterior mediastinal lymph nodes consistent with metastases.
Given the extensive and aggressive nature of the disease with no plausible therapeutic strategy for the identified mutations, off-label treatment with concurrent external RT and immunotherapy was started. Immunotherapy is believed to enhance the immunogenic effect of RT against malignant cells . Patient received radiation to retroperitoneum and left side of the neck with a dose of 39 Gy divided in 13 daily fractions. Alongside, he was given anti-programmed cell death protein-1 (anti-PD-1) antibody nivolumab (240 mg fixed intravenous dose given once every 2 weeks). Following treatment for 3 months, PET-CT revealed a significant reduction in the size of the lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular region, upper abdomen and right posterior retroperitoneum . However, new sites of hypermetabolic activity were noted in mediastinal lymph nodes which reduced in size on a later follow-up.
Figure illustrates the changes in tumor burden during the entire course of treatment. Tumor burden and response to therapy were evaluated using the revised Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 .
Patient has been following up for 15 months since the initial diagnosis. He is currently tolerating treatment with nivolumab with negligible side effects and good performance status (Zubrod score 0). The plan is to continue nivolumab with imaging studies at every 12-week interval. Written consent was obtained from the patient for case publication.