A 9-year-old female child presented with complaints of pain in the right iliac region just superior to the pubic symphysis associated with painful micturition for a period of six months. On examination, there was a tender firm irregular 5 × 3 cm mass felt near the insertion of the rectus abdominis tendon. The skin appeared normal and no lymph nodes were palpable. CT scan showed an irregular non enhancing 5 × 5 × 2.5 cm hypodense lesion in distal right rectus abdominis. No evidence of calcification or intraabdominal extension was seen. The bladder appeared normal.
A freehand aspiration guided by palpation was done using a 22 gauge needle and 10 ml syringe. Both air dried and 95% ethanol fixed smears were prepared and stained by the May Grunwald Giemsa and Papanicolaou respectively.
The smears were moderately cellular with a relatively clean background, lacking inflammation or necrosis [Fig ]. The cells were predominantly discrete with loose clustering at places and occasionally showed evidence of micro-acini like formations [Fig ].
The cytoplasm was abundant, finely granular, and eosinophilic with some cells exhibiting clear vacuolated zones. No pigment was seen. The nuclei were rounded and eccentrically placed with a moderate degree of anisonucleosis. The chromatin was fine, evenly dispersed. A striking single eosinophilic macro nucleolus was noted in all the cells [Fig ]. None of the nuclei showed inclusions. Mitotic figures were absent.
Based on these features and taking into consideration, the history, age of the patient, location of the tumor and absence of melanin pigment, a diagnosis of soft tissue sarcoma was made, the differential including CCS. Following FNA interpretation, a wide local excision was done.
The resected specimen was nodular with attached skeletal muscle and measured 5 × 5 × 2.5 cms. The cut surface showed a firm fleshy homogenous gray white mass appearing to be in continuum with the surrounding skeletal muscle/tendon [Fig }.
Hematoxylin and eosin stained sections from the tumor revealed nests and alveoli like arrangement of the cells separated by thin fibrous septa intimately associated with the peripheral muscle and dense tendinous connective tissue. Predominantly the cells were polygonal with clear cytoplasm containing PAS positive material. The nuclei were rounded; relatively uniform, with mild, if any, pleomorphism, vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleolus. Foci of cells with granular eosinophilic cytoplasm were also seen. No evidence of mitoses, hemorrhage, necrosis or pigment was made out.
A stain for reticulin further illustrated the nesting pattern. Fontana Masson stain for melanin pigment was negative.
The morphology was suggestive of CCS and the diagnosis was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The tumor cells stained positive for HMB 45 [Fig ], Neuron specific enolase (NSE) [Fig ] and S100 [Fig ]. Desmin, CD99 and Melan A were negative. Cytogenetic study could not be done in the present case.