A 67-year-old man had a greater than 20-year history of smoking 20 cigarettes/day, although he quit smoking 10 years before presentation. In July 2015, he sought medical advice for right supraclavicular lymph node enlargement. Physical examination identified right supraclavicular lymph node enlargement that was not painful. Laboratory data were normal excluding elevation of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (8.7). Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed one occupying lesion in the left lung, as well as right supraclavicular lymph node enlargement and multiple mediastinal lymphadenopathies. Moreover, there were multiple bone metastases, including metastases in the fourth cervical vertebra, left first rib, and left pubis . According to the eighth edition of the classification of lung cancer, the stage of this malignancy was IV (T1cN3M1b). Transcutaneous needle biopsy was performed at the site of right supraclavicular lymph node enlargement. Based on the result of immunohistochemical analysis, a diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was made . Via next-generation sequencing (NGS) and fluorescence in situ hybridization, ALKr was detected in biopsy samples. Therefore, crizotinib therapy was started, which resulted in the shrinkage of all lesions after 3 months. In addition, CEA levels had declined to 6.7 at this time. At the end of the follow-up period, all lesions exhibited further shrinkage excluding the left lung lesion, which was stable. Laboratory analysis revealed normal CEA levels (<5.0).
In October 2019, the patient experienced dizziness and right hip pain. PET revealed multiple bone metastases in the right ilium and right ischium . Moreover, there were multiple metastatic foci in the brain . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disclosed nine BMs . Laboratory analysis revealed a CEA level of 3.6. We recommended biopsy of the right iliac bone. Because the patient had high intracranial pressure and worsening dizziness, he and his family refused biopsy. ALKr was not detected in a blood sample examined via NGS. Following Liu’s report , the patient received whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT) combined with simultaneous integrated boost (SIB) directed at the metastatic foci. The dose of WBRT was 39.6 Gy delivered in 22 fractions, and that of SIB was 55 Gy delivered in 22 fractions . The patient also received radiotherapy of the right iliac bone lesion (60 Gy in 24 courses, ). Although radiotherapy resulted in improvement of the patient’s right hip pain, his intracranial pressure worsened. The patient underwent MRI after completing 10 fractions of cranial radiotherapy. MRI indicated that the number of BMs had increased to approximately 50 . After careful consideration, we decided to finish WBRT. After finishing WBRT, the patient became comatose, and MRI revealed approximately 80 BMs, including some in the brain stem . Satoh et al. reported that the overall concordance rate of the ALK status was 100% according to immunostaining between histologic and paired liquid-based cytology specimens . However, Aldea et al. found that the detection rate of genomic alterations was lower in patients with isolated central nervous system (CNS) progression . Because the result of blood testing was doubtful, the patient received alectinib 600 mg twice daily. After a week of oral alectinib treatment, the patient gradually regained consciousness, and his physical symptoms had gradually improved after a month of therapy. MRI revealed a reduction in the number of BMs to approximately 60 and a decrease in the total metastatic tumor volume . Some metastatic foci vanished, especially in the brain stem. However, the right thalamus hemorrhaged and ruptured into the ventricle because the patient autonomously terminated antihypertensive therapy, resulting in cerebral hemorrhage. The patient was treated for cerebral hemorrhage. Meanwhile, the patient continued to take alectinib. After a month of treatment following the development of hemorrhage, the patient’s condition had gradually stabilized. MRI illustrated that most of the hematoma was absorbed and the number of BMs had further decreased to approximately 20 . The total metastatic tumor volume had also further decreased.