A 31-year-old woman was hospitalized due to syncope and dyspnoea (WHO-FC III) 5 years prior to presentation. The patient had no medical history or drug therapy. Pulmonary hypertension with right heart failure was suspected by echocardiography and confirmed by RHC. Pulmonary hypertension associated with left heart disease (Group 2) and lung disease (Group 3) was ruled out by echocardiography, computed tomography, and spirometry. Chronic thromboembolic PH (Group 4) was ruled out by ventilation/perfusion scan. Finally, I-PAH was diagnosed after excluding other PAH by clinical history, laboratory examination, and drug history according to current PH guideline. At diagnosis, her serum brain natriuretic peptide level was 9.5 pg/mL (normal range <5.8 pg/mL); 6 min walking distance was 175 m; mean PAP was 40 mmHg; PVR was 9.3 wood unit; and CI was 1.7 L/min/m2 . An AVT was not performed at the time. A triple upfront oral therapy with beraprost, bosentan, and sildenafil was started. Her symptoms improved from WHO-FC III to WHO-FC II on targeted therapy. After 1 year, haemodynamics were improved (mPAP: 23 mmHg, PVR: 2.4 wood unit, CI: 2.99 L/min/m2). However, the RHC showed the deterioration of haemodynamics (mean PAP: 41 mmHg, PVR 7.3 wood unit, CI: 2.41 L/min/m2) after 2 years of treatment. She developed progressive dyspnoea after 3 years of PH-specific treatment and sildenafil (60 mg/day) was switched to tadalafil (40 mg/day). After 4 years of treatment, bosentan (250 mg/day) was switched to macitentan (10 mg/day). The patient’s clinical parameters and haemodynamic status during the 5-year follow-up are shown in .
The patient was referred to our institution for the introduction of intravenous epoprostenol due to the failure of oral combination PH-specific treatment. Right heart catheterization confirmed a worsening risk haemodynamics pattern (mean PAP: 48 mmHg, PVR: 7.5 wood unit, CI: 2.75 L/min/m2). An AVT was performed for the first time in the patient with 20 ppm of NO administered for 10 min, and the patient demonstrated dramatic haemodynamic improvement (mean PAP: 21 mmHg, PVR: 2.8 wood unit, CI: 2.4 L/min/m2) . The AVT was diagnosed as positive based on the current PAH treatment guidelines, which defined a positive AVT as a reduction in the mean PAP ≥10 mmHg to reach an absolute value ≤40 mmHg in the setting of increased or unchanged cardiac output. We prescribed a high-dose CCB (nifedipine 160 mg/day) in addition to her existing PH-specific therapy instead of initiating intravenous epoprostenol, and her dyspnoea resolved to WHO-FC I. After 1-year of CCB treatment, the patient’s symptom remained WHO-FC I and the RHC demonstrated mean PAP, PVR, and CI values of 23 mmHg, 2.4 wood unit, and 3.03 L/min/m2, respectively. After 3 and 5 years of CCB treatment, symptom was resolved, and PH remained almost normalized with macitentan, tadalafil, beraprost, and nifedipine .