Written consent was taken from the patient, and the patient agreed for participation and publication of his hospital course information and images.
A 60 year-old-male is a known case of stage five CKD for the past 15 years with secondary hyperparathyroidism who was following at a private hospital and a recent diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis 2 months before presentation with ongoing treatment of prednisolone and hydroxychloroquine. He presented to our institution with right knee pain after a simple fall from ground level 8 h before his presentation to our emergency department.
The patient reported a previous history of similar injury 8 years ago; he reported a simple fall on his left leg sustaining acute left QT rupture, which was successfully repaired at another hospital.
The patient was walking with a cane at home the morning of the incident, suffered a low-energy fall on his right knee, and felt a pop. He was unable to bear weight afterward. He went to a private hospital and underwent magnetic imaging radiographs magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right knee, which showed QT complete rupture. Later that day, he presented to our emergency department.
The patient was hemodynamically stable, conscious, alert, and oriented. He had an old left knee surgical scar. The right knee had mild effusion with palpable right QT defect proximal to the patella. The patient could not do straight leg raise, and the distal neurovascular examination was intact.
Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral plain radiographs of the right knee showed degenerative changes with no obvious fracture and a defect in the QT site . MRI of the right knee showed the following: (1) Complete QT tear with retraction of about 3 cm with complete rupture of the medial patellofemoral ligaments, (2) Complex tear of the medial and lateral menisci with a flipped intra-articular meniscal fragment, (3) complete tear of the lateral collateral proper and popliteus tendon, and a (4) partial tear of the posterior cruciate ligament fibers with underlying mucoid degeneration .
After confirming the diagnosis of acute right QT rupture, which we initially attributed to the use of systemic steroids along with CKD and chronic systemic disease, we planned and consented the patient for acute surgical repair.
The patient was in a supine position under spinal anesthesia. The right lower limb was prepped and draped in standard fashion from the thigh to the mid of the leg.
A midline skin incision was made over the knee to the proximal thigh. Superficial and deep dissection was carried out until reaching the QT.
QT was identified, and incomplete avulsion was noted from lateral to medial; the vastus medialis oblique (VMO) muscle was still attached to the patella. There was extensive tendon and muscle discoloration and signs of necrosis going proximally up to 10 cm, sparing the VMO . The distal femur was exposed and found to have discoloration of the articular cartilage surface and proximal pole of the patella . Thus, due to the extensive necrosis involving the QT and muscles, a decision was made to debride and approximate QT.
Debridement of the distal part of QT was carried out, and samples were sent for histopathology. Samples were taken from the synovium and proximal part of the lateral condyle of the femur. Irrigation of the wound and joint was done. The joint capsule was closed using vicryl, and QT was approximated to the patella using Ethilon and Vicryl suture. The wound was closed in layers. A sterile dressing and knee extension brace were applied.
The patient tolerated surgery well; his right knee was in full extension, protected within the brace. We instructed him to avoid any range of motion. We disclosed the intraoperative findings to the patient, and he reported similar findings described to him after his first operation. The report of the previous surgery showed a complete tear of the QT with a necrotic tendon at the proximal and distal ends, which were debrided and repaired by two anchor sutures.
As there was a high index of suspicion of AKU, a workup was sent for AKU, including genetics, urine HGA, whole exome sequencing, echocardiography, and whole spine MRI.
Further history from the patient revealed a darkening of the urine. He has no similar family history; however, three of his sisters were diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis.
The results of the investigations were as follows: Histopathology showed deposit of acellular brown pigment and calcification with brown discoloration. MRI of the spine showed degenerative changes along with intervertebral disc calcification . Urine HGA was positive and echocardiography revealed no abnormalities.
We discharged the patient with regular follow-ups with nephrology, rheumatology, genetics, and orthopedics, with non-weight bearing instructions and knee extension with a knee immobilizer brace.
Six weeks postoperatively, the wound healed well, and active knee exercises and full weight-bearing were allowed. Four months postoperatively, the patient could do a full range of motion in both flexion and extension.