A 53-year-old woman clinically diagnosed with MEN1 was referred to our hospital. She previously underwent laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy for a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor and presented with a nonfunctional pituitary adenoma that could be followed up, a mediastinal tumor, and asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism. 99mTc-methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) scintigraphy showing increased uptake in the neck region . The diagnosis of mediastinal tumor was uncertain; however, after the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism, the patient underwent total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation of the parathyroid gland on the left forearm and hemithyroidectomy for a thyroid nodule. Four adenomatous parathyroid glands were confirmed in frozen sections. The thyroid tumor was diagnosed as a papillary thyroid carcinoma. Postoperatively, the intact PTH level transiently decreased but returned to the preoperative level within 2 weeks. MIBI scintigraphy was performed again to identify the ectopic parathyroid adenomas (EPAs), which revealed that MIBI had accumulated in the right upper mediastinum . Chest computed tomography revealed a 45-mm-sized mass behind the superior vena cava (SVC) in the right upper mediastinum as a well-defined solid and cystic lesion . Magnetic resonance imaging was performed to confirm the absence of tumor invasion into the surrounding tissues and other tumors. Blood tests revealed high levels of intact PTH (103 pg/mL) and Ca (11.4 mg/dL).
Based on various preoperative laboratory and radiological findings, the mediastinal tumor was clinically diagnosed as ectopic parathyroid hyperplasia. RATS was performed using the da Vinci Xi system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with four arms. A robotic endoscope was placed in the seventh intercostal space (ICS) on the middle axillary line, and three robotic operating trocars were placed in the fifth ICS for the right hand, eighth ICS for the left hand, and eighth ICS for the fourth arm. All robotic trocars were 8 mm ports. Fenestrated bipolar forceps, a monopolar spatula, and SynchroSeal (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) were used. A 12-mm assistant port was also placed in the eighth ICS on the anterior axillary line with carbon dioxide insufflation. The mediastinal tumor was located between the SVC and trachea. The ectopic adenoma was easily detected, and the surgical margin could be clearly identified. The operation time was 76 min, console time was 46 min, and amount of blood loss was minimal. The tumor morphology was consistent with preoperative radiological findings; therefore, it was completely resected using RATS without injuring the capsule. Blood tests performed 1 day postsurgery showed a decrease in calcium level (8.3 mg/dL), and the patient was discharged on the 4th day without postoperative complications. Two weeks after the surgery, the serum intact PTH level decreased to 25.6 pg/mL. The final pathological diagnosis was ectopic parathyroid adenoma with solid and cystic components .