A 38-year-old man arrived to Heart Failure Department with 2 months of dyspnoea, limbs oedema, orthopnoea, palpitations, and chest discomfort. He had history of Ch-CMP and permanent non-valvular atrial fibrillation; coronary artery disease had previously been excluded by coronary arteriography. He was on optimal medical therapy according to current heart failure guidelines and also receiving anticoagulation with Apixaban. He underwent implantable cardioverter-defibrillator implantation as primary prevention of sudden cardiac death.
Upon physical examination he appeared to be congestive, tachypnoeic, and with raised jugular venous pressure at 45°. Heart sounds were irregular with pansystolic murmur at the apex irradiated to the axilla; pulmonary auscultation revealed reduced breath sounds bi-basally. He had ascites and Grade III oedema in lower extremities.
Initial troponin I was positive without change in subsequent measurements, interpreted as chronic injury associated with heart failure. Electrolyte levels were normal and renal function was preserved .
Transoesophageal echocardiography showed a dilated mitral ring (47 mm), lack of leaflet coaptation resulting in FMR (effective regurgitant orifice area: 0.4 cm2, regurgitation volume: 42 mL), severely dilated left ventricle (index volume: 131 mL/m2, reference: 35–75 mL/m2), severe systolic dysfunction [left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF): 20%, reference: 52–72%], moderately dilated right ventricle, and severe PH [pulmonary systolic artery pressure (PsAP) 67 mmHg] . Mitral regurgitation was classified as severe in accordance with established reference value for FMR in the European guideline for valvular disease.
Despite optimal medical treatment, he presented worsening of symptoms and recurrence of hospitalizations. Stage D Ch-CMP was diagnosed, and heart transplant was considered.
Right heart catheterization (RHC) for pre-transplant study was performed. showed high mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP 57 mmHg) and persistent elevated mPAP after vasodilator administration (nitroprusside 3 μg/kg/min and prostaglandin 0.02 μg/kg/min), consistent with severe fixed post-capillary PH .
During the follow-up, the patient presented clinical deterioration and further increase of PH making him ineligible for heart transplant. Our heart team considered MitraClip® implant in order to decrease FMR severity, improve haemodynamic variables, and reduce pulmonary pressure that would allow considering HT candidate.
The procedure was performed 3 months after initial referral, and the clip was successfully implanted, resulting in a reduction of FMR from severe to moderate without any complications . Six months after cautious treatment with MitraClip®, pulmonary pressures and cardiac output improved with stable moderate FMR on transthoracic echocardiogram.
The patient remained clinically stable in the following months and underwent to a successful heart transplant 1 year after MitraClip® implantation.
Currently, the patient has no heart failure symptoms, ventricular function is preserved without rejection signs and no reactivation of Chagasic disease has been observed.