A 72-year-old man with chronic kidney disease stage 5 dialysis (CKDG5D) secondary to hypertension and diabetes was hospitalised in April 2020, reporting abdominal pain and fever after noticing cloudy PD effluent 3 days before hospitalisation.
The initial physical examination showed that the patient’s general condition was reduced and that he was obese (body mass index [BMI], 34.5). He had a fever of 38.5 °C. His blood pressure was 116/74 mmHg, his heart rate was 80 beats per minute, his respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute, and his oxygen saturation was 96% without supplementation. He reported no vomiting, nausea, or diarrhoea. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. Examination showed strong, diffuse abdominal tenderness with maximal pain in the right lower abdomen. The PD catheter exit site was clean and dry, and there was no tunnel tenderness.
The patient’s medical history included type 2 diabetes (first diagnosed in 2012, insulin-dependent since 2018), hypertension, severe coronary heart disease requiring multiple revascularizing procedures (including bypass surgery), and persistent atrial fibrillation necessitating implantation of a cardiac pacemaker and a left atrial appendage (LAA) occluder. The patient had required continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) since June 2018 and had not experienced any previous dialysis-related infections or other complications.
During the course of this infection, an outpatient analysis of the PD effluent found a leukocyte count of 11,000/nL. At the time of hospital admission, the first PD effluent was cloudy, with a leukocyte count of 7060/nL. Initial blood tests found elevated levels of indicators of inflammation: C-reactive protein (CRP), 17.5 mg/dL (normal, < 0.5 mg/dL); procalcitonin (PCT), 3.22 ng/mL (normal, < 0.5 ng/mL). Blood gas analysis found a serum lactate level of 2.4 mmol/L (normal, < 1.2 mmol/L) but no acidosis or electrolyte disorders. The urine test strip results were negative for leukocytes and nitrites.
Initially, we intensified dialysate exchanges till PD effluent was clear and the patient’s abdominal pain decreased followed by an increased number of daily dialysate exchanges for the first 3 days of treatment. From the fourth day of treatment on, the patient was placed on a continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD) regimen.
After obtaining blood, urine, and PD effluent samples for microbiological analysis, we initiated antibiotic therapy because analysis of ambulatory PD effluent detected L. monocytogenes. In the first 24 h of hospital stay the patient showed fever up to 39 °C and hypotension associated with reduced vigilance. Therefore, a septic course of disease in terms of a meningitis could not be ruled out. On the basis of the results of resistance testing, we treated the patient with ampicillin administered intravenously at a dosage of 6 g twice daily according to German meningitis guideline .
We also treated the patient empirically with intraperitoneal cefazolin and ceftazidime because we could not rule out infection with a different or an additional bacterium at the time of admission.
Microbiological cultures of the PD effluent samples obtained on the first day of hospitalisation detected L. monocytogenes. The German Consultant Laboratory for Listeria confirmed the identification and classified the bacterium as a member of serotype IIa. Additional microbiological analysis confirmed the presence of L. monocytogenes in the PD effluent. Because no other pathogen was detected in the PD effluent, intraperitoneal antibiotic treatment with cefazolin/ceftazidime was discontinued after the administration of a single dose on the first day of treatment. No bacterial growth was detected in cultures of blood or urine samples. Cultures of consecutive samples of PD effluent obtained on the next day and on ten other days during the hospital stay did not grow bacteria.
During intravenous antibiotic treatment, the leucocyte count in the PD effluent decreased continually to 315/nL, but on the fifth day of treatment the leukocyte count increased to 3778/nL. The CCPD regimen had not changed, and the CRP and PCT levels had decreased continually. There were no further episodes of fever. To rule out underdosing of ampicillin, we determined the serum ampicillin level and its association with the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the Listeria isolate, which was determined to be 0.5 mg/L and was interpreted as “susceptible” according to the clinical breakpoints provided by the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) . With expert consent, we determined to establish a therapeutic range of serum ampicillin levels of at least four times the MIC . The first test of the serum ampicillin level (after 5 days of intravenous ampicillin administration with the last dose given 7 h before sample taking) found a concentration of 149 mg/L. We collected further samples at two and 4 h after the next dose of intravenous antibiotic, and tests showed sufficient serum ampicillin levels of 235 mg/L at 2 h and 95.5 mg/dL at 4 h. Therefore, we continued the previous intravenous antibiotic treatment.
At day seven the leukocyte count in the PD effluent had increased to 5182/nL; therefore, escalation of antibiotic therapy became crucial. The recent International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) Guideline does not provide any recommendations for monotherapy with intraperitoneal ampicillin by intermittent application (with one exchange daily) . Also, the adequate duration of therapy has not yet been established. We decided that, in addition to continuing intravenous administration of ampicillin, we would add a dose of 4 g ampicillin to a 2-L bag of Extraneal dialysate (Baxter International, Deerfield, IL, USA). The bag was shaken to ensure adequate mixing of the drug in the dialysate. The antibiotic-containing dialysate was drawn into the peritoneal cavity and allowed to dwell for 12 h.
With this combination of intravenous and intraperitoneal antibiotic therapy, the leukocyte count in the PD effluent finally declined permanently. We continued drug monitoring and detected sufficient serum ampicillin levels even when the drug was administered intraperitoneally only at a dosage of 4 g daily. The leukocyte count stayed low. Detailed information about antibiotic therapy and serum ampicillin levels can be found in the figure and the table .
After the PD leukocyte count had been lower than 100/nL for 7 days, we discontinued antibiotic therapy on day 21 and discharged the patient from the hospital. A more detailed anamnesis led us to suspect that the Listeria infection was caused by consumption of a creamed cheese. This cheese was analysed by the local health authority, but no Listeria could be detected. Moreover, the bacterium was not detectable in stool samples obtained during inpatient treatment. Therefore, the origin of the infection remained unclear. Outpatient examination 3 days after hospital discharge found that the patient was fit and well. There were no signs of a relapse of infection. The patient is under regular outpatient supervision. Within 3 months there was no recurrence of infection.