A 53-year-old Caucasian male patient with a metastatic cutaneous melanoma bearing a BRAF V600E mutation was enrolled in a phase I clinical trial based on TIL-ACT approximately 3 years following initial diagnosis. The main objective of the trial was to assess feasibility and safety of TIL-ACT therapy in metastatic patients with melanomas. His disease was refractory to several lines of treatment, including v-RAF murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitors, anti-programmed-death 1 (PD1) and anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) therapy. Relevant comorbidities included a postherpetic right dorsal neuralgia and lymphedema of the lower left limb of approximately 3 years due to prior left inguinal mass ablation, lymphadenectomy and adjuvant radiation for melanoma.
TILs were expanded from a subcutaneous clavicular metastasis in the presence of high-dose IL-2, following a conventional pre-rapid expansion protocol (pre-REP) and REP, using autologous feeder peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). The patient was treated with standard lymphodepleting non-myeloablative chemotherapy regimen of cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg/day for 2 days) and fludarabine (25 mg/m2/day for 5 days), followed by the infusion of 55×109 TILs. The infused cell product contained mainly effector-memory T cells, with a CD4+/CD8+ T-cell ratio of 1:1. Due to transient acute renal insufficiency and oliguria, only two doses of high-dose IL-2 (720,000 UI/kg/dose) were given. The patient experienced a rapid recovery from all expected toxicities related to myelosuppression and IL-2 and was discharged 2 weeks after the TIL infusion.
Five days after discharge (day 19 post-TIL-ACT), he was readmitted for acute onset dorsal back pain at the thoracic (T6–T8) and lumbar (L1–L4) region, and numbness and tingling sensation in his hands and feet. He also described an unsteady gait. On examination, he had a broad-based gait with a Romberg sign, absence of deep reflexes in the lower limbs, and loss of vibration sense in the knees, ankles and big toes. Extensors and flexors of the feet and toes were weak (MRC4).
The initial work-up, including brain and spine MRIs, was normal. Nerve conduction studies revealed prolonged distal motor latencies, desynchronization of the compound muscle action potentials for the median, ulnar, peroneal and tibial nerves and absence of F-waves. Sensory nerve action potentials were reduced in the lower limbs. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed albuminocytological dissociation with a high level of protein (2551 mg/L, normal: <460 mg/L) and no lymphocytes or tumor cells. CSF bacteriological cultures and PCR testing for herpes-family viruses were negative. CSF and blood protein electrophoresis revealed an intrathecal oligoclonal IgG pattern. Recent negative testing for HIV infection and viral hepatitis was not repeated. summarizes the laboratory work-up.
After full neurological evaluation, the diagnosis of immune-mediated neuropathy was made and GBS was considered. The patient did not exhibit any severe symptoms such as respiratory alterations, autonomic involvement or bulbar palsy.
Further autoimmune laboratory work-up showed normal antinuclear and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid factor and blood complement values. Titers of myelin-associated or antiganglioside antibodies, as well as recent antibodies described in peripheral neuropathies directed against the node of Ranvier and the antifibroblast growth factor receptor 3 antibody, were negative. It is notable that negative results were not unexpected, as the prevalence of these antibodies is low in immune demyelinating neuropathies. An antineuronal antibody paraneoplastic panel was also negative. summarizes the complete autoimmune laboratory work-up.
Importantly, a positive cytomegalovirus (CMV) viral load concomitant to the onset of GBS was detected in serum, with CMV PCR peak values of 9300 copies/mL on day 36 post-TIL-ACT, consistent with CMV reactivation on lymphodepletion. Of note, the patient’s serological profile at screening was consistent with prior exposure to CMV, but CMV PCR was negative on day 6 post-TIL-ACT, prior to developing neurological symptoms. No antiviral therapy was administered since the viral load decreased spontaneously on lymphoid reconstitution, with progressive return to undetectable levels within 1 month. shows the timeline of events.
A single 5-day course of intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/day) was administered 2 days after admission. The neurological manifestations of the patient progressively improved, with disappearance of symptoms of the upper limbs, and persistence of paresthesia and muscle weakness of the left lower limb. As he required intensive neurorehabilitation, he was transferred to a dedicated facility after 6 weeks of hospitalization. During the last follow-up at 21 months, the patient’s neurological condition had completely recovered and he was able to walk normally. It is of importance to report that no other patient enrolled in this trial developed other unknown neurological side effect.
The first tumor assessment obtained 4 weeks after cell transfer showed a partial radiological response with a target tumor mass reduction of 35%. The response was durable, with further tumor shrinkage to up to 90% reduction 21 months after TIL infusion .
Given that CMV-specific T cells have been isolated from TILs of patients with melanoma, we assessed the presence of such cells in the TIL product as well as in blood pre-TIL-ACT and post-TIL-ACT. We reasoned that if the patient experienced CMV reactivation post-T-cell infusion, the product would not contain any measurable frequencies of CMV-specific T cells to provide immediate protection during the lymphopenic period, while such cells would eventually reconstitute from endogenous precursors. We performed in vitro stimulation with CMV lysate of autologous PBMC obtained at the screening visit, during the acute symptomatic phase, at 6 and 12 months after the TIL-ACT, in addition to the TIL product. Flow cytometry analysis revealed a detectable frequency of circulating CD4+ T cells responding to CMV antigen with interferon-γ and tumor necrosis factor-α at baseline and 6 and 12 months post-TIL-ACT, but not during the symptomatic phase. In addition, there were no detectable CMV-reactive T cells among the infused cells in the TIL product .