A 33-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital because of fever, general fatigue, nausea, and progressive anemia. The patient’s condition was normal until 1 week before admission, when she experienced flu-like symptoms such as fever, general fatigue, and abdominal discomfort. The patient was diagnosed with HS at the age of 6 in another hospital by the presence of hemolytic anemia, spherocytosis, increased fragility of spherocytes by osmotic fragility testing, and the absence of antibodies by direct or indirect Coombs test. Asymptomatic gallstones were diagnosed at the age of 19. The patient had undergone her annual blood test examination, and her hemoglobin concentration was maintained at approximately 10–12 g/dl. The patient was not under routine medications. Neither her parents nor her siblings had a history of HS. On admission, vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 108/56 mmHg; pulse rate, 100 beats/min; body temperature, 39.0°C; and respiration rate, 12 breaths/min. While breathing ambient air, the patient’s oxygen saturation rate was 100%. On examination, she was alert, the skin and conjunctivae were pale, and the enlarged spleen was palpable from the costal margin. No skin rash or lymphadenopathy was observed; other physical findings were normal. The results of laboratory tests were as follows: white blood cell count was 2.97 × 109/l (granulocytes, 35%; lymphocytes, 44%; atypical lymphocytes, 9%; and monocytes, 12%), red blood cell count was 1.68 × 1012/l; hemoglobin concentration was 5.4 g/dl; hematocrit was 14.4%; mean corpuscular volume was 86 fl; mean corpuscular hemoglobin was 32.1 pg; mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration was 37.5%; and platelet count was 84 × 109/l. Reticulocytes decreased to 0%. Spherocytosis was present on the peripheral blood smear. Liver function tests revealed levels of aspartate transaminase (AST) of 39 IU/l, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 31 IU/l, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 342 IU/l, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 144 IU/l, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT) of 23 IU/l, total bilirubin of 2.9 mg/dl, and direct bilirubin of 1.0 mg/dl. Hepatitis B virus surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C virus antibody were negative. Haptoglobin concentration decreased to 2 mg/dl, and the direct antiglobulin test was negative. Phosphatidylinositol glycan deficient clone was ruled out by flow cytometry. In addition to the past history, the presence of spherocytes on the peripheral blood smear, and the presence of gallstones, the definite diagnosis of HS was made with lower fluorescence of eosin-5-maleimide (EMA)-stained red blood cells due to the decreased amount of target proteins by a flow cytometry-based test (EMA binding test) and shortened the acidified glycerol lysis test (AGLT) value after admission. Because of high fever, history of gallstones, and the presence of pancytopenia, empiric administration of antibiotics was initiated for possible abdominal infection. The patient received two units of packed red blood cell and showed marked clinical improvement. On the 7th hospital day, fever relapsed and gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal discomfort and nausea) worsened. Liver function tests showed levels of AST as 492 IU/l, ALT as 320 IU/l, LDH as 517 IU/l, ALP as 351 IU/l, γ-GT as 166 IU/l, total bilirubin as 2.1 mg/dl, and direct bilirubin as 1.0 mg/dl. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed splenomegaly and gallstones, without hepatobiliary tract infection. Magnetic resonance cholangiography revealed no evidence of choledocholithiasis; blood cultures were negative. The results of anti-HPV immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) measured at admission were both positive, and HPV-B19 deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) increased to 105 copy/ml by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the patient’s peripheral blood. Thus, HPV-B19-induced aplastic crisis was diagnosed. Because of rapid recovery of hematopoiesis and clear evidence of HPV infection, bone marrow aspiration was not performed during admission. Liver function tests returned to normal without treatment. On the 14th hospital day, the patient was discharged without any symptoms, and the hemoglobin concentration elevated to 8.9 g/dl (Figure ).
We systematically reviewed the case reports of HPV-B19 infection that occurred in adult patients with HS and conducted a literature search using the “Pubmed” search engine. The following terms “hereditary spherocytosis” and “parvovirus B19” were used to identify the appropriate peer-reviewed, English-language papers. We collected cases of adults, defined as patients over 18 years of age, and excluded pediatric cases. In addition to the present case, we reviewed all these cases, collected clinical information described in these articles, if written, and discussed the outcome. Between 1984 and 2010, a total of 19 reports with 22 cases, including the present case were identified
[-]. Patients’ characteristics, including those of the present case, are summarized in Table . Family history of HS was detected in 13 cases. Fever and liver dysfunction was documented in 18 and 4 cases, respectively. Skin manifestation was documented in only 2 cases. HPV-B19 infection was diagnosed through detection of anti-HPV B19 antibody in 12 cases, HPV-B19 DNA using PCR in 1 case, both antibody and PCR in 7 cases, and others in 2 cases.