A 49-year-old man presented with a 10-month history of discomfort in his right posterior shoulder. The patient also complained of discomfort while performing activities that required raising their right arm overhead. Initially, the patient would experience pain in their posterior shoulder after playing tennis (The patient was an office worker who had played tennis as a hobby for several years). On visiting our hospital, the patient could move their shoulder actively at 160° of flexion and abduction, 60° of external rotation at the side, and 90° of external rotation during abduction. On physical examination, the patient was able to maintain muscle strength around the shoulder. Also, there was no sensory impairment around the shoulder area. However, muscular atrophy of the infraspinatus muscle was observed over the scapular area . In a previous ultrasound examination conducted at another orthopedic hospital that the patient had visited prior to visiting our hospital, a cystic lesion was detected near the scapular spine . Ultrasound-guided aspiration was performed repeatedly, revealing bloody aspirated contents.
Plain radiographs, including the true anterior–posterior, internal-rotation, and axillary views, revealed no abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a huge loculated cystic lesion with high intensity on T2-weighted images and low intensity on T1-weighted images (3 × 2 × 4 cm). The cystic lesion was located over a wide range, from the suprascapular notch to the spinoglenoid notch .
The infraspinatus muscles were atrophic with minimal fatty infiltration. None of the findings were consistent with glenoid labral tear or rotator cuff pathology. Electromyography and nerve conduction (EMG-NCV) examinations were performed with respect to muscle atrophy on visual examination; but there were no specific findings. (EMG showed no specific findings in the supraspinatus muscle and infraspinatus muscle, which was not compatible with damage to the suprascapular nerve. Also, the nerve conduction to the right arm was within normal limits.)
On selecting the most appropriate treatment method, several factors were taken into consideration: 1) the large size of the cyst, that is, the hematoma; 2) its wide range of location; 3) the normal rotator cuff and labrum; and 4) clinical discomfort that persisted despite 10 months of nonsurgical treatment. Accordingly, open cyst decompression employing the posterior approach with the patient in the prone position was the optimal approach. Inasmuch as the cyst was located above and below the scapular spine, an incision was made along the scapular spine line .
First, following minimal detachment of the deltoid muscle and retraction of the infraspinatus muscle, the spinoglenoid notch was exposed. Around the notch, a large, well-lobulated cyst was found compressing the suprascapular nerve ; hence, we gently isolated the cyst from the nerve and other soft tissues. However, we found that the cyst had spread beyond the scapular spine, near the suprascapular notch. We retracted the supraspinatus muscle and identified the cyst’s upper margin. To avoid iatrogenic injury, we carefully removed the entire cyst and performed decompression while directly visualizing the nerve. Finally, a biopsy was performed to achieve an accurate diagnosis. The biopsy results indicated “fibrous tissue with hemosiderin-laden macrophages,” suggesting that the cyst was a hematoma-like lesion .
An arm sling was used for postoperative immobilization until the pain subsided (2 weeks). The patient performed gentle passive forward flexion exercises the next day after the surgery. Two weeks after the procedure, the arm sling was removed and active full range of motion exercise was recommended. At 6 months after the operation, the patient's muscle atrophy was slightly recovered, and there were no specific symptoms.