The patient presented with an adnexal mass found by physical examination more than 1 mo previously.
On August 23, 2020, a 70-year-old postmenopausal woman who presented with an adnexal mass found by physical examination 1 mo previously was admitted to the department of gynecology at our hospital. She did not complain of any clinical symptoms or discomfort.
The past medical history was unremarkable. One month prior, a right adnexal mass was found by ultrasonography at the local hospital.
The patient had no remarkable personal or family history.
Upon arrival at our hospital, the patient was well-nourished, and without pain, pallor, or jaundice. Abdominal examination revealed distension without tenderness.
Laboratory examination demonstrated found hemoglobin: 10.3 g/dL, leucocyte count: 4.86 × 109/L, hematocrit: 31.7%, and platelet count: 210 × 109/L. Liver and renal function tests, and the coagulation profile were all within normal ranges. Cancer antigen markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19.9 were all within normal ranges.
B-ultrasound re-examination at our hospital showed a small amount of pelvic effusion (122 mm × 64 mm) in the right adnexal area . No tenderness or rebound pain was found in the lower abdomen, and a mass of about 12 cm × 6 cm in the pelvic cavity with a tough texture and low mobility was detected by palpation. Whole abdomen computed tomography (CT) showed a small amount of effusion in the pelvic cavity, with lesions on the right . The irregular cyst wall and thick soft tissue seen in the CT image might have resulted from tumor transformation. However the tumor markers were all normal. An MRI examination suggested a mucinous neoplasm in the right pelvic cavity . It was not clear whether the neoplasm originated from abdominal mesodermal tissue or the appendix. The patient was transferred to the general surgery department. During laparoscopic exploration, a large amount of jelly-like mucosubstance was found in the right lower abdomen and pelvic cavity, and a huge cystic mass of about 10 cm × 7 cm originating from the apex of the appendix were found .