A 28-year-old woman presented at the China-Japan Friendship Hospital complaining of redness and swelling of the extremities for 16 mo and stiffness of the skin of the extremities for more than 11 mo. Upon examination, the patient had stiff skin on both lower limbs; swollen and stiff skin on both arms; restricted movement of wrist joints, metacarpophalangeal joints, and interphalangeal joints of both hands; restricted fist clenching and wrist flexion and extension of both hands; and no swelling or sclerosis of fingers . When the skin of the patient's fingers on both hands was pressed, slow blood filling and localized whitening was observed, followed by slow recovery, and no signs of reddening and purpling. The patient denied Raynaud's phenomenon and had never experienced pale, red, and then purple hands after cold or emotional excitement, cold water test was negative, and no abnormalities in perinail nailfold capillaries.
Sixteen months ago, the patient developed edema of both lower limbs (calves) without any obvious cause, which was aggravated by prolonged standing and slightly relieved by lying down. Subsequently, the redness and swelling increased, spreading from calves to knees and feet with skin stiffness. The patient was diagnosed with "lymphangitis of both lower extremities" in a local hospital, and was given anti-inflammatory and magnesium sulfate topical treatment, but the treatment did not have an obvious effect. The patient then gradually developed redness and swelling of both upper extremities, which later worsened with skin stiffness. Ten months ago, she consulted the local hospital for redness and swelling of the extremities and skin stiffness without significant improvement, and was considered to have "scleroderma", and skin pathology biopsy resulted in a diagnosis of "suspected eosinophilic cellulitis". Six months ago, the patient was seen again at the above hospital, where she was diagnosed with EF after a supplemental antinuclear antibody (ANA) profile test showed ANA 1:1280 speckled. Prednisone acetate 60 mg once a day orally was prescribed for anti-inflammation, and intravenous cyclophosphamide 200 mg was given to control her condition; symptoms then improved. After discharge from the hospital, the prednisone acetate dose was reduced by 5 mg every three weeks, and oral cyclophosphamide 4 tablets once a week were started after one month. Two months ago, due to the aggravation of the condition, the patient was given prednisone acetate 40 mg, cyclophosphamide intravenously to control the disease, and leflunomide 10 mg once a day, and her symptoms were relieved more than before.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) for more than one month.
Unmarried and infertile. Menstruation started at age 15 years, with a cycle of about 28 d, 3-4 d per period, low volume, dark red, clots, no dysmenorrhea. The patient’s grandmother was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis.
Body temperature was normal, bilateral tonsils were not enlarged, respiratory sounds of both lungs were clear, no dry and wet rales were heard, local over-clear sounds on percussion, no obvious abnormalities on cardiac and abdominal examination. The skin of both upper and lower extremities was dark purple or pink, with lead tube-like changes, and was tight and hard, and could not be lifted. Restricted flexion and extension of both wrists, inability to make fists with both hands, and restricted movement of both ankles.
Blood tests indicated white blood cells of 6.51 × 109/L (reference range: 3.5–9.5 × 109/L), lymphocyte of 0.9 × 109/L (reference range: 1.1–3.2 × 109/L), neutrophil percentage of 78.5% (reference range: 40%–75%), triglycerides of 3.16 mmol/L (reference range: < 1.7 mmol/L), creatine kinase of 19 IU/L (reference range: 26–200 IU/L), lactate of 3.92 mmol/L (reference range: 0.5–2.96 mmol/L), hypersensitive C-reactive protein of 5.02 mg/L (reference range: < 3.0), ANA of 1:320 nuclear granule type, C-reactive protein of 0.645 mg/dL (reference range: < 0.8 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 5 mm/h (reference range: 0–20 mm/h), immunoglobulin G (IgG) of 663 mg/dL (reference range: 694–1620 mg/dL), serum IgG2 of 92.8 mg/dL (reference range: 169–786 mg/dL), CD3+ T-cell count of 684.2 cells/μL (reference range: 835–2217 cells/μL), CD3+CD4+ T-cell count of 267 cells/μL (reference range: 395–1264 cells/μL), natural killer (NK) cell count of 46 cells/μL (reference range: 136–880 cells/μL), CD19+ B-cell count of 65.58 cells/μL (reference range: 92–498 cells/μL), glycosylated hemoglobin of 7.1% (reference range: 4%–6%), normal rheumatoid factors, and no significant abnormalities seen in coagulation function. Cytokine-related assays, such as interleukin (IL)-2, IL-3, and IL-6, were not significantly abnormal, and angiotensin-converting enzyme was not abnormal.
Imaging examinations were not conducted.
Reticular basket-like hyperkeratosis with roughly normal epidermal thickness and numerous eosinophilic granulocytes, a few lymphocytes, and histiocytes infiltrating the deep dermis and collagen in the subcutaneous fat layer.