A 70-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with dyspnea, cough, and blood-tinged sputum that became aggravated 1 month prior to admission. The patient had been diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 3 years previously and was on medical treatment. He was a 50 pack-year smoker who quit smoking after being diagnosed with emphysema. At the time of admission, his vital signs were stable, but breathing sounds in the right upper lung field were decreased with wheezing on auscultation. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 4-cm lung mass involving the upper lobe, arch of the azygos vein, and mediastinal fat in the paratracheal area. No pleural effusion was present. Bronchoscopy confirmed bronchial stenosis of the upper lobar orifice and an endobronchial lesion that extended into the distal trachea along the lateral wall. A biopsy specimen was obtained upon bronchoscopy, and the result confirmed squamous cell carcinoma. Positron emission tomography (PET) confirmed fluorine-18-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose (FDG) uptake in the right main bronchus, but there was no increased FDG uptake in the mediastinal lymph nodes. Chest CT and PET scan images are shown in Fig. . Preoperative respiratory functional tests showed a forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 1.42 L (58% of predicted) and a forced vital capacity of 2.65 L. The clinical stage was T4N0M0 (stage 3A).
Under general anesthesia with a double lumen endotracheal tube, the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Through a right posterolateral thoracotomy at the 5th intercostal space, the lung mass was identified in the right upper lobar orifice, encasing the arch of the azygos vein and adhering to the right main bronchus and distal trachea. We decided to conduct a sleeve right upper lobectomy with en bloc resection of the azygos vein. Following circumferential dissection and release from the adjacent anatomical structures, the arch of the azygos vein was divided proximal and distal to the tumor. There was no evidence of tumor invasion into the superior vena cava. The right upper pulmonary artery and vein were dissected and divided using an autostapler device, and complete mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed. Afterward, the right main bronchus and bronchus intermedius were fully mobilized from the pericardium to reduce tension on the anastomosis, and a bronchotomy was performed to assess the precise intraluminal tumor location. The right main bronchus and intermediate bronchus were sharply transected, and the right upper lobe was removed. Although a frozen section of the bronchial margin of the main bronchus was positive for tumor infiltration, further excision of the main bronchial edge was unavailable due to its close proximity to the carina. Because this patient showed distal tracheal invasion on preoperative examination and was expected to have high morbidity or mortality after carinal resection and reconstruction, intraoperative PDT was planned following gross total resection of the tumor. Forty-eight hours before surgery, 2 mg/kg of the photosensitizing agent Photofrin® (Pinnacle Biologics Inc., USA) was mixed with 40 cc of normal saline and injected intravenously. Exposure to sunlight after injection of the photosensitizer was prohibited, but the patient was allowed to live under fluorescent lamp illumination. Before beginning the intraoperative PDT, the chest cavity was irrigated to remove as much residual blood as possible to prevent interference with light delivery. The laser was transmitted via an optic fiber with a 30 mm cylindrical diffuser. Light from a 630 nm laser diode (Diomed, Cambridge, UK) was delivered to the bronchial lumen from the bronchus intermedius to the distal trachea. The surgical bed abutting the tumor was also illuminated before bronchial anastomosis to treat undetected, viable cancer cells. These three sections were each irradiated at 120 J/cm2, delivered as 300 mW for 400 s. Figure shows an intraoperative PDT.
A flexible bronchoscopic examination on postoperative day 5 revealed mucosal elimination, and edema could be observed in the area where the PDT was performed. No abnormal findings were seen at the anastomotic site . The patient was told to avoid exposure to sunlight or bright indoor lights for at least 4 weeks after PDT and was discharged home on postoperative day 8. The day after PDT, he had mild flu-like symptoms, including mild fever and chills, but fully recovered before discharge. No other serious side effects were noted. Postoperative histopathological examination confirmed squamous cell carcinoma of the right lung (T4N0M0, stage 3A). Based on the decision of the multidisciplinary team, the patient received four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with a regimen of high-dose methotrexate, cisplatin, and doxorubicin. Bronchoscopy performed 3 months after the surgery showed that the mucosa previously damaged with PDT was almost cured by epithelialization. Only mild stenosis was observed, and no abnormal findings were seen in the biopsy performed at the previously presumed lesions. Thirteen months after the surgery, the patient is alive without evidence of cancer recurrence.