A 26-year-old male patient presented at the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at Akdeniz University with complaints of teeth mobility, intense pain, and difficulty in chewing. His medical history was not significant for any medical conditions. Intraoral examination revealed generalized gingival hyperplasia with a greater severity in the palatal region . The gingival enlargement was sessile, soft in consistency, and red in colour with ulcerated surfaces covered by a necrotic slough . Furthermore, gingival recession, periodontal pockets, bleeding of the oral soft tissues, and halitosis were recorded on clinical examination. Widespread alveolar bone loss consistent with severe teeth mobility was detected on the orthopantomogram . Further radiological examination of the patient with computed tomography scan revealed multiple alveolar lesions with poorly defined and invasive margins .
Following extraction of the teeth with severe mobility, periodontal therapy was initiated, focusing on aggressive periodontitis among other differential diagnoses. However, no significant improvement in periodontal conditions of the remaining teeth or the severity of oral lesions was achieved. Consequently, eosinophilic granuloma was strongly considered and an incisional biopsy was obtained from the palate. Histopathological examination revealed bony destruction consisting of Langerhans cells with nuclear grooves accompanied by eosinophils and lymphocytic infiltration . LCs were immunopositive with S-100 and CD1a . On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with LCH.
The patient was referred to the Department of Hematology for further examination. Radiographic examination of the patient revealed ground-glass lung nodules within the upper lobe on conventional chest radiography, although further radiographic examination with positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT) failed to show lung involvement. Blood and coagulation profiles and liver functions as well as urine analysis were found to be noncontributory. A bone marrow biopsy did not reveal any infiltration. On the basis of clinical and radiographical findings, the definitive diagnosis of LCH with unifocal involvement was reached. The patient underwent systemic chemotherapy with vinca alkaloids (Vinblastine 6 mg/m2/week) and corticosteroids (Prednisolone 40 mg/m2/day) and remained under follow-up by the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Regression of gingival lesions, significant decrease in mobility of the remaining teeth, and severity of pain were noted at 12-month follow-up after initiation of chemotherapy . Radiological examination revealed no progression in alveolar bone loss, except for mandibular left premolar and molar teeth, around which periradicular bone loss minimally progressed since the initial presentation . Currently, the patient remains stable and asymptomatic for oral lesions with no further complaints of teeth mobility and pain.