A 70-year-old man visited our hospital for treatment of solitary hepatocellular carcinoma in segments 5 and 6. Examination revealed four lesions: two indicative of early gastric cancer and two of suspected adenocarcinoma. The first lesion was a type 0-IIa well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with a diameter of 16 mm. The second was a type 0-IIc well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with a diameter of 10 mm. The third was a type 0-IIc lesion of suspected adenocarcinoma with a diameter of 10 mm. The last lesion was a type 0-IIc lesion of suspected adenocarcinoma with a diameter of 3 mm. The diagnosis of all cancer lesions and the two suspicious of adenocarcinoma were an absolute indication for endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). Before undergoing hepatic surgery, percutaneous portal embolization (PTPE) was performed to increase the future remnant liver volume (FRLV). FRLV was hypertrophied from 334 to 563 ml after PTPE, and the resection rate was decreased from 963 ml (74.3%) to 1144 ml (67.0%). Then, a right hepatectomy was performed preceding gastric cancer treatment. The Pringle maneuver was performed during liver transection. An anti-adhesion membrane was spread out on the right subphrenic space, inferior vena cava, cut liver stump, hepatoduodenal ligament, and under the wound. Endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed 2 months after the hepatectomy, and the first lesion was diagnosed as eCuraC-2 due to submucosal tumor invasion. Neither swollen lymph nodes nor distant metastases appeared in preoperative imaging diagnoses. While considering surgical and oncological safety, an additional laparoscopic gastrectomy was planned upon the patient’s request and was to be carried out 4 months after the hepatectomy.
Extensive adhesions were found, especially around the resected margin of the liver. Though the enlarged remnant left hepatic lobe was an obstacle for surgery, lifting up the liver by the cut round ligament effectively created a better surgical field. Laparoscopic adhesiotomy was started from adhesion-free space on the left abdomen .
The transverse colon was adhered to the cut stump of remnant liver and obstructed vision of the duodenum. Sufficient mobilization of the transverse porcolon via the fusion fascia on the transverse mesocolon revealed a section of the duodenum displaced by adherence to the portal hepatis (Additional video 1). Rigid adherence of the duodenal bulb to the hepatoduodenal ligament due to previous surgery was found . We carefully peeled off the adhesions from the ventral side of the duodenum, which enabled us to visualize the localization of the supra-pyloric vessels . It was challenging to identify the right gastric artery via the ventral side because of the stiffened area around the hepatoduodenal ligament . We then exposed both the gastroduodenal and common hepatic arteries via dissection on the outermost layer after transection of the duodenum. Localization of the proper hepatic artery was revealed by dissection of the next consecutive layer, and a pedicle of the right gastric artery was divided safely .
Consecutively, supra-pancreatic lymph nodes were dissected to accomplish the D1+ lymph node dissection. In brief, the lymph nodes along the common hepatic artery (station 8a) were removed en bloc just anterior to the portal vein. The lymph nodes located at both sides of the celiac artery (station 9) were dissected, and the root of the left gastric artery was clipped and divided. Adjusting the traction on the gastropancreatic ligament was necessary due to a limited surgical field from the enlarged left lobe of the liver . Total laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D1+ dissection followed by Roux-en-Y reconstruction was completed. The operative time was 306 min, and the estimated blood loss was 100 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 9.