A 26 year old female presented in the outpatient clinic with bilateral tibial pain following HIIT. Continuation of exercise resulted in severe right groin pain six months later.
A 26 year old female presented with bilateral medial tibial pain. She had been performing HIIT exercise for 45 min, five times weekly, for a seven month period. Her tibial pain was gradual in onset, and was now severe and worse on exercise, despite six weeks of rest. The patient was unwilling to cease HIIT and continued to exercise against medical advice. She presented with severe right groin pain six months later.
There was no specific underlying disease.
The patient was taking norethisterone for birth control. She had previously had an open reduction and internal fixation of a right ankle fracture seven years previously and had made a full recovery.
On initial presentation the patient complained of pain in the anteromedial aspect of the middle third of both tibiae. There was tenderness bilaterally in these regions. Gait was normal and the patient was able to squat and tiptoe easily. Spine and bilateral hip, knee and ankle examination was within normal limits. There were no clinical features of rhabodomyolysis such as myalgia, muscle weakness or dark urine. She presented six months later with right groin pain. Range of motion in both hips was 135/135, adduction 35/35, abduction 45/45, internal rotation 10/15 (painful and reduced motion on the right).
Blood tests did not show any abnormality. Vitamin D level was within normal limits.
Radiographs did not show any tibial fracture. An old healed right ankle fracture fixation was seen . MRI scans of both tibiae demonstrated periosteal oedema and fluid overlying the antero-medial cortices of the tibial diaphyses, but no fracture, consistent with bilateral medial tibial stress syndrome .
MRI scan of the right hip demonstrated an incomplete, undisplaced stress fracture at the medial subtrochanteric level of the right femur . A dual energy X-ray absorbitometry scan demonstrated a normal BMD of the lumbar (L1-L4) vertebrae with a T-score of +0.6 and normal BMD of the left femoral neck, T-score +1.8.