A 52-year-old Caucasian female was admitted to the Department of Dermatology and Venereology because of a single, painless, gradually enlarging, reddish - brown nodule on the right arm accompanied by two small indurated plaques lasting six months . On dermatological examination a firm, dome-shaped nodule reaching 7 cm in diameter located on the lateral area of the right arm was found. The surface of the lesion was micronodular with diaphanous yellowish content inside. Additionally, two solitary, round erythematous, indurated plaques 1,5 cm in diameter were found on the right forearm and posterior area of the arm. The patients denied fever, weight loss, malaise. A biopsy specimen of the skin nodule showed a dense dermal polymorphic infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, eosinophils and numerous histiocytes with abundant pale pink cytoplasm exhibiting emperipolesis phenomenon . Immunohistochemical staining of the histiocytes showed expression of S-100 protein (+), CD68(+), but CD1a (-) . Clinical examination, chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound showed no sign of enlarged lymph nodes. On the basis of the aforementioned findings a diagnosis of cutaneous Rosai – Dorfman disease was made.
Additionally, a routine serological screening test for syphilis gave positive result and was confirmed by positive TPHA (1:20,480) and weakly positive VDRL (1/4). The patient claimed to be never diagnosed nor treated for syphilis previously. IgG anti – Chlamydia (C.) trachomatis antibodies were also elevated, HIV test was negative. Other routine laboratory test results were within normal range. No abnormalities on cardiological consultation were found. A sensory impairment in the skin enervated by a maxillary branch of trigeminal nerve was demonstrated on neurological examination and lumbar puncture was recommended. Because of patient’s refusal to the procedure, magnetic resonance of the brain was performed and showed uneven outline of the left cerebellopontine angle; contrast agent injection excluded focal lesions.
The patient complained also of bleeding after intercourse lasting three weeks. Her last Pap smear was performed 20 years ago. The gynaecological consultation revealed nascent uterine myoma, while cervical cytology revealed the presence of low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and atypical glandular cells. Further diagnostic and therapeutic procedures included endometrial abrasion and cervical biopsy. Cervical cancer G3, stage IB1 according to FIGO was confirmed by histopathological examination and postoperative assessment. Patient underwent Wertheim’s hysterectomy.
The treatment with doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 28 days was started, then low-dose methotrexate (MTX, 15 mg/week) was introduced and resulted in partial improvement . The treatment with MTX was ceased after three months due to neutropenia possibly in the course of the methotrexate treatment and postoperative radiotherapy. Further regimen included dapson 100 mg daily, but skin lesions showed no improvement after three consecutive months, therefore complete surgical excision was recommended. The procedure have not be carried out, so far, due to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. Patient’s husband had also positive syphilis serology and was treated with doxycycline. Both completed appropriate after-treatment follow-up.