A 39-year-old female patient was born with a univentricular atrioventricular connection, pulmonary valve stenosis, and great artery transpositions. A modified right Blalock–Taussig shunt was performed at 18 months, an aorta-pulmonary shunt at 7 years, bidirectional Glenn anastomosis at 11 years, and the Fontan operation at 22 years of age. In the Fontan procedure, the main pulmonary artery (PA) was closed and an extracardiac connection (20 mm Gore-tex tube) was anastomosed to the inferior vena cava (IVC) and under the right PA surface. Finally, a 4 mm hole is made in the tube as a fenestration to the atrium. Postoperatively, a pacemaker (PM) implantation was performed for sick sinus syndrome. She had been repeatedly hospitalized for heart failure since she was ∼32 years old. She had moderate or severe atrioventricular valve (AVV) regurgitation and coronary PA fistula, which were difficult to surgically repair.
At 38 years old, she was hospitalized due to heart failure. Upon admission, she suffered from fatigue and nausea but did not have hypertension. Initial blood pressure was 86/64 mmHg, heart rate (HR) was 80 beats per minute (b.p.m.) in PM tuning, and oxygen saturation was 95% on room air, with no leg oedema. Chest X-ray revealed pulmonary congestion, and blood tests showed mildly elevated hepatic enzymes [aspartate aminotransferase: 41 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase: 29 IU/L; and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 2918 pg/mL]. This NT-proBNP was the highest value in the years. Echocardiography revealed reduced ventricular ejection function (EF: 36%) and moderate common AVV regurgitation. At the time of admission, she was treated with carvedilol 7.5 mg daily, losartan 12.5 mg daily, furosemide 40 mg daily, spironolactone 150 mg daily, bepridil hydrochloride hydrate 100 mg daily, and warfarin as an anticoagulant. Her fatigue, headache, and nausea symptoms persisted although the congestive findings improved with intravenous furosemide. Additionally, supraventricular tachycardia episodes, including atrial fibrillation, paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, and atrial tachycardia were frequent. We examined the cause of persistent symptoms. Computed tomography scan detected a left adrenal tumour (3.2 cm × 2.4 cm; ), as shown by 123I-MIBG scintigraphy at the same site . Catecholamine concentrations by a 24 h urine collection test were elevated at the time of diagnosis . We diagnosed the patient with pheochromocytoma based on these findings. Her quality of life (QOL) was impaired due to sound and light hypersensitivity and insomnia. The most serious problem included the increased supraventricular arrhythmia occurrence, which easily caused heart failure. We started metyrosine (tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor) and α-blocker doxazosin for pheochromocytoma. Furthermore, the fenestration had been naturally closed, and transcatheter fenestration dilatation was performed to improve heart failure management before pheochromocytoma removal. The total cavopulmonary connection (TCPC) conduit and interatrial puncture were performed using a Brockenbrough needle under transoesophageal echocardiography guidance and after guidewire placement and balloon (3 × 20 mm) dilation, and 8 × 27 mm stent was implanted after the hospital ethics committee approval since it is not covered by insurance. We confirmed a postoperative fenestration flow in the stent and the decreased conduit pressure from 20 to 15 mmHg . Right heart catheterization showed that cardiac output (CO) remained low with CO and cardiac index (CI) of 2.15 L/min and 1.42 L/min/m2 postintervention, respectively, but heart failure hospitalizations were reduced under metyrosine . However, she gradually refused to take the medication due to abdominal distension and urinary incontinence, thus metyrosine was discontinued. Shortly thereafter, her symptoms flared up again, with elevated catecholamine levels .
The patient went into ventricular fibrillation (VF) and cardiopulmonary arrest outside the hospital while waiting for pheochromocytoma resection and was resuscitated by an automated external defibrillator. There were no findings that suspected ischaemic heart disease, and coronary angiography was not performed. Additionally, her serum potassium level was 3.4 mEq/L, which was low but was comparable with that before the VF onset. The serum potassium level was considered low due to pheochromocytoma. This patient was considered to indicate implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy because VF was possibly caused by underlying low cardiac reserve, which could not be ruled out. Moreover, our team had repeatedly discussed tumour resection, but this cardiac accident confirmed that the strongest prognostic factor for this patient was sudden cardiac death due to a fatal arrhythmia caused by pheochromocytoma.
On a surgical day, the patient’s initial blood pressure was 72/52 mmHg, HR was 88 b.p.m., and arterial saturation on room air was 93%. Standard monitors, including an arterial catheter, and defibrillator pads were placed. Anaesthesia was induced with midazolam and fentanyl, and she was intubated after muscle relaxation with rocuronium and ventilated with pressure-controlled ventilation. The positive end-expiratory pressure was 4 cmH2O, and the rate adjusted to maintain the end-tidal carbon dioxide was 31 mmHg. Anaesthesia was maintained with a low sevoflurane concentration. Arteriovenous sheaths were inserted from the inguinal region as planned after anaesthesia and intubation, and a circulatory support system was placed to respond in case of rapid haemodynamic deterioration. Central venous pressure (CVP) was monitored from two locations, namely, the left internal jugular vein and the right femoral vein (13–15 mmHg). Transoesophageal echocardiography was monitored to confirm the blood flow in the fenestration area . The surgery was started in the right half-lateral recumbent position to minimize the effect of the surgical position on the circulatory system, and the intra-abdominal pressure was set up to 8 mmHg. The circulatory condition was stable and both CVPs were up to 19–20 mmHg although intra-abdominal pressure temporarily increased to 14–15 mmHg during surgical port placement. Small amounts of noradrenaline (0.04–0.06 μg/kg/min) and carperitide (0.013 μg/kg/min) were used. We used nitric oxide inhalation of 10 p.p.m. to reach the tumour and process the adrenal veins. Bleeding occurred when we manipulated around the adrenal vein, and we temporarily increased the insufflation pressure up to 10 mmHg. During adrenal vein ligation, the blood pressure transiently increased, which was treated by nitroglycerine and nicardipine. Milrinone, which is a phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitor, was also used. Noradrenaline (0.04 μg/kg/min), carperitide (0.013 μg/kg/min), milrinone (0.25 μg/ kg/min), and dobutamine (2 μg/kg/min) were titrated to maintain normotension after the tumour removal. The operation time was ∼3 h, with an estimated blood loss of 74 mL.
Postoperative recovery was good. The removed tumour was a well-demarcated 3.0 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm nodular tumour . There were no findings of malignancy, and all postoperative catecholamine levels have normalized . She was discharged home on the 14th postoperative day, walking unaided. At discharge, bepridil hydrochloride hydrate was switched to amiodarone 200 mg daily. No ventricular arrhythmias have occurred so far for more than a year.