In July 2008, a 27-year-old immunocompetent male patient was referred to our hospital for a 3-week history of fever, asthenia and pancytopenia. The patient had spent 4 month in an area endemic for Leishmania infantum in the South of France (Oriental Pyrennees). His medical history included dental infections and an allergy to methicillin. He reported two similar episodes of high fever and asthenia in 2006 . The first episode in June 2006 had resolved spontaneously. During the second episode, in November, the patient was hospitalized with splenomegaly (17 cm), fever (40 °C) and weight loss (10 kg), anemia, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia . Microscopic examination of a bone marrow (BM) aspirate was negative for parasites. The bone marrow smear showed normal cellularity and there was no indication of immunosuppression. All microbiological and immunological tests were negative (blood and urine culture, testing for HIV, salmonella, brucellosis, Lyme borreliosis, hepatitis A, cytomegalovirus infection, arboviral infection, and malaria) except for positive titers of anti-Leishmania antibody (IFA 1/400) and a positive serology for EBV suggestive of prior infection. In this context of fever of unknown origin, a presumptive 8-day course of intravenous antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone and ofloxacin) was administered. All signs and symptoms, including fever, splenomegaly and asthenia, resolved in 4 weeks. No specific anti-leishmanial drug had been administered, as the treating physician had not retained this diagnosis. All laboratory parameters normalized during the same period, confirming complete remission of the episode .
In 2008, relapse occurred with weight loss (4 kg), fever (40 °C) and arthralgia . Physical examination showed an enlarged spleen, measuring 20 cm on the subsequent CT scan. Antinuclear antibodies were positive (dilution of 1/1280) with a nonspecific pattern. The bone marrow (BM) aspirate showed hemophagocytosis. All microbiological tests, including Histoplasma capsulatum antibody were negative except anti-leishmanial antibody titers that were again positive (ELISA >1.7 for a threshold at 1). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on a L. infantum kinetoplast DNA target found 30 parasites per mL, i.e., above the threshold for active VL (1 parasite/ml) . Blood and BM cultures for L. infantum were negative.
Fever lasted 4 weeks before the diagnosis of VL was confirmed. The patient was then treated with liposomal Amphotericin B (l-AmB) (3 mg/kg/day D1-5 and D10) . Complete fever resolution was obtained in 3 days along with a dramatic improvement of the patient’s general well-being. Ultrasonography showed regression of splenomegaly from 20 to 14 cm at the end of the first week, followed by normalization to 12 cm 6 months later. At that time laboratory parameters had returned to normal levels and quantitative PCR for L. infantum was negative. When last seen, in September 2010, the patient was completely asymptomatic.
We reexamined a bone marrow smear performed in 2006 during the first hospitalization. Independent, complete examination of this smear by 2 observers (10 h of observation under the microscope) revealed the presence of a single typical amastigote form of Leishmania sp. . Material on the smear was then thoroughly scarped from the slide with a blade and resuspended in 30 μl of sterile distilled water. Real time PCR amplification was performed in a thermal cycler TAQMAN® (Applied Biosystems) using Leishmania kDNA specific primers as described by Mary et al. . One negative blood slide and one negative tissue slide were used as controls. Amplification of the material retrieved from the slide occurred at 28 CTs, corresponding to the presence of 1.8 parasites .