A 65-year old Caucasian woman, with a two centimetre calculus located in the pelvis of the left kidney , underwent supine PCNL. Percutaneous access was achieved through the middle calyx: the procedure was uneventful and the intra-operative blood loss was minimal. At the end of the procedure, stone-free status was achieved and a Malekot-type 22 Fr nephrostomy tube was left in situ.
On the fourth post-operative day, the patient developed gross hematuria and severe pain of the left loin. A significant drop in the hemoglobin level was noted (from 9.5 g/dL to 6.8 g/dL) but she remained hemodynamically stable and the coagulation parameters were within normal limits. She was initially treated conservatively with bed rest and transfusions but gross hematuria persisted. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of a large left perinephric hematoma with active extravasation of contrast. An urgent selective left renal angiogram was arranged in order to achieve endovascular control of the bleeding vessel.
Access was achieved through the right common femoral artery and selective catheterisation of the left renal artery was performed. On angiography, a PA was noted, arising from a branch of the posterior division of the left renal artery, with active extravasation of contrast . Selective catheterisation and embolisation of the bleeding branch was technically not feasible. Embolisation of a more proximal arterial branch was considered inappropriate due to the associated risk of more extensive renal parenchymal ischemia. In order to overcome these limitations, a 6 mm × 19 mm self-expandable Fluency covered stent™ (Bard, New Jersey, USA) was advanced over a guidewire and deployed to achieve endovascular exclusion of the PA. A control angiogram at the end of the procedure revealed the absence of opacification of the PA, with the appropriate preservation of renal parenchymal perfusion .
Twenty-four hours later, hematuria ceased and the patient remained hemodynamically stable. An abdominal CT angiogram was performed in order to enable us to evaluate the result of the endovascular manipulation. Uniform global enhancement of the renal parenchyma was noted. There were no signs of active contrast extravasation or opacification of an aneurysmal cavity.
The woman was discharged 48 hours later and a plain abdominal X-ray film, which was done six weeks later, confirmed stone-free status and the presence of a covered stent graft in the anatomic location corresponding to the left kidney .