A 23-year-old Hispanic woman with SLE and atrial septal defect closure as a child presented with a 1-month history of stabbing, substernal, and exertional chest pain. Chest pain did not have any positional component and had been persistent for 5 days prior to presentation. She initially presented to her local hospital and was discharged with a provisional diagnosis of pericarditis 2 days prior to presentation. She also endorsed 5 months of fatigue, weakness, and dyspnoea on exertion. She was diagnosed with SLE 2 years ago with arthritis, non-scarring alopecia, rash, and elevated serum anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) and double-stranded DNA antibody (dsDNA Ab). Her SLE was managed by her primary care provider with 10 mg prednisone and 200 mg hydroxychloroquine daily. She was a non-smoker, and had no known family history of CAD or sudden cardiac death.
On presentation, she was afebrile, normotensive at 113/72, tachycardic to 106 b.p.m., saturating 95% on room air, but had significant dyspnoea during speech. Her examination revealed an S3 gallop, an 8-cm jugular venous distension, with mild bi-basilar pulmonary crackles. Initial complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were unremarkable, suggesting no bone marrow or renal involvement, respectively, related to SLE. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus tachycardia, ST depressions in I, aVL, and poor R-wave progression in the lateral precordial leads . Chest X-ray demonstrated mild pulmonary artery congestion without Kerley B lines or pleural effusion and a normal cardiac silhouette. Total cholesterol was 113 mg/dL and triglycerides were 75 mg/dL. The B-type natriuretic peptide level 85.8 pg/mL (normal < 100 pg/mL). The serum estimated sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were both within normal limits. Serum ANA titer was 1:640 with a homogenous pattern, dsDNA Ab was elevated, and both C-3 and C-4 complements were decreased, consistent with serologically active SLE. Troponin T was initially 0.3 ng/mL (normal <0.03 ng/mL) and peaked at 4.6 ng/mL within 8 h of initial presentation.
Given her persistent angina, ECG changes and troponin rise, an urgent coronary angiography was performed. It revealed 90–95% stenosis of proximal left anterior descending artery, 100% occlusion of the left circumflex artery, and 100% occlusion of the right posterior lateral branch with a ‘string of beads’ appearance concerning for coronary vasculitis . There were no targets for percutaneous intervention; a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 25–30%, with a severely hypokinetic mid inferoseptal, inferolateral, anteroseptal and anterior walls, and an akinetic apex. There was mild to moderate aortic regurgitation. No pericardial effusion was noted. After discussion with rheumatology for treatment of coronary vasculitis, the patient was given intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 3 days followed by 1 mg/kg/day prednisone equivalent in addition to a single dose of intravenous cyclophosphamide 860 mg and oral hydroxychloroquine 400 mg daily.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) was performed to determine the aetiology of cardiomyopathy and to exclude a secondary process such as SLE myocarditis. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed left ventricular ejection fraction of 30% and a transmural delayed enhancement (DE) in the apex without any viability, subendocardial DE in mid-septal, and inferolateral walls with significant viable myocardium . There was no evidence of myocarditis based on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging sequences. The CMRI findings favoured myocardial infarction and ICM. Computed tomographic angiography of the chest did not demonstrate aortic or other large vessel vasculitis .
During the hospital course, the patient’s angina was poorly controlled with isosorbide dinitrate 30 mg daily and ranolazine 500 mg twice a day due to significant hypotension and QTc prolongation respectively. She also developed clinical symptoms consistent with heart failure requiring aggressive diuresis. Once euvolemic, she underwent right heart catheterization which revealed mean pulmonary artery (PA) pressure of 21 mmHg, right atrial pressure of 2 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 7 mmHg, thermodilution cardiac index of 0.89 (L/min/m2), pulmonary vascular resistance of 3 Woods Units, and PA oxygen saturation of 51%. She could not ambulate more than 10 feet on a flat surface at a slow pace without significant dyspnoea. On hospital Day 14, a second coronary angiography revealed disease progression despite ongoing CAD and SLE management .
During a multi-disciplinary meeting between cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, and rheumatology, it was decided that her myocardium, cardiac output, and functional status were not likely to recover due to rapidly progressive CAD unresponsive to immunosuppression and medical therapy, not amenable to percutaneous or surgical revascularization. Her heart failure and chest pain were refractory to conservative measures putting her at significant risk of sudden cardiac death, therefore, the option of OHT was offered. On hospital Day 14, she was listed as Status 3 for OHT on United Network for Organ Sharing. She underwent OHT on hospital Day 16.
Pathology of the explanted heart demonstrated concentric intimal fibrosis with associated moderate lymphocytic inflammation of the thickened intima of all major epicardial coronary arteries with sparing of the small branch coronary arteries. Acute multifocal microinfarction of the left ventricle was seen. There was no significant myocarditis, pericarditis, or vacuolization of the myocytes to suggest hydroxychloroquine toxicity.
Her post-OHT course was uncomplicated and she was discharged home. She continues to be followed by a transplant cardiologist and rheumatologist at our institution. Her post-transplant biopsies have not demonstrated evidence of rejection or vasculitis, and five months after transplantation, she no longer reports any symptom-limiting activities.