A 49-year-old woman visited our institute for an incidentally detected brain tumor during the routine medical checkup of the brain with MRI. She had a history of hysterectomy for uterine myoma 6 years ago and total thyroidectomy for thyroid carcinoma that was diagnosed as well-differentiated PTC 2 years ago. TNM-stage was Stage III (T3N0M0) when thyroidectomy. Radioiodine treatment was not performed because of no evidence of invasion to surrounding tissue, lymph node metastasis and distal metastasis. She also had a familial history of thyroid carcinoma, since her mother had suffered from the same thyroid tumor. Physical and neurological examinations were all normal with no deficit. All serum tumor markers were within the normal range. Computed tomography showed that the tumor was a homogeneously enhanced mass lesion in the left cerebellum. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a homogeneous strongly enhanced hypervascular lesion with surrounding enhanced vessels located in the left cerebellar hemisphere . Digital subtraction angiography showed a strongly stained lesion fed by the peripheral branch (tonsillohemispheric segment) of the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and draining into the inferior vermian vein, revealing arteriovenous shunting . Preoperative thyroglobulin (Tg) was 9.5 ng/ml (normal range: 0–50), and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (Anti-Tg antibody) measured by FEIA method was under 6.0 IU/ml (normal range: under 13.6). A pre-diagnosis of solid type cerebellar hemangioblastoma was made based on these radiographic findings and the epidemiology that it is the most common primary cerebellar neoplasm in adults (Committee of Brain Tumor Registry of Japan ).
We performed tumor resection by bilateral suboccipital approach. By opening the arachnoid membrane between the vermis and left biventral lobule, a long perspective from the proximal to distal portion of the PICA across the predicted location of the tumor bulk was exposed. The tumor position was identified using a navigation system, and the exposed well-margined tumor bulk was totally resected after dissecting the feeding artery from the PICA peripheral branch and the draining vein into the left inferior vermian vein. An intraoperative pathological examination was performed, and the frozen section of the tumor tissue showed that polygonal cells proliferated in nests and cords with many blood vessels . The findings appeared compatible with hemangioblastoma. Postoperatively, the patient had no physical or neurological symptoms.
Histological examination of the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissue revealed proliferation of vacuolated sheeted tumor cells with clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm and numerous thin-walled vessels . A thyroid follicle-like pattern including eosinophilic liquid was partially present . Irregular nuclear contours and nuclear grooves were focally observed. Immunohistochemical findings were positive for CD31 (dilution 1:40; Dako, Japan), CD34 (dilution 1:50; Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan), vimentin (dilution 1:50; Dako) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) (dilution 1:200; Dako) , and negative for GFAP (data not shown). The final diagnosis was PTC.
Postoperative MRI showed total resection of the tumor bulk and no ischemic complications . Therefore, postoperative radiotherapy and adjuvant therapy were not administered. At 2 years postoperatively, the patient has no symptoms and no recurrence on follow-up MRI. Tg and anti-Tg antibody 2 months and 2 years after operation were under 0.1 ng/ml and under 6.0 IU/ml, 0.11 ng/ml and under 6.0 IU/ml, respectively, which all were normal range.