A 69 year old female visited emergency room for fever and chest pain. Contrast enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse soft tissue infiltration with air-fluid collection around upper esophagus, which was compatible with acute mediastinitis and esophageal perforation (A). However, the diagnosis was missed and delayed at the time.
She received radiotherapy and chemotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer 17 years ago and was completely cured. And she underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) for acute myocardial infarction 7 years ago. Because of these underlying diseases and delayed diagnosis, the thoracic surgeon decided to perform conservative treatment rather than immediate surgery. Intravenous antibiotics and proton pump inhibitor were administered immediately.
Gastrografin esophagography, performed after 4 weeks, revealed esophagomediastinal fistula in the upper esophagus (B). Endoscopic vacuum-assisted closure therapy for esophagomediastinal fistula treatment was performed, but was not effective. Endoscopic clipping with fibrin was tried, but was not effective. So she was referred to our intervention department to treatment for esophagomediastinal fistula.
We considered a fistula embolization with NBCA glue via transcatheter. A 4F angled taper Glidecath (Terumo Corporation, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into a nostril and passed into the upper esophagus. Esophagography was performed by injection of contrast material via diagnostic angiographic catheter. Esophagography revealed esophagomediastinal fistula in the upper esophagus. The diameter of the esophagomediastinal fistula was measured to be about 3 mm. Using the diagnostic angiographic catheter and 0.035 inch Glidewire (Terumo), an orifice of the fistula was selected. NBCA and iodized oil were mixed at a 1:3 ratio and 1.5 mL of the liquid glue was drawn up in a 3 mL syringe. Embolization of the fistula was performed by injection of the NBCA glue into the mediastinal soft tissue up to the orifice of the fistula via the diagnostic angiographic catheter (A & B).
Esophagography after 4 weeks revealed resolution of the esophagomediastinal fistula . At 2 months later after embolization, the patient’s condition has improved and she tolerates solid food. The patient was discharged without complications at 3 months after embolization. A follow-up esophagography after 6 months did not revealed esophageal fistula recurrence.