A 72-year-old male patient presented with acute heart failure syndrome (AHFS), characterized by severe leg oedema , ascites, and moderate bilateral pleural effusions. He had been treated for fulminant myocarditis in 2005, which resulted in a reduced LV ejection fraction. Previous treatment consisted of CRT-D and anticoagulation due to persistent atrial fibrillation, TEER of the mitral valve, and LVAD (HeartMate III) implantation . At that point in time, his TR was only mild to moderate. A heart transplantation was refused by the patient.
In the last months before TEER, he was hospitalized several times with symptoms of AHFS. His heart failure medication included furosemide (80 mg), bisoprolol (5 mg), and empagliflozin (10 mg). A mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist and an angiotensin receptor blocker were ceased due to low blood pressure and progressive renal dysfunction. The transthoracic echo showed a reduced LV ejection fraction of 25%. The right ventricle was severely dilated with slightly impaired RV function; however, the atrioventricular valves and the right heart could not be sufficiently visualized transthoracically. Due to image shadowing of the LVAD and CRT leads, a TOE was performed, which showed a torrential TR [vena contracta 22 mm, effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) 1.75 cm2] caused by annular dilatation secondary to left-sided heart failure ( and Video 1; see , and ) without any signs of lead-induced TR.
After a thorough literature search and internal discussion within the heart team, we decided to treat the patient with a TEER. This decision was based on a markedly elevated EuroSCORE II of 74.36% and TRI-SCORE of 48%. Treatment with a continuous intravenous furosemide infusion for 7 days achieved a deficit of 12 kg , which also resulted in a reduction of the gap between the anterior and septal leaflet (see , ) and TR grade (III–IV°). Right heart catheterization prior to the mitral TEER revealed a combined moderate pre- and post-capillary hypertension (pulmonary artery pressure 58/20/40 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 17 mmHg, and 4.9 wood units) and was not repeated ahead of the tricuspid TEER. Tricuspid regurgitation was successfully managed with two Pascal Ace® devices (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) in anteroseptal position under general anaesthesia. Post-procedural echo revealed only a minimal remaining TR ( and Video 2). After discharging, the patient progressed well without further need for rehospitalization or relevant symptoms of right heart failure. His weight and diuretic dose remained stable for at least 18 months after the TEER procedure. Diuretic therapy was reduced to furosemide 40 mg, and valsartan 80 mg was added. The dose of phenprocoumon was able to be reduced significantly with less fluctuations in international normalised ratio measurements. His 1-year follow-up showed an excellent outcome with only minimal TR on TOE ( and Video 3). Figures demonstrate the patient’s severely oedematous legs prior to the TEER procedure and after 1 year during a TOE follow-up .