A 34-year-old gravida four, para two female with history of two ectopic pregnancies
arrived at the ED complaining of 20 minutes of left-sided lower abdominal pain with
four episodes of non-bloody emesis. She denied other symptoms, including vaginal
bleeding. Initial medical history included two previous ectopic pregnancies; the
first, approximately six months prior to arrival at the ED, resolved with
intramuscular methotrexate. Her second ectopic pregnancy was suspicious for cornual
pregnancy based on history and US at seven weeks estimated gestational age but had been officially
diagnosed by obstetrics as an ectopic pregnancy of unknown location and deemed
resolved after intramuscular methotrexate one month prior to arrival. After initial
quantitative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (βhCG) of over 16,000
milli-international units per milliliter (mIU/mL) (normal hCG range: <3 mIU/mL),
her levels fell to 1700 mIU/mL two weeks prior to arrival.
Triage vital signs were significant for blood pressure (BP) of 86/51 millimeters
mercury (mm Hg) but were otherwise within normal limits, including a heart rate (HR)
of 85 beats per minutes (bpm). Physical examination revealed voluntary guarding of
the abdomen and only moderate tenderness of the left lower quadrant. A one-liter
saline intravenous bolus provided transient BP improvement to 108/58 mm Hg with
other vital signs within normal limits. While preparing for an abdominal and pelvic
computed tomography, initial complete blood count (CBC) found stable hemoglobin and
hematocrit of 12.0 grams/deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 12.0 – 16.5
g/dL) and 36.1% (reference range 36.0 – 49.5%),
respectively. Approximately five minutes after last vital signs were taken, the
patient stood to provide a urine sample and nursing witnessed sudden diffuse pallor
immediately followed by syncope lasting less than 60 seconds. Repeat vital signs
revealed BP of 68/38 mm Hg and HR of 108 bpm. After being placed in Trendelenburg
position, type and cross, quantitative βhCG, and repeat CBC were drawn.
Point-of-care US revealed free fluid in the abdomen as well as a thickened
endometrium with an endometrial mass . Obstetrics was emergently consulted for suspected ectopic rupture;
upon arrival to bedside, repeat hemoglobin and hematocrit revealed a dramatic
decline to 6.2 g/dL and 20.1%, suspected due to hemorrhage. Two units of
packed red blood cells were administered en route to the operating room. The
surgeons found approximately two liters of intraperitoneal blood and diagnosed a
ruptured, left cornual ectopic pregnancy . A cornual wedge resection and a unilateral salpingectomy were
performed. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative
day three.