A 66-year-old right-handed male patient has been admitted to our hospital, reporting persistent pain (Visual Analog Score [VAS] 5) and weakness in his right shoulder for 2 years, without any associated trauma. Before visit at our hospital, he had visited another hospital where the recommendation for RTSA was made due to IRCTs. Clinical evaluation revealed active forward elevation (FE) of 120°, abduction (ABD) of 90°, external rotation at side (ERS) of 10°, and internal rotation (IR) to the back at the level of T7 ( and ). Pain and functional assessment scores specific to the shoulder indicated dissatisfaction, with a Constant score of 42/100 and an American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score of 50/100. Standard radiography showed superior translation of the humeral head, with no signs of advanced arthritis ( and ). The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed PSIRCTs with advanced atrophy and high-grade fatty infiltration ( and ). Given his occupation as a self-employed restaurant owner, he expressed reluctance toward undergoing RTSA and was actively seeking alternative treatment options. The patient had chosen to undergo a tendon transfer procedure, a combined transfer of LTT and MTT with a single split Achilles tendon allograft in Y-configuration.
The patient was positioned in the lateral decubitus position and administered general anesthesia. Arthroscopic interventions, involving the rotator interval and capsule release, and acromioplasty were performed. After debriding any non-feasible tissues of torn rotator cuffs , two triple-loaded medial-row anchors (5.5-mm Healicoil, Smith and Nephew, Andover, MA, USA) were placed in the supraspinatus footprint. For interpositional graft, an Achilles tendon allograft was augmented with an acellular dermal matrix (ADM) graft to provide a spacer effect, ensure high tensile strength, and promote strong suture retention . The graft was split approximately 6 cm from one end, forming a “Y”-shaped configuration. To harvest the MTT and LTT, a curved incision was made from the lateral scapular spine to the middle medial border of the scapula . After meticulous dissection, the MTT was detached from the insertion site of the medial half of the scapular spine to the lateral scapular border and the acromion attachment site. The LTT was similarly detached from the scapular spine after meticulous dissection and release of the deep fascia. Both harvested MTT and LTT were sutured with No. 2 non-absorbable sutures in a continuous locking suture .
Subsequently, small incisions were made in both the supraspinatus fascia and infraspinatus fascia for the graft’s passageway. Using a long curved clamp, the graft was delivered into the subacromial space. Two suture limbs from the medial-row anchor were threaded through the remaining posterior cuff muscle for a side-to-side suture with the graft, while the remaining limbs were threaded through the graft. Secure fixation of the graft was achieved with three knotless lateral-row anchors (4.75-mm Swivelock anchors, Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) using a suture bridge technique. Finally, each end of the Y-configuration of the graft ( and ) was attached to the MTT and LTT, with the patient’s arm placed in maximum external rotation at a 60° abduction angle .
Patients wore an abduction brace for the initial 4 weeks followed by active-assisted range of motion (ROM) exercises after brace discontinuation at 4 weeks. Strengthening exercises in all directions begun at 3-month postoperatively. However, heavy labor work and sports were strictly prohibited until 6-month postoperatively to ensure proper healing.
The patient underwent follow-up at post-operative intervals of 1, 3, 6 months, and 1 year. At the 1-year mark, the patient experienced reduced pain (VAS score 2) and demonstrated improved function with Constant score of 78/100 and ASES score of 83/100. Shoulder ROM increased: FE to 170°, ABD to 140°, and ERS to 40° ( and ). IR at back has slightly decreased to T10. Acromiohumeral distance (AHD) increased from 5.2 mm to 8.1 mm without signs of arthritic progression . A 1-year post-operative MRI scan showed no evidence of re-tear in the transferred tendon (, , ), and there were no infection and nerve-related complication. The patient successfully returned to work at his restaurant at the 6-month post-operative mark and has continued working since.