A 26-year-old healthy female right-hand dominant vegetarian female presented to our orthopedic outpatient clinic with the complaints of a 3-month-old progressive swelling that suddenly appeared on the medial aspect of her forearm and had gradually progressed in size over the past 3 months. She had no antecedent trauma history. She had difficulty extending her right middle, ring, and little finger and was kept in a flexed position at the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints, with a more severe deformity of the little finger than the middle finger ( and ). The patient displayed a positive pseudo-Volkmann’s sign as the fingers could not be extended with the wrist held in extension, but the fingers were extendable passively with the wrist in the flexed position. The patient had no other systemic manifestations. A provisional diagnosis of Volkmann’s ischemic contracture, pseudotumor, or tuberculosis manifestation was considered ( and ).
Plain orthogonal radiographs were taken of the forearm, and any bony injury or abnormality was ruled out. A specialized ultrasonography was undertaken of the forearm by a musculoskeletal sonologist and was suggestive of a well-defined hypoechoic multiseptated cystic lesion measuring 6.5 cm × 3.8 cm × 2.2 cm with a central echogenicity suggestive of a scolex. On a color Doppler, the mass and wall showed increased vascularity. The lesion was located at the musculotendinous junction of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) muscle, with the tendons of the medial three fingers passing through the lesion. The overlying ulnar artery and nerve were spared. An electromyography-nerve conduction velocity was done to confirm the non-involvement of the nerves of the forearm .
After consulting with an infectious diseases specialist, the patient underwent magnetic resource imaging (MRI) of the brain to rule out any NCC, along with an MRI of the forearm. The patient was advised oral praziquantel thrice daily and albendazole twice daily for 14 days to assist in the involution of the cyst, and a trial was given to manage the patient conservatively.
Unfortunately, after 8 days of treatment with the above antiparasitic drugs, the cyst wall burst, and there was a yellowish discharge from the skin from the center of the swelling. The patient was admitted, and after an anesthetic workup, surgical exploration and debridement were planned.
After administering general anesthesia and aseptic preparation of the patient under a tourniquet, a 10 cm incision was made on the antero-medial aspect of the forearm, centered over the swelling. The soft tissue was dissected, the FDP tendon was approached, and the cyst was visualized. The cyst was incised and opened, and the purulent sample was collected. The necrotic tissue and all visible material of the cyst were debrided, and the tendons were visualized and freed. A thorough wash was given to remove all the necrotic material from the wound. The tendons were visualized, and their free movement was appreciated by passively extending and flexing the fingers of the hand. The ulnar nerve and artery were explored, and their non-involvement was confirmed. The wound was closed over an 8-Fr negative suction romovac drain with a polyamide monofilament suture. A sterile dressing was applied. The drain was removed on the following day of the surgery. She had no neurovascular compromise post-surgery and was started on active and passive physiotherapy on day 2 after surgery (: yellow arrow depicting the fibrosed tissue with a cyst entrapping the tendons).
The patient had a return of range of movement and a resolving Volkmann’s sign. The flexion and contracture of the fingers were reduced immediately! The middle and ring fingers returned to near full extension, and the little finger also improved. She was discharged on post-operative day 4 with regular daily physiotherapy, a cover of Praziquantel and Albendazole for a further 2 weeks, and advice for a regular follow-up. The intra-op histopathological sample came positive for T. solium, with its characteristic hooklets and suckers being identified.
She was regularly followed up at 3 monthly intervals, and at 1 year post-op follow-up, she had full resolution of the disease and a complete range of movement with no flexion or contracture of any of the fingers and no systemic manifestations.