A 24-year-old, obese, Latin American man with a history of measles, scarlet fever, and appendectomy, and taking no medications, consulted a private odontological care centre because of two days of toothache on the right side of his mouth. Evaluated as a common painful third molar, surgical extraction was attempted, but resulted in partial extraction due to the dentist's inexperience. The patient experienced mild haemorrhage and pain which was controlled by conventional haemostatic measures and analgesia. A prophylactic antibiotic was prescribed to the patient, and a later appointment was scheduled for the extraction of the residual tooth.
On the following day, the patient continued to have mild haemorrhaging and local swelling. The same supportive measures were prescribed since these were considered normal outcomes of a traumatic procedure. On the third day after surgery, persistent pain accompanied by malaise, moderate haemorrhaging and progressive local swelling prompted hospital care, where management included conventional haemostatic measures, analgesic, one-day hospital surveillance and early discharge. No laboratory analysis was ordered.
The next day, the patient complained of mild local pain, accompanied by trismus, minor local bleeding and clots, ecchymoses and mild jaw enlargement. Surgical extraction of the tooth residues and wound closure were performed, without apparent hemorrhagic complications. The dentist assumed that the patient had a coagulation disorder, based on such slow healing, and recommended a blood test and medical evaluation at the hospital because the private odontological clinic lacked the necessary laboratory resources. That same day, the patient experienced exacerbated pain, poor response to analgesia and continued local bleeding, which required emergency hospital care and a stay in the internal medicine department.
Physical examination revealed that the patient had pallor, right-sided jaw enlargement, ecchymoses and an oral cavity with active gingival haemorrhage from surgery . There was no gingival enlargement, local abnormal colour, or clinical hepatosplenomegaly and/or lymphadenopathy.
The patient's complete blood count (CBC) showed pancytopaenia with differential count of neutrophils 0.489 × 109/L (31.5%), lymphocytes 0.924 × 109/L (59.5%), monocytes 0.122 × 109/L (7.84%), eosinophils 0.006 × 109/L (0.38%), and basophils 0.012 × 109/L (0.76%). The patient had normocytic normochromic anaemia (Hb 107 g/L, MCV 84fL, MCH 29 pg and MCHC 351 g/L), thrombocytopenia (platelets 6.3 × 109/L) and abnormal coagulation times (prothrombin time (PT) 16 s with control sample 11 s, INR 1.43, activated partial tissue thromboplastin (aPTT) 39 s with control sample 32 s). Additional laboratory data revealed dyslipidaemia, hypoalbuminaemia and high levels of lactate dehydrogenase. An abdominal ultrasound revealed mild splenomegaly.
During a short stay of three days in the internal medicine department, a peripheral blood smear revealed a 6% blast cell content with Auer rods and promyelocytic cells. The patient was referred to the National Cancer Institute, where M3-APL was diagnosed based on bone marrow samples, with hypercellularity and 80% neoplastic promyelocytes . The findings were subsequently confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) for chromosomal translocation t(15;17) .
Supportive measures were established based on the patient's stay at the internal medicine department. The patient experienced transfusion-associated fever that occurred after he was transfused with erythrocytes and platelets. Thrombocytopenia was refractory to platelet transfusion and he maintained platelet counts between 6.3 × 109/L and 30 × 109/L. The patient further developed neutropaenia and fever, and the protocol for a high risk of opportunistic infection included isolation and antibiotics (ceftriaxone, metronidazole and fluconazole). At the National Cancer Institute, specific treatment was started immediately after diagnosis. His induction therapy included ATRA (all-trans retinoic acid) and daunorubicin. Laboratory analyses showed platelets at 8 × 109/L, delayed coagulation times and a fibrinogen level of 43 mg/dl (normal range 159 to 317). Further supportive measures included cryoprecipitates in addition to fresh frozen plasma (15 mg/kg q.i.d.) when the patient's fibrinogen level was lower than 100 mg/dl, and platelet transfusion when his platelet count was below 50 × 109/L. His CBC and coagulation parameters (PT, aPTT, thrombin time and fibrinogen levels) were monitored daily.
Despite early specific treatment, the patient suffered generalised seizures secondary to intracranial bleeding caused by DIC, which was confirmed by delayed coagulation times, low serum fibrinogen, high fibrin degradation products and D-dimer. The patient died after four days of hemorrhagic complications.