A 53-year-old female with a past medical history of chronic odontalgia and facial pain was seen in consultation for consideration of a facial stimulator trial. She also suffered chronic migraine headaches. Her facial pain began approximately 8 years earlier after a root canal of an upper left molar which was reportedly complicated by retention of a metal fragment, trigeminal nerve damage (V2 distribution) and chronic left facial pain. She suffered incapacitating pain refractory to treatment with pregabalin, tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants, clonazepam, carbamazepine, topical lidocaine, methadone, transmucosal fentanyl, sphenopalatine ganglion blocks, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), acupuncture, psychological approaches to pain, facial muscle steroid injections and radiofrequency ablation of the trigeminal ganglion.
After a successful percutaneous trial of facial stimulation the patient was taken to the operating room for permanent implant. After induction of general anesthesia, a 14-gauge Tuohy needle was inserted subcutaneously through an incision on the left cheek. Under fluoroscopic guidance, a 1 × 8 sub-compact percutaneous lead (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was inserted over the left maxilla, with care to place the distal 2 contact points next to the upper molars. Several adjustments to the lead were necessary before a position was found where no muscle twitching was observed upon testing, even at high amplitude and low frequency stimulation (e.g. 10 A, 2 Hz), see Fig. .
Next, the lead was tunneled from the cheek to a temporal incision, where it was looped and then tunneled via a posterior auricular route to an implantable pulse generator (IPG, RestoreUltra, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) in the infraclavicular region. Because of concerns over erosion of bulky commercial anchors, 2-0 silk suture was used to anchor the lead.
On follow-up the patient noted improved pain control and reduced pain medication consumption with her facial stimulator; however, when she increased the amplitude above 2.75, she experienced blepharospasm. After reprogramming failed to remedy this issue she was subsequently treated with freshly prepared botulinum toxin, 100 units/4 ml. This was injected into her bilateral cheeks and face, temple and occiput. The facial injections were based on observed muscle stimulation when the patient adjusted the amplitude of the device. Each facial injection was 0.05 ml which is 1.25 units of botulinum toxin. The temple and occipital regions were treated because of the patient’s history of migraine headaches.
This treatment provided excellent relief of the facial spasms, allowing her to use her stimulator at high amplitudes, thereby maximizing her pain relief. She received two subsequent treatments of botulinum toxin injections at 5-month intervals with similar results. Her facial twitching began to return after about 3 months, but she chose to wait 2 additional months before returning to clinic.
Unfortunately, the following year the patient developed an infection near the post-auricular lead, and she had previous unrelated methicillin resistant staff aureus (MRSA) infections on the contralateral face. Due to the risk of recurrent MRSA infection combined with a planned instrumented spinal fusion for severe adult onset scoliosis, a decision was made to explant the system to reduce the risk of seeding her spinal hardware. After explantation of her stimulator system, her facial pain returned to baseline. She has been maintained on oral opiates and at last follow-up, she was inquiring about any other pain management options.