An 80-year-old female patient presented to our institution due to jaundice and epigastric pain. Her past medical history included arterial hyperetension, cardiac arrythmia, asthma, and chronic renal failure. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed showing a 12mm mass lesion in the pancreatic head causing obstruction of the common bile duct which was dilated. EUS was performed with a linear array echoendoscope (GF-UCT 140 Olympus Medical Europe ) under conscious sedation with midazolam and pethidine and a 3.5cm hypoechoic heterogeneous mass lesion with poorly demarcated margins was seen in the pancreatic head (A). EUS-guided FNA was performed with a 22-gauge needle (Expect Slimline, Boston Scientific, MA) . Suction was applied during the FNA process (10ml of vacuum) and the sample was expelled into normal saline. The sample was transferred to the cytology lab immediately.
Aspirated material was placed on smears and air dried and alcohol fixed slides were prepared. A cell block was made from the residual material containing tissue fragments unsuitable for processing by cytologic techniques, using the fibrin clot method and it was formalin fixed and paraffin embedded. Subsequently 5μm thick sections were obtained and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin. Additional sections from the cell block were obtained for immunocytochemistry.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to investigation.
EUS- FNA conventional smears and cell block smears showed atypical pleomorphic mononuclear cells admixed with multinucleated osteoclast like giant cells measuring 10 to 20 ovelapping nuclei, in the center of each cell. Nuclear membranes and chromatin pattern were regular. Ill-defined nucleoli were observed . The mononuclear cells were positive by cytokeratin AE1/AE3, EMA, and CEA , but showed no reaction with S-100 and CD117 (c-kit). The multinucleated cells were positive by CD68 immunostain . A cytological diagnosis of osteoclast-like giant cell pancreatic tumour was rendered.