We present a 56-year-old male with no drug allergies and a history of dyslipidemia and structural partial epilepsy since the age of 27, who was followed up by a neurologist.
The seizures consisted of absence-type focal seizures with altered consciousness for 2–3 min with postcritical period with slurred speech and bradypsychia. The patient did not present auras or any other type of seizures. Their frequency was 6–8 per month and was triggered by stress and work situations.
Since the diagnosis, the patient had been treated with multiple antiepileptic drugs without success, either because of the appearance of adverse effects or their ineffectiveness in seizure control.
At the time of the surgery, the patient was under treatment with levetiracetam 1000 mg/12 h, perampanel 8 mg/24 h, and 3 eslicarbazepine 800 mg tablets every 48 h.
A magnetic resonance imaging showed a left temporal parahippocampal lesion suggestive of cavernous angioma with pathological activity on the left posterior temporal lobe in electroencephalogram .
Due to a diagnosis of a drug-resistant epilepsy secondary to a left parahippocampal cavernoma, the patient was referred to our department for the evaluation of surgical treatment.
Subsequently, informed consent including the use of diagnostic and intraoperative images for educational and academic purposes was obtained from the patient.
A transtentorial supracerebellar approach in semi-sitting position was chosen . On this occasion, we preferred the semi-sitting position instead of Concorde position as it provides a better anatomical orientation, cerebellar mobilization caused by gravity, and better cleanliness of the surgical field. Due to the risk of air embolism, a bubble test was performed to rule out right-left shunt, which was positive. Therefore, a transesophageal echocardiography was performed, confirming the presence of patent foramen ovale, which was closed percutaneously before the intervention was carried out.
The patient was operated in semi-sitting position with his head fixed, elevated, and flexed to expose the suboccipital region. An external lumbar drain was placed to evacuate approximately 50 cc to aid cerebral relaxation and better retraction during surgery.
A left paramedial vertical incision was made, one-third superior to the transverse sinus and two-thirds inferior. After muscle dissection, the left suboccipital craniotomy was achieved exposing the transverse sinus. The dura mater was dissected in a C shaped and lifted up to increase the corridor view and elevate the tentorium.
The tentorial incisura was reached preserving the bridging veins and the opening of the ambient and quadrigeminal cisterns was performed to relieve cerebral pressure avoiding the placement of retractors. Neuronavigation-guided assistance was used to execute the tentorial incision, reaching the medial temporal lobe. The fusiform and parahippocampal gyrus along with the collateral sulcus were located. After performing corticotomy in the parahippocampal gyrus with the support of neuronavigation-guided monitoring, the cavernous angioma was located .
The resection was performed without surgical or anesthetic incidents and the patient remained in the intensive care unit for 24 h.
The patient did not present any complications during the postoperative period and was discharged 4 days after surgery.
After 6-month follow-up, the patient is seizure free (Engel IA). shows postoperative imaging control with complete resection.