A 47-year-old Caucasian male was admitted with nonspecific abdominal pain, vomiting, weight loss, and early satiety. The patient had no significant past medical history, and physical examination was inconclusive, apart from noting slight abdominal distension, with routine observations within normal limits. Laboratory investigations including complete blood count, biochemical and coagulation tests, and urinalysis examinations were unremarkable as well. Subsequently, a computed tomography (CT) of his abdomen was performed, revealing a multilobulated and ill-defined, soft tissue mass, arising from the root of the mesentery, compressing the posterior wall of the stomach . To characterize the mass further an abdominal MRI was performed, showing peripheral enhancement and a likely necrotic center, with satellite lesions evident at the periphery of the mass . Radiological evaluation opted towards a lymph nodal mass of unknown origin. After multidisciplinary meeting team discussion (MDT) a laparoscopic biopsy was decided and performed, deemed to be the safest approach. Histopathological examination revealed a 3 × 1 × 0,4 cm solid, soft, and tan mass. On microscopic examination, the neoplasm was composed of neoplastic plasma cells showing variable degree of maturation. Some of the cells were oval with round eccentric nucleus, “spoke wheel” chromatin, and no nucleoli. Other cells appeared with prominent nucleoli and occasional multinucleated. Mitotic figures were also apparent . Immunohistochemically these cells were positive for CD138 and CD38 while CD56 was expressed in a small percentage of neoplastic cells. Other markers such CD20, CD79a, CD3, CK20, CK7, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and HHV8 were negative, whereas proliferative index MIB-1 was high. The neoplastic cells also showed cytoplasmic monotypic IgA and κ-light chain restriction .
All the above set the diagnosis of mesentery plasmacytoma, which was finally classified as SEP of the mesentery, since bone marrow examination was normal with less than 5% of plasma cells and concentrated urine was negative of Bence-Jones protein, while no other site of disease was revealed on additional imaging investigations, and renal parameters and calcium levels were normal. Moreover, serum protein electrophoresis did not show any monoclonal protein spike. The final diagnosis was IgA- κ type solitary extramedullary plasmacytoma of mesentery. The patient was treated with 50 Gy of radiotherapy, delivered over six weeks, and developed mild radiation related diarrhea. The tumor responded very well, with complete radiological response, and the patient remains disease free one year later, on follow-up visits.