Mrs. C, a 67-year-old married non-Latino white American woman with a diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) for more than 20 years and no full remission of the symptoms, was referred for care in March 2021. She suffered from low mood and energy, a lack of interest, trouble falling asleep, and difficulty concentrating on work or reading, which affected her daily life activities and social functioning. Her symptoms had shown no signs of improvement, despite her being adherent to antidepressants and anxiolytics (specifically bupropion 150 mg daily and alprazolam 1.5 mg at night). Her symptoms were easily aggravated by general life stressors. Thus, she was referred to our department for evaluation and treatment.
The diagnosis was assessed by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders fifth edition (DSM-V) for MDD using a checklist to meet five out of nine criteria before the first treatment session on 4 March 2021 (T0). The patient presented with a sustained depressed mood, markedly diminished interest, significant weight loss, insomnia, fatigue, feelings of worthlessness, a diminished ability to think or concentrate, and recurrent thoughts of death. These symptoms generally cause significant distress in social areas of functioning and are not attributable to a substance or a medical condition, a psychotic disorder, or a manic or hypomanic episode . The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) has been used as a reliable and valid tool for the diagnosis of a depressive disorder, and also during follow-up for measuring the severity of depression, as a self-administered patient health questionnaire ; see study flow in Fig. .
Before treatment, the diagnostic TMS demonstrated marked hypoexcitability of the left hemisphere due to a significant drop in motor-evoked potential [(MEP) 0.64 mV] and intracortical facilitation [(ICF) 1.43 mV] at 120% of motor threshold (MT), decreased short intracortical inhibition [(SICI) 1.02 mV], and a prolonged silent period (195 ms). Details of the normal diagnostic TMS parameters were described in our prior study . Her PHQ-9 score was 23 out of 27, indicating severe depression.
The new iTBS treatment protocol consists of three-pulse TMS at 50 Hz in 20-ms intervals, which are repeated as a 2-second train at a frequency of 5 Hz every 10 seconds. The location is over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) at 140% of MT, with a total of 2400 pulses for the first session. This is then followed by subsequent weekly iTBS at 100% of MT, a total of 1200 pulses for another four sessions. We immediately applied 20 minutes of tDCS with anodal stimulation over the left DLPFC and cathodal stimulation to the right supraorbital region after each iTBS session. The pharmacological regimen remained the same before and during the study process.
The patient reported a 30% improvement in symptoms, mainly in mood and anxiety, after the first session (T0), which lasted for the following 6 days (T1). A 70% improvement was observed by the patient after the third (T2) and fourth (T3) sessions, corresponding with a significant decrease in the PHQ-9 score from 23 at the first session (T0) to 2 out of 27 in the fourth session (T3) and 2 out of 27 at the 6-week follow-up (T5), as shown in Fig. . Her mood, anxiety, concentration, relaxation, and ability to make decisions all improved, with the benefits enduring for at least 6 weeks after the treatment session ended. However, she still experienced some difficulty falling asleep. These symptoms were consistent with the follow-up diagnostic TMS results from the fifth session (T4). This demonstrated consistent MEPs, an increased SICI response (inhibition down to 0.29 mV), and a normal silent period (120 ms) of the left hemisphere.
The patient noted only pressure on the head in one session of the TMS treatment, which disappeared soon after stimulation. There was no sign of a headache. After removing the electrodes from the tDCS session, a burning sensation vanished. There was only minor redness on the scalp, which went away after a few hours.