In this case report, a patient with rotational ankle injury and acute ligamentous trauma was insufficient-ly treated and he developed lateral ankle instability that was belatedly treated surgically using an autol-ogous semitendinosus graft.
Male Caucasian, 42 years old, manual worker had a rotational left ankle injury with varus-internal rota-tion mechanism of trauma. No symptoms from his lower extremities were recorded before his injury and he reported amateur sport activities during childhood (soccer). After the injury, he immediately consulted a medical practitioner at a primary care center, where a clinical and X-ray evaluation ensued, with no apparent bony defects. Gradually, he recovered and fully resumed the previous level of activity in 3–4 weeks, with no apparent protocol of rehabilitation. In 6 months, the patient was subjected to two additional ankle injuries with the same mechanism of action and no fractures were found with the two additional X-rays. He also consulted thrice a medical practitioner at two different primary care centers. The patient was occasionally using cold compresses and elastic bandages for his ankle but he did not follow a specific rehabilitation plan. Because of his worsening symptoms, the patient turned to our out-patient clinic for a solution.
During his clinical evaluation, the patient complained of pain, especially at the lateral side and after ac-tivity, with a sense of instability and unreliability when walking and driving. On palpation, pain was reproduced just inferior and anterior of the lateral malleoli, anterior drawer test, and talar tilt test tested positive. That showcased a rupture of both anterior talofibular and calcaneofibular ligaments .
Static and stress anteroposterior and profile radiographs were performed on both ankles. In the stress radiographs, the talar tilt of the left ankle was measured at 21° in the anterioposterior view . In addition, anterior sliding of 13 mm was measured in profile view . In the magnetic resonance imaging, there was confirmation of the ruptures of anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and calca-neofibular ligament (CFL).
A program of non-surgical treatment followed our evaluation for 6 weeks that targeted on functional reeducation, biofeedback, and strengthening of dynamic ankle stabilizers. The non-surgical treatment failed, so we turned to anatomical reconstruction of ATFL and CFL with autologous semitendinosus graft as the best treatment for our case .
The procedure was performed as described in bibliography . A lateral ankle approach was chosen with a straight incision that carved slightly posteriorly distally , the soft-tissue was dissected, and complete degeneration of the lateral ligamentous complex of the ankle was found , that sig-nified no chance of anatomical repair and made the anatomical reconstruction imperative. The semiten-dinosus graft was harvested from the ipsilateral knee , debridement of the scar tissue was per-formed, and the positions of fixation in the lateral malleolus, talus, and calcaneus were marked and pre-pared. The graft was fixated with absorbable screws with the ankle in neutral position and the graft was slightly tightened (, , ). The intra-operative stability of the ankle was found satisfactory and the surgical wound was closed. A dorsal backslap splint with the ankle in neutral position was placed.
The splint was kept for 6 weeks. The sutures were removed at 2 weeks with no wound complications. After the 2nd week, the patient started exercises to improve the range of motion and light partial weight bearing. After the 4th week, a complete program of functional physiotherapy was applied for 2 months and included exercises for range of motion, stability, elasticity, and biofeedback of the ankle.
The patient had several follow-up appointments, the last one being 11 months port-operatively. The pa-tient’s American Foot and Ankle Score improved from 60 before surgery to 85, with no complaints about subjective instability when walking on irregular surfaces (sandy or rocky terrain). On post-operative dynamic X-rays of the ankle, the talar tilt decreased from 21° to 3° in the anteroposterior view and the anterior translation from 13 mm to 4 mm in the profile view .