A 21-year-old man with no previous history underwent elective craniotomy for cerebellopontine angle tumor under general anesthesia with propofol and remifentanil. Because of intraoperative acute brain swelling due to intra-tumoral hemorrhage, the operation was completed after additional internal decompression of the left cerebellum and external decompression. After surgery, the patient was admitted to our intensive care unit to control intracranial pressure under deep sedation. Computed tomography performed on postoperative day (POD) 2 revealed decreased brain edema. After stopping propofol infusion, he fully awoke with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of E4VTM6 and was extubated without a cuff leak test. However, the patient rapidly developed inspiratory stridor and dyspnea with tracheal tagging and chest retraction following extubation. Insertion of a nasopharyngeal airway and suctioning of secretions did not improve his respiratory failure, and reintubation was performed because oxygen saturation deteriorated. Laryngeal edema evaluated using a videolaryngoscope was slight, so an endotracheal tube of the same size as the removed tube (inner diameter 8.0 mm) could be inserted smoothly. At that time, the cause of the stridor was unknown. Because surgical manipulation might transiently damage the lower cranial nerves and reduce laryngeal function, we decided to attempt re-extubation after several days of mechanical ventilation.
On POD-5, after confirming negative cuff leak test (leak volume < 110 mL), the patient passed spontaneous awakening and breathing trials and was re-extubated. As with the initial extubation, stridor recurred, and fiberoptic laryngoscopy was performed in Fowler’s position. It revealed mildly swollen supraglottic tissues and a downward collapse of the epiglottis during inspiration . Additionally, the left arytenoid was swollen unilaterally and was sucked into the glottic inlet during inspiration, resulting in severe airway obstruction . Based on these findings, acquired laryngomalacia was diagnosed as the cause of the patient’s stridor. Simultaneously, aspiration of oral secretions was observed, which led to even greater dyspnea, and the patient was intubated again. Since the short-term prospects for improvement of laryngomalacia and impaired laryngeal function are unclear, a tracheostomy was performed on POD-7. Laryngeal re-evaluation was performed by an otolaryngologist on POD-18. Although the laryngomalacia improved completely, redundant mucosa of the left arytenoid was observed, even after the swelling subsided. In addition, bilateral vocal cord paralysis caused by vagal nerve palsy due to aggressive resection of the tumor was observed, and airway management with tracheostomy was continued. Two months later, although the right vocal cord motion was gradually restored, the left vocal cord motion had not recovered and excess mucosa of the left arytenoid was still observed .