A 70-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with a chief complaint of dysuria. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a large bladder tumor, and cystoscopy revealed a nodular tumor filling the left half of the urinary bladder. CT revealed a cT2bN0M0 bladder cancer .
He underwent transurethral resection of the bladder tumor and was diagnosed with high-grade pT2 urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation. Left hydronephrosis developed 2 weeks later due to obstruction of the lower part of the left ureter. We immediately planned radical cystectomy following left percutaneous nephrostomy without neoadjuvant chemotherapy. He underwent RARC with urethral resection with an intracorporeal ileal conduit urinary diversion. The extra fourth arm was set on the left side of the patient, and 12 and 5 mm ports for bed-side assistant were set on the right side of the patient. The lymphadenectomy was performed as a level of extended template including the common iliac, external iliac, internal iliac, and presacral lymph nodes. In an ileal conduit procedure, an approximately 25 cm segment of ileum was isolated and the distal ends of both ureters were anastomosed to the ileum by the Bricker technique. The total operative time and console time were 571 and 476 min, respectively. The estimate blood loss was 570 mL. Insufflation pressure was 10 mmHg. Histopathological examination revealed high-grade pT2b urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation, INFβ, lymphatic invasion (+), vascular invasion (−), resected margin (−), and pN0 (0/55). The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged approximately 1 month after RARC.
Four months later, he was admitted to our hospital emergently for shortness of breath; his hemoglobin level fell to 5.1 g/dL. Gastrointestinal bleeding was suspected, and he underwent colonoscopy, which showed a 4-cm submucosal oozing tumor in the descending colon . Tumor biopsy was not performed due to the risk of bleeding.
Enhanced CT revealed intraperitoneal recurrence in the descending colon , massive local recurrent mass in the pelvic floor , swelling of the pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes, and nodules in the oblique abdominal muscles . Additionally, right hydronephrosis and hydroureter developed due to right ureteral obstruction by disseminated peritoneal metastasis.
Five months after RARC, chemotherapy was initiated with dd-MVAC, which consisted of methotrexate (30 mg/m2), vinblastine (3 mg/m2), doxorubicin (30 mg/m2) and cisplatin (70 mg/m2) every 2 weeks. He tolerated six cycles of the treatments without severe adverse events. CR according to the RECIST v1.1 was achieved . He has been followed for 1.5 years since RARC without evidence of recurrence.