A 12-year-old girl presented with acute flushing, cyanosis, swollen eyelids, urticaria, and dyspnea experience after an endurance run in winter or swimming in a cold-water pool. She also developed dyspnea after having a cold drink. She had no history of food allergies, atopy, or asthma. No association was noted between anaphylaxis and food intake in her history.
Laboratory assessment during the asymptomatic period revealed the absence of peripheral eosinophilia (white blood cell count, 5150/μL with 2% eosinophils) and a total immunoglobulin (Ig) E level of 1255 IU/mL. Specific quantitative IgE testing with ImmunoCAP® > 0.7 UA/mL for house dust, dermatophagoides, cedar pollen, and cat dander and negative for wheat, shrimp, and crab. The skin-prick test also was negative for wheat, shrimp, and crab. On the basis of the symptomatic episode, she underwent a 2-day challenge test to measure urinary LTE4 levels before and 3 h after the test. Urinary LTE4 was quantified by using a commercial enzyme immunoassay kit (Cayman) after purification by high-performance liquid chromatography.
On the first day, she was asked to ingest 200 mL of cold water at a temperature of 5 °C in 30 s, which did not trigger any symptomatic responses. After the challenge test, the plasma catecholamine (adrenaline, noradrenaline, and dopamine) and histamine levels did not significantly alter , but her urinary LTE4 level increased , post-challenge test 400 pg/mg-cr). On the second day, she underwent the exercise loading test according to the Bruce protocol by using an ergometer to increase the power of exercise every 2 min. She had been fasting for > 15 h and did not have breakfast. She developed acute flushing, cyanosis, swollen eyelids, dyspnea, and hypotension when the maximum loading reached 80 watts. Just after the exercise loading test, her plasma adrenaline and noradrenaline increased . At 15 min. after the exercise loading test, her plasma adrenaline and histamine rose sharply with anaphylaxis symptoms, such as cyanosis, dyspnea, and hypotension. Those symptoms were accompanied by increasing urinary LTE4 .
The diagnosis of EIA had to be distinguished from systemic mastocytosis, exercise associated laryngoesophageal reflux, cardiovascular disorders, cholinergic urticarial, and hypoglycemia. The episode was confirmed to be EIA that was diagnosed on the basis of positive exercise loading test with hyperleukotrieneuria. Her serum tryptase level was 1.3 μg/L, within the normal range when she was asymptomatic.
After challenge testing, the patient was treated with anti-LT receptor antagonists. During next hospitalization, to improve her quality of life related to exercise, training by exercise prescription was conducted. Two weeks later, she increased the exercise intensity without anaphylaxis. After she was discharged, she was restricted from strenuous exercise especially in cold environments and prescribed an adrenaline autoinjector.