An 83-year-old Japanese man was introduced to our department with the chief complaint of macroscopic hematuria. There was a past medical history of hepatitis B and hepatocellular carcinoma treated with radiofrequency ablation, but no history of urological problems. Physical examination and vital signs were unremarkable.
Urinalysis showed combined hematuria and pyuria, but urine culture was sterile. Urine cytology indicated atypical cells. Abnormal hematological findings include leukocytosis (WBC count: 15,700/μl) and eosinophilia (12%). The serum IgE level was 9.8 IU/ml (normal <173 IU/ml).
Cystoscopy demonstrated a thumb tip-sized bladder tumor at the trigone and papillary mucosa at the left lateral wall. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 20 × 17 × 15 mm bladder tumor at the trigone and muscle invasion in the bladder . Computed tomography (CT) revealed no distant metastases. The patient underwent transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TURBT). Histopathological examination revealed that 90% of the volume of the tumor was LELC marked by syncytial growth pattern , heavy lymphocytic infiltrate, necrosis, brisk mitosis and muscle invasion. The epithelial cells expressed CK7 and CK34βE12, and the lymphocytes CD3 and CD20 . The rest of the tumor was composed of non-invasive urothelial carcinoma.
The patient received concurrent chemoradiotherapy. The chemotherapy regimen included gemcitabine administered at 1000 mg/m2 on Days 1 and 8 and cisplatin 70 mg/m2 on Day 1 of a 21-day cycle. Radiotherapy, 60 Gy in total, was started on Day 1, concurrently with chemotherapy.
Ten months after his initial visit to our department, the patient underwent second TURBT for evaluation of pathological effect. No viable cancer cells were detected in the bladder specimens, including the muscle layer. At the time of this writing, the patient is under observation with regular clinical follow-up and remains well after 12 months, with no evidence of disease recurrence.