A 68-year-old man from a remote part of Nepal, who used to consume alcohol, presented with a slowly growing tender lump on the lateral aspect of his right back for 2 months. Additionally, he experienced progressive abdominal distension, epigastric pain, and swelling in his lower limbs for one and a half months, accompanied by significant weight loss. Despite his history of consuming home-brewed alcohol of about one liter per day for almost 30 years, he denied any previous symptoms suggestive chronic liver disease. He did not report any yellowish discoloration of his body parts, alterations in bowel habits, or frothy urine before the onset of these symptoms. Furthermore, there was no history of malignancy in his family or personal medical history. On examination, he appeared icteric and had a firm enlarged with tense ascites. Additionally, he had bilateral lower limb pitting oedema. Upon further inspection, an ~8×5 cm hard, tender, and immobile mass spanning the right lower posterior ribs was found . The rest of the examination was unremarkable. Blood investigation results showed a deranged liver function test and non-reactive serology. An ultrasonography scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed hepatomegaly with an irregular outline and coarse echotexture with heteroechoic mass in the right lobe of the liver along with ascites. The patient’s serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was remarkably elevated, measuring above 2000 ng/ml (Normal range: 0–8.78 ng/ml). The ascitic fluid analysis was negative for malignant cytology. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed an ~12.5×12.1×7.7 cm exophytic, ill-defined, irregular, heterogeneous soft tissue density arising from the inferior surface of the liver with heterogeneous enhancement in post-contrast images with compression of the main and left portal vein . Additionally, ~10.2×6.5 cm heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue density in the right posterior chest wall causing erosion of the 11th posterior rib along with the involvement of all muscle layers and subcutaneous tissue and gross ascites with minimal pleural effusion was observed; features suggestive of hepatocellular carcinoma with portal vein thrombosis with bony metastasis in the right posterior chest. No mass lesions were noted elsewhere. A biopsy of the right thoracic mass revealed tumour cells with a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, arranged in solid sheets and acinus suggestive of metastatic carcinoma. As the patient could not afford further investigations, an immunohistochemical analysis could not be performed. With a diagnosis of HCC with bony metastasis, the patient was given comprehensive counselling regarding the prognosis and treatment options, including radiotherapy and the chemotherapeutic agent sorafenib. Despite this, due to financial constraints, the patient declined further treatment and was instead managed palliatively with painkillers. The patient was discharged upon request and was subsequently lost to follow-up.