A 14-year-old Syrian female was admitted to the Urology Department of Tishreen University Hospital with 2-month history of mild pain in the left lumbar region pain with hematuria and weight loss of over 10 kg in that interval. She was treated with antibiotics without improvement. There was no previous medical or familial history.
On physical examination, her temperature was 38.3 °C, oxygen saturation 98%, and arterial blood pressure was 11/8 (systolic pressure/diastolic pressure). She was stable with normal physical examination except for pallor and left lumbar region mass.
On laboratory analysis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were elevated. Complete blood count (CBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), renal and liver function, and glucose were normal.
Urinalysis showed 50–60 red blood cells .
Ultrasonography showed deformation of the left kidney measuring 7 × 5 × 2 cm3 with dilation of the left renal vein. Intravenous contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a mass with size of 7 × 5 × 3 cm3 arising from the anterior part of the left kidney with tumor thrombus in the inferior vena cava extending to the right atrium without metastases . Doppler echocardiography did not show a tumor thrombus into the right atrium.
The operation proceeded by laparotomy midline abdominal incision. The exploration of the abdominal cavity showed a normal right kidney with normal liver. In the first stage, the right renal pedicle, inferior vena cava, hepatic vein, and lumbar veins were isolated. Then, left renal artery and vein were ligated, and left nephrectomy with lymphadenectomy of regional and paraaortic was carried out. Vessel loops were placed at the iliac branching, the hepatic vein, the right renal artery and vein, and over the incision on the inferior vena cava vascular to remove the tumor thrombus. Venotomy on inferior vena cava vascular was performed to excision the tumor thrombus by inserting a clump of blood suction device (Sil Silver) with monitoring of the patient’s vital signs (pulse, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation). The patient was systemically heparinized in the intensive care unit. The postoperative course was uneventful; after 72 hours, she was referred to the urology department. Seven days later, she was discharged from the hospital in good condition. The histopathology of the resected renal mass revealed a tumor cell with clear cytoplasm, indistinct nucleoli, and abundant extracellular matrix. There were cystic and focal areas of necrosis . The regional and para-aortic lymph nodes did not show any involvement. Immunostaining was vimentin-positive but negative for CD 99, CD34, pan CK, desmin, CK7, cytokeratin, CD 10, WT 1, EMA, NSE, and chromogranin A. the final diagnosis of CCSK with inferior vena cava was made. At 15 days postoperatively, the patient was treated with chemotherapy containing vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide. We followed the patient for 12 months after surgery; she remains stable without any recurrence or metastasis.