A 65-year-old man presented with a 10-day history of sudden onset binocular diplopia and gait disturbance; he also complained of tinnitus. His medical history consisted in chronic glaucoma treated with latanoprost eye droplets. The patient was on daily acetylsalicylic acid for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. His family medical history revealed an ischemic stroke in one of his sisters and an unexpected death during her sleep in another sister. He also reported a fifty pack-year smoking and admitted chronic alcohol intake. His general practitioner introduced candersartan 4 mg daily upon symptoms onset. Careful neurological examination revealed a left abducens nerve (CN VI) palsy, a left peripheral facial nerve (CN VII) palsy, and a contralateral face-sparing hemiparesia . Right-sided mild dysesthesiae were also reported. There was no other cranial nerve deficit, no other focal neurological deficit (FND). There was no headache, no fever, no meningismus. Lab tests did not reveal inflammatory reaction. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed a BCM located on the left side of the floor of the fourth ventricle with evidence of recent extralesional bleeding. There was no other cerebral cavernous malformation on gradient-echo sequences. The BCM was associated with a developmental venous anomaly (DVA) draining both sides of the cerebellum directly into the vein of Galen . The co-existence of an ipsilateral deficit of CN VI and VII and a contralateral face-sparing hemiparesia was highly suggestive of the inferior medial pontine syndrome, also known as Foville syndrome. The patient was admitted to the neurosurgery department for close follow-up. Acetylsalicylic acid was stopped. Considering this first bleeding episode, the non-exophytic character of the pontine hemorrhage, and the mild degree of disability of the patient (Glasgow Outcome Scale [GOS] of 5), a conservative management was decided in the first place. The option of stereotactic radiosurgery was deemed unnecessary at the acute phase and in the setting of a first bleeding. Five months later, the patient was admitted for recurrence of the symptoms with a grade V House-Brackman peripheral facial palsy and complete abducens nerve palsy on the left side, associated with contralateral face-sparing paresthesia. The CT scan of the brain showed evidence of rebleeding. After 2 weeks of close monitoring in the intensive care unit, surgical excision of the BCM was performed. The patient was operated on in a right park-bench position, the head being slightly rotated on the right to better expose the left side of the posterior fossa. Following a median incision and a median posterior fossa craniotomy, a telovelar approach was used to gain access to the rhomboid fossa. The exophytic hematoma appeared clearly on the left side at the level of the striae medullares, thus enabling us to remove the hematoma and the adjoining cavernoma through the infrafacial triangle. The DVA was left intact . The postoperative course was complicated by a surgical site infection requiring surgical revision, placement of a temporary external ventricular drain and combined antibiotic therapy (meropenem and linezolid). The patient suffered from a left-sided grade VI House-Brackmann peripheral facial nerve palsy, further complicated by a corneal ulcer which was managed with local treatment. He also presented postoperatively with a non-pre-existing left-sided glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) palsy responsible for dysphagia and aspiration pneumonia, requiring a temporary gastroplasty. The patient was finally sent to neurological rehabilitation 3 months after the procedure.