A 64-year-old man presented with multiple fractures of the 8th to 12th left ribs after an accident in December 2014. The patient was treated conservatively, with no ongoing symptoms noted. In 2019 and 2020, he had been seen in hospital with the main complaint of left shoulder pain, which was under observation. In March 2021, he visited the emergency department complaining of left shoulder pain and epicardial pain after eating. A left diaphragmatic hernia was diagnosed by computed tomography (CT) and radiography, and surgical repair was recommended. However, the patient refused as the symptoms improved. Fourteen months later, the patient revisited the hospital in similar circumstances and improved spontaneously. He consulted our hospital for the surgical indication. We recommended that he undergo surgery, showing images of the X-ray and CT when his transverse colon was obstructed and he felt pain and when symptoms improved. Finally, he decided to undergo surgery.
The chest radiograph in the absence of symptoms showed prolapse of intra-abdominal tissue into thoracic cavity . In the presence of symptoms, it revealed intestinal air in the left lower lung field . CT images in the absence and presence of symptoms are shown in Fig. . It shows intra-abdominal tissue evacuated into the thoracic cavity, even in the absence of pain. When the patient felt pain, the transverse colon was obstructed where it passed through the diaphragm into the thoracic cavity. Because the symptoms occurred frequently, he decided to receive the operation.
The patient position was right semi-supine position. We inserted a 12 mm port through the umbilicus, a 5 mm port through the right side of the abdomen, and 12 mm and 5 mm ports through the left side of the abdomen, respectively and started laparoscopically. We confirmed colon incarceration . We dissected around the hernial orifice, and pulled the prolapsed transverse colon and omentum back into the abdominal cavity . The size of the hernia ring was 5 × 3 cm . We closed with single nodal sutures using non-absorbable sutures and did not use a mesh . The operating time was 174 min and loss of blood was small amount.
The patient’s postoperative course was good. The patient started eating on POD 2 and was discharged at POD 8. The absence of diaphragmatic herniation recurrence was confirmed seven months after surgery .