A 30-year-old female presented to our hospital with complaints of pain and swelling over the right ankle joint with difficulty in bearing weight (injury hospital duration of 36 h) following a motor vehicle accident. According to history, the mechanism of injury was axial compression with the supination of the ankle. Initially, the patient was managed with analgesics for pain and trial of closed reduction of fracture followed with short leg cast somewhere else. Then, the patient was referred to our hospital for further management. On examination, there was swelling of the left ankle and foot, associated with no external injury noted; however, the skin over ankle was ecchymosed over medial malleolus. No neurovascular deficit was found. Radiographs of the ankle were taken in anteroposterior and lateral view , which showed talar body fracture of type 2 Sneppen (classification) with an ipsilateral medial malleolar fracture.
Computed tomography was done to the proper classification of fracture and pre-operative management planning . An attempt to closed reduction was done in our hospital but was unsuccessful.
Surgery was performed by an orthopedic surgeon (foot ankle specialist). The patient was treated by open reduction internal fixation with cannulated cancellous screw fixation for medial malleolus fracture and Herbert screw for talus fracture.
The patient was taken inside operation theater (OT), general anesthesia was given, and the patient was positioned on the OT table (supine), parts prepared, painted, and draped.
Both the anteromedial approach, the anterolateral approach was used. The curvilinear incision was extended proximally to ease the reduction of the talar head. The incision was deepened tendons that were safely retracted throughout the procedure. The joint capsule opened. Fractured talus identified and reduction achieved with reduction clamp and found satisfactory on image intensifier appropriate sized Herbert screw applied to hold the reduction. The medial malleolar fracture was fixed with an appropriate sized cannulated cancellous screw after confirming satisfactory reduction . The wound was washed thoroughly with saline joint congruity was checked and found satisfactory before closing the wound in the layer .
An aseptic sterile dressing is done. Well-padded dressing with below-knee short leg slab was applied. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 2 with advice to continue knee range of motion, static quadriceps exercises, and non-weight-bearing mobilization. The patient was called on post-operative day 14 for suture removal, and the slab was converted to cast. The patient was followed up after 6 weeks cast that was removed and advised to start partial weight-bearing. The patient was kept on a close follow-up after 12 weeks, which was started full weight-bearing. Wound complication was encountered on post-operative follow-up and was managed with alternate day sterile dressing, and the result was satisfactory. No signs of AVN appeared on radiographs at 6-week follow-up , with an absent Hawkins sign and osteosclerosis of the talar dome.
After follow-up of 6 months, the ankle showed early arthritic feature and her functional ROM of the ankle was 0−40°.