We report the case of a 55-year-old North African woman, with no relevant antecedents, who presented with squamous cell uterine cervical carcinoma stage IIb according to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics criteria. She had no distant metastasis, and was treated with concomitant chemoradiotherapy with 46 grays on the pelvis with cisplatin (40mg/m2) followed by high-dose-rate intracavitary brachytherapy. The patient was cured on clinical and radiological evaluation and was on regular follow-up. She remained in a stable condition for eight months until she presented with a painful nodule in her left breast, and left upper quadrant abdominal pain. A physical examination found a hard nodule of 2cm in major axis without inflammatory signs or lymph nodes. A mammography was performed and showed a bifocal malignancy in the upper-internal quadrant of her left breast classified as Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System category IV (BI-RADS IV). An excisional biopsy with histological study demonstrated a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with estrogen receptor negative, progesterone receptor 1% status . A pelvic examination under general anesthesia showed no suspicious lesion. The thoracoabdominal pelvic and brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large splenic isolated hypodense lesion sized 100mm at the largest diameter . There was no lymphadenopathy or other visceral involvement on the CT scan.
Based on previous history of tumor, the imaging and the histopathology findings, our patient was considered in splenic and intramammary metastatic relapse from the squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix.
She undertook a chemotherapy regimen based on paclitaxel 175mg/m2 and cisplatin 50mg/m2 every three weeks, with poor tolerance after three cycles and poor general condition, with a performance status of three according to Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) criteria. For that reason, we stopped chemotherapy and our patient died three months later.