A 63-year-old Japanese woman who had been in good health and had never smoked was admitted to a local hospital with 1-month’s history of gait disturbance, dementia, and urinary incontinence. She was referred to our hospital for suspected pineal region tumor with hydrocephalus. On admission to our hospital, neurological examination of the patient revealed no abnormalities, including evidence of visual disturbance; in addition, there were no features of hypopituitarism, such as secondary central diabetes insipidus or hypothyroidism. The standard blood workup also revealed no abnormalities. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her brain revealed hydrocephalus and a hyperdense space-occupying lesion in the pineal region. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain revealed a tumor in the pineal region measuring 25mm in diameter; the tumor was visualized as a hypointensity on T1-weighted images, as a uniform hyperintensity on T2-weighted images, and showed heterogeneous enhancement after gadolinium administration (Figure ). There were no other intracranial space-occupying lesions. A chest radiography and CT showed a 30-mm nodule in the right middle lobe and ipsilateral mediastinal lymphadenopathy (Figure ). The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was elevated to 247.9ng/mL (normal range <5.0ng/mL), whereas the serum levels of other tumor markers such as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) were within normal limits. During the preoperative investigation, the patient began to show a progressively worsening level of altered consciousness. Therefore, a neuroendoscopic third ventriculostomy with tumor biopsy was performed under general anesthesia as an emergency procedure. Histological examination of the tumor specimen revealed adenocarcinoma (Figure A). Subsequently, flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed, and a diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma was established (Figure B). Based on the consistency of the histological characteristics between the lung tumor cells and pineal region tumor cells, the diagnosis of pineal metastasis from adenocarcinoma of the lung was established. Because an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-CT revealed no other metastases, the lung adenocarcinoma was clinically characterized as T2aN2M1b, stage IV, according to the TNM classification of the International Union Against Cancer. The samples obtained from the brain and lung tumor cells revealed no mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene.
Postoperatively, with gradual improvement of the hydrocephalus, the patient was able to communicate and walk with assistance. Her performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) was one, therefore, she was treated by chemotherapy using a combination of carboplatin (area under the concentration-time curve 5, day 1) plus pemetrexed (500mg/m2, Day 1) administered in 3-week cycles. Stereotactic radiation (45Gy in 15 fractions of 3Gy once daily) to the pineal region was undertaken concurrently. Grade 3 hematological side effects were observed, however, the patient tolerated the treatment. After six courses, she was assessed as showing good partial response by follow-up chest CT (Figure A) and brain MRI (Figure B). Currently, 12 weeks after completion of the chemotherapy, she remains alive, with no evidence of disease progression.