A 69-year-old man presented to our outpatient department complaining of anterior chest discomfort, which had intermittently continued for a week. Because the symptom was improving and blood testing and electrocardiography (ECG) showed no abnormalities, he returned home, and visited a doctor again 1 week later. He had a history of successful percutaneous coronary stenting for angina pectoris (10 years ago), surgical resection of rectal cancer (6 years ago), and lung metastatic cancer (5 years ago). Medications included low-dose aspirin (100 mg/day), cilostazol (200 mg/day), valsartan (80 mg/day), and cilnidipine (10 mg/day). He visited our outpatient department without any symptoms during the preceding week. However, auscultation revealed pericardial friction rub and ECG showed ST-elevation in I, II, III, aVF, and V2 to V6 leads . Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 2.97 mg/dL (normal, ≤0.30 mg/dL) and troponin I level of 1995 pg/mL (normal, ≤26.2 pg/mL). Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was within normal limits. On admission, the patient showed no symptoms with a blood pressure of 133/84 mmHg, temperature of 35.0°C, heart rate of 68 b.p.m., respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed circumferential mild pericardial effusion without any findings of cardiac tamponade including swinging heart and diastolic collapse of right atria and ventricle (Video 1). Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis. Computed tomography (CT) also revealed mild pericardial effusion with attenuation of ∼60 Hounsfield units (HU), indicating blood constituent . Acute pericarditis and pericardial effusion with minor injury in cardiac muscle were diagnosed. Treatment including aspirin (750 mg every 8 h) and colchicine (0.5 mg/day) was started according to pericardial disease management guidelines. On hospital Day 3, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) lasting 20 min was recognized, although the patient was asymptomatic. A regular dose (15 mg/day) of rivaroxaban was added to his medications.
On hospital Day 5, laboratory evaluation revealed that CRP and troponin I were reduced, at 0.44 mg/dL and 1718 pg/mL, respectively. However, the volume of pericardial effusion was unchanged on echocardiography. The patient abruptly complained of severe chest discomfort and cardiogenic shock developed, accompanied by systolic blood pressure of 50–59 mmHg and a heart rate of 155 b.p.m. of AF. He suffered cardiogenic shock with pulseless electric activity due to cardiac tamponade despite synchronized cardioversion. Urgent pericardiocentesis was performed and confirmed haemorrhagic effusion. Percutaneous cardiopulmonary support was introduced immediately, and intra-aortic balloon pumping was also started, because return of spontaneous circulation was not obtained.
Bloody drainage and cardiac dysfunction were continued. Despite extensive medical treatment including blood transfusion, heart rate, and blood pressure gradually decreased without any ventricular arrhythmia and the patient finally died 12 h after onset of cardiogenic shock.
Autopsy revealed a drainage tube placed in the posterior side of the pericardial cavity and ∼690 mL of blood retained there. Culture and polymerase chain reaction yielded negative results for bacterial infection. The heart weighed 520 g and exhibited many petechiae on the fatty tissue of the inferoposterior wall. In addition, blood oozing was identified on manual compression (, Video 2). Because the oozing site led to the coronary sinus, perforation of the coronary vein was identified. Microscopically, the perforated site was confirmed in the coronary venous wall as expected . Lymphocytic infiltration , macrophages containing haemosiderin and mild fibrosis were detected in pericardial and myocardial tissues only around the perforated site. The coronary vein was considered to have been perforated a few days earlier based on the presence of fibrosis.