A 60-year-old man was referred to our hospital with the chief complaints of fever and left lower abdominal pain. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were 483.1 ng/ml and 2034 U/ml, respectively. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed sigmoid colon cancer with intraabdominal abscess and two synchronous liver metastases. One of the liver tumors (tumor 1) was located in segment 8 near the caval confluence. Tumor 1 was 2.2 cm in size and attached to both the right hepatic vein (RHV) and the middle hepatic vein (MHV) . The other tumor (tumor 2) was located in the left lobe. Tumor 2 was 10 cm in size and invaded the umbilical portion of the portal vein . Sigmoidectomy was performed, and pathological findings revealed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The depth of the tumor was subserosal, and there was no lymph node metastasis. Rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog was the wild type. Hepatic resection was initially contraindicated because all three major hepatic veins were invaded by the tumors . Tumor 1 near the caval confluence had invaded both the RHV and the MHV, and we could not preserve the left hepatic vein during left hemihepatectomy for tumor 2. Therefore, the patient underwent four cycles of panitumumab/5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) therapy after sigmoidectomy; following which, both liver metastases decreased in size. Tumor 1 remained attached to the RHV; however, it was located a short distance from the MHV . Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels decreased to 18.7 ng/ml and 14 U/ml, respectively, and the 15-min indocyanine green retention rate was 9.7%. Based on these findings, we planned radical liver resection. Three-dimensional volumetric software (Synapse Vincent; Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan) calculated the total liver volume (TLV) at 1344 ml with estimated volumes for limited resection of segment 8 and left hemihepatectomy of 13 ml (0.9% of TLV) and 263 ml (19.6% of TLV), respectively. When the RHV was severed during limited resection of segment 8, the non-congested FLR volume was estimated at 354 ml (26.3% of TLV) because the congested FLR volume was calculated at 714 ml (53.1% of TLV) . We devised a novel TSH procedure because the small non-congested FLR volume was a potential risk for postoperative POLF . We first performed limited resection of segment 8 with resection of the root of the RHV. The left portal vein was neither ligated nor embolized because most of the umbilical portion was invaded by tumor 2 and because we expected not to cause adhesions around the porta hepatis for the second hepatectomy. Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed that the size of tumor 1 was 1.0 × 0.6 cm, and it had invaded the RHV . Histological diagnosis was compatible with metastatic carcinoma of the sigmoid colon, and invasion of the RHV was confirmed . Surgical margins were negative for cancer. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 9 without complications. No local recurrence or new metastatic lesions were detected by contrast-enhanced CT or gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging performed 38 and 42 days after the first hepatectomy, respectively. CT and magnetic resonance imaging also confirmed the development of intrahepatic venous collaterals between the RHV and MHV . Three-dimensional volumetric software estimated the non-congested FLR volume at 1242 ml (78.5% of TLV) . Both serum aspartate aminotransferase level and alanine aminotransferase level were within normal limits. The 15-min indocyanine green retention rate was considered to keep less than 10% as same as before the first hepatectomy because the patient underwent no chemotherapy during a waiting period; therefore, left hemihepatectomy was performed 58 days after the first hepatectomy. Intraoperatively, we saw no adhesions around the porta hepatis, and the left hepatic artery and the left branch of the portal vein were safely exposed and divided. Intraoperative Doppler ultrasonography confirmed the presence of intrahepatic venous collaterals arising from RHV to MHV . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 9 with no signs of POLF. He underwent eight cycles of panitumumab/FOLFOX therapy for 5 months after the second hepatectomy, and his clinical course is summarized in Fig. . Contrast-enhanced CT performed 10 months after the second hepatectomy revealed that the intrahepatic venous collaterals remained patent .