A 47-year-old man complained of scapular crepitation whenever he moved his shoulder. He had a motorbike accident 28 months prior that resulted in a claviclasterum dislocation that was treated with open reduction. The sound became increasingly irritating over time, with no improvement despite the use of medications and physical therapy. He was stressed because of the noise and was unable to carry out his daily activities. The physical examination revealed abnormal scapula motion accompanied by snapping sounds during active shoulder movement. CT scans reveal an abnormality in the scapular superomedial corner Massive bursitis and thickness of the superomedial scapular corner can also be seen on MRI .
Under endotracheal anesthesia, the patient was set up in the chicken-wing position . The anesthesia machine and its tubes were put at a position that allowed the robot arm to rotate 360 degrees around the operating table .
After calibrating the robot system with the operating table, the patient was covered. The following 2 portals were used in our procedure: Portal 1: between the scapular spine and the inferior angle of the scapula Portal 2: at the level of the superomedial angle (Ejnisman portal) ,
These portals were located 2 cm medial to the medial margin of the scapula.
The arthroscopic probe was inserted through the Ejnisman portal to dissect layers. The serratus anterior muscle served as the roof of this cavity and was also the first anatomical landmark used for orientation. The posterior chest wall, the ribs, and palpable intercostal spaces comprised the floor of this space. We found the serratus anterior space filled with fibrous tissue .
After the debridement of inflammatory tissues was carried out, we revealed the abnormal superomedial angle . Two needles serving as landmarks for the inferior margin and lateral margin of the intended resection zone were inserted under arthroscopic visualization.
A 3D-CT scan of the scapula was performed with Artis Pheno Robot (Siemen) after covering the robot arm . Another surgeon from outside assisted with the 3D reconstruction of the scapula and checked the position of the needles in relation to the margin of the intended bone area for resection. We aimed to make the distances between the suprascapular notch and the lateral edge of the resection about three centimeters and the distances between the scapular spine and the inferior edge of the resection about two centimeters . Then, the two marked needles were repositioned to the proper position.
The scapuloplasty procedure was then carried out by using an acromionizer within the level of these needles. It is necessary to thoroughly clean the cavity then, leaving no debris left.
Following the scapuloplasty, a second 3D CT scan should be conducted to ensure that the proper amount of bone was removed . Some minor repairs with acromionizer could be required to removed neglected debris.
For comfort, the patient was placed in a sling for two weeks. Maximal protection passive range of motion was performed immediately following surgery. He had a smooth recovery and was back to his normal activities within a month of surgery. After 16 weeks, the patient resumed sports activities. There was no recurring symptoms at the 6-month follow-up .