A 38-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with a history of unabating postural instability and difficulty in walking for more than 30 years.
The patient was first brought for treatment at the age of 5 years. Clinical documentation at that time reported that the patient had exhibited unabating postural instability and difficulty in walking that did not improve with rest. He also exhibited cognitive impairment and irritability.
Since childhood, the patient experienced frequent episodes of chronic diarrhea lasting multiple weeks. At the age of 11 years, the patient underwent bilateral cataract surgery. At the age of 36 years, the patient presented with bilateral masses on the Achilles tendons coupled with thickening of the Achilles tendons.
The patient had no specific personal and family medical history.
Neurological examination revealed gait ataxia, increased muscle tension in both lower limbs, bilateral hyperreflexia of the Achilles and knee tendons, a bilateral positive Babinski sign, and bilateral positive ankle clonus, indicating that the pyramidal tracts were damaged bilaterally. In addition, the patient also presented with arched feet and egg-sized, hard, painless lumps in both achilles tendons .
Blood lipid level examination revealed a total cholesterol concentration of 4.03 mmol/L (reference range: 2.60–5.20 mmol/L).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed T2-weighted and FLAIR imaging hyperintensity in the bilateral cerebellar dentate nuclei. Electroencephalography showed abnormal slow-wave activity, composed of θ and δ waves, bilaterally in the posterior regions. MRI of the right ankle indicated fusiform swelling and abnormal signals in the Achilles tendons.
Based on the patient's medical history, clinical manifestations, and imaging analyses, it was unclear if CTX was involved, and gene sequencing was required to confirm the diagnosis. After informing the patient, the patient was eager to identify the underlying cause and had hopes for treatment; therefore he agreed to undergo gene sequencing analyses. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood cells of the patient, and first-generation sequencing of the exon coding region of CYP27A1 revealed that the gene had a compound heterozygous mutation of c.380G>A and c.1563dupA . Further examination demonstrated that the mother and sister of the patient were carriers of the c.1563dupA mutation.