A healthy active 25-year-old female presented to our level one trauma center after a fall from height while rock climbing, sustaining a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture-dislocation . She was neurovascularly intact and after provisional closed reduction was taken to the operating room for provisional external fixation. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were obtained for definitive surgical planning ( and ).
This AO/OTA 41-C3 tibial plateau fracture was consistent with a Schatzker VI and Moore Type five pattern . Twelve days after initial external fixation, her fracture was treated with dual plate fixation through two surgical exposures – an anterolateral exposure and a posteromedial exposure. The anterolateral exposure is a “lazy S” centered at Gerdy’s tubercle, incising the iliotibial band (ITB), and anterior compartment fascia in-line with the skin incision. The posteromedial exposure uses a skin incision 1–2 cm posterior to the posteromedial edge of the tibia. The medial aspect of the proximal tibia was exposed in windows mobilized around the pes anserine tendons. Through the anterolateral incision and a submeniscal arthrotomy the lateral articular surface and meniscus were scrutinized. Intraoperative fracture reduction was assessed with direct visualization and biplanar fluoroscopic imaging. After anatomic reduction was obtained, implants were placed posteromedial, medially, and laterally to function as buttresses .
After bony fixation, we turned our attention to the soft-tissue reconstruction. We harvested the ITB to be used for ACL reconstruction by proximally extending the anterolateral incision. The anterior and posterior borders were identified and incised longitudinally in line with the fibers leaving 2–3 mm of intact ITB on anterior and posterior sides. An angled meniscotome was used to extend the incisions proximally 15 cm from the joint, and a long handled curved meniscal knife used to transect the ITB proximally, leaving the distal insertion intact at Gerdy’s tubercle. The graft was then tubularized using a #2 braided non-absorbable whip stitch.
A diagnostic knee arthroscopy was performed after establishing anteromedial and anterolateral arthroscopy portals. After confirmation of her ACL tear and meniscal tear with no further intra-articular pathology, we reduced and repaired the patient’s bucket-handle lateral meniscal tear with all-inside meniscal repair devices in vertical mattress fashion. A large, curved Kelly clamp, was then placed through the anteromedial portal around the over-the-top position of the lateral femoral condyle. A passing suture was used to pull the ITB through the posterolateral capsule and into the notch. A separate 4 cm anteromedial tibial incision was created, and a clamp was then inserted through this incision, entering the joint under the intrameniscal ligament. A shaver was used to create a bony trough in the anterior tibia to create a bony bed for healing and to push the tibial insertion more posterior to a more anatomic position. Sutures from the ITB graft were grasped with a clamp and brought down through the anteromedial incision.
Femoral graft fixation with accomplished with the knee at 90° flexion and neutral rotation with #2 non-absorbable sutures placed in the posterolateral periosteum. The graft was cycled and final tensioning was performed with the knee in 30° of flexion. Suture anchors were placed in the anterior tibial cortex through the anteromedial tibial incision. The graft was then fixed to these suture anchors with a tension slide technique for onlay fixation on the anterior tibia.
She was initially treated with physical therapy, but her range of motion plateaued at 0–90° by 3 months postoperatively. At that time, she elected to undergo arthroscopic lysis of adhesions and manipulation under anesthesia. Diagnostic arthroscopy at the time of the procedure showed an intact lateral meniscus repair and ACL graft with no signs of the early post-traumatic arthritic changes. After manipulation, we were able to obtain a range of motion of 0–130°. Postoperatively, she continued to attend regular physical therapy sessions working on knee range of motion, quadriceps strengthening, and gait training. At 1-year post-operative, she had returned to all activities including high intensity rock climbing. She had painless knee range of motion from 0° to 140° without any subjective or objective signs of instability.