A 15-year-old boy complained of progressive pain in the right knee region for 3 months. He visited our institution and underwent a radiography examination in March 2011. The radiographs showed an expandable osteolytic lesion in the metaphyseal part of the tibia . After examinations including magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography (CT), and bone scan , an incisional biopsy was performed. Our substantive diagnosis was osteosarcoma. After four courses of preoperative chemotherapy, segmental resection was performed 3 cm away from the tumour border. The epiphysis of the proximal tibia was successfully preserved. Thereafter, the tumourous defect was reconstructed with a frozen intercalary allograft and internal fixation . Postoperative chemotherapy was started 4 weeks after surgery.
Regular follow-up in the first year did not identify any clinical or radiographic evidence of recurrence or complications. However, 21 months after the primary surgery, the patient complained of pain in the previous surgical region; moreover, a sinus tract was noted. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were twofold and fivefold the normal limits, respectively, but no bacterial growth was detected. No obvious bone deconstruction was found in X-ray . The patient was suspected to have a chronic allograft rejection and/or infection. To prevent the progression of the rejection process and possible implantation infection, the allograft and plate were removed and the segmental defect was reconstructed with an antibiotic-loaded cement spacer, containing 3 g of tobramycin and 1 g of vancomycin per 40-g package of bone-cement powder, and with two Kirschner wires .
After the second surgery, liquid oozing out of sinus tract reduced and the sinus tract was healed. The ESR and CRP levels normalised. However, the patient limped with intolerable pain due to the deconstruction of the tibia plate caused by friction between the spacer and bone 1 year after the second surgery. Radiographs showed the severe damage of the proximal tibia and a gap between residual bone and the spacer . Thereafter, a CT scan revealed that the bone defect involved the metaphysis of the tibia and was markedly irregular. We then decided to reconstruct this irregular defect with a custom-made uncemented 3D-printed prosthesis rather than with a standard intercalary prosthesis, allograft, or autograft.
The prosthesis was designed by our clinical team and fabricated by Chunli Co, Ltd., Tongzhou, Beijing, China. Improving the degree of matching between the prosthesis and bone defect was the major aim in our design process. Moreover, we considered enhancing the osteointegration capability of the prosthesis. For the first step, the 3D CT scan data was imported into the Mimics V17.0 software (Materialise Corp., Belgium). Building 3D computer models of the proximal tibia, the cement spacer, and the distal tibia was completed . The size of the proximal tibia defect, including the depth, width, and length of the defect, was precisely measured with the Mimics software. With this defect parameter, the initial prosthesis model was created, with a 27 mm height, 34 mm width, and 36 mm length, using Solidworks 2013 (Dassault Systemes, France). To ensure satisfactory fitting with the proximal tibia, the shape of the prosthesis was optimised via computer simulation . Six screw holes were designed to affix the proximal head of the prosthesis to the cortex of the tibia plate . The porous surface of the prosthesis head was designed to simulate trabecular structure with a porosity of 65%.
The proximal part of the prosthesis was fabricated by Electron Beam Melting technology (ARCAM Q10, Sweden). For the other parts of the prosthesis, traditional casting was applied to ensure mechanical strength. The stem of the distal part of the prosthesis was coated with hydroxyapatite .
The surgery was performed by the senior surgeon (Chongqi Tu). The cement spacer was removed, and the proximal tibia was reamed to fit the 3D-printed prosthesis. Implanting the proximal porous head of the prosthesis exactly at the preoperative position was relatively demanding. Moreover, the stem of the distal part was press fit inserted into the reamed distal tibia. After confirming both locations of the proximal and distal parts of the prosthesis, five screws were inserted to enhance primary fixation stability .
Considering insufficient primary stability, the patient was allowed non-weight-bearing standing and walking with two crutches 3 weeks after surgery. Range of motion exercises of the knee were performed from postoperative week 4. Partial weight-bearing with crutches was encouraged from 6 weeks postoperatively, followed by gradual full weight-bearing. The patient was followed up every month for the first 3 months, then every 2 to 6 months to date. The range of motion, Enneking functional evaluation score, and radiographs were assessed at each follow-up visit to verify the outcomes of the 3D-printed prosthesis reconstruction.
At the last follow-up at 26 months, knee joint function was satisfactory , with a knee joint motion of 0°–130° and an Enneking functional evaluation score of 28 out of 30 (93.3%). Radiography indicated that the prosthesis fitted well with the tibia and no signs of complications were found . The Tomosynthesis-Shimadzu metal artefact reduction technology (T-SMART) scan showed that the 3D-printed prosthesis was well integrated with the proximal tibia .