A 15-year-old previously healthy female was brought to our emergency department due to loss of consciousness and witnessed generalized seizures. On admission, her physical examination revealed low-grade fever of 38 °C, changed mental status of confusion, rigidity of the arms and legs, and oral-facial dyskinesias. Other nervous system examinations were not remarkable. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests showed cells counts, levels of glucose and protein were all within normal ranges. Electroencephalograph (EEG) demonstrated diffused 2.5–3 Hz delta waves with amplitude of 10–40 μV. The patient was given anti-viral therapy for presumed viral encephalitis. One day later, she experienced another generalized seizure followed by unconsciousness, thus she was intubated and transferred to intensive care unit (ICU).
Blood test results were unremarkable except for decreased parathyroid hormone (PTH) of 10.40 pg/mL (normal range: 15–65 pg/mL) and serum calcium of 2.16 mmol/L (normal range: 2.20–2.65 mmol/L). Continuous EEG demonstrated non-convulsive status epileticus, requiring high dosage of anticonvulsants such as phenobarbital and general anesthesia. Cranial MRI was repeated and revealed enhancement of the pia matter. Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies were detected in both the serum and CSF. Thoracic, abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) was performed for the patient and revealed no tumors. Pelvic CT revealed hopointensity and edema of the right posas major suggesting that a MRI scan should be ordered for the patient. Six days later, pelvic MRI with contrast was scanned which showed edema and slightly enhancement of the bilateral posas major and obturator internus implying muscles inflammation. CT guided needle biopsy of the right major posas was taken. As showed in Fig. , diffused ossifications of the bilateral posas major were found in CT scan. Scattered muscle inflammation but no ossification was observed in the biopsy specimen. The patient was treated by Intravenous immunoglobin (IVIg) (0.4 g/kg/d) for 5 days followed by plasma exchange. The patient’s neurologic status improved gradually. Physical therapy was recommended for the patient. Because of the financial problem, the patient was discharged. Even though, we trained her parents to do passive movements for the patient at home. Two months later, the patient walked to our clinic by herself. She had no complaint of back pain, joints pain or mobility problem. However, her neurologic examination revealed decreased orientation and intelligence.