An 88 year old 63 kg woman, presented to the University of Arizona Medical Center after she tripped and fell at her home. She complained of left hip and wrist pain. Patient denied any past medical or surgical history. She was not on any medications and had no known drug allergies. Physical examination revealed tenderness on palpation of the left hip with deformity and tenderness over the ipsilateral wrist. Radiographs confirmed a nondisplaced left intertrochanteric femur fracture and an ipsilateral dorsal bending distal radius fracture. She was neurovascularly intact in bilateral upper and lower extremities.
Informed consent regarding closed reduction and splinting of the distal radius fracture were discussed with patient and family, all consenting. The 22 gauge needle was inserted dorsally 3 cm proximal to fracture site, at a 30 degree angle. The needle was advanced to the fracture site once the skin was penetrated. A flash of blood was present. Over a thirty second interval, a 20 mL mixture of lidocaine 1% and bupivacaine 0.25% was infiltrated into the fracture hematoma. Neither anesthetic contained epinephrine. Within 15 seconds following the completion of injection, the patient became difficult to arouse, responding only to sternal rub. She developed mild tonic clonic movements of her upper and lower extremities lasting 15 seconds. Vital signs remained stable. Electrocardiogram showed no abnormalities. Approximately one minute after completion of injection, patient began responding verbally. At approximately 5 minutes post injection, patient was awake, alert, and oriented. She did not recall the events surrounding the injection. She underwent closed reduction of her distal radius fracture and a sugar tong splint was applied. She was admitted to the medicine service, underwent cephalomedullary nail fixation of her femur the following day, and was discharged from the hospital to inpatient rehabilitation on hospital day 4. Upon 2 and 6 week follow up, she had no neurologic sequelae.