A 47-year-old man was referred to our interventional radiology department for an incidentally discovered visceral aneurysm. Five months prior, he had reported somatic fractures of T12 and L1 as a consequence of a motorbike accident and was treated with vertebral fusion with rods and screws. Contrast multislice computed tomography performed during rehabilitation revealed a 2.8-cm saccular aneurysm directly connecting the proximal SMA with the CA, which was critically compressed by the median arcuate ligament . The patient was hemodynamically stable (BP, 128/86; HR, 77) and asymptomatic, and laboratory test results were within normal limits. The patient was diagnosed with Bühler aneurysm. The endovascular approach was chosen after a multidisciplinary consultation with abdominal and vascular surgeons and patient counseling. Right transfemoral aortography was performed under local anesthesia. After a failed attempt to catheterize the CA, an injection after SMA engagement showed a saccular AOB aneurysm interposed between the superior wall of the SMA and the inferior floor of the post-stenotic CA. A retrograde high flow running from the SMA to the common hepatic and splenic arteries was observed. The aneurysm involved a 3-cm-long AOB. No takeoff or landing zone for direct stent-graft sealing of the Bühler aneurysm was observed in this anatomic presentation. Conventional coiling was attempted; however, the detachable coils prolapsed from the aneurysm and were withdrawn before detachment. At this point, the sheath was upsized to a 45-cm-long 10-Fr armed sheath (Super Arrow-Flex, Arrow) . A self-expandable 9 × 50-mm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) stent graft (Viabahn; Gore, Phoenix, AZ, USA) was deployed in the SMA in the LL projection. The length of the Viabahn was chosen to exclude the AOB while preserving the flow in the pancreaticoduodenal arcades. A 0.035-inch Amplatz guidewire was left as a safety wire in the SMA through the SG. Then, a pre-curved 5-Fr catheter (Glidecath; Terumo) was advanced parallel to the safety wire and wedged between the Viabahn and the native wall. A 2.7-Fr microcatheter (Progreat; Terumo, Ja) pre-charged with a 0.014-inch Pilot guidewire was then coaxially advanced through the 5-Fr catheter alongside the stent graft in a periprosthetic manner. Once the Progreat tip was inside the saccular aneurysm, framing and packed coiling of the AOB aneurysm were achieved by releasing an overall length of 385 cm of detachable coils (Ruby coil with three-dimensional shape and soft configuration; Penumbra, Alameda, CA, USA). A 9 × 20-mm angioplasty balloon was then inflated at a low pressure inside the Viabahn for better wall apposition. Completion angiography showed a patent mesenteric stent graft with retrograde opacification of the CA and no residual backflow inside the aneurysm. Femoral hemostasis was achieved using an 8-Fr Angio-Seal (Terumo). The patient was discharged 2 days later, and he was given dual antiplatelets for 3 months and lifelong cardioaspirin. Follow-up clinical and instrumental imaging tests were scheduled, and the last computed tomography angiogram performed 9 years later ruled out aneurysm enlargement or reperfusion with regular patency of the Viabahn and CAs .