A 64-year-old woman complained of a growing mass in her right lateral malleolus with intermittent blunt pain.
The growing mass in the right lateral malleolus lasted for > 12 mo, with intermittent blunt pain during the daytime for 3 mo.
The patient had no history of ankle trauma or surgery.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
A soft movable mass was palpated at the posterior lower margin of the right lateral malleolus tip, without symptoms of redness, erythema and drainage ; however, deeper palpation of the mass triggered severe blunt pain.
The following laboratory tests were all normal: complete blood count, serum biochemical test (including renal and liver function, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and electrolytes), hypersensitive C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antistreptolysin O, rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, common tumor markers included a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen (CA)-125, CA-15-3, and CA-19-9.
X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right ankle were taken. The X-ray presented an osteophyte formation at the posterior margin of the subtalar joint and irregular soft tissue calcification , whereas MRI showed a mass of low-intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted imaging protruding from the posterior margin of the subtalar joint into the soft tissue, with mild cartilage erosion .
Based on the medical history, physical signs, and imaging examinations, a suspected diagnosis of diffuse PVNS of the right subtalar joint was made.
The mass was resected using the Kocher approach . During surgery, we found deep brown soft tissue mixed with a small amount of cartilaginous tissue. The pedicle of this brown tissue was traced to the margin of the subtalar joint and the tendon sheath of the flexor hallucis longus tendon. After removing the mass in surgical vision, a 3.0 Steinmann pin was drilled into the lateral process of the calcaneal and talus, respectively. A retractor was used to distract the Steinmann pin (Huatrau, Chinatrau Instrument Co. Ltd., Guangzhou, China) until sufficient vision of the subtalar joint was achieved. The mass surrounding the articular surface was removed completely; however, some of the cartilage was mildly degenerated.