A 49-year-old female presented with a new-onset generalized seizure and was found to have multiple hyperdense masses with calcifications in the right hemisphere on computed tomography. A brain magnetic resonance imaging with and without contrast demonstrated ten distinct dural-based, homogeneously enhancing lesions within the right hemisphere (-), the largest measuring 5 × 8 cm (arrow, ) and effacing the lateral ventricles. On examination, she was neurologically intact. Her medical history was significant for basal cell carcinoma of the face excised four years earlier. Family history was unremarkable.
She was taken to the operating room for resection of the dominant right parafalcine mass (arrow, ) and four other (arrow, ) lesions that were amenable to the same incision and craniotomy access. Although the tumors all displayed a mildly elevated Ki-67 index of 5–10% on histologic examination, they did not meet criteria for an atypical meningioma diagnosis and thus the final diagnosis was the WHO Grade I meningioma. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of the resected tumors and matching blood was performed and identified the presence of the same clonal somatic NF2 nonsense mutation and somatic heterozygous deletion of chromosome 22 overlapping with NF2. Germline mutations in NF2 were not found. However, a germline missense mutation in TP53 (c.542G >A, p.Arg181His) was revealed, previously described as deleterious. Subsequently, the patient was referred for formal genetic testing, which confirmed this finding, and she was diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Postoperatively, the patient underwent periodic surveillance imaging to monitor for growth of her tumors. Twenty-eight months after surgery, she underwent the second stage of resection of the progressively enlarging, although asymptomatic tumors that remained, which similarly demonstrated WHO Grade I pathology and a mildly elevated Ki-67 index of 4–6%.
WES of all tumors revealed the same somatic NF2 nonsense mutation and chromosome 22 deletions with otherwise normal copy numbers of all other chromosomes. Additional somatic mutations unique to each sample were discovered, but likely non-pathogenic as none were previously characterized as oncogenic [Supplementary Table]. Together, these findings suggested that all tumors originated from the same founding clone.