An 81-year-old man fell from a 4-m height and presented with severe left low back pain. Computed tomography (CT) showed an unstable pelvic injury (AO type B2) with fracture of the left ilium and pubis . Because of active bleeding from a branch of the left lateral genital artery as detected on contrast-enhanced CT, transcatheter arterial embolization was performed on the day of the injury. Eight days later, dual INFIX was used to stabilize the pelvic ring injury. The patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent table. A longitudinal 5 cm incision was made centered over the anterior inferior iliac spine. Care was taken to protect the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, which was retracted laterally. The entry point to the supra-acetabular corridor was identified from an obturator-outlet view on image intensification . Polyaxial screws were introduced along a path between the anterior inferior iliac spine and ipsilateral posterior superior iliac spine until the head of the screw lay immediately above the fascia [, ] . The size of the screws inserted was 80 mm long cranially, 100 mm long caudally, and both 8.0 mm in diameter. This process was repeated on the opposite side. Once both screws were inserted, 5.5 mm titanium rods were cut and shaped, considering the size and abdominal shape of the patient so as not to compress abdominal organs. Bilateral cranial screws were connected by a rod passed subcutaneously, and caudal screws were connected by the other rod. Finally, cross-link connectors connected cranial and caudal rods on the right and left ( and ). The surgical time was 100 min and intraoperative bleeding was 85 mL. Post-operatively, the patient was allowed to move freely and bear weight depending on pain without any limits. No iatrogenic neuropraxia of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve occurred. Bony fusion was achieved as seen on CT at 4 month’ follow-up. Therefore, the implant was removed 4 months postoperatively in a 40-min operation. One year after the first operation, the patient could walk without a cane and had no limitation of daily living and there is no problem radiologically (, and ).