A 43-year-old Indian man was referred to our gastroenterology department with complaints of dysphagia for both solids and liquids. The symptom was non-progressive. He also had recurrent vomiting and he regurgitated undigested food. He had considerable weight loss. The physical examination was unremarkable. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed normal findings. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a dilated esophageal body and no peristalsis was seen. The lower esophageal sphincter was tightly closed. With gentle pressure, the endoscopist was able to negotiate the endoscope into the stomach. Retroflexion of the endoscope revealed no mass lesion in the esophagogastric junction or in the cardia. All of these features pointed towards the diagnosis of primary achalasia cardia. Chest X-ray of the patient showed an air bubble below the left hemi-diaphragm in the gastric region which is not expected in a case of achalasia cardia . Barium swallow in this patient showed dilated esophagus, "bird beak" appearance of the distal esophagus and an esophageal air fluid level.
The presence of an air bubble below the left hemi-diaphragm in the gastric region as seen in the chest X-ray posed a diagnostic challenge. But since the clinical history, examination, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and barium swallow X-ray were suggestive of achalasia cardia, a final diagnosis of achalasia cardia was made and pneumatic balloon dilatation of the lower esophageal sphincter was planned.
Under sedation, pneumatic balloon dilatation of the lower esophageal dilatation was carried out. The procedure was performed under endoscopic vision. The balloon was placed across the lower esophageal sphincter and inflated. The balloon was kept in the inflated position for 2 minutes. With the help of the retroflexed endoscope, active bleeding was seen across the chest junction which indicated a successful dilatation of the lower esophageal sphincter. There were no procedure-related complications.
A chest X-ray after the procedure showed two air bubbles under the left hemi-diaphragm in the gastric region. A second air bubble had appeared adjacent to the previous one which was present before dilatation. Since a successful dilatation of the lower esophageal sphincter results in the appearance of the gastric bubble, the second air bubble that appeared was the gastric air bubble. Careful examination of the first air bubble present before the procedure, showed haustral markings. This confirmed that the air bubble was a colonic air bubble. The "double bubble" is thus a colonic air bubble and a gastric air bubble .
The colonic air bubble was seen before the procedure mimicking the gastric air bubble which caused diagnostic confusion. After successful pneumatic dilatation, the gastric air bubble appeared below the left hemi-diaphragm, which is an anticipated event. This appearance of a double bubble in a case of achalasia cardia not only causes diagnostic problems, but is also very unusual and has not been reported in the literature before.