A 37-year-old female was admitted to our department presented lower urinary tract symptoms for a year, including urinary frequency, urgency, and hematuria. The patient was placed an IUD 9 years ago in the local hospital after vaginal delivery of two children. After that, she had no discomfort and no follow-up. Her physical examination was normal. Urinalysis shows WBC (−), RBC 3+. There was no bacterial growth in urine culture. Color doppler ultrasound showed that there was a hyperechoic mass in the bladder, which was probably a blood clot. The CT scan revealed a triangular foreign body at the top of the bladder, penetrating the bladder wall. Cystoscopy showed that a strip of metal substance penetrating into the right wall of the bladder, and the surface of which was covered with stones . We tried to extract it under cystoscopy, but it wouldn't move. The diagnosis of this patient was bladder foreign body, bladder stone, and urinary tract infection. On August 8, 2019, the patient underwent cystotomy and foreign body removal under general anesthesia. During the operation, we found that one branch of the contraceptive device pierced into the right wall of the bladder, the other branch was located in the tissue between the uterus and the bladder.
A 46-year-old woman was referred to our hospital complaining of "frequent urination, urgency and pain for over 10 days". The patient had a history of three vaginal deliveries and no C-sections. She was previously placed an Intrauterine device in a local hospital in 1998, but she had an unexpected pregnancy in 1999. As no indication of a residual IUD was found in the uterus on ultrasonography, her doctor believed that "the IUD had spontaneously expulsed", and a new IUD was inserted after her abortion. Her physical examination was normal. The urinalysis showed leukocyte 1 + , and urine culture turned out to be Escherichia coli. Her CT scan showed an IUD on the left side of the bladder and another IUD in the uterus . Also, her IVP films showed two IUDs in the pelvic cavity. Her cystoscopy revealed an 1.5 cm long U-shaped foreign body near the left ureteral orifice, with calculus on its surface. The posterior end of the foreign body was inserted into the bladder wall, causing local inflammation of the bladder. As the foreign body was very close to the left ureteral orifice, considering the difficulty of foreign body removal under cystoscopy or laparoscopy, we performed cystotomy to remove the foreign body for her under general anesthesia on November 12, 2019. The patient recovered well and was discharged 5 days after operation.