A 77-year-old Japanese woman with end-stage renal disease due to chronic glomerulonephritis was introduced to our hospital because of a fourth episode of distal end-to-side radial-cephalic autologous AVF in her right forearm, which had been created 29 months previously. Hemodialysis had been initiated approximately 10 years before the current event, and she had undergone operations related to previous AVFs a total of 21 times: the creation of bilateral radiocephalic AVFs two times and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) 19 times. A physical examination revealed a weak vascular murmur and thrill in her right forearm. Preoperative ultrasonography of the right forearm demonstrated venous stenosis located 0–4 cm from the site of anastomosis, and affecting 6 cm of the median cubital vein. Additionally, the diameters of both lesions was <2 mm, and the distal and proximal diameters of the lesions were approximately 4–6 mm. PTA was successfully performed as a salvage operation (A–P).
After disinfecting the patient’s right upper limb, we inserted a 5 Fr × 3 cm sheath (Mosquito Sincere Catheter Introducer, including a guidewire [diameter 0.025 inch × length 50 cm], Boston Scientific Japan K. K., Tokyo, Japan) in the cephalic vein around the middle of her right forearm toward the site of anastomosis by the Seldinger technique (A).
Retrograde angiography from the vein under avascularization revealed venous stenosis 0–4 cm from the site of anastomosis (B). Kyousha™ NT Peripheral Guidewire (diameter, 0.018 inch; length, 100 cm; Boston Scientific Japan K. K., Tokyo, Japan) and NSE PTA balloon catheter GDM01 (balloon diameter, 4 mm; length, 4 cm; and rated burst pressure, 18 atm; Nipro corporation, Osaka, Japan) could pass through the lesion. After 2000 units of heparin were administered and allowed to circulate for 5 min, we dilated the lesion several times at 4–18 atm for 30 s, and retrograde angiography showed the improvement of stenosis (C,D).
We subsequently decided to treat a lesion downstream from the sheath insertion site. First, we detected the stenosis (length, approximately 6 cm) of the median cubital vein by antegrade angiography (E). A dilator and guidewire were threaded into the sheath (F), and the guidewire was placed in the vein (G). Next, the coaxial dilator/sheath was pulled and gradually stood (H,I), and the tip of the dilator/sheath was slightly inverted toward the downstream side (J). While maintaining this state, the distal end of the guidewire was pulled around the tip of the dilator, inverted toward the downstream side, and navigated (K). The coaxial dilator/sheath was carefully reinserted into the vein over the guidewire and the guidewire and dilator were removed from the sheath (L,M).
We confirmed the stenosis of the median cubital vein by antegrade angiography again (N). The guidewire and balloon catheter could pass through the lesion; we then dilated the lesion several times at 2–10 atm for 30 s (O). As angiography showed the improvement of stenosis (P), we removed the sheath and finished the procedure. A schematic illustration of her AVF in the right forearm is shown in .
The patient was able to receive hemodialysis therapy uneventfully after PTA.