We report the case of a 42-year-old woman with a 10-year history of relapsing remitting-MS, treated with natalizumab in the last 2 years. She was JCV antibody-positive and had previously received another disease modifying therapy (interferon beta-1a/Rebif 44).
After the 28th infusion of natalizumab, she eventually developed subacute cognitive decline, confirmed by neuropsychological tests. Approximately 2 weeks after this clinical onset, a brain MRI scan revealed the presence of multiple new lesions, highly suggestive of PML. Natalizumab was immediately discontinued, she was hospitalized and JCV DNA copies were found in cerebrospinal fluid (2,322 copies/mL), leading to a definite diagnosis of PML .
Three months later, prompted by further cognitive deterioration and subacute right hemiplegia, another brain MRI scan revealed significant inflammatory activity, compatible with the clinico-radiological diagnosis of an Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS).
She subsequently received corticosteroids (several 3–5 days cycles of 1 g/die i.v. bolus of methylprednisolone, alternating with 25 mg/die of prednisone per os), until the clinico-radiological spectrum became stable, and she was moved to a neuro-rehabilitation center.
The final clinical outcome was a severe functional impairment, with impossibility of independent ambulation, right hemiplegia, incoordination, mixed aphasia, cognitive decline, and an overall Expanded Disability Status Scale score of 7.0, compared with the baseline value of 2.5.
Since the clinical onset, the patient was closely followed-up in our center with several brain MRI scans, three of them with contrast administration, respectively at 35, 91, and 280 days from the first diagnostic examination.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.
MR data were collected on a 3-T scanner (Trio, Siemens Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany).
In all scans, along with the routine clinical sequences, an unenhanced 3D double-echo FLASH sequence (TR = 28 ms; TE1 = 7.63 ms; TE2 = 22.14 ms; voxel size = 0.65 mm × 0.65 mm × 1.3 mm; 128 axial slices) was acquired with a flip angle of 20° to provide QSM and R2* maps, as already described in detail (–).
A complete depiction of the evolution of MRI findings during the disease course is shown in Figure , where four MRI scans are displayed, in comparison with a pre-PML baseline examination, performed after 14 natalizumab infusions, while the patient was asymptomatic .
In summary, the first brain MRI performed shortly after clinical onset revealed new bilateral parieto-occipital subcortical lesions, with mild contrast-enhancement and clearly increased susceptibility and R2* values in the adjacent U-fibers. Moreover, a new fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)-hyperintense lesion was present in the left globus pallidus, with no significant paramagnetic effect .
Despite natalizumab discontinuation, a follow-up MRI scan, performed 35 days later, revealed progressive extension of the subcortical white matter (WM) lesions with persistently high QSM and R2* values in the adjacent U-fibers. Besides, the left pallidal lesion showed a mild increase of both susceptibility and R2*, reflecting a more marked paramagnetic effect .
Following a clinical exacerbation, another brain MRI scan performed 91 days after the first diagnostic examination showed further increase in the multifocal extension, with changes in the contrast-enhancement pattern, suggestive of intense inflammatory activity due to IRIS. QSM anomalies of U-fibers adjacent to WM lesions were still present, even if more blurred, while susceptibility changes in the left globus pallidus became more evident .
Finally, in a chronic stage, 280 days after the first examination, a follow-up brain MRI revealed partial regression of the lesions, associated to a moderate parieto-occipital atrophy, and even higher QSM and R2* values in the affected U-fibers. Furthermore, the left pallidal lesion showed a punctate hypointense focus on FLAIR images, corresponding to a significant increase in susceptibility on QSM and R2* maps.
Plots showing the time evolution of QSM and R2* values in the U-fibers adjacent to the left parieto-occipital subcortical lesion are shown in Figure F.