The index patient, a 38 year old female, was born after an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. Shortly after delivery she was found to have an ectopic 3rd kidney and a patent ductus arteriosus which required surgical closure at 18 months of age. Her development was normal with no history of seizures, meningitis, encephalitis or major head trauma. She was noted to have thrombocytopenia at age 23 years after complaints of unexplained weight loss. Bone marrow aspiration did not reveal any abnormalities. She continues to have easy bruising and prolonged bleeding time. She had her first seizure at 24 years with no evidence of any precipitating factors. Her neurologic examination was normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral multiple and diffuse PNH (Figure ). She has episodic headache with photophobia and phonophobia. An echocardiography at age 32 years revealed a mildly dilated aortic root and ascending aorta with mild aortic regurgitation.The second patient, a younger sister of the index case, is now 36 years of age. Her medical history is relevant for migraine headaches with visual aura. Her neurologic examination was normal and her EEG did not show any interictal abnormalities. An MRI of the brain shows heterotopic gray matter of both hemispheres (Figure ). Her echocardiogram was normal.
The parents are a healthy nonconsanguineous couple. The mother is now 56 years. She is of English, Irish, and Belgian ethnic background. Her past medical history is unremarkable. Her brain MRI does not show evidence of PNH. The father is now 58 years. He is of Ukrainian and Polish ethnic background. His past medical history is unremarkable. His brain MRI does not show evidence of PNH.
DNA sequencing revealed both sisters to be heterozygous for a c.2002C > T transition in exon 13 of the FLNA gene resulting in a p.Gln668Ter mutation. This nonsense mutation has previously been reported as a FLNA disease-causing mutation in a patient with PNH
. Analysis of lymphocyte extracted DNA from the mother and father did not reveal the FLNA exon 13 mutation. Parental relationships were verified molecularly using the Identifier kit (Applied Biosystems).