A booking ultrasound scan at 13 weeks gestation in a 27-year-old primigravida showed an 11 × 9 × 10 cm smooth-walled, mixed echogenic mass in the pouch of Douglas (POD) suggesting a dermoid cyst and a viable singleton intra-uterine pregnancy. A repeat scan four weeks later showed an increase in the size of the cyst of 1 cm in each dimension. CA-125 assay was within the normal limits in pregnancy. Alpha-foetoprotein (AFP) was not tested owing to the difficulty in interpretation during pregnancy. Following extensive discussion of different treatment options and timings, the patient opted for surgical removal. The left ovary together with the cyst was removed at 18 weeks of pregnancy. The cyst was impacted in the pelvis owing to the gravid uterus and unfortunately it ruptured during removal. The peritoneal cavity was washed meticulously with 0.9% saline solution. In view of the almost definite clinical diagnosis of an ovarian dermoid cyst, the peritoneal fluid was not sent for cytology. The right ovary was examined per-operatively and looked clinically normal. Histology of the cyst confirmed the diagnosis of a mature cystic teratoma . The patient was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. She presented again at 20 weeks gestation with abdominal pain, breathlessness and generalised malaise. Investigations were performed including a VQ (ventilation and perfusion) scan that was highly suggestive of pulmonary embolism. She was treated with low-molecular-weight heparin. She continued to have episodes of abdominal pain and fluctuating temperature. The white cell count range was 9–19 × 109/l and the C-reactive protein range was 76–163.4 ng/dL. Repeated bacteriological cultures were negative.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a collection of fluid occupying the POD and subsequently a subcutaneous collection was found during an ultrasound scan. She was treated with antibiotics empirically. Seven weeks following her initial surgery, she developed painful induration of the wound. She underwent wound exploration that revealed copious, thick, sebaceous-type material tracking extra-peritoneally up to the costal margin and umbilicus. Bacterial culture was again reported to be negative.
She developed dependent oedema, abdominal distension, intermittent vomiting and significant weight loss despite advancing pregnancy. In view of the patient's continuing deterioration and significant psychological distress, it was decided to deliver the baby.
She underwent an elective caesarean section at 31 weeks gestation following a course of antenatal steroids for foetal pulmonary maturation. A caesarean section was performed under epidural anaesthesia in the presence of a general surgeon. The anterior abdominal wall was morbidly adherent to the uterus making identification of the uterus virtually impossible. Eventually the 'lower segment' was exposed with the fundus remaining obscured by the dense adhesions. The caesarean section was performed with a J-shaped incision. The baby was delivered in good condition. The patient underwent general anaesthesia following delivery. There were diffuse adhesions with the bowel adhered to the uterine fundus and lower part of the pelvis. There were large lumps of possible granulation tissue on the bowel clinically mimicking malignancy. The bowel was compromised with adhesions producing kinking and bowel stasis. About 85 cm of the ileum and 45 cm of the caecum and colon involved with the mass suggesting infiltrating malignancy were resected by colorectal surgeons. The abdominal wall, rectus muscles, sheath and bowel were infiltrated by sebum-like material. Following extensive exploration and drainage, the patient was left with a mucus fistula on the left side of the abdomen and an ileostomy on the right side. Histology of the specimen confirmed granulation and inflammation consistent with granulomatous peritonitis without any evidence of malignancy . She suffered further wound breakdown and developed a small bowel fistula through the operative wound. She also developed anaemia, hypoproteinaemia, bilateral pedal oedema and intermittent episodes of abdominal pain with dyspnoea. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a homogenous collection in the POD. An attempt to drain this possible collection vaginally was not successful. In view of her continuing pain and poor nutritional status, advice was sought from a tertiary referral centre. Discussions and journal searches suggested that this rare condition settles spontaneously and steroids might be of some help. In an experimental model with rats, a massive granulomatous reaction induced by intra-peritoneal inoculation of starch was significantly reduced when prednisone at a dosage of approximately 1 mg/kg orally daily was commenced two weeks before inoculation. Therapy started when the starch was inoculated had only a minor effect on this response, but if commenced two weeks after inoculation, it failed to ameliorate the granulomatous reaction .
Over the following six weeks (one year after her initial surgery), her condition improved both physically and mentally. The inflammatory markers returned to normal. She is presently thinking about going back to work and the possibility of conceiving again.