A 33-year-old female with a medical history of hypothyroidism, polycystic ovarian syndrome, pseudotumor cerebri, pacemaker placement for bradycardia, a gastric sleeve, and a C6-7 cervical disc replacement (1 year prior for myelopathy), presented with 2 years of low back pain/radiculopathy. On examination, she exhibited significant isolated weakness in her right lower extremity without sensory or reflex abnormalities . Lumbar X-rays and an MRI showed moderate degenerative disc disease at the L5-S1 level, a 3 mm minimal degenerative retrolisthesis, and a right paracentral L5-S1 disc protrusion causing moderate lateral recess narrowing [ and ]. She underwent an L5-S1 ALIF without complication .
One week postoperatively, she had fevers, but a postoperative CT of the abdomen and laboratory studies were normal. Shortly thereafter, her husband tested positive for COVID-19; she was not tested at that time. Two weeks postoperatively, she complained of new left leg paresthesias (i.e., note her prior deficits were right-sided) with weakness and diffusely decreased sensation to light touch. She was given a steroid taper and sent for a lumbar CT scan that “suggested” encroachment on the left L5-S1 neural foramen by the L5-S1 ALIF . Of interest, the MRI showed an intramedullary “lesion” at the L1-2 level in the area of the conus medullaris of unclear significance .
She then underwent a revision ALIF for cage repositioning. Postoperatively, her symptoms continued to worsen. MRIs of the cervical, thoracic spine, and brain were all normal along with multiple lab tests. She was sent home, but was now wheelchair bound. Repeat X-rays showed good location of the L5-S1 ALIF cage . A neurologist performed an EMG of the left lower extremity and determined that her deficit was likely consistent with transverse myelitis and/or a poly-sensory neuropathy (i.e., bilateral superficial peroneal and sural nerves).
Four months later, now with additional bilateral upper and lower extremity weakness/sensory loss, and worsening urinary urgency with incomplete bladder emptying, she underwent a complete spinal Myelo-CT; it was negative. However, the cerebrospinal fluid obtained from the lumbar puncture showed findings consistent with MS (i.e., primary progressive subtype). She then began MS modifying therapy.