A 19-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our institution for the treatment of monostotic FD of her femoral neck. She presented in June 2015 with non-traumatic, nonspecific left hip pain that occurred during university basketball training. She first noticed the pain a month before and visited an out-patient clinic in another hospital when the pain did not improve. She denied any injury to the area or loss of range of motion (ROM), and her condition was not improved by analgesia. X-rays of the region demonstrated a fairly extensive ground glass lesion in her left femoral neck, which is a classic sign of FD. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the lesion to be 10 cm in length . She was managed conservatively for 6 months; however, because the pain did not improve she was referred to Keio University Hospital for management. She opted for surgical treatment of the lesion for pain relief and to prevent future fractures and to return to her active lifestyle. She has no other significant past medical history.
In July 2016, she underwent surgery to augment her left femoral neck with an autologous cortical, free fibula bone graft. A minimal curettage and lavage of the femoral neck was done to remove fibrous dysplastic tissue to make room for the graft. The free fibula graft was then harvested from her left fibula. The graft was 10 cm long and hammered into the femoral defect to act as an intramedullary pin. No screws or plates were used and the defect in the fibula was filled with β-tricalcium phosphate (Superpore®; HOYA Technosurgical Inc., Japan) . Samples of the tissue were sent to our pathology department for histological analysis, which confirmed the diagnosis of FD. There were no intraoperative complications and her postoperative course was uncomplicated; a short course of prophylactic cefazolin and adequate analgesia were prescribed. She discharged with non-weight bearing (NWB) on crutches on postoperative day 7.
As no dynamic hip screw was used, she was NWB for 6 weeks to allow for adequate healing and integration of the bone graft. With physiotherapy, she returned to partial weight bearing (PWB) at 4 weeks postoperation, full weight bearing (FWB) at 8 weeks, and returned to her sporting activity at 3 months. The operative site and the donor site have healed well and her postoperative course has been unremarkable. Follow-up X-rays demonstrated healing and integration of the femoral graft without reabsorption and with no recurrence of FD . She was followed up regularly for a year to monitor for reabsorption of the fibula graft, which is a common complication of autologous bone grafting. At 1-year follow-up, she had completely returned to competitive basketball, recently taken up tai-chi, and had no limitation of activities and no residual hip pain.