A 51-year-old man with history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), and 38 pack-years smoking presented with an enlarging tongue mass. Exam noted a 4.5 × 1.9 cm ulcerated tongue lesion that had been growing for seven months prior to presentation. Imaging supported the physical exam with a PET/CT demonstrating an ill-defined hypermetabolism throughout the tongue with additional FDG-avid lingual tonsils, bilateral level 2A and 3 lymph nodes, and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes . Incisional biopsy of the tongue mass was positive for invasive SCCa, keratinizing, and well-differentiated with a depth of 2 mm . The cancer was staged cT4a N2c M0, Stage IVA (AJCC 8th edition) by our institutional multidisciplinary head and neck tumor board, based on maximum tumor size of 6 cm on clinical exam and PET finding of diffuse hypermetabolism throughout the entirety of the tongue with standardized uptake value (SUV) of 17, leading to assignation of clinical depth of invasion of > 10 mm. The recommended treatment was surgery followed by appropriate adjuvant therapy based on final pathology.
The patient underwent neoadjuvant hypofractionated radiation therapy as a temporizing measure while awaiting surgery which was delayed due to social and scheduling factors. He was treated with one course of the RTOG 8502 “Quad-Shot” regimen to a dose of 14 Gy given in four fractions over the course of two days to gross disease (primary tumor and involved nodes). Repeat CT neck immediately prior to surgery showed an increase in size of the dorsal tongue lesion, with re-demonstration of prominent right-sided cervical lymph nodes, now also increased in size .
The patient underwent subtotal glossectomy and bilateral selective neck dissection with pectoralis muscle reconstruction eight weeks after completion of RT. The operative report describes a mucosalized ulcerative lesion involving the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. Final pathology demonstrated no residual carcinoma, 0/28 left cervical lymph nodes positive for carcinoma, and 0/30 right cervical LN positive for carcinoma. At one month follow up he was reported to be doing well overall, with expected dysphagia related to surgical changes. Physical exam revealed no evidence of disease. CT neck 2.5 months following surgery, four months following Quad-Shot RT, showed no evidence of disease. His case was again discussed at multidisciplinary tumor board, with a new group consensus to refrain from adjuvant therapy. Unfortunately, he was subsequently lost to follow-up.
The patient’s initial biopsy and surgical specimen were reviewed after the fact to confirm the initial cancer diagnosis and the pCR. Review of initial biopsy confirmed at least 2 mm depth of SCCa . Review of the surgical pathology glossectomy specimen confirmed no residual disease, with residual keratin granulomas which were 7 mm deep, suggesting at least a commensurate depth of invasion of the tumor prior to treatment . Of note, the neck dissection was without evidence of treatment related changes.