A 7-year-old male patient began his condition in 2008 with pain and claudication in the left lower limb. He was taken to his Family Medical Unit, where he was referred to the Emergency Unit of the Lomas Verdes High Specialty Medical Unit (UMAE) of Traumatology and Orthopedics of the Mexican Institute of Social Security (IMSS), where they performed a bone biopsy and curettage with bone graft application in lyophilized cadaveric tricortical bone allograft, with a presumptive diagnosis of aneurysmal bone cyst. He remained under surveillance in the private sector; however, pain persisted in the left lower limb. Afterwards, he presented with pain exacerbation, which was why he returned to the emergency department in 2013.
Additional studies were performed showing osteolysis of the left iliac bone. Suspecting a malignant process, he was referred to the UMAE at Pediatrics Hospital National Medical Center “Siglo XXI” to the Oncology Department for study protocol at 11 years, 11 months old. Further studies were performed with pelvic radiographs and computerized tomography with three-dimensional reconstruction (see Figs. , and ). The bone scan was negative for infectious or inflammatory bone disease. The magnetic resonance showed a neoplastic lesion of the pelvis with edema, suggestive of Ewing’s sarcoma. An incisional biopsy was performed in December 2013, with an initial histopathology report of an aneurysmal bone cyst. However, the observed osteolysis in the radiographic studies created diagnostic doubts.
Follow-up was performed through the outpatient clinic, showing slight improvement of his symptoms. In June 2014, a new bone biopsy and curettage was performed, with the use of lyophilized cadaveric tricortical bone grafts fixed with Kirschner wire. The histopathological study reported necrosis and reabsorption of spongy bone tissue and vascularized fibrous connective tissue with some osteoclastic giant cells. Two years later, lyophilized cadaveric tricortical bone grafts were used again. He had appropriate evolution and remitting symptoms; thus, he was discharged from the service (Additional file ).