A 64-year-old Chinese woman presented to our outpatient service with abdominal discomfort associated with nausea for two months, but no other symptoms. There was no history of fever, cough, chest or abdominal pain, night sweats, weight loss, or anorexia. Her history included a 4-year cholecystectomy. Her medical history did not include any tuberculosis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. On physical examination, her body temperature was 36.5 °C. Palpation of the abdomen revealed epigastric tenderness and no hepatosplenomegaly. Routine blood analysis revealed mild anemia, hemoglobin level was 100 g/L, blood platelet count was 242 × 109/L. Liver function tests were within normal limits (total bilirubin: 5 mg/dL, direct bilirubin: 2 mg/dL, indirect bilirubin: 3 mg/dL, total protein: 68.1 gm/dL, albumin: 34.7gm/dL, SGOT: 17 U/L, SGPT: 12 U/L). Tumor markers were within normal limits and HIV antibody reaction was negative. Chest radiography and cardiac ultrasound (US) revealed no abnormalities.
Abdominal US showed the spleen with a large hypoechoic lesion. The mass size was 6.9 × 6.9 × 6.7 cm with regular margins and homogenous internal echo. Contrast-enhanced US showed that splenic hypoechoic lesion appeared with a rounded, clear boundary, heterogeneous enhancement, and centrally irregular necrosis. Our diagnosis was lymphoma .
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large hypodense lesion (6.4 × 6.5 cm) on the spleen with an unclear boundary which became clear after enhanced scanning and heterogeneous lesion enhancement. Centrally irregular necrosis can be seen in the mass. Our diagnosis was inflammatory pseudotumor .
The patient did not have a magnetic resonance imaging examination before surgery.
Due to the position of the mass and the risk of gastrointestinal tract injury and tumor bleeding, needle biopsy of the spleen mass was excluded. The patient therefore underwent laparoscopic splenectomy for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. The histopathological report showed splenic granulomatous inflammation with large inflammatory necrosis and caseation necrosis. We finally diagnosed splenic tuberculosis. After surgery, the patient was started on quadruple anti-tuberculosis therapy (rimifon, streptomycin, rifapin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) .
Three months after splenectomy, the patient presented to our outpatient service for re-examination. Routine blood analysis revealed mild anemia, hemoglobin level was 108 g/L, blood platelet count was 258 × 109/L. Liver function tests were within normal limits, purified protein derivative test was negative. Chest radiography and abdominal CT scan revealed no abnormalities.