A 66-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the emergency room (ER) of our hospital with symptoms of dyspnea. Medical history included arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, obesity, and stage IV renal failure.
Due to low oxygen saturation on arrival, the patient was directly admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where oxygen therapy and monitoring were delivered. At that moment, a laboratory analysis was ordered, including hematologic profile, hemostasis and biochemistry, chest X-ray, RT-PCR for SARS-COV-2, and serology for different respiratory viruses.
The RT-PCR test for SARS-COV-2 (GeneXpert, Cepheid®) was positive. Laboratory findings included elevated levels of creatinine (7.04 ng/mL) and C-reactive protein (26 mg/dL) in parallel to other abnormalities related to COVID-19 infection, which are described in . Chest X-ray showed bilateral pneumonia with bilateral peripheral alveolar infiltrates. PCR testing for other respiratory viruses such as, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), rinovirus and adenovirus (PCR multiplex FilmArray, Biomerieux®) was negative.
A week after admission, stage IV kidney disease progressed to stage V, and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated. In the ICU, blood cultures were positive for Candida auris and Staphylococcus aureus, and treatment with Isavuconazole and Daptomycin was established. Sputum culture grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, which were treated with Piperacillin/Tazobactam and Tobramycin. In the third week in the ICU, the patient had a cardiac arrest that was resuscitated. Post-arrest CT scan demonstrated pericardial and pleural effusion. Due to hemodynamic instability, the patient needed 22 transfusions during the two months of hospitalization.
After 25 days in hospital, the daily control hemogram (DxH 800 de Beckman Coulter®) demonstrated left shift leukocytosis, monocytosis, myeloid blasts, hemoglobin of 11.3 g/dL and a platelet count of 252 × 109/L. May-Grünwald (MG) staining of peripheral blood smear was performed.
PBS confirmed left shift leukocytosis (67% segmented, 11% band cells, 1% metamyelocytes, 6% myelocytes). Blue-green, poorly-defined, refractive cytoplasmic inclusions were observed in 1–2% of neutrophils and in some monocytes .
Biochemistry revealed elevated levels of ALT and lactate, and the laboratory decided to extend liver enzyme test to determine aspartate aminotransferase (AST), gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT), bilirubin (Bb), and alkaline phosphatase, apart from lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Results are shown in which contain the course of biochemical and hematological parameters the day of admission, the day before inclusions appeared, and the day they were detected.
shows a very significant elevation of ALT/AST and LDH concentrations coinciding with liver failure. Of note, biochemical values remained within normal range or slightly elevated the day before liver failure, and it was not until liver failure occurred, that most parameters increased dramatically.
The laboratory reported the presence of crystals on peripheral blood smear immediately to the responsible physician. Unfortunately, the patient died a few hours later of multiorgan failure.