A 67-year-old Caucasian female was admitted to the ED of Pescara General Hospital on March 17th, 2021, for seizures, vertigo, emesis, nausea, postural instability, and recurrent falls, lasting approximately 10 days. She had been suffering from CD since 1991. In 2007, she underwent hemicolectomy with gastric resection and ileostomy.
The patient had a long history of Crohn’s Disease (CD), but she always declined biological therapies, repeatedly resorting on steroids to relieve her disease activity phases. During hospitalization due to refractory diarrhea, she was re-evaluated by a consultant gastroenterologist, who once more suggested to introduce steroids in therapy, considering her symptoms related to relapsing CD.
Neurological examination confirmed vertiginous syndrome with postural instability, difficulty in controlling eye movements with vertical nystagmus, and retropulsion. A brain CT scan did not detect any sign of ischemic or hemorrhagic lesions. At the time of hospitalization, the patient was on a treatment schedule with 500 mg/daily of mesalazine. The patient lost consciousness during her ED stay, being admitted into the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), where she was put on Propofol, Fentanyl and Rocuronium, in conjunction with intubation and mechanical ventilation. The next day her clinical status quickly improved; she was extubated and transferred to the Neurology unit, to complete her neurological diagnostic workup. An X-ray of shoulders reported a compound fracture of the humerus head, likely caused by one of her previous falls. A chest X-ray showed signs of bilateral pleural effusion. A brain MRI scan showed altered signal intensity in the peritrigonal region, corona radiata, and centrum semiovale of the brain, compatible with leukoencephalopathy. Cerebral Spinal Fluid (CSF) analysis showed no cells, negative Pandy’s reaction, glucose 60 mg/dL, and total CSF proteins 26 mg/dL. All viral and microbiological examinations carried out on CSF and serum turned out negative. Among immunological CSF examinations, normal levels of IgA (1.48, reference: 0.0-2.0 mg/L), IgG (10.3, reference: 4.8-58.6 mg/L) and IgM (0.417, reference: 0.0-2.0 mg/L) were reported. CSF and serum results of an electro-isofocusing analysis showed the presence of oligoclonal bands with mirror pattern (type 4), indicating the absence of intrathecal synthesis. Western blot analysis on serum revealed a high titre of onconeural anti-SOX1, compatible with a neurological, cerebellar type, paraneoplastic syndrome, whereas Amphiphysin-Ab, CV2-Ab, Ma2/Ta-Ab, Ri-Ab, Yo-Ab, Hu-Ab, Recoverin-Ab, Titin-Ab, zic4-Ab, GAD 65-Ab, Tr-Ab showed all negative results. Markers of cancer, including CEA (Carcinoembryonic Antigen), AFP (Alpha-fetoprotein), CA125 (Cancer Antigen 125), CA15.3 (Cancer Antigen 15.3), NSE (Neuron-Specific Enolase); markers of thyroid function (TSH, Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone; FT3, Free Triiodothyronine; FT4, Free Free thyroxine); antibodies against celiac disease; vitamin B12 and level of folic acid showed all normal values. Therefore, in the suspect of an autoimmune paraneoplastic encephalitis, an extensive search of a hidden tumour was started. A control brain MRI scan confirmed the presence of non-specific leukoencephalopathy, and a Total-body CT scan revealed only a suspected invagination of a jejunal loop, compatible with CD, whereas the presence of an underlying Small Cell Lung Carcinoma could be excluded, together with any lesion compatible with SCLC metastatic repetition.
In spite of therapy delivered (Immunoglobulin (Ig) therapy, 1 g/Kg/die for 5 days, cortisone therapy 20 mg twice/daily), her clinical conditions progressively worsened after approximately 10 days. A control chest X-ray documented left pleural effusion and hypodiafania, compatible with parenchymal inflammatory processes in the middle basal lobe. Sepsis and inflammatory biomarkers rose (PCT, Procalcitonin, 12.164 ng/mL, CRP, C-Reactive Protein, 133.71 mg/L), although blood cultures yielded persistently negative results. Severe thrombocytopenia (9000 PLT /uL) and anemia (7 g/mL Hemoglobin) ensued. After exclusion of Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC), the patient received high dose (0.5 g/Kg) Intravenous Immune Globulin infusion, as well as antimicrobial therapy associating 4.5 g piperacillin-tazobactam every 8 h; 50 mg tigecycline every 12 h and 70 mg/daily caspofungin. The patient desaturated to SO2 85% and pO2/fO2 256 mmHg. As a consequence, she was re-transferred to the ICU, where she died a few days later, due to refractory septic shock and refractory respiratory failure.