A 44-year-old female living with HIV and on ART for the last 14 years, with a CD4 count of 338 cells/µL and viral load < 20 copies/mL presented to the hospital with a history of being unwell for a week. She had been put on abacavir, lamivudine, and dolutegravir 3 weeks before, as a routine switch from a TDF-based regimen. She had previously been on a regimen of TDF, 3TC, and efavirenz but had it changed because of the availability of a new formulation of ABC, 3TC, and DTG (Triumeq) that was deemed better by her primary physician. She reported a dry cough, sore throat, chest discomfort, and myalgia. She also reported a history of vomiting 3 days before the hospital visit. She was subject to fever and chills, was anorexic and nauseous. She also complained of occasional headaches, without neck stiffness or photophobia. She had been tested for malaria a couple of times a few days prior, but was persistently negative. At presentation, her blood pressure was 142/84 mmHg, heart rate 102 beats per minute, with temperature 36.1 °C and oxygen saturation at 94% on ambient air.
On examination, she had an inflamed throat and posterior palate with tender tonsils to palpation, her chest was clear and the cardiovascular system examination was otherwise unremarkable. She also had tenderness to palpation of the limb muscles without evidence of arthritis. Remarkably, she had a white cell count of 2.6 × 109/L (73% granulocytes, 22% lymphocytes), hemoglobin of 14.0 g/dL, and platelet count of 122 × 109/L, but her kidney function tests were within normal. The rest of the laboratory results are outlined in Additional file : Table S1. She was admitted for intravenous rehydration and bed rest, with a presumption of a viral upper respiratory tract infection. However, the sore throat persisted despite the initial relief. On the second day of admission, she complained of generalized body ache. Laboratory results showed a significant increase in liver enzymes, thus prompting testing for viral hepatitis and repeat testing for malaria, which turned positive, and she was subsequently started on artesunate. The patient was advised to suspend her ART given the liver impairments. She responded well to treatment and the transaminases started to improve, although she kept complaining of myalgias and progressive body swelling with paresthesia in the lower limbs. She was discharged on the seventh day feeling better.
She was, however, readmitted a day after discharge (ninth day since the first admission) complaining of an episode of severe headache followed by profuse sweating. She denied fever but reported that she had vomited six times that day and had three episodes of diarrhea with burning lower abdominal pains. Her blood pressure was 87/50 mmHg, heart rate 130 beats per minute, temperature 35.4 °C, and oxygen saturation at 88%. Apart from a tender epigastrium, systemic examination was otherwise unremarkable. She was started on rabeprazole, antibiotics to cover hospital acquired infection, and ondansetron. Unfortunately, cultures were not taken. She was also started on Ringer’s lactate. Significantly, her laboratory results showed features of acute kidney injury (AKI) with a creatinine of 183 µmol/L. On the second day of this admission, she developed a rash in the extremities that spread to the trunk, she was started on cetirizine and mometasone cream. As her blood pressure improved, the kidney function improved. In addition, there was a notable improvement in the liver transaminases compared with previous tests. The rash also improved. She was discharged after 5 days (13 days after the initial admission).
However, the patient was readmitted the night of the day of discharge, in a hysterical state with burning chest pain and chills. Her blood pressure was 108/67 mmHg, heart rate 153 beats per minute, temperature 34.2 °C, and oxygen saturation at 92% on room air. Systemic examination was unremarkable. There was no notable rash at this time. A bedside electrocardiogram was unremarkable apart from the extreme tachycardia and an arterial blood gas report consistent with respiratory alkalosis with lactate of 4.3 mmol/L. However, there was a highly elevated serum level of aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, and potassium. On further interrogation, the patient revealed that she had taken the ABC-containing tablets shortly before she became unwell and she had vomited a while after that. It was also noted that the patient had been restarting her ART every time she was discharged, contrary to advice.
The patient was managed supportively and showed marked improvement, although she still had peripheral neuropathy of the left lower limb requiring physiotherapy and the use of a crutch. On clinical suspicion of abacavir hypersensitivity, an HLA-B*57:01 test was requested. This proved positive and the patient was advised to completely stop the ABC/DTG/3TC regimen, as she was hypersensitive to ABC. She was discharged after a 2-day stay at the hospital. On follow-up, she did well. She presented 12 days later (27 days after the initial presentation) with severe headaches and episodes of confusion. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a left posterior parietal tuberculoma. She was started on rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 2 months, and then rifampicin and isoniazid for 16 months (this was occasioned by persistent symptoms at 12 months and persistent but shrinking tuberculoma). She received a short course of dexamethasone at the beginning of this treatment. Two months after the initial presentation, her ART regimen was changed to a two-tablet regime consisting of DTG and a fixed-dose combination of emtricitabine plus TDF. This was occasioned by a rise in the HIV viral load with stable liver and kidney function test results while on antituberculous therapy. She made tremendous improvement overall, although she has persistent headaches 24 months after the first episode. The most recent CD4 count is 512 cells/µL and viral load is 22 copies/mL. The timeline of events is summarized in Fig. .