A 75 year old man with medical history of terminal kidney failure, who presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain and bloating associated with bilious vomiting evolving for 3 days. He reported recurrent abdominal pain and bloating since childhood kept without investigation.
Upon examination, the patient was calm, afebrile, with normal vital signs. The left abdomen was distended with tenderness in the left upper quadrant. Laboratory tests showed a high c-reactive protein level (150mg/l) and a high white blood cell count (20000/μl). No anemia nor hemostasis disorders were noticed. Plain X-ray of the abdomen in erect posture showed an air fluid colonic level in the left hypochondrium ( a).
Emergency Ct-Scan of the abdomen showed a dilated caecum located in the left hypochondrium measuring up to a diameter of 12 cm. Whirl sign and transposition of superior mesenteric artery to the right of superior mesenteric vein on CT scan made the diagnostic clear of caecal volvulus on intestinal malrotation. A bird beak sign was also found.
The patient was admitted in a surgical reanimation unit, nasogastric aspiration brought 400 ml of fecaloid liquid.
We decided to perform an emergency surgery. Surgery was performed by an attending physician with 12 years surgical experience in our teaching hospital. The caecum was in the left hypochondrium hugely distended and contained signs of prepeforation such as deperitonisation lesions ( a). Caecal volvulus was seen ( b). Clockwise de-rotation of volvulus was performed. Upon devolvulation All the small bowels were located in the left side of the abdomen and all the colonic segments were in the right side ( c). We deducted that the patient had two anomalies: the first being an intestinal malrotation that made the caecum located originally in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen and the second was a poor peritoneum fixation of the caecum that made the volvulus possible due to its high mobility. We decided upon these findings to perform an ileocaecal resection with immediate ileocolic anastomosis using GEA 60 charges followed by LADD's procedure. Antibiotics prophylaxis was given for 48 hours post operatively using cefazolin intravenously at the dosage of 1gr three times a day. Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis was given using enoxaparin subcutaneously at the dosage of 4000 UI once a day.
The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on Day 6. A Follow up examination was done 2 weeks and then 30 days after surgery and was without abnormalities. There was no need for further biological analysis or imaging.