A 76-year-old woman, who had previously undergone trans-thoracoabdominal esophagectomy with gastric tube reconstruction, was admitted for aspiration pneumonia. An impending rupture of AAA was suspected based on enhanced computed tomography (CT) findings; therefore, she was referred to our department. The AAA was located 5 mm below the left RA, with the aetiology being a saccular degenerative aneurysm. The AAA was enlarged exclusively towards the right side, measuring 87 × 39 mm . There were no indications of infection surrounding the aneurysm, especially around the sac. No signs associated with AAA rupture were present. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with a saccular JRAAA. Regarding the initial laboratory data, systemic inflammatory markers were significantly increased by aspiration pneumonia (Additional file 1). The blood culture tests were conducted several times, and all these results were negative. Prior to surgical treatment for JRAAA, appropriate antibiotic therapy (Ampicillin-Sulbactam 3.0 g x 4 times/day) was provided for 10 days, and the pneumonia and following systemic inflammatory reactions had improved consequently.
Given her relatively young age, GR was initially planned. However, the operative risk was estimated to be high because of past trans-thoracoabdominal esophagectomy 40 years previously and her frail condition unrelated to the cancer, with a body weight of 35 kg. Anatomical findings showed that the diameter of the thoracoabdominal aorta between the celiac artery (CA) and RA ranged from 21 to 23 mm, with over 50 mm available for the proximal landing zone (Additional file 2). Regarding the diameter of each visceral branch, that of the SMA, right RA, and left RA measured 6.0, 4.5 and 4.2 mm in size, respectively. In 1-ChEVAR with reconstruction of the left RA, the length of the proximal landing zone was not enough long. Using 2-ChEVAR with reconstruction of the bilateral RAs would achieve a longer proximal landing zone than 1-ChEVAR. The length from the top of the right RA orifice to the bottom of the SMA orifice was about 10 mm. We decided this length might be insufficient to prevent gutter endoleak. We also considered that 2-ChEVAR with reconstruction of bilateral RAs would not be suitable because of the risk for potential accidental occlusion of the SMA orifice by those two chimney grafts. Thus, we planned to perform ChEVAR with three chimney endografts.
After general anaesthesia, 7-Fr long sheaths were inserted into the SMA and bilateral RAs through the exposed bilateral axillary arteries . A 7-mm endograft (VIABAHN, W.L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) and two 5-mm endografts (VIABAHN) were inserted into the SMA and bilateral RAs, respectively, along a 0.018-inch wire (V-18™ control wire, Boston Scientific) via each sheath. Subsequently, EVAR was performed by using a 26-mm stent graft (Excluder 26-12-140, W.L. Gore and Associates, Inc., USA) and contralateral leg endograft (Excluder 12–100) through the exposed common femoral arteries, using Dry seal sheaths (W.L. Gore and Associates) sized 16- and 12-Fr, respectively. The proximal extension device (aorta extension 28.5–33, W.L. Gore and Associates) was deployed from under the CA. After the deployment of all chimney endografts in the appropriate positions, ballooning to the main device and chimney endografts was performed simultaneously . The aortography showed no endoleaks . The total operative time was 259 min (Additional file 3). The patient was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 8. Postoperative CT showed preservation of visceral circulation, without endoleaks . The follow-up CT at 6 months postoperatively showed significant shrinkage of the aneurysmal sac and preservation of visceral branch flow . Laboratory tests showed no deterioration of renal function and no elevation of systemic inflammation markers (Additional file 4, 5).