A 12-year-old male was admitted to the hospital following sudden syncope after strenuous activity. The echocardiography showed the color in the left coronary artery. ECG revealed that the sinus rhythm was missing the ST segment and alterations in the T wave were indicative of ischemia. The lab analyses revealed that troponin, BNP, and fasting blood glucose levels were within normal levels. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed that both the anomalous left coronary artery (LCA) and the normal right coronary artery (RCA) arose from a more posterior and leftward location on the right sinus of Valsalva and coursed intramurally along the anterior aortic wall (arrows) between the aorta (Ao) and the pulmonary artery (PA) . Computed tomography (CT) confirmed the diagnosis and demonstrated the intramural course of the anomalous LCA with normal RCA, along with normal left anterior descending artery (LAD) and normal left circumflex artery (LCx) .
Due to the AAOCA diagnosis, we next evaluated the patient for myocardial ischemia, disease progression, and surgical risk. To correct the malformation, we performed a novel surgery wherein a neo-ostium was created on the left coronary sinus while maintaining the abnormal opening. Additionally, we introduced a lateral translocation of the pulmonary artery to improve coronary flow.
The surgery was performed with a median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated through aortic and bicaval cannulation. Antegrade cardioplegia was administrated to induce cardiac arrest. Crosswise incisions were made distal to the narrow segment of the left coronary artery and to the corresponding position of the left coronary sinuses respectively. Both locations were then anastomosed . The pulmonary artery translocation was performed by introducing an approximately 1 cm long and 0.5 cm wide autologous blood vessel patch of the right pulmonary artery and inserting this patch in the lateral aspect of the main pulmonary artery . After surgery, the patient was stable during the postoperative period and was discharged from the hospital uneventfully on the sixth day post operation. Postoperative CT revealed no stenosis of LCA and no interarterial compression .