A 64-year-old man was evaluated during the year 2022. He presented with a 4-year history of progressive ptosis of the left eyelid, and horizontal binocular diplopia more on looking at far objects. He also developed ptosis of the right eye for the last 6 months. There was no history of fatigability/fluctuation of ocular symptoms. He had no bulbar symptoms, headache or vomiting. He had diabetes mellitus and hypertension for ten years. Examination showed left oculomotor (internal and external opthalmoplegia with pupillary sizes of right eye: 8 mm and left eye: 11 mm), with trochlear, abducens, and right partial oculomotor and abducens nerve involvement (Supplementary video). Other cranial nerves and motor system examination were unremarkable.
Investigations showed reduced blood hemoglobin level of 10.7 g/dL with elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (120 mm/h) and normal platelet count (3,34,000/microL). Liver function tests showed raised total proteins (9.70 g/dL) with albumin:globulin reversal (0.80). The glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) was 9.2%. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed 5 cells (2 lymphocytes) with raised protein level (228.2 mg/dL). CSF cytospin analysis was negative for abnormal / atypical cells. The possibilities of inflammatory/ granulomatous disorders and neoplastic disorders were considered. Anti NuclearAntibody (ANA) profile, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) and Anti-ganglioside antibodies were negative. Brain MRI revealed thickened bulky bilateral cavernous sinus with bilateral thickened oculomotor nerves (
a-d).Whole body 18F-FDG - Positron Emission Tomography (PET) MRI did not show any abnormal metabolic lesion. The peripheral nerve conduction study was normal. Serum protein electrophoresis showed a paraprotein peak in the early gamma region. Immunofixation showed elevated IgM levels (3810 mg/dL). Free kappa light chain level was elevated (70.1 mg/L, normal - 2.2 to 19.40 mg/L) and raised kappa lambda ratio of 8.549 (normal - 0.26 to 1.65). Bone marrow aspiration done from posterior iliac crest showed mature small lymphocytes, and IHC testing (CD5, CD10 negative) revealed mature B cell type, low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with MYD88 mutation positivity. Thus, a diagnosis of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia was made. Patient was referred to an oncology center and received chemotherapy consisting of Bendamustine and Rituximab regimen. Patient was reviewed after the fifth cycle of chemotherapy but did not show any significant neurological improvement.