This was a spontaneous conception of dichorionic (DC) twins in a healthy 31-year-old White woman with two previous uneventful pregnancies with two healthy babies. She booked her pregnancy in a tertiary hospital in London during the COVID-19 pandemic. At routine ultrasound scan at 12 weeks gestation, a DC twin pregnancy was diagnosed with one placenta located in the anterior wall and the other in the posterior wall of the uterus. There were no obvious fetal defects in either twin but there was a 16% inter-twin discordance in crown–rump length (63.9 mm versus 53.6 mm). At 21 weeks, there was a 24% inter-twin discordance in fetal size but no obvious defects in either twin, other than hyperechogenic bowel in the smaller fetus, Doppler studies demonstrated normal values in pulsatility index in the uterine artery, umbilical artery, fetal ductus venosus, and MCA. Both fetuses were male. A review at 23 weeks and 5 days showed a 26% weight discordance and bowel echogenicity in the smaller twin. Maternal blood was tested and was negative for congenital infection and cystic fibrosis.
At 27 weeks gestation, ultrasound examination demonstrated that in the larger twin there was mild ascites, cardiomegaly, enlarged echogenic placenta, and increased fetal MCA PSV to 65 cm/second (1.8 MoM). These appearances were suggestive of fetal anemia. The smaller twin, whose growth velocity was maintained on the third centile, had reduced amniotic fluid volume, normal umbilical artery Doppler, congested looking liver, and reduced MCA PSV at 17 cm/second (0.5 MoM). The inter-twin discordance in MCA PSV (1.3 MoM) raised the suspicion of possible TAPS syndrome in a DC twin pregnancy, but despite extensive ultrasound examination, there was no visible vascular communication between the two placentas. After discussion with the parents of the option of early delivery or fetal blood transfusion, it was decided to perform the latter, and blood was given to the anemic fetus by cordocentesis, which increased the hemoglobin concentration from 3.5 to 12.5 g/dL. Fetal blood sampling or exchange transfusion of the polycythemic twin was not considered at this stage.
Close monitoring every few days in the subsequent 2 weeks showed that the growth of the bigger twin was substantially reduced from the 41st to the 6th centile, and the MCA PSV gradually increased from 32 cm/second (0.9 MoM) immediately after the transfusion to 54 cm/second (1.4 MoM) at 29 weeks gestation. In the smaller twin, the growth was maintained on the third centile, but there was a gradual further reduction in MCA PSV to 14 cm/second (0.4 MoM). At 29 weeks, since both fetuses were small for gestational age and there was worsening anemia and polycythemia, respectively, it was decided to undertake delivery by cesarean section rather than carry out further antenatal interventions.
At delivery, there were no visible communicating vessels between the two placentas. One twin was pale and weighed 1140 g. He required noninvasive respiratory support and blood transfusion soon after birth due to hemoglobin of 5.6 g/dL. The co-twin was plethoric and weighed 1259 g. He was intubated and ventilated at birth and received surfactant. He had a partial volume exchange transfusion on day 1 due to hemoglobin of 24.9 g/dL. The twins had a stable neonatal course and could establish full enteral feeds. Both showed mild intraventricular hemorrhage on cranial ultrasound scan. The genotype from the samples sent from both babies was the same, confirming monozygosity.
Histopathological examination confirmed dichorionicity , and no communicating vessels were present between the two placentas. There was an unequal partition with discs 1 and 2 contributing to 28% and 72% of the placental weight. Disc 1 showed evidence of a previous bleeding episode, and disc 2 showed villous edema. Placental sample tested negative for herpes simplex virus DNA, cytomegalovirus DNA, Toxoplasma gondii DNA, rubella virus RNA, and Coronavirus RNA—SARS-CoV-2.