A 27-year-old man from Yasuj (central part of Iran) was hospitalized from 5th to 18th of March 2012 in surgery ward of Nemazee Teaching Hospital, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, due to intermittent episodes of acute lower extremity arterial thrombosis. Symptoms initiated three days prior to admission with a severe abrupt-onset entire left lower extremity pain and claudication not relieved by analgesics. He had a 10 pack-year history of cigarette smoking and a multipartner sexual relationship. Otherwise, his medical history showed a healthy young man up to the present illness. The patient’s family history was unremarkable for thrombophilia. In physical examination, he was afebrile with a good general appearance and his blood pressure, pulse rate and respiratory rate were 120/80 mmHg, 100 bpm and 16/min, respectively. His left lower extremity was cold from knee down and bluish discoloration of digits was noted.
Left femoral artery pulse was undetectable as well as its subsequent branches. Sensory and motor functions of the entire left lower extremity were intact. Other parts of physical examination had normal findings except for an oral aphthous lesion and a healing genital ulcer with a negative Pathergy test. Color-Doppler sonography of the left lower extremity arteries revealed a thrombus in the left common iliac artery, 5 cm in length, initiating from the abdominal aorta bifurcation. Trivial blood flow in the common iliac artery and decreased blood flow in the lower branches were found, so that the blood flow velocity was 27 cm/sec in the left common femoral artery compared to 58 cm/sec velocity of the normal opposite side. Evaluation of distal arteries including anterior and posterior tibialis arteries demonstrated a complete thrombosis in the lower halves of both with no blood flow. Anticoagulant therapy was promptly initiated and Fogarty catheter was inserted for proximal thrombectomy. After the operation, the patient’s end extremity was warm and he felt no pain anymore. Weak pulses of both dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis arteries were also detectable. Forty-eight hours later, the patient developed another episode of cold end extremity and pulselessness in the same limb. In color-doppler sonography, despite establishment of triphasic blood flow of the left lower extremity arteries up to midpart of distal arteries, no flow was detected in the distal halves of anterior and posterior tibialis arteries due to an embolus/thrombus. Therefore, the patient underwent Fogarty insertion for thrombectomy again. After the second surgery, all previous symptoms and signs were removed and follow-up CT-angiography revealed normal course and caliber of all the arteries of the left lower extremity with no evidence of collateral formation in favor of chronic vascular insufficiency. Meanwhile, to find out the reason of recurrent thromboembolic events in an otherwise healthy young man, an extensive work-up was performed. Lab investigation revealed a CBC with Hg of 16.7 g/dL, WBC of 7000/mm3 and platelet count of 179000/mm3. PT, INR and PTT were 13 seconds, 1 and 25 seconds, respectively. Lipid profile showed total cholesterol of 202 gr/dL, TG of 146 gr/dL, HDL-c of 37 gr/dL and LDL-c of 136 gr/dL. Serum levels of antiphospholipid-antibodies, anticardiolipin antibody (ACLA), P- and C-ANCA and anti-β2 glycoprotein IgM and IgG were all within the normal ranges. Liver function test showed no abnormality and viral markers for hepatitis B and C had negative results. Homocysteine level was normal and LDH was 445 IU/L. Coagulation factor assay revealed no abnormal findings and results were not in favor of protein C/S or antithrombin deficiency. Investigations showed no factor V Leiden gene mutation. Other blood tests had normal findings. Regarding proximal involvement of lower extremity arteries, abdomen pelvic sonography, helical chest and abdomenopelvic CT-scan demonstrated no mass, organomegally or the third space fluid collection. EKG (electrocardiography) and trans esophageal echocardiography (TEE) excluded any cardiogenic source of emboli. Ultimately, we found a reactive HIV Ab ELISA with the same result in repetition. Western blot test confirmed the diagnosis of HIV infection. The patient was then discharged with antiplatelet and anticoagulant and referred to a HIV center to receive medical support. In outpatient follow-up, endogenous anticoagulants were rechecked two weeks after the acute phase with all results within the normal limits.