In October 2015, a 45-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with a 1-year history of pelvic mass. Computed tomography (CT) examination showed bilateral ovarian tumors. Her serum cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level was 11.22 kU/L (reference range: 35.0 kU/L). Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 1.31 µg/mL (reference range: 0–6.5 µg/mL). She underwent a total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection with total omentectomy subsequently. Postoperative pathological examination showed bilateral ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical examination yielded the following results: CK (+++) , Ki-67 (+++) , P53 (+++) , S-100 (−), and villin (−) . The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage was IIA. After cytoreductive surgery, the patient followed eight cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 over 3 hours plus carboplatin area under the curve (AUC) =5, every 21 days as one cycle. After the chemotherapy, the patient was followed up by means of reexamination every 3 months. Therapeutic evaluation was stable.
In November 2017, the patient was presented to our hospital again with abdominal pain. Subsequent abdominal enhanced CT examination showed the lesion occupying the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum, which was of size 3.6×2.8 cm . Gastroscopy showed chronic superficial gastritis and submucous eminent lesions in the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum (size 3.5×2.5 cm; ). Combined with the results of CT and gastroscopy, we diagnosed the patient with gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Then, we performed a fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy under endoscopic ultrasonography. The gastric metastasis was located in the intrinsic myometrium. H–E staining revealed the gastric metastasis of ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma . The serum CA125 level was 10.40 kU/L. The patient underwent pelvic enhanced CT examination and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, and no other metastases were found. Subsequently, laparoscopic resection of the gastric metastasis was accepted. Because the interval between the last chemotherapy was ~18 months, ie, the platinum-free interval (PFI) was >12 months, the patient underwent another eight cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin plus gemcitabine. The patient was reexamined after every two cycles of chemotherapy. The serum CA125 levels showed no elevation. She is currently in complete remission. Written informed consent has been provided by the patient to have the case details and any accompanying images published.