An 85-year-old woman with severe aortic valve stenosis (AS) was admitted to undergo transcatheter aortic valve implantation. She had a history of cerebral infraction, with no remarkable family history. Recently, she experienced chest pain, clammy sweat, and anorexia; she visited a local doctor for AS treatment.
She complained of chest and back pain and developed fever after undergoing preoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). The next day, the symptoms did not improve and computed tomography (CT) revealed prominent mediastinal emphysema and pleural effusion. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy confirmed esophageal perforation located 30 cm from the incisors (A), and gastrografin contrast revealed mediastinum leakage .
She was diagnosed with thoracic esophageal perforation. Radical thoracotomy surgery (primary repair or resection) was difficult because she was elderly and had severe AS. Therefore, two-stage surgery and indirect approach, comprising cervical esophagostomy to avoid contamination, gastrostomy for decompression, and jejunostomy for nutrition, was adopted. Reconstruction was planned after the mediastinitis and perforation were healed.
An emergency operation was performed 32 h after TEE under general anesthesia; a 12-mm trocar for the laparoscope was placed through the umbilicus, and four 5-mm ports were placed in the left upper, right upper, left middle, and right middle quadrants. We washed the contaminated mediastinum with saline through the esophageal hiatus from the abdominal cavity side and placed the drainage tube in the mediastinum. We then performed gastrostomy and jejunostomy laparoscopically, followed by cervical esophagostomy using a tube. Esophageal dissection was performed by an autosuture device (operation time: 2 h 14 min; blood loss: minimal).
Postoperatively, clinical course was good. At 11 days postoperatively, CT revealed almost complete resolution of the mediastinal air and cavity and the mediastinal drain was removed.
At 22 days postoperatively, endoscopic retrograde observation via gastrostomy revealed a healed perforation (B), and the cervical esophageal stump that was separated during surgery was connected; it became patent spontaneously (A). Endoscopic findings confirmed that the recanalized segment’s lumen was strong, and we assessed the recanalized segment’s continuity by CT. Anastomotic surgery was unnecessary; however, because of esophageal stenosis, endoscopic balloon dilation was necessary. After four sessions of dilation (B), she could orally consume food without additional surgery. Currently, she can walk with assistance and has a good oral intake .