Experiencing consistent back pain and an intermittent cough for over two months.
A 70-year-old female patient was admitted to our institution with feeling sour in her back and occasional cough for more than 2 mo. No other special clinical symptoms and signs were complained. Before admission, a computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest revealed multiple pulmonary nodules in both left and right upper lungs. No special treatment was given.
A history of hypertension, regular oral antihypertensive medication treatment, and well-controlled blood pressure.
Nothing special.
Nothing special.
CT scanning scan and 3D reconstruction images showed that there were a ground-glass nodule with rough edges (about 2.5 mm × 9 mm in size) in the apicoposterior segment of left upper lobe, a ground-glass nodule with clear edges (about 6 mm × 4 mm in size) in the lateral basal segment of left lower lobe and ground-glass density shadows were seen in the apex of right lungs, with blurred edges, and the range was approximately 9 mm × 6 mm .
We performed thoracoscopic resection of the left upper lung apicoposterior segment of the patient. During the operation, the rapid freezing pathology suggested that the carcinoma in situ was accompanied by multifocal microinfiltration. Thus, we performed preventive dissection of the mediastinum and hilar lymph nodes for pathological examination. Postoperative pathological report was Minimally Invasive Adenocarcinoma, no metastatic in each group of lymph nodes.
Re-examination of chest CT scan and high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) 21 mo after surgery showed: postoperative changes in the left upper lung, a pure ground-glass nodule in the apical segment of the right upper lobe (about 13.2 mm × 5.6 mm in size), a mixed ground glass in the superior segment of the right lower lobe Nodules (about 4.3 mm × 2.9 mm in size), a pure ground-glass nodule in the lateral basal segment of the left lower lobe (about 7.2 mm × 5.3 mm in size) , and there are other ground-glass nodules about 2-4 mm in diameter in the lower lobe of both lungs. We took pathological biopsy of the right upper lung and right lower lung lesions for the patient under thoracoscopy.
The histological findings of the right upper lobe nodule showed that cancer cells grew in a monolayer, with large nuclei, rich cytoplasm, mitotic figures were not easy to see, focal septal widening, interstitial fiber and fibroblast proliferation, dense proliferation or clustered proliferation of tumor cells, nucleoli was visible.
The immunohistochemistry experimental protocol for this project comprises the following key steps: Sample fixation, dehydration, paraffin embedding, sectioning, antibody staining, and result analysis. Firstly, tissue samples are subjected to fixation, followed by dehydration and paraffin embedding to prepare paraffin sections. Subsequently, specific antibodies such as CK7, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and EMA are used for staining, followed by microscopic observation and image recording. Finally, result analysis and pathological diagnosis are conducted based on the staining outcomes. Immunohistochemistry experiments are a crucial step in the study, utilized to identify immune markers, thereby supporting accurate disease diagnosis and classification.
The pathological manifestation of the right lower lobe nodule was no obvious nodule was visible to the naked eye. Histomorphology showed multiple lesions in the lung tissue, with diameter of 0.5-1.8 mm, and the small foci in the alveolar septum were distributed in mild form of the aggregation of short spindle cells . And the Immunohistochemistry showed that the lesion was positive for Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and somatostatin receptor 2a , and negative for S-100, Chromogranin A (CgA), Synaptophysin (Syn), Cytokeratin (CK) and HMB-45.