A 45 year-old woman came to our department complaining of an episodic headache for more than half year and worsened for 2 weeks. A typical headache attack would start with a pulsating pain in the two pterions of the bilateral temporal regions. The bilateral pain would synchronously spread backward in a coronal way and converged at a midline point of the occipital area, the occipital protuberance, within ten minutes. After converging of the bilateral pain, the head pain would become fixed and restricted within this pain spreading trajectory, i.e. a line-shaped area of 5–10 mm in width linking the two pterions of the bilateral temporal regions and the occipital point. The pain, pulsating in characteristic, reached its peak in severity within 10–20 min and was described as moderate to severe, and the patient denied this pain epicranial but complain it intracranial. The headache attacking was often triggered or precipitated by anxiety but not related with menstruation. Dizziness, head heaviness, photophobia and phonophobia but not nausea or vomiting usually accompanied the headache attacking which would last for half day or remitted over a sleep. The headache usually attacked 3–4 times a month in the past half year, but attacked almost every day with occasional 1 day remission in recent 2 weeks. In recent 2 weeks, a typical coronal line-shaped head pain started with left side tinnitus which usually lasted for 10 min, otherwise the head pain and the left side tinnitus occured simultaneously, and the headache became more severe (7–8 in scale of 10) compared to those of the past half year (4–6 in scale of 10). Analgesics, a compound consisting of aminopyrine, phenacetin, caffeine and phenobarbital, in combination with flunarizine (5 mg once), may partially relieve the coronal line-shaped head pain in 5 min, but trial of the analgesics alone failed to relieve the pain. She had a history of migraine without aura attacks in a frequency of once per 2–3 months for more than 10 years while she was 20–30 year old, beginning after giving birth of her son and remitting 15 years ago. The migraine headache attacking was prone to be triggered by anxiety or dysphoria, and usually accompanied with dizziness and head heaviness, but with no nausea or vomiting. Partial relief of the headache could be achieved after taking analgesics, a compound consisting of aminopyrine, phenacetin, caffeine and phenobarbital, but a complete elimination of the headache achieved over a sleep.
There was no family history of migraine or other recurrent headaches, except for her son. Her son of 25 year old age, the first and the only one child, had two episodes of abrupt most severe (10 in scale of 10) lancinating pain over the whole head 4 and 2 years ago respectively. The episodes lasted for about 30 min and remitted spontaneously. According to the International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-III, beta version) (IHS ), the headache was retrospectively diagnosed as thunderclap headache (TH). On the other hand, her son had recurrent severe vertigo attacks, a feeling of spinning around of the background, for 12 years in a frequency of 1–2 attacks per week, beginning at his age of 13 year old. Each episode of vertigo attacking would be preceded or accompanied with 1–2 min of amaurosis and the duration of the vertigo attacking would be 5–10 min. The vertigo attacking was usually accompanied with photophobia but with no phonophobia. No nausea or vomiting was noticed during the vertigo attacking and no headache attack found around the vertigo attacking. And he had a feeling of head heaviness and could not walk steadily while the vertigo was attacking. According to the International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD-III, beta version) ((IHS). ), the diagnosis of the episodic vertigo attacks could be grouped under “episodic syndromes that may be associated with migraine” in ICHD-III, beta version.
A complete physical and neurological examination was performed to exclude rhinitis, otitis media or cranial neuritis revealing normal. Inspection, palpation and sensory examination of the pain area, as well as the areas innervated by the lesser occipital nerve (LON), greater occipital nerves (GON) and auriculotemporal nerve (ATN) were all normal. Routine blood work-up with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), blood electrolyte and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) were all normal either.
The patient accepted prophylactic treatment with sodium valproate (500 mg twice a day) and her coronal line-shaped headache was dramatically alleviated leaving with only 1–2 times of mild headache attacks per month during the next three-month follow-up. Her son also accepted treatment with sodium valproate (500 mg twice a day) and his vertigo did not recur during the next 3 months follow-up.