An otherwise healthy five-year-old girl fell from a bicycle and was treated by a traditional healer. According to her parents, at the time she did not have any serious wounds or injuries. Herbs and leaves were applied by the healer to both lower limbs. Within 24 h, the skin of both lower limbs darkened into a bluish and black color with sharp demarcation above the ankles. She was immediately brought to primary care, which referred her to a tertiary private hospital where she was hospitalized with a suspicion of necrotizing fasciitis in both lower limbs. Clinically, the patient was alert and complained that she was feverish and was in intense pain. Vital signs were within normal limits except for her tachycardia (N: 126x/min) and fever (T: 39 °C). Physical examination revealed a bruise in her left lower back as well as bluish black sharp discoloration and demarcation in both distal legs with blisters of the skin. At the time, the sole of her feet was not bluish and was normal in color as shown in . Laboratory results in indicated a severe infection. She was treated with broad spectrum antibiotics. Three days after her admission, her feet, distal portion of both legs, and part of the thighs darkened progressively as shown in . Doppler ultrasound examination that the dorsalis pedis arteries pulse were absent. A diagnosis of Purpura gangrenosa vasculitis was made. As the condition of the lower limbs had deteriorated, the parents were explained about the urgent need for bilateral amputation. The parents refused and the parents asked for the patient to be taken home without any further medications. The patient continued her treatment with the traditional healer. The healer believed that wrapping her lags in plastic filled with herbs and leaves would serve as an adequate remedy. A month later, the patient returned to the hospital with both lower extremities amputated at just above the ankle level. Both lower limbs were black and necrotic with dry gangrene from the thighs all the way to the distal. Both distal bone ends were exposed and dry. The patient was alert but looked malnourished. Unfortunately, the parents denied further treatment once again due to financial circumstances. Two months later, the patient was admitted to the surgical ward by the city council to receive prostheses. In spite of the cutaneous gangrene up to the thigh areas, there weren’t any signs of any further propagation of the disease since her last admission. Physical examination showed autoamputation of both legs above the ankles without any signs of sepsis. Both knees were held in a slightly flexed position with adduction of both hips. shows that both stumps had exposed bone with surrounding necrotic tissue. The lower extremities X-Ray results do not show any signs of destruction of the bones and their surrounding soft tissues as shown in . Debridement of necrotic bone and soft tissue and skin grafting was performed to cover the exposed tissue and bone ends. The child was subsequently fitted with patella tendon bearing prostheses. In the present day, 5 years after the operation, the patient is currently in a healthy condition without any additional complaints and is grateful that she is able to walk again. Her lower extremities do not exhibit any further vascular or neurological abnormalities as shown in .