A 43-year-old woman presented with dull retrosternal chest pain associated with diaphoresis for 5 h. She was in acute distress secondary to the pain. On admission, her heart rate was 109 beats per minute and her blood pressure was 160/100 mm Hg. Her oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. Further examination revealed regular cardiac rhythm, normal breath sounds, and absence of murmurs, jugular venous distension, or peripheral edema. She reported active tobacco abuse (30 pack-years smoking history), nulliparity, and no contraceptive medication use. The differential diagnosis included acute coronary syndrome (ACS), spontaneous coronary artery dissection, esophageal spasm, gastro-esophageal reflux disorder, pulmonary embolism, and musculoskeletal pain.
A 12-lead ECG showed sinus rhythm with ST elevations > 2 mm in leads V1–V4 with reciprocal changes in inferior leads, which led to a diagnosis of anterior STEMI. The chest X-ray showed a normal-sized heart with no consolidation or abnormality noted in the lungs.
The patient was loaded with aspirin and ticagrelor, and emergently taken to the cardiac catheterization lab. Coronary angiography showed acute thrombotic occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) with spontaneous recanalization and 80% stenosis, with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow grade 2 distally . Given the significant thrombus burden, we proceeded with aspiration thrombectomy which established TIMI flow grade 3. Following thrombectomy, optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the LAD was performed to evaluate the underlying etiology for the acute coronary event. OCT revealed a significant residual thrombotic burden overlying an eroded, non-obstructive plaque . After additional rounds of thrombectomy, repeat OCT showed plaque erosion with no evidence of plaque rupture. A final coronary angiography revealed 50% residual stenosis. Stenting was deferred, given the non-obstructive nature of the underlying plaque, absence of plaque rupture, restoration of TIMI flow grade 3, and improvement of symptoms and resolution of the ST elevation on ECG (Electrocardiogram). An Eptifibatide bolus of 180 mcg/kg was administered, followed by a 2 mcg/kg/min infusion for 18 h. On day 3 of admission, cardiac MRI (CMR) showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50% and myocardial changes consistent with the subacute stage of medium-sized infarction in the LAD territory. Specifically, we noted late gadolinium enhancement involving the basal to mid anteroseptal, distal septal, and distal anterior walls, consistent with a transmural infarction . The patient was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy and high-intensity statin (atorvastatin 80 mg daily). Smoking cessation counseling was done, nicotine patches were prescribed, and the patient was enrolled for cardiac rehabilitation therapy.
At 2 months follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic. Repeat angiogram showed a non-obstructive lesion in the proximal LAD . Functional assessment with instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) confirmed that the intermediate stenosis was not hemodynamically significant (iFR=0.90). OCT showed a stable, non-obstructive, thick cap fibro-fatty plaque in the proximal LAD with no evidence of thrombus . Repeat CMR showed remarkable recovery with improvement in the LVEF to 58% and the late gadolinium enhancement pattern was now consistent with a non-transmural infarction of the mid anteroseptal (50% involvement), distal anterior, and distal septal segments (50–75% involvement) . Her low-density lipoprotein at the time of presentation was 79 mg/dl which improved to 54 mg/dl on a high-intensity statin. On her most recent follow-up, 27 months after the initial presentation, she continued to do well. She had successfully quit tobacco with counseling and temporary nicotine replacement therapy, and her last cigarette use was on the day of her myocardial infarction . We plan to continue to treat her with dual antiplatelet therapy for as long as she can tolerate it without bleeding issues and consider anatomic or functional assessment (preferably a non-invasive study with coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) or stress testing) only if she were to have symptoms concerning for angina.