A 66-year-old Chinese female presented with recurrent abdominal pain for 20 years and fever for 1 wk.
The patient began to experience intermittent dull pain in the upper abdomen more than 20 years ago, with no obvious inducement, and spontaneously relieved by rest. Initially, no other concomitant symptoms were found, but the pain occurred 1-2 times per month. In the past 2 years, the frequency of abdominal pain increased to about 1-2 times a week. The patient developed chills and a fever 1 wk ago, with the highest body temperature of 38.3 ℃, which were relieved after oral administration of antipyretic and analgesic drugs. No jaundice was evident.
The patient was diagnosed as type 2 diabetes and hypertension 2 years ago, which has been controlled well with oral medication.
The patient had no special personal and family history.
At admission, the patient’s consciousness was clear, with a body temperature of 37.3 ℃, and a blood pressure on 145/85 mmHg, without skin and sclera jaundice. The abdomen was soft and flat, with percussive pain in the right upper quadrant and liver area, without tenderness or rebound pain. Murphy’s sign was negative.
Laboratory tests indicated that only alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyltransferase (γ-GTP) were slightly elevated at admission, with normal infection indicators, tumor markers, and total bilirubin (TBIL) .
Contrast-enhanced abdominal magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates a dilated bile duct in right liver with a large cyst occupying the beginning of the right anterior and posterior hepatic ducts, accompanied by rights liver atrophy, left liver hyperplasia, and counterclockwise hilar translocation . The opening of left hepatic duct was very close to the cyst , the right portal vein branch was not clearly seen, with no variation of extrahepatic bile duct and other blood vessels . The peripheral bile ducts were full of stones . According to the preoperative imaging evaluation, standard right hepatectomy could resolve this lesion.