We present a 37-year-old-female who complained of exertional dyspnoea accompanied by cyanosis on mild to moderate exercise. Her past medical history was unremarkable. On physical examination, resting oxygen saturation was 92%, cardiac auscultation revealed a loud second heart sound, lungs were clear, and there was no evidence of congestion. The ECG revealed sinus rhythm, right axis deviation of the QRS, and T wave inversion in the right precordial leads. The echocardiogram demonstrated an enlarged right ventricle (RV) with moderate dysfunction and systolic flattening of the interventricular septum. The arterial blood gas test showed low arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2) (59 mmHg). The patient was admitted for a complete diagnostic workup. The combination of the exploratory and echocardiographic findings, along with the low resting PaO2 and the cyanosis on effort, raised suspicion of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and, more specifically, of pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD). The right heart catheterization (RHC) confirmed severe pre-capillary pulmonary hypertension (PH): mean pulmonary artery (PA) pressure: 51 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR): 8.5 WU, and preserved cardiac output (CO). Blood tests were normal and ruled out PAH-associated causes such as HIV or autoimmune diseases. Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease was considered the most probable diagnosis, so special attention was paid to the lung function tests and computerized tomography (CT) scan results. It was noteworthy that the diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was severely reduced (26%), and the CT scan showed the typical PVOD findings (see ). The cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) exhibited a severely reduced functional capacity with a peak oxygen consumption (PVO2) of 9 mL/kg/min (37% predicted), profound desaturation on effort (SatO2: 71%), and signs of severe ventilatory impairment, namely the abrupt increase in VE/VCO2 values from the onset of exercise, instead of its usual initial fall; a high VE/VCO2 slope at 57, and a severe reduction of PetCO2 values with even a downward trend over the test [initial PetCO2: 23 mmHg, final: 16 mmHg ]. Pulmonary arterial hypertension-specific therapy was slowly initiated while monitoring for signs of pulmonary congestion. Sildenafil was started along with diuretics. This was extremely well tolerated, so macitentan 10 mg was added. The patient was finally discharged on combination therapy, supplemental oxygen, and diuretics, with a carefully planned close follow-up. Importantly, an evaluation for a possible lung transplantation was requested to the respiratory team, and a genetic study was solicited.
A complete reevaluation was scheduled 4 months later. The genetic results revealed a pathogenic biallelic mutation in EIF2AK4. At that time, the patient reported marked symptomatic amelioration. The repeated RHC showed significant improvement: mean PA pressure dropped to 36 mmHg and PVR to 3.9 WU. The echocardiogram demonstrated favourable RV remodelling. Interestingly, although the CPET values were still in the severe range both for functional and for ventilatory impairment, the behaviour of most of the curves improved : (i) PVO2 increased to 10 mL/kg/min (39% predicted) and showed a shorter post-exercise recovery delay, (ii) VE/VCO2 slope was similar, but the morphology of the ventilatory equivalents curves changed significantly, exhibiting a less steep profile, (iii) PetCO2 kinetics showed a more flattened behaviour with higher values at peak exercise (initial PetCO2: 25 mmHg, final: 21 mmHg). This slight improvement was accompanied by a less pronounced desaturation (minimal: 79%). Considering this information, it was agreed to keep the patient off the transplant list and to maintain the same treatment. Two years later, she remains stable with a good subjective quality of life.