A 83-year old patient in good medical condition underwent radical cystectomy and urinary diversion by Bricker ileal conduit for pT3a, G3, pN0, R0 urothelial bladder cancer. On the 3rd postoperative day, wound drains showed fecal secretion and relaparotomy was undertaken. Intraoperatively, massive adhesions and ileoileal anastomotic insufficiency were found. Extensive lavage of the abdomen was performed, the former ileoileal anastomosis resected and reconstructed. Severe wound healing disorder occurred resulting in an open abdomen. A further relaparotomy and extensive lavage were performed on the 9th postoperative day; despite massive adhesions full overview of the surgical site could be obtained. There was no macroscopic sign of anastomotic leakage at this point. As primary wound closure could not be achieved, open wound care was initiated consisting of wet saline dressings changed every two days following minor abdominal lavage. On the 16th postoperative day, leakage of urine was suspected due to increased secretion of the wound and confirmed by radiographic imaging. Relaparotomy was mandated, ureteroileal anastomosis reconstructed and two nephrostomies placed. Persistent exudation led to the assumption of continued anastomotic insufficiency, which was confirmed by flexible endoscopy and radiologic control . The leakage probably due to the patient's advanced age accompanied by therefore deteriorated wound healing involved half the circumference of the ureteroileal anastomosis. A novel relaparotomy was initiated but futile due to pronounced adhesions. For lack of surgical strategies modified intraabdominal VAC therapy was employed to close the leakage. A piece of polyurethane foam was covered by Mepithel®, a silicon wound dressing, to avoid injury of the intestines and wound around a tube . The tube was inserted through the abdominal wound and positioned at the leakage under radiologic control by instilling contrast agent through the conduit . All changes of the device (duration about 40 minutes) with inspection of the intraabdominal situation by flexible endoscopy to rule out injuries of the intestines were performed by the same surgeon with the patient under general anesthesia in a room with the possibility of radiologic control. VAC dressing was applied as previously described and the tube led out of the abdomen through an polyurethan foam padding the open abdomen was connected to the VAC unit. After fixing the foam to the skin with special adhesive tapes suction was adjusted to 125 mmHg. While changing of the device was projected every three days, two extracurricular changes had to be performed due to increased mucosal output of the conduit clogging the foam. Within 32 days of VAC therapy the intraabdominal fistula resolved as demonstrated by radiological control . For the remaining wound defect of the abdomen conventional wound care and secondary closure after 15 days were employed. Final endoscopic and radiologic controls of the conduit showed gradual mucosal coverage in the area of the anastomosis. The patient recovered well and was admitted to a rehabilitation unit. After a follow-up period of 13 months no further anastomotic insufficiency was noted.