A 66 year-old man with a past medical history of hypertension, hypothyroidism, hyperhomocysteinemia, and major depressive disorder was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation of altered mental status. The patient had been cattle ranching four days prior to his initial hospital presentation. While cattle ranching, he began having malaise and cramping in his hands. He subsequently vomited and started having diarrhea. Given that the temperatures outside were above 100 degrees Farhanheit during the first two days while cattle ranching, the patient’s wife felt he was dehydrated and encouraged him to drink more fluids. On the third day of cattle ranching, the patients’ mental status deteriorated as he became increasingly lethargic. He was taken to an outside hospital and was intubated for airway protection. Outside hospital laboratories demonstrated the following significant laboratories: WBC 11.4 K/cmm, Hemoglobin 15.6 K/cmm , Na 143 mEq/L, K 5.9 mEq/L, Phosphorus 6.4 mEq/L, anion gap 22 mEq/L, creatinine 5.5 mg/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 22.7 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR) 50 mm/hr, lactate 2 mMol/L, and troponin 0.229 ng/mL, CK-MB 8.1 ng/mL, and lipase 1091 unit/L. The patient displayed evidence of multiorgan failure and was transferred to our hospital for further care.
Upon arrival (five days after his initial presentation to the outside hospital), the patient was euthermic at 97.8 F. His heart rate was 86, blood pressure 162/82, and respiratory rate 18. His neurological examination was significant for lethargy, dysarthria, impaired vertical eye movements, diffuse weakness in all limbs (4 out of 5 power in the extensors of the arms and flexors of the legs), bilateral ataxia on finger to nose, and bilateral extensor plantar responses. General physical examination was normal other than bilateral scattered crackles on lung auscultation. There were no stigmata of infectious endocarditis.
Laboratory findings upon transfer were remarkable for an elevated C-reactive protein of >190 mg/L, ESR of 111 mm/hr, ALT 91 U/L, AST 51 U/L, and a macrocytic anemia with a hemoglobin and hematocrit of 13.2/38.2 K/cmm. WBC, platelets, PTT/PT/INR, vitamin B12, folate, homocysteine, cardiac enzymes including CK, thyroid studies, creatinine, and blood cultures were normal. Abdominal ultrasound showed evidence of hepatic steatosis and transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal ejection fraction with left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction but no evidence of vegetations or wall motion abnormalities.
Diffusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple punctate foci of restricted diffusion involving the frontoparietal cerebral cortex and cerebellum bilaterally as well as two larger foci in the dorsomedial and ventrolateral thalami bilaterally . These abnormal lesions showed decreased ADC and heterogeneous postcontrast enhancement . Magnetic resonance angiography of the head and neck vasculature showed normal flow-related signal within the intra and extracranial vessels. There was trace layering of intraventricular hemorrhage within the bilateral occipital horns on the GRE sequence.
After nine days of hospitalization, the patient started to awaken and became more alert. During hospitalization he was started on Amantadine and was eventually discharged to an acute rehabilitation facility. After two weeks of inpatient therapy, the patient had persistent cognitive deficits including poor short term memory.