The index case is that of a 30-year-old G4P3013 patient who presented to the labor and delivery unit at 40 weeks and 6 days for induction of labor. Obstetrical history included three previous uncomplicated vaginal deliveries. She had no prior surgical or significant medical history. Her labor induction was started with dinoprostone, which was removed after about 4 hours due to persistent category 2 fetal heart rate tracing. A decision was then made to perform a cesarean section delivery due to the persistent category 2 fetal heart rate tracing, refractory to resuscitative measures. Intraoperative blood loss was estimated at 1000 ml. In the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), the patient started having increased vaginal bleeding secondary to uterine atony. The bleeding did not respond to uterotonic agents including oxytocin, misoprostol, methylergonovine, and carboprost. Tranexamic acid was also administered; however, this was not effective. We then proceeded with examination under anesthesia and placement of a Bakri balloon was attempted; however, after infiltrating the balloon with normal saline, the device was expelled from the uterus on two occasions. The total estimated blood loss was noted to be 2500 ml, and the patient remained hemodynamically stable. The interventional radiology team was consulted, and the patient underwent bilateral UAE using tris-acryl gelatin microsphere (Embosphere Microspheres®) 700–900 microns and Gelfoam slurry . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 4 after meeting all her postoperative milestones. On postoperative day 28, she presented to the emergency room due to foul smelling vaginal discharge, abdominal pains, fever, and chills. An abdomino-pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained, which revealed an enlarged uterus with unenhanced areas of the endometrium and myometrium as well as internal foci of gas within the uterine fundus. These findings were suggestive of uterine necrosis, with approximately 50% normal residual myometrial thickness . She was started on empiric broad spectrum antibiotics. She continued to have persistent malodorous vaginal discharge and remained febrile even after adjusting her antibiotics in consultation with the infectious disease team. The patient declined a hysterectomy as she wanted to preserve her fertility. She was consented for examination under anesthesia, dilation and curettage (D&C) with direct ultrasound guidance 4 days after starting her on antibiotics. The D&C procedure was uncomplicated, and organized necrotic tissue was curetted and sent for pathological and tissue culture evaluation. The pathology results subsequently showed features of acute and chronic endometritis. The tissue cultures grew Streptococcus anginosus and Prevotella species, and culture directed antimicrobial therapy was commenced. The patient subsequently had improvement in her clinical symptoms—she had no more vaginal discharge and she remained afebrile for more than 48 hours. She was discharged on hospital day 7 to complete a 14-day course of antibiotics. At her follow-up visit, her examination was within normal limits and she denied any abdominal pain, pelvic discomfort, or abnormal vaginal discharge or bleeding and was happy to have retained her uterus. She desired and received an etonogestrel subdermal implant for contraception.