A 61-year-old Asian woman, previously healthy, presented with a painless slow-growing mass lesion in the mesosternum. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed no generalized lymphadenopathy. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed space-occupying lesions in the mesosternum, a greater likelihood of malignancy, and multiple rounds or round-like nodules with variable sizes scattered throughout both lungs. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) detected two areas of bone destruction with soft tissue density shadow formation in the mesosternum with FDG uptake, malignant lesions, and possible metastases. Besides, low-density lesions in the right medial lobe of the liver showed poorly defined boundaries and slightly increased FDG metabolism; malignant lesion metastases were also considered. Bilateral thyroid gland showed heterogeneous density, a slightly low-density nodule in the right lobe, and poorly defined boundaries and slightly increased FDG metabolism; the middle segment wall of the esophagus was slightly thickened with slightly increased FDG metabolism, thus a combined gastroscopy test was recommended. Further liver magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed focal signal abnormalities in hepatic segment 8, inflammatory lesions were considered and malignant lesions were to be excluded, and liver puncture should be checked if necessary, also multiple hepatic hemangiomas . The thyroid ultrasound test revealed bilateral thyroid lesions with formation of multiple nodules (Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System, TI-RADS). The gastroscopic examination showed non-atrophic gastritis with erosion, fundic gland polyps (the greater curvature), HP (-), and chronic inflammation of antrum mucosa (the lesser curvature). The colonoscopy showed that the surface of the colorectal mucosa was smooth, and no significant abnormality was observed. However, these imaging evaluations plus endoscopy could not identify the primary location of the tumor. Significant laboratory investigations showed elevated tumor markers [Carbohydrate antigen19-9 (CA19-9): 38.80 U/ml↑, CA50: 32.02 IU/ml↑, Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 10.00 ng/ml↑, Cytokeratin fragment antigen 21-1 (CYFRA21-1): 4.08 ng/ml↑]. The endoscopic ultrasonography showed multiple nodules in the liver (etiology to be determined), no obvious endobronchial space-occupying lesions were found in the pancreatic parenchyma, and no obvious abnormalities were observed in the gallbladder. Pathological examination of tissue from an ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the mesosternum lesions suggested a poorly differentiated metastatic carcinoma, with a bias toward classical adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical (IHC) detection failed to determine the exact tissue origin. The mammography detection showed that there were focal calcifications in the upper outer quadrant of the breast. Ultrasound examinations revealed that the bilateral breast had lobular hyperplasia, with formation of several nodules Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) in the upper outer quadrant of the breast, and no axillary lymphadenopathy was detected. In addition, MRI revealed that the upper outer quadrant of the breast exhibited focal mass with non-mass-like enhancement (BI-RADS 3). There was sternal metastasis with adjacent soft tissue thickening. Because the primary site could not be identified, we decided to treat the patient with local radiation therapy (6MV-X, 50GY/10) to the metastatic lesion of the sternum first.
Comprehensive genomic analysis using the multiple-genes panel NGS that was designed to detect variants of cancer-related genes was performed. The genomic DNA was extracted from patient’s peripheral blood. NGS was performed to an average depth of >5,000x on the Novaseq 6000 platform (Illumina, USA). This assay demonstrated the presence of an ERBB2 copy number variation (CNV), amplification. This amplification is well known to be a positive biomarker for trastuzumab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody that specifically targets the extracellular site of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). The genomic analysis also identified additional CCND1 amplification and multiple gene mutations, including TP53 (37.59%) mutation, c.738G>A, p.M246I; SPRED1 (29.20%) mutation, c.1150G>C, p.E384Q; MLH3 (23.11%) mutation, c.616G>C, p.D206H; LRP1B (17.39%) mutation, c.5772C>G, p.I1924M; ERBB2 (17.22%) mutation, c.2264T>C, p.L755S; XRCC2 (15.41%) mutation, c.37G>A, p.E13K; SETD2 (14.71%) mutation, c.5531C>G, p.S1844C; NCOA3 (13.66%) mutation, c.2429C>T, p.S810F; BRAF (15.50%) mutation, c.1739A>T, p.N580I; ERBB4 (11.02%) mutation, c.1573C>T, p.R525C; and KMT2D (0.89%) mutation, c.4843C>T, p.R1615. Tumor mutational burden (TMB): 7.9 mutations/Mb. Microsatellitestable (MSS), Programmed cell death-Ligand 1 (PD-L1) (-) .
Furthermore, a 90-gene expression assay for identifying tumor tissue origin was performed based on a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsy sample of the patient’s mesosternum lesions. As shown in , these test results strongly supported a breast cancer as the cell of origin with a score of 98.1. Then, the patient underwent careful examination after the tissue-of-origin test with attention paid to the breast region. Histopathological examination of the mesosternum lesions revealed a poorly differentiated metastatic adenocarcinoma; combined with immunohistochemical findings, the cells stained for Estrogen receptor (ER) (-), Progesterone receptor (PR) (-), HER2 (3+), Ki-67 (+50%), Mammaglobin (+), GATA3 (+), GCDFP15 (+), and SOX10 (-) and tend to be breast cancer metastasis . These findings suggested adenocarcinoma of breast origin. MRI and mammography-based tumor localization were subsequently utilized to perform the calcification focal resection in the right outer upper quadrant of the breast. Postoperative pathology confirmed it as invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast, grade II with mucin secretion, and foci of invasive papillary carcinoma, with 0.7 cm in maximum dimension. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that the cells stained for ER (+, 90%), PR (+, 70%), HER2 (2+), Ki-67 (+, 10%), and Androgen receptor (AR) (+, 10%) . Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) detection revealed HER2 gene amplification . After a local surgical resection, the patient has received monthly zoledronic acid treatment and 8 cycles of TCbHP regimen (Docetaxel + Carboplatin + Herceptin + Pertuzumab), with subsequent HP (Herceptin + Pertuzumab) maintenance therapy intravenously at a standard dose every 3 weeks for up to 6 months. These regimens were well-tolerated. The patient was regularly reviewed at monthly intervals. Six months after the operation, she was found to have stable disease, with the obvious osteogenic changes in metastatic lesions of the sternum , and no change in the solitary liver lesion, which further confirmed that atypical hemangioma may be involved . Tumor markers (before treatment: CA19-9: 38.80 U/ml↑, CA50: 32.02 IU/ml↑, CEA: 10.00 ng/ml↑, CYFRA21-1: 4.08 ng/ml↑) all decreased to normal levels.