A 76-year-old man was referred to a local hospital with a 2-week history of dysuria and constipation. He had a medical history of hypertension and atrial fibrillation, for which he had been prescribed antihypertensives and anticoagulants. When the initial abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a large IIAA, the patient was transferred to our hospital for emergency treatment. At our hospital, the biochemical test indicated renal dysfunction (urea nitrogen 60.4 mg/dL, creatinine 3.41 mg/dL and glomerular filtration rate 15 ml/min/1.73m ). Contrast-enhanced CT confirmed the presence of a large and isolated left IIAA measuring 90 mm in diameter . CT images revealed bilateral hydronephrosis along with the compression of the rectum by the IIAA . However, there was no evidence of intestinal perforation. We therefore established a diagnosis of an isolated, left IIAA with secondary rectal obstruction and bilateral ureteral obstruction.
We anticipated that open surgery would be difficult as the IIAA was large and compressed surrounding organs. We therefore proceeded with endovascular repair. Owing to the significant tortuosity of the right external iliac artery, left femoral artery approach was preferred. Subsequently, emergency endovascular repair was performed after obtaining informed consent from the patient. The left femoral artery was cannulated using a 6-French gage (Fr) sheath catheter. A 4-Fr catheter was used to select the left internal iliac artery and two outflow vessels. As there was no evidence of rupture, the cardiologist deployed a 10-mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug (AVP) II in each outflow vessel and a 16-mm AVP II in the inflow vessel. Hemodynamic stability was maintained throughout the procedure.
After successful completion of the endovascular repair, the patient underwent continuous renal replacement therapy. After 3 days, a urologist inserted a ureteral stent into the right ureter; however, he was not able to rescue the left ureter as the deformation was highly severe. The patient also had persistent abdominal distention and limited defecation. Ten days after the endovascular repair, he suddenly developed severe abdominal pain. Abdominal CT at this point revealed intestinal perforation. Emergency open surgery was recommended, and after obtaining written informed consent from the patient and his family, emergency surgery was performed by median laparotomy under general anesthesia. This revealed necrosis and perforation of the anterior wall of the rectum. Compression caused by the aneurysm, which was firmly adherent to the posterior wall of the rectum, had severely damaged the mesorectum. Therefore, the surgeons decided to resect the lesion; however, owing to strong adhesion between the aneurysm and the rectum, incising through the IIAA wall was deemed necessary . Although a large amount of hematoma was discharged, no active bleeding was observed. The maximal portion of the hematoma was removed. After resection of the affected part of the rectum, a colostomy was formed. Thus, we concluded that the rectum was heavily compressed by the IIAA in the pelvis, resulting in rectal necrosis.
Renal replacement therapy proved unnecessary 5 days after the open surgery. Although a vesicorectal fistula developed 18 days after the open surgery , there was no sign of infection, and the fistula was left untreated. Renal function gradually improved and normalized 4 weeks after endovascular repair. After enough rehabilitation, the patient was discharged 3.5 months following endovascular repair. The patient has been follow-up as an outpatient and has been living well 6 months after endovascular repair.