The patient was a 41-year-old woman, who was 34 weeks and 5 days pregnant. She had been hospitalized with a suspected diagnosis of placenta previa due to genital bleeding. Post-admission pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the lowest end of the placenta was still in the internal cervix, i.e., a marginal placenta previa. Autologous blood donation was performed in preparation for a cesarean section, following which she began to complain of right lower back pain that worsened every day. Oral acetaminophen 1.8 g/day and intramuscular 15 mg pentazocine, administered every 3 h, were ineffective. As leukocyturia was observed, but urinary bacterial infection was not detected, the obstetrician suspected pyelonephritis, and a urologist was consulted. By reexamining the original MRI, the urologist determined that her right ureter encircled the dorsal aspect of the IVC and was being compressed by the growing fetus, causing hydronephrosis. The patient was diagnosed with right hydronephrosis due to retrocaval ureter . He was not convinced regarding the efficacy of a urological stent in relieving pain of urological origin and preferred epidural analgesia. An elective cesarean section was planned by the obstetrician, who assembled a surgical team with sufficient personnel, including an interventional radiologist, keeping in mind the possibility of placenta previa. The department for pain control was apprised of her condition. Her hematocrit, leukocyte count, eGFR, and creatinine were 28.1% (reference range 33.5–45), 7000/μL (3500–9000), 93.1 mL/min/1.73m2, and 0.76 mL/dL (0.45–0.94), respectively, in the absence of coagulation disorders. We explained that epidural analgesia would not treat the stenosis, only provide pain relief, and the patient provided consent. With infusion of 1 g cefazolin, an epidural catheter was inserted at the T12–L1 interspace. Epidural analgesia was induced with 0.2% ropivacaine, at 4 mL/h, as the 4-mL bolus dose of 1% lidocaine was effective. Her NRS pain score decreased from 9 to 10 to 0 to 1 after epidural catheter insertion, and for 3 days no additional analgesia was needed. Her eGFR and hematocrit worsened to 69.7 mL/min/1.73 m2 and 26.8%, respectively, and an elective cesarean section, at 35 weeks of pregnancy, was performed. Ten milligrams of hyperbaric bupivacaine were administered for spinal analgesia, in addition to the insertion of the epidural catheter, with inter-departmental cooperation. Intraoperative hemorrhage, including amniotic fluid during surgery, was 1400 mL. Only autologous blood transfusion was required. The fetus weighed 2246 g at birth. Both mother and child were fine and were discharged within 2 weeks.