Our patient was the third child of non-consanguineous Caucasian parents; her father died from cystic kidney disease when she was three years old. Her birth and neonatal development were uneventful.
At the age of three years, skull asymmetry became visible, which was more and more pronounced in the following years. Fibrous dysplasia was identified by computed tomography, involving in particular the left skull base with the optic canal. Café-au-lait spots were not visible. Beginning at the age of five, the girl underwent five subsequent surgical interventions for plastic reconstruction of her face. However, after each surgery, the girl experienced a marked regrowth of the dysplasia leading to massive facial disfigurement .
Finally, at the age of eleven years, our patient presented with gigantism, leading to endocrinological examinations. Her pubertal development now showed Tanner stage PH2-3, B2-3; her body weight was 80.8 kg and length 175.2 cm (both above than the 97th percentile). Besides the asymmetrical skull dysplasia, the girl also presented with an acromegalic appearance. Laboratory evaluations revealed a massive hyperprolactinemia of 5475 mU/L (normal range < 500 mU/L), high growth hormone levels (that is, 43.2 mU/mL at 8 a.m.), and an elevated insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) of 892 ng/mL (age-related normal range, 111 ng/mL to 693 ng/mL). Her alkaline phosphatase was 690 U/L (normal range, 51 U/L to 332 U/L). A pituitary adenoma was seen on magnetic resonance imaging, located within the massively expanded dysplastic skull base . An ophthalmological examination revealed neither diplopia nor any other subjective impairment of her vision. There was a mild paleness of her optic nerve papilla and mild left-sided hemianopia.
The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary conference for the four problems, that is, her facial disfigurement, possible danger to her left visual nerve and the pituitary tumor leading to local pressure and acromegaly. Besides the futility and probable enormous difficulty of cosmetic surgery, our patient and her mother refused any further surgical interventions for this purpose. A surgical intervention at her pituitary gland appeared difficult due to its complete impaction within the dysmorphic, fibrous bone of her skull base. Therefore, we did not obtain a histopathology specimen, and so it was not possible to tell whether the pituitary tumor was a lesion of acidophils, prolactin cells or both. Radiotherapy of her pituitary gland by conventional or gamma-knife irradiation was considered as too toxic, especially since malignant transformation is a well-known possible late effect, particularly in fibrous dysplasia tissues .
Thus, based on published experiences in McCune-Albright syndrome [,,,], at the age of twelve years, our patient started pharmacological treatment. First, to treat the fibrous dysplasia, we initiated parenteral bisphosphonate therapy with pamidronic acid (Aredia), given every four weeks with a dosage of 30 mg, which equals about 0.4 mg per kilogram body weight. This was done by continuous infusion over four hours with cardiorespiratory monitoring and included regular examination of her kidney and liver function parameters.
In parallel, cabergoline, as the current standard therapy of prolactinomas, was given with a stepwise escalation of the dosage to reach a level of 2 mg twice weekly, which was tolerated well. Regular controls of blood pressure and cardiac function were included.
The clinical course was monitored regularly in monthly to three monthly intervals. The therapy was tolerated well. No acute side effects, such as rash, nausea, electrolyte disturbances, cardiovascular, pulmonary or renal impairment, occurred. Further, the continuous treatment, which has been extended without change for two and a half years, was not associated with osseous necrosis of the jaw or elsewhere, nephrocalcinosis or cardiac valve fibrosis.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed no further progression of the fibrous dysplasia; her osseous status has remained unchanged for two and a half years. Her alkaline phosphatase, initially elevated up to 690 U/L, declined to 587 U/L after one year, and 417 U/L after two years of therapy.
Her visually evoked potentials showed a mild prolongation after the first six months of therapy, which did not go along with any subjective symptoms.
Endocrinological tests showed an immediate and rapid response of prolactin, which fell to the normal range within two months of therapy and have remained completely suppressed since. In parallel, we observed a normalization of her growth hormone levels, and her IGF-1 level fell to normal levels after four months. The growth of our patient slowed down, her final length of 180 cm was, however, much higher than her mid parental expectation. Our patient achieved menarche about one year after the initiation of treatment, that is, several months after normalization of her prolactin levels. Magnetic resonance imaging of her skull base showed a marked shrinkage of the hypophyseal tumor.
In summary, we observed stabilization both of the osseous and the endocrinological symptoms of the disease in our patient, allowing a significant improvement in the quality of life of our patient without further surgical interventions.