A 66-year-old Caucasian woman presented to primary care with a 4-week history of breathlessness and ankle swelling. With the exception of hypertension, her past medical history was unremarkable. Initial investigations included measurement of N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), which was found to be elevated at 2829 ng/L (normal value <125 ng/L) and so she was referred for urgent evaluation by the integrated heart failure service at our institution.
The patient attended on Day 10 following presentation to primary care. Clinical observations were unremarkable, oxygen saturations were 98% on room air, respiratory rate 19, blood pressure 129/72 mmHg, and heart rate 86 beats/min. Physical examination revealed oedema to the mid shin, a grade III mid-diastolic murmur, raised jugular venous pressure, and clear lung fields.
The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a large, mobile mass arising from the right atrium and extending into the right ventricle . The mass appeared to be attached to the intra-atrial septum, extending into the inferior vena cava in subcostal tilt view. The mass was described as echo-dense and heterogeneous, measuring 90 × 42 mm in apical four-chamber view. The tricuspid valve was stented open and so calculation of valve gradients was not possible, the basal right ventricular dimension was 43.5 mm and the tricuspid annular dimension was 49.7 mm. The inferior vena cava diameter measured 19.1 mm with minimal respiratory variation.
The patient was counselled on the differential diagnosis and in view of the risk of sudden death, was admitted directly from clinic to undergo urgent surgical resection. Prior to operation, further diagnostic evaluation was undertaken. Chest radiography showed a dilated right atrium and small left pleural effusion. Computerized tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed an isolated mass within the right atrium extending into the right ventricle and superior vena cava, a small left basal pleural effusion, with no evidence of distant metastases or remote thromboembolism . Coronary angiography showed moderate, proximal atheroma in the left anterior descending artery, whilst the right and circumflex coronary arteries were normal.
On Day 13, the patient underwent surgical resection, the preoperative EuroSCORE II was 3.12%. The approach was via midline sternotomy, with systemic heparinization and standard aortic and bi-caval cannulation to achieve cardiopulmonary bypass with active cooling to 34°C. Following cross-clamping, the coronary arteries were perfused with cold blood cardioplegia delivered through the aortic root. Perioperative transoesophageal echocardiography again demonstrated the presence of an enormous right atrial myxoma obliterating the right atrial and ventricular cavities (Video 1). Right atriotomy revealed a massive right atrial mass, which was excised from the interatrial septum and removed in its entirety . The tricuspid leaflets were noted to be morphologically normal on visual inspection.
Following excision, and restoration of circulation, transoesophageal echocardiography showed severe tricuspid regurgitation due to annular dilatation ( and Video 2). Cardiopulmonary bypass was re-initiated and a 34 mm Physio II (Edwards Lifesciences, California, US) tricuspid ring was implanted. Subsequent imaging showed a central jet of mild tricuspid regurgitation and a dilated and moderately impaired right ventricle (Video 3). The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, the postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged to her usual place of residence on Day 22.
Histopathological examination demonstrated the mass was composed of myxoid substance with stellate myxoma (lipidic) cells and variably sized vessels. There were areas of haemorrhage, both recent and remote, and scattered calcification. A small focus of glandular elements was identified (and highlighted by CK7 immunohistochemistry) , which is an uncommon but benign feature reported in the literature. On Day 45, the patient attended for transthoracic echocardiography. There was evidence of reverse remodelling, with a reduction in right ventricular dimensions to within normal limits (34 mm). The right ventricular function was improved, reported as mildly impaired (tricuspid annular plan systolic excursion 9 mm), and only trivial tricuspid regurgitation (insufficient envelope to estimate pulmonary artery systolic pressure). No cardiovascular signs or symptoms were present.