A 42-year-old nulligravid woman at 17 weeks of gestation was transferred to our hospital for strong left lower abdominal pain. She had undergone laparotomic myomectomy for multiple myomas when she was 39 years old. The total number of excised myomas was 34, and blood loss was 9024 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged about a week after the operation. At the same period, she visited a cardiology clinic for mild hypertension; as a result, medication was not necessary with the diagnosis of white coat hypertension. Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvic area 6 months after the surgery revealed no abnormality in the uterus, uterine artery, or ureters.
She subsequently became pregnant through in-vitro fertilization and the embryo transfer technique. Thereafter, she underwent prenatal checkups, and the pregnancy followed a normal course. At the 17th week of gestation, she felt continuous pain around the left lower abdomen, for which she was referred to our hospital.
She presented no vaginal bleeding. The laboratory data showed slight anemia and an increase of leukocytes: hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL, white blood cell count 18.1 × 109/L, and platelet count 283 × 109/L. The renal function was normal: serum creatinine 0.57 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 9.7 mg/dL. Fetal development was normal and the placenta was mostly positioned on the posterior wall in the uterus with sonography. Abdominal and transvaginal ultrasonography demonstrated severe left hydronephrosis and a 17.5 mm hypo-echoic coin lesion surrounded by a hetero-echoic 6 cm mass in the parauterine space . Color Doppler ultrasonography revealed a spinning turbulent flow pattern inside the mass lesion . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed left uterine artery feeding blood flow to the mass and ureteral obstruction by the mass . The hydronephrosis of the left ureter was so severe that the calyceal diameter was over 31 mm . These results indicated left hydronephrosis secondary to UAP.
The patient underwent laparotomy. The sigmoid colon was firmly adhering to the surface of the uterus and the left pelvic wall. The UAP was buried among the adhesion . First, ligation of the left internal iliac artery was conducted to block the blood flow to the UAP. Next, exfoliation of the adhesion, removal of the hematoma and detaching of the left ureter from the UAP was carefully performed. Blood loss was controlled because blood flow to the UAP had been blocked. The total blood loss was 870 mL, and the surgical duration was 169 min. The ureteral obstruction was resolved, and the left lower abdominal pain disappeared following surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 11 days after the operation. She subsequently attended the remaining prenatal check-up series, and the pregnancy followed an uneventful course until early in week 35 of gestation. Fetal growth and Doppler studies were normal. However, from the end of week 35 of gestation, she developed pregnancy-induced hypertension without proteinuria; thus, a cesarean section was performed at 36 + 0 weeks of gestation. A healthy girl of 2257 g was delivered. The Apgar’s scores were 8 and 9 at 1 min and 5 min after birth, respectively. The placenta was mostly positioned on the posterior wall in the uterus. The umbilical artery pH was 7.349. At the cesarean section, the left lower uterine segment where the UAP had previously been present was not visible. She was discharged 7 days after the operation, and post-operative follow-up at 1 month after the delivery was uneventful. Moreover, the infant was also confirmed to have grown well and to be developmentally normal at the one-year examination after birth.