A 54 years-old right-handed man was admitted to the Department of Neurology of The Second Hospital of Lanzhou University in September 2021 with a sudden onset of lower limb weakness. Four days before admission, the patient felt weakness in both lower limbs, more severe in the left leg, and was unable to walk. Two days later, the weakness in the right lower limb worsened, and he was unable to stand. He also presented with back pain, urinary retention, and constipation. The patient was a non-smoker with a medical history of scoliosis, hypotension, and AS, all of which were untreated. On examination, the subject’s blood pressure was 75/50 mmHg. At that time, his weight was 40 kg, and his spine was deformed and curved. The neurological examination revealed that his speech, cognition, and cranial nerve function were normal. He had full strength bilaterally in all muscle groups in his upper limbs, with bilaterally brisk reflexes and normal muscle tone. Conversely, in his lower limbs, his muscle tone was significantly decreased, with tendon hyporeflexia. In both lower limbs, he had a flaccid tone with a Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 1/5 strength in the left leg and an MRC grade 2/5 strength in the right leg. He had dissociated sensory loss, and his superficial sensation was lost, with relative sparing of deep sensation below the level of the Th6 dermatome. Bilateral Babinski signs were present. The modified Rankin scale (MRS) score was 4/5.
Laboratory tests showed: C-reactive protein (CRP) 55.54 mg/L (normal range <6 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 23 mm/h (normal range <20 mm/h), immunoglobulin A (IgA) 4.5 g/L (normal range <4 g/L), D-dimer 1.13 mg/mL (normal range <0.5 mg/mL), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT) 268 u/L (normal range 10–60 u/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 205 u/L (normal range 45–125 u/L), triglycerides (TG) 4.44 mmol/L, lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)] 482 mg/L (normal range <400 mg/L), creatine kinase (CK) 365 u/L (normal range 50–310 u/L); HLA-B27 was positive. Homocysteine (HCY), hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), antiphospholipid antibodies, thyroid function, and routine anticoagulant blood tests were normal. Electromyography (EMG) showed multiple sensory and motor nerve damages. A color Doppler ultrasound showed a thrombus in the intermuscular vein of the left lower limb.
An MRI of the whole spine was undertaken. On the sagittal T2, there was an abnormal intramedullary signal intensity from T2 to T5, with central cord swelling. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with an apparent diffusion coefficient showed restricted diffusion, which can be seen in patients with acute ischemia (–). A spinal angiogram was recommended but declined by the patient.
Due to his AS, the patient had spinal deformities, ligament ossification, and spinal space occlusion , which made lumbar puncture technically challenging. CT of the sacroiliac joint showed that he had bilateral sacroiliitis and calcification of the anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments . A chest CT showed abnormalities of the thoracic vertebrae and an old fracture of the ribs. Experienced anesthesiologists performed multiple lumbar puncture attempts in the left lateral position at different levels (L2_3 and L3_4), with both midline and paramedian approaches, but these failed. After five failed attempts, the Taylor approach was successfully used for lumbar punctures. After local anesthetic infiltration, a spinal needle was inserted 1 cm medial and 1 cm caudal to the posterior superior iliac spine, which was located immediately in front of the skin depression. On the first attempt, a needle was inserted toward the medial side of the head toward the L5_S1 space to obtain clear cerebrospinal fluid. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal cell count (3 m/L) and an elevated protein level (0.72 g/L). The patient was negative for serum anti-aquaporin4 antibody (AQP4), oligoclonal band (OB), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
An MRI was performed to differentiate between possible inflammation and infarction. The MRI demonstrated restricted diffusion from T2 to T5. Combined with a severe acute deficit within hours, the subject was diagnosed with SCI.
We treated the patient with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for 1 month at the therapeutic dose, atorvastatin calcium (20 mg daily), and 160 mg intravenous methylprednisolone for 5 days, to reduce spinal cord edema. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were prescribed for the symptomatic treatment of AS. After 2 weeks, a thoracic spine MRI showed a slightly decreased signal (–). One month later, a reexamination of the lower vascular ultrasound showed unobstructed blood flow and resolution of venous thrombosis. After 8 weeks, the patient could walk with a medical walker. His MRS score was 3/5. A total of 6 months after the onset of his symptoms, he was able to walk independently and live without assistance. The treatment timeline is shown in .