A two-year-old Caucasian girl was brought to our Pediatric Emergency Department, referred from a pediatric outpatient center for unclear reasons after presenting with respiratory symptoms for two weeks. Her medical records showed that she had been diagnosed with neonatal withdrawal syndrome, which required long term treatment with phenobarbital. At the outpatient center, she had been diagnosed with repeated bronchiolitis and she needed health care services from a pediatric pulmonologist, who prescribed treatment with fluticasone. She had no other relevant medical or pathological background.
Medical records informed us that the child's mother had a medical history of substance-related disorders and she was receiving treatment for heroin dependence with methadone. No other pharmacological treatment was prescribed for cannabis and tobacco abuse.
When attending our department, the mother presented an unhealthy aspect and abnormal behavior. A physical examination of the child showed a minor asthma attack with respiratory difficulties and clinical features refractory to the outpatient bronchodilator treatment (salbutamol) over the past 15 days. The examination also revealed use of her accessory muscles for respiration, wheezing and bilateral hypoventilation. Her blood oxygen saturation level was 98% and cyanosis was not observed. Her vital signs revealed tachycardia and tachypnea without fever (her heart rate was 148 beats per minute, her respiratory rate, 60 breaths per minute and temperature 36°C). A neurological examination did not show a focal neurological deficit (15/15 Glasgow Score Scale) and the remainder of the physical examination was normal. The child received respiratory support and pharmacological treatment with gradual clinical improvement. Her blood cell count and serum biochemistry were normal. Under suspicion of exposure to drugs of abuse, urinary toxicology screening for commonly used drugs of abuse by cloned enzyme donor immunoassay (CEDIA, Microgenics, Barcelona, Spain) was done. Repeated urinary tests were positive for cocaine. Since urine toxicology was done in a pediatric emergency ward and speed was of paramount importance, the level of benzoylecgonine (BZG) in her urine was not quantified.
Information concerning the environment where the child had been living was obtained from the mother, who confirmed a history of crack smoking by both parents in the presence of the child during the days previous to her hospital admission. She denied that her child had ingested cocaine by any other route than passive inhalation. Chronic exposure to cocaine in an environment where drugs of abuse were being used by the parents was verified by hair analysis for the child and her parents .
After 48 hours, our patient recovered completely without any respiratory difficulties. She was discharged from the hospital and the proper authorities were alerted in order to evaluate the child's home conditions.
In the present case, a quantitative analysis of cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, cannabis and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) in her hair was performed according to forensic standards using an immunoassay (VMA/DRI®) on the available length of hair. The child's and her parent's hair samples (as an entire strand) were cut close to the scalp at the vertex region using stainless steel scissors. Whenever possible (hair shaft length more than 3 cm), the hair strands were divided into subsequent 3 cm segments, each representing hair growth in subsequent three-month periods. To exclude external contamination, the samples were washed before testing.
A comprehensive toxicological screening was performed on the collected hair samples. The test was positive for BZG, the main metabolite of cocaine, and cannabis in the entire hair samples. Quantitative analysis confirmed that BZG was present in the child's hair at a concentration of 1.9 ng/mg and 7.04 ng/mg. BZG concentrations found in her mother's and father's hair were 7.88 ng/mg and 6.39 ng/mg, and 13.06 ng/mg and 12.97 ng/mg, respectively. Opiates were detected in her mother's hair. Amphetamines and MDMA were not detected.