In December 2007, a 66-year-old African-American woman with a past medical history significant for diabetes mellitus, hypertension, congestive heart failure, and fibroids presented to the Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia with a non-healing ulcer of the right nipple. The patient’s past medical history was also significant for right breast DCIS for which she had undergone lumpectomy and whole breast radiation therapy in February 1998. These interventions were followed by five years of tamoxifen therapy. By mammography, the DCIS lesion measured three centimeters and was located six centimeters from the nipple in the inferomedial quadrant of the right breast. At lumpectomy, the lesion was a nuclear grade II/III micropapillary tumor with apocrine features . The margins of the specimen were negative for tumor.
Our patient received a standard course of radiation. Over 34 days, the right breast was treated with 6 Mv photons to a dose of 5000 cGy using medial and lateral tangential fields measuring 16 × 22 cm. Fifteen degree wedges were used to enhance dosimetry. The daily fraction size was 200 cGy. Over four days, the area of resection was boosted an additional 1000 cGy using an en face 16 MeV electron field measuring 12 × 5 cm. The total dose of radiation was 6000 cGy.
Nine years after surgery and radiation, our patient presented with a non-healing ulcer of the right nipple . The lesion was an irregularly shaped excoriation that partially eroded through the nipple. There was both serous and bloody discharge. The surrounding nipple-areolar tissue was effaced, retracted, and indurated. There was no odor or cellulitis. She stated she had been suffering from a "raw" right nipple with intermittent healing for approximately two years.
There were no other significant physical exam findings, including no palpable axillary lymphadenopathy. Mammography and magnetic resonance imaging studies were negative for recurrent breast cancer. However, the latter demonstrated abnormal enhancement in the nipple-areolar region.
An incisional biopsy of the lesion demonstrated invasive SCC. Subsequently, our patient underwent wide excision of the nipple-areolar complex. Pathologically, the lesion measured 15 mm (length) × 14 mm (width) × 9 mm (depth) and was characterized as a moderately to poorly differentiated invasive SCC . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CK903 , CK5/6, p63 , and calponin and negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors as well as Her-2/neu, supporting a diagnosis of SCC. The resection margins were free of tumor and there was no evidence of lymphovascular invasion. The tumor was staged T1N0M0 (Stage 1).
Our patient was felt to be at high risk for recurrence according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines . Specifically, her tumor occurred at the site of prior radiation therapy and had poorly defined borders, a depth greater than 4 mm, and a moderate to poor differentiation. For this reason, re-excision of the area was performed to ensure minimum 10 mm margins were obtained. Sentinel lymph-node biopsy was offered but our patient declined.
She was considered to have local disease and hence no further treatment was recommended. She will have close clinical follow-up biannually and mammography annually. She was also instructed to perform self skin and lymph node exams.