A 50-year-old Caucasian female visited the regional dental office due to uncertain pain in the right mandibular region. No significant diseases were mentioned in the anamnesis. The patient was diagnosed with gingivitis, and treated with a non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug and oral rinsing with chlorhexidine. The condition of the patient did not improve significantly. When she returned a week later, she had no alleviation, but labial paresthesia on the right side of her lip. As the cause of the new symptom remained unidentified, she was referred to the oral surgery group. Initially, the paraesthesia affected only the right side of the lower lip, but by this time it had spread to the skin of the right side of her chin. The oral surgeons decided to extract the lower right wisdom tooth, but the labial paraesthesia still persisted. Since there was an extended composite restoration in the lower right first molar, and translucency around its apical region was visible, the lesion was diagnosed as periapical granuloma. The lesion on tooth 46 was not close to the mandibular canal; this can be seen on Fig. . Therefore, root canal treatment was carried out, despite the uncertain result of the percussion, palpation and sensibility test. The transparent lesion around the apex and the negative sensibility test lead to the decision of endodontic treatment. Diagnosis was made by a dentist who is not a staff member of our Department. The treatment revealed that the pulp was vital. Our oral diagnostic team examined the patient, and we diagnosed the case as cemento-osseous dysplasia based on the panoramic radiograph showing apical translucency lesions around the anterior teeth with vital pulp . The paraesthesia has been continually present ever since. Because the lesion around the lower right canine had already involved the cortical bone by CBCT scan , a root canal filling and removal of the apical lesion were performed. On the CBCT image the involvement of the entire periapical region can be seen including the lingual region and the buccal cortical . It became clear during the planning of the surgery that the blood vessels and nerves of tooth 43 would be injured.
The root canal treatment was carried out on the lower right canine in a single-visit treatment using local anaesthaesia. We explored the entire root canal length using a size #15 hand instrument. The working length was determined using an apex locator, (Woodpex III, Guilin,China), then the length was also confirmed with radiographic imaging. Following the length determination, the root canal was shaped using Wave One (Densply Maillefer, York, USA) rotary instrument. The root canal was obturated using guttapercha and AH Plus sealer (Dentsply DeTrey GmbH, Konstanz, Germany) with lateral condensation technique. Glass ionomer cement (Fuji IX GP, GC Co., Tokyo, Japan) was then applied to seal off the access cavity, while the permanent restoration was done.
We prepared an intraoral mucoperiostal flap using an L-shaped incision and the surgery was carried out by using a surgical microscope (Aspheron, Schmidt and Bender Hungaria, Budapest, Hungary).
We opened up the buccal cortical bone using a surgical bur, thereafter we removed the lesion surrounding the apex of the root. The root apex was resected and a retrograde root canal filling was placed using mineral trioxid aggregate (MTA+, Cerkamed, Stalowa Wola, Poland).
The area of the lesion was augmented using gentamicin impregnated BoneAlbumin (OrthoSera Dental Zrt., Gyor, Hungary). We seeked to lower the chance of osteomyelitis occuring with the use of gentamicin. Sutures were then carefully placed to achieve tensionfree closure of the flap for optimal healing.
The 19-year-old Caucasian woman is the daughter of the first patient. CBCT showed a radiolucent lesion around the root of the lower right incisor . She is presently asymptomatic after a one-year follow-up, but she occasionally felt tension and moderate pain in the right side of the mandibular region eradiating to her ear, approximately 2 years earlier. The symptoms had no dental background, and ceased gradually.
Pulp tests and periapical pathology diagnoses were made by authors on teeth 33,32,41,43 with the use of percussion, palpation and sensibility test.
Panoramic radiograph and CBCT scans of the first patient showed radiolucent lesions located in the periapical bone, specifically on lower incisors and canines – in the premandibular, and in the right molar region of the mandible with radiopaque parts showing the lesions inside . The affected teeth were asymptomatic, CBCT proved the presence of apical pathology. The buccal cortical involvement was discovered with the aid of CBCT, which also affected the treatment plan because 2D imaging methods provide no information on bucco-lingual dimension. Prior to the surgical intervention the use of CBCT was motivated by the fact that only 3D imaging could ascertain the precise shape, location and involvement of surrounding anatomical landmarks of the lesion.
Figure shows the postoperative condition . At the 6-months periapical follow-up, the bone healing is being processed . 18 months later it can be seen on the CT image that the buccal cortical bone surrounding the root of tooth 43 has regenerated . In the case of the second patient, there were no notable changes in the radiographic status 1 year later, and she has no complaint at present.
The removed tissue pieces contained both connective tissue and calcified areas. In the calcified area, beside the irregular trabecular – lamellar bony formations, oval and globular cementum-like structures were present. In the non-calcified area connective tissue was found and connective tissue filled out the centre of another bony sample as well. No elements or remnants of a capsule were visible. The histological diagnosis was cemento-osseous dysplasia .