The male patient was the naturally conceived son of a 34-year-old gravida 2, para 0, miscarriage 1 mother. His healthy parents were consanguineous (first-degree cousins, of Algerian origin), without history of hypertension, calcification or cardiomyopathy. Prenatal concerns included a fetal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) associated with a hydrops fetalis and a polyhydramnios, treated by one amnioreduction due to poor maternal tolerance. No other abnormality was noted on the prenatal ultrasound. Furthermore, antenatal investigations of fetal cardiomyopathy were negative or normal (enzyme disorder, maternal viral infection, normal fetal karyotype). Preterm birth was medically indicated because of an abnormal fetal heart rate: the newborn was delivered by urgent caesarean section at 29 weeks’ gestation. The newborn was eutrophic (birth weight 1330 g), umbilical cord pH was 7.21; his Apgar scores were 4 at 1 min, 8 at 5 min, 10 at 10 min. Resuscitative and neonatal appropriate care were provided.
At birth, he presented with hydrops fetalis (oedema and mild pericardial effusion); he was not dysmorphic; postnatal echocardiography confirmed the diagnosis of HCM without other heart anomalies and routine x-ray didn’t show bone abnormalities. The patient developed severe hypertension a few hours after birth (mean arterial pressure > 70 mmHg, normal range: 35–40 mmHg). This hypertension was refractory to a triple therapy (propranolol, nicardipine, clonidine). To assess this atypical hypertension, extensive blood and urinary tests (for endocrine disease and inborn error of metabolism) were performed, but yielded negative results. A renal artery Doppler ultrasound was performed and detected extensive calcifications of the renal arteries, the abdominal aorta and its major branches. To further elucidate the extent of the calcifications, a low-dose whole-body computed tomography was performed and detected diffuse calcifications of large- and medium-sized arteries . The brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging was normal at term equivalent age. In view of these findings we retrospectively reviewed the chest x-ray performed at day 1 of life: it is noteworthy that calcifications were already apparent . Prenatal ultrasound images were also retrospectively reviewed by several radiologist experts but no arterial calcifications were detected. These singularities were consistent with GACI: the patient’s genotype was analysed, and a mutation was found in the ENPP1 gene.
The treatment consisted of four courses of bisphosphonates administered by intravenous route on day 40 of life, on day 70 of life, on month 21 of life and at 2 years old: each course consisted of 2 or 3 disodium pamidronate infusions (0.50 mg/kg/infusion) delivered over 1 week. At 20 week-follow-up visit, 2 months after the two initial courses of bisphosphonates, the extent of the arterial calcifications was assessed by a whole body computed tomography and an almost complete resolution of the lesions was demonstrated . Concurrently, from 2 months-old to one-year-old, the baby developed transiently hypophosphatemia (serum phosphate level of 3.1 mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L); normal infant range = 4.6–7.1 mg/dL and 1.5–2.3 mmol/L) with inappropriate urinary phosphate excretion (fractional excretion of phosphate > 5%). All other relevant markers of phosphate homeostasis were within normal range (serum 1,25-(OH)2-vitamin D level, parathyroid hormone level, serum calcium level, serum alkaline phosphatase level). The infant had no bone deformities. The transient hypophosphatemia was corrected with oral phosphate supplementation and no vitamin D supplementation. Concerning cardiovascular outcome, at 2-year-old follow-up, hypertension was still treated with a triple combination of drugs: blood pressure levels were constantly above 140/80 mmHg. However, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy resolved with this treatment. The patient had normal growth and development. He had neither ocular nor cutaneous manifestations of Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (PXE).
The investigation of a multi-gene panel was performed by high-throughput next-generation sequencing. Genomic DNA was processed with the TruSight One/Nextera hybrid capture method and coding regions with adjacent intronic regions of the two GACI-associated genes ENPP1 and ABCC6 were enriched by PCR (Illumina®). Subsequent analysis was conducted by massive parallel sequencing using the MiSeq Benchtop System (Illumina®). Quality criteria require a minimal coverage of 20× for at least 97% of target regions of the investigated genes: the minimal coverage of 20× achieved for all targeted regions was 98% with an average coverage of 172 sequences per base. For assessment of the variants, the dbSNP, ExAc, HGMD, LOVD and UniProt databases, as well as the prediction programs PredictSNP, PhDSNP, SNAP, SIFT, PolyPhen-1, PolyPhen-2, MutationTaster, SNAP, MAPP and Panther were used. Next-generation sequencing analysis of the patient’s ENPP1 gene revealed a homozygous mutation c.784A > G (p.Ser262Gly). There was no mutation in the ABCC6 gene. The parents consented to undergo genetic testing. The c.784A > G (p.Ser262Gly) mutation was also present, in the heterozygous state, in the consanguineous parents. The mutation c.784A > G (p.Ser262Gly) has so far not been described in the literature and mutation databases: there are no entries for the variation in the 1000 Genomes project and the Exome Aggregation Consortium, which indicates a very low global minor allele frequency (MAF). The prediction programs PredictSNP, PhDSNP, SNAP, SIFT, PolyPhen-1, PolyPhen-2, MutationTaster and SNAP all classify the variation as pathogenic whereas the prediction programs MAPP and Panther classify the variation as benign.
The combination of cardiovascular findings and extensive calcifications on imaging, together with the ENPP1 mutation, confirmed the diagnosis of GACI1 in the proband.