A 49-year-old female, was hospitalized in the Gynecology Department of Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China Medical University in February 2021, due to hypogastralgia, diarrhea, and intermittent fever for more than 1 month. She had undergone “right salpingo-oophorectomy, myomectomy and diagnostic curettage” for “right ovarian endometriosis cyst and uterine fibroid” one year prior to onset, and the pathology showed a “(right) ovarian endometriosis cyst and uterine fibroid”; menstruation resumed after 5 courses of GnRH-α treatment. The patient developed intermittent fever on January 2021, accompanied by hypogastralgia, was weak and also had diarrhea. She received anti-inflammatory treatment in the local hospital, but still had intermittent fever. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment, where there was a weight loss of 2 kg during the period. Special family history: the mother and one sister of the patient had colon cancer, and another sister had rectal cancer.
The admission laboratory examination showed that the infection index was high and the patient was in a state of moderate anemia, CA125: 200.5 U/ml (normal <35.0). Gynecological examination indicated a tumor of about 5 cm in size with poor mobility which is between the uterine isthmus and rectum. TVS showed that a 5.1 × 4.6 × 3.7 cm mass was seen in the right posterior part of the uterine isthmus, with unclear boundary and mixed echo of cyst and blood flow signal could be detected by CDFI . A pelvic MRI indicated a mixed signal mass in the right posterior part of the uterus . After communicating with the ultrasound department and acquiring the informed consent of the patient, a pelvic tumor biopsy was performed under the guidance of an ultrasound through the vagina with local anesthesia . The pathology of the puncture biopsy revealed “adenocarcinoma, tending to endometrioid adenocarcinoma”. After full explanation with the patient, surgery was combined with transcystoscopic bilateral ureteral stent implantation, transabdominal rectal partial resection and anastomosis, radical uterectomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, paraaortic lymph node sampling, omentectomy and appendectomy. In consideration of the special family history of the patient, LS was not excluded, and gene testing was carried out at the same time. The patients were given symptomatic treatment such as anti-inflammatory, fluid supplement, prevention of fungal infection and correction of anemia. More than ten days after operation, there was a little fecal tissue in the vaginal drainage tube. Since the digital rectal examination could touch the fistula, the anastomotic fistula was determined to be about 1 cm long, so the patient underwent temporary colostomy and rectal repair. Histopathological diagnosis suggested that “endometrioid adenocarcinoma (moderately differentiated) invaded the rectal wall and cervix, endometrium suggests focal complex hyperplasia, and there was no lymph node metastasis .” Immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) showed: CDX-2(−), ER(+), CK7(+), P16(+), P40(−), PR(+), P63(−), and Vimentin(−) . The results of gene detection indicated MSH2, MSH6 variation, PTEN, KRAS, NF1, KMT2C variation, and microsatellite are highly unstable.
The patients received 6 cycles of paclitaxel–carboplatin chemotherapy. During the treatment, grade II bone marrow suppression occurred, but was healed after symptomatic treatment. At follow-up date (10 months after surgery), CA125 has returned to normal level, and there is no obvious sign of tumor recurrence in imaging examination.