A 2.5-year-old Iranian boy from consanguineous marriage was referred to our center on December 2020 due to labored breathing, wet cough, and poor appetite 4 days prior to admission. Physical examination showed fever (T: 39 °C), tachypnea (RR: 40/minute), and tachycardia (120/minute) with prolonged expiration time, subcostal chest wall retraction, and bilateral diffused coarse crackle. Patient weight was 10.5 kg, and height was 91 cm (below 50th weight-for-height percentile). Although the patient had good appetite and was from a family with good socioeconomic status, he still showed failure to thrive. Neurological examination on admission was normal. Chest X-ray revealed hyperaeration, prebronchial cuffing, and bilateral nonspecific infiltrations in the lung . He had a significant past medical history of admission several times due to pneumonia since early infancy and one pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) admission due to severe pneumonia. He had bilateral corneal opacity, which was diagnosed several months prior to this admission in another medical center. The etiology for corneal opacity was not investigated, but he was a candidate for corneal grafting. Ophthalmic examination in our center revealed bilateral severe corneal xerosis, total stromal haziness, normal intraocular pressure, and normal fundoscopy. Treatment with intravenous fluid, IV antibiotic (ceftriaxone), and antipyretic (paracetamol) was started. Since the patient had a prolonged expiration time with hyperaeration on chest X-ray, albuterol (MDI) was started with two puffs every 4 hours via spacer, to which he responded well. Initial laboratory tests on admission were as following: complete blood count (CBC); WBC 16,400/µl, 27% lymphocytes and 52% neutrophils, hemoglobin: 10 mg/dL, platelet count: 324,000/μL. C-reactive protein (CRP) 50 mg/l, urea 16 mg/dl (16.6–40), creatinine 0.6 mg/dl (0.2–0.8), and urine analysis was normal, Microscopic evaluation of the patient’s stool showed moderate fatty acid droplets. Culture samples taken from blood and throat were negative. Further investigations for the etiology of recurrent pneumonia were started including immunoglobulin (IG) level, CD flow cytometry, purified protein derivative (PPD), gastric washing for tuberculosis (TB), nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), and sweat chloride test, all being in the normal range except for sweat chloride level, which was 80 and 95 on two different days. Diagnosis of cystic fibrosis was confirmed, and appropriate treatment including pancreatic enzymes and multivitamins was started. Serum levels for vitamin A and D were 25.2 mg/dl (30−60 mg/dl) and 9 ng/dl (30–70) respectively, both at deficiency level. We raised the possibility that the patient’s corneal opacity could be due to profound vitamin A deficiency, so appropriate treatment with a single oral dose of 200,000 IU vitamin A followed by 1500 IU per day was started.
The patient was discharged with standard CF treatment include multivitamin, azithromycin, pancreatic enzymes (CREON capsule), and routine outpatient visits to the CF clinic every month, plus ophthalmologist visits every 2 months. The serum level of vitamin A and D was checked 6 months after discharge, both being normal. Corneal opacity decreased gradually in outpatient follow-ups.