A 58-year-old female presented with a 4-year history of slow, intermittent, downward drift in her left eye. Blunt trauma to the left eye at 10 years of age left her with severe vision impairment therein. About 35 years later, she was diagnosed with traumatic cataract and sensory esotropia in the left eye and underwent left cataract extraction and recession of the medial rectus muscle, and resection of the lateral rectus muscle. Slow, intermittent, downward drifting of the left eye subsequently developed upon distance fixation and increased steadily in size and frequency over the next 4 years. The patient did not experience diplopia due to her poor vision of the left eye. Her visual acuities were 20/20 in her right eye and 20/400 in her left eye without glasses and 20/200 with glasses (+ 1.75 Dsph = − 3.0 Dacylax 180); however, the patient refused to wear glasses or contact lenses after cataract surgery.
Eye movements were normal, and no oblique muscle dysfunction was found. When the patient fixated at a distance, she demonstrated an intermittent, slow, downward drift of the left eye (approximately 0.5 Hz frequency) that never rose above the midline, of variable magnitude ranging up to 30 prism diopters in the primary position. She reported that a slow, downward drift occurred during fatigue, inattention, or distance viewing. When she attempted to fixate with her left eye at a near target, she was orthophoric with no vertical movement in either eye. The Bielschowsky head-tilt test demonstrated no significant difference between primary and head-tilt positions. She had a left relative afferent pupillary defect. The anterior and posterior segments were healthy with posterior chamber lens implant of the left eye. She had no other neurologic disorders. A brain magnetic resonance imaging failed to reveal any abnormalities of extraocular muscles or pulley. Laboratory work-up to rule out ocular myasthenia and thyroid eye disease was negative for both.
The patient was diagnosed with hypotropic DVD in the left eye. To correct her hypotropia at distance, she underwent a 7 mm recession of the inferior rectus muscle in her left eye. At 3 months after surgery, she was orthophoric at near fixation and slightly hypertropic to 8 prism diopters at distance fixation . Left eye downward drifts were slightly reduced in vertical amplitude but not frequency. In addition, intermittent downward drifts occurring at distance fixation became constant vertical oscillations that crossed the midline after surgery. When she attempted to fixate with her left eye at a near target, she was orthophoric for about 10 s, followed by slow, pendular oscillations of the left eye (Additional file 2). Her ocular manifestations before and after strabismus surgery suggested clinical characteristics of both hypotropic DVD and HBP.