A 22-year-old man was admitted to our emergency department following a road traffic accident and presented with a slight cough and a small amount of bloody sputum. Approximately 37 h after admission, he developed severe chest tightness, chest pain, dizziness and haemoptysis. His was 178 cm in height and 82 kg in weight.
The patient experienced multiple traumas when his motorcycle collided with a truck. On admission to our emergency department, he was conscious and had a slight cough and a small amount of bloody sputum. His blood pressure and breathing were stable, with an oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 95%-97% at 5 L/min of mask O2. Whole-body computed tomography (CT) showed a left fifth rib fracture and mild PC as well as fractures to the left clavicle and scapula, pubis, left femoral shaft and right ulna. After plaster fixation of his right upper arm, he was admitted 18 h after the onset of mild PC to the orthopaedic ward for further surgical treatment. There he received an analgesic, antibiotics and left tibial tuberosity traction treatment. However, he developed severe chest tightness, chest pain, dizziness and haemoptysis 19 h later. Clinical examination revealed severe hypoxia with an SpO2 of 68%, tachypnoea (respiratory rate: 36 breaths/min) and tachycardia (heart rate: 157 bpm). Endotracheal intubation was subsequently performed, and a large amount of bloody sputum was suctioned from the endotracheal tube. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) 15 min later.
The patient was free of relevant medical history.
When transferred to the ICU, the patient received volume-controlled ventilation and the following parameters were set: Fraction of inspired oxygen, 100%; positive end-expiratory pressure, 15 cm H2O; tidal volume, 420 mL (6 mL/kg); and respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min. The patient was maintained under deep sedation (Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale: -3 to -4) to reduce respiratory distress, and a lung recruitment manoeuvre was performed to open his airways. Nevertheless, he developed refractory hypoxemia (SpO2: 78%) and hypotension (invasive blood pressure: 10.5/5.5 kPa). Physical examination revealed coarse, moist rales that pervaded the lung. No apparent abnormalities were found in the heart or abdomen. Both legs were deformed and swollen, and multiple skin abrasions were observed all over his body.
Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a pH of 7.44, partial pressure of CO2 of 5.2 kPa and partial pressure of O2 of 7.9 kPa. Routine blood examination indicated mild leucocytosis (15.3 × 109 cells/L) and a reduction in haemoglobin (from 12.3 g/dL at admission to 10.3 g/dL after transfer to the ICU). Coagulation function test results showed a normal prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time and thrombin time; however, his fibrinogen level was low (1.4 g/L). Biochemical examination revealed a glutamate transaminase level of 74.2 U/L and glutamate transaminase level of 44.9 U/L, indicating slightly abnormal liver function.
Bedside chest X-ray showed diffuse infiltration on both sides . After ECMO was established, chest CT and pulmonary artery imaging were performed, at which point there was no evidence of a pulmonary embolism, but substantial consolidation was noted in both lungs . Fibreoptic bronchoscopy revealed diffuse and profuse blood in all bronchopulmonary segments and fresh bleeding was observed in the trachea and right bronchus.