A 58-year old woman presented to the gynaecology out-patient department with a 1-day history of increasing bilateral hip and suprapubic pain. She had a past history of carcinoma of the cervix 12-years prior to this admission, which was treated with a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with adjuvant radio- and chemotherapy. She developed a colo-vaginal fistula and bilateral ureteric obstruction 2-years ago due to complex pelvic sepsis, which was managed by fashioning a defunctioning loop colostomy and an ileal-conduit urostomy. However, the patient was otherwise well with no other significant medical problems.
On examination, the patient was dehydrated and pyrexic (38.6°C). Her blood pressure was 101/56 mmHg and pulse rate was 92/min. Abdominal examination revealed deep suprapubic tenderness with erythema of the perineum and inner thighs. Bowel sounds were normal. Initial haematological investigations demonstrated a haemoglobin level of 12.8 g/dl, white cell count of 19.1 × 109/litre, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 109 mm/hour and a C-reactive protein of 357 mg/L. She was treated conservatively with analgesia, fluid resuscitation and intravenous antibiotics (benzyl-penicillin-2.4 g, clindamycin-900 mg, ciprofloxacin-400 mg) which were administered 3-times per day. On the second day post-admission, her condition deteriorated significantly and she was transferred to the high dependency unit (HDU) with septicaemic shock with a pulse rate of 110/min, blood pressure of 70/43 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation of 94% on 2 litres/min of oxygen therapy.
An urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the pelvis revealed extensive oedema of the urethra, vagina and rectum with fluid collections within the proximal thigh adductors bilaterally which contained an air/fluid level within the pubic symphysis with extension into the retropubic space and superior to the urethra . Subsequent surgical assessment identified extensive perineal and inner thigh cellulitis suspicious of necrotising fascititis. She underwent emergency debridement of the necrotic skin and subcutaneous tissues with drainage of pus. Post-operatively, she was transferred to the intensive care unit for inotropic support in the form of intravenous noradrenaline.
Histopathological assessment of a 20 cm × 7.5 cm ellipse of skin showed necrosis of the skin, dermis and subcutaneous fat with evidence of focal inflammation and pus within all tissue layers. Gram staining confirmed gram-positive cocci extending from the surface of the skin into the deep fatty tissue and arranged in chains, suggestive of streptococcal necrotising fasciitis. Cultures of swabs taken from the perineal wound isolated viridans group streptococci, coagulase negative staphylococci, enterococci and mixed anaerobes. The patient underwent repeated exploration and debridement of the wound in theatre under general anaesthesia on days five, seven, nine, twelve and fourteen post-admission.
The wound was suitable for VAC dressing (VAC Therapy™, KCI, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom) from day-9 after initial debridement . Owing to the considerable pain and the position of the wounds, the VAC system had to be reapplied in theatre 3-times a week initially, and then reduced to twice weekly. Sequential wound assessment demonstrated marked improvements with visible granulation tissue following the application of the VAC system set at 125 mmHg continuous topical negative pressure . Skin grafts obtained from the antero-lateral aspect of the left thigh were applied to the perineal and thigh wounds on day-20. The VAC system was then applied over the skin graft at a lower topical negative pressure of 50 mmHg.
On day-36, a repeat MRI was performed to investigate persistent bilateral groin sinuses. This demonstrated extensive oedema of all the muscle groups around the pelvis, most marked in the region of the obturators and the adductor muscles in the proximal thigh and bone marrow oedema in the symphysis pubis suggestive of osteomyelitis. Biopsy of the symphysis pubis corroborated the presence of osteomyelitis with collections of acute inflammatory cells and some reactive debris in the marrow space in combination with viable and necrotic bone. A gram stain showed some gram-positive organisms similar to those seen on the original biopsy, suggesting a residual nidus of infection in necrotic bone. The patient remained on long-term antibiotic therapy with continued application of the VAC dressing system as further surgical intervention was deemed inappropriate . VAC therapy was discontinued on day-51. The patient was discharged 3-months post-admission with both groin wounds fully healed. She remains well 16-months later with no further signs of soft tissue sepsis or osteomyelitis.