A 24-year-old man with complaints of fever, abdominal pain and 3 episodes of passing loose stools consulted an alternative medicine practitioner and was given ayurvedic medications. Following intake of the medicines, he had worsening diffuse abdominal pain and vomiting along with decreased urine output. He went to a local hospital on the 2nd day and was found to have deficient renal function (his serum creatinine level was 10.3 mg/dl). He was referred to our emergency department (ED) on the 3rd day for further management. He had no history of co-morbidities or any known underlying disease.
On examination, he was conscious, oriented, with a pulse rate of 64/min, blood pressure of 132/80 mmHg, respiratory rate 24/min, and an O2 saturation (SpO2) of 99% on room air. He also had some minor facial and pedal edema. Respiratory and cardiovascular system examinations were normal. Abdomen examination showed moderate tenderness in the left lower quadrant with no mass palpable and no flapping tremors.
His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia . Non-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed no obvious renal or ureteric calculi, nor any pelvicalyceal/ureteric dilatation on either side. He had minimal ascites and bilateral basal pleural effusion. Upon admission, his hemoglobin was 13.5, blood urea 121, serum creatinine 11.33 mg/dl, serum sodium 139 mmol/l, serum potassium 3.9 mmol/l, total bilirubin 0.5 md/dl, and direct bilirubin 0.1 mg/dl. His ABG showed compensated metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.36, PCO2 of 28 mmHg and HCO3 of 18meq/l.
The patient was admitted to the nephrology department since he had metabolic disturbances and AKI. He was taken for emergency hemodialysis via a left double lumen femoral catheter. He started improving clinically after one session of dialysis and other supportive care. His renal function rapidly improved and his serum creatinine was 2.17 mg/dl on the fifth day of admission. The femoral catheter was then removed and he was discharged on day six. On follow up his serum creatinine was within normal limits (1.2 mg/dl). The ayurvedic supplement he had been taking was sent for toxicological analysis and showed the presence of a high concentration of lead which might have caused the interstitial nephritis leading to AKI in our patient. The serum level of lead was not measured in this patient