This report presents the case of a previously healthy 40-year-old Caucasian male with no history of malignancies or significant radiation exposure. He presented to the Emergency Department with an 8-day history of central epigastric pain which radiated to the back and was associated with generalized malaise and low-grade fever. Clinical examination demonstrated palpable splenomegaly of around 4 fingerbreadths below the left costal margin with an otherwise soft abdomen. He had a raised white cell count (WCC) of 24.3 × 109/L, a haemoglobin level of 12.1 g/dL, a platelet count of 201 × 109/L and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 84.2 mg/L.
Ultrasonographic (US) studies showed massive splenomegaly of 20.1 cm in diameter with a heterogeneous mass in splenic hilum measuring 12 cm by 9 cm. A homogeneous fluid collection was also noted adjacent to cranial aspect of spleen measuring 16.7 cm by 15 cm. The liver was normal on ultrasound studies. Computed tomographic (CT) imaging demonstrated a 16 cm × 14 cm × 21 cm partially solid partially cystic lesion in spleen with mass effect on surrounding structures, as seen in Fig. , with no evidence of distant metastases. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was also performed to further characterize the mass. Findings included a solid component towards the hilum and lower splenic pole, as well as an upper central cystic component containing hyperintense fluid (likely representing blood or mucin content) on T1 weighed images. Given that the hilar component was abutting the pancreatic tail, the possibility of the splenic mass representing direct infiltration by a distal pancreatic tumour (particularly an acinar cell carcinoma) was raised. The liver showed a few simple cysts, with no evidence of metastatic deposits on this scan.
An broad infectious screen, including human immuno-deficiency virus, hepatitis A, B and C, toxoplasma, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, Epstein–Barr virus, rickettsia, leishmaniosis, leptospirosis, mycoplasma and parvovirus, was negative.
Core needle biopsies of the spleen were attempted twice, both of which comprised entirely necrotic material with no viable tumour tissue present. Immunohistochemistry only demonstrated non-specific expression of CD10, along with a high Ki67 index. Whilst the possibility of a necrotic lymphoma was entertained, the biopsies were deemed non-diagnostic.
A positron emission tomography (PET) scan was subsequently performed, demonstrated in Fig. . This showed a mixed density splenic mass with intense peripheral tracer uptake, particularly antero-superiorly and medially. In addition, it showed large photopenic defects in keeping with necrosis and diffusely increased bone marrow uptake throughout the axial and appendicular skeleton. The latter prompted further investigation with a trephine bone marrow core biopsy, which showed mild bone marrow hypercellularity with mild megakaryocytic atypia on histological analysis. This raised the possibility of an underlying myeloproliferative disease.
Given that no definitive diagnosis was achieved at this stage, a diagnostic and therapeutic splenectomy was planned. Access to the abdominal cavity was achieved by an L-shaped laparotomy incision. A massive spleen adherent to the pancreatic tail at the hilum was identified and resected. In addition, three small liver lesions were detected in segment V, VII and VIII, respectively, as seen in Fig. along with the specimen. Given the context, these were highly suspicious for metastatic deposits, but not present on magnetic resonance imaging performed 12 days prior. These small lesions along with the rest of the liver were assessed using intraoperative US. This deemed these three lesions as easily resectable and did not detect any further liver lesions. Therefore, an open splenectomy, distal pancreatectomy and liver metastasectomy were hence carried out.
Frozen section analysis on one of the metastatic liver deposits showed a well-circumscribed tumoural nodule comprising pleomorphic neoplastic cells with frequent bizarre nuclear forms. The findings were interpreted as a high-grade poorly differentiated malignancy, with lymphoma being the most likely diagnosis.
Gross pathological analysis showed a large splenic mass weighing 4 kg and measuring 28 cm, which was affixed to the pancreatic tail. On sectioning, the spleen was almost entirely replaced by a centrally cystically necrotic mass. The mass was largely non-viable however, towards the periphery, had a pale white, fleshy appearance. The tumour was centred on the spleen and did not appear to arise from the pancreas, with the resected pancreatic tail being unremarkable and free of malignancy. Analysis of the resected liver lesions demonstrated well-circumscribed fleshy white subcapsular tumour deposits, which were similar in morphology to the splenic mass.
Histological analysis of the splenic tumour showed diffuse effacement of the splenic parenchyma by a high-grade neoplasm. The tumour variably comprised neoplastic spindled and epithelioid cells. The spindle cell component was organized in short fascicles while the epithelioid component infiltrated the splenic parenchyma in cohesive sheets. The neoplastic cells were bizarre, pleomorphic and showed very brisk mitotic activity. Widespread areas of tumour necrosis were seen. The tumour invaded beyond the splenic capsule into the surrounding soft tissues. Slides demonstrating these findings are found in Fig. .
A broad immunohistochemical panel was applied. Cytokeratin stains (broad range cytokeratin, MNF116 and various other cytokeratins including cytokeratin 7, 20, 5/6 and 8/18) were negative, as were markers of melanocytic (S100, melan-A, SOX-10 and HMB-45), haemato-lymphoid/histiocytic (CD45, CD20, PAX5, CD2, CD3, CD5, CD56, CD68, CD138 and ALK1), dendritic cell (CD23, CD21 and CD123) and germ cell (PLAP, CD117, OCT3/4) differentiation. Immunohistochemical attempts at identifying a specific sarcomatoid lineage of differentiation were also negative, with vascular (CD31, ERG), neural (S100, SOX10) and adipocytic (S100, MDM2, CDK4) markers being negative. The tumour only showed non-specific expression of CD10, cyclin D1 and a high Ki67 proliferation fraction (around 80%).
The overall histological and immunohistochemical findings were thus supportive of a diagnosis of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) of the spleen, with metastatic deposits in the liver. The excision of both the splenic tumour and the hepatic metastatic deposits was deemed complete.
The patient recovered well post operatively and was discharged home 11 days later, with a plan to start single-agent Doxorubicin at a starting dose of 30 mg/m2 weekly for 3 cycles when fully recovered from surgery. However, he presented to the Emergency Department yet again three weeks post operatively with persistent lower back and abdominal pain associated with fever. A CT scan of his abdomen was performed, showing extensive recurrent disease burden in the peritoneum and liver as seen in Fig. . He was hospitalized and given the first dose of doxorubicin the following day. The patient developed small bowel obstruction four days later, presumably secondary to tumour compression. Further chemotherapy was withheld in view of the patient’s poor condition and he eventually succumbed to his illness two and a half months after his initial presentation, and 34 days after splenectomy.