A right-handed, 63-year-old Chinese woman, with 12 years of education, was admitted to our hospital in September 2018 at the request of her family members.
In 2016, the patient had developed psychotic symptoms, including delusions and auditory hallucination, without an apparent cause. She said someone wanted to harm her and was talking about her. Sometimes she told her family members that she heard knocking on the door, and she exhibited diminished emotional expression and avolition. She required the support of family members to conduct daily activities and communicate with others. Her sleep quality was poor, but she showed no disturbance of consciousness. She did not seek medical advice and receive any remedy at that time.
After these symptoms had continued for about 12 months, she was taken by her family to the outpatient department of our hospital. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal any obvious structural abnormalities . She was diagnosed with schizophrenia by an experienced psychiatrist based on criteria in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . Delusions and hallucinations disappeared after the patient took 5 mg of olanzapine every night for 1 month. We monitored the blood glucose, blood lipid, blood pressure and weight every month to investigate the possibility of metabolic syndrome after treatment with olanzapine. However, she began to walk slowly, her neck became rigid, and she experienced episodic memory impairment, leading her to forget new events, ask the same question repeatedly and get lost in new places. Her physical functions, such as dressing and eating, were also impaired. However, she did not develop language dysfunction, and she was able to communicate smoothly with family members. She was treated with benzhexol hydrochloride at 2 mg every night for extrapyramidal symptoms, but the symptoms did not improve. The daily dose of olanzapine was reduced to 2.5 mg in July 2017, but the symptoms still did not improve after 1 month. Therefore, we believe that her symptoms did not cause by olanzapine then stop using benzhexol hydrochloride. In May 2018, her neck stiffness became worse and gradually spread to the limbs. She developed severe neck, limb and postural rigidity, but no tremor. She walked unstably, exhibited bradykinesia and memory decline, and showed obvious decline in her ability to take care of herself. On the other hand, she did not exhibit socially inappropriate behaviors, apathy, or dietary changes, and she responded normally to family members’ feelings.
At her admission to our hospital in September 2018, the patient reported never smoking or drinking. She had previously undergone gallbladder surgery. She was in good health and had no family history of mental disorders. The patient had good support from family members and did not report any major adverse life events. The patient and her family members denied any drug abuse. She did not have any history of violence, agitation and suicidal behavior during the course of her illness. Her vital signs were stable, and no abnormal physical signs were detected at admission. Blood and urine tests, blood glucose level, liver and renal function and thyroid function were normal, and the patient showed no evidence of infection. Electroencephalography, electrocardiography, and transcranial doppler ultrasound results were normal. Mental status examination showed no signs of hallucinations or delusions. The patient had stable mood but temporal disorientation and deficits in attention, calculation and language competence, as well as delayed recall. She also exhibited impairments in visuospatial organization and abstract thinking. She had no insight into her disease. The total score on the MMSE was 16 and on the MoCA was 9.
During hospitalization, brain MRI showed mild frontotemporal atrophy relative to the MRI in 2016 . She scored 16/30 on the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE). She exhibited temporal disorientation and deficits in attention, calculation and language competence, as well as delayed recall. She scored 9/30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), indicating impairments in visuospatial organization, attention, language ability, temporal orientation, and abstract thinking. Her total score on the Activity of Daily Living Scale (ADL) was 54, indicating difficulty in performing daily life activities . Based on her two-year history of using antipsychotics and hypermyotonia, she was diagnosed with tardive dyskinesia. After consultation with experts in the neurology department, her diagnosis was changed to Parkinson’s disease on the basis of her bradykinesia and hypermyotonia. Olanzapine treatment was replaced with the combination of levodopa and benserazide hydrochloride (375 mg/d), pramipexole hydrochloride (0.75 mg/d), Selegiline hydrochloride (5 mg/d), and benzhexol hydrochloride (3 mg/d). Her bradykinesia, rigidity and shuffling gait improved after 2 weeks, but not her memory. She was discharged in October 2018.
During a follow-up visit 2 months after discharge, 53 genes associated with dementia were analyzed . The only mutation detected was a heterozygous variant in SORL1 (chr11:121340726, c.296A > G). She showed a higher score of 20/30 on both the MMSE and MoCA. She was prescribed with memantine (10 mg/d) and donepezil (10 mg/d) and stopped taking benzhexol hydrochloride, but her cognitive function showed no change at follow-up in July 2019. At follow-up in August 2019, brain MRI detected moderate frontotemporal atrophy that appeared more serious than in 2018 , while 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-based positron emission tomography/computed tomography demonstrated bilateral frontal and caudate hypometabolism . The score on MoCA improved to 23/30, but the score on the ADLS fell to 31. She was unable to complete many daily life activities .
Our patient was diagnosed with probable AD because of early, significant episodic memory impairment, medial temporal lobe atrophy, brain glucose hypometabolism based on PET and AD-associated genetic mutation . She was prescribed memantine (10 mg/d) and donepezil (10 mg/d). At her last follow-up in October 2019, the patient showed poor memory, slow reaction and bradykinesia, but no psychotic symptoms.
The patient had temporal disorientation and deficits in attention, calculation and language competence, significant episodic memory impairment. She had significant temporal lobe atrophy, brain glucose hypometabolism based on PET and AD-associated genetic mutation. A timeline of the historical and current information is shown in Fig. .
The psychotic symptoms of the patient occur after the age of 60, but disappeared after treatment with antipsychotics in 1 month. She did not display the clinical course typical of patients with schizophrenia. Frontotemporal dementia: The patient did not display the impaired language function typical of semantic variant primary progressive aphasia or the non-fluent/agrammatic variant of primary progressive aphasia [, ]. She also did not display early behavioral disinhibition, apathy, loss of sympathy or empathy, dietary changes, or deficits in executive tasks typical of the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia .