A healthy and otherwise normal 45-year-old woman from the rural middle Delta in Egypt presented to the outpatient clinic with fever, 39°C together with persistent upper-left-quadrant abdominal pain. She was a heavy-duty worker as a farmer, helping her husband nearly all the day time.
Her past medical history was free from any chronic debilitating diseases such as diabetes, liver or renal diseases. Searching for other predisposing factors known to cause splenic abscesses was negative such as metastatic and distant hematogenous infection and a contiguous site of infection. Moreover, the patient recent medical history was free from any surgical operation, recent hospital admission or trauma.
Clinical examination reproduced localized pain and tenderness in the left hypochondrium together with coated tongue and toxic face. The patient radial pulse was 110 beats/minute. Constitutional symptoms as nausea and anorexia were present.
Laboratory testing for hematological and biochemical controls was performed and revealed leukocytosis while other tests were otherwise within the normal ranges.
Imaging study included chest and abdominal X-ray, followed by abdominopelvic ultrasonogam and CT scan of the upper abdomen. Both chest X-ray and CT scan of chest denoted clear lung fields and free costophrenic angles. Both ultrasonography and CT scan showed mild enlarged spleen with multiple well-defined cystic focal lesions; the largest measure 2 × 1.5 cm (, ). Liver, kidneys, pancreas and para-aortic region are normal in ultrasonography and CT scan .
The patient underwent laparotomy for splenectomy under general anesthesia. Spleen was found mildly enlarged with three small abscesses pointing through the serosal surface. Surgery was completed with smooth operative course and the patient has been found healthy with complete relief from all disease-associated symptoms in the early postoperative period. Operative and post-operative photographic pictures were taken showing the enlarged spleen in situ and the abscesses on splenic surfaces as well as the cavity of the abscesses when laid open (, , ).
The histopathological study of the spleen revealed that the cause of these multiple splenic abscesses was nonspecific inflammatory process and the bacteriological study denoted that pathogens detected include staphylococcus and streptococcus.
In the early postoperative period, within 2 weeks, the patient was referred to our internist and hematologist for proper immunization program and antibiotic prophylaxis.