A 32-year-old man without any significant medical history presented with a sudden visual field defect in his right eye for two hours. His best-corrected visual acuity at the time was 20/20 in both eyes, and the pupillary reflex and anterior segment were normal.
Fundus examination showed a sectorial area of retinal whitening in the superior part of the posterior pole sparing the macula in the right eye. Structural optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed thickening and hyper-reflectivity of the inner retina above the macula on a vertical B-scan. FA confirmed the occlusion of the supero-temporal retinal artery near the optic disc with sparing of an arteriole supplying the macula . However, after several minutes, the occluded artery slowly filled with dye from the central retinal artery to the proximal portion, and by a countercurrent flow from adjacent venules to the distal portion .
The fundus was also imaged using the AngioVue OCTA device (v. 2015.0.1.7, Optovue, Inc., Freemont, CA, USA). Scanning areas were 3 × 3 and 6 × 6 mm. On the initial 6 × 6-mm scan, some flow signal was present at the origin of the (partially) occluded temporal artery near the optic disc, corresponding to the slow filling on FA . However, flow was not detected in the superficial or deep capillary plexus (SCP, DCP), in the area of inner retinal whitening [Figures and ]. No flow signal was detected in the macular branches of the occluded artery, but a flow signal was present in the adjacent venules draining the spared macular area [Figures and ].
Six hours after the first examination, the patient reported improvement in his sectorial scotoma and OCTA was repeated. It revealed that flow signal was re-established in the ischemic area [Figures , , ] in both the SCP and DCP, and in the branches of the initially occluded artery [Figures and ]. Comparisons of OCT angiograms also showed recovery of the peripapillary capillary perfusion .
Comprehensive vascular, cardiologic, hematologic, and metabolic workups revealed high homocysteine levels (47 μmol/L; N <15 μmol/L), leading to administration of vitamin supplements.