A 74-year-old man presented to the outpatient department of our institute with complaints of dyspepsia, fullness in the central abdomen extending from epigastrium to umbilicus, and mild lower urinary tract symptoms such as dysuria, increased urinary frequency, nocturia, and diminished urinary stream for the preceding two years . On physical examination, there was a palpable lump in the upper abdomen extending from the epigastrium to the pubic symphysis, which was nontender, firm in consistency with indistinct lower border. A urethral catheter was placed immediately and 2000 mL of urine was drained that led into improvement of abdominal distension and discomfort. His initial investigation revealed hemoglobin of 11 g/dL, TLC (Total Leukocyte Count) of 11000/µL, serum urea of 66 mg/dL, serum creatinine of 2.1 mg/dL, and serum PSA of 2.4 ng/mL. The ultrasonography of the abdomen showed bilateral hydroureteronephrosis and a large cystic lesion of 26.3 × 20.5 cm size in continuation of urinary bladder. Voiding cystourethrogram revealed a large diverticulum with its neck communicating with posterior wall of bladder. Abdominopelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed bilateral hydronephrosis with large bladder diverticulum with 27.3 × 21.5 cm size and smooth diverticular wall . Cystoscopy revealed diffuse trabeculation inside the urinary bladder. The neck of diverticulum was seen on the posterior wall of bladder. The inner aspect of diverticulum was smooth and biopsy showed features of inflammation without any evidence of malignancy. Open prostatectomy and diverticulectomy through a midline incision were done simultaneously . Postoperative course was uneventful. The histopathological assessment of the specimen revealed that the wall diverticulum was composed of mucosa and lamina propria with scattered thin muscle fibers with features of chronic inflammation without any evidence of malignancy. On day 12, follow-up cystography showed smooth bladder contour without leakage. Hence, the suprapubic catheter was removed. Uroflowmetry showed a peak flow rate of 11 mL/s on voiding 256 mL urine, with 15 mL residual urine and improved serum creatinine of 1.7 mg/dL and serum urea of 40 mg/dL. Patient was discharged in satisfactory condition and was doing well on follow-up.