In winter, a 70-year-old woman had taken a bath alone. When her family checked on her after 1 h, she was lying unconscious in a bathtub filled with hot water. The patient was initially transferred to another hospital. Given her comatose state (Glasgow Coma Scale [GCS] 3), severe hypotension, and multiple organ failure, she was immediately intubated and referred to our hospital for further treatment. On arrival to our hospital, her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 135/71 mmHg; heart rate, 105 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; SpO2 100% using 10 L/min O2; and body temperature, 40°C. She had no stiffness in the neck and a normal Babinski reflex. Laboratory data revealed a normal white blood cell count (8,500/μL), hemoglobin, platelet, and electrolyte levels. By contrast, laboratory data showed mild elevation of C-reactive protein (5.37 mg/dL), hepatic dysfunction (aspartate transaminase, 1,305 U/L; alanine transaminase, 894 U/L), acute kidney injury (blood urea nitrogen, 24.6 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.62 mg/dL), and coagulopathy (prothrombin time – international normalized ratio, 1.14; D-dimer, 36.2 μg/dL). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head was normal . A whole-body CT scan showed no abnormalities in the lungs, kidneys, or liver; therefore, infectious disease was not suspected. A rapid influenza antigen test was not carried out. The patient had no history of endocrine disease, and she used no medications internally. Based on all these factors, we suspected this deep coma and multiple organ failure with high fever indicated severe HS by exclusion. We carried out fluid resuscitation with iced saline and cooling until her body temperature reached 39°C, and her consciousness gradually improved to GCS 7T (E2VTM5). The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and received mechanical ventilation therapy under sedation with propofol (40 mg/h). We kept her body temperature at 36°C using adhesive surface cooling pads (Arctic Sun 5000; Bard Medical, Covington, GA, USA).
On day 2, the patient remained in a deep comatose state despite withdrawal of sedative drugs. A repeat head CT revealed bilateral and symmetrical low-density areas and diffuse bilateral swelling of the thalamus. In addition, in another detailed discussion of the patient's medical history with her family, we learned she had suffered from a severe cough with high fever 2 days before hospital admission. A rapid influenza antigen test, undertaken after culturing scrapings taken from her nose, was positive. As the patient was hemodynamically unstable, we did not take a cerebrospinal fluid sample at admission. Additionally, as the head CT on day 2 also revealed diffuse brain swelling, we did not carry out a lumbar puncture. Based on the characteristic CT findings and medical history of influenza, we made a differential diagnosis of influenza A-associated ANE. Intravenous peramivir (300 mg/day), steroid pulse therapy (1,000 mg/day), and D-mannitol infusion (135 g/day) were added to her treatment protocol. Continuous renal replacement therapy and plasma exchange were also initiated. Surface cooling with Arctic Sun 5000 (Bard Medical) and mechanical ventilation therapy with a target PaCO2 of 30–40 mmHg were continued. Although acute kidney injury, acute hepatic failure, and coagulopathy improved, brain edema gradually affected the whole brain . The patient remained in a deep coma state, and spontaneous breathing ceased on day 4. Pupils were dilated and fixed bilaterally, and the pupillary light reflex had disappeared. An electroencephalogram taken at bedside on day 6 revealed electrocerebral inactivity. Treatment was withdrawn on day 7, and the patient died of ANE on day 21.