A 47-year-old male patient with alcoholic liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class B) and portal hypertension, entered the emergency department with acute rectal bleeding, hypotension (83/44 mmHg), and anaemia (haemoglobin levels of 5,6 g/dL). He initially received a blood transfusion and supportive care. Colonoscopy showed rectal varices (>20mm) and internal hemorrhoidal disease (grade III) with a low-rate active bleeding, which was treated with endoscopic sclerotherapy (polidocanol injection).
In the following 6 months, the patient experienced recurrent episodes of acute hemorrhoidal haemorrhage with chronic anaemia requiring blood transfusions (with haemoglobin levels ranging between 8,2 g/dL and 10,1 g/dL) that persisted despite several treatment procedures: a second endoscopic injection sclerotherapy, endoscopic band ligation, inferior mesenteric vein embolization, and TIPS.
Using the Hemorrhoidal Bleeding Score recently proposed by Fathallah et al. to objectively assess the patient’s clinical response, it could be inferred that none of the treatments performed had any significant clinical impact, since the resulting score persisted at 7 points throughout all of them (daily bleeding with anemia requiring blood transfusions and little discomfort).
Given the refractoriness of the hemorrhoidal disease and the patient’s comorbidities (which rendered him ineligible for surgical treatment), a multidisciplinary team decision was made to perform emborrhoid as a salvage therapy.
Embolization was performed under local anesthesia via a right femoral arterial approach. The inferior mesenteric artery was catheterized with a 5-F Simmons catheter. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed to identify all superior rectal artery branches supplying the corpus cavernosum recti. Each terminal branch was then catheterized using a 2.8-F microcatheter and embolized with 3mm-diameter microcoils. Technical success (defined as occlusion of all target branches from the SRA with interrupted blood flow in the hemorrhoidal territory) was achieved .
The procedure was well tolerated, and there were no immediate or short-term complications.
Clinical improvement was assessed 6 weeks after the procedure using the Hemorrhoidal Bleeding Score which dropped from 7 to 2 (no bleeding, with anemia not requiring blood transfusions). The haemoglobin levels rose from 10,1 g/dL to 12,9 g/dL.