A 55-year-old man presented to the Emergency Department with chest discomfort, fever, and fatigue. He had profound leukocytosis (> 58,000/µl) and elevated peripheral blast count (85%) concerning for acute leukemia. He had no other past medical history or family history of cancer. Following bone marrow aspiration to confirm the diagnosis of high-risk AML (> 95% blasts), chest computed tomography (CT) was obtained, demonstrating a 5.5 cm heterogeneous anterior mediastinal mass abutting the aorta . The patient underwent a CT-guided biopsy of the anterior mediastinal mass with pathology demonstrating carcinoma of unknown origin. The mass stained positive for pan-cytokeratin (Lu-5), cytokeratin-20 (CK20), and intestinal differentiation (CDX2), and negative for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1)/Napsin, prostatic origin (NKX3.1), octamer binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4), glypican, and synaptophysin. All serologic tumor markers to include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, alpha fetoprotein (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), prostate-specific antigen (PSA), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were normal. Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) demonstrated heterogenous fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avidity within the mediastinal mass (max SUV 3.8), diffusely increased marrow signal appropriate in the setting of AML, and no other focus of increased FDG avidity. A second attempt at mediastinal CT-guided biopsy was similarly unsuccessful at determining the origin, in spite of next generation sequencing and tumor origin analysis.
After multi-disciplinary discussion, the patient began induction chemotherapy for treatment of his high-risk FMS-like tyrosine kinase (FLT) 3 AML with idarubicin, cytarabine, and midostaurin. This course was complicated by neutropenic fever, clostridium difficile colitis, appendicitis, and culture-negative tricuspid valve endocarditis. After recovery, a repeat bone marrow biopsy and aspirate demonstrated a complete molecular remission. The patient had appropriate hematologic recovery and maintained good performance status. Repeat CT scan of the chest demonstrated no significant change in the mediastinal mass.
He subsequently underwent open thymectomy via sternotomy for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes after a 4-week chemotherapy holiday. Standard thymectomy was performed, including removal of both cervical horns, all tissue between the phrenic nerves, and inferiorly to the diaphragm, to include a portion of the right pleura to which the mass was adherent. The deep aspect of our dissection demonstrated a free plane between the mediastinal mass and the aorta, as well as the pericardium. Final pathology demonstrated margin-negative resection of a primary thymic adenocarcinoma, 6.5 cm in greatest dimension, with tumor staining consistent with the preoperative core needle biopsies . Additional commercial genetic testing of 91 candidate genes was negative for identifiable pathogenic mutations, variants of unknown significance, or gross deletions or duplications. There was no evidence of local invasion, with 0 of 10 lymph nodes involved, yielding pathologic Stage 1 (pT1N0M0), Masaoka-Koga Stage 1, thymic adenocarcinoma. This was confirmed on expert pathological send-out review.
The patient has recovered well and is now more than 3 months from surgery. Adjuvant radiation was considered but ultimately deferred to avoid further AML-related systemic therapy delays. He restarted consolidation chemotherapy four weeks postoperatively given his high-risk AML and has now undergone successful allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant from a matched unrelated donor.