A 41-year-old woman presented to her primary care physician after experiencing one episode of left upper and lower extremity weakness lasting several minutes. Because her father had been diagnosed with MMD, the patient was referred to our hospital in 2011 for a close examination of her cerebrovascular system due to possible familial occurrence of MMD.
The patient was asymptomatic at the initial presentation. Based on initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), mild stenosis in the bilateral MCA was suspected but there was neither stenosis in the ICA and no evidence of moyamoya vessels . There were also no abnormalities in the brain parenchyma. General laboratory tests, including complete blood count, coagulation, and thyroid function data, were normal. In addition, 99m-Tc single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed stable cerebral hemodynamics without laterality [ and ]. Since the patient was asymptomatic and had no significant imaging abnormalities, an annual MRI follow-up was performed. There were no imaging changes over approximately 10 years but MRI performed at the age of 53 showed a signal loss in M1 and its distal portion, suggestive of the right M1 occlusion . No other vascular changes were found and there was no cerebral infarction . In addition, 99mTc-SPECT imaging showed a subtle decrease in resting cerebral blood flow in the right compared to the left hemisphere and imaging after acetazolamide challenge showed hemodynamic compromise in the right cerebral hemisphere .
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed occlusion of the right M1 segment and a plexiform vascular network around the occluded segment . The vessel diameter of the M2 segment was nearly normal. There was no stenosis in the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) or the ICA terminus. Furthermore, there was no transdural anastomosis with the external carotid artery and no abnormalities in the ICA or the vertebrobasilar artery system.
Several laboratory tests were performed to distinguish the etiology. Repetitive blood tests showed that blood counts, thyroid, and renal function were within normal ranges and various items associated with collagen-related disease were negative. In addition, there were no coagulation abnormalities (prothrombin time: 11.2 s, activated partial thromboplastin time: 28.6 s, and D-dimer: 0.5 μg/dL) and cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal (cells: 1/μL, protein: 37 mg/dL, glucose: 67 mg/dL, and oligoclonal bands: Negative). The antinuclear antibody (ANA) test was positive and showed high antibody titers (ANA test was positive at 1:640, speckled and nucleolar staining patterns were positive at 1:640, and the homo pattern was positive at 1:80). However, test for all other disease-specific antibodies, such as antibodies to double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid, ribonucleoprotein, Sm, SS-A/Ro, SS-B/La, Scl-70, Jo-1, ribonucleic acid polymerase III, myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), and proteinase3-ANCA, was all negative. Although a definitive diagnosis was not reached, the immunological data strongly suggested autoimmune disease involvement.
Bypass surgery was considered due to progression on angiographic findings and hemodynamic deterioration. However, since the patient had been asymptomatic to this point and had without cerebral infarction, conservative follow-up was chosen with strict management of risk factors for atherosclerosis, administration of an antiplatelet drug, and periodic MRI. The patient has remained asymptomatic ever since.