An 86-year-old woman who had been living with her elderly husband was admitted to our hospital with the complaints of nausea, anorexia, and epigastric discomfort. When she was 73 years old, the patient had undergone laparotomy and right hemicolectomy for resection of colon cancer. Five years after hemicolectomy, she had received hernia repair surgery using mesh for an abdominal incisional hernia. There was no history of abdominal or thoracic trauma. Laboratory tests were all within the normal range. Her electrocardiogram showed no ischemic changes. Although chest X-ray revealed an abnormal gas-filled mass in the left thoracic cavity, the patient had no symptom of dyspnea. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed herniation of the gastric corpus through the left posterior part of the diaphragm . We diagnosed adult Bochdalek hernia and planned its surgical treatment. As mesh had been placed under the previous upper abdominal midline incision more than 10 years earlier, dense adhesions between the mesh and abdominal tissues were expected. Therefore, we decided to perform diaphragmatic hernia repair by HALS, considering the patient’s safety. After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position with her legs apart. The previous midline incision was opened carefully to insert a LAP DISC® (Hakko, Nagano, Japan) for a hand port. Dense adhesions, which had to be divided, were found between the mesh used to repair her incisional hernia and loops of the small intestine. The disk for HALS was placed after complete removal of the mesh. Subsequently, a 12 mm trocar was inserted into the inferior umbilical region for the laparoscope. A 5 mm trocar was also inserted into the left upper abdominal region. Herniation of the gastric corpus into the left thoracic cavity through a hernial orifice in the left posterior diaphragm was confirmed. The gastric corpus could not be pulled back into the abdominal cavity because of adhesions around the hernial orifice. After these adhesions were carefully removed by HALS using Harmonic ACE shears (Ethicon, NJ, USA) (a), the stomach was completely freed and could be returned to the abdominal cavity. A 5 × 3 cm hernial defect with sac was observed (b). We decided to perform simple closure of the defect without mesh reinforcement because the rim of the hernial orifice was relatively strong. Accordingly, the defect was repaired with interrupted nonabsorbable sutures (2-0 Nesporen; Alfresa Pharma Corporation, Osaka, Japan) using a 5 mm port on the left upper abdomen and the surgeon’s left hand via the hand port (c). The midline incision for the hand port was closed without mesh reinforcement. A drain tube was placed under the left hemidiaphragm. The operating time was 244 min and there was no significant bleeding. Her postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 20. There was no evidence of recurrence at 1-year follow-up.