A 15-year-old boy (body weight 49 kg, height 181 cm), ASA physical status II (allergic rhinitis, frequent epistaxis) was scheduled for elective surgery of a pelvic mass resection. Besides anemia (9.3 g/dL) and an increased platelet count (592 × 109/L) his blood tests were normal.
After premedication with oral midazolam, the boy was taken to the operating room. Electrocardiogram, non-invasive blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and pediatric bispectral index sensor were used and his vitals were stable. After establishing peripheral intravenous (IV) access, 500 mL of Ringer’s Lactate was started and an induction of intravenous general anesthesia with fentanyl, propofol, and rocuronium was performed following maintenance with sevoflurane.
Next, a right radial artery line was placed followed by an ultrasound guided central venous catheter in the right brachiocephalic vein, without intercurrences.
The teenage boy was then placed in a lateral decubitus position and a subarachnoid block (SAB) was performed under an ascetic technique with a 27 G quincke needle. A median approach was successfully performed after a single puncture at the L3 - L4 level. Correct placement of the needle was verified by a free flow of clear cerebrospinal fluid. Hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.5% (total 7.5 mg) plus morphine 0.200 mg (0.4 mcg/kg) were used for SAB.
The child was positioned in dorsal decubitus, 1960 mg of cefazolin IV was administered and active warming was started using a forced-air warming system.
The patient’s vitals were stable during the whole surgery, which lasted for 1 hour and 30 minutes and was eventless. His tympanic temperature (TT) was 35°C at the end of surgery.
About 20 minutes after arriving at the recovery room, nearly 2 hours after the SAB, the boy presented a decreased TT (34.4°C) associated with excessive sweating, no shivering, hyperglycemia, nausea and complained of feeling hot. All other vital signs, complete blood count and electrolytes were normal. An antiemetic was administered with resolution of nausea. Warm blankets and active warm were implemented.
One hour later, the boy was discharged from the recovery room. His vitals were stable and his TT was 34.5°C and he was feeling more comfortable.
The emergency team was called about 5 hours later because the boy was still hypothermic (TT 34.0°C and axillar temperature (AT) 33.9°C) and sweating. Hyperglycemia remained (201 mg/dL). All his vitals were normal and his diuresis was preserved (0.8 mL/kg/h). It was decided to warm the patient with a forced air system, maintain clinical vigilance and hourly monitoring of temperature and capillary glycemic values.
Despite all the measures, temperature maintained below 36°C for the next 16 hours (33.8°C - 35.4°C), with gradual remission aapaapm of symptoms and normalization of glycemic values.
We excluded the most probable causes of post anesthesia hypothermia (hypovolemia, environmental conditions or infection). His symptoms were considered to be secondary to the intrathecal morphine, as we consulted medical literature and found that some similar cases have been reported in adult patients. Some of them used naloxone or flumazenil to reverse symptoms successfully (-), however, our attitude was to maintain clinical vigilance. In our clinical case, the symptoms disappeared 16 hours later, without pharmacotherapy, which favors that the cause of hypothermia was due to intrathecal morphine.