A 15 years old male diagnosed with type 2 diabetes was referred to an endocrinology outpatient clinic. He was diagnostic at age 13 with an A1c control in 6.8% and initiated treatment with metformin twice a day. After two years of irregular follow up, the patient presented with history of 2 kg weight loss, fatigue, mild polydipsia and polyuria but without signs of insulin resistance, such as acanthosis nigricans and/ or obesity. His weight was 52 kg (BMI between the 10th and 25th percentiles for age and gender), Hb: 14.6 g/dL, fasting glucose: 132 mg/dl, Hb A1c: 6.4%, creatinine clearance: 181.61 ml/min, C-peptide: 1.63 nmol/L, total cholesterol:166, LDL: 114.2 mg/dl, Triglycerides: 64 mg/dl and HDL: 39 mg/dl. Also, he had TSH: 1.43 mIU/L and FT4: 1.21mμg/dl. He had Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies and anti-islet cell antibodies which were negative. In his medical history, his birth weight was 3.06 kg with no family first degree relative with history of Diabetes. We decided to initiate insulin treatment (12 units/day of Levemir and 01unit of pre-prandial lispro) with good clinical response. The patient did not demonstrate hypoglycemia during this period. Both situations suggested the diagnostic of type 1 diabetes and the probability that he was on a spontaneous period of partial clinical remission (honeymoon phase) [, ]. In the follow-up period over the next 6 months, the insulin requirement did not change, and he maintained good glucose control levels . Hb A1c control was 6.3%.
The low insulin-dose requirement in a long time and his non-acute presentation, in the childhood, of diabetes was unusual for type 1 diabetes. We decide to request an Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) with measure of Glucose (mg / dl), insulin (uUI/ml) and C-peptide (ng/ml) to evaluate pancreatic response. The following results for the test we see in the Fig. .
These results were not typical of either type 1 or type 2 diabetes and supported further evaluation. In addition, we performed an OGTT on his parents, with normal results. We considered appropriate to perform a test for diagnosis of MODY. MODY panel was performed in the next follow up, by next generation sequencing identifying a pathogenic variant c.629C>T p.(Thr210Met). in heterozygous in GCK gene confirmed by Sanger sequencing according to the American College of Medical Genetics . However, this variant has been previously described as associated with MODY diabetes [, ]. The biochemical studies show this variant causes the reduction of GCK enzyme activity. This result confirmed the diagnosis of GCK-MODY. The specific molecular analysis for GCK also was performed in his parents. The result was negative for this variant, which suggested that it was a “de novo” variant.
With the result of genetic analysis, we suspended insulin. We decided to initiate metformin (850 mg) twice/day. The clinical response was excellent as well as the initial treatment . We also suggested life-style change with nutritional follow-up.
In the follow-up period to asses control, continuous glucose monitoring was performed to evaluate glucose levels. We see the initial response to insulin treatment during this period in Fig. a. A second report of continuous glucose monitoring was performed during oral medication treatment . Currently, the patient continues with only oral medication (metformin), and he increased his weigh with optimal clinical control. His most recent Hb A1c was 6.2%.