A 37-year-old man who smokes but denies any previous medical illness was referred to Prince Sultan Cardiac Center complaining of worsening shortness of breath, especially during exertion, abdominal swelling, and lower limb edema. He has no family history of connective tissue disorders. Upon examination, the patient looked tired, jaundiced, and unable to lie flat on the bed. The patient was afebrile. His heart rate was 113 beats per minute, his blood pressure was 101/70 mmHg, and he saturated 97% on room air. On chest auscultation, there was an audible diastolic murmur all over the chest. The abdominal exam was unremarkable, and there was bilateral pitting edema up to the shaft of the leg. Laboratory investigations showed the following: hemoglobin of 13 g/dl, normal platelet count, elevated liver enzymes with AST of 843 U/L (Normal: 0–32 U/L), ALT 1766 U/L (Normal 0–41 U/L), total bilirubin of 290 umol/L (Normal: 0–21 umol/L), and direct bilirubin of 200 umol/L (Normal: 0–3.4 umol/L). Creatinine was also elevated at 120 umol/L (Normal: 62–106 umol/L). The coagulation profile was abnormal, with INR 2.15 sec., while cardiac enzymes were within normal. The patient’s chest x-ray showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette . The abdominal ultrasound was normal. The patient had transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which showed severely reduced ventricular function with an ejection fraction of about 25%, dilated both ventricles, a bicuspid aortic valve with severe regurgitation, dilated inferior vena cava, congested liver, and an ascending aortic aneurysm with a maximum diameter of 6.9 cm . CT scan with contrast further delineated the aneurysm and its extension into the distal aorta, which was only confined to the ascending aorta . Following an urgent heart team discussion, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for close observation and started on intravenous inotropes to support his circulation and optimize his condition for surgery. His blood pressure was maintained at less than 120 mmHg, and his heart rate was sustained to 55 beats per minute. The patient underwent a modified Bentall procedure in the second week of admission. The surgery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home one week post-surgery. Tissue pathology showed degenerative changes only. The follow-up echo four weeks later demonstrated improvement in overall cardiac function, and the patient reported significant symptomatic improvement.