A fifteen-year-old boy fell out of the still rings during gymnastics at school. He suffered trauma to both elbows with pain and loss of function. He had no relevant past medical or surgical history.
Radiographs showed a non-displaced supracondylar fracture on the left side, and a lateral condyle fracture with also suspicion of a dislocated coronal shear injury on the lateral view of his right elbow (a). The left supracondylar fracture was treated conservatively with an above-elbow cast. A CT-scan of the right elbow showed a coronal shear injury of the trochlea with accompanied lateral condyle fracture of the humerus (b and c).
Open reduction and internal fixation of the lateral condyle fracture as well as the trochlear injury were planned. The surgical intervention was performed by the third and fourth author.
The patient was positioned supine on the operating table with his right arm on a radiolucent table. Patient received cefazoline prophylaxis preoperatively. First, closed reduction and percutaneous cannulated lag screw fixation of the lateral condylar fracture with use of image intensifier was performed. Second, an anterior neurovascular interval approach was initiated . A volar S-shaped incision was made from medial (proximal) to lateral (distal), with an incision throughout the bicipital aponeurosis. The brachial artery and median nerve (A) were identified.
Entering through this neurovascular interval, the brachial muscle was approached. By splitting the brachial muscle, the joint was reached. In B, the bulging joint capsule is apparent due to extensive haemarthros.
A longitudinal arthrotomy with release of hematoma was performed. After rinsing the joint, the coronal shear fracture was visualized (C). The dislocated osteochondral injury was measured as 15 × 15 mm.
The osteochondral fragment was removed. Swelling of the chondral tissue of the shear-off fragment after trauma calls for trimming of the edges in an angle of approximately 60–80° of both the edges of the fragment as well as the defect in order to create an interlocking match . After debriding the subchondral bone and abrading the defect site, removing any fibrous tissue, the defect site was filled with fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter, The Netherlands) and the sheared off fragment was placed back, resulting in a congruent articulating surface (D) and a stable interlocking match.
One 14 mm speedtip screw (1.5 mm, Medartis) was placed subchondral in order to deliver additional compression and stability (E).
By combining these three fixation techniques, interlocking cartilage, fibrin glue and screw fixation, a stable fixation of the challenging osteochondral fragment was achieved .
After checking the reduction and fixation with the image intensifier , the joint capsule was closed, followed by the subcutaneous tissue and skin. A full range of motion was reached after surgery. We supplied a protective above-elbow cast for two weeks.
Two weeks after surgery, the cast was removed and radiographs were acquired for follow up. At this point, the patient was encouraged to exercise without heavy lifting.
After three months follow up, patient reached a full range of motion of the right elbow, with 140 degrees of flexion, full extension, 85 degrees of pronation, and 80 degrees of supination. There were no adverse events and the patient was very satisfied with the functional results.