A 28-year-old Caucasian woman presented with palpitations and episodic dyspnoea. She had a significant family history of her mother developing DCM in her 30s complicated with sudden cardiac arrest (SCA). The patient had a past medical history of mild persistent asthma and obesity. She had two uneventful pregnancies when she was 23 and 26 years of age. She did not have any history of tobacco, alcohol, or substance use. She denied participating in sports or that she performed strenuous physical activities on a regular basis. The patient’s physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 128/70 mmHg and heart rate of 90 beats per minute (b.p.m.). Her cardiac examination was unremarkable for any murmurs, gallops, rubs, jugular venous distention, or rales. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a premature ventricular contraction (PVC) in the precordial leads. In addition, Holter monitoring revealed frequent PVCs (>5000 PVCs/24 hours) and sixteen episodes of nonsustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) with rates up to 152 bpm .
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a DCM with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of ∼30%. After the patient’s coronary anatomy was found to be normal on coronary computed tomography angiography, she underwent a comprehensive analysis of 67 genes primarily associated with inherited forms of arrhythmia and cardiomyopathy (PKP2, DSG2, TTN, DES, DSP, LMNA, KCNA5, etc.; Invitae Corporation; San Francisco, CA, USA). She was found to have a heterozygous likely pathogenic variant in exon 15 of the DSG-2 gene (c.3059_3062del; p.Glu1020Alafs*18). The sequence caused a premature translational stop signal in the DSG-2 gene and was expected to disrupt the last 99 amino acids of the DSG-2 protein as seen in the functional protein analysis. A similar likely pathogenic DSG-2 variant was previously reported in individuals affected with ACM (rs74685437B, ExAC 0.007% ClinVar Variation ID: 199827).
To further assess the aetiology of her cardiomyopathy, the patient underwent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging which revealed regional biventricular systolic dysfunction, including dyskinesis of the mid-inferolateral, mid-anterolateral, distal septal, distal lateral walls, and basal RV free wall (Videos 1–3). The patient’s LVEF was moderately reduced at 35% and RV cavity size and overall right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) were normal. She had mid-myocardial and epicardial fatty infiltration involving multiple LV wall segments that were most pronounced in the dyskinetic segments. She also had mid-myocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), consistent with fibrosis, of the distal septal wall and epicardial LGE of the basal to mid-inferolateral wall . Further tissue characterization utilizing T1 weighted mapping (SHMOLLI) demonstrated reduced global myocardial T1 relaxation time with focal areas of greatly reduced myocardial T1 relaxation time in the anteroseptal and anterolateral walls, most consistent with focal areas of myocardial fatty infiltration .
Based on the clinical presentation of ventricular arrhythmias, family history of SCA, known likely pathogenic mutation in the DSG-2 gene, abnormal fibrofatty replacement in multiple LV segments, and regional biventricular dyskinesis predominantly affecting the LV, the patient was diagnosed with left-dominant ACM and was managed according to published recommendations with guideline-directed medical therapy (carvedilol 12.5 mg twice daily and sacubitril–valsartan 49–51 mg twice daily) and cascade clinical screening of her first-degree family members., She subsequently underwent implantation of a cardiac defibrillator for primary prevention given her significantly reduced LVEF despite guideline-directed medical therapy, ongoing heart failure symptoms, and an expected meaningful survival of more than 1 year., At 6 months follow-up, the patient continued to do well on medical therapy with no major arrhythmic events.