A 70-year-old man was referred to our hospital for further examination of a tumor at the duodenum. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy identified a submucosal tumor at the accessory papilla in the second part of the duodenum . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a 8-mm hypoechoic mass in the submucosal layer , and endoscopic biopsy demonstrated a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor with a low Ki-67 index suggesting grade 1 (G1). Computed tomography (CT) revealed a highly enhanced tumor in the early phase, showing neither apparent lymph node metastases nor distant metastases . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also detected no lymph node and liver metastases.
Although there have been no recommendations regarding the treatment strategy for GEP-NETs of the accessory papilla of the duodenum, radical resection with pancreatoduodenectomy has been recommended as the first-line treatment for GEP-NETs of the ampulla of Vater due to relatively poor prognosis . Furthermore, endoscopic intervention was considered to be difficult due to the potential risk of the proper muscular layer damage of the duodenum as well as location at the accessory papilla. Therefore robotic pancreatoduodenectomy with lymph node dissection was performed.
Our standardized protocol for robotic pancreatoduodenectomy was previously reported . Following the kocherization of the duodenum, the jejunum and the stomach are divided. The hepatoduodenal ligament was dissected to perform hilar lymphadenectomy. After the transection of the pancreas on the superior mesenteric vein, the uncinate dissection was performed along the superior mesenteric artery. Thereafter the specimen was removed through the Pfannenstiel incision. The reconstruction included the pancreaticojejunostomy with interrupted two-layer modified Blumgart method, the hepaticojejunostomy with interrupted sutures, and the gastrojejunostomy with the robotic-sewn anastomosis.
The total operative time was 406 min, and the estimated blood loss was 150 mL. Uneventful postoperative course including no complications was observed with the patient being discharged on postoperative day 8. The final histological diagnosis was neuroendocrine tumor G1 based on the findings of synaptophysin positive, chromogranin A positive, and Ki-67 index (< 1%) . The presence of lymphovascular invasion was not found in the D2-40 immunostaining. Surprisingly, the lymph node metastases were confirmed at posterior areas of the pancreas (station 13). Regarding immunohistochemical staining of endocrine cells, the insulin-, gastrin- and somatostatin-immunoreactive endocrine cells were not detected.
The patient was followed up for 6 months without recurrence postoperatively.