A 51-year-old male taxi driver was admitted to Fukuoka City hospital with high fever (40 °C) and a shaking chill despite his use of over-the-counter antipyretics. He was transferred to the emergency department about 14 h after the symptoms onset. His medical history included bronchial asthma, pneumonia, and a surgical procedure for the resection of bilateral orbital tumors at 40 years of age. The patient had neither a history of contact with sick persons nor of any travel abroad. His body height was 160 cm and his body weight was 52 kg.
At the time of admission, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 108/74 mmHg; heart rate, 90 beats/min; respiratory rate, 40 breaths/min; body temperature, 40.1 °C; and Glasgow Coma Scale, E4V4M6 (total 14/15). Upon physical examination, a swelling of the bilateral eyelids and petechiae were detected on the conjunctiva. Some dental caries, purpura and petechiae were noted on the limbs , and 1–2 cm sized swollen lymph nodes noted at submandibular and inguinal areas were remarkable. Neck stiffness was not detected. Laboratory data on admission revealed high inflammation (white blood cell 13,500 μL, and c-reactive protein 12.29 mg/dL), normocytic anemia (Hemoglobin 8.7 g/dL), high protein and low albumin levels (total protein 12.3 g/dL and albumin 2 g/dL), renal failure (serum creatinine 4.52 mg/dL), hyperkalemia (6.12 mEq/L), proteinuria and hematuria . Computed tomography showed enlargement of the liver and bilateral kidneys in addition to swelling of the cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, mediastinal, and celiac lymphadenopathy.
Severe infectious disease was suspected, and we started ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously every 12 h after drawing a blood culture. However, purpura spread rapidly and the progression of drowsiness and fever was sustained on the 2nd hospital day. We performed a lumbar puncture and the turbid spinal fluid analysis revealed meningeal inflammation (white blood cell count, 2370 /fields; protein, 293 mg/dL; and glucose, 16 mg/dL), which was compatible with bacterial meningitis . Gram-staining of the spinal fluid showed gram-negative diplococci. The blood culture also became positive for gram-negative diplococci. We strongly suspected that the septic status of the patient’s meningitis and bacteremia was due to N. meningitidis. We increased the dose of ceftriaxone to 2 g intravenously every 12 h. The patient’s general status and consciousness then improved and his fever subsided. On the 5th hospital day, the patient’s fever (38 °C) re-appeared with hypotension, hyponatremia and eosinophilia, which led to a suspicion of relative adrenal insufficiency due to meningococcemia. We started a daily intravenous administration of 300 mg hydrocortisone on the 7th hospital day, and tapered the regimen to a daily oral administration of hydrocortisone on the 11th hospital day. Ceftriaxone was stopped on the 12th hospital day. No recurrence of infection was observed and he was discharged on the 25th hospital day. The clinical course is summarized in Fig. .
We investigated the patient’s co-morbidities and performed microbiological analysis of the strain. His past surgical history (bilateral orbital tumors), his symptoms (swelling lachrymal glands and lymph nodes), the elevated levels of IgG4 (3200 mg/dL) and immunoglobulin E (304 IU/ml), and hypocomplementemia (C3 37 mg/dL, C4 7 mg/dL, and CH50 < 12.0 U/ml) were the characteristics of Mikulicz’s disease included in IgG4-related disease. Furthermore, a biopsy of the patient’s lymph nodes confirmed the presence of IgG4-related disease (IgG4/IgG index 100%). We prescribed oral prednisolone 30 mg a day on the 19th hospital day. In addition, the strain of N. meningitidis was identified as non-typable. The sequence type (ST) was identified as ST-11448, which belongs to ST-23 (ST-23 complex), the most common ST in Japan . Moreover, we also analyzed the N. meningitidis strain according to PorA and FetA typing, which has a higher resolution power than that of ST, and identified that the PorA VR1, PorA VR2 and FetA were 5, 2–82, and F4–1, respectively. These results suggested that this N. meningitidis strain was a non-capsulated derivative of the domestic ST-23 strain. (See ).