The patient is a 72-year-old man capable of independently performing activities of daily living. Regarding his medical history, he developed gastric ulceration at 18 years of age and underwent partial gastric resection. He was treated with rivaroxaban 10 mg / day for atrial fibrillation. Also, he regularly inhales formoterol fumarate for managing bronchial asthma. He used to smoke 20 cigarettes/day and drink more than three cups of sake between 20 and 65 years of age. He reported no positive history of food or drug allergy.
Approximately 40 days before admission to our department, the patient developed pain in the lower left abdominal region. Eight days later, he visited a hospital where he underwent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen that showed multiple colonic stenosis. Colon cancer was suspected, and the patient was admitted to the facility immediately. The patient also had fever (38 °C) on admission and, therefore, underwent thoracoabdominal contrast-enhanced CT that showed pulmonary thromboembolism . Therefore, the dose of rivaroxaban was increased from 10 mg/day to 30 mg/day on Day 14 (days numbered from day of admission at the first facility).
Then, he underwent fasting treatment and received maintenance intravenous fluids. On Day 14 of hospitalization, he underwent colonoscopy that showed stenosis in the hepatic flexure of the transverse colon and a circumferential ulcer of the sigmoid colon. On administration of a contrast, a 55-mm stenosis was found in the transverse and descending colon . Pathological examination of the stenosed colon tissue revealed intranuclear inclusion bodies and a positive immunostaining for anti-CMV antibodies and CMV antigens (CMV DNA viral load was not performed). Consequently, the patient was administered 5 mg/kg ganciclovir (GCV) every 12 h since Day 27. Although the patient’s abdominal pain was relieved by the treatment, the fever was not alleviated.
Although the coagulation profile of the patient was normal on the day of admission (Day 1), an abnormal coagulation profile was seen on Day 25; the international normalized ratio of prothrombin time (PT-INR) was elevated (8.35) and the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was prolonged (170.8 s). As a result, rivaroxaban was discontinued. Up till then, the patient had received a total of 18 units of fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) and 180 mg of vitamin K. However, the coagulation profile had not improved. Although the platelet count was 113 × 109 cells/L on admission, the count began decreasing since Day 25 till it reached 73 × 109 cells/Lon Day 31. Therefore, to further explore the cause of the coagulation abnormality and continue the treatment of CMV colitis, the patient was transferred to our hospital on Day 32.
On admission to our facility, the patient’s clinical findings were as follows: Height, 163 cm; weight, 51 kg; body temperature, 36.8 °C; pulse rate, 108 beats/min; blood pressure, 118/92 mmHg; respiratory rate, 12 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 90% on ambient air. Breathing sounds were heard with coarse cracks on the dorsal surface of the lungs bilaterally. The heartbeat was irregular, but no heart murmur was heard. The abdomen was flat and soft, and there was no spontaneous pain; however, there was tenderness on palpation in the right hypochondrium and iliac regions. No peritoneal irritation was observed. Bilateral to the chest, approximately 20 scattered erythematous papules (~ 1 cm in length) were found; no superficial lymph nodes were palpable. Purpuric spots and pain were present on the right fifth finger, whereas only purpuric spots were seen on the left second and third fingers . A peripherally inserted central catheter that was placed in the left upper arm at the previous facility was present.
Table shows the patient’s laboratory data upon his admission to our hospital (Day 35 from the day of admission at the first facility).
These were as follows: White blood cell count, 14.54 × 109 cells/L; C-reactive protein, 1847.62 nmol/L; platelet count, 60 × 109 cells/L; and normocytic anemia. There was no significant abnormality in the peripheral blood; however, biliary enzymes were elevated (alkaline phosphatase: 20.02 μkat/L; γ- glutamyltransferase: 1.62 μkat/L). The coagulation disorder was apparent (PT-INR, 4.37; APTT, 154.1 s) but the D-dimer level was virtually unchanged (2.1 mg/L) and the level of fibrin degradation products was normal (3.6 mg/mL). Levels of thrombin-antithrombin complex (2.6 ng/mL) and plasmin-α2 plasmin inhibitor complex (< 0.2 ng/mL) were also normal. However, soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) was elevated (8540 U/mL), factor II activity was marginally reduced (49.1%), factor X activity was reduced to 59.7%, factor V activity was < 1.0%, and ADAMTS13 activity had decreased to 18%. Abdominal CT showed splenomegaly with a maximum splenic length of 9.6 cm and enlargement of axillary, left superior fossa, and paraortic lymph nodes. On Day 1, the patient had a maximum splenic length of 7.6 cm, indicating that the splenomegaly had increased since then.
Figure shows the clinical course after admission at the first facility. The administration of 5 mg/kg GCV every 12 h was continued. The purpura on the right hand observed at the time of admission to our facility widened. A total of 16 units of FFP were transfused to the patient at our hospital for 3 days (from Day 35, Day 4 from the admission to our hospital) but the coagulation profile did not improve. Since this patient had CMV enteritis, we considered vasculitis or malignant lymphoma as the cause based on the purpura on the fingertips, truncal rash, increasing splenomegaly, high alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level, high sIL-2R level, low platelet count, and PT-INR and APTT prolongation. A biopsy of the skin rash on the right lateral surface of the abdomen and of a left axillary lymph node was performed on Day 34 and Day 36 (Day 3 and 5 from the admission to our hospital), respectively. However, there were no indications of vasculitis or malignant lymphoma.
On Day 35 (Day 4 from the admission to our hospital), the patient developed bacteremia caused by Staphylococcus aureus and Fusobacterium species. He was treated with meropenem (MEPM) 2 g/day and vancomycin (VCM; trough ≥15 μg/mL). On Day 37 (Day 6 from the admission to our hospital), his abdominal pain worsened, and he went into shock. Non-contrast CT of the abdomen showed extensive free air in the abdominal cavity, which led to the diagnosis of gastrointestinal perforation that warranted an emergency surgery. During the operation, scattered necrotic changes were observed in the small intestine. A 1-cm perforation was found 10 cm to the right from the top of the transverse colon; the colon was resected from the ileum to the perforated area . An additional excision was performed on the left side of the transverse colon because of stool drainage from that region. Subsequently, ileal colostomy was performed, and a stoma was placed in the right lower abdomen. The surgical specimen of the ileum showed a perforation in the transverse colon, necrosis due to ischemic changes associated with circulatory failure, and numerous thrombi, including microthrombi, in the small- and medium-sized arteriovenous ducts . There was no evidence of lymphoma, vasculitis, or ulcerative colitis on pathological examination. We performed cardiac ultrasound scan multiple times, but no valve destruction was seen. In addition, a second blood culture was negative. Abnormal coagulation and multiple thrombosis were present before the onset of staphylococcal bloodstream infection. Furthermore, the pathology of the intestine showed no invasion by S. aureus. Therefore, we thought that Staphylococcal bloodstream infection had little to do with abnormal coagulation and multiple thrombosis. Because of the drug sensitivities of S. aureus and Fusobacterium species and the presence of intestinal perforation, VCM was discontinued, and only MEPM (1 g, 12 hourly) was administered from Day 39 (Day 8 from the admission to our hospital) onward. The thrombocytopenia and coagulation abnormalities observed preoperatively improved slightly and normalized postoperatively. In addition, the activities of factor II, factor X, factor V, and ADAMTS13 normalized. There was no evidence of vasculitis, lymphoma, or any other thrombotic disease; therefore, the final diagnosis was multiple microthrombi caused by CMV enteritis that mimicked thrombotic microangiopathy-like conditions. GCV administration was continued until Day 57 (Day 26 from the admission to our hospital).
On Day 88 (Day 57 from the admission to our hospital), the patient was transferred to the previous hospital for rehabilitation. One year has passed since he was discharged from the hospital; no recurrence has been observed since.