A 52-year-old man felt numbness and pain in the waist for 9 months before coming to our hospital. Six months ago, the patient developed numbness in both lower limbs. He could walk, but he was unable to run, and he had headache occasionally. Three months ago, the patient had difficulty in urinating and defecating, and he was unable to walk. After 1 month of antituberculosis treatment and the removal of spinal tumor in other hospital, the symptoms were not improved. Therefore, he came to our hospital for further treatment. Neurological examination revealed spastic paraparesis with decreased motor power in both the lower limbs. Lumbar puncture was performed on admission, and the intracranial pressure was 140 mmH2O. Routine examination of cerebrospinal fluid: pale yellow, clear and transparent, no clot, negative Pandy test, white blood cells in cerebrospinal fluid were 16.0 × 106/L (the normal range is 0–8.0 × 106/L), red blood cells in cerebrospinal fluid were 0.0 × 106/L, and white blood cell classification—mononuclear cells were 93% and multinuclear cells were 7%. Cerebrospinal fluid biochemistry: cerebrospinal fluid total protein (UCFP) 1034.17 mg/dl (the normal range is 15–45 mg/dl), cerebrospinal fluid potassium (K) 3.38 mmol/l (the normal range is 2.5–3.2 mmol/l), cerebrospinal fluid sodium (NA) 143.70 mmol/l (the normal range is 138–150 mmol/l), cerebrospinal fluid chlorine (CL) 114.90 mmol/l (the normal range is 120–132 mmol/l), cerebrospinal fluid carbon dioxide (CO2) 23.50 mmol/l (the normal range is 20–29 mmol/l), cerebrospinal fluid glucose (Glu) 3.49 mmol/l (the normal range is 2.24–3.92 mmol/l). The IgG antibodies of cysticercosis in both blood and cerebrospinal fluid were positive. MRI of his brain showed no obvious abnormality. MRI of his cervical spine showed the multiple cystic foci around the spinal cord at and below the level of axis vertebral body, small ring abnormal signal at the level of C6–7 intervertebral space, considering infectious disease . MRI of his thoracic spine showed long strip-shaped abnormal signals around the spinal cord at the level of C7–T6, and strip-shaped and beaded abnormal signals around the spinal cord at the level of T6–11 . MRI of his lumbar spine showed that degenerative changes of lumbar spine, postoperative changes of lumbar 1 and 2 adnexal areas as well as long strip and multi-cystic abnormal signals in the spinal canal at the level of L2–5, which were consistent with the manifestations of infectious diseases . The pathological section of the patient’s spine mass indicated typical cysticercosis with an eosinophilic outer cuticle layer and a single-layered sub-cuticle cell .
The patient was from Heilongjiang Province of China. He liked to eat roast meat and lettuce dipping sauce all the year round. He denied the history of defecation parasites or subcutaneous masses.
According to the patient’s symptoms, epidemiological history, auxiliary examinations and pathological results, he was diagnosed as cysticercosis. The lesion involves the entire spinal cord. After 10 days of treatment with albendazole 20 mg/kg/day for insecticidal treatment, dexamethasone for anti-inflammatory treatment, and cobamamide adenosine for nutritional nerve therapy, the patient’s paralysis of both lower limbs improved significantly, and the lower limbs were able to move slightly on the bed. The patient was followed up for 3 months, and the clinical symptoms did not deteriorate. This patient will continue to be treated and followed up in our hospital in the future.