A 78-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 10-day history of poor oral intake owing to nausea and vomiting. No hematuria nor flank pain was observed. The patient was a smoker with no significant medical or family history. Abdominal examination revealed gastric distension, but no palpable mass.
Laboratory examination revealed mildly elevated hepatobiliary enzyme levels and renal failure. The levels of tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, and SCC) were normal. Hematuria was negative upon microscopic urinalysis and urine cytology did not reveal any atypical cells.
Enhanced CT revealed a soft tissue mass in the right renal pelvis . CT showed duodenal wall thickening in the second portion of the duodenum which was judged to be inflammatory , but no obvious mass was observed in the duodenum. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed duodenal stenosis without tumors or ulcers , and duodenography revealed stenoses in the second and third portions of the duodenum . Retrograde pyelography indicated a defect in the right renal pelvis and dilatation of the upper and middle calyces.
As a priority, the patient underwent gastrojejunostomy as a treatment for the gastric outlet obstruction symptoms, although a causal relationship between the right renal pelvis tumor and the duodenal stenosis had not been determined at this point. Biopsy was attempted during the gastrojejunostomy but could not be performed because of the presence of hard tissue without a nodule around the duodenum and the risk of perforation. Instead, peritoneal washing cytology around the duodenum was performed; however, there were insufficient cells for diagnosis.
Ureteroscopy was attempted 2 weeks after the gastrojejunostomy; however, the ureteroscope could not pass through the ureter owing to the stenosis. However, endoscopic brush cytology of the right renal pelvis revealed a high-grade urothelial carcinoma. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as having urothelial carcinoma of the right renal pelvis.
After diagnosis, chemotherapy was initiated with (GC; gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 and cisplatin 70 mg/m2 on day 2). Owing to the deterioration of renal function after 1 cycle of GC, treatment was changed to (GCarbo; gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 and carboplatin 150 mg/m2 on day 2). After 7 cycles of GCarbo therapy, the patient developed obstructive jaundice due to disease progression. Although 2 cycles of pembrolizumab (200 mg once every 3 weeks) were administered, the tumor extended. The patient died 287 days after the gastrojejunostomy. Gastrojejunostomy and outpatient chemotherapy enabled oral intake for 271 days and allowed the patient to spend 140 days at home.
Autopsy findings revealed carcinoma of the right renal pelvis with thickening of the renal pelvis wall and proliferation beyond the wall . Histopathological findings revealed PUC and involvement of the duodenum, jejunum, mesentery, and common bile duct .
We concluded that the PUC in the renal pelvis directly infiltrated the duodenal wall, causing the stenosis.