An asymptomatic 42-year old woman presented to our sexual health clinic 1 month following unprotected sexual intercourse with a high risk male partner whom was later presumed to be the source of infection. She denied any other high risk sexual contacts at the time. A HIV Antigen/Antibody (Ag/Ab) test was reported as negative at that time, but she represented 5 months later for a repeat screen at which time a 4th generation Ag/Ab test was reactive. HIV line immunoassay testing was consistent with recent HIV-1 acquisition, and plasma HIV RNA at this time was detectable but below the level of quantification (< 200 copies/ml).The individual continued to follow up for routine clinical care, and plasma HIV RNA became undetectable 4 months following her initial positive test as shown in Table . Her CD4 count remained stable, but 2 years following diagnosis, she presented with groin and axillary furunculosis. She was treated with antibiotics however her skin condition did not improve to a satisfactory degree. A decision was made to commence abacavir/lamivudine/dolutegravir ART on clinical grounds. This subsequently improved with ART administration.
Subsequent review of the sample taken at her initial STI screen revealed that the first-line 4th generation Ag/Ab (ARCHITECT® Abbott) screening assay result was at the threshold of positivity. However, this result was not confirmed on two other 4th generation tests. The clinical suspicion was low at the time, as her partner was not known to be high risk, and no further testing was performed. Retrospective HIV RNA testing of this sample, however, revealed a viral load of 71,550 copies/ml . Genotypic testing confirmed the presence of a Group M, subtype C virus. HLA typing demonstrated B27 positivity, which has been reported to be enriched in HIV controllers .
Informed consent was obtained and the patient provided blood for further analysis. Single copy viral load testing of a sample from September 2016 (acquired 27 months following infection and prior to initiation of ART) was performed using replicate Aptima viral load Target-Capture Transcription-Mediated-Amplification (TC-TMA) assay on the Panther system (Hologic), which detected 0.84 plasma copies/ml (3 positive replicates of 13 performed). Purified peripheral blood CD4+ T cells were tested from six samples obtained longitudinally between December 2015 and January 2017 (before and after ART initiation) for total cell-associated HIV-1 DNA and unspliced RNA testing using previously described quantitative PCR methods (10 to 20 million input cells per experiment) [, ]. Exogenous activation for 48 h using αCD3/αCD28 antibodies was incorporated to increase detection of HIV-1 RNA from cells. No cell-associated HIV-1 DNA or RNA was detected in any of these samples.
Flow cytometry was performed to determine the frequency of markers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subset differentiation (CD45RA; CCR7), activation (CD69; HLA-DR/CD38), immune checkpoint (PD-1) and CCR5 expression prior to and following initiation of ART (September 2016 and November 2016). No major changes in surface marker expression were observed before and after ART initiation with the exception of modest increases in the frequency of CD8+ T cells expressing CD69, and decreases in CCR5 expression on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells . In addition, HIV-specific CD8+ T cell responses were measured in samples obtained in June 2016 and following initiation of ART in January, 2017 by cell surface and intracellular staining as in supplementary materials following 6 h stimulations using HIV subtype C overlapping, pooled Gag peptides (obtained from the NIH AIDS Reagent Repository). The frequency of CD107a + (a toxic degranulation marker) and intracellular TNFα+ and IFNγ+ expressing CD8+ T cells increased following initiation of ART as shown in Fig. g, h.