A 78-year-old man presented to the ED complaining of suprapubic pain that started early in the morning and became progressively worse, pain was not radiating anywhere, and was associated with frequency, with no other lower urinary tract symptoms, fever, or chills. Triage assessment was level 4 semi-urgent. His medical history was remarkable for hypertension, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and a history of low-grade bladder ca diagnosed in 2013.
His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15, Blood pressure was 124/60, pulse was 77/min, respiratory rate was 20/min, oxygen saturation was 98% on room air, and temperature was 37 °C. The patient was conscious, alert, and oriented to place, time, and person. His abdominal examination revealed a soft lax abdomen without tenderness and no costovertebral angle tenderness. Complete blood count, kidney function test, urine analysis, and urine culture were done, and all were normal, except for anemia with a hemoglobin level of 12.9 g/dL and potassium level near the lower normal level with a value of 3.34 mmol/L. The patient was given IV Paracetamol, IV Hyoscine butyl bromide, IM diclofenac, and normal saline. He was then referred to a urology clinic and discharged.
On the next day, the patient had severe loin pain in the morning, then suddenly collapsed and lost consciousness as reported by his family. He was then transferred to the ED by ambulance. In the ED the patient was unconscious with a GCS of 6/15 (E4 V1 M1), both blood pressure and O2 saturation were not recordable, pulse was intact, and pupils were both mid-dilated with sluggish reactivity to light. Intubation with rapid sequence intubation was performed. Post-intubation electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm without acute ST changes. The patient subsequently became pulseless, 1 cycle of CPR was done with 1 mg of Epinephrine, sodium bicarbonate, and calcium gluconate were given. After that, the patient reverted and was started on noradrenaline at a maximum dose with blood pressure recorded at 80/50. Labs were sent for type and cross for blood transfusion, complete blood count, C-reactive protein, kidney function test, electrolytes, troponin, and BNP.
Four minutes later, he was arrested again, another 1 CPR cycle with adrenaline was done and the patient reverted again. Post-CPR electrocardiogram again demonstrated normal sinus rhythm without acute ST changes and the results of venous blood gas on the ventilator were PH = 7.295/pCO2 = 23.9 mmHg/cHCO3 = 11.4 mEq/L/ctCO2 = 12.1 mmol/L/BE (base excess) = − 13/pO2 = 138 mmHg/SO2 = 98%. During that, we noticed that his lower limbs were paler and colder than his upper limbs, thus carotid and femoral pulses were examined, and the examination showed a diminished femoral pulse when compared to the carotid pulse. Point of care ultrasound was done using the “Butterfly IQ ultrasound probe,” which is a portable pocket-sized probe that can be easily connected to a phone or a tablet (image shown in Fig. ), and found a dilated abdominal aorta, around 8 cm, with an intimal flap. Despite starting a massive blood transfusion and giving 1 g of tranexamic acid, the vascular surgery team was not available until about one hour later, while they evaluated the patient in ED, his condition was extremely unstable. During that, laboratory results were out, and hemoglobin level dropped from 12.9 g/dL to 10.2 g/dL within a day, PO4 = 5 mg/dl, troponin = 64 ng/L. The patient was arrested again, and 8 cycles of CPR were done with adrenaline 1 mg given 4 times, the patient had pulseless electrical activity during the whole resuscitation process. Unfortunately, the patient died despite all these efforts.