We present the case of a 57-year-old male fulfilling clinical and electrophysiological diagnostic criteria for Lewis-Sumner Syndrome beginning at the age of 43 years . He had no family history of neuropathies nor other neurological disease. After an initial subacute onset, the clinical history had been slowly progressive, reaching a plateau of clinical disability that had been stable for the next 10 years. Antiganglioside antibodies (anti-GQ1b, anti-GD3 and anti-GM1) were negative. The disability consisted mainly of distal sensory-motor dysfunction of the right lower limb with foot drop (eversion and dorsiflexion plegia), despite the presence of multiple subclinical electrophysiological signs of an asymmetric multifocal demyelinating polyneuropathy with conduction blocks, affecting both upper and lower limbs, in the electromiographies with nerve conduction studies (NCS/EMG) performed over time. He scored 45/48 in the inflammatory Rasch-built Overall Disability Scale (iRODS) for immune-mediated peripheral neuropathies, translating very mild clinical disability [, ].
In January 2019, in the context of severe pneumonia due to Influenza A (H1N1) virus infection, ongoing for 4 days, he developed hyperacute (onset in a few minutes) left peripheral facial palsy with prominent lower half predominance, dysphagia, dysphonia, cervical flexion paresis, sensory-motor dysfunction of the left arm and global worsening of his right leg motor deficit (now also affecting plantar flexion and knee extension), mimicking multifocal embolic and/or brainstem stroke . He was rapidly admitted in the emergency room and received full stroke protocol, including urgent cranial computer tomography (CT) scan and angio-CT, without any evidence of acute brain lesions. After 72 h, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRi) was carried out, definitively excluding acute vascular injuries. CSF analysis was unremarkable, revealing no albuminocytologic dissociation. NCS/EMG were performed 9 days after the onset of the acute neurological dysfunction, confirming the neuropathic nature and revealing a new relapse, with electrophysiological criteria for asymmetric CIDP with bilateral facial involvement, with markedly increased facial distal motor latencies (DML), worse on the left as show in Tables and . The MRI images were reviewed and no signal changes of the cranial nerves were reported, although the absence of thin cuts of the infratentorial region limited cranial nerve assessment. He reached a minimum iRODS score of 07/48 during the peak of this relapse, indicating severe clinical disability. The patient was promptly started on oseltamivir on the first day of admission upon laboratorial confirmation of H1N1 virus RNA in the serum. Fortunately, improvement was noted soon after treatment initiation and the patient was able to eat small portions of pasty diet on day 2. The relapse episode swiftly evolved favorably in the following days almost returning to his basal condition after 6 days . The patient greatly recovered of the acute neurological deficits presented at admission, even without the use of IVIg, steroids or other immunomodulatory therapies, which were not started due to the favorable clinical course. His iRODS score greatly improved to 42/48 at the 3rd month of follow-up, although not fully to the previous status, and remains stable after 1 year (as of January 2020).