Previously healthy 10-year old girl presented with intermittent fever up to 38,5°C, fatigue, malaise, occasional headaches, legs pain and pallor. The symptoms did not prompt her or her parents to seek medical help. Two weeks later she began to cough, when laboratory investigation showed severe anemia with hemoglobin of 44 g/l and she was admitted to the local hospital. Chest X-ray, echocardiography and ultrasound examination of abdomen were normal. After receiving transfusion of packed red blood cells (RBC) she was referred to regional hospital. During 2 weeks stay she received packed RBC transfusion on two occasions but moderate anemia (hemoglobin up to 94 g/l) persisted. There were no signs of hemolysis and bone marrow examination was normal. Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria and persistent mild to moderate proteinuria (+ to ++ on dipstick) with normal renal function tests (urea 4.5 mmol/l, creatinine 47 μmol/l). A week after admission she started with dry cough again and began to expectorate blood-tinged sputum. On physical examination, inspiratory crackles over both lower lung fields were noted. Her anemia has worsened (hemoglobin 72 g/l), chest X-ray showed bilateral patchy pulmonary infiltrates and active pulmonary hemorrhage was suspected. This was supported by finding of patchy areas of ground-glass opacities on chest computed tomography scan suggesting diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Therapy with prednisone, 20 mg/day was started and she was transferred to our hospital.
On admission, she was pale with body height (149 cm) and body weight (40 kg) at 90. Percentile. Inspiratory crackles were present bilaterally over her lower lung fields, but the rest of physical examination was unremarkable. Blood pressure (BP) was 90/60 mmHg. Chest X-ray showed bilateral patchy pulmonary infiltrates in the middle and lower lung fields. Flexible fiber optic bronchoscopy revealed the presence of bilateral alveolar bleeding with progressively more hemorrhagic samples obtained by consecutive aliquots during bronchoalveolar lavage. The cytological analysis of these specimens showed presence of numerous hemosiderin-laden macrophages. Pulmonary function testing showed restrictive lung disease pattern (vital capacity – VC 71% and total lung capacity – TLC 74% predicted). Blood counts were: Hb 104 g/l, RBC 3.8×1012/l, WBC 11.1×109/l, Plt 411×109/l, Rtc 3.12%. Serum urea and creatinin levels were normal. Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria (8–10 RBC/hpf) and mild proteinuria (474 mg/24 h). Presence of pulmonary and renal manifestations suggested further serological testing. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies were negative, and C3 and C4 components of complement were normal. Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) revealed perinuclear ANCA (p-ANCA) at a titer of 1:80 with antimyeloperoxidase (anti-MPO) ANCA specifity by ELISA (52.7 U/ml, normal <5 U/ml); IIF for cytoplasmic ANCA (c-ANCA), and ELISA for antiproteinase 3 (anti-PR3)-ANCA were negative, but anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies titer (ELISA) was on borderline for positivity (19.7 RU/ml, normal <20 RU/ml). She was immediately given i.v. methylprednisolone (MP) pulses (600 mg/m2/day) for 3 days, followed by prednisolone, 40 mg/day, which resulted in cessation of hemoptysis, marked improvement of lung function (VC 90%, TLC 91%) and normal finding on chest X-ray within 10 days.
However, moderate anemia persisted together with moderate proteinuria (638 mg/24 h) and microscopic hematuria. Percutaneous renal biopsy was perfomed and tissue samples were analyzed by light microscopy (LM) and immunofluorescence (IF). LM showed cellular crescents in 4 out of 25 glomeruli and fibrinoid necrosis in 1 of 25 glomeruli , with lymphomonocytic interstitial infiltration around glomeruli with crescents and perivascular infiltration of small arterioles; IF showed diffuse global linear staining of the GBM for IgG accompanied by segmental linear to granular staining for C3, suggesting anti-GBM disease [,,]. Diagnosis of pulmonary-renal syndrome caused by anti-GBM disease and coexistent AAV was made. The treatment was then changed to a regimen consisting of prednisone (60 mg/day) for 4 weeks with subsequent taper to 30 mg on alternate day; i.v. cyclophosphamide (CY) pulses (0.5–0.75 g/m2) were given monthly for total of 6 doses, followed by mycophenolate mofetil (MMF; 600 mg/m2 b.d.) [,]. Four weeks after starting this treatment her hemoglobin level (132 g/L) and pulmonary function tests (FVC 100%, FEV1 97%) were normal, p-ANCA/anti-MPO ANCA returned to normal and anti-GBM antibodies were undetectable. During the 10-month follow-up she remained well, her BP and renal function test remained normal. Proteinuria remained unchanged during the first 8 months but gradually resolved thereafter, whereas two episodes of macroscopic hematuria on two occasions were occured, during unspecific febrile illnesses. At the latest follow-up visit, 10 months after starting treatment, her body weight was 44 kg, BP was 96/58 mmHg, with normal findings on physical examination and normal pulmonary function tests. Her complete blood count was normal, whereas 4–6 RBC/hpf in urine sediment were only present. Blood and urine laboratory values were as follows: urea 4.5 mmol/l, creatinine 59 μmol/l, p-ANCA negative; anti-MPO ANCA 3.5 U/ml; anti-GBM antibodies undetectable; proteinuria 116 mg/24 h. Her drug therapy consisted of prednisone 15 mg on alternate day, and MMF dose was reduced to 750 mg/day.