A 59-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the hospital with the symptoms of mild abdominal discontinuous pain for approximately 4 mo.
The patient suffered from symptoms of mild abdominal discontinuous pain for approximately four months, accompanied by abdominal distension and poor appetite. The patient’s intake was decreased by almost 1/2 compared with normal, and induced a weight loss of 5 kg. In the last month, the symptoms of abdominal pain and distension were worse than before, accompanied by fatigue, but without nausea and vomiting.
No special previous medical history was reported.
No special personal or family histories were found.
Epigastric tenderness without rebound or guarding was found. No other positive signs were found.
Routine blood tests showed a hemoglobin (Hb) of 81 g/L (N:113-151 g/L), red blood cell of 2.88 × 1012/L (N: 3.68-5.13 × 1012/L). Other tests, such as white blood cell, platelet and neutrophil were all normal. Serum protein electrophoresis showed an increased incidence of polyclonal α1-globulinemia of 4.7% (N: 1.1-3.7%), α2-globulinemia of 15.2% (N: 8.5-14.5%) and γ-globulinemia of 26.1% (N: 9.2–18.2%). Other blood chemistry parameters such as tumor markers, liver and kidney function, coagulation tests and amylase levels were all within normal limits. Serology for hepatitis B and C and autoimmune serology, including anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and antinuclear antibody were all negative. The serum level of IgG4 was detected and was significantly elevated at 3670 mg/L (N: 80-1400 mg/L).
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a diffusely enlarged pancreas with a capsule-like rim, an obstructed splenic vein, slight splenomegaly and collateral vessels from the gastric fundus . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed the irregular expansion of pancreatic duct in the neck and body of pancreas, and the swelling of pancreas . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed that gastric varices in the partial gastric fundus and the red-color sign were positive .