Our patient was born at 36 weeks of gestation by a twin pregnancy of a 28-year-old Italian woman. Weight at birth was 2450 g. He presented a clinical history of complications during the pregnancy for maternal pre-eclampsia and chirurgical partum, no hypotonia or feeding difficulties at birth. The family history was totally negative for ID or neurodevelopmental disorders, the twin brother was healthy. Growth charts showed height growth above the mean for age and target stature and weight growth significantly above the mean for age from the early years of life and even in the neonatal period. At the age of 3 years, speech delay and psychomotor delay were diagnosed. Simultaneously, because of minor dysmorphic features, some genetic investigations have been performed, such as karyotype and molecular analysis for Kabuki Syndrome, both resulted normal. The twin brother also underwent karyotype analysis which resulted normal. At the age of 6 years, cleft palate was surgically corrected. During childhood, several specialist assessments were performed and the patient was followed up due to severe early-onset obesity. Audiological tests, echography of the abdomen and heart, and brain MRI were performed, excluding the presence of any major abnormality or functional disorder. At the time of our first outpatient visit, at the age of 12 years, the patient’s phenotype was characterized by severe obesity (BMI + 3.2 SD), high stature (height + 1.39 SD), and minor dysmorphic facial traits including sparse eyebrows, epicanthus, hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia, and thin lips. Occipital-frontal head circumference (OFC) was 55 cm (+ 0.54 SD). Bone age was found to be about 13 years, but testicular volume was still prepubertal in size according to Tanner stage. Our patient was cooperative and calm on physical examination . He underwent several clinical and laboratory investigations to rule out secondary causes of obesity, including endocrinopathies. To date, no hormonal disorder has been identified. Haematochemical investigations documented a picture of fasting hyperinsulinaemia (insulin 33 IUI/mL, but not after oral glucose load), with normal fasting glycaemia (86 mg/dL), normal glucose tolerance (glycaemia 110 mg/dL after 120' after oral glucose load) and glycated haemoglobin (5.5%). Levels within normal limits were documented for TSH (3.860 IU/mL), FT4 (16.40 pmol/L), FT3 (4.69 pg/mL), IGF-1 (198 ng/mL), cortisolemia (14.48 ug/dL), ACTH (67. 3 pg/mL), 24-h cortisoluria (120 mcg/24 h), vitamin D (28 ng/mL), calcemia (10 mg/dL), phosphoremia (4.1 mg/dL), PTH (20 pg/mL), alkaline phosphatase (200 U/L). Screening for coeliac disease was negative. Gonadotropins were compatible with the early pubertal stage reached (FSH 7.54 mUI/mL; LH 2.02 mUI/mL), as were testosterone levels (15.5 ng/dL). The total cholesterol (190 mg/dL) and LDL-cholesterol (100 mg/dL) were at the high limit of the normal range for age; HDL-cholesterol (57 mg/dL) and triglycerides (55 mg/dL) were within the normal range. 24 h arterial pressure monitoring was normal. At the last endocrinological assessments, at the age of 14, the boy appeared to have a spontaneous onset of puberty (testicular volume from 3 to 5 cc bilaterally; bone age 14.6 years). Severe obesity was persistently present (BMI + 3.2 SDS), whereas a slowing of height growth rate (2.6 cm/6 months) was recorded with stature (+ 0.6 SDS) still above the target height (+ 0.3 SDS).
At present, the patient is also being followed up for mild to moderate ID with speech impairment and is undergoing neuropsychiatric training and speech therapy with good results.