A 67-year-old Japanese man presented to the hospital with asymptomatic gross hematuria. He had been smoking for 20 years (20 cigarettes/day). Cystoscopy before transurethral resection (TUR) indicated a nonpapillary sessile tumor on the right bladder wall and a papillary pedunculated tumor on the bladder neck. Histopathological examination of TUR specimens showed muscle-invasive SmCCB and DAP, after which he was referred to our hospital.
Initial physical examination indicated phimosis and nodular and papillary tumors inside the preputial collar. Exfoliative cytodiagnosis of the penile tumor yielded positive results, and suggested SCC. Urinalysis showed hematopyuria, and the urinary cytology results were positive. Serum tumor markers including neuron-specific enolase, pro-gastrin-releasing peptide, and prostate-specific and SCC antigens were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a locally, muscle-invasive bladder tumor. Moreover, a prostatic urethral tumor protruding into the bladder and a non-invasive penile tumor were identified, without pelvic lymph node swelling. No remarkable lesions including bone and lung were identified on computed tomography or bone scintigraphy. He was diagnosed with synchronous triple cancer of the bladder, prostate, and penis. He underwent laparoscopic radical cystectomy, urethrectomy, and partial penectomy with an ileal conduit urinary diversion. The obturator and external ilieal lymph nodes were also dissected. No operative complications were noted.
The bladder tumor appeared well-circumscribed and solid on gross examination. No tumors were observed in the prostatic urethra. The nodular and papillary penile tumors were located inside the preputial collar . Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of bladder tissue revealed small and round tumor cells closely arranged in cords . They exhibited positive staining for the neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin (data not shown) and cluster of differentiation (CD 56) . Therefore, the bladder tumor was diagnosed as a SmCCB (pT3aN0M0). Microscopically, no malignant tumor cells were observed in the prostate. However, HE staining of the TUR specimen was positive for DAP , which means DAP was completely resected by TUR. HE staining of the penis specimen demonstrated papillary tumor invasion of the submucosal stroma. Furthermore, cancer pearls and single-cell keratinocytes—characteristic of SCC—were found in the penile tumor , and therefore, it was diagnosed as SCC (pT1N0M0). Thus, he was diagnosed with synchronous triple urogenital cancer, including SmCCB, DAP, and penile SCC.
To clarify the common pathogenesis, we performed polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests by using a HPV typing set (6603, Takara Bio Inc). This assay can detect low-risk HPV types, including HPV-6, 11 and high-risk types including HPV-16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 52b. HPV- deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) containing the domains associated with carcinogenesis (E6 and E7). The assay can amplify PCR products for these domains were detected in all three cancers . Moreover, to examine cell apoptosis, immunohistochemical staining was conducted. Sections were incubated with monoclonal mouse anti-human antibodies for p53 (1:200, Dako) and bcl-2 (1:100, Dako) at 4°C overnight. Next, sections for p53 and bcl-2 were treated with anti-mouse immunoglobulins (Vector Laboratories) for 30 min at room temperature. We obtained positive staining for p53 and bcl-2 in all three cancers .
Since SmCCB was pathologically invasive, the patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin and irinotecan, based on the treatment regimen for small cell lung cancer. The patient is currently alive at 6 months postoperatively without evidence of tumor recurrence.