A 39-year-old female was hospitalized at Bethesda Lempuyangwangi Hospital Yogyakarta Indonesia, with the chief complaints of confused state, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and epigastric pain. Symptoms began 1 day before hospitalization. Behavioral changes, communication difficulties, social disengagement, and confusion were reported by the patient’s family 1 day before admission. The patient has uncontrolled hypertension and a history of uncomplicated febrile seizures at age one. She has never taken any antiepileptic medication and has never suffered recurrent seizures. The family denied a history of mental illness, smoking, alcohol, and illegal drug use. The patient had 2 doses of Sinovac vaccine on January 2021 and February 2021 and had 1 dose of Moderna COVID-19 vaccine on August 20th, 2021. On the following day, the patient experienced tenderness and swelling on the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine administration site and subsided after the paracetamol consumption.
An emergency room evaluation found 160/85 mmHg blood pressure, 22 breaths per minute respiratory rate, 100 beats per minute pulse rate, no fever, and 97% oxygen saturation on room air. Memory loss, difficulty pronouncing words, impaired numeracy and linguistic skills, time and place disorientation, and attention deficiency were all noted in the ER. Examiners did not find any cranial nerve palsy, motor and sensory deficit, pathological reflexes, and meningeal signs. The neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (16.9) and C-reactive protein (31.75) increased, indicating an ongoing inflammation . A chest x-ray and urinalysis revealed no abnormalities. The COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test came out negative. The computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed no anomalies . Due to our hospital’s facility limitations, we did not undertake brain MRI, electroencephalography, or cerebrospinal study. Moderna COVID-19 vaccine-associated encephalopathy was diagnosed. The patient received 1 g ceftriaxone twice a day, 40 mg pantoprazole once daily, 4 mg ondansetron three times daily, 5 mg flunarizine twice daily, and 12 mg betahistine three times daily.
On the second day of hospitalization, epigastric and left hypochondriac pain was found, but no neurological abnormality. As a therapy, 62.5 mg of methylprednisolone injection twice daily was added. She began to recognize and interact with her surroundings on her third day in the hospital. When the patient was compliant, an MMSE was performed. The MMSE score on the third and fourth day was 18, indicating slight cognitive impairment. The sixth day of hospitalization showed a significant decrease in C-reactive protein to 10.21 mg/L. The patient was discharged on the seventh day and there were no adverse events observed. One week following hospital discharge, the patient was recovered completely. We re-administered the MMSE 10 months later, and her score of 30 shows that she does not have cognitive impairment.