A 39-year-old male presented with complaints of recurrent knee locking and pain in the left knee following a fall from a height of 7 feet, 4 years back, presented to the orthopedic clinic for management. On examination, there were evident quadriceps wasting of 3 cm with a positive Lachman test, anterior drawer test, pivot shift test, McMurray test, and Apley’s grinding test. There was no laxity in the coronal plane and the dial test was negative. A clinical diagnosis of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tear with meniscal tear was made and the patient was advised radiological examinations. Kellgren-Lawrence Grade II osteoarthritis was noted on a plain radiograph of the knee which did not reveal any fracture. His Lysholm knee score was 62/100.
MRI was performed on a 3T scanner using a dedicated knee coil. Proton density fat-saturated images were acquired in all planes in addition to a T1-weighted image and gradient echo image. The MRI was diagnostic of a complete chronic ACL tear, medial, and lateral meniscal tears with bucket handle components giving rise to the “triple posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)” sign, double anterior horn sign, and an osteochondral defect in the medial femoral condyle (, ). While some signs have been described on coronal and sagittal images in the literature to help identify a bicompartmental meniscal tear, no sign has been described on axial images. We propose a novel “molar tooth sign” on axial images to assist in identification of this rare entity which necessitates pre-operative identification for appropriate procedural planning .
A gait analysis was also performed for the patient using BTS bioengineering 3D gait lab (Italy). His gait examination revealed decreased percentage of stance phase of affected limb, reduced stride length slight, and increase in peak flexion of affected limb.
Based on the clinical and radiological findings, the patient was advised arthroscopic ACL reconstruction with meniscal repair/menisectomy. Intraoperatively, diagnostic arthroscopy confirmed a complete ACL tear with an avulsed femoral attachment, bucket handle component arising from meniscal tears of both medial and lateral menisci, and osteochondral defect in medial femoral condyle and an intact PCL. Arthroscopic single bundle ACL reconstruction was done using a five-strand semitendinosus and gracilis autograft. The bucket handle component of medial meniscus (MM) had a complex morphology due to which subtotal menisectomy was performed. For the lateral meniscus, the bucket handle component was reduced and repaired using two sharp-shooters by inside-out method . Postoperatively, the patient was allowed a range of motion exercises with non-weight bearing protocol for 6 weeks. At 2 months follow-up, the patient had a painless, full range of motion.