A 15-year-old Caucasian male presented with painless cervical lymphadenopathy and excessive sweating. The patient’s family and psychosocial history was unremarkable. Moreover, no relevant past interventions were recorded in the adolescent’s medical history. Normocytic anemia (Hemoglobin 86 g/L Mean corpuscular volume 93.6fL), thrombocytopenia (Plt 49 × 109/L), and blasts (36%) dominated in the peripheral blood. Bone marrow analysis by flow cytometry revealed the diagnosis of precursor B-ALL (60% of aberrant “common” B-cells by European Group for Immunological Classification of Leukemias (EGIL) classification; TdT+, CD19+, CD10+, CD79a+, citIgM−). A favorable hyperdiploid clone (55, XY, X, +4, +6, +10, +14, +17, +18, +21, +21/46, XY) was detected by classical cytogenetic technique (G-banding). PBX1 gene duplication and tetrasomy of chromosome 21 were verified by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Clonal IgH and T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangements were confirmed by molecular analysis (real-time polymerase chain reaction). No unfavorable cytogenetic or molecular disease features (for example, bcr/abl, KTM2A) were discovered. Additionally, next-generation sequencing (NGS) investigation of the tumor DNA revealed NRAS and CBL mutations but without potential therapeutic implications. No leukocytes or blasts were discovered in cerebrospinal fluid, and initial brain magnetic resonance (MR) was normal, thus central nervous system (CNS) was free of disease (CNS1 status). Diagnostic assessment was carried out according to the protocol’s standards, and no special (for example, financial) work-up or therapeutic challenges were encountered.
Chemotherapy according to the ALL-Intercontinental Berlin–Frankfurt–Münster (IC BFM) 2009 protocol was initiated, consisting of induction (prednisone, vincristine, daunorubicin, PEG-asparaginase, intrathecal methotrexate), early intensification (cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, 6-mercaptopurine, intrathecal methotrexate), consolidation (combination of dexamethasone, vincristine, vindensine HD-cytarabine, HD-methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, PEG-asparaginase, etoposide, intrathecal therapy), and re-induction therapy (dexamethasone, vincristine, doxorubicin, PEG-asparaginase, cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, 6-thioguanine), followed by maintenance (6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate). While good prednisone response (peripheral absolute blast count < 1000/µL) was achieved by day 8 (peripheral absolute blast count 237/µL), flow cytometry minimal residual disease (FC-MRD) on day 15 and 33 was 28.9% and 0.03%, respectively. Solely due to high FC-MRD percentage of blasts (> 10%) on day 15, the patient was classified into high-risk (HR) disease group. Persistent minimal residual disease (MRD) (0.0012%) was detected by day 78, no MRD (0%) status was achieved prior to second high-risk block (consolidation), and the patient remained disease-free through further intensive chemotherapy course. Following the decision of the national transplantation team, the patient was not eligible for allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation.
Throughout the 10-month intensive chemotherapy, the patient experienced multiple toxicities of various degrees. Treatment-related adverse events of moderate to higher grade, according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.03, are listed in Table . The most troublesome complications warranting multidisciplinary approach are described in more detail below.
Hyperglycemia (serum glucose 12.1 mmol/L) was first noted on the third day of induction, during increase of prednisone dose (beginning with 25% of the calculated dose, 25% daily increments, full dose of 60 mg/m2/day reached on the 4th day), when nutritional advice was sought. As serum glucose levels (17.3 mmol/L) had risen additionally by day 9, intensive insulin therapy was initiated, intermittent-scanning continuous glucose monitoring system was applied, and education of the patient and his mother was performed in detail. Further workup (Glycated hemoglobin, C-peptide, diabetes related autoantibodies) excluded the possibility of type 1 diabetes, and hyperglycemia had resolved after 31 days of insulin therapy. Short-term steroid use (dexamethasone 20 mg/m2/day over 5 days) during consolidation demanded solely nutritional adjustments. During the re-induction, hyperglycemia (serum glucose 14.5 mmol/L) appeared the third day of dexamethasone use (10 mg/m2/day), necessitating multiple daily insulin injections (basal-bolus regimen) for 34 days. Adrenal insufficiency (cortisol 63 nmol/L) and central hypothyroidism (triiodothyronine < 0.80 nmol/L, thyroxine 47 nmol/L, thyroid stimulating hormone 0.04 mU/L) were detected by the end of the fourth week of induction and third week of steroid therapy in re-induction, warranting 2-week hormone replacement therapy (levothyroxine, hydrocortisone) with prolonged tapering.
As evaluated by Pediatric Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss, End Stage Renal Disease (pRIFLE) criteria , our patient developed acute kidney injury (AKI) on three occasions, details of which are presented in Fig. .
One day after a 3-week dexamethasone course (10 mg/m2/day) with 1-week tapering, at the end of the first part of re-induction, a bizarre behavior pattern was observed. The patient’s speech was incoherent, and aggressive outbursts were replaced by manic-depressive mood swings. A sudden-onset qualitative consciousness disturbance accompanied by short tonic–clonic convulsions demanded prompt neurological evaluation. No electrolyte disorders, abnormal glucose levels, or high blood pressure readings were detected. Urine toxicological screening was negative. Urgent head computed tomography (CT) scan was unremarkable, and repeated electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed choroid plexus hemosiderosis, providing no explanation for psychological status alteration. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) encephalitis and meningitis panels (Borrelia, tick-borne encephalitis, herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, measles, mumps, Human herpesvirus 6) in cerebrospinal fluid were negative, as were autoimmune encephalitis autoantibodies. A child psychiatrist diagnosed the patient with steroid-induced psychosis and introduced medications (risperidone, promazine), along with intensive psychological support. Within a week, all symptoms ceased, and the patient’s psychological status remained stable even after the drugs’ discontinuation. No new cerebral events were described, and follow-up EEG and neurological status were satisfactory.
Hemosiderosis, due to repeated blood transfusion, was revealed during MRI of the brain and confirmed with high ferritin levels and MRI of the liver . The baseline ferritin level of 323 µg/L (serum iron 20 µmol/L, total iron-binding capacity 43 µmol/L, unsaturated iron-binding capacity 23 µmol/L) in our patient had risen to 5143 µg/L after 9 months of intensive chemotherapy and then spontaneously fallen to 2994 µg/L at 1 month after (ferritin reference range 10.3–55.8 µg/L). During intensive chemotherapy, the patient received a total of 43 doses of blood (red cell) transfusions. After only a month of chelation therapy (deferasirox 20 mg/kg/day), a significant decrease to 1664 µg/L was noted with no deterioration in kidney function observed.