Medical history: A 40 year old woman has been suffering from progressive systemic sclerosis, diagnosed at the age of 16 years. She was not regularly followed up, eider for regular check up’s, eider for medications. Her last control at the Rheumatology Clinic was a year ago, and since then she was on methotrexate (10 mg). She was married, but had never been pregnant. Important information from her previous medical history is the fact that she suffered an ischemic stroke 6 years ago, but a work up for hypercoagulability state was never conducted, and any prophylactic anticoagulant or antithrombotic therapy was not given. One week before the admission at Cardiology Clinic, she was hospitalized at the Rheumatology Clinic because of shortness of breath, cough, fatigue and weakness. On physical examination she was pale, with cyanosis on the both hands. She had pinched nose, taut skin with numerous teleangiectasias with retraction of the lips. On auscultation she had decreased breath sounds, absent in the basal parts of the right lung. Her BP was 120/80 mmHg, and HR = 80/bpm. Laboratory tests: polyglobulia with red blood cells 6.0 × 1012/L, Hb 172 g/L and hematocrit 0.57; moderate thrombocytopenia (50-100 × 109/L), in two separate controls, and elevated WBC (>20 × 109/L), with neutrophilic predominance (> 90%). Other biochemical parameters were in the normal range. The chest X-ray detected consolidation of the basal parts of the right lung, accompanied with deteriorated respiratory function (blood gas analyses revealed partial respiratory insufficiency: pH 7.446; pCO2 4.06 kPa; pO2 6.99 kPa; sO2 88%). At that point the patient was treated with corticosteroids, antibiotics, bronchodilators and oxygen therapy. After several days she experienced sudden onset of sharp chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, rapid heartbeat and central cyanosis.
Because of a suspicion of pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE), D-dimers were measured, and found to be increased (> 4500 ng/mL), and CT scan with pulmonary embolism protocol was performed. It reviled multiple thrombi in the right ventricle , and massive acute pulmonary embolism involving the right pulmonary artery and extending into the lobar and segmental brunches. Truncus pulmonalis was dilated up to 40 mm in diameter; same was with the right PA, 28mm .
We also registered small bilateral pleural effusion and tiny layer of pericardial effusion . CT scan and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), indicated dilated right heart cavities, severe tricuspid valve regurgitation, pulmonary hypertension, McConnell’s sign - all together manifestations of right ventricular dysfunction were present, as a result of massive pulmonary thromboembolism, at which point decision for treatment with fibrinolysis was made. There was demonstrating signs of severe illness: was dyspneic, tachypneic, with low sO2 saturation (~76% with oxygen mask) and central cyanosis, but hemodynamically stable: HR ~80/bpm, BP 120/80 mmHg. The ECG showed sinus rhythm with signs of right axis deviation and incomplete RBBB .
Thrombolytic treatment with streptokinase was applied, using the 24 h administration protocol (250 000 IU during the first hour, followed by 100 000 IU/h in the next 24 hours), with subsequent heparin (UFH) infusion (1000 IU/h). At the very beginning of the UFH infusion, in the morning hours on the second day of the PTE treatment, she again felt chest pain, but now clamping, accompanied with ST elevation in the lateral leads (D1 and AVL), and broad QRS complex (~120 msec), consistent for STEMI . The patient was immediately sent to the cat lab, where coronarography was performed. The angio study revealed 4 occluded arteries (left anterior descending artery, diagonal branch, circumflex artery and obtuse marginal artery). The only potent one was the right coronary artery. An attempt for thromboaspiration on the left anterior descendent artery and its diagonal branch was undertaken, clot was aspirated from LAD and diagonal brunch, but the TIMI flow remained low .
Despite all the efforts, 20 hours after the intervention, the patient died in cardiogenic shock. Blood sampling for the acquired antiphospholipid syndrome, that we performed, were positive for anticardiolipin (aCL) antibodies. It was the first and only time that suspicion for antiphospholipid syndrome was arisen in this patient with the history for progressive systemic sclerosis.