A 30-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a mass in his occipital region for 1 mo.
One month prior to admission, the patient had found a mass, the size of which was approximately 1 cm × 1 cm, in the left occipital region and he did not consider it to be serious. One month later, the patient found that the mass was enlarged, so he presented to the hospital.
The patient was in good health prior to the present illness.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
Physical examination showed a mass in the left occipital area of the patient, approximately 2 cm × 2 cm in size, that was rigid and had no associated tenderness.
The laboratory examinations (including routine blood and urine tests, coagulation function tests, liver and kidney function tests, and tumor markers) were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) examination showed a left occipital nodule with a subcutaneous diameter of approximately 2 cm, a uniform density, and a CT value of approximately 25 Hu. The nodule boundary was clear, the edge was smooth , and there was no destruction of the adjacent skull bone . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an oval subcutaneous nodule in the left occipita, and the lesion showed iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI). The nodule grew close to the superficial fascia of the left occipita to the subcutaneous fat layer, and the edge was clear and smooth . T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) showed inhomogeneous high signal intensity in the lesion, and the central signal was higher than that of the periphery . A contrast-enhanced scan of the lesion showed obvious inhomogeneous enhancement, and the peripheral enhancement was higher than that of the center, showing an inverted target sign . The sagittal contrast-enhanced scan of the lesion showed obvious thickening and enhancement of the adjacent fascia, showing a fascial tail sign .
Postoperative pathology showed that a large number of proliferated spindle cells were arranged erratically, and myxoid matrix, local angiogenesis, and a small amount of erythrocyte extravasation could be seen . Immunohistochemistry showed positive expression of SMA in spindle cells in the lesion .