A 31-year-old female with past medical history of leiomyomas status post myomectomy presented to the emergency department (ED) with 12 h of sudden 8/10 abdominal pain, worse on the right side than the left, unable to be relieved by ibuprofen. Abdomen and pelvis computed tomography (CT) revealed a large right adnexal cyst with hyperdense fluid within the right lower quadrant that extended up towards the liver, consistent with a hemorrhagic cyst in the setting of a negative pregnancy test. The CT also revealed an indeterminate 3 cm right renal mass concerning for RCC.
In a following outpatient appointment, the patient’s primary care provider discovered that the patient’s mother had renal cancer status post nephrectomy at age 42 and was presently on dialysis secondary to polycystic kidney disease (PCKD). The patient was promptly referred to urology, who was concerned for a potential diagnosis of hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) syndrome given history of uterine fibroids. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a complex bosniak category IV 2.4 cm right renal cystic lesion, even more concerning for RCC .
Three months after ED presentation, the patient underwent a robotic partial nephrectomy without complications and was discharged the following day. Wide resection of the tumor was performed given concern for HLRCC. Pathology revealed a 2.5 cm RCC, tumor grade 2, with negative margins. AJCC stage was pT1a. The tumor had features that were not specific for any of the established types of RCC and, hence, was placed in the unclassified category. Specifically, the tumor exhibited cells with clear cytoplasm and low nuclear grade arranged in a papillary-like architecture with fibromyomatous-type intervening stroma . Immunostaining was positive for CK7, carbonic anhydrase 9, vimentin, and PAX8 and negative for several other markers. The patient was referred to medical genetics for further evaluation and testing.
Medical genetics uncovered a patient history of ungual fibromas removed from her toes and family history of kidney cancer in the patient’s mother at age 42 and maternal aunt at age 42. The patient also had a maternal first cousin who had their kidney removed at age 40 and a maternal aunt who had her kidney removed at an unknown age. Her mother, maternal aunt with kidney cancer, and maternal cousin all had hypopigmented patches of skin. Her mother may have had dental pits. Her paternal family history was limited but had no known cancer history. There was no known history of family members with other skin findings, seizures, learning delays, heart/lung/eye tumors, or complications. The patient did not have knowledge of the genetic status of family members. The patient’s ancestry was African American without Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry and consanguinity. RenalNext® test, a next-generation sequencing panel, was used to test 20 cancer susceptibility genes for hereditary kidney cancer: BAP1, CHEK2, EPCAM, FH, FLCN, MET, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, MITF, PMS2, PTEN, SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, TP53, TSC1, TSC2, and VHL. The test identified a 5’UTR deletion in the TSC1 gene, a likely pathogenic variant. The remaining genes were negative for pathogenic variants and variants of uncertain significance. Later, dermatology identified on the patient additional benign skin findings, including small growths and hypopigmented regions.
Three months after her partial nephrectomy, the patient received a chest CT to rule out concerns for pulmonary embolism, which incidentally revealed a possible enhancing pancreatic body/tail lesion that was indeterminate particularly given the history of RCC. A month later, MRI magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed a 1.7 cm solid, enhancing lesion involving the pancreatic body/tail, worrisome for metastasis in the setting of RCC . There was also a punctate 5 mm cystic lesion in the region of the pancreatic head. An echocardiogram was also performed at this time and was unremarkable. The patient promptly received an endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) with fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of the pancreatic body/tail mass. Pathology of the biopsy revealed a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor, WHO grade 1. The patient was then referred to surgical oncology to evaluate for resection of the likely nonfunctional PNET.
About four months after the incidental PNET finding on CT, the patient underwent robot-assisted distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. Pathology revealed a 1.8 cm well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor, WHO grade 1 (Ki-67 < 1%) , and all 14 lymph nodes negative for metastatic tumor. AJCC stage was pT1N0. Her post-operative course was complicated by a grade B pancreatic fistula, as defined by ISGPS, which resolved with a drain placed by interventional radiology and antibiotics. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis at the time noted scattered areas of bone sclerosis in the sacrum that was stable compared to previous known imaging without new destructive or aggressive osseus lesions. TSC patients often have sclerotic bone lesions, and the areas of bone sclerosis seen on CT could be related to her TSC.
Neurology ordered a brain MRI a month following the distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy, which revealed two small, focal cortical dysplasias/tubers, one in each frontal lobe , in addition to a very small focus in the right superior frontal lobe. The patient did not have a seizure history or present with neurocognitive dysfunction. A subsequent brain MRI one year later revealed no interval change, and neurology agreed to follow up if the patient becomes symptomatic in the future.
A year and a half following the distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy, the patient is currently negative for recurrence and metastatic disease of either RCC or PNET, and no additional malignant tumors have been identified.