A 67-year-old Iranian man was admitted to Shahid Beheshti hospital affiliated with Yasuj University of Medical Sciences with mild lower abdominal discomfort (constant, dull abdominal aching) with a three-month duration. His bowel habits were normal, and he had no urgency, hesitancy, weak stream, or burning sensation when urinating. There was no fever, body weight loss, or recent history of trauma, surgery and chronic pancreatitis, or other diseases of the pancreas. Before presenting to the hospital, the patient visited other healthcare facilities and clinics and had received some unspecific oral medications like pantoprazole and hyoscine hydrobromide. His vitals were within normal range. A proper abdominal physical examination including inspection, auscultation, palpation, and percussion was done; the abdomen was soft, non-distended, without a palpable mass. The digital rectal exam was normal.
Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed a large retroperitoneal, cystic structure measuring 135 × 88 mm in mid-line position in the level of bifurcation of the aorta, and the urinary bladder was well distended with mildly increased wall thickening (5.5 mm) associated with some trabeculation in the wall without any stone. As the patient had no history of abdominal dysfunction, and there was no suspicion for bowel obstruction, foreign bodies, and urolithiasis, abdominal radiography was not ordered. However, contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen and pelvic revealed a well-defined huge (140 × 120 mm), unilocular, thickened wall cystic structure within the left hemi-pelvic cavity extended from recto-sigmoid junction to the level of upper end of iliac crests and crossing mid-line, as well as with pressure effect over recto-sigmoid, lower rectus muscle, and urinary bladder. The cystic structure showed no solid components or gross internal septations and the content was homogenous. There was no overt connection the cystic structure and the surrounding organs . The radiologist reported some differential diagnoses for this huge cystic structure as neuro-entric cysts, anterior sacral meningocele, and other cystic structures of the pelvic cavity. Paraclinical and laboratory findings as complete blood count (CBC), plasma concentrations of pancreatitis (amylase, lipase) and neoplasm markers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha fetoprotein (AFP), Cancer antigen (CA) 15–3, CA 19–9, and CA 125), urea, creatinine, bilirubin, aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) were within normal range.
As this retroperitoneal cystic structure did not cause ureteric obstruction leading to obstructive uropathy, early preoperative ureteric stenting was not indicated according to the preoperational consult to the urologist.
The patient underwent explorative laparotomy, and after opening into the retro-peritoneum, a large thick-walled retroperitoneal cyst, compressing the bladder wall was found , afterward connections and adhesions of the mentioned structure to the adjacent organs such as recto-sigmoid colon, both ureters, iliac arteries, and the sacrum were released, and the structure was isolated and was removed successfThe mass was incised and contained clear serous fluid (pale yellow). The cytologic findings showed acellular cystic fluid with no malignant or epithelial cells. Cyst fluid culture was negative. One of our differential diagnoses was hydatid cyst which was ruled out by the absence of daughter cysts and normal echinococcal titers.
The histopathology of the cyst wall revealed a benign cystic lesion with no epithelial lining. A histologic diagnosis of non-neoplastic retroperitoneal pseudocyst was made .
The patient got per os (PO) on the 1st day after the operation, and became pain-free, had passed stool, had acceptable urine output on the second day after the operation, so then was discharged home on day 3 post-operation. The patient was followed up in the clinic with a normal abdominal examination and well-healing wounds after one week, and one month after discharge from the hospital, and there has not been any evidence of recurrence after 3 months of follow-up. He is optimistic about the future and says that this event has helped him to pay more attention to his health afterward.