A 31-year old male professional wrestler was referred to our department by his primary care physician because of recurrent uni-lateral anterior shoulder instability episodes and anterior shoulder pain preventing participation in competition and practice. The first reported instability episode was a traumaic subluxation which had occurred a year earlier during a wrestling fight. Multiple further subluxations ensued afterwards. The patient had not undergone any previous surgical interventions on his shoulder. During clinical examination the patient featured a positive apprehension- and relocation test, a negative sulcus-sign and a Beighton Score of 0. No loss of range of motion or strength was noted. CT scans with 3D reconstruction revealed no lack of glenoid surface area, however flattening of the glenoid concavity due to fracture and medialized malunion of the anterior glenoid rim was visible on axial CT scans . Preoperative MRI examination showed no detachment of the labrum from the medialized anterior glenoid rim. The patient was treated with arthoscopic osteotomy, reduction and percutaneous screw fixation of the bony fragment along with arthroscopic capsulo-ligamentous shift.
The surgical technique has previously been described . The operation was performed in beach chair position and under general anaesthesia. Diagnostic arthroscopy revealed that the articular surface of the anterior glenoid rim was slightly medialized resulting in a reduced concavity depth as visible on the preoperative CT scans. The capsulo-labral complex was still attached to the medialized osteoarticular fragment without any visible Bankart lesion. Only a small and shallow Hill-Sachs lesion was detected. The fragment was mobilzed using a periostal elevator and subsequently reduced. A percutaneous fracture screw system was used to fix the fragment with a cannulated self-tapping screw inserted from antero-inferiorly into the gleno-humeral joint . Finally the anteroinferior capsuloligamentous complex was moderatly tightened using two knotless suture anchors. The Patient was discharged from the hospital on the third postoperative day and had to wear a shoulder sling for 4 weeks before starting physiotherapy.
The post-operative clinical improvement of the patient was recorded prospectively at 3, 6, and 12 months. The Western ontario shoulder instability index (WOSI, range 2100–0 points) improved from 895 preoperatively to 355, 142 and 37 points, respectively. The Rowe Score (range 0–100 points) increased from 47 preoperatively to 87, 97, and 97 points, respectively. Similar to the Subjective Shoulder Value (SSV, range 0–100 %) which increased from 85 to 93, 96, and 99 %, respectively. The Athletic Shoulder Outcome Scoring System (ASOSS, range 0–100 points) increased from 52 to 84, 96, and 96 points, respectively. At the 6 and 12 months follow-up the patient featured a negative apprehension test and the range of motion as well as strength of the affected shoulder was fully restored. He started actively participating in wrestling competitions 5 months after surgery without any events of shoulder instability .
Based on the glenoid concavity depth and radius measured on a standarized axial imaging plane on preoperative, postoperative, and 1-year follow-up CT scans the BSSR was calculated utilizing a previously published and validated mathematical formula . The preoperative CT scans revealed a glenoid concavity depth of 0.7 mm and a BSSR of 11.3 % compared to 3.1 mm and 40.3 % measured on the unaffected contralateral side . Postoperative CT scans showed a deepened concavity (3.3 mm) and improved BSSR (46.1 %) compared to the pre-op scans . The follow-up CT scans showed a slight remodeling of the glenoid concavity (3.2 mm) with steady BSSR (44.7 %) .