A 5-year-old boy was referred to the department of paediatric orthopaedics because of large/prominent and painful joints. The child was a product of full term uneventful gestation. At birth his weight, length and OFC were around the 10 Th percentile. Features of Pierre-Robin association have been identified. A median cleft palate, micrognathia, and glossoptosis were the main prominent features. The mother was a 29-year-old gravida 1 abortus 0 married to a 33-year-old unrelated man. Both were healthy and their family history was unremarkable. We performed complete physical examination for the parents, which include full oro-facial, musculo-skeletal, ophthalmologic, and audiologic assessments. No relevant features have been detected.
Nasopharyngeal cannulation has been arranged to overcome his respiratory obstruction. This cannula, which itself acts as an airway, primarily acts as a sort of "splint" which makes further airways on either side of the tube between the tongue and the throat wall, thus assisting the infant in breathing and preventing the tongue from falling back down into the throat, which would cause the infant to asphyxiate. This treatment was carried out for 6 months, at a time the jaw showed sufficient growth. His cleft palate has been repaired at the age of 8 months. His glossoptosis and micrognathia did not require surgical intervention, as they had improved, but his mandibular arch remains significantly smaller than average. Sensorineural heraing loss has been detected at the age of 3 years. Bilateral hearing aids and a speech and language therapist and audiologist have been assigned later on to assist the child's speech retardation. His subsequnet course of motor development has been of significant retardation. Early joint stiffness associated with painful bouts of early osteoarthritis were additional burden and involved the weight bearing joints(hip, knee and ankle joints). Early lumbar spondylosis associated with early osteoarthritis of the neck and the back were present. Walking has been achieved lately albeit with difficulty because of the enlarged/stiff joints, superimposed by his defective vision. He had a history of frequent bouts of unexplained hyperthermia. Examination showed growth deficiency of -4 SD. Craniofacially, there was brachycephaly, sparse skull hair, a retracted mid face, faint eyeborws, sparse eye lashes, ocular hypertelorism (the eyeballs appear large) and hypodontia was evident. The skin is dry and the nipples are hypoplastic. The nails showed significant dysplasia. He wore bilateral hearing aids and had a high-grade myopia of – 8 diopters. The routine blood and urine tests, serum electrolytes and rheumatoid tests (C-reactive protein, ESR, rheumatoid factor) were negative. Serum and urinary oligosaccharides, mucopolysaccharides, serum lactate, pyruvate, creatine phosphokinase, and chromosomal study were normal.
On the bases of the skeletal survey, lateral skull radiograph showed absent frontal sinus, mid-facial hypoplasia and relative thickening of the calvaria. Anteroposterior hand radiograph showed, short-stubby hand with large carpal bones associated with pseudoepiphyses of the second proximal metacarpophalangeal joint . Lateral spine radiograph showed platyspondyly associated with anterior clefting of the vertebrae . Anteroposterior pelvis radiograph showed, coxa valga, a hypoplastic ileae, acetabulo-femoral and metaphyseal dysplasia, with the propensity for the development of slipped epiphyses associated with multiple epiphyseal fragmentations/stippling. The latter might lead for the development of Perthes disease. Early signs of early osteoarthritis were evident . Knee radiographs showed significant epi-metaphyseal dysplasia associated with the development of cupped-metaphyses of the distal tibio-fibular. A picture of ball and socket ankle joint associated with features of early osteoarthritis.