The patient was a 45-year-old man who was referred to Sina hospital, Tehran, Iran by ambulance after crashing his motorcycle into a car.
The patient’s airway and breathing examination suggested no problems. Moreover, no external bleeding was observed. His focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) was positive. The patient’s Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15. Upon hospital admission, his blood pressure (BP) was 110/75 mmHg, pulse rate 84 beats/minute, and respiratory rate 18 breaths/minute.
The patient was candidate for the CT scan of abdomen and pelvis. Thirty minutes after applying the initial intravenous fluid therapy, the patient’s systolic blood pressure dropped to 85 mmHg. The transfusion of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) began by transferring the patient to the surgery room.
A laparotomy was performed and about 3 L of blood and clots were found in the patient’s abdomen. After the blood suction, a partial splenic rupture (grade II injury) was identified in the inferior pole and controlled by packing. However, widespread bleeding was observed in the liver, which could not be controlled by packing. A large hemangioma was observed involving almost the entire left lobe of the liver. The hemangioma was ruptured at two points, including segments II and III of the liver, with lacerations extending 2-3 cm . A horizontal mattress suture was done to control bleeding.
Using a liver needle and 2-0 chromic suture, we entered the hemangioma at the perforation site of the lower portion of the liver and exit from the upper part. Then, we entered the upper part of the liver and exited from the lower part, and then it was tied. According to this approach, hemangioma was packed from the lower segment of the liver. The whole liver was not circled to repair the second perforation owing to the large size of the liver. We entered from the perforation and circled half of the liver thickness with a horizontal mattress suture. Then, the intra-abdominal area was totally re-examined. Oozing was observed from the inferior pole of spleen, so splenectomy was conducted. A drainage tube was inserted around the hepatic hemangioma, and the abdomen was closed. The patient received 4 units of PRBC and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) during the surgery. The patient’s BP was 110/70 mmHg at the end of the surgery.
The patient was transferred from the intensive care unit (ICU) to the ward after 2 days and he was discharged from the hospital in a good general health condition after 5 days. Around 2 weeks after the surgery, a CT scan was performed . The patient’s status was stable during the 8 weeks’ follow-up.