A 62-year-old male patient with no ongoing systemic personal history attended a consultation with the Periodontics Postgraduate Program at the Institución Universitaria Colegios de Colombia in September 2016, referred by the Oral Rehabilitation Postgraduate Program to rehabilitate the edentulous area of the right lateral incisor with an implant-supported restoration. Extra and intraoral tests, together with diagnostic imaging evaluation and complete medical history were performed. A vertical defect of 3mm was evidenced in tooth 12 . Clinical examination showed infectious foci, active periodontal disease, and dental caries. Subsequently, alginate dental impressions were taken, and plaster models were made for later articulator mounting and occlusion analysis.
Following thorough analysis of the case, the patient underwent the hygienic phase and was later asked to approve the performance of vertical GBR while simultaneously positioning the implant. This procedure was suggested to correct the vertical defect in the area and modify the zenith point concerning the other teeth in the aesthetic area. The patient accepted the suggested treatment and provided signed informed consent. The surgical procedure was performed in September 2016, starting with asepsis, antisepsis, infiltrative anesthesia with lidocaine 2% (3 carpules in total), followed by paracrestal incision with a 15c scalpel blade on the edentulous area of the right lateral incisor. Afterwards, a vertical incision mesial and distal to 12 and aided by the buser periosteal elevator allowed reflecting the flap at full-thickness . Subsequently, the milling protocol recommended by the manufacturer for bone type III was initiated to provide primary stability to the dental implant ; milling was performed with abundant irrigation of physiological saline. Parallelism was verified, and the 3.3mm x 10 mm V3 implant by miss implants was positioned at 30N torque without irrigation. The implant was positioned supra-crest at 3 mm, that is, at the level of the mesial bone crest of tooth 13 and 1.5 mm apical to the distal bone crest of tooth 11 .
Vertical GBR was completed after implantation. It was initiated by stabilizing a collagen membrane in palatine , then 0.5cc of bovine xenograft was positioned around the implant . The GBR was completed by leaving the membrane to rest over the implant, creating a curved-shaped position. The membrane was stabilized with reabsorbable stitches 5-0. Finally, the flap was coronally positioned with simple stitches and reabsorbable suture 5-0 (see ). At the end of the procedure, the patient received some recommendations. Further treatment was initiated with amoxicillin 500 mg, every 8 hours for 8 days, and ibuprofen 800 mg ,every 12 hours for 3 days.
Five months later (February 2017), the second surgical phase was performed using a roll technique to increase vestibular gingival thickness. The provisional implant was functional throughout the whole integral rehabilitation process. In October 2017 (13 months after initial positioning), the abutment was torqued to 20N, and the final crown was cemented in zirconium. Follow-up appointments were scheduled every 6 months. The peri-implant tissues were evaluated in October 2020 (3 years after functional loading) .
The patient reported satisfaction with the treatment results, in which the initial vertical bone defect in the edentulous area of tooth 12 was corrected. As a result, an average vertical gain of 3 mm with support of the bony ridges of the adjacent teeth moderately correcting the zenith point of the zone. Likewise, the roll technique performed in the second surgical phase produced adequate vestibular gingival thickness. These results have remained stable over the 3-year follow-up period.