A 39-year-old female visited our hospital complaining of intermittent abdominal pain for the previous 3 months. The clinical doctor gave her a physical examination: the abdomen was flat, and the abdominal mass was not touched. The clinical diagnosis was stomach swelling and digestive tract hemorrhage. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a swollen mass in the gastric antrum and angle. CT revealed a 3.4 cm slight homogeneous enhancement, which was nodular soft tissue in the lesser curvature of the stomach; the body of stomach was poorly filled; the mucosae and serosa were smooth; the definite margin of the tumor was surrounded by fat; and no enlarged lymph node after the abdominal cavity and peritoneum was found. Her disease was diagnosed as gastric tumors. She received laparoscopic gastric resection for gastric lesions.
According to gross examination, two different solid tumors with different volumes were found in the stomach, measuring 4.3 cm*3.3 cm*2.7 cm and 2.6 cm*2 cm*1.8 cm. Histologically and immunohistochemically, the larger tumor consisted of spindle cells surrounded by a peripheral lymphoid cuff , which was arranged mainly in small bundles or in a woven pattern . The tumor cells were positive for S-100 and negative for CD117, DOG1 , CD34, Desmin, smooth muscle actin (SMA) and H-caldesmon (data not shown); the Ki-67 labeling index of the cancer cells was less than 5% (data not shown). The larger tumor was therefore classified as a gastric schwannoma. The smaller one was composed of medium-sized round, oval cells with amphiphilic cytoplasm that was granular, and vacuolization was observed. The tumor was lamellar, at which the boundary between tumor and normal cells was well demarcated . The tumor cells were positive for DOG1 , sporadically positive for CD34 (data not shown) and CD117 , and negative for S-100 , Desmin, SMA, H-caldesmon, and CK-pan (data not shown). Hence, the smaller tumor was diagnosed with epithelioid GISTs. A total of less than 5 mitoses per 50 high power fields (with a 40 objective) were assessed in most cellular neoplastic areas. The estimation of recurrence risk or death of the GISTs in our case could be considered low risk, depending on tumor size and the mitotic index .
Why did GISTs and gastric schwannoma occur at the same time? Did they have a relationship to the gene mutation? To answer these questions, exons 9, 11, 13, 17 of C-KIT and exons 12 and 18 of PDGFRA were analyzed by PCR and Sanger sequencing both in GISTs and gastric schwannoma. The tumor cells of GISTs contained a deletion mutation (c.2527_2538 del12,843–846del4), which was located in exon 18 of PDGFRA . However, no gene mutation was detected in gastric schwannoma.