A 62-year-old male patient from rural Bengal (India), farmer by occupation, presented with acute-onset nonradiating low-back pain followed by weakness and numbness of both lower limbs for 1 month. There was associated double sphincter dysfunction, for the same duration, in the form of acute painless retention of urine and constipation. He was put on a catheter on the third day of illness that remained in situ at the time of admission to our care. On detailed questioning, he revealed that lower limb weakness started from left side in a hololimb manner with rapid involvement of right lower limb within subsequent 24 hours. His sensory symptom, which was in the form of loss of sensation in both lower limbs and lower trunk up to umbilicus, started at around the same time, although in a more symmetrical manner. At the time of presentation, he specifically complained of a girdle-like sensation around the umbilicus, below which he felt diminished sensation to touch or any other stimulus. All his complaints remained approximately static since the onset of illness. There was no history suggestive of any cranial nerve involvement, seizures, headache, vomiting, or loss of consciousness. There was no history of associated fever, cough, hemoptysis, weight loss, trauma, or dimness of vision. He used to eat cooked mutton, fish, chicken, and raw vegetables. General examination revealed multiple pea-sized nodules all over the body, especially both forearms, arms, and chest and one on left lateral border of tongue . His pulse was 80/minute, regular, and blood pressure was 110/80. Neurological examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Score of E4V5M6, no meningeal signs, and normal cranial nerve examination. Fundoscopy also was unremarkable. Motor examination revealed normal bulk, with decreased tone in bilateral lower limbs and normal tone in both upper limbs. Power was 0/5, and deep tendon reflexes were absent in bilateral lower limbs with normal upper limbs. There was loss of all sensation in his lower limbs, with a sensory level corresponding to T9 dermatome, in addition to impaired joint position sense. There was no detectable gibbus or any spine tenderness.
Routine investigation revealed hemoglobin 11.4 gm%, total leukocyte count 7100, differential count N61L24E12, absolute eosinophil count 852, and platelet of 1.75 lakhs. Liver and renal function tests were within normal limits. Fasting blood sugar was 86 mg/dl. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of dorso-lumbar spine with contrast, which was done outside approximately 1 week following symptom onset, showed small rim enhancing lesion in the spinal cord at D11 level with edema in the surrounding cord as well as diffuse cystic lesions in skeletal muscles and brain parenchyma consistent with cysticercosis. On admission, a repeat MRI of dorsal spine (plain and contrast) showed diffuse cord swelling with edema in the lower dorsal spinal cord extending up to conus medullaris and showing patchy enhancement within. It also showed extensive neurocysticercosis within both paravertebral as well as posterior paraspinal muscles . Report of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination was as following: protein 129 mg/dl, glucose 75 mg/dl, cell count 30 cells/ml (98% mononuclear), and few erythrocytes. CSF adenosine deaminase was within normal limits, and culture did not reveal any growth. Patient was immediately put on intravenous injection methylprednisolone 1 g/daily for 5 consecutive days followed by oral steroids. Meanwhile, MRI of brain (plain + contrast) revealed multiple elliptical rim-enhancing lesions with few showing eccentric internal dot within both cerebral hemispheres, both cerebellar lobes, and within orbits, suggestive of neural and ocular cysticercosis . MRI of both thighs showed numerous elliptical rim-enhancing lesions with few showing eccentric internal dot within bilateral thigh region, giving a starry-sky appearance . Histological examination of a nodule excised from the right arm showed numerous cysticerci in the subcutaneous tissue . The immunological enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test for cysticercal antibodies was positive, and a diagnosis of DCC was reached in this case.
Following intravenous steroid administration, within 5–7 days our patient showed improvement with observable increase in power of the lower limbs up to the extent of 3/5. He was subsequently discharged with antiepileptics , symptomatic therapy, and regular physiotherapy. Antihelminthic agents were avoided in view of extensive cysticercosis in brain including crucial areas such as brainstem. The patient was unfortunately lost in follow up after 3 months following discharge from our care.